Jehovah Iireh: OR, GODS PROVIDENCE IN DELIVERING THE GODLY. Opened in two
Sermons in the City of BRISTOLL, On the day of public thanksgiving in that
City, March 14. 1642. For the deliverance of that City from the Invasion
without, and the Plot of Malignants within the City, intended to have been
acted the Tuesday night before.

With a short Narration of that Bloody and abominable Plot.

Preached by JOHN TOMBS, B. D.

It is this two and twentieth day of April, Anno Dom. 1643. ordered by the
Committee of the House of Commons in Parliament concerning Printing, that this
Book entitled, Johovah Jireh, or Gods providence in delivering the godly, be
printed.

John White.

London Printed by Rich. Cotes, for Michael Sparks Senior, 1643.

To the Noble and right worthy Patriots, Colonel Nathaniel Fiennes Governor,
Colonel Richard Cole, Colonel Alexander Popham, and to the rest of the worthy
Commanders, and Soldiers in the City of Bristoll.
AS it is a certain truth, that no events happen without God, so it is most
certain that all events are ordered by Gods wisdom to excellent purposes.
The utmost and meet end of all Gods actions is himself, that as all things are
of him, and through him, so all things may be to him, Romans 11. 36. The
subordinate and nearer ends are many and various as the Almighty sees
conducible to his glory which is the utmost. And thus are we to conceive that
in the ordering of the present commotions of this Land the Lord has sundry
ends, whereby he will in fine show himself great in counsel, though as yet we
can hardly discern whereto they tend. Among many other ends he has, these two
seem most apparent, the discovery of men, and the discovery of himself. For
whereas on the one side the bloody minded Papists, the proud sensual
Libertines, the juggling deceitful Priests and Prelates had gotten the
reputation of honest men, and on the other side the sincere, zealous and
faithful Christian suffered all indignities under the imputations of
hypocrisy, covetousness, faction and such like calumnies; now by these
present trials the integrity, faithfulness and courage of the one, the
hypocrisy, falsehood, and wickedness of the other are made manifest. And
whereas the frequency of profane oaths, and Atheistical perjuries, the
scorn of Religion, derision of Piety, and contempt of holiness had worn out
the apprehensions of God, and imboldned men to play with him as a contemptible
name, God has begun to discover himself, and yet further will in time appear
to be the great Lord of Hoasts, and the protector of his despised, and
oppressed people.

In reference to the later of these forenamed ends God has vouchsafed to
discover many Plots, to give many deliverances, to do great things in these
few years last past for the vindicating of his own Name, the worth and
innocence of his people* and declaration of the malignitie of ungodly spirits.

Among which that which he did in preserving of this city in the late
deliverance hereof is not the least, being in the apprehension of those that
know all the circumstances and the concurrence of Gods providence therein, a
very remarkable and memorable thing.

In the commemoration and acclamation thereof it pleased God that by the
appointment of one of you I should have a part, having by Gods providence bin
driven hither for shelter against the unreasonable and impetuous violence of
superstitious people enraged by the instigations of bloody minded Papists,
corrupt Priests, and loose Libertines. Since which time I have been solicited
to publish these subitany Meditations: though the matter deserves a more full
discovery and an exacter commentary. Nevertheless that the remembrance hereof
might not die, and that some light might be added to them that seek out Gods
works as having pleasure therein, I have yielded to their request. And
forasmuch as the deliverance in the first place belonged to your selves as
first destinated to slaughter, and my work in the T^anksgiving proceeded from
you, I have conceived it meetest to tender these Sermons to you for your
acceptance and use, praying the Almighty still to preserve your persons and to
direct your ways for the public good and your own salvation. In both which to
serve you continues

Yours in all humble observance, JOHN TOMBS.

A short Narration of the late bloody and abominable conspiracy against the
City of Bristoll, as appears by the examination of the Parties thereunto.
1642.
AMalignant and treacherous Party within this City, having long endeavored to
bring in the forces of the enemy into this City, they hoped that they had
gotten an opportunity to effect their design on Tuesday night last being the
seventh of March, when by their invitation Prince Rupert having drawn a great
party of Horse and Dragoones with some foot to Durdum Down, within two miles
of this City, the evening before that night, these treacherous and bloody
persons within the town had framed a party to fall upon the backs of the
Guards, and to surprise them and cut them off, and to let in the enemy, who
upon the ringing of two Bells, viz S. John's and S. Michaels, were to give on
upon the Town without, as the conspirators were to fall upon the guards
within. The ringing of these two Bells being a common sign unto them both
within and without the town. For the better effecting of this traiterous and
wicked conspiracy, the chief heads thereof had that night assembled together
in their houses those of their confederacy, with diverse Sailors and Halliers
with all sorts of Arms, Muskets, Pistolls, Swords, Clubs, and Barrells of old
Nails to charge the Ordnance withal after they had furprised them. And these
several companies under their several Leaders were to have fallen upon the
several Courts of guards; Master Robert Yeomans (who is the head of this
conspiracy and pretends a Commission from his Majesty for what he has done)
being to fall upon the maine Guard, and Master George Butcher with his company
was to have fallen upon the Guard at Froome Gate, and to have opened it for the
enemy to enter by: others no doubt had their parts to play, and the better to
distinguish themselves from those that were destinated to destruction, those
that were of their party had a word which was ( Charles) and certain marks of
white Tape tied upon their breasts before, and their hats behind, and such as
were to be spared within doors had certain marks set upon the inside of
their doors; for the rest (if we may believe the speeches of an Officer
amongst the enemies Forces) one of them was heard to say that Prince Rupert had
commanded them to give no Quarter, but to kill man, woman and child that had
not those marks upon their persons and houses. And that at the same time that
they were to fall into the town, the Sailors were to set the town on fire in
several parts; (which is conceived should have been Captain Boones part) but
God of his mercy delivered us from this dangerous and devilish conspiracy, by
some notice that we had given unto us of their meeting at Yeomans his house,
about an hour or two before the plot was to have been put in exeeution, which
was to have been upon the ringing of the Bells about one or two a clock in the
morning. Having seized on Master Robert Yeomans with his company, and after,
Butcher with his company, the neck of the plot being broken within the Town,
the enemy without (whose design as it should seem depended much upon it)
having shown themselves upon the Down the next morning after two or three
shot of Canons made against them from our work upon Brandon hill, they wheeled
off, and so God put a Hook into their nostrills, and turned them back again:
for which great mercy of his in delivering us from a dangerous invasion of the
enemy without, and from a damnable conspiracy of some traytorous inhabitants
within the City; both this town and the whole kingdom (so far as it is
concerned in the preservation of this City) has great cause to give thanks to
Almighty God, unto whom alone the glory thereof is due.

This is a short narration of the late detestable and bloody Plot against this
City, whereof no doubt more hereafter will appear, the matter being yet under
examination, only one writing which was found in Robert Yeomans his house, I
thought fit to add, which was as follows.

All Inhabitants of the Bridge, the High Street and Cornestreete, keep within
your doors upon peril of your lives: All other inhabitants of this City that
stand for the King, the Protestant Religion and the Liberties of this City, let
them forthwith appear at the High Cross with such arms as they have for the
defense of their lives, their wives and children, and follow their Leaders for
the same defense.

There was also a Protestation taken amongst them to this effect, that they
would oppose to the utmost of their power, all Forces whatsoever that were, or
should be amongst them, or that should come in without the consent of the King.

Jehovah Iireh.
2 PETER 2. 9. The Lord knows how to deliver the Godly out of Temptation, and
to reserve the unjust to the day of judgment to be punished.
THis passage contains two consectaries deduced from the 5, 6, 7. Verses; the
Apostle had advised Christians To take heed unto the sure word of Prophecy,
Chap. 1. Verse. 19. as being a light shining in a dark place, not from a
private delivery by the will of man, but by the motion of the holy Ghost, Verse.
20, 21. withal he foretells, Chap. 2. 1. that as there had been false Prophets
among the People, so there should be false Teachers among them, whose practice
he declares, Verse. 1, 2, 3. and their judgment, Verse. 3. which he confirms by
three instances. 1 Of Gods not sparing the Angels that sinned, Ver. 4. 2 His
bringing in the flood upon the world of ungodly, but saving Noah a Preacher of
Righteousness, Verse. 5. 3 His overthrow of Sodom and Gomorrah, and delivering
just Lot, Verse. 6, 7. From these instances he inferres by an Induction two
rules to be observed in the course of Gods proceedings. First, That he knows
how to deliver the Godly out of temptation. Secondly, That he knows how to
reserve the unjust to the day of judgment to be punished. The particle [(...),
for if] Verse. 4. shows these instances to be brought as a medium to prove a
conclusion, and the argument is thus. If God even then when he cast the Angels
that sinned down to hell, yet preserved the guiltless Angels, and even then
when he brought the deluge on the wicked world, saved Noah a Preacher of
righteousness, and even then when he overthrew Sodom and Gomorrah, delivered
just Lot, and sic in caeteris, then it follows as in my Text, The Lord knows
how to deliver the Godly out of Temptation, etc.

The former of these two Consectaries I have chosen this day to insist on,
being a day set apart for the commemoration of a late deliverance of this City
from a blood, and abominable conspiracy within it, wherein God has added one
more memorable Instance to verify this rule of Saint Peter, The Lord knows
how to deliver the godly out of Temptation.

Two conclusions may from hence be gathered. First, That the godly while they
live among unjust men upon the earth be in Temptation. Deliverance from
Temptation presupposes a being in Temptation. Secondly, That God knows how to
deliver them though they know not; Noah and Lot knew not how they should be
delivered, but God knew how to do it.

To confirm the former of these we need not many Scriptures, it being proved
by continual experience, yet I shall produce some, Luke 22. 28. Our Lord
Christ says of himself, Ye are they which have continued with me in my
Temptations. Our Lord Christ when he lived on earth, was in continual
Temptations, and what was Christ's estate is the estate of all Christians
comformably; Saint Paul of himself, Act. 20. 19. says, That he served the
Lord with all humility of mind, and with many tears and Temptations which
befell him by the lying in wait of the Jews, and Heb. 11. 37. among other
things that befell the Saints it is said They were tempted. Temptation then is
one of those things that are the lot of the godly.

I shall endeavor to open this truth, by inquiring; first, who are to be
accounted godly; secondly, what temptation they are under; thirdly, why it is
so with them? In answer to the first we may take notice that the word we
translate godly in Grecke (...) is as much as in English right worshippers. So
they that be right worshippers are godly persons; the Etymology fitly
expresses the thing: Now by worship is meant the honor and service that is
done unto a God. For godliness implies religious service, and all that
religious service we perform to any thing under the notion of a God, that is
worship: And it is Mediate, or Immediate; mediate service is that which is
directed to man, yet by reason of respect unto God. For this is a clear truth,
that even all the duties of righteousness we perform to men, if they be done
in obedience to God, they are part of his service and worship, not in respect
of the matter wherein, but in respect of the motive by which they are
performed. Thus when a servant does discharge his duty faithfully to his Master
as Doing the will of God from the heart, he is said to do service to the
Lord, Ephesians. 6. 5, 6, 7. Colos. 3. 24. Every servant that obeyes his master,
every child that honors his father, every soldier that obeyes his Commander
out of conscience to God, not for wages, portion, applause or the like respects
only, therein he worships God. Immediate worship is that which is directed
only to God. And this has by use engrossed the name of Worship. Now when this
is not right worship, though men be never so devout in it, yet they are not
godly persons: when the Priests of Baal called on the name of Baal from morning
even till noone, saying, O Baal hear us, though they cried aloud and cut
themselves after their manner with Knives and Lances till the blood gushed out
upon them, 1 Kings 18. 26. 28. yet there was no godliness in all this. In like
manner though the Papists and other superstitious persons are very devout in
their way, spend much time in prayer after their manner, fast often, and do
many laborious works for satisfaction of their sins, yet because they worship
not God aright they are not godly persons. If it be then asked who are they
that are Right worshippers? I answer. To right worshipping these things are
requisite.

First, they that are right worshippers worship only the true God; whosoever
he be that gives religious worship of any sort to any other besides the Lord
Jehovah, whether it be inward worship of the soul, as trusting in it, loving
it, fearing it, magnifying and extolling of it in their hearts, or outward
worship, as by gesture of the body, kneeling, falling down before it, bowing,
lifting up the hands or eyes, kissing, or by offering of gifts, bringing
oblation, incense, sacrifice, first fruits, tithes, or by swearing by them,
praying to them, making vows to them, blessing them, singing Hymns in their
praise, consecrating Temples, making Priests, keeping holy days to them, (for
all these are religious worship) whosoever I say gives any or more of these or
any other sort of Religious worship not mentioned to any besides the true God,
is an Idolater, and therefore not a right worshipper; for this is the true
definition of an Idolater: Whosoever gives Divine worship to a Creature is an
Idolater: as may be gathered from the Apostles description of Idolaters, Romans
1. 25. where it is charged upon them that they changed the truth of God, that
is, the invisible Power and Majesty of God, which they knew by the things that
are made, Verse. 18, 19, 20, 21. into a lie, that is, into a lying resemblance,
and worshipped and served the Creature, (...) more then the Creator, so our
last Translation has it, but the better and true reading is, Besides the
Creator. For it is plain by the words, Verse. 23. That they changed the glory
of the incorruptible God into an Image made like to corruptible man, and Verse.
25. that they changed the truth of God into a lie, and therefore they
worshipped the Creature more then the Creator: But this was their Idolatry that
they worshipped the Creator by a lying resemblance, and so worshipped the
creature besides the Creator. So then this is the first note of a right
worshipper, that he worships with Religious worship none but Jehovah the true
God.

Secondly, they that are right worshippers as they worship only the true God,
so they direct this worship only by the true Mediator, which is Jesus Christ
the Son of God. He only is a right worshipper, that worships God in Christ,
whosoever he be that makes any other mediator unto God, let him be called
mediator of redemption or of intercession, it is against the true worshipping
of God, and an high violation of the glory of Jesus Christ. For as the Apostle
tells us, 1 Timothy 2. 5. There is one God and one Mediator between God and man,
even the man Christ Jesus; no more Mediators are acknowledged by the Apostle,
then there be Gods. To us there is but one God the Father, of whom are all
things, and we in him, and one Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are all things, and
we in him, 1 Cor. 8. 6. Therefore the true worshippers are described to be such
as rejoice in Christ Jesus, Phil. 3. 3. that glory in him as their Lord and
Mediator.

Thirdly, they that are right worshippers, worship the true God by the true
Mediator according to the true rule, that is, they worship the true God
according to his own prescription, and appointment, not according to men's
devices and inventions. For as our Savior tells us, Matthew. 15. 9. In vain do
they worship God, who teach for Doctrines the Commandments of men. He that
shall go as far as Jerusalem to visit Christ's Sepulcher, that shall sprinkle
himself with holy water, keep relics of Saints, observe old customs of
former Christians, abstain from eating flesh, if he could keep all the
traditions of men, not fail in any point of ceremony, and thereby think to
please God as if he did him honor, thereby shall not only miss of his end,
but also instead thereof provoke the wrath of God against himself through his
superstition. Let all superstitious persons who are very devout in their way,
know this for a certain truth, that God does not esteem them as godly
persons, because they are not right worshippers of God. The godly have the Law
of God in their heart, Psalm. 37. 31. and according to it, endeavor to walk in
all duties of his worship.

Fourthly, right worshippers worship God for a right end, that they may honor
him and exalt him in their souls, and give him glory. The Pharisees Matthew. 6.
5. prayed to God, gave Alms, and no doubt also brought their sacrifices to
Gods Altar, yet nevertheless they were adjudged Hypocrites, because they did
these things that they might be seen of men. And the same censure belongs to
all others that shall pray, preach, hear, or perform any other duty of Gods
worship that they may gain a name of Religious persons, and not chiefly for
the glory of God that his name may be sanctified, whosoever misseth the right
end of worship, loses the title of a Godly man.

Fifthly, Right worshippers worship God from a right principle. Two principles
of our worship are necessary that our worship be right.

First, the Spirit of God; no man can worship the Lord in truth, unless the
Spirit of God dwell and act in him, 1 Cor. 12. 3. No man can say that Jesus is
the Lord but by the Holy Ghost. Secondly, a right faith, without which a man
cannot worship truly, for the doctrine of our Lord Jesus is the doctrine which
is according to godliness, 1 Timothy 6. 3. The mystery of Godliness, 1 Timothy 3.
16. the faith of Gods elect, the acknowledging of the truth, which is after
godliness, Tit. 1. 1. whence I infer that to godliness is requisite an
acknowledgement of the truth, and that only the true faith is that which
begets godliness. Wherefore all Heretical persons that hold falsehoods
against the fundamental truths of the Gospel cannot be right worshippers; a
corrupt faith does beget a corrupt worship.

Sixthly, right worshippers must worship God with right affection. They that
worship God truly must worship God in spirit and truth, Joh. 4. 23, 24. We are
the Circumcision which worship God in the spirit, Phil. 3. 3. that is, that
worship God, not only with the outward man, but also in the inward man, with
knowledge, love, zeal, reverence, obedience, etc.

Secondly, these godly persons you hear are under Temptations. Temptation is
as much as Trial. By Temptations are meant sinful and evil practices, and
that both as sinful and harmefull. For the conclusion being drawn from the
instances before, Verse. 5, 6, 7. it is to be conceived that the Temptation that
God knows how to deliver from, is the same with which Noah and Lot were
exercised. Now Lot was exercised with the evil practices of the Sodomites as
they were sinful, That righteous man dwelling amongst them, in seeing and
hearing vexed his righteous soul from day to day with their unlawful deeds,
Verse. 8. In like manner Noah was tried by the corrupt doings of the old world.
The sinful and impure actions of evil men are Temptations to the godly that
live among them. Likewise Lot was exercised with their evil practices as they
were harmefull. So you may read Genesis 19. 4. 9. That the Sodomites compassed
Lots house, and would have broken in upon him, and violated the Strangers that
came into his house. And accordingly, to deliver from Temptation, is not only
to deliver from the infection of sin, but also to deliver from mischievous
massacres, violations, breaking open of houses, spoiling, persecution,
combinations, reproaches, taunts and all other injurious usages godly men are
in danger to meet with. Now these are called temptations. First, partly
because they are provocations to sin, for a man that lives among wicked men is
not only by example provoked to imitate them, but also by continual and
incessant molestations, driven to do as they do, for their own ease, quiet,
and security, and drawn by their flatteries, and wiles to comply with them,
and thereby tempted. Secondly, partly because they are exercises of patience,
and constancy whereby the strength and steadfastness of Believers is tried.

Now for the reasons hereof. First, the first is from the innate hatred and
malice that is in the heart of all unrighteous men toward the godly. There is
a venomous malignity in the heart of wicked men toward the godly, be they as
near to them as the wife in the bosom, or the child that is the fruit of
their loins: though it may be smothered a while in the heart, yet it lurkes in
the heart, and will flame forth when that which covers it is removed, and some
occasion bring it forth into act. Thus our Savior informs his Disciples, Joh.
15. 19. If ye were of the world the world would love his own: but because ye
are not of the world, but I have chosen you out of the world, therefore the
world hates y^u. And after him Saint John 1. Epist. 3. 13. Marvel not my
Brethren if the world hate you.

Even as there is a natural Antipathy between some beasts, as a Wolf will
worry and devour a Lamb, though it lie down quietly by it, so there is a
secret Antipathy between an ungodly and a godly person, though never so
willing to live in peace. Hence it is a sport to them to do mischief, a
contentfull thing to vex them. If they hear evil of them, they will believe
and divulge it; if they have ascoffe to flout them with, they will vent it; if
they have a desire to harm them, they will practice it. And that they hate
them because they are godly, appears by the falsehood of their pretenses for
their hatred. They pretend they hate them for censuring them, sometimes for
faction, turbulency, sedition, sometimes for hypocrisy and such like
pretenses. And yet who more censorious, factious, turbulent, seditious,
fals-hearted than themselves? or whom do they favor more than such persons?
doubtless if the godly were such, they would love them as being like
themselves. Search the matter to the bottom, and it will appear that these
are but colors to cloak their hatred with from the eyes of men. It appears by
the universality of their hatred to godly persons. If their hatred were
particular to some, it might be surmised it came from some particular cause of
difference. But experience shows it to be general, their spirits are
imbittered against those that they never had any dealing with, their hearts
rise against those they never saw, if they hear or conceive them to be
Precisians, Puritans, Roundheads, or if there be any other Appellation by
which they denominate godly persons. Though the same persons were delightful
to them before, though they were esteemed and praised by them, yet when once
they begin to be godly they loath them, vilify them, abuse them. It appears
further, in that they hate them notwithstanding near relations, by reason of
which nature teaches them to love them. An unrighteous father or mother will
not brook a righteous child, an Idolatrous, husband will not agree with an
holy wife: they that agree not in the true worship of the same God, cannot
agree among themselves. Besides this hatred is implacable, without mercy: there
must be no favor showed to a Puritan, when a Papist, a Drunkard, a Thief, a
wandering rogue shall find favor, come off easily in any trial, be remitted
any wrong; but no plea, no intercession, no deprecation shall prevail to save
a godly person from the extremity of oppression.

Secondly, ungodly men are of unquiet spirits, they are like Satan that never
rests, Matthew. 12. 43. The wicked, says the Prophet, Isay 57. 20. are like the
troubled sea, when it cannot rest, whose waters cast up mire and dirt. They are
still surmising some evil, or inventing some evil, or speaking some evil of
them, or acting some evil against them. It is wages enough for them to do
hurt to godly men, though they hazard life, estate, credit, and their souls
too, yet they are furiously carried to do them mischief, Come say they, Jer.
18. 18. let us devise devises against Jeremiah; come let us smite him with the
tongue. They devise mischief on their Beds; they set themselves in a way that
is not good: they ab^erre not evil, Psalm. 36. 4. They sleep not except they
have done mischief, and their sleep is taken away unless they cause some to
fall, Prove. 4. 16.

Thirdly, they be injurious. The best of them, says the Prophet, is a Briar;
the most upright is sharper then a thorn hedge, Micah 7. 4. Take the best,
that is, the most civil, ingenuous, regular, of unregenerate men,
superstitious people, carnal worldlings, lukewarm formalists, they cannot
brook a zealous religious person, if they cannot wound deadly they will
scratch and tear their flesh, if they cannot bite, they will bark and snarle
at them.

Fourthly, they are proud, high conceited of themselves: But the godly are of
no account in their eyes; they conceive themselves Giants, godly men as
Pygmees; now pride begets disdain, and insolent behavior. When pride
compasses them about as a chain, violence covers them as a Garment, Psalm.
73. 6. when pride is in the heart there will be spurning and trampling upon
with feet.

Lastly, ungodly men are acted by Satan, Ephesians. 22. He is the spirit that
works in the children of disobedience. And they that are ruled by Satan must
needs do what hurt they can to godly persons. When the Devil entered into
Judas his heart he could not stay but goes out presently about his work of
betraying his master, John 13. 27. no sooner have they a Commission from Satan,
but they are presently ready to execute it. And therefore it cannot be but
that while the godly live among the unjust they should be under temptations.

Applic. For application of this Truth, we may be informed in the reason of the
present mischievous carriage of unjust men toward the godly, why they now
tempt them, not only by persuasions to sin with them, but also by scorning,
contemning and injurious dealing, yea and (as the present experience proves it
true) by mischievous Plots to destroy them, and to root them out of the Land of
the living: The late example of their practices, which occasioned this days
solemnity is a most remarkable Instance of the malignity of spirit that is in
the hearts of wicked men against godly persons. What the plot was you have
heard from the relation read to you. I hope you thereby sufficiently apprehend
the certainty and manner of it from their own confessions, the
mischievousnesse of it, how great it would have been, if it had taken effect:
and by something in the relation, as the securing of some persons and houses by
privy marks, who were like themselves, and the destinating of others to a
panolethrie, it appears that it was carried with a hatred and enmity against
godly persons, whom they have branded with the name of Roundheads.

I deny not but it has been alleged, that the reason of this plot was
loyalty to the King, that they might expel out of the City, those that rebel
against him, and admit his forces into it: concerning this matter it is
needful something be spoken. The constant Protestation of the Commanders and
Soldiers here is, That they will maintain to the utmost of their power with
their life and fortunes the Kings majesty's royal person, honor and estate.
If any shall keep this City against the King, undoubtedly that person should
be made an example by some heavy end. I hope none here have any such thoughts
or purposes; but that their ends are right to protect it for the King, and not
against the King. But it will be said, How can that be, since it is against his
will? his command is to the contrary? Concerning this, thus much is said, that
even by the judgment of those persons against whom lies no exception it has
been granted, that sometimes it may not be rebellion to resist the personal
will and command of the King. I will allege three instances. The first out of
a Book entitled The true difference between Christian subjection and
Antichristian Rebellion, composed by Thomas Bilson afterward Bishop of
Winchester, and in great power at Court in King James his days, dedicated to
Queen Elizabeth, and for ought can be gathered by the frequent Printing of it,
and the preferment of the Author adjudged Orthodox. In it there are these words.

If a Prince should go about to subject his kingdom to a foreign realm, or
change the form of the Commonwealth from imperie to Tyranny or neglect the
Laws established by common consent of Prince and people to execute his own
pleasure: in these, and other cases which might be named, if the Nobles and
Commons join together to defend their ancient, and accustomed liberty,
Regiment and Laws, they may not well be accounted Rebels. And a little after.
As I said then, so I say now, the law of God gives no man leave to resist his
Prince: but I never said that Kingdoms and Commonwealths might not proportion
their states as they thought best by their public Laws, which afterward the
Princes themselves may not violate. By superior Powers ordained of God we
understand not only Princes, but all politic states and regiments, somewhere
the people, somewhere the Nobles having the same interest to the Sword that
Princes have in their kingdoms. And in kingdoms where Princes bear rule by
the Sword, we do not mean the Princes private will against his Laws: but his
Precept derived from his Laws, and agreeing with his Laws: which though it be
wicked, yet may it not be resisted of any subject with armed violence. Marry
when Princes offer their subjects not justice; but force: and despise all laws
to practice their lusts; not every, nor any private man may take the sword to
redress the Prince: but if the Laws of the Land appoint the Nobles as next to
the King to assist him in doing right, and withold him from doing wrong, then
be they licensed by man's Law, and so not prohibited by Gods to interpose
themselves for the safeguard of equity and innocence and by all lawful and
needful means to procure the Prince to be reformed: But in no case deprived
where the Scepter is inherited.

The second instance is in King James, who in his answer to Cardinal Peron his
Oration to the three estates of France, speaks of the Protestants in France,
who had sundry times in the days of Francis the second, Charles the ninth, and
Henry the third, Kings of France, taken up Arms against the oppression of the
Guisian faction at Court maintained by those Kings, as of the Kings best
subjects, and that their civil wars was not taking up arms against their
King, it was but standing on their Guard; which the event proved to be true.

The third instance is the Act of Parliament confirming the Treaty with the
Scots Commissioners passed by our present King this very Parliament, in which
it was enacted, That the Scots Covenanters who had seized on Edenborough
Castle, raised an Army in Scotland against the Kings will, and entered England
therewith, were nevertheless on September 7. 1641. to be declared in all
Churches of this kingdom of England no Rebels: from which also they were
acquitted by our present King in their Parliament of Scotland. But it will be
said, that though things are carried never so violently or unjustly, yet
Christians are taught to suffer, not to resist.

Answ. It is true, we may not resist Authority; but suffer under it, though
proceeding unjustly. We are forbidden to resist not only the supreme, but also
the meanest person in authority proceeding according to authority, that is, in
a way of law judicially, though the proceedings be unjust, yet while the
proceedings are according to authority, there is no resistance allowed but by
suffering. But if so be that the proceeding be by mere violence, spoiling men
of their goods, destroying, restrayning their persons without any legal
charge, surely Gods Law has not debarred men of the use of the Law of nature,
which directs a man to defend though not to revenge himself against violence;
suppose a Prince should take with him a company of robbers and cut-throates,
and set upon a Subject by the high way, I would have it considered whether a
Traveller might not defend his person and goods: and in like manner may it be
said concerning breaking into a man's house. Though David's heart smote him when
he cut off the lap of Saul's garment, yet we read not that he repented his
gathering a band of men to him, his getting into strong holds for defense of
himself against Saul.

If there were now any that had a hand in this wicked Plot here present, I
would speak to them by way of Expostulation. What have the godly done, or what
do they that there should be such devices against them? If it be said they are
factious, and disturb the land by their faction; I would further know what is
their faction? Do they make a side or party to engrosse wealth, honor or
secular power to themselves? They strive much you will say to prevail; True,
they strive, but for whom? for themselves, or for God? What is it they are
earnest for? Is it not for a necessary reformation? Is it not that the holy
Ordinances of Christ may be kept from profanation by the promiscuous
admittance of all forts of open ungodly persons, drunkards, swearers, etc. unto
them? Is it not that those inventions of men which are by many thought parts of
Gods worship, without which Gods service is not well performed, and
consequently superstitious in their use, may be removed? Is it not that Gods
worship may be reduced from a mere empty formality by saying prayers, and
reading out of a Book, to a lively and fruitful performing thereof? Is it not
that in stead of a swarm of ignorant Ministers, that have not knowledge or
skill to teach the principles of Christian Religion, of licentious, and lewd
Ministers that by their evil life are a shame to our Religion, of mere
worldlings, of proud ambitious Ministers that seek their own things, and not
the things of Jesus Christ, of corrupt Ministers that are corrupt in their
opinions, as in the doctrine of Grace, Christ's presence in the Eucharist, etc.
there may be placed over the Church of Christ godly, able, painful, orthodox
Ministers that may guide the people of God into the way of peace? It it not
that in stead of that kind of discipline which all the world knows has been
used only to draw money out of men's purses, to oppress godly persons, and holy
exercises tending to promote knowledge and piety under pretense of
conventicles, to domineere and Lord it over Gods heritage, there might be a
right way of discipline set up, tending to the right ordering and furthering of
Gods worship? Is it not that in stead of the increase of Popery and the Mass
(which are likely in time unless prevented to overgrow true Religion)
preaching of Christ may be promoted? If this be their faction, so far as I
can conceive it is a faction for God, and they that aim at their oppression
for this cause, aim at the oppression of godliness and godly persons.

Secondly, we may hence learn that they do ill provide for their peace, that
do favor such unrighteous persons. If ye ask who do so? I answer; first,
they that choose to dwell near them for worldly advantages: This was Lots
sin and folly, Genesis 13. 10, 11, 12, 13. who chose his habitation in Sodom,
because it had a pleasant and fruitful situatuation, though the inhabitants
were exceeding wicked before the Lord. Ye know how ill he sped by going to
Sodom, thinking to get more wealth he lost all. Secondly, those that make
marriages, leagues and bonds of amity with them. Usually such persons find
their marriages to be their misery, their friendship to be their snare. They
that were mingled among the heathen learned their works, and they became a
snare to them, Psalm. 106. 35, 36. Jehosaphat his joining in affinity with
Ahabs house occasioned the breaking of his ships, the corrupting of his family,
and the destruction of many of his posterity. Thirdly, those that connive,
bolster up, plead for such men, it is usual with God to make them a vexation
in the conclusion to those that have upheld and pleaded for them. Fourthly,
those that commit power to them by choosing them to be Magistrates and officers
of trust; They that put into employment malignant spirits against the godly,
must look to have a temptation and a snare by them.

Thirdly, it should warn us to take heed of unnecessary society, with unjust
and ungodly men: we are commanded not to be unequally yoaked with unbelevers, 2 Corinthians. 6. 14. there must be a separation from them, verse. 17. I cannot now
examine the several sorts and cases of separation both civil and
ecclesiastical. This in the general may be said, he that heeds not to avoid
society with ungodly men which is not needful, does certainly cast himself
into temptation.

Fourthly, it should warn us how we deal with such kind of men when we are
necessitated to have any thing to do with them. It was the saying of David in
his Cygnea cantio, his last words, 2 Samuel 23. 6. 7. But the sons of Belial
shall be all of them as thor^es thrust away, because they cannot be taken with
hands. But the man that shall touch them must be fenced with iron, and the
staff of a spear. He that must have to do with wicked men had need be fenced
with iron. If you ask how? I answer.

1. Be armed as Lot was, with the spirit of mourning, ye must mourn for their
sins as Lot did here, 2 Pet. 2. 8. That righteous man dwelling among them in
hearing and seeing vexed his righteous soul from day to day with their
unlawful deeds. If ye must be in their company, yet ye must not delight in
their company: if ye do, it is a sign ye are of the same disposition with
them. There is sometimes a necessity of their company by reason of natural
relation, neighborhood, trading; but there is a greater necessity that we
mourn for their swearing, scoffing, lying, profane speeches which we cannot
remedy.

2. Take heed of trusting them or harkening to them, make them not of thy
privy counsel, unless thou would be betrayed by them. It is the Prophet
Micah his use, Mic. 7. 4, 5. Because the best of them is a Briar, trust not in
a friend, put ye not confidence in a guide, keep the doors of thy mouth from
her that lies in thy bosom. And the Prophet Jeremiah, Chap. 9. 4. Take ye
heed every one of his neighbor, and trust ye not in any Brother; for every
Brother will utterly supplant, and every neighbor will walk with slanders.

3. Thou must be wise in speaking to them, Psalm. 39. 1. I will keep my mouth
with a bridle, says David, while the wicked is before me, when we are in the
company of evil men we have need look to the motions of our tongues.

4. Get patience, and meekness in bearing their injuries and reproaches. In
such company thou shall meet with Temptations, and therefore should be
fitted to encounter with them.

5. Be wise how thou do reprove them: though reproof be a duty, yet it must
be well managed; our Saviors direction is, Matthew 7. 6. Give not holy things
unto the Dogs, neither cast pearls before Swine lest they trample them under
their feet, and turn again and rend you.

6. Endeavor by all good means to convert them. Take heed of complying with
them in their ways, under pretense of turning them. That Is the ready way for
them to glory and insult over thee and to harden themselves. But be thou as a
light shining before them to convince them, Philippians 2. 15.

7. If we cannot convert them, yet let us endeavor to restrain them by our
authority, prayers and power with them.

Fifthly, It should admonish us to prepare our selves for these temptations:
while ye live on earth ye shall not live in a heaven of Saints, but in a
world of ungodly men, and therefore make account of temptations and fit your
selves for them; ye that be here of this City because God has given you
deliverance now, do not grow secure, but think ye may have more trialls.
Remember the spirit of wicked men is restless, though they miss in one plot
they will attempt another; according to the spirit by which they are guided, as
Satan goes about seeking whom he may devour, so do wicked men his Agents.

Sixthly and lastly, Herein is manifested the gracious providence of God for the
godly, that though they are under Temptations, yet they are delivered from
them, though they walk among snares, though they are placed as Christ says as
sheep in the midst of wolves, a few weak sheep in the midst of a great
multitude of ravening wolves, yet the Church is preserved, this is Gods work;
so it was at this time in this City, a small company of godly persons preserved
from a great number of malignant spirits within and without it: O let us admire
the goodness of our God herein. It is the business of this day: Do it fully,
Let your spirits be raised up in admiration of Gods care and working for his
people. Let your hearts and tongues magnify God, and say, Great is the Lord,
and great are his works* and great deliverances gives he unto his people.
Happy O people saved by the Lord. Happy are they that be in such a case: yea
rather happy are they that have the Lord for their God.

2 PET. 2. 9. The Lord knows how to deliver the Godly out of Temptation, and
to reserve the unjust unto the day of judgment to be punished.
WE have considered in the Morning the estate of the Godly in respect of
unjust men among whom they live: they are under Temptation. We are now to
consider their estate in respect of Gods care and aspect to them. The Lord
knows how to deliver them. The Truth emergent from hence is this. Though it
be that the godly while they live among unjust men be in temptation: yet God
knows how to deliver them. This is the express assertion of the Text. The
Lord knows how to deliver the godly out of Temptation. The phrase [ The Lord
knoweth] imports both care, providence, and vigilance to deliver, and also
skill and wisdom how to contrive it, and consequently, certainty of
deliverance. To like purpose are many other places of holy Scripture, Psalm. 9.
9. The Lord also will be a refuge for the oppressed, a refuge in times of
Trouble, Psalm. 33. 18. Behold the eye of the Lord is upon them that fear him:
upon them that hope in his mercy, to deliver their soul from death. To make
this Truth a little more explicate, we are to consider, that this skill,
vigilance and providence of God in delivering the godly out of Temptation,

First, Has reference to diverse sorts of deliverance. There are diverse kinds
of deliverance, and diverse degrees in those kinds. There is a deliverance of
the Soul from the wrath of God. Jesus that delivers from the wrath to come,
1 Thessalonians. 1. 10. A deliverance from the power and guilt of sin, from the
anguish and horror of conscience, from desertion and Apostasy. There are
deliverances of the body, of the natural life, from death, from tears, from
sickness, from wants, from danger. The Lord knows how to accommodate his
deliverance, to give deliverance according to what kind and degree he thinks
meet. Sometimes God delivers from death, Psa. 116. 8. Thou have delivered my
soul from death. Sometimes by death, Isa. 57. 1. The righteous perishes and
no man lays it to heart; and merciful men are taken away, none considering
that the righteous is taken away from the evil to come. See, The Lord knows
sundry ways of deliverance, not only by keeping them from the hands of unjust
men, but sometimes by letting them fall into their hands.

Secondly, It has reference to the persons delivered. Sometimes the Lord
delivers many, sometimes few, sometimes whole Cities and people, sometimes a
small remnant in them, Romans 9. 27. Isa. 10. 22. Though the number of the
children of Israel be as the Sand of the Sea, a remnant shall be saved: though
there be great multitudes of men, yet a few shall be delivered.

Thirdly, it has reference to the means of deliverance. Sometimes the Lord
delivers by a visible power, sometimes the Lord delivers by an invisible
working, sometimes God delivers by putting a mere fancy into the mind of the
enemy, sometimes by a real accident unthought of: 1 Samuel 23. 26, 27. Saul and
his men, had encompassed David and his men round about to take him. But there
came a Messenger unto Saul, saying, Haste thee and come: for the Philistines
have invaded the Land. Wherefore Saul returned from pursuing after David, and
went against the Philistines. Sometimes the Lord delivers by an Angel,
sometimes by men. That which the Prophet speaks, Isa. 28. 29. is true of the
means of deliverance. This also comes forth from the Lord of hoasts, who is
wonderful in counsel, and excellent in working. That we least dream of, is
often times the means of deliverance; that which we most hoped in, is often times
most unprofitable to us.

Fourthly, It has reference to the case of the persons delivered. Sometimes
the unjust persons be many, strong, cunning, active, malicious: on the other
side, the persons delivered are few, weak, distracted* fearful, simple, yet
notwithstanding the Lord knows how to deliver them. Even these poor ones are
preserved, and those strong, cunning and active men miss of their prey*

Fifthly, It has reference to the time of delivery. Gods skill, vigilance, and
providence is clearly seen, in the season and opportunity of deliverance,
Isa. 64. 3. Then did terrible things which we looked not for: when the case
of persons rescued is in appearance hopeless, yet the Lord knows how to
deliver even then.

Sixthly, It has reference to the fruits and consequent of the deliverance.
There is a deliverance which is but incompleate: persons are delivered from one
judgment, but reserved to another. The King of Sodom was delivered from the
Kings that came against him, but reserved to fire and Brimstone. Sometimes God
gives a complete deliverance that procures a continued peace. Jehoshaphat was
delivered from the invasion of the Moabites, and the fruit of it was, the
Realm was quiet: for his God gave him rest round about, 2 Chronicles. 20. 30.
Sometimes God gives a deliverance which ends in triumph and glory; sometimes a
deliverance which leads to more temptations. God it may be gives a deliverance
to show what he would do if we would cleave to him: but because of our
forgetfulness of God, our not rendering again according to his mercy, we may
be delivered from one conspiracy so as to fall into another, from one evil so
as to be reserved to a greater.

The reasons why God does thus providently and skilfully deliver the godly out
of temptation are;

First, because of his promise, God has engaged his word for the deliverance
of his people, Psalm. 50. 15. I will deliver thee, and thou shall glorify me.

Secondly, because they pray to him: in the same place he says, Call upon me
in the day of trouble, and I will deliver thee. God will not be wanting to the
prayer of the poor destitute, he will hear their cry. Though it be that proud
Atheistical persons make no reckoning of prayer, as if it could do any thing
for deliverance, yet sure prayer is a mighty engine with God, it is of singular
force for deliverance. The effectual servent prayer of the righteous avayleth
much, Jam. 5. 16.

Thirdly, because of his love* for that makes him employ his wisdom and power
for the deliverance of the godly, Deuteronomy. 33. 3. yea he loved the people; all
his Saints are in thine hand.

Because they reciprocally love God, and are tempted for his sake. For thy sake
we are killed all the day long and counted as sheep for the slaughter, Psalm.
44. 22. Therefore he must needs favor their cause, and be engaged in point of
honor to deliver them, Psalm. 91. 14. Because he has set his love upon me,
therefore will I deliver him. A good master will not suffer his servant to
miscarry for his fidelity in doing his business. Surely God that is the best
master, who has far more goodness then all the creatures, will not fail to
protect and rescue his servants, his children, that are in danger for his sake.
Besides it concerns God to show himself just, in righting the innocent, that
he may make good his title, The God of judgment. The Lord knows the way of
the righteous, Psalm. 1. 6. and therefore is by his righteousness bound to
help them.

Fifthly, the rage of the enemies is a sufficient reason for God to deliver his
people, and to employ his providence and power for their rescue* Deuteronomy. 32. 27.
says God, I would make the remembrance of them to cease from among men, were
it not that I feared the wrath of the enemy lest their adversaries should
behave themselves strangely. The Lord intends to use wicked men as his rod
often times to scourge the godly: but he intends they should correct them, not
destroy them, he would not have them altogether unpunished yet corrected in
measure: he would not have them lost though chastised. Therefore he gives
deliverance at last though the enemy rage much; The rod of the wicked shall not
rest upon the let of the righteous: lest the righteous put forth their hand
unto iniquity, Psalm. 125. 3. Because he knows the enemy is implacable,
unmercifull, knows not how to put bounds to his rage, but acts in his fury ad
extremum virium, to the utmost of his power, therefore God sets bounds to his
rage and curbs his fury, Psalm. 76. 10. Surely the wrath of man shall praise
thee: the remainder of wrath shall thou restrain.

Sixthly, the presumption and boasting of the enemy is a great motive to God to
deliver his people. Thus the Psalmist urges God to remember the reproach of
the enemy, the voice of the enemy, Psalm. 74. 18. 23. Because they conspire
together, they say, Come let us destroy them all together, let us out them off
from being a nation, that the name of Israel may be no more in Remembrance,
Psalm. 83. 4. they say let us persecute and take him, there is none to deliver
him, they magnify their own power, they deride the poor godly man, as if
there were no help for him in God, they promise to themselves satisfaction of
their rage, malice, covetousness, therefore God will disappoint them. Because
of Senacheribs blasphemy and reproach God delivered Hezekiah and Jerusalem.
Because thy rage against me, and thy tumult is come up into mine ears:
therefore will I put my hook into thy nose, and my bridle in thy lips, and I
will turn thee back by the way by which thou came, says God, Isa. 37. 29.
not only by reason of the cries of the oppressed, but also by reason of the
bragges of proud tongues that have said, We will prevail, who is Lord over us?
therefore says God, I will arise, and set him in safety from him that p^ffeth
at him, Psalm. 12. v. 5.

Applic. For Application. First, this may serve to abate the presumption and
boasting of unrighteous men in their practices against the godly. It is usual
with ungodly persons when they have hatched a plot, when they have gathered a
power, to ensnare and crush the godly to promise themselves certainty of
prevayling because of their cunning, confederacy, secrecy: because they
conceive the godly have no power, or no wit to withstand them. And therefore in
the laying of all their plots, in the pursuing of all their designs they make
God as a cipher, and vilify godly persons, as if they were a contemptible
poor nothing. And all is because they have no acquaintance with this truth
that God knows how to deliver the godly out of temptation. Wherefore they
vaunt and boast themselves: all their speech is of their great multitude, great
party, strong power, good Commanders, wealthy men, cunning plotters, firm
union, these and such like things they glory in. Senacherib makes no other
account but to take Jerusalem by reason of his multitude of Chariots and
horsemen, sends word to Hezekiah by Rabshakeh to this purpose. Think thou
that thou shall be delivered out of my hands? I will give thee two thousand
horses if thou be able on thy part to set riders upon them. As if he had said,
thou have so few men as not to be able to furnish two thousand horses with
able riders, and how then can thou stand against me who bring into the field
hundreds of thousands? The same thought is in other ungodly persons, they make
no account but to prevail and carry the day because of their multitude and
confederacy. God is secluded from their thoughts, as if he were but a looker
on that did nothing. But as we use to say, they that reckon without their host
must reckon again: they that reckon without God make up an easy reckoning,
but a foolish one: they please themselves in a vain presumption which cannot
hold. Experience might inform them, that when men presume most, they fail
most, and that Gods people are then nearest to deliverance when they are in
appearance in the most hopeless condition; The reasons hereof are evident. God
knows how to deliver when man does not, and when men say there is no help for
him in his God, then it is that God does most certainly appear with
deliverance. Out then with all these Atheistical thoughts, as if the godly and
their cause were lost, when forces fail, enemies grow potent, and are many in
number. Let this one experiment of this Cities deliverance teach you to see the
presumption of men to be a vain thing. When almost was there a time wherein a
City was nearer spoiling and destruction, and yet preserved? The narration read
to you may easily give you to conceive how near it was to be taken, how great
the presumption of the plotters was of the success. Yet lo in this one
instance this truth verified, The Lord knows how to deliver the godly out of
Temptation: by his skill, and vigilance we have had deliverance. Let not then
proud spirits vaunt of their plot and power, but remember what Jethro said
concerning the deliverance at the red Sea, Exodus 18. 11. Now I know that the
Lord is greater then all Gods: for in the thing wherein they dealt proudly he
was above them.

Secondly, This should strengthen our faith, and encourage us to seek unto God
and rely upon him, even then when in our own apprehension we be at the
weakest, and the enemy most potent. So did Jehosaphat, 2 Chronicles. 20. 12. O our
God will thou not judge them? For we have no might against this great company
that comes against us: neither know we what to do: but our eyes are upon
thee. And a little after, verse. 15. Be not afraid nor dismayed by reason of
this great multitude: for the battle is not yours but Gods. Be it that we be
brought to great straights, so that we see no way of escape, no means of
help, yet let our eyes be fixed on the power that is above, still keep up
your heart with prayer in dependence upon God. And let me tell you, that faith
is as good as a whole Army, yea it is more then great forces, By it the Saints
have obtained victories, escaped the edge of the Sword, Heb. 11. 34. Mark what
Hanani the Seer told Asa, 2 Chronicles. 16. 7, 8, 9. Because thou bast relied on the
King of Syria, and not relied on the Lord thy God, therefore is the host of
the King of Syria escaped out of thine hand. Were not the Ethiopians and Lubins
a huge host with very many Chariots and horsemen? yet because thou did rely
on the Lord he delivered them into thine hand? For the eyes of the Lord run to
and fro thoorow out the whole earth to show himself strong in the behalf of
them whose heart is perfect toward him. The truth is: Faith is our greatest
strength; Armies be of no power without God, and when God makes an Army to be a
scourge to a people, it is likely because they want faith in God for
deliverance. Oh that then our hearts might be established upon God, whatever
straights we are brought to, that we could learn to cling, and rest, and
hang upon him by faith, though outward help fail. He is the Lord of hosts,
the God of all power and wisdom: Let our faith in God be strong, though the
arm of flesh we use be weak.

Thirdly, if God be so expert in deliverance, we should learn to wait upon
God, and to stay his time for deliverance. God does not deliver according to
thy will, but according to his own purpose, and therefore we should quiet our
selves in his wisdom and care, patiently staying till he be pleased to send
deliverance. We are ready to anticipate Gods work, to prescribe the way and
time of deliverance, and if they fail to begin to grow weary with waiting, yea
to draw desperate conclusions therefrom, and all is because we have not
learned this lesson, that the Lord knows how to deliver when man does not;
that his ways are unsearchable and past finding out by us, that he reserveth
the ordering of means, the time when, and the extent of deliverance how far
it shall reach. Learn then to be contented though he disappoint thee in the
way of deliverance thou fixest thy thoughts and hopes on, and keep up thy
confidence in God his faithfulness and power. Remember that of the Prophet,
Isa. 28. 16. He that believes shall not make haste.

Fourthly, if it be the Lord that knows how to deliver, then when we have
deliverance, we must remember to magnify his wisdom, goodness, care,
vigilance and providence. And this is the proper business of this day. God
has given a great deliverance to this City. And I beseech you to consider to
whom it can be ascribed but to him. It were extreme sottshnesse for any man
to imagine that such a deliverance came by chance, that it was hap-hazzard,
uncertain blind Fortune that did so discover and prevent a plot so long
before contrived, and so near the accomplishment, nor can it be conceived to
have been by the foresight of men. The truth is, all sorts of persons were in a
dubious and trembling condition. A plot was feared, but what it might be, or
what way to discover it, I suppose the Agents in the discovery knew not till
God directed some unexpectedly to give intelligence. Those that sat at the
stern here will acknowledge they were at a stand, and knew not what to do:
those that seemed best to understand the state of things, here conceived them
in a hopeless condition. If then it cannot be ascribed to fortune, or to men,
to whom shall we ascribe the delivery but to God? Doubtless they show
themselves arrant fools, gross doaters, sottish persons, stupid wretches,
that will not say, Digitus Dei est hic, herein is the finger of God. That a
plot contrived with so much cunning, brought on so near to an issue, should
even then be discovered, even then be prevented when it was to be acted, with
such a merciful preservation of those against whom it was intended, binds us
to give great praise unto God. Let us then with our whole heart acknowledge,
that great has the wisdom, providence and vigilance of God been over this
place in discovering and preventing this plot.

To make us more sensible hereof, let us consider the greatness of the
delivery by the number of persons delivered, even many thousands of lives in
all likelihood, a whole City, and a great City preserved. Yea doubtless those
that conceived themselves safe enough have cause to acknowledge their
deliverance. Let men dream of a word or a sign as a security for them; alas!
in a furious concourse, while men are in heat of blood, do ye think they
can attend to observe and mark a word, a little white Tape in the bosom or in
the hat? Alas! who may not easily conceive that in such a confusion as must
needs have been at the rising up and entering of so great forces into a City, in
such hurly burly, in such fighting there would have been little distinction
made of inhabitants, yea possibly (as is usual in such fights) their own
Forces some of them might have suffered as enemies. It is easy to conceive
that not only goods, but also persons would have perished together. And
therefore they that imagined themselves safe enough by reason of the good will
they thought the parties plotting and invading did bear to them, yet have
reason to acknowledge a great deliverance of them in the disappointing of this
Plot, not only the persons particularly designed to destruction, but also many
hundreds of those who thought themselves safe enough, would have been involved
in the common slaughter.

Secondly, let us consider the greatness of the deliverance in the fullness of
it. Though many thousands were destinate to destruction, yet not the hair of
one man's head lost, not one drop of blood shed, not one person that we know of
lost, no not so much as one Penny: this was a great deliverance.

Thirdly, let us consider the greatness of the deliverance by the smalnesse of
the means. A deliverance in a manner without any help against a great Power:
without any foresight against a vigilant enemy: that God might have all the
glory, and man only the knowledge of his own weakness.

Fourthly, a deliverance in a desperate case, when the enemy was confident,
when the preserved were fearful.

Fifthly, a deliverance in the very nicke of time, immediately before the plot
should have been acted.

Sixthly, a deliverance that has vouchsafed to make for the present, the place
safe, the inhabitants in a better posture for the future, which may in
probability tend to the peace of the whole kingdom. However it be that things
succeed, yet surely there could not be a way in likelihood that might have
tended to the shortning of this war, and so consequently to the peace and
quietness of this kingdom more effectual then this, that God was pleased to
deliver this City: And which is of all the most blessed effect, it has
redounded to Gods glory by many thanksgivings to him, which we this day with
the acclamations of our souls give unto him: and I doubt not but that it will
tend much to the undeceiving of the people from those hard thoughts they have
had of the godly as turbulent, and discover the deep wickedness that is in the
hearts of malignant spirits, notwithstanding all their pretenses, so that I
hope in time it shall be that as in the days of Joshua, so God will bring it
to pass that no dog shall move his tongue against his people, and all will see
a necessity of reformation in the discipline of the Church, which is the great
desire of all the godly in the Land. I will express my conceits unto you. I
have conceived this plot in the intention of it, and many circumstances in it
very like that ever to be abhorred Massacre at Paris in France under Charles
the ninth of France, and the discovery and disappointment like unto that of the
Castle and City of Dublin in Ireland somewhat more then a year since, by
which although the war and misery of that kingdom has not been altogether
prevented, yet has been through the Almighties sole power in a great measure
lessened. Doubtless the same spirit of Antichrist has moved in all these
plots, and this present war is set on foot by the same Jesuiticall
Achitophels, by the same Catholic league. It is the same plot that began in
Scotland, but lighted on Ireland, and now in a heavy manner of England. It is
plain enough to every one that will consider the agents, the circumstances of
it that it is the plot of Papists, and Jesuited spirits to root out the
Protestant Religion under other pretenses. And God does begin now to discover
it, and I doubt not but will more discover it, and clear the innocence of his
people, and add deliverances to them, but ruin and downfall to that
Antichristian state. What are we to do this day but to acknowledge the
greatness of this deliverance, to magnify God our deliverer, and cause the
voice of his praise to be heard; to rejoice in Gods work which he has done?
Though we may not rejoice in the misery of any man as delighting in it, though
we are not to insult over them, but to pity them, who did not pity us, though
we are not to reproach them, but to pray for them, that God would soften their
hearts and open their eyes, that they may see against whom they strive; yet for
as much as the Scripture says, The righteous shall rejoice when he sees the
venge me, he shall wash his feet in the blood of the wicked, Psalm. 58. 10.
that God may be magnified we are to rejoice that they are cast down, and
that God has vouchsafed unto his people a day of deliverance, and (blessed be
his name) a day of thanksgiving without any interruption. I beseech you let not
this mercy be lost, keep a yearly memorial of it, let not this day be lost,
spend it not only in ease from labor and carnal mirth, but remember that
Deus nobis haec ^ti^ fecit, God has done this great thing for us, and let our
rejoicing be in God, our praises of him, Oh praise our God all ye people, and
let the voice of his praise he heard, which endues our soul with life, and
suffers not our feet to slip. And in your praises observe these directions.

First, remember the great deliverance of all deliverances, even the
deliverance which the Lord Jesus the great Captain of our Salvation has
gotten for us by his death over Hell and Death. Every deliverance we have from
the inferior instruments of Satan the great adversary should lead to the
remembrance of the grand deliverance from Hell eternally to be remembered.

Secondly, let this deliverance confirm your faith, and erect your hope in
expectation of those great diliverances which all Gods people long for, even
the great deliverance from Antichrist when God will judge the whore, and avenge
the sea of blood that has been drunk these many hundreds of years by that
cruel dominion of the Papacy, which all that love Jesus Christ do earnestly
pray for and endeavor: the deliverance from Gog and Magog when their great
multitudes shall be overthrown: the deliverance from the grave, when the
Earth and the Sea shall give up their dead. Learn we to argue as the Apostle
does, 2 Cor. 1. 10. who delivered us from so great death, and does deliver; in
whom we trust that he will yet deliver us. God has delivered this City and
therefore will deliver his Church which is his own City. It is the
argumentation of the Apostle here. God delivered Noah from the old world at the
deluge, he delivered Lot out of Sodom, and therefore, God knows how to
deliver the godly out of Temptation. One deliverance is enough to conclude a
succession of deliverances. All Gods deliverances are grounded upon the same
reason, and therefore the assurance of one is a confirmation of our faith
concerning all.

Thirdly, learn to delight thy self in God, learn to glory and make thy
boast in him. Say as Nebuchadnezzar himself acknowledged, Dan. 3. 29. There is
no other God that can deliver after this sort. We that hope in the living God,
that trust in Christ Jesus should raise our spirits to an high and holy
magnanimity and courage in our God, despise the Idols that superstitious
persons magnify. Has God delivered us? Has the Son of God saved us? away
then with Crosses, Crucifixes, dead Saints, Images, Relics, breaden Gods;
they are but dead things, they cannot deliver, they are but vanity and lies,
there is no breath, there is no trust in them. Let us exalt our God and say,
Our God is the living God and an everlasting King, the portion of Jacob is not
like them, Israel is the rod of his inheritance, Jerem. 10. Our God is a God
that can deliver, and does deliver, and will deliver. Let the experiment of
Gods deliverance raise our hearts to an high apprehension of the power, and
excellency and worthiness of our God.

Lastly, let us cleave steadfastly to our God. Has God stood to us? let us
stand fast to him: stand to his truth by professing, to his commands by obeying
them, stand unto his people by appearing for them, stand to his cause by
engaging our selves in it, stand to Gods Name by trusting on it. Does God
deliver the Godly? Oh prize godliness then as great gain, as profitable for
all things. Does God hear prayers? Oh then let us use prayers to God. Let us
contradict sinners, and say, It is not in vain to serve God, that there is
profit in keeping his ordinances, and that we walk mournfully before the Lord
of hoasts, Mal. 3. 14. Let us return and discern between the righteous and
the wicked, between him that serves God and him that serves him not, v. 18.
To manifest which I should proceed to handle the other Conclusion in the Text,
The Lord knows how to reserve the unjust to the day of judgment to be
punished; but time will not permit.

FINIS.

