Tom Tel-Troths come to town again with his humors. Under which Humor is
contained these particulars: Viz. A Rope for a Parat. A Babble for a Fool. A
Spring for a Woodcocke. And a Snare for a Fox.


Collected and published to make honest and wise men merry, or fools and
knaves mad.

printer's or publisher's device

Printed at London for Th: Lambert near the Red Cross in Little Britain.
1643.

Tom Tel-Troths HVMOVR.
HOw now my masters, what is the matter? what, shall we have Tom Tel-troathes
humor? what kind of fellow's this Tom Tel-troath, that he must have his
peculiar humor published, (nay more) and this humor of his is proposed as a
pattern for honest men to imitate? it is strange, yet as true; for let me tell
you, this book contains (as in the title it is promised) A rope for a Parat,
(you may understand me) A babble for a fool, (don't mistake me) A spring for a
Woodcocke, (I hope you conceive me) and a Snare for a Fox, (that is a cup of
good Ale, as I think) this is Tom Tel-troathes humor.

Item, he esteems a man not altogether for his wealth, but something for his
virtue and honesty, for he is persuaded that a rich man may bind a lie more
firmly by his credit, then a poor man by his oath: this is Tom Tel-troathes
humor.

Item, he cannot endure a man that will beat his wife, for he thinks that such
provocations may induce an honest woman to work revenge without resisting: you
know how, my masters, don't you? this is Tom Tel-troathes humor.

Item, he is of opinion that a Brokers conscience lies in his shopbooke, and
that of all extortioners he is the greatest; for your common Usurers are to be
accounted courteous kind neighbors, and Commonwealths men, in comparison of
Brokers; yet of both, if there be ever a good one, there is none bad: this is
Tom Tel-troaths humor.

Item, he loves to look before he leap, and to advise before he execute any
great design, because foresight is as good as working, and policy oftentimes
performs what strength cannot: Probattm est: this is Tom Tel-troths humor.

Item, of all kind of creature; (next unto man) he honnours a woman, because
she is man's necessary partner, and may at her pleasure elevate his fortune,
these things he knows may be, but he is loath to prove it in himself: this
is Tom Tel-troths humor.

Item, he hates a Bawd and a Horsecourser, and holds them both alike in their
professions, because both sell Jades, only the difference is in this, the Bawd
sels few under fifteen, and the Horscourser all under five: this is Tom
Tel-troths humor.

Item, he is indifferent-whether he have any money or none, but to supply his
wants, and pay his debts, otherwise he thinks money to be a thing not worthy
of such esteem as it has now adays among people, because though we covet it
so much, yet in time of necessity a halfe-penny loaf, and a pint of beer, or
water, will stand us in more stead, then ten millions of gold or silver,
which we can neither eat nor drink, this is certain true: and this is Tom
Tel-troths humor.

Item, he wishes that those prattling ignorant Parats which call indifferently
for an Almond and a Rope, because they are a cage of unclean birds, whose
tongues set people together by the ears, while they cry, Walk knave, walk,
both to good and bad, let the last word stand, a rope for Parat, walk knave,
walk: this is Tom Tel-troths humor.

Item, he loves a Soldier with his heart, and he counts his profession truly
honorable, but in this respect he would live lovingly by his neighbor, but
is loath to have need of him, so he loves and respects a Soldier, but he
begges of heaven, that he may never stand in want of that calling: you
understand me Gentlemen, peace is a precious commodity: this is Tom Tel-troths
humor.

Item, he is of that Religion which preferres obedience before sacrifice, and
humility before private opinion or self-conceit, and if any thing wants
reformation, he thinks prayer, patience, and longanimity, to be a better,
safer, and more pleasing way, then thus to go so roundly to work, expecting
great matters to be done in a moment: this is not: Tom Tel-troths humor.

Item, he preferres Antiquity before Novellisme, as age claims precedence
before youth, and although he confesses that Barnes, Stables, Tubs, Chaires,
and Baskets were made and used before Churches and Pulpits were built, yet he
holds it fitting that every Tub should stand upon its own bottom, and that
there should be a distinction between divine and profane places, persons,
and things, let all be done to property, and nothing to slander and obloquy:
this is Tom Tel-troths humor.

Item, he deemes it an horrible disgrace for a man to scold in the street, for
it is a material point of wisdom and humanity to distinguish a Socrates from
a Zantippe, let a hen be known by her cackling, and a cock by his manly
crowing, carriage, and valor: this is Tom Tel-troths humor.

Item, he scorns cowardice, and he as much hates quarrelling: in his own
defense, and a lawful cause he can fight, yet preferres peace before
dissension, remission of faults before severe revenge, and if he wear any
weapon, it is rather to defend himself or his friend, then to oftend others:
this is Tom Tel-troths humor.

Item, he cares not much whether there be any Bishops or no, (as the case
stands) if there be any, he would have them to be as as they ought, painful
Preachers, humble and devour, examples of piety, charity, hospitality, and all
Religious acts, no unnecessary intermedler with worldly and temporal
businesses, through avaritious desire of gain) but careful feeders, not
fleecers of the flocks committed to their government: this is Tom Tel-troths
humor.

Item, he is no great gamester, unless it be at Put, for a pot, to pass
idle time: but he loathes them who put more into their heads then their legs
can well carry, and so turn pastime and honest recreation into painful
profanation, and a high way to damnation: This is a snare for a Fox, but not
Tom Tel-troths humor.

Item, he loves at all times (according to his ability) whatsoeve^ himself
does, to provide necessary; for his wife and family, this every honest man is
bound in conscience to do, and (if I mistake not this is Tom Tel-troths humor.

Item, he holds it requisite in a woman, so he hopes his wife is, to be sober,
honest, loving, thrifty and cleanly, for, and to her husband; (...) raylineg
scold, no sluttish queen, no drunken for, no carry-tale gossip, no backbiter,
no envious slanderer, nor one who rather then he should be conted a Roundhead,
will make him a Ramhead, the first qualities are to be loved and respected, the
last to be loathd and rejected of all: and this is Tom Tel-troths humor.

Item, to become surety, and to enter into bond for another man's debt, to be
deluded by fair promises, to engage himself so far for his feigned friend,
that you may, count him a sure constant man, and know always where to find
him, I hope you conceive me, that's a spring for a Woodcocke, but it is not
Tom Tel-troths humor.

Item, he conceives but little difference between a Potter and a Carrier, or
Carter, yet some there is, for the Porter patiently understands how things are
carried by himself, but the other must say Gramary horse for his living; and
though the world run on wheeler with him, yet sometimes he has enough to do
to keep the Cart upon the wheels, therefore the Porter may claim precedence:
this is Tom Tel-troths humor.

Item, he deemes it unfitting that a man should disfigure himself by spoiling
that which God and Nature has lent him for an ornament, and that is the hair
of the head, which some pole so close, that they seem rather to be Monkyes
then men; no he says that mediecrity is to be observed in such a measure,
that not only pride, but also scandal may in some sort be avoided: this is
Tom Tel-troths humor.

Item, as he loves no shorter hair then necessity urges, so on the other side
he abhorres this abominable custom of Protean Periwigs; which to say plain,
mikes a man in the open street appear like a Player, acting a part upon ^^e
Sta^^e (...) ^asualty of sickness to deprive him of that natural ornament,
he will be contented to wait his leisure who took ^ow^y the first crop, till he
send a second: but a Periwig out upon it, that is a babble for a fool, not
fitting for a wise man to use, (don't mistake me) this is Tom Tel-troths humor.

Item, when he sees a man go into a noted common bawdy house, then he
conjecture; (I and that very probably too) that within self then an hour
after there will be a commotion between two malignant Plants, (Planet, I might
have said, ^t let the full word stand) which conjunction is likely to produce
dangerous and pestifero^^ ef^ects, among the rest, it will certainly lighten
(the pockets he means) and great intolerable heat may be judged to succeed,
with malevolent diseases; what the pox shall we think else of this horrible
conjunction, when a whore and a knave in that kind meet together, shine the
Sun nere so clear, betwixt them there is foul weather: this is Tom
Tel-troths humor.

Item, he holds it repugnant to reason that truth should hope to be upheld and
propagated by falsehood, he would have every man speak (...) unto his
neighbor, (...) familiar with verily and sincerely, should let verity and
sincerity b^e more conversant with their he rts: he would have no letters
written without subscriptions and supe s ription, lest the intellectual
suspect them of forge y: moreover he remembers an old Proverb, Veritas non
quaerit a^gul^s; this is Tom Tel-troths humor.

Item, he think it a great poin^ of fo^ly in any man to thirst after news,
whereof this age is so plentiful, that the matter being so false, the minor
(though true) is suspected: and he can never forget my Lord Deputiet (more
knave then) fool, who when a certain Lord was accused of speaking uncertain
words, this fellow got a loaf in one hand, and a Neats tongue in the other, so
eating the bread, and holding up the tongue, my Lord asks, What Is thy conceit,
sirrah? Why Tom (quoth he) thou see I hold my tongue, and eat my bread
quietly: this anigma needs so Oedipus to discover it, it is so easily conceived,
and this is Tom Tel-troths humor.

Postscript.
THis holding of the tongue puts me in mind
To hold my pen; well Thomas once again
I council thee to have thy heart inclined
To what thy tongue has promised; else in vain
Is this thy Humor published in the street,
Unless thy heart and tongue in concord meet.
FINIS.

