THis choicely learned and accurately labored Treatise I cannot let pass with
a bare Imprimatur: but must add, I am confident, that, as it will serve (most
seasonably) both to correct the licentious surfets of the Press by its
example, and uncheate the masquery of the times by its use, so can it not but
much delight the Reader with its variety both of story and conceit.

Charles Herle.

THE HYPOCRITE DISCOVERED AND CVRED.

The Definition Of Hypocrisy. The Kinds Of Hypocrisy. The Subject Of
Hypocrisy. The Symptoms Of Hypocrisy. The Prognostics Of Hypocrisy. The
Causes Of Hypocrisy. The Cure Of Hypocrisy.
A DISCOVRSE FVRNISHED With much variety of Experimental and Historical
observations, and most seasonable for these times of happy design for
Reformation.

In two Books.

By SAMUEL TORSHELL.

With an Epistle to the Assembly of Divines, about the discerning of spirits.

1 JOHN 4.1. Beloved, believe not every spirit, but try the spirits, whether
they are of God,

1 COR. 12.10. To one is given by the Spirit the word of wisdom; to another,
discerning of spirits.

ORdered, November. 24, 1643. that this Book be printed, for John Bellamie.

JOHN WHITE.
Imprimatur, Edm. Calamie.

London, Printed by G. M. for John Bellamy at the Sign of the three golden
Lions near the Royall-Exchange, M.DC.XLIV.

TO THE REVEREND AND LEARNED Prolocutor, the Assessors, and the rest of the
Reverend Divines, in the Honorable and Reverend Assembly now sitting, by the
Ordinance of our High Court of PARLIAMENT.
I Have ventured forth a tender piece, which is not likely to escape the
censure of such as are guilty, whom perhaps it may make to smart; and therefore
it will need the patronage of such as are very discerning, and very sincere.
Such I esteem you, and from my very soul do bless God for you, and have
hopes that God has in it his thoughts to refresh this poor and torn nation,
and the Churches, because he has given courage to so many able and godly
Divines to meet together, though threatened with Proclamations to the contrary,
and being met, a sweet agreement in common principles and the love of the
truth, though prophesied of by ungodly, wanton and profane wits, that they
would presently break asunder through variety of opinions. Truly if you had
brought with you that pride and pomp which we were wont to see in our former
mock-Synods and Convocations, we might have expected that before this time you
should have been the dirision and scorn of the Prelaticall and Atheistical
party. But for ever blessed be the name of God, for that sweet condescension,
for that humble and resolved subjection unto light, for that diligent and holy
pursuit of truth, which all-together do promise an happy issue of your
meeting. Go on with your prudent and holy debates, and the Lord so bless them
and crown them, that your advice being laid before our great and high Court,
they may under God settle upon us the glory of all the Ordinances of Christ,
and remove every burden which the tyranny of abused Episcopacie had laid upon
us. I call their courses tyranny, and their Impositions burdens, as having had
thorough the happiness of these late times, better means and opportunity to
discern and weigh them: for let me speak freely, and as becomes us now that
the hand of God is so much out against the nation, let me speak humbly, I
confess my thoughts were heretofore more favorable, as walking according to
those principles I had received in my education. The truth is, though I never
thought Episcopacie to be of Divine-right, as it was proudly challenged, yet I
looked upon it as the most ancient and most prudentiall way of government, and
so obeyed it and spoke well of it, though not its mad and furious ways, for I
ever protested against their Altars and their cringes, their suppressing of
faithful and painful Preachers, their discouraging and undermining of the
power of godliness, their wanton and profane abuse of the high and dreadful
censure of excommunication; yet in a general conformity to such things as I
conceived were by law established, I obeyed it, as thinking it to be a sin not
to have done so. I will not be ashamed to put those charitable thoughts I had
(for so I will call them, and so my own conscience after I examined it, does
call them) among the errata of my life. The reading of Cyprian, first made me
stumble in the point of Episcopacie, but afterward when I met with Mr Whites
learned and serious Speech against it in Parliament, which was afterward
printed, to the great good I believe of the Kingdom, as no doubt inviting many
to look into that point, which they had not formerly studied, I was fully
convinced of the inconveniences and mischiefs of it among us.

It may be the wisdom of this generation, will account it an unwary and
imprudent part in me, to express my self so freely and so nakedly, in a time
when all the religious endeavors of our Parliament run such a dangerous
hazard, and when the violent Popish Counsels drive on with such advantage; and
I confess that in such a throng of accidents and occurrances, wherein a man
may easily lose himself and miss the times he would feign meet and comply
with, it were better to stand still till the times found and came up to him:
but give me leave to breath out a sad thought or two, I much doubt we shall not
meet those good times we look for, for as some Declarations of Parliament, and
some other Books formerly and of late, have made it manifest, that there is a
design for the readvancement of Popery, so I fear the counsels of God are
that way for our trial, I mean the word of prophecy in the eleventh chapter
of the Revelation, concerning which thing I profess I have not seen Mr Mead's
argument satisfied, That that slaying is yet to be expected. I should with all
my heart say Amen to the contrary opinion, and should be glad to be found in an
error in this thing, and I hope I am in one. Howsoever, this opinion is so far
from weakening and disengaging of me, that it carries me on more effectually
and resolvedly in the good liking of all the present attempts for Reformation;
for by comparing the Prophecy, with the late and present motions of Ireland,
of the Kings-Army, and of some Princes abroad, I have collected that whosoever
runs all along to the end of the course with the Court-Counsels and Army, must
be a Papist at last whatsoever he be now, or whatsoever his thoughts be yet.

Upon these considerations, I had once resolved to have brought my Hypocrite
before the Parliament-barre, and in an humble Dedication, to have Indicted it
before them, the grandstate-Hypocrisie, I had drawn up some Articles of
Impeachment to that purpose, but this very week, while I was thinking of it,
there came abroad, besides Mr Prinnes Book, (The Favorite,) another Discourse,
to my apprehension very clear, serious and weighty, I mean, The Mystery of
Iniquity, whereby I was happily prevented.

Being hereby diverted, I have applied my self to you, Fathers and Brethren,
Reverend and Beloved. Much depends upon your advise for the promoting of
Reformation, which notwithstanding what I have said and feared, and for ought I
know, may have an happy progress, and oh that it might have so, withwithout
interruption or prevention. To this purpose your inspection and care will be
very needful, that while unworthy, corrupt and scandalous men be very
deservedly shut out of one door, they or as bad as they get not in again by
another.

There is a necessity of a public and standing-Ministerie, as our Lord Jesus
took care for it, Ephesians. 4.11, 12. so he would not immediately instruct
Cornelius, but remits him to the Ecclesiastical Ministry, namely to Peter,
who must tell him what he was to do, Acts 10.6. And though it pleased him
extraordinarily by an heavenly vision to convert Paul, (in which regard he
says, he received not the Gospel of man) yet he so far honored the
Ministry, Act. 9.6.
that he sent him to Ananias, to tell him also what he must do.

There must be some, that must have power to open and shut the door of
entrance into Ecclesiastical Ministry, else some will get in, that care no
otherwise for the Priests office, then that they may eat a piece of bread 1 Samuel 2.36.
: others will creep in to corrupt and pervert the Congregation, privily
bringing in damnable heresies 2 Pet. 2.1.
, speaking perverse things to draw away disciples after them Act. 20.30.
. For the prevention of which, as to one is given by the Spirit the word of
wisdom, to another the word of knowledge by the same Spirit, to another
prophecy, 1 Cor. 12.10.
so there is given to another discerning of spirits. This (...), the gift of
discerning of spirits, was principally the prerogative of the Apostolical
times, an extraordinary faculty that then the Apostles, yea and some private
men had from God, to detect and convince fanaticall spirits. Some excelled
others in this. It seems Peter was more able to discern then Philip, for Simon
Magus joining himself to the Church continued with Philip Act. 8.13
; but when Peter came to Samaria, he presently discerned and discovered him,
that his heart was not right in the sight of God, but that he was in the gall
of bitterness and in the bond of iniquity Act. 8.20, 21, 23.
. This gift Peter also exercised another time about Ananias, who pretended to
like well of the Apostolical fellowship, and the Christian Community which
was thought requisite for those times, but he lied to the Holy Ghost, and Peter
found that Satan had filled his heart Act. 5.3.
. Peter Martyr thinks the Church had then this gift, the better to suppress
heresies and corruption in manners, because they then wanted the help of the
Magistrates Sword. And Musculus is of opinion that the gift was taken away
again, that the Scripture concerning Antichrists rising might be fulfilled,
for had that gift remained, the Ancients would have discerned him, and he could
not have stepped in. I incline to it, that it was a prerogative, and a gift then
peculiar; yet in some measure it still remains, and as he that is much
acquainted with Virgils style, and has his Genius, as it were, is reasonably
able to judge of a Poem, whether it be Virgils or no; so those that maintain
much communion with the holy Spirit of God, and know much of his working, may
discern somewhat far of others. Theodor. Hist. l. 4 c. 19, 20.
So the very private Christians of Alexandria, soon found and dis-relished the
corrupt Bishop, whom the Governor had substituted in the place of Orthodox
Athanasius. And why else does S. John write generally for the use of the
faithful 1 John 4.1
; Beloved believe not every spirit, but try the spirits whither they are of
God; because many false Prophets are gone out into the world. And S. Paul
warning and advising the standing Ministry, assembled at Miletus, speaks unto
them thus, Act. 20.20, 29, 30, 31.
Take heed to all the flock, for know this, that of your own selves shall men
arise, speaking perverse things, therefore watch. The Ancients since the
Apostles times took and used this liberty. Not only the Fathers in the
Trullan Council, judged many of the opinions of Origin, Dydimus and Evagrius
to be (...), mentis deliria, and called others of them (...), dreams. But other
Councels judged persons. And Athanasius in particular notably discerned Arrius.
Calvin of late was singular this way, and so have been some few reverend
Divines and others, whom we have known. Indeed it is proper and most
necessary, as Beza observes, for Rulers in Ecclesiastical Discipline.

I only offer it, and submit it to your grave judgments, whether that place of
the Apostle, 1 Cor. 14.29, 32. do not in some part hold out this point unto
us, where he says, Let the Prophets speak, two or three, and let the other
judge. If any thing be revealed to another that sits by, let the first hold
his peace; For ye may all prophecy one by one. And the spirits of the
Prophets are subject to the Prophets. That the Apostle speaks not there of the
promiscuous Assembly or whole Congregation of the godly, but only of a certain
order of them, who were called Prophets, to me appears unquestionable, 1 Cor.
1.28, 29.
seeing he had said before, God has set some in the Church, first Apostles,
secondarily Prophets, etc. Are all Apostles? Socin. in Tr. de eccl. Theophyl
Nico aid. in defens. Socini. Schmaltz in resut. These. D. Frantz.
Are all Prophets? This we generally hold against the Photinians, who deny a
necessity of calling, and make it lawful for any Christian man to preach or
prophecy. What order these Prophets were, it may be we are not certain.
Whether they were the ordinary Doctors or Teachers of the Church, such as had
the gift of Prophecy, that is of interpreting the Scripture. For we may
collect it from Act. 13.15. Where we read, that after the reading of the Law
and the Prophets, the Rulers of the Synagogue, sent to Paul and Barnabas, who
were then present, saying, Men and Brethren, if ye have any word of
exhortation for the people, say on; That the use was, that some place of
Scripture being read, then one of the Doctors arose, and expounded it, and drew
some Doctrines or Exhortations from it, and after him another, and so a third,
or if there were more Prophets or teachers there, they spoke in course. Or
whether they were an office distinct from the office of ordinary teachers,
namely such who opened the more hidden points, pertaining to Christian
Religion; as is intimated, 1 Cor. 12.28, 29. and Ephesians. 4.11. where Prophets and
teachers are distinguished. But whatsoever those Prophets were, this is it only
that I enquire upon the place, what judging it is that is there spoken of, and
what subjection of spirit. For though the learned Camera be absolute in it,
that the Apostle deals not there de probatione seu discretione spirituum, but
only speaks of order, that the Prophets assembled had authority (when it may
be two or three might rise together) to appoint who should speak, and in what
order, and the rest to be silent. And though I grant this may be the special
intent of the place, because of the Argument that follows, Ver. 33. For God is
not the Author of confusion (or tumult) but of peace, as in all Churches of
the Saints (i.) according as it is the use and custom of the rest of the
Churches, with which the Apostle would have that of Corinth (wherein happily were
nourished some proud and forward wits) to agree. Yet, may not this also be
comprehended, that the Prophets might and were to judge of the spirits of those
Prophets, who would be forward to rise and offer to speak: Some it may be out
of pride and stomach; some out of Envy, least some others should be delivered
of a choice notion before them; some it may be pretending special revelation
and commission to speak. I doubt not, but even yet, a privater meeting of
Divines in a Classis or Prophesying (as they say they were wont to call the
Monthly Exercises in Cheshiere and those parts, heretofore) but much more such
a godly and venerable Assembly as yours, may judge not only of the Doctrine
that is spoken, but of the spirit of him that speaks. Both indeed according to
the Scripture; yet not neglecting the gift that is in you, and that ability of
giving Judgment, which God has trusted you with, as such that have obtained
mercy of the Lord to be faithful. 1 Cor. 7.25.
The due exercise of this gift and judgment, as it will be necessary in your
testimony of such whom you commend unto the Parliament for the furnishing of
those Congregations that are voided by the absence of such Ministers as have
either shunned or justly fallen under the censure of our High Court: So
especially, if ever you come to recover the possession of the ancient right of
Presbiters which the Bishops had so unjustly and tyrannically invaded; I mean
to be estated in and entrusted with the power of ordination, 1 Timothy 5.22.
it will be most necessary, to that end that you lay not hands suddenly on any
man, which whether it be meant of Ordination or Absolution, I find the Ancients
are not agreed. But if the place be understood of Ordination, as I have applied
it, It is a rock upon which many of our Bishops (I know not whether All) will
be broken. How suddenly (to say the best of it) have their hands been laid upon
many, witness the first Centurie lately published, and Mr Whites pious and
learned Preface. Methinks many of them upon the perusing of that Book (if it
come to their hands) should say of diverse names there, which they know, as
Martian Archbishop of Constantinople said once of Sabbatius a wretched and
unworthy man whom he had ordained to be a Presbyter, Socrat. Hist. l. 5. c. 20.
We wish we had rather laid our hands on the briars, then on such heads. I have
in this small Treatise, endeavored some discovery, and have judged such as
serve not our Lord Jesus Christ, Romans 16.17, 18.
but their own belly, who by good words and fair speeches deceive the hearts
of the simple, that we mark them which are contrary to the doctrine which we
have learned. Those that I have overtaken, I have marked them nigro carbone,
and have presumed to shame them before your eyes. I have done it with some
liberty of speaking now and then more pleasantly then the majesty of preaching
would allow. For I preached the substrata indeed some while ago; but since
furnished it with story and experiments. I had not communicated it, but upon
the advice and encouragement of some whose judgments I highly esteem. And
indeed I had not put my last hand unto it, but some of my books being rifled,
and others even all kept from me through the injury of the times, and the
calamity of those parts; I have presented it to you as it is; The Lord make
every path smooth unto you, and prosper you in yourway. This is the prayer of

The meanest of your fellow laborers, and your servant SAM. TORSHEL.

To the Reader.
Good Reader,
THe worthy Author was pleased to put a value on my poor judgment (it
deserves not) to commit and betrust this his pious and learned Treatise to my
view and censure, as a friend. And I having justly encouraged him to make it
thus public, could not but send this testimony also with it, if it may any way
encourage thee to read it. The Argument of it is that, which was much the
subject of our Savior Christ's own Sermons in his times: Pharisaicall and
outward Hypocrisy. And is as useful and necessary for these, When Christ has
therefore reassumed his fan into his hand, thoroughly to purge his sloore, which
this Treatise tends to in this Discovery. The composure of it, is made up of a
great variety of ^legant, curious and delightful learning; He has set forth
the cure together with the discovery, which let every man that reads be
attentive to make use of; And by so much the more, by how much, that time is
now approaching, of which Christ has long since said, Behold I come as a
thief, Blessed is he that watches, and keeps his garments, Least, He walk
naked and they see his shame.

THO: GOODWIN.

A TABLE OF THE CONTENTS OF THE CHAPTERS.
The first Book.
CHAP. I. THe reason and use of the Treatise. A prevention of mistake. The
order or method propounded to be followed. Chap. 2. The Definition of
Hypocrisy. The original words that express it. The Genus. The Differentia in
the Definition. Chap. 3. The kinds of Hypocrisy. Unknown, Known. Simple.
Dipped. Doubl-dipt. Chap 4. The Subject of Hypocrisy. All men. Carnal.
Regenerate, Every age. Sex. Condition. Chap. 5. The Symptoms of Hypocrisy.
The usefulness. Pleasure. Difficulty of this part. The method in it
propounded. Chap 6. 1. Two Symptoms from the principle of working of
Hypocrites. They work not in Gods strength. Not to or for God. Their motion
has an external and artificial cause. Chap 7. 2. The Symptoms of
Hypocrisy, from the end aimed at by them. The first of these Symptoms.
Vainglory. Affected carriage. Affected habit. Affected tone in speech. Painted
virtue. Chap. 8. A second of those Symptoms from the end of Hypocrisy.
Religion pretended to serve other ends. A cover for undutifulnesse,
uncharitableness. Hatred of Godliness. Revenge. Ambition. Chap. 9. The second
Symptom from the end of hypocrisy, further enlarged. Two other instances.
Religion put on for sedition: and for covetousness. Chap. 10. A third of those
Symptoms from the end of Hypocrisy. Tenderness and scruples pretended.
Straining at Gnats. Scruples made to cover treachery, rebellion, envy. To
beget opinion of extraordinary holiness. Chap. 11. Thirdly, Symptoms of
Hypocrisy, respecting profession. The first of these Symptoms.
Unanswerablenesse to profession. Goodly fronts. A form, a name of godliness,
instanced in Munks. Nuns. Jesuit's. The Pope. Popular Preachers. Common
professors. Chap. 12. The second Symptom respecting profession. Hyp. abroad
only in fair weather. They choose the winning side. They may be sufferers. They
will nor venture the whole stock. Chapter 13. Fourthly, Symptom of Hypocrisy in
respect of duties. Partiality in duties. Chapter 14. Fifthly, Symptoms of
Hypocrisy from the carriage toward Gods ordmances. The first of these. Blind
Hypocrites pretend they want light. The second, Partiality in Ordinances. Chapter
15. The third Symptom of this head. Devised worships. Chapter 16. The fourth
Symptom, respecting the ordinances. Dead preaching. Dead hearing. Dead
praying. Dead fasts. Chapter 17. Sixthly, some Symptoms of hypocrisy from seeming
graces The first. The second. The third. Unsound faith. Sandy hope. Pretended
love. Chapter 18. Other particulars. The fourth. Fained humility The fifth. Polluted
chastity. The sixth. Holy desires counterfeited. The seventh. Pretended hatred
of vices and errors. Chapter 19. The eigth. The weeping Hypocrite. The ninth
Stage-mortification. Chapter 20. The tenth. The deceits of zeal. Chapter 21.
Seventhly, The Symptom of hyp. in respect of tentations. Strong temptations
discover the inclination. Chapter 22 8. The Symptoms of hyp. in respect of
judgments. Insensiblenes under judgme^ts. Chapter 23. Ninthly, The Symptom of hyp.
from the carriage toward company. Hypocrites comply with all tempers. Chapter 24.
Tenthly, The Symptoms of hypocrisy from the general carriage. Hypocritical
slanderers. Prying censoriousnesse.
The second Book.
Chapter 1. Prognostics of Hypocrisy. The first. It threatens the decay of gifts.
The second. It prepares the way to heresy. Chapter 2. Other Prognostics. The
third. Atheism. The fourth. Hypocrisy works much mischief to the Church. Chapter
3. Other Prognostics. The fifth: Hyp: loose their comfort. The sixth: they loose
their courage. Ch 4 Another Prognostic. The seventh: the first part of it. The
hyp. hated of men: bad and good. Chapter 5. The seventh Prognostic: the other part
of it. Hypocrites very odious to God. Chapter 6. The causes of hyp. The first.
Entertainment of Religion upon slight grounds. The second. Hyp. know not, nor
believe in God The third, hyp: want resolution. Ch: 7. Other causes: the
fourth, hyp. have not a right fear: the fifth, hyp: are of a base spirit. Chapter 8.
The sixth cause: Hypocrites are indulgent to their corrupt affections. Envy.
Popularity Ambition. Love of riches. Chapter 9. Of the cure of hypocrisy: the
difficulty of the cure. Chapter 10. The preparative to the medicaments for the cure
of hyp. the praise of sincerity. Chapter 11. The first medicament. Faithful
attendance upon wholesome preaching. A powerful and searching ministry. Chapter
12. The second medicament: the right knowledge of God and believing in him. Chapter
13. The third medicament: Resolution for God and the truth. Chapter 14. The fourth
medicament: the thorough fear of God. Chapter 15. The strengthening of the fourth
medicament, by putting in another Ingredient: the thoughts of our great account
before God. Chapter 16. The fifth medicament. The exalted thoughts of our Christian
dignity. Chapter 17. The sixth medidament. The cure of corrupt affections. Of
Envy, the folly of it Of poplarity, the poison of it: of vainglory, the
deceitfulnes of it: of worldliness, the vanity of it. The conclusion.
Errata.
For Acts, page 9 lin 5. r. Artr. p. 10. lin. 12 It with, r. it outwith. p. 66.
l 11. Grofthead, r. Grosthead. p. 6^. l. 25. Pelagious, r. Pelagius p. 67.30.
Mores r. Mares. p. 83 l 7. gloss r gl^sse. p. 92. l. 18. Augustedarum, l.
Augastodonum. p. 94. l. 19. wrought, r wrote, p. 98.7. Rave r. Rome 103 l. 1,
7. sting, r. string. p. 103. l. 22. lives, l. lines. p. 127 l. 29 entrusting,
r. instructing. p. 141. l 18. Climacas r Climacus. p. 141. l. 29 did read, r.
did, read. p. 143. l. 10 stuff, r. sluft. p. 143. l. 28 lives t. lines. p.
145. l. 1 as said, r. as he said. p. 1^7. l. 13, grave, r. brave. p. 58. l. 31.
After honesty, r. I will mention, etc. to, his conscience. After that is to
come in, I will not farther, etc. which passage in the copy was mistaken in the
press.

Errata in the Margin, p. 13. Tarnor r. Tarnov. p. 14. Ad Herb. r. Ab Herb. p.
25. Pratreo. r. Prateo. p. 29 Stellitent r. Stellitent p. 59. Conct. 1. Canss.
p. 70. Almon. r. Aimon. p. 67. (...). r. (...). p. 67. (...). p. 71. Eleaz. r.
Elmer. p 90 Ideam. r. Ideam. Jesus r. Esai. p. 97. Not. r. Mat. p. 98. l. 23.
and in Mar Mentagn. r. Montaign. p, 109. provocari, r. provocavi, p. 125.
lepama r. lepaina.

IN Mundum YPOKPITIKON ET Librum DIAKPITIKON.
FVlgida fax retegitfaeces, Liber iste fenestrat
Pectora; spurcitiem jubar arguit, intima mundi
Ista Dei lamp as scrutatur viscera foedi.
Turba sacerdotum (vah! centuriata) pudete.
Quid juvat altari summo repetita dedisse
Oscula lascivis labijs? Quid musica vocis
Decantata Deo suavi modulamine? Vitae
Dum fuerint cantus, Satanaeque tripudia vestrae.
Flectere quid prodest curvato poplite ad aras?
Tingere vel vestes sacrati pulvere Templi?
Cum vomitus coeno bibuli volutare soletis.
Nec dici haec pudeat, sed non potuisse refelli.
Pandite faelices radij mysteria secli.
Lumine latrones tectos deprendite vestro.
Narranti, larvataaetas, compesce furores;
Namque premi debet, non vir, sed pagina docta.
CUIL: JENKYN Ecc. Christiapud Londinenses Pastor.

THE HYPOCRITE DISCOVERED.
The first Book.
CHAP. I. The Reason and Use of the Treatise. A prevention of mistake. The
order or method propounded to be followed.
I Have undertaken the Hypocrite, The use and benefit of the Treatise.
his Discovery, and his Cure. An hard task, I confess, but very necessary;
and in such times as these most necessary and useful. For as the Church in all
ages has been ever full of unsound members, a Cain living in external
communion with Abel, an Ishmael with Isaac, a Judas with the Apostles, a Demas
with the Disciples, bran with the meal, bad fish in the drawnet, tares in the
wheat-field: So especially in the time of the Churches credit, when Jerusalem
is made a praise in the Earth, many that were strange unto her, and that were
wont to look upon her, as if they had not known her, will then be of her
acquaintance, and claim friendship, that they may partake of her Reputation.
The Samaritan will be of near kindred to the Jews, when they are in
prosperity; and when the fear of the Jews is upon the Nations, many of the
Nations will join themselves unto them.

Blessed be God that we live to see Religion beginning to recover her
loveliness, and that men confess she is beautiful; but we will not believe,
that all who now woo and court her, are in love with her; for seeing they were
ashamed of her rags, we may suppose they are now taken with her Dowry, not
with her face; and pretend love, because the present State does countenance and
bid so fair a Portion with her.

We must needs say, that the time has been, that some hard and dry frosts
have locked up the Earth, that little fruit has sprung up, and those fruits of
holiness which did spring were too much nipt and blasted. We have felt of late
some warm and comfortable showers, a feeding and refreshing rain: but as that
weather is good for the Corn, so it brings up likewise abundance of Weeds.
Hypocrites come up thick and grow fast in such seasons. As this point
therefore is always useful, so especially now in such a time as this most
seasonable and necessary, that we may have some help in some measure to
understand other men; and may be able every one to discern our own hearts,
that we deceive not our selves, which is indeed the principal thing that I
aim at, 2 Cor. 13.5. 1 Cor. 13.7. Romans 14 4.
and which the Scriptures constantly commend unto us, To prove and judge our
selves; not to be apt to suspect, to condemn others.

And here let me take occasion once for all, A prevention of mistake.
before I enter upon the work, to put in a caveat against the prejudices, to
which such a Discourse as this may be subject, and against the ill use which
worldly and carnal men may put it unto. I know that all speech of and against
Hypocrisy is acceptable to profane men, who presently turn the edge of every
Trial and Reproof this way, upon the breasts of all that are (as they are
called for distinction) Professors, and do account every Professor to be an
Hypocrite, and do hate the godly under this pretense, Mat. 27.63. 2 Cor. 6.8.
that they are Hypocrites. Christ was called a Deceiver, and so they reckoned
the Apostles. So that Religion and Godliness come to be hated under other
names and colors. But let such men know, that they shall stumble at my very
threshold, if they fasten any such intentions upon my present Design, or upon
my thoughts, which are full of honor toward all them that fear God, and walk
before him in an holy, open and public Profession of his name, which is so
necessary, that ordinarily there is no salvation without it; according to that
of the Apostle, with the heart man believes unto righteousness, Rom 10.10.
Vid Abra. Scultet. Conc. 1. in Isa. 44.
and with the mouth confession is made unto salvation. We must all be
Confessors (as the old Church called them who shone forth in an holy life, or
as this age calls them, Professors) though we come not all to the honor of
Martyrdom: and if any be ashamed of Christ, Mark. 8.58. Luke 9.26.18.8. 2 Timothy
2.12. Isa. 44.5.
of them will Christ be ashamed before his Father. Shall that then be generally
censured for Hypocrisy, which God requires of us, as a necessary duty? If any
man therefore shall say, He is the Lords, and call himself by the name of
Jacob, and shall subscribe with his hand unto the Lord, and surname himself by
the name of Israel: Be tender of such a man's reputation, and be not ready to
entertain a charge against him rashly, but respect him for his cloth sake, and
the liverie that he wears. Oh disgrace not these servants of God, for God who
is their Master will revenge their disgrace; Jude ver. 15.
yea Christ will account all your hard speeches to have bin spoken against
himself.

We see how dangerous it may prove to judge others, but against our selves we
may be safely severe, and unless in some special cases of Desertion and
Despair, we may apply all rules of Discovery and censure to our selves
thoroughly, without hazard. And this I profess to be my main Scope, to put a
candle into every man's hand, when he is alone by himself in a dark room.

The order that I have proposed to follow in this Treatise; The method of the
whole Treatise.
shall be to enquire into, 1. The Definition of Hypocriosie; what it is. 2. The
Kinds of it. 3. The Subject. 4. The Symptoms. 5. The Prognostics. 6. The
Causes. 7. The Cure of it.


CHAP. II. The Definition of Hypocrisy. The Original words that express it.
The Genus. The Differentia in the definition.
WHat Hypocrisy is, The definition of Hypocrisy. Aquia Sum: 22ae. qu 111.
art 1. Isid: Aetymol. lib 10 lit. H. Aug de Sermon. Them in Mont.
we all better know, then how to avoid it. Aquinas defines it to be, That
Simulation whereby one feignes the person of another. Wherein he follows
Isidore, That the name of Hypocrite is drawn from them that come disguised
upon the Stage, their faces and habits so colored and altered, that they
sometimes appear to be men, sometimes women, sometimes old, sometimes young,
etc. And so St Augustine had expressed it, as players faining other persons, act
the parts of such as themselves are not, for he that acts the part of Agamemnon
is not Agamemnon, but counterfeits him: So in the Church and in the whole life
of man, The original words that express Hypocrisy.
he that would seem to be what he is not, is an hypocrite. This Definition
does most rightly answer the sense of the Original word in the Greek text,
(...), which is derived of (...), a word signifying to counterfeit or feign:
And so the word is rendered in our English Translation, Luke 20.10. (...). Vid
Cael Rbodig Lect. Antiq. lib. 2. cap. 8. Alsted paratit. in verb^ Hyp. Mat.
23.33.
They sent forth spies, which should feign themselves just men. And it has
been observed, that among Greek Authors, from whom the use of this word was
borrowed, an Hypocrite is constantly used for an Actor. And to this purpose
also among the Hebrews, Hypocrites are called (...), Facies, Faciales sive
personati. But in the Original text they are expressed by other words, sometimes
they are called, (...) died or colored men, of (...) to color or stain,
which perhaps may be one reason why our Savior calls Hypocrites, a Generation
of Vipers, which are named in Hebrew (...), because of their various colors.
Sometimes and most ordinarily they are called Chanephim counterfeiters, The
genus and difference of Hypocrisiz. Reginald prax. fori l. 17. c. 22. n 212.
Tollet Instit. Sacerd. l. 8. c 9.
of (...) to dissemble, counterfeit, or hide. So that all these words express
what we have in Aquinas his large definition.

In the stricter and applied sense and use of the word, as it is commonly taken
by Ecclesiastical Authors; it is thus defined by the Casuists. That it is,
Simulatio virtutis seu sanctitatis, a counterfeiting of virtue or holiness. In
which definition, as Tollet observes, Simulatio is the Genus, but the form or
difference is, that it is, Simulatio virtutis. For every counterfeiting is not
Hypocrisy, in our present use of the word, but when virtue is counterfeited
where it is not. And it is called the counterfeiting of holiness or virtue,
because, though as Aquinas speaks, Barth Fum. Armil. Aur. Verb. Simul.
it is directly opposite to the one Virtue of Truth, for every dissimulation is
a kind of lie; Yet indirectly (as other Casuists observe) it is opposed to
every virtue.

We must needs take notice of this difference, for every and all kind of
Hypocrifie is sin, but so is not all kind of simulation. I will instance this
in some particular Cases.

1. A man may hide and dissemble his affections and passions, and that without
sin. Prove. 12.16.
A fools wrath (says Solomon) is presently known, but a prudent man covers
shame. The prudent man keeps in his anger and hides it, which else would be his
shame. Which happily may be the meaning of that other sentence of his; A fool
utters all his mind, Prove. 29.11.
but a wise man keeps it in till afterward. Saul was a commendable example
of this, who when the sons of Belial despised him, and brought him no
presents, 1 Samuel 10.27. See, Psalm. 38.13, 14.
who when yet he held his peace; or as the Margin of our last Translation does
finely express it, He was as though he had been dease.

2. A man may in some cases dissemble his condition, Of which we have an
example not condemned, that I find, by any Interpreter, Genesis 42.7. (...)
in Joseph, who when he saw his brethren, made himself strange unto them, or,
fained himself to be another man; which was the better to try them, Alierum se
firxit. Job. Alsted. Theot Cas. c. 21. n. 14, 15.
and work out some good ends he had in design. Alstedius resolves it in some
other instances; that a Preacher in place of persecution, may feign himself a
Merchant; That a man may put on a woman's apparel to escape unjust captivity.

3. Joseph also is an example of some other cases wherein a man may dissemble
his intentions: which will appear in his dealing and contrivances with all his
brethren, and particularly afterward with Benjamin, for bringing his old
father into Egypt. Genesis 42.9, etc. 25. Genesis 44.1, 2, etc. 1 King. 3.
So also Solomon when he called for a sword, had no intention to kill and
divide the child, though his action carried such a meaning to the standers by,
but to discover thereby the true mother.

4. A man may dissemble and hide some of the truth. So Jeremiah dealt with the
Princes by the advice of Zedekiah. Ier 38.27.
And such almost was St. Act. 23.5, 6, 7.
Paul's dealing between the Pharisees and Sadduce's.

5. Theod Hist. l. 3. c. 1^. (...).
Lastly, Concerning the Case of those Christian soldiers, who dissembled or
fained themselves sick, that they might not sacrifice, I incline to favor
them, because it seems they were conscious of their weakness to hold out to
martyrdom, and yet there was in their hearts a love (though a weaker love) to
Christ. This Case is somewhat like that which P. P. Mart Loc. Com. cl 2. c. 13.
s. 14. 14.
Martyr handles upon David's carriage before Achish, which let the Reader see
how he determines: for I will not follow this path any farther, which is out of
my present way, and in which I should stay too long to behold the skirmishes of
Divines obout diverse of such like facts, for in that very instance of David,
Casp. Brockm. System to. 2. pr^ 64. Wigard Sy^t. to. 1. p 912. H. Mason. New
art of lying. chapter 5. Rev 3 1. 1 Timothy 5 6. Act. 23.3. Mat 23.27.
they agree not; Brockmond defends it; Wigandus condemns it. But the reader I
suppose will be satisfied about this case of David's, and many others recorded
in the Scriptures, if he peruse Mr. Masons learned Book against Equivocation.
And therefore leaving these cases, we rest in the definition given above, that
Hypocrisy is the counterfeiting of Holiness. This in Scripture phrase, is, To
have a name to be alive, and yet to be dead; or, To be dead while one lives;
This is to be a whited wall; and a painted Sepulcher; a Deceitful worker,
transforming himself into an Apostle of Christ,

CHAP. III. The Kinds of Hypocrisy. Unknown. Known. Simple. Dipped. Double-dipt.
HAving found the Definition of Hypocrisy, The Kinds of Hypocrisy. Zanch. to.
4. in praec. 3. p 57^. Phil. 1 Dt. Tailor. Com. on Tit. 1.16.
we are next to enquire after the Kinds of it. Zanchy (whom some of our Divines
do follow) makes two Kinds.

1. Such as know not themselves to be Hypocrites, but think themselves in a
good estate and sound enough. He instanceth in the Pharisec mentioned, Luke 18.
and in St. Paul before his conversion. Others instance it in Simon Magus spoken
of in the Acts of the Apostles. Acts 8.


2. Such as know themselves to be Hypocrites, that know they dissemble in the
things they speak and do. Such as were the gross hypocritical Pharise's.

Whether the first kind may be properly called so, I will not contend; but it is
of the second sort I am to treat. And under this the Casuists take notice of
three sorts.

1. Such as pretend and seem to have holiness and virtue, Undipt.
which they have not. Men free from gross corruptions and notorious vices, yet
(withal) such as strive not for perfection, nor that put themselves on to the
true and right exercise of virtue, but are content to cast a longer shadow, and
to appear more then they are or care to be, This is simple Hypocrisy, undipt,
hypocrisy of the natural color, that which every man has in him, more or
less.

2. Such as pretend virtue, Dipped.
and yet will and live in the contrary vice. As if a man live in the act of
wantonness, in his lusts, and yet will seem and have the reputation of being
continent and chaste. This is Dipt-hypocrisie, hypocrisy of the first die, the
first stain.

3. Such as live in sin, and intend sin, and seem holy to that end, that
they may sin more freely. Reginald gives an instance, Double-dipt. Regin.
Praxi^. l. 17 c. 22. n. ^ 13. Toll Instruct. Sacerd. l. 8. c. 9.
of an Adulterer that seems chaste, that a Virgin whom he desires to vitiate,
may be trusted to his care. Tollet gives another, of a man that seems holy and
learned, that he may get a Bishop-ricke or Benefice of which he is utterly
unworthy, and in which he intends to live lazily, and to mind no more then the
fleece. Another Casuist gives a third instance, Bizozer. Sun. in 8. praec.
in an Heretic that seems good and devout, more easily to spread his
haeresies, and corrupt his hearers. This is Double-dipt-hypocrisie, hypocrisy
of a scarlet-dye. Cajetan calls it, perfect-hypocrisie.

These are the Kinds, or rather the Modi of hypocrisy, which yet I will not be
curious to distinguish in the following discourse.

CHAP. IV. The Subject of Hypocrisy. All men. Carnal. Regenerate. Every Age.
Sex. Condition.
THe Subject of Hypocrisy is Man, every man. The Subject of Hyp. Psalm. 116.11.
It is natural to all. What the Psalmist said he spoke in have, Omnis homo
mendax, it seems by St. Paul's applying and confirmation of it, he might have
delivered upon consideration and with good leisure: I said in my have all men
are liars: Romans 3.4.
Yea, says St. Paul, Let God be true and every man a liar. And may not we say,
Omnis homo hypocrita? Isa. 9.17.
We have authority to say so, for they are the words of the Prophet, Every one
is an hypocrite, and an evil doer. So true and right was that observation of
the Emperor Frederick the third, who when one said unto him, he would go find
some place where no hypocrites inhabited, he told him, He must travail then
beyond the Sauromatae and the frosen Ocean, and yet when he came there he
should find an Hypocrite, if he found himself there. When the Lord complains
against Ephraim for their falsehood, he says, Hos. 6.7.
They dealt like men. They like men have transgressed the Covenant, there have
they dealt treacherously against me. Like men, that is, like light and weak
persons, says the Geneva margin, Zanch. in loc.
like treacherous, inconstant dissemblers, as Zanchy observes. Adam himself
was so, and so are all his sons and daughters. That all unregenerate and
carnal men are so, needs no proof; and that it remains still in the
regenerate, we have a proof in St. Act. 2.11, 12, 13.
Peter himself and Barnabas. That the people of all qualities are the subject
of it, we have it confirmed by many and woeful experiences; and concerning the
Priests, besides the frequent discoveries and complaints we find in the
Prophets, and the Items and caveats which we have from our Saviors mouth and
the Apostles, to warn and arm us against false Prophets gone out into the
world; the observation has been so ordinary in all ages, that at length Mylius
(a Preacher mentioned by Joh: Wolf. Lect. Me nor To. 2. ad an. 1560.
Wolfius) hit right upon the conceit, That when the Devil resolved to match
his daughters, and gave Pride to Rich-men, Covetousness to Merchants, Craft to
Proud-men, Envy to Artificers, he married his best beloved Hypocrisy unto
Priests. Pet. Charron. of Wisdom. lib 3. chapter 10. nu. 10.
Hypocrisy is the lesson of both Sexes, (though as one observes, most natural
to women) of all ages, and conditions. It continues with age, it appears in
infancy. The wise and learned practice it, the dullest and most rude yet
attain to this skill. All are not fit for the wars, learning must have the
picked and choycest wits, Arts must have leisure and pains: but all sorts are
apt enough, and thrive in the mystery of dissembling. The whole throng of men
is but an Horfefaire of cheaters, the whole world a shop of counterfeit wares,
a Theater of disguisings: That as the Philosopher said, he could not but
wonder, that when Astrologers, and Gypsies, and Mountebanks met together, they
could refrain themselves from laughing at one another, being acquainted with
one another acts and tricks; so it is mervaile that every man turns not a
Democritus, when he knows his own cheatings, and converseth with so many
counterfeit creeples.

But yet, notwithstanding all I have said so generally, all are not properly to
be so denominated. Hypocrisy is in all, but with so graduall a difference,
that all are not to be called Hypocrites. But they that are so, and deserve to
be called so, are the subjects we enquire after for the most part, and
endeavor to know: Which brings me to the fourth Head I propounded, The Signs
or Symptoms of Hypocrisy.

CHAP. V. The Symptoms of Hypocrisy. The Usefulness. Pleasure. Difficulty
of this part. The Method in it, propounded.
THE way that I have hitherto gone, has been dry and somewhat unpleasant, and
I have run over it with more speed. But here I have found a Spring, here I will
sit down and pitch, here I shall stay long: and I hope the Reader will be
content to linger here. It Is a fruitful plot, every one may gather something;
and something happily he shall meet with that will meet with him. I will lead
him up and down to view this vale of wonders, and now and then bring him to a
Crystal fount, wherein he may look down and see his own face. And if he will
venture and take pains, and follow; I will guide him into the dark and narrow
cavern's of men's hearts. But he must take pains, and sometimes stoop, and
carry a candle lighted at the holy Scripture in either hand. For men's ways are
dark and straight, like some caves that reach far within the earth, under
the hanging of some mountain or steep rock.

It Is an hard work I set upon, for as it is in the Prophet; Men seek deep to
hide their counsel from the Lord, Isa. 29.15.
and their works are in the dark. We shall have much ado to follow and find
these men, because they have learned of Adam, to run and hide themselves in the
thickets. Genesis 3. Rev 9.8.
They have Lions teeth, and yet wear women's hair, and who would think such
deceit were under such fair locks? They are Wolves, and yet wear
Sheepes-cloathing, Who would not be beguiled with such garments? The Painter in
Pliny made a Bird so lively, that true live Birds were deceived with it; The
Horse in Aelian, neighed at the picture of an Horse. But these men have more
skill to beguile even men, Christians, holy men; they can paint the Christian
so well, and set it with such lively colors. How neatly did Judas carry it,
when the Apostles were ready to suspect every one themselves, rather then him?
They said, Master, is it I? is it I? but none of them said, Master is it Judas?
It cannot be an easy search, because the hypocrite leaves not a track, but often
times finds an untrodden way. Their way is as the way of a ship in the sea.
Prove. 30.19.
An horse-way is known by the track, and where a Cart has gone, we perceive by
the print of the wheels; but we know not the way of a ship: Though Mercator,
and Hondius, and Jonston, or others of them in their Mapps, draw lines of
Drakes and Schoutens, or other men's voyages, yet the Mariner can see no such
path upon the sea: So is the way of the Hypocrite. Or if we have some
directions and marks to follow them, yet we may miss of them at the very
last. They are as cunning to keep secret their sins, as an harlot does her
lover. The Sister of the Emperor Henry the third, Vincent. Spec Hist. l. 25.
c. 10.
when a great snow fell, carried her lover upon her shoulders, that the fact
might not be discovered: The lover is entertained, but nothing can be seen but
the print of the Ladies feet. The Hypocrite harbors his lust, but ye shall
find nothing but the footsteps of the upright. A cunning thief hides himself
not more closely in a dis-orderly blind alehouse; Nor does a
zealous-shee-papist hide her Priest with more secrecy and care, then sin is
hid by the Hypocrite; You may search all rooms and miss, he has a secret
vault and a false door. And finally, it is harder to discover hypocrisy then
the tricks of an horsecourser in a fair.

Yet as hard as it is, we must upon our journey. The Signs, or as I choose
rather to call them, the Symptom's of Hypocrisy, (because they are diseases
also themselves incident to the grand disease of Hypocrisy, and which serve to
discover it,) are many and far more perhaps then I can take notice of; I want
the benefit of long experience and great practice, having lived most out of the
crowd; but yet many I have observed, and will dispose them under these
following heads.

1. Symptoms from the principle of the working of Hypocrites, 2. Symptoms
from their end aimed at in working. 3. Symptoms from their profession. 4.
Symptoms from their carriage toward Dutie^. 5. Symptoms from their carriage
toward Gods ordinances. 6. Symptoms from seeming Graces. 7. Symptoms from
Temptations. 8. Symptoms from their carriage in respect of Judgments. 9.
Symptoms from their carriage toward Company. 10. Symptoms from their general
carriage.
CHAP. VI. 1. Two Symptoms from the principle of the working of Hypocrites.
They work not in Gods strength. Not to or for God. Their Motion has an
external and artificial Cause.
THere are two things that I take notice of under this head.

1. The fruits which hypocrites bring forth, Hypocrites work not in Gods
strength
they bring them not forth in Christ, in the strength of his power, or in
reference to his Law, the command of his mouth. There are branches which bring
fruit, but yet not in the vine. The sap of the vine-stock comes not to these
branches to put forth in them. Thus that of our Savior, which our last
Translation renders, Joh. 15.2.
Every branch in me that bears not fruit: We may read without wrong to the
Original, and with very good authority, Every branch that in me bears not
fruit. This sense the Syriac follows, and the Arabic of the Roman Edition,
observed by Erpenius. Tremellius thus translates it, and so do our old English
and the Geneva. And this reading seems best to satisfy the place, for
Hypocrites are branches, but not in Christ. Now Christ in that place seems to
distinguish between hypocrites, whom he calls branches only, or branches, that
though they do bear some fruit, yet bear it not in him; and his true and
sound members whom he calls branches bearing fruit. This appears to be his
meaning, because the hypocrite is not in him, as it is further clear from the
sixth verse, where this phrase receives more light, If a man abide not in me,
he is cast forth as a branch. And in the fifth verse it is said, Whosoever is
in (Christ) and abides in him, he brings forth much fruit. The hypocrite then
may bring forth fruit too, such as it is, but not in Christ. Hos. 10.1. Sept.
(...). ut est in Edit Rom and Complat. vel. (...), ut edit. venet. Basil. and
Plantin. habent. Vitis frondo sa Vitis vastata, Tharg. Ionathae. Seipsa
contentam esse virtutem ad beat vivendum. Cic. paradox. Turpe est Deos
fatigare: quid votis opus est? fac te felicem. Senec. Ep 31. Hypocrites have an
artificial and external cause of working. Th. Herbert Descrip. of the Persian
Mon. p. 8.
They may bring forth fruit, as it was said of Israel, and yet be empty vines.
Israel is an empty vine, he brings forth fruit unto himself. Empty of sap from
Christ, though full of other principles, a vine whose fruit is but leaves, as
the Septuagint reads it, a dry withered vine, as it is in the Chalde
paraphrase, though full of some sap, such as it is; as we say a wine vessel is
an empty caske, when there is no wine in it, though it be full of somewhat
else, full of air. An Hypocrite may bring forth fruits of Temperance and
Justice, but so as Socrates was temperate, and Aristides just; full of their
own strength, not sensible of the need of Christ, not in reference unto Christ,
not in the faith and strength of him. They do not speak it so plainly, with
Cicero, That virtue is sufficient to help it self, and with Seneca, that we
need not trouble God; but if we could dig under the roots of these vines, we
should find somewhat like to that moral spirit and principle in them.

2. Many hypocrites have their gales of devotion, and are forward and strong in
it so long as the wind sits that way, but when the fit is over and the humor
down, then they fail, and lose it, and run another course; like those winds
that some Travelers speak of, about Sant^-Croix in Africa, which the
Portugalls call the Monzoones, which blow constantly one way for six Months,
and then the quite contrary way the other half of the year. While the vein
lasts, ye shall see them out-doe and overact the soundest Christians. While the
ague-fitt is upon them, they have an higher color and more heat, then the
well complexioned right sanguine Christian, that has much and good blood in
him; but then, as our Countryman observes of the French, Iohnsons Relation of
the Kingdom, lib. 2. p 118.
That he enters like thunder, and vanishes out again like smoke; so they
answer not their fierce beginnings, but languish commonly and sink, or turn
the edge of their vehemence against their former course. I knew one man (that I
mention not other instances from other men's observations) who set out like Jehu
against corruptions, and overran even good manners, in some houses that
entertained him, so that he would tear and deface any Devotionall picture (as
they call it) wheresoever he came; and out of his detestation of Images would
scarce endure a cross in a Gentleman's Coat of Arms; who afterward when a
favorable Prebend-wind had cooled him, came to be active for superstitious
innovations, and of a bitter spirit against the godly minded. Such men as these
are like Chrysolene stones (a kind of Chrysolites) that some Naturalists speak
of, that are of a golden color, in the morning very bright, Isid Ae^ym. lib.
16. c. 14. Chiysolectrus. Hos 6 4. Vide Joh. Tarner. in loc.
but still toward noone dull and loosing the splendor. Or we may borrow a
resemblance from better authority, out of the Prophet, they are morning clouds
and early dew's that go away. The morning Cloud is soon dissolved by the
Sun, and men are deceived in their hopes of rain; and the early d^w, though
it lie upon the whole face of the earth, is soon dried up. So Hypocrites
though they run, and in regard of the matter of their work run well, Gal.
5 7.
yet something hinders and drives them back, that they obey not the truth,
They put their hand to the Plough, Luke 9.62.
but grow weary and look back, whereby they show they are not fit for the
Kingdom of Heaven. They go back and walk no more with Christ. Joh. 6 66.
They begin hopefully, but look not to themselves, 2. Joh. 9.
and so they lose the things which the Ministers have wrought, (...), or as an
other reading ^ h^th it (...). 1 John 2.19. Pietas quae sinem novit non est
vera pietas. M. Buce^. in Lu. 1.
and so they loses or which they themselves have gained. The savor of their
good education is worn out, and the labor of the Ministry lost and spent in
vain.

But by all this it appears that they are Hypocrites, for if they go from us,
it is because they were not of us, for if they had been of us, they would no
doubt have continued with us: So right is that observation of Bucer, That piety
which has an end is no true piety. And accordingly it follows in the latter
end of that verse of St John, as our English Translation supplies it, They went
out that they might be made manifest that they were not of us. They are but
gilded pieces which wash away in time. A piece of solid gold though ye wash
it a 1000. times, it still remains gold. But if it be but guilding (though it
be fair and double guilt) time will discover it, D. Preston new Coven. p. 224.
it will wash. Which agrees with the note of a late godly divine of ours; That
Hypocrisy in any man, is commonly discovered before his death.

CHAP. VII. 2. The Symptoms of Hypocrisy fram the end aimed at by them. The
first of these Symptoms. Vainglory. Affected carriage. Affected habit.
Affected Tone in speech. Painted Virtue.
1. Vainglory a Symptom of Hypocrisy.
HYpocrites aim not at God or his glory, it is themselves and their own glory,
that they intend to advance. That that they dod, they do it for the praise of
men. Christ tells us, that they hypocrite dwells at this sign. Mat. 6.2.
When thou do thine Alms do not sound a Trumpet before thee, ver. 16.
as the hypocrites do, that they may have glory of men. And again, When ye
fast, he not at the Hypocrites of a sad countenance (of a sour countenance, Ne
estote tetrico vultu. Beza. Vultu^ fermentatus. Exterminare ^aciem.
of a leavened countenance) for they disfigure their faces, that they may
appear unto men to fast. They exterminate, they deforme their faces, they make
themselves look wanne and pale and thin; that by a demure and mortified
look, they may be reputed holy and mortified persons. As we read in the
Histories of Moscovia, of one Daniel, Sigism^ ad Herlerstein de reb. Mosco.
circa an. 1^00.
who was Metropolitan of that Country, an egregious hypocrite, who being a
strong and full-bodied man, of a red and high color in his face, when he came
abroad to preach or otherwise to officiate, was wont to make his visage look
pale by holding it over the smoke of brimstone, that he might seem to be a
man given to prayer, and much fasting. And I can fit this Story with what I
have heard of another, who would sometimes pleasantly tell his very private
friends, that he could buy commodities the cheaper in the Exchange, Affected
carriage and habit, (...) Symptoms of Hypocrisy.
because of his short hair and very little band.

The Reader will pardon me, that I exemplify these points with Histories and
other instances, so frequently, when he shall consider, that such a Discourse
and Treatise as this, is most properly made up of observations. But to the
point in hand: for my part I confess, that where grace dwells in the heart, she
will be Mistress, and will dispose of all things, not only within, but
without doors too, and will have a modest sign, a comely plain front; She
cannot endure to dwell, as it were in an Alehouse with red lattices and
garishly painted posts. Grace is a commanding thing, and will have sober hair
and sober garments; as (if I remember right) I have heard it was old Mr Dod,
who answered a friend that demanded of him, why he cried not out against
Gaslants that wore long hair, that if he could preach Christ into their
hearts, they would of themselves cut their hair. 'Twas a grave and right
answer, becoming so experienced and godly a Divine, if it were he, or if not,
I do him no wrong to fasten it upon him. I know, Grace is the best law against
vanity, against flaunting. Yet an affected outside is commonly suspicious. I
once persuaded a good woman to leave off a singular dress, when I told her we
must live like sincere Christians, but must go dressed like our neighbors. It
becomes no man to have a speaking habit, it wins nothing to God, it exposes
the godly often to derision. Wear your band and your hat, and any thing else,
as others do, so they be not exorbitant. Ye have enough besides to make ye
known what ye are, namely, to let all that converse with you find, that ye
are holy and just and honest in all dealings. Let that speak us, rather then
our Coats. Which brings to my mind a passage in a letter of Directions, which I
wrote for the use of a friend about twelve years since, which I will here
transcribe. My garments I would have fashioned to my behavior, not too
youthful nor affectedly grave; Those would not fit a Divine, these not a young
one. Take my mind in one particular, it may be I err in it; I love not a
speaking garment, for they were intended to hide us, not to tell what we are.
Yet I have seen some so habited, that every stranger could point at them,
There goes such an one. It would argue me insufficient to use my own tongue or
discretion: if I should ^ppoint my Tailor, my Sempster, or my Barber to be my
interpreters. Thus I wrote then, and do now perceive J am still of the same
mind. Truly this is the Pharisees humor right, to make broad their
Phylacteries, Mat. 29.6.
and to enlarge the borders of their garments. H. Ainsworth Annot. in Exo.
13.9, 16. Montac. Appar. App 7. Sect 29, 30, 31 Affected To^e of Speech a
Symptom of Hypocritie. Apper^ad Orig p. 249. Matthew. 6.7.
And what the deep fringe was in them, the narrow band may be in others. But J
say, let not thy glory be in thy habit.

And what I say of the habit, J may instance in the affected Tone, that some
use to speak in. There may be danger of Hypocrisy in that too. Some learned
men do think, that that Battologie which Christ condemns in the Hypocrites,
was not meant, as our Translation seems to interpret it, of volublenesse of
tongue, Use not vain repetitions; but of that (...), or drawing out of the
Words in length, which was called Battologia, of one Battus, who had an
impediment in his speech. But whether we admit of that sense or no, we find the
thing it self to be true, that often times a Tone is affected to carry on the
liking of the hearers. But J was much taken with he wit and fine spirit of a
godly Gentlewoman, and zealously affected in Religion, who when her Chaplain
returning from London, where he had never been before, began to use and take up
a whining fashion of speaking, she presently admonished him, To live like a
good man, but to speak like a man.

I may add to this also the loud speaking, affected by some to win credit
among the ignorant, who judge by the sound. J know the Prophet is bid to lift
up his voice like a Trumpet, and the zeal of doing good will command a man's
utmost strength; Melch. Adam. in vita Farelli.
as Farellus the first builder in the Church of Geneva, when some Monks made a
noise and rung the Bells out, to hinder the people from hearing him preach; He
contended with the Bells, and sent out so shrill a voice, as over-mastred the
noise, both of the Bells and their clamor. Yet I say, some are, as (they say
of) the Nightingal, nothing but voice, and make use of that to beguile, where
their matter is not powerful to persuade. As for that Farellus whom I named,
though I see no reason to doubt of his sincerity, Lib 4 Epist. Oecolam.
yet J observe that Oecolampadius, that godly and grave Divine, thought fit to
admonish him of his vehement loudness. Such here (says he) as favor both
thee and the Gospel, fear least thou attempt something unfit, through the
heat of thy zeal, of which J admonished thee sufficiently before thou wentest
from hence, that by how much thou art more propense to violence, so much the
more thou should endeavor to be calm, and tame thy Lion-like spirit with
Dove-like modesty. And in another letter more plainly. I enquired of N,
concerning thee. He when he had commended thy industry and zeal, added, that
thou do rail mightily at the Mass Priests. I know what they deserve, and
how they are to be painted out: yet with your good leave, let me speak to you
as a friend and a brother, you seem to forget your office, which is to preach,
not to rail, etc. But whatsoever may be judged of Farell (of whom as I said, I
cannot but think honorably) we have a pertinent example of this in our
Harding Bishop Jewels Adversary, who in the Reformation was it seems a
Thundering Preacher, when he wished he could cry out against Popery, as loud as
the bell of Osney; yet we know what he was, and how bitter an enemy to the
truth he proved.

The Reader may be furnished with more instances of this Vaineglory in other
kinds, out of that Character of an hypocrite, Hypocrisy is painted virtue.
written by Dr Hall, some of whose words I will here insert: He turns into the
great Church and salutes one of the pillars on one knee, worshipping that God,
which at home he cares not for. He sits at the Church, where he may be best
seen, and pulls out his Tables in have, as if he feared to loose the note, when
he writes either nothing, or his errand. He turns his Bible with noise, etc.
In conclusion, he calls the Hypocrite aptly, The Strangers Saint. And so indeed
he is; which is the difference between him and the true believer, who is Gods
Saint, as it is in the Apostle, 2 These. 1.10.
When he shall come to be glorified in His Saints, and admired in them that
believe. The sincere people of God are his Saints, they are holy in his eye.
But these men are all for men, and do all (...), to be seen of men, and that
they may appear. Mat. 6.1.
They are on the Stage, and do all Theatrico more, that they may have have a
Plaudite. Honor me now, 1 Samuel 15.30.
I pray thee (says Saul) before the Elders of my people, and before Israel,
and turn again with me, that I may worship the Lord thy God. That I may be
counted also thy Masters servant. Sure that was his very reason, and he had
learnt true Macchiavellisme many hundred years before Nic. Macchiavel was
borne, That it was safe and best for a Prince to seem pious. These are the men
that will do nothing sine test, they will have some witness of every
devotion; so far are they from that which the Apostle required of the
Philippians, Phil. 2.12.
to obey not only in his presence, but much more in his absence. Vainglory is
it that rules over them; if there be any excellency it must be known, and if
they want, they will rather paint then not be seen. It was otherwise with
Moses, he when his face shone, took a veil and covered it; but these if there
be any thing that shines in them, any parts, any gifts; off goes the Veil,
they will not endure to be hid, to have their parts obscured, but get up into
the P^lpit, or stand up upon the Book-sellers-stall, or any thing rather then
not be seen. And rather then not to have somewhat to show, when they want
beauty, they will paint, and dress themselves as Jezabel did, and show
themselves at the window. And indeed this open window is all with them, for I
cannot believe that any painted Jezabel can take any content to stand long
alone at her Glass, for she knows she is painted, and the painting is not for
her own, but others eyes. All the felicity of an hypocrite is, that he is the
gaze of others eyes. Hist. Magdeb. Centur. 3.
That he may be observed with Paul Samosatenus Bishop of Antioch, even in the
Marketplace to read, dictate, and make dispatches. Whence is it else (that I
may yet give one other instance) that some who have no spirit, no invention, no
words, for private, secret prayer; can yet before company power forth petitions
with much variety, enforce them with much earnestness, with apt and many
words, and continue long unwearied and unspent? Or, that others who are weary
of their Glass, and can keep no company with their own hearts in any subject
of meditation, but loose themselves and their thoughts presently, can yet
before others dilate upon that subject with much variety of expression? But
truly these are all but Pedlars of virtue that are thus for the show. We may
walk in some streets of London, where are the Warehouses of great Merchants,
or the Shops of whole-salemen, and all is made up, we can see nothing hang out.
But Hypocrites are like Pedlars in a Countrey-fare, that have not a glass, nor
a combe-case, nor a piece of ribboning, but all is hung forth, all is spread
abroad. Rich Christians, golden Christians, often times their worth is not
seen, but these Dasies grow every where, and will be in your eye. Nay, they
will call upon you, rather then be looked off; 2 Kin. 10.15, 26.
ye must needs see their zeal, and know all; Come, says Jehu, and see my
zeal. Yet we know well enough what manner of man Jehu was, for all his
bragging to Jonadab, Is thy heart right as mine is? As bright as he burnt, it
was the oil of glory that fed his lamp; it was this wind of glory that did
drive his Mill.

CHAP. VIII. A second of those Symptoms from the end of Hypocrisy. Religion
pretended to serve other ends. A cover for Vndutifullnesse. Uncharitableness.
Hatred of Godliness. Revenge. Ambition.
2. ANother Symptom of Hypocrisy is, Religion pretended to serve other ends.
that hypocrites pretend Religion to cover other ends. Herod could make use of
Religion to hide his cruel intentions, when he meant to slay Christ, he
promises devotion; Mat. 2.8.
Go (says he) to the Wisemen and learch diligently for the young child, and
when ye have found him, bring me word again, that I may come and worship him
also. But 'twas a cruel bloody worship he meant; not to have acknowledged
Christ to be his God, but to have made Christ the Sacrifice and his mothers lap
the Altar. The Pharisces who endeavored to bring the wealth of the people into
their own nests, as the religious orders of Friars in the Romish Church do
now, found out a way to teach their Disciples to be uncharitable, even to the
necessities of their own Parents, pretending that what was once religiously
consecrated might not be converted to any other use, and so they were freed
from any duty they ought to do for their father or mother. See how directly
our Savior discovers this hypocrisy. Moses said, Mar. 7.10, 11, 12.
Honor thy Father and thy Mother. Now one duty included in that precept is,
That we must relieve our aged Parents, if they want. See how they avoid this.
But ye say, If a man shall say to his Father or Mother, it is Corban, that is
to say, a gift, by whatsoever thou might be profited by me. He shall be
free. And ye suffer him no more to do ought for his Father or Mother. The
Original in this place is very concise, and has troubled Expositors; but I
have given the sense which our last Translation leads me unto, which
Translation and the supply that it makes to clear the sense of the Original,
Vide etian ludru. Capel. Diat. in ^a. Mat. 15.5. ad fin Camer. Myrothec.
stands now allowed and backed by the most excellent Critics John Coch of
Breme, Dan. Heinsius, Ludovicus de Deiu and others. That the Pharisees taught
them this form of speaking, for this is observed to be the express form used
by the Jews, and to say, that what they now possessed being entered into the
profession of Pharisaisme, was now no more their own, but Corban, Gods
propriety, Gods gift, assigned over to God, and not at their dispose.

And may we not find out some other hypocritical pretenses for
uncharitableness? Religion a cover for uncharitableness.
When a man shuts his hand against the cries of the poor, and says, It Is not
fit to encourage and maintain wandering beggars in their lazy trade, and that
it is a sin to give to such as eat the sweat of the poor, is it not possible,
I say, that here where a case of conscience is pretended, it may be but a
cover, and the true reason be, because he has not an heart to give? It may be
the Priest and the Levite that passed by the wounded man, had some such thing
to say for themselves, but it may be also they were hypocrites in it, and I am
sure the good Samaritan deserved the most commendation.

The very hatred of Religion is sometimes shrouded under the cloak of
Religion. Hatred of Religion under cover of Religion. Ezra 4.2.
Such were those hypocrites that we read of in the book of Ezra; they which
delighted in the ruins of the Temple, and had indignation against Zerubbabels
endeavors to re-build it, to that end that they might hinder the work, they
offer their service to promote it: Let us build with you, for we seek your
God, as ye do. We have a pertinent place to this purpose in the Prophet
Isaiah, Isa. 66.5.
Hear the word of the Lord, ye that tremble at his word, your brethren that
hated you, that cast you out for my names sake, said, let the Lord be
glorified. When they execute their censure upon you out of malice and hatred,
they pretend pure zeal for God, and the glorifying of his Justice.

I might be plentiful in other instances, but I will confine my self to four
others, upon which I will insist; when Religion is pretended to cover Revenge,
Ambition, Sedition, Covetousness.

1. Religion a cover to revenge.
We sometimes find that hypocrites have made use of Religion to cloak their
Revenge. When Shechem the son of Hamor had defiled Dinah the daughter of
Jacob, her brethren, specially two of them, her brothers of the same womb,
Simeon and Levi, whose hearts meditated revenge, contrive it this way, Genesis
34.14.
To offer conditions of Religion to the young Prince and his City, that they
should receive the Sacrament of Circumcision, and that Shechem should receive
the ravished Dina for his wife; but they meant it a deceitful marriage and a
bloody Sacrament: for when the men of the City were sore, 1 Samuel 18.17.
they and their accomplices came upon them and slew them. Saul had nothing in his
mouth but fighting the Lords battles, but his design was, that Davia might be
made food for the Philistines sword. Abner never thought of the word of the
Lord, or of observing the will of the Lord, till his heart was full of revenge
against weak and forsaken Ishbosheth, for a sorry word which that poor Prince
had spoken, which the boisterous Captain could not brook; and then and not
till then purposing to revolt to David, and to bring about the Army with him,
he will needs have them think (forsooth) that it was only tenderness of
conscience that wrought upon him; and then having communication with the Elders
of Israel, he said, 2 Samuel 3 18.
Ye sought for David in times past to be King over you, now then do it; for
the Lord has spoken of David saying, By the hand of my servant David will I
save my people Israel, etc. Which examples are true experiments of that
observation made by the author of Ecclesiasticus; There is an exquisite
subtilty and the same is unjust, Ecclus. 19.25, 26.
and there is one that turns aside to make judgment appear; There is a
wicked man that hangs down his head sadly; but inwardly he is full of deceit.
Such an one was Herod, who was vexed at the Baptists freedom, and took
occasion to make him pay his head for the liberty of his tongue: Mat. 14.5.
He seemed unwilling to give sentence, but by no means must he break so
religious a thing as his Oath.

2. Ambition has been as witty as revenge, Religion a cover to ambition.
to make Religion a step to mount by. Absalom thought his father David kept the
seat too long, he had a great mind to be grasping the Scepter; he makes
himself strong by many popular insinuations; and now there wants nothing but
some fine contrivance of removal from Court, that he might at distance be
better looked upon as a fit head for the people made ready to his hand to join
unto. He knows not how to make his actions look better then with the face of
devotion, He had made a Vow unto the Lord while he was a banished man in Syria,
2 Samuel 15.8.
to serve the Lord in Hebron, This best fitts his turn, and he desires his
fathers leave to go thither to perform it. But to was (it seems) a vow to get
the Crown, and to serve his own high ends. Absalom had a younger brother, that
copied out right after him, Adonijah I mean, who aspiring to the government,
used much policy all along, He took the advantage of David's indulgence toward
him, and of his old age, He blazed his Title to the Crown, procured a guard of
estate, made a popular show of himself being a comely man of person, Joined
himself in faction with Joab and Abiathar, both of them potent men in their
several ways, and both discontent; entertained the Nobles with feasting; drew
into his party some principal Court-officers; procured Jonathan a
Court-favourite to be his Intelligencer; And among the rest Religion is also
woven in, He has a Vow too as well as Absalom, to draw together his
confederates, and a public Sacrificing at the well Rogel. 1 King. 1 9. Vid. P.
Mart. in loc.
Cardinal Peter Caraffa (afterterwards Pope by the Name of Paul the fourth) is
one of the most notable and pertinent examples that this latter age has
afforded of this kind of Hypocrisy. Rodolp. Hospin. de Monach-Ordo sodalitatis
Divini Amoris
There was a religious Order sprung up, that called themselves, The Divine
fellow^ip, or, The fellowship of Divine love, to them Caraffa joins himself,
and that so strictly, that he not only refused the Bishopric of Brundusium,
which the Emperor Charles the fifth offered to him, but of his own accord
resigned the Bishopric of Theatine, which he had under Pope Julius the second.
This fact of his, carrying so much show of self-denial and mortification, took
so much with the Order, that they changed their Name, and called themselves
Theatines from him. And who would not have counted him a miracle of holiness?
But the world afterward took notice, that he contemned lesser preferments to
procure greater; for he that refused Bishoprics, yet gladly accepted a
Cardinalship at the first offer from Pope Paul the third; so that his Title
which was taken before for the gracing of an Order, was used afterward
ordinarily for the denomination of an hypocrite. This path of Hypocrisy has
been so much trod and beaten by Clergymen, that wise men who discerned it,
long since gave notice of it in a fable of a Monk, who being a poor fishermans
son, still spread a Net over his Table, as a remembrance of his mean
original, till having by those shows. Mr. H. Masen of Hearing and doing. chap.
2. p. 27, etc.
till having by those shows of humility reached the highest preferments, he
laid away the Net, because then the fish was caught. Which the reader shall
find well morallized and gravely applied by a late Divine. But because as that
author notes, it will please men the better, because the Tale is framed of a
Clergyman; I will fit it with two other examples of men of another profession.
The one of the Prince of Eggenburg a potent man in the Court of the Emperor
Ferdinand the second, Stat. Cur. Ferd. 11. chap. 9.
and who it seems could make Religion advance his potencie, for he put it to no
other use in the opinion of the Relator, who calls him, A Bigot in Religion,
dissembling, and one that knew how to satisfy the Emperor in all things. The
other of a Prince, whom for the honor of his worth, I will forbear to name,
who (if an History written by a Jesuit may be credited, Famian. Strada de
Bello Belg. 7 Dec. 1. lib. 2.
which for my part I profess I scarcely credit) was of no Religion but that
which would advance his ends, and though he wrote an Apology for the
Calvinists, yet the Historian endeavors to make it good by a Letter under his
own hand to the Duke of Alencon the King of France his brother, that he
professed with the Calvinists only to curry favor with them, and because he
needed their help. To conclude, what else shall we call that pretense of some
that they desire preferment, only that they may be more enabled to do more
good; then plain hypocrisy? for he that does not much good, to the extent of
his power, in the estate wherein he is for the present though mean; does but
pretend he would be better, if he were preferred to an higher condition.

CHAP. IX. The second Symptom from the end of Hypocrisy, farther enlarged.
Two other Instances. Religion put on for Sedition. And for Covetousness.
3. SEdition also sometimes wears the liverie of Religion, Religion a cover
for Sedition. Number. 16.1. See Number. 3.28, 30.
when it is ashamed of its own name. Korah the Levite being well conceited of
himself it seems, and (as Solomon Jarchi observes) being offended at the
preferment of Elizaphan the son of Vzziel of a younger family then his own,
Numb. 16.10.
and affecting the Priesthood, thought fittest to make some commotion for the
accomplishment of it, and to fish in a troubled water. This being his Design,
he easily drew others into his party, namely Dathan, Abiram and On, the sons of
Reuben, they being his neighbors (for the Reubenites camped next to the
Kohathites on the fouthside of the Tabernacle) and having much like Interests,
Numb. ^.10 See M. Mores Map. of Cana.
being willing to recover by any means the dignity which their grandfather
Reuben the firstborn of Jacob had lost, and which was held from them by the
Tribe of Judah. This was the double plot, and the true ground of the sedition.
But all this while, as if they (holy men as they were) had had no other
ambition but Spiritual, and to be near God; pretend an holy dislike of a
proud tyranny in Moses and Aaron as if they were only holy. Ye take too much
upon ye, (say they) Seeing all the Congregation are holy, every one of them,
and the Lord is among them. They might be sure this Pretext would take, when
they made themselves Tribunes of the people, and Champions for their spiritual
liberties, that every body might be a Priest and offer Sacrifice. This humor
is commonly predominant in the vulgar people: It appeared in Germany in the
Sedition of the Anabaptists, every one would be a Preacher, and claim
privilege of Christian liberty as they pretended. It is a notable Story which
I am led unto. Ioh. Sleiden. Comment. ad An. 1525.
In the year 1525. the Country People of Suevia and other parts about the
Danube, covenanted together by an Oath, and raised a terrible Sedition,
pretending the maintenance of the Gospel and the public liberty. The
Magistrates promised to satisfy them fairly, but they would not be quieted.
They sent abroad their demands, 1. That they might have the choice of their
Ministers. 2. That they might be exempt from paying tyth's. 3. That they might
be no longer counted Servants, being redeemed by the blood of Christ. 4. That
all Fish-pooles, Woods and Commons might be at their liberty. 5. That they
might be exempt from Tributes, and Mortuaries or Herriots. Before the
publishing of these Demands, Luther had wrote a book to persuade people to
obedience; and after these came abroad, he writes another in answer to them;
for they had appealed to him, as if he had patronized their doings, He shows
they abused the Name of God, because they pretended in their sedition, the
promoting of the sincere Doctrine of the Gospel, and of righteousness and
equity, whereas in truth they took a course to deprive Magistrates of that
authority which God had put into their hands. And in many other words, he
deals friendly, yet faithfully and roundly with them. And in another writing,
advises to put them to the sword, Gabr. Prdtreolus, Elench. Haeret. l. 10. c.
15. p. 288.
and cut them off as wild beasts. Which I the rather note, because the Papists
fasten this very crime of sedition upon him, to which we see how great an enemy
he was.

It Is very observable, Jude, v. 8.
that the Apostle St Jude puts this among the characters of hypocritical
seducers, Those filthy dreamers that defile the flesh, That they despise
dominions and speak evil of dignities; if the place be to be understood of
Magistrates, Adam Sasbout. in loc. Philip. Parcus in loc.
which I find some to make doubt of. But the younger Pareus takes it in the
sense in which I have alleged it, and applies it against the Gnostics and
Basilidians of old, the Anabaptists and Libertines of late. Yea those roguish
and vagrant disciples of John Batemburg, who were not ashamed publicly to avow
sedition, (if we may believe Lindan, Lindan. Dubitant. 2 Dialog. de
Patemburgicis.
a man whom we have reason enough to suspect in his reports, because of his
gross partiality toward the Sea of Rome) were yet zealous against Romish
superstitions. To whom we may add Hacket and his Accomplices in our own story,
so seditious, and yet withal so shamefully hypocritical, that I know no man
that has endeavored to excuse them. The fuller Answer. Script. and Reason.
The Lord of Hosts by Mc. Buroughs.
Let no Malignant or ill affected reader wrong my meaning here, as if I would
in the least measure reflect upon the present war, and the pretenses of it,
the necessity and justifiablenesse whereof I am fully satisfied in, and so I
think may the world be, by the Books that are abroad.

4. But above all, we have most to say in the discovery of hypocrites who serve
their Covetousness by Religion. When Ahab is sick for the vineyard of Naboth,
and Jezabel will needs have it to make him well, a holy fast must be
proclaimed, a religious Scrutenie and a zealous tenderness of Gods dishonor,
to bring the business about. It Is a known story, Judas was a covetous wretch,
but one would think he were an holy man, an enemy to vain expenses, a great
friend to the poor, brim-full of charity: When the humble sinner bestowed her
costly sweet ointment, where she thought it was most worthily spent, Religion a
cover for covetousness.
upon the feet of Christ; Judas cries out, Why is this wast? It had been better
given to the poor. Good words; but we know the mystery; He would have been
Almoner; Joh. 12.5, 6.
He was a Thieft, the text tells us, and bare the bag, and cared not for the
poor. Act. 19 24, 25, 26, 27. Act. 8.18.
Demetrius the Silver-smith is become religiously zealous for Diana; but it was
indeed the decay of his Trade that pinch't him. Simon Magus was so desirous of
the gift of the holy Ghost, and of the power of giving it, by the imposition of
hands, that rather then miss he would give money for it, but it was because he
meant to make money of it again, and so would lay out his money in a good way
of trading. And how came Foelix so devout, Act. 24.26.
that he sent so often for his prisoner, and heard him so often? It was his money
rather then his Doctrine that he gaped after, and he would rather have seen a
fee, then heard the other point. Foelix then was an hypocritical hearer; and
are there no examples to be found of hypocritical preachers too, who love to
labor where they may be sure to eat, Hos 10.11. Mich. 3.11.
like Ephraim, who loved to tread out the Corn? Yes, They were such of whom
the Prophet speaks; The Priests teach for hire, and the Prophets divine for
money; yet will they lean upon the Lord, and say, Is not the Lord among us?
Luke 20.47.
And such of whom our Savior speaks, Beware of the Scribes which desire to
walk in long robes, which devour widows houses, and for a show make long
prayers. Christ does not condemn Macrologie or long prayers; which I also note
as a caution by the way against profane spirited men, who are ready to catch at
the shado'ws of advantage which such like places seem to give them, and turn
the sharpedge of such Texts against all such who having their hearts full of
matter, and their spirits inflamed do continue long in prayer; But he
discovers the abuse of it among the Scribes, who either by this means did
insinuate themselves into rich widows as most faithful and religious over
seers of their estates, to whom they might safely commit themselves and their
estates, that so they might gain a convenient opportunity to beguile them; or
under pretense of long prayers, expounding the word, instructing of them, and
the like, staid with them, fed upon them, St. Chrysostom. in los.
and eat them up; which is St Chrysostoms observation. A practice like unto
this, a late godly and reverend Divine of ours, discovered in some Antinomian
Ministers about London, and therefore warns the reader in these words. 1. Dr.
Tailor, The rule of the Law. Preface to Read.
Look carefully to your precious soul's. 2. Look well to your estates and
outward means, lest these Impostors make a prey and advantage on you, as they
have done on some already, who have confessed that these Pedlars have basely
inveagled from them, even the very Cushions of their window's; for the Apostle
observed not in vain, that through covetousness they make merchandise of
unwary souls. Of this sort are they which creep into houses, and lead
captive silly women laden with sins. 2 Timothy 3.6.
This is the parallel to that line which St Augustine drew, Aug. de opere
Monachorum, cap. 28.
when he described some hypocritical Monks of his time, who gadded about the
Country, selling the relics of Martyrs, or pretending them to be such, making
a gainful poverty, and exacting the hire of a counterfeit sanctity.

Truly, our trade that we ought to drive in preaching ought to be to bring in
souls to God. Our gain is when the people gain by us. They therefore much
mistake the mystery of their trade, who seek the fleece not the sheep; Isa.
56.11.
yet many such there were in the Prophets time, when he complained; They are
greedy dogs which can never have enough, they are shepherds that cannot
understand, they all look to their own way, every one for his gain from his
quarter. These are they that will pollute the Lord among his people for
handfulls of barley, and for pieces of bread, as another Prophet speaks. Eze.
^3.1^. c. 22, 25, 26. Jer. 5.31. 2 Pet. 2.2, 3, 15, 16. Mat. 7.15. 2 Cor.
11.9.12, 13.
The Scriptures are full of complaints of such, and so are the Stories of all
times. Yea the blindest times took so much notice of this trade of
covetousness even in Preaching Friars and other Religious Orders, that though
they durst not speak out, they expressed their apprehension and just indignation
against them in Pictures. There was found in the Abbey of Fulda, besides other
Emblemes taxing the Popish Prelates and other Orders, one picture of a Wolf in
a Monks Cowle and a shaven crown preaching to a flock of Sheep, with these
words, alluding to some like words of the Apostle, coming in a pendant out of
his mouth, God is my witness how I long for you all in my bowels. And
underneth was writ, This hooded wolf is the hypocrite; Joh. Wolf. Lect. Memor.
Tom. 1. ad An. 1300.
of whom in the Gospel, Beware of false Prophets. This picture was made 200
years before the Reformation at Luthers preaching. And one Heerbrand a Germane
Divine tells us, that he being employed for the purging out of what relics of
Idolatry, Jac. Heerbrand. in Resut. Assert. Jesuit.
he found remaining in some Churches allotted unto him, coming unto
Pfort-zheim, he found a Cushion in St Michaels Church curiously wrought with
the like picture, only with this difference, that the Wolf was preaching to a
flock of Goese, every one holding in his Bill a pair of praying beads. He
further tells us, that being at Argentine, visiting the rarities and
Antiquities of that City, he was showed an ingenious piece of carving even in
the very stone work of the wall of the great Church, wherein it seems their
forefathers had under the shapes of Wolves, Bears, Foxes, and the like,
carrying holy water, crosses and tapers, expressed their dislike of the
religious rapin's and thefts used by the Clergy. And this work could be no
less then 300 years old when he law it, which was in the year 1551. But in
the times nearer to the Reformation, this hypocrisy (it seems) came to be more
notoriously known. For the reader may gather by that pleasant Dialogue of
Erasmus, Eras. Colloq cui Tit. Francisc.
where the two Franciscans are entertained of their Host, that it was then
ordinary to have such pictures hang up in their Hostries and common Innes; and
accordingly he wittily faines such a like picture hanging there, of an Ape in
the habit of a Franciscan Friar, sitting by a sick man's bed, holding a cross
in one hand, as if he were giving him ghostly counsel, but with the other hand
picking his pocket. I the longer dwell upon these Trifles, because by them we
discern the practice, and withal, the intelligence of former times.

And truly these Fables let them be, yet they have been truly acted from time
to time. He was a notorious palpable hypocrite, that Salvian was acquainted
withal, and did indeed but daube on the colors of Religion over his
oppression, When the good Father out of pity to a poor man's case, became a
petitioner to a mighty man to restore somewhat that he had taken injuriously,
and without which the poor man's life could not be sustained; Audita
religiosissimi sceleris ratione discessi Salv de Gubern. Div. lib. 4.
He told Salvian fiercely; He had sworn he would have it, and therefore could
not part with it. Salvian calls this, A Religious wickedness.

But we need not ascend so high as Salvians time for examples of this kind of
hypocrisy; we find it practiced in our age among all conditions of men. When
that Prince whom I formerly mentioned out of Strada, O inaestimabile facinus,
and prodigiosum. Quid non ausae sint improbae mentes? Armant se ad latrocinium,
dum per Christi nomen etc. Fam. Strada de bell. Belg. lib 3. Dec. 1.
intended a marriage with Anne the daughter of Maurice Duke of Saxony, to
please Margaret of Parma the Governesse of the United Provinces, he conditioned
that she should forsake the Lutheran Religion: Her Uncle by the mothers side,
Philip Lantgrave of Hesse, desirous to break the match, and prefer his own
daughter, would not yield to the condition, pretending conscience, and yet
accepted the same condition for his own daughter. So far dare they abuse
Religion, whose God is their private commodity, says Strada; a grave and a
good note, whether he be faithful in relating the history or not, is not to
my purpose to enquire. But from others whose relations we may dare to trust, we
may be further confirmed; Knox History of Scotland, p. 503.
for Mr Knox reports as bad matters of some Noblemen in Scotland, who were
forward for the Reformation, but it was to get spoils, and to seek their own
private commodity; for he says, They were otherwise licentious, they greedily
griped the possessions of the Church, and would not lack their part of Christ's
Coat. And for my part, I will believe that rare French Divine John Camero of
Bordeaux, Stellitent in Santangel ep. ad lect. and p 22
though speaking in his own cause, that his adversary Elias Santangel the
Lawyer was a Protestant for worldly respects, and cared for no Religion further
then he could serve his ends by it; And the rather, because J find the same
character fastened upon him by Dr Gilbert Primrose then Camerons Colleague,
Primrosi carmen in Stellitent.
lately shining in our English Orb. I might trace more of these Foxes, for the
tracke of their feet is easily seen; and if we may believe some men's reports,
we find some such practices in some of our own Courts. W. Huntley breviat p.
144.
But I have hunted long upon this Sent, and wearied my Reader happily in this
path. It will be time to conclude this Chapter, when I have only noted this
one thing more: That it is no wonder to find Religion and the Truth pretended
for private commodity; when as hypocrisy is so sly and dangerous, that
sometimes Truths may be truly in the kind assented to for the same reason.
Which experiment we find in the Gospel; the people that were fed with Christ's
loaves and tasted of his bread, and saw his power and care to provide: it
wrested from them an assent and acknowledgement, Joh. 6.14, 15.
That of a truth he was that Prophet which should come into the world. And yet
notwithstanding this assent, they were no more, no better then hypocrites, as
may be gathered by the whole Story.

CHAP. X. A third of those Symptom's from the end of Hypocrisy. Tenderness
and Scruples pretended. Straining at Gnats. Scruples made to cover treachery,
rebellion, envy, to beget opinion of extraordinary holiness.
3. Scruples pretended by Hypocrites.
THe matter of this Symptom and this Chapter, is I confess of the same
spinning with the former, but I have only for the Readers ease wound it up upon
another bottom: That hypocrites sometimes pretend tenderness and
scrupulousness, when it may appear there is no such matter; Vid Mont. Appar.
ad Orig vij. 25, 26.
because they strain at smaller things, and can swallow greater. The Pharisees
made a scruple of it to eat with unwashen hands, because it was contrary to
the Tradition of the Elders. They were so precise in it, that they washed
before meat, Mar. 7 3. (...) Mat. 15.2, 3, 4.
and in eating between every dish or service; Except they wash their hands
often, (says St Mark) they eat not. And to that purpose they had water-pots
ready at their Feasts. Yet they made no conscience of Gods express
commandment, Honor thy Father and thy Mother. They would not touch money the
price of blood, and yet had their hands deeply in the blood of Christ. They are
much like such as these, of whom Dr Hall spoke in his Character; Mat. 27.6. See
a like case, Joh. 18.28.
He turns all Gnats into Camels, and cares not to undo the world for a
circumstance: flesh on a Friday is more abomination to him then his neighbors
bed.

I the rather give this Symptom, because though all scrupulousness be a
disease of conscience, Martin Bresser. de Consc. lib. 6. cap. 2.
as some Casuists have rightly observed, and be caused sometimes by ignorance,
sometimes by melancholy, sometimes by Satan's tentations, etc. yet it may arise
from overweening self-conceit and secret pride, and other corrupt affections,
and so may be a more evident sign of Hypocrisy: which will also appear, when
Scruples are but pretended, as we find they have bin.

1. Scruples to cover treachery.
To cover Treachery. The Pharisees are an example. They took counsel how to
entangle Christ in his talk, and they send their Disciples to him with a
seeming scruple, Mat. 22.17, 18.
as if they stumbled at the lawfulness of paying Tribute to Caesar; but Christ
perceiving their wickedness, and that they meant to tempt and entrap him, calls
them hypocrites for their labor. This treachery of theirs is more fully
discovered by St Luke, who says, Luke 20.20.
They watched him and sent forth spies, which should feign themselves just
persons, that they might take hold of his words, that so they might deliver him
to the power and authority of the Governor.

2. To cover envy. Scruples to cover envy.
When Christ had healed a woman that had been crooked 18. years, and the
people were much affected with the miracle; the Ruler of the Synagogue having
much indignation, and fretting with envy that Christ received so much glory of
the people, he colors over his pale of Envy, with the red of zeal, and
stands up for the maintenance of the honor due to the Sabbath, and tells the
people they ought to make more conscience of that day. There are six days,
(said he to the people) in which men ought to work, in them therefore come and
be healed, and not on the Sabbath day. One would have thought he had bin a
mavelous tender man, Luke 13.15.
and full of scruples touching any thing to be done on the Sabbath. But Christ
who knew all things, knew his heart, and calls him Hypocrite, and convinces him
of the unreasonablenesse of that pretense he insisted upon. Such Hypocrisy did
the Colleagues of Brentius discover, Melch. Adam in vita Bren p. 438.
who when he being enlightened with Luthers writings, began to expound St
Matthew in his chamber, and by reason of the confluence of Auditors, removed
his Lecture into the common Schools at Heidelberge; they envied the concourse
to him, but covered their Envy with a religious pretense, that it was a
profane thing for him to handle Divinity, being himself not in orders, and
especially in such a place.

3. To beget an opinion of more then ordinary sanctity. Scruples pretended to
seem holy.
The Pharisees and Scribes were scrupulous preachers, they taught the precisest
points, the most rigid observations; they bound heavy burdens and grievous to
be borne, and laid them on men's shoulders: but 'twas only to be high and
weighty in the peoples thoughts: for they believed not their own
prescriptious; Mat. 23.4.
They would not move those burdens with one of their fingers. Such are
Preachers (if there be any such, as it is likely such there be) when do much
urge upon their hearers, the frequency of fasting, the exercise of secret
prayer, the diligent study of holy Scripture: To have the name of great
advancers of serious piety: whereas if you go after them, and get some
occasion and look in, and see them in their study; you shall find them study
in the strength of their own wit and reading, and entertain their hours with
Aristotle or Aquinas, and the Schoolmen, with Augustine or the Councels,
while the book of God lies by as a neglected and dusty Pamphlet.

This is to be an Hypocrite, whereas such as are sincere are ready to do more
themselves then they urge upon others; as St Paul presses a due maintenance
for others, in respect of their labor in the Ministry; but yet works with his
own hands for his own livelihood. 1 Timothy 5 18. 1 Cor. 9.12, 13


CHAP. XI. Thirdly, Symptoms of Hypocrisy respecting Profession. The first of
these Symptoms. Vndnswerablenesse to Profession. Goodly Fronts. A form, a
name of godliness. Instanced in Monks. Nunn's. Jesuits. The Pope. Popular
Preachers. Common Professors.
HYpocrites are not answerable to the Profession they make: Hypocrites not
answerable to their profession
it carries not proportion with their practice, but bears a larger measure.
They are course cloth with a fine list. And as reverend Mr Greenham said of
them: Greenh. Com. pl. p. 18^, 435.
If ye talk of Religion, ye shall have many that will hold ye talk a whole
dinner time, or half a day, and yet look into their lives, and they will
falsify whatsoever they have said. Mat. 7.21.
These say, Lord, Lord, but they are workers of iniquity. They look white
like silver, but they draw black lines. They have a fair outside, but stuffed
within with malice, worldliness, intemperance; like window-cushions made up of
velvet, and perhaps richly imbroidered, but stuffed within with hay: Or like some
houses that are built high with lofty Turrets that are presently in the
Travelers eye, and if they draw nearer to view, they find them built with
stately porches, neat gate-houses, fine stair-cases, curious Galleries; but
never a fair chamber or convenient for lodging. They have much to entertain
the passenger and the viewer, they will entertain you with fine Notions,
choice Discourses, but if ye dwell with them, ye shall find ill
Accommodations, They answer not your expectation. Ye shall hear of them, as
ye ride thorough the Country, they have the name among Professors, they
carry it away from others: but ye shall experience it, that they are not such
as they are spoken, they are not furnished indeed to be hospitable to the
weary Christian, they cannot close with your godly spirits; Prove. 13.7. (...)
Qui fiegit se divitem. Romans 2.20.
ye shall not find the spirit of grace and of mortification, and of a sweet,
humble, quiet mind to be there. There is that makes himself rich (says
Solomon) yet has nothing. The Original is, He faineth himself to be rich. He
has a form of Knowledge and of the Truth in the law; as the Apostle speaks.
He is as if he had and wore the Rationale, the Breast Plate of Vrim and
Thummim, Knowledge and Truth: for it may be the Apostle here alludes to that,
to convince their vanity of boasting; as in the following verses he discovers
their unanswerablenesse, and concludes in the two last verses of that Chapter:
Romans 2, 28, 29.
He is not a Jew who is one outwardly, neither is that circumcision which is
outward in the flesh; but he is a Jew who is one inwardly, and circumcision is
that of the heart in the spirit, and not in the letter, whose praise is not of
men, but of God. A Jew (in St Paul's sense in that place) is a Professor of the
true Religion, and Circumcision is the wearing of the badge of that Profession.
Now in that sense, there are many Jews outwardly in propatulo, that are not
true Jews, (...)
Jews inwardly; for the (...), here mentioned by the Apostle, is inward Piety
and Justice, to which these are Strangers. Isa. 48.1, 2, 4.
They are only called by the name of Israel, and swear by the name of the
Lord, and make mention of the God of Israel, but not in truth nor in
righteousness. They call themselves indeed of the holy City, and stay
themselves upon the God of Israel; but they are obstinate, and their neck is
an iron sinew. Isa, 58.1, 2.
They seek God daily and delight to know his ways (they take a pride in it)
as a Nation that did righteousness and forsook not the ordinance of their God
(as if they were the only people that held up Gods ordinances) they ask the
ordinances of God, they take delight in approaching unto God, (they miss not a
Sermon) yet they are such whose transgressions must be cried against with a
voice like a trumpet. 2 Timothy 2.5. Lord Brook Not. of Episco. page 93.
They have a form of godliness, but deny the power of it. A Text which my
Lord Brook gives a notable interpretation of, and understands it properly of
the Antinomians, Grindletonians, and Family of Love; who despising learning,
and bragging of the spirit, are yet traitors, high-minded, heady, etc. They
have a form: they receive a slight mark, but refuse a deep stamp and
impression. St James tells us what the Mark is, Jam. 1.26, 27.
A seeming to be religious; and what the deep stamp is; the brideling of the
tongue, the visiting of the fatherless and widows in their affliction, and
continuing unspotted from the world. But unto these, and the like good works,
they have no mind, Tit. 1.16.
as the Apostles word is; They profess that they know God, but in works they
deny him. (They will be his servants, but they will choose their labor) being
abominable and disobedient, Revel. 3.1. Revel 3 9. Non solum in falsis verbis,
sed in simulatis operibus mendaciu est. -- Christianum se dicere, and opera
Christi non facere, mendacium est. Ambr. Sermon. de Abrah. Hos. 11.12. Psalm.
78.34, 35, 36, 37. Lu 10.25, etc. Mat. 3.7, 8. Jer. 42 20. Ezekiel. 33.30, 31, 32.
Isa. 29.13. Mat. 7.22, 23. This Symptom instanced in Monks. Nuns. Jesuits.
and unto every good work reprobate; of no judgment, or of no mind. These
have a name that they are a live, but are dead. The Synagogue of Satan, which
say they are Jew's and are not, but do lie. There is a lie in works too as
well as in words, as St Ambrose observes. And it is agreeable to that of the
Prophet Hoseah, Ephraim compasses me about with lies, and the house of Israel
with deceit. And the Prophet Jeremy fits us with a direct instance, Jer. 2.20,
21, 22, 23. and we have another in the Psalm; When God slew them, they sought
him, they returned and enquired early after God; they remembered that God was
their rock, and the high God their Redeemer (good words, fair signs of
Repentance and Faith) nevertheless they did flatter him with their mouth, and
they lied unto him with their tongue, for their heart was not right with him.
So then, the lie was in their heart; and in their unanswerable conversation
too; for it follows: Neither were they steadfast in his Covenant. The Lawyer
mentioned by St Luke, seems to have been such an one as I have described; and
such were the Pharise's and Sadduces that came to John's Baptism. But we have
express examples in Johanan and Jezaniah, in Ezekiels hearers, in the Jews,
and in the people that our Savior speaks of.

By applying this Symptom, we may first notoriously discover this disease of
Hypocrisy to be deeply grounded in the Friars of the Romish Church, who make
profession of strict vows of poverty and chastity; but unanswerable to their
vow of poverty, they endeavor to get all into their Covents. Like Ravens they
croake over the beds of dying men, and attend them, not so much to afford them
ghostly counsel, but to be put into their last wills and procure good
legacies, It will appear that I do not wrong them to any that shall take
notice of the Order prescribed for the making of Wills, Manuale seu Rituale
sec. usum Sarum. page 164.
in the Rituall of Sarum (as it is called) where the Priest is to direct the
sick person to bequeath. 1. To his Parish Church. 2. To the Curate. 3. To the
Vicar. 4. To the Clerk. 5. To such or such (other) Churches. 6. To Hospitals.
7. To such or such Covents. And lastly to their children and kindred. Other
practices of theirs for gain, I have before in part noted, besides what I
might mention out of late discoveries of their cunning and active seducing of
women with great portions, and rich men's sons. And concerning the vow of
chastity, they pretend unto much, they would seem Angels. Sanders, Hon. of
Imag. chapter 15.
What a tender nice stomach had Dr Sanders, who in stead of other matter to
object against our reverend Jewel, condemns him to be a man given over to a
lewd mind, that his book was full of bawdy Images. And what might be the
reason of this noise? Forsooth, because the Printer of Bishop Jewels book, had
put a naked boy in some Anticke shape at the end of some Tractates in that
Impression which Sanders saw. Sure such men as these that cannot endure to look
upon an harmless Anticke, are miracles of chastity. Bale lives of English
votaries.
But John Bale has paid them home. And our Histories are full of the lusts
and uncleanness of Cuthbert and Dunstan, and others their glorious Saints and
forwardest against Priests marriages. But because our Bale might be thought
partial; I will allege the testimony of one they have not that exception
against, namely Alvar: Pelagius, who tells us, That Drunkenness, wantonness,
Crapulae, chrietati, and incontinentiae, (quod est little vitium commune)
intendunt Clerici, and plerique vitio contra naturam. Contrasanctam castitatem
quam Domino promiserunt, sic offendunt continuo, etiam public, etc. Alvar.
Pelag. de planct: Eccles. lib. 2. circa an. 1340.
and unnatural sins, were the Clergies continual practice, and that they
had Brothels within their Cells, yea in the Churches. And that I may not
neglect the holy Sisters too, though it be an ordinary point, and in which I
might be large in those testimonies that may be had from their own Stories; I
will by the Readers good leave, insert a passage, though it be a little light
and pleasant, out of Monsieur de Balzac's letter unto the Bishop of Marseilles,
where naming a Nunnery, he says; They pass their time merrily there, and of
two hundred, calling themselves Virgins, I verily think there is not one who
speaks truth, if she have not recovered her maidenhead. It may be their
intention is not ill, and that in suffering themselves to be courted, they have
no other design then to raise servants unto God, etc. I could say more upon
this argument, but I spare the Readers modesty; and I shall meet with this
point more opportunely hereafter. All times have taken notice of these
religious orders, Tacco de collegiis pro soemineo sexu (quem Gregorius magnus
devotum appellavit) institutis: utinam sexus ille Deo dieatus, qui de Christi
patrimonio delicate pascitur, seipsum non aliquando, de stupro and adulterio,
prolisque partu suspectum redderet, atque infamem Vtenam non herbis, non
quarundam inc^sione venarum, non lurtdis potiombus, non lotionibus pedum
exquisitis, vel aborium procuraret, vel saetum praesocaret. Iac. Whimpheling.
in Chron. Potho Presb. Promiensis, de slatu Domus Dei. lib 3. in Bibl. Patr. To
12.
that they do be-lie their profession. Among others, we find a very graphicall
description of their hypocrisy by one Potho a Presbyter almost 400 years
since, which would be too long to infert. But all the characters are exactly
found in the late Order of the Jesuits, a Sect or Society of Jesus, but they
gave themselves the name, God never gave it them. He gave it Christ, for
Humiliavit, a virtue they little regard; for he that does but smell of it, is
eo ipso, not meet to be of that company, Andr Sermon in Phil. 2.9.
as Dr Andrews speaks. Who is there that presents a fairer and demurer
outside then the Jesuit does? They say his long cloak, and broad hat, and
grave garb and fashion as he walks in the streets of Paris, procures him
respect and reverence before all the other Orders, who trucke up and down
there in their habits. It was somewhat that caused that wise Prince Henry the
4th of France to say of them (if he spoke as he meant) That they were Timothies
at home, Chrysostomes in the Pulpit, Hist. of Conc. of Trent. Engl. page 799.
Austins in disputation. But whatsoere he said or thought of them, the world
thinks the contrary, that they profess poverty, and yet possess more lands
and revenues then many Princes; that they teach others to fast, and play the
gluttons themselves; that they vow virginity, and yet are notorious letchers;
that they are Monks by profession, but indeed a Macchiavellian rout interessed
in all estates; that they pretend peace, yet are compounded of envy, hate,
malice, ambition, Vid. Daven. Determ. qu. 17. Whitak. de Scrip. Epist. Dedic.
p. 4. Mont. Appar. vij. 16. R. Thoms Elench Refut. Tortur. c. 2. p. 22. Seeds
Stercoraria. P^al 113.7, 8.
and are the Incendiaries of Christendom. We see then the Brethren of the
several Orders are all like one another, and all of them are as like as may be
to their father. The Pope is a grand hypocrite, and is to practice it even by
an Order at the solemnity of his creation. The Prior and Canons of Lateran
bring him to the Marble-seate, called the Dungchaire, wherein he sits so, and
so low, as if he lay along; Then come the Cardinals and lift him up
honorably, using to him the words of the Psalm; He rayseth up the poor out
of the dust, and lifts the needy out of the dunghill, that he may set him
with Princes. After this he rises, and taking out of his Chamberlains bosom
an handful of Brasse-money, throws it among the people, saying, Acts 3.6.
Lib. Cerem. Sect. 12. c. 4 Tit. 15,
Silver and Gold have I none, but what I have, give I unto you. With what shows
of humility and poverty is this business carried? Yet who more lofty and more
rich then he?

But enough, if not too much of these. Hypocrisy notorious in popular
preachers.
We may apply the character nearer. Whereas preaching ought to be to no other
end but for the gaining of souls, what shall we say to those that preach only
for oftentation and to gain applause? Nay, what may we not say against such,
who make a solemn prayer before Sermon, for the assistance of the holy Spirit
of God in the deliverie of the Word; and yet trust not at all to the assistance
of Gods Spirit but to their own wit and eloquence, and come to declaime and
vent their neat compositions, in the study and framing of which, they never
sought God, nor sent up a prayer for direction?

But alas; This Hypocrisy notorious in common professors.
not to instance the Clergy only, who is it but he comes short of Profession,
It was Salvian de Gubern. Div lib. 4. mihi, p. 134, 135. and lib. 3 ad fin.
Speaking of injurious dealing, he says; Quo fit ut etiam nos, qui nos
Christianos esse dicimus, perdamus vim tant^ nominis, vitio pravitatis. Omnino
enim nihil prodest nomen saretum habere sine morthus, quia vita a professione
discordans abrogat illustris tituli honorem, per indignorum actuum vititatem.
Hoc ipso, per nomen Sacratissimum rei simus, qui a Sancto nomire discrepanus.
Nam and ideo plus sub religionis titulo, Deum ludimus, quia positi in religione
peccanus. Vide etiam, Ad Cathol Eccles. l. 1. mihi. p. 330. Sed long major
insania, si de veritate evangelij non dubites; vivere tamen, quast de ejus
falsitate non dubitares. Pic. Mirand in Epist.
Salvians complaint of old, that they had Christ in their mouth's, but to no
purpose; that they abused him under the bearing of his Name. And how justly may
we take up that of that Noble Mirandula against many: It were a great madness
not to believe the Gospel now that it is every where believed; yet a greater
madness it is, not to doubt of the truth of the Gospel, and yet to live so as
if without doubt it were false.

Oh how is Gods name dishonored, by those who profess his name. As the
Apostle to the Jews; Thou that say a man should not commit adultery, do
thou commit adultery? Thou that abhorrest Idols, do thou commit Sacrilege?
Thou that make thy boast of the Law, through breaking of the Law,
dishonourest thou God? Romans 2.22, 23, 24.
For the name of God is blasphemed among the Gentiles through you. We know who
said it; If a man be an hearer of the Law only, he is not just before God. Yet
how many are there, that are hearers only, Evangeliophori, it is Erasmus his
word, Gospell-carriers, Bible-bearers only. I cast not this Title upon godly
persons, as profane men do in scorn and derision of their necessary and
commendable profession. But if any man obey not that word which he hears and
talks of, but lives dissolutely, then I say to him, Erasm Colloq. cui Tit.
Cyclops.
as he in Erasmus, Quid Polyphemo cum Evangelio? What has a lewd wicked man to
do with the Gospel? And as he observes, many carry their Bibles, as the
Franciscans hang the rule of their Order at their girdles, but mind not to
observe it: They take care to adorn their Bibles, to guild and string them
richly; but no care that the Bible shall adorn their hearts. He tells us
pleasantly of the Soldier, that beat a blasphemer with his Bible, and so
defended the Gospel with the Gospel, and broke his pate with it; and yet for
all his zeal, was no way such a man as the Gospel requires. Such are profane
defenders of the Reformed Religion, yet are no way reformed: They will storm
against the Papists if they blemish our Religion, and yet themselves never
regard the very rules of Christianity, which (as Eusebius speaks) are,
Modesty, (...). Vide coetera quae sequuntur ad, (...). Eusebius. Hist. l. 1. c.
4. p. 11. edit Christophers.
Justice, bearing of the Cross, constancy in the professing of godliness and
true worship. In which sense he says, Abraham and the old Patriarks among the
Jew's might not improperly be called Christians. Well; all these are (as the
common Translation of the Psalms has it) strange children and dissemble with
God: or as it is in the Margin of our last Translation, Psalm. 18.44.
They yield fained obedience, or, lie unto God. St Cyprian a very godly Bishop,
it seems was much troubled with such as these; men that made so open and
forward a profession, that they suffered some things in the cause of Christ,
and according to the phrase of that time, were reckoned among and usually
called Confessors; Vt honorem sui nominis servent, ut qui gloriosi voce suerint
sint and mortbus gloriosi. Cypr. Epist. 6. in Edit. Pam. Doleo enim quando
audio quosdam improbe and insolenter d^scurrere adineptias, vel ad discordias
vacare, etc. Hortamur tamen per communem fidem, per pectoris nostri veram circa
vos and simplicem cbaritatem, etc. Epist. 7.
yet (as it appears) men of evil conversation. In his sixth Epistle he urges
them that they would keep up the honor of their name. It is manifest then they
lived below their profession. He wishes that he were among them (for he was
then in secessu, because of the persecution) that he might persuade them, ad
servandam gloriam suam, to keep up the honor of their holiness: For I grieve
(says he) when I hear that some wickedly and presumptuously follow their
sports, and that some are all for contentions, and will not be ruled by the
Presbiters and Deacons. He is the true and glorious Confessor of whom the
Church may have cause to boast, but not to blush. And in his seventh Epistle
writing to Rogatian and other Confessors, he says, The Bishops portion of joy
is greater then others in the fruit of the people. And then he bespeaks them
sweetly, gravely, holily. We beseech ye, (says he) by our common faith, by
that true and pure love that is in our heart toward you, that ye who in your
first conflict have overcome the Adversary, would maintain your reputation by
continuance and abiding in good, etc. We may wonder that in such times of
Persecution any should be unsound; That they which must profess unto the Stake
and the Scaffold, should keep up any lust against Christ. Yet so it was, that
the men Christians were covetous, voluptuous, malicious, etc. the women
Christians froward, vain, proud, fashionable. Timeo cervicem ne margaritaru^
and smaragdorum laqueis occupata, locum Spathae non det. Tert. de Cult. Faem.
cap. 13.
Tertullian took notice of it, (and he lived in the bitterest times,) He told
them, That he was afraid those necks would never be stretched forth handsomely
and courageously to receive the stroke of the sword, which they decked and
hung so, with Chains and Pearls and Emeralds. We then will now leave to
wonder at it, when we see such pride, and vanity, and costlinesse among our
Professors; but yet we will suspect they are not sound, not right, for they
profess a Gospel of mortification, of humility, of selfdeniall; which they
have no regard to answer; like those Sarrabaits whom St Augustine describes,
Aug. Sermon. 11. ad frat. in Eremo.
a sort of hypocritical Monks in Egypt, of whom (it seems) St Hierome had
written and complained to him, that were Angels to see to, but Wolves in their
conversation.

We learn then by all this not to be led by shows, or to esteem a Pharisee
any thing the holyer for the deepnesse of his fring; or to believe that every
one is a Gentleman that wears good clothes and of the new fashion; or to take
all for wise Counselors that go in Ermines and wear long Beards. They that
know the Country, tell us of a custom among the Russies, That the great Duke
of Muscovie selects men of the gravest aspects and countenance with reverend
long beards, who sit on each side of his Chamber of Estate, when foreign
Ambassadors are entertained, as if they were his wise-grand-Councell; when
indeed they are mean and unqualified persons, and of no more ability then so
many pictures in a fair wrought hanging, that serve only to cover a wall. It Is
just so, even in the very business of Religion; Many are only Wells without
Water: 2 Pet. 2 17. (...). Lucran. Dial. cui Tit-Alector.
Apes in Purple: and like those great Colossi and Images, that Lucian speaks
of, that in outward show resemble the shapes of Jupiter or Neptune, brave and
comely, wrought over with gold and pearl; but within filled up with pieces of
wood, pitch, mortar, and full of flies, spiders and cobwebs. Yea some are
directly contrary to what they appear, if ye look upon them one way; like a
kind of double-pictures, (I know not what name they give them) which are framed
so by the making up of the paper or cloth, in folds and pleat's, that if one
look one way upon them, they present one shape, if ye look the other way,
another. As I have seen some represent a faire-Woman the one way, the other
way a Serpent; or a Philosopher one way, the other way a fooles-head. Such
there are, that if you view them one way, or at one time, or in some places and
company, you shall see a Saint; but turn and look after them in other places
and company, at other times, and ye shall find a profane man, a scoffer at the
power of godliness, a drunkard, a wanton. But it is time to conclude this long
Chapter, and this Symptom.

CHAP. XII. The second Symptom respecting profession. Hypocrites abroad only
in fair weather. They choose the winning side. They may be sufferers. They will
not venture the whole stock.
THere is another Symptom of Hypocrisy considerable about this outward
profession, when men follow Christ, Hypocrites abroad only in fair weather.
while the loaves are to be had, and go a long with him, so long as fair
weather lasts; but are loath to loose any thing by Religion, or to endure the
wetting with and for Christ. A Scribe comes to Christ, Mat. See, 2 Match. 6.21.
8.19, 20. and says, Master I will follow thee whithersoever thou go. But
we hear no more of him, after Christ had cooled him with this answer, The
Foxes have holes and the birds of the air have nests, but the son of man
has not where to lay his head. It Is thought by good Interpreters, that he
supposed he should have found a better service, and repented of his forward
profer. Such Snailes as these come abroad in the dew, but afterward creep in
again. If they perceive the air to thicken, and the Clouds to grow black for
rain, they house themselves, and get back again, though their feet were over
the threshold, and they had begun their journey. They love not dirty way nor
stormy weather; they are with the forwardest, when the garments and the
palme-branches are spread, and the people cry Hosanna to tryumphing Christ,
Mark. 14.51, 52.
but they slinke away when he is led to Calvery. If once the swords and staves
appear, they will rather leave their linen garments and run away naked,
then be taken with him. Eusebius. Hist. l. 6. c. 34. Eusebius. de vita Constable l. 1. c.
11. Theod. l 1. c. 6.
They were such whom Eusebius speaks of in the persecution under Decius, and
of others in the Court of Constantius, who would be sure to keep their
preferments what ever became of their Religion: A famous and well known
History it is, recorded both by Eusebius and Theodoret.

He that is sincere to Gods cause, loves it whatever becomes of it, Hypocrites
fall in with the winning side.
but the Hypocrite he chooses and cleaves only to the strong and winning side;
and therefore ordinarily may be observed to stand in Bivio, expecting the
event, that he may apply his designs for Religion accordingly as things fall
out; as we read of Gelon King of Syracuse in Sicily, who when there was war
between the Grecians and the Barbarians (as they called them) kept his
Ambassadors at Delphos a neuter City, to await the issue, and to be ready to
congratulate the victor, Palladius in vita Isidori presb.
which course was also held by the wretched Theophilus Bishop of Alexandria,
when the Emperor Theodosius the first warred against Maximus. We may indeed so
keep our selves uningaged, and so stand, where we have no interesse; but every
one has an interesse in Religion, and must be engaged and of a side in it. A
man may carry things so evenly in other matters, that he may be safe by
moderation, what ever the event be, carrying if not an equal, yet a sober
affection to either; but into the business of Religion we must cast our selves
with resolution, as Peter threw himself into the sea, sink or swim, he meant
to come to Christ. Such a testimony Musculus gave of his sincerity to the truth
he had entertained. Melch. Ad. in vita Musc. page 372, 374.
He forsakes rich Popery, to cleave unto peore truth. He was a Monk in
Lutzelstein Abbey, when the truth shone first into him, where when Werner died,
he was chosen into his room, but perceiving it to be Satan's policy to hinder
him from following the truth; he forsakes the preferment, leaves the Abbey,
marries a wife, goes to a Protestant Town, gets his living with his hands, and
at length being called to preach in Dorlizheim a poor village, he that refused
the rich revenues of the Abbey, was there content to lie upon a little Straw,
and in extreme poverty, so that he was fain to borrow the little household
stuff he used. He continued there a painful and constant Preacher of the
Gospel. Here indeed is the trial, the hypocrite loves not Religion so well,
to venture so hard for it and with it. I am sorry that so worthy a man and rare
a wit as Erasmus of Roterdam, has merited to be an instance of this. He liked
well of Luthers doctrine, Abr. Bucholz. ^sag. Chren. O^^and. Epit Hest Cent 16.
l. 1. cap. 25, 38.
and showed his liking in his letters to the Saxon Elector, to the Archbishop
of Mentz, to Cardinal Campegius, and to Luther himself. But after the
Emperous had proscribed him, and threatened all that should favor him, he
deserted his cause, and his own former judgment. If it be a sinking cause,
let is sruke alone; he will keep himself safe; as King Henry the 4th then of
Navarre, told Beza, who urged him to show and engage himself in the quarrel
of the Protestants Religion, Melch. Adam. Decad in vita Bezae.
"That he would keep upon the shore and not lanch too far out into the
deep, but so that if a storm should rise, he might soon get to land again:
A lesson which Balduin a man in great esteem among the French, but a very
Ecebolus in Religion, taught him.

But let me clear this point a little further before I leave it. Hypocrites may
be sufferers.
I do not take suffering in the cause, to be always an undoubted testimony of
sincerity to it. For to make this discovery yet fuller, an hypocrite may be a
sufferer, I mean when vainglory and popular favor does sustain him; for
then though he endure heavy censures and those censures cruelly executed, yet
he is all this while the conqueror, and rides in the head of the Troops of
his admirers and applauders, though it be on a scaffold or a gibbet or at a
stake. This is St Augustines observation: Do ye think (says he) there may
not be some that would suffer only for the praise of men? If there were not
such kind of men, the Apostle would not have said, Though I give my body to be
burned, and have not charity, I am nothing. There may be some therefore that
may do this, rather through boasting then out of love. Aug. in Psa. 44.22.
The Ecclesiastical Histories, do plentifully confirm this observation,
where we find many Heretics as well as true Catholics, suffering even unto
blood. And to fit it somewhat near with some instances in our own age; what
can we even in the largest charity conceive of him, whose sufferings are
related fully by the author of the Breviat, set forth by W. Huntley, page 161,
162. Breviat. of Prelates usurpat. 3. Edit.
whom yet we knew afterward by another name in Cheshiere, and some other
parts, to be full of rage and madness against all that he knew or could
discover to be godly and best affected. And I am sure, some will pass the like
judgment upon another of those instances, recorded by the same author, page
163. I will shut up this point, Vicit amor patriae, laudisque immensa cupid^
with the words of a learned Divine, some through heat of blood or greatness
of spirit adventurous, or otherwise prodigal of life for purchase of same, can
with joy embrace such dangers in Christ's cause, as would much daunt many good
professors. In persuasions of zeal hence grounded, they might perhaps dye in
battle against the Infidels, or in the Romish Inquisition, and yet do no more
for the Savior of their souls, then they would for a strumpet or some consort
of bodily lust, or then malefactors have done one for another. And it is a
miserable kind of Martyrdom, to sacrifice a stout body to a stubborn mind. So
then, that saying which has gone current through all Antiquity, That it is not
the suffering but the cause which makes a Martyr, will hold good still, and
justify our observation, that some sufferers may be no Martyrs.

But this was taken notice of only by the way, Hypocrites will not venture their
whole stock.
but the symptom that we were now looking upon was, that ordinarily the
hypocrite will not venture his whole-stocke upon Gods cause, and which I also
add, he is loath to be at any cost in Gods service, or to loose any thing by
his profession. Ruth 1.
Orpah takes her leave of Naomi, when she has no further hope of preferment by
her. Ananias and Saphira will be sure to provide for themselves, Act. 5.
though they give up their names to the Community. Amos 8.5.
The people that Amos complains of, are observers of the Sabbath, but they
grudge at the loss of so much time and gain. Isa. 58.3.
Nay another Prophet tells us of a people, that sanctify a Fast, and yet keep
their poor laborers hard to their task. All these are unwilling to follow
Christ, when they must part with their comforts, with their ease, with their
estate. They could be content to live by the truth, but cannot endure the truth
should live upon them. If it come to that, that the Gospel will not mtintaine
them, but they it, and that they must loose a good trade, good customers, good
friends, great men's favors, etc. farewell so unthriving, so unprofitable a
profession. So far are these from sincere David's mind, who resolved he would
not serve God, but it should cost him somewhat. But these want love, for if
they had love, love would be bountiful, and make them willing to part with any
thing. Joh. 12.5, 6.
Judas was an hypocrite, and thought all was waste that was bestowed upon
Christ.

But in the Prophet Micah, we find hypocrites to be liberal, and to offer
largely, they think not great things too much, burnt offerings, calves of a
year old, thousands of Ramms, ten thousand rivers of oil, yea the firstborn,
the fruit of the body.

But I answer, it may be if they had bin taken at their word, they would not
have bin so good as their promise; or if they were in earnest, it was but such
earnest as a Merchant is in, when he casts his goods overboard for fear of
drowning; and so I grant an Hypocrite may do much under some present terror;
but consider him ordinarily, and you shall find him to have set up this
resolution in Religion, to be neither a Sufferer nor a looser.

CHAP. XIII. 4. Symptoms of Hypocrisy in respect of Duties. Partiality in
Duties.
THe Symptom that I here consider is this, Hypocrites partial in Duties.
that whereas we find hypocrites performing many duties, they have not a fair
ecuall and sincere respect to every duty, but make their choice. Saul will
sacrifice, but not obey. And the Pharisees were such men, Luke 11.42. Exo. 32
15, 16. The Tables were written on both thei^sides (...) on the one side and on
the other (as the LXX, hinc and binc), were they written, and the Tables were
the work of God, and the writing was the writing of God Vid. Guide. Pancirol de
reb memor. l. 1. chapter de Char. liter and Henr. Salmuth. not. ad Opisthographos.
See M Stock Com. on Mal. 3.5. L Ve^ulam, Medi^. Sacrae, ^ 7.
as we perceive by that speech of our Savior, Woe unto you Pharisees, fir ye
tith mint and rue and all manner of herbs, and pass over judgment and the
love of God; these ought ye to have done, and not to leave the other undone.
Here was somewhat performed that was a duty, but a passing over of others, like
a husbandman that plucks a side his plow and makes a balke, when he comes to
an hard and stiff piece of ground; somewhat done that ought to be done, but
other things as necessary left undone. Such men serve not Gods will, but their
own choice; They make a difference of the Tables, as if only one side were of
Gods writing; as if both had not the same equal authority.

There are some that seem to have a care of the first Table, they will hear
frequently, pray in their Family, hate Idols, avoid rash oaths, keep the
Sabbath, etc. but have little of no regard of the second, but live in malice,
covetousness, oppression, slandering, disobedience, etc. The reason why
Hypocrites boast of the works of the first Table, which are Adoration and duty
toward God, is double, both because such works have a greater pomp and
demonstration of Holiness, and also, because they do less cross their
affections and desires. The Apostle takes this way to convict hypocrites, by
sending them from the works of sacrifice to the works of mercy, which are the
works of distinction, whereby to find out hypocrites, according to that of the
Apostle, Pure Relegion and undefiled with God the Father is this; to visit the
fatherless and widows in their afflictions. Others are second Table men, they
deal justly, they obey laws, they are liberal to the poor, etc. but they
care not for Religion, they condemn all forwardness, as a silly preciseness,
they come to Church and hear drousily, carelessly; they care not for the
Sabbath, but count it a weariness unto them, especially to hear twice and to
perform the other duties of the day, and are ready to think of it, as
profanely as one of late writ of it, who after he has related the practice of
some, whom he condemns for Precisians, in their preparatory duties, public
Church duties, private Family duties, and secret duties of that day, says, It
is such a toil as that he would not put his horse to it. Some will perform
easy duties, but pass by the difficult; they are forward in applauded,
commended duties, but slarinke from such as are less accounted of, or exposed
to more censure. But this indeed is not to serve God at all, when God is not
served fully; which appears by that censure given by the Holy Ghost in the pen
of the writer of the History of the Kings, concerning the strange Nations which
planted in Samaria; 2 Kin. 17.33, 34.
They feared the Lord and served their own gods after their own manner, they
feared not the Lord. Their fear of the Lord was no fear. Romans 2.28.
So their Religion is no Religion, who abhor Idols, and yet commit
sacrilege, as the Apostle instanceth; who throw down Baals Temple, 2 Kin.
10.29.
but keep up Jeroboams Calves, as Jehu did, because he was persuaded it was
for the profit and stability of his Crown. How far are these crooked sticks
that will not touch with Gods measure, but only here and there, from what
David was, who had this testimony given of him, That he did fulfill all Gods
will. Act. 13.22.
It is indeed an argument that the stock is imperfect and unsound, when the
fruits of righteousness of but one or some few kinds do spring out. They
that obey the Royal Law with respect unto the maker of it, will as well
respect and tender the poor, as honor the rich and noble. But this was the
deformity which St James observed in those hypocrites he deals against, ^am.
2.1, 2. etc.
that they gave honor (as it was their duty) to the rich, If there come into
your Assembly a man with a gold ring in a goodly apparel, ye have respect to
him, and say, sit thou here in a good place. But in the mean time another duty
they neglected, they despised the poor: If there come in also a poor man in
vile raiment, ye say, stand thou here or sit under my footstool. The Apostle
concludes that they were partial; ver. 4.
they went not thorough with the Law, as he after says, If ye respect
persons, ye are convinced of the Law as transgressors. They that are thus
partial, ver. 9.
serve themselves and do their own will, not gods, for then they would do
all his will. If then ye see a man willing to go a great way in a duty, like
a servant that is forward to go 10. miles of his Masters errand to a Fair,
where he shall be sure to meet with his companions; but to stick at a less
duty, like the same ill servant that grumbles to go one mile, because he has
no occasion or pleasure of his own to serve: Say that man is an hypocrite, and
that he goes not one foot of Gods errand, but takes all the pains for his own.

CHAP. XIV. 5. Some Symptoms of Hypocrisy, from the carriage toward Gods
Ordinances. The first of these, blind Hypocrites pretend they want light.
Partiality in Ordinances.
COncerning the wholesome and blessed Ordinances of God, which in much wisdom
and goodness he has set up, to carry ^s a long to Heaven, we have some things
to observe for the discovery of Hypocrites.

1. Whereas the disease lies in their own hearts, Blind hypocrites pretend
want of light.
they impute the fault unto the want of means, and with the blind woman, who
was Seneca's wives fool, find much fault that the windows are not opened, and
that the light comes not in. They pretend a darkness and uncertainty in the
dispensation of sacred truths, when the truth is, they will not discern the
things belonging to their peace, the time of their visitation. Mat. 16.1, 2, 3.
Vid. Alphons. Tostat. in lo^qu. 6, 7, 11.
They were such whom our Savior dealt with, who when they asked a sign, he
said, When it is evening, ye say to will be fair weather, for the sky is red;
and in the morning, it will be foul weather to day, for the sky is red and
lowering. Ye can discern of weather, though the signs be but conjecturall;
but ye will be wilfully dull and blind in things clearer and more nearely
concerning ye; O ye hypocrites, ye can discern the face of the Sky, but
can ye not discern the signs of the times? Is it not clear enough unto you,
that all the predictions of the Prophets are fulfilled in me? that I am the
Messiah, the Savior that was looked for to come into the world? Ye are a
wicked and an adulterous generation to seek a sign. There Is enough now
delivered, without signs, if only ye had faith to receive what is delivered.
Ex Aegypto popu^us exivit. Nesciebat viam quae ad terram duceret sancta^. Misit
Deus columnam ignis, ut per columna^ populus via^ disceret Misit etiam per diem
icolumnam nubis, ut neque ad sinistra^, neque ad dextram declinaret. Sed non es
talis, homo, ut merearis and tu ignis columnam. Non habes Mosen, non accipis
signum Nunc enim post adventum Domini, fides exigitur, signa co^duntur. Time
Deum, and prae sum de Domino, Ambros. in Luke 12. Mat. 23.3.
Israel knew not the way to the holy Land, as St Ambrose speaks, and therefore
had a pillar and a cloud; but now is the time when faith is required, signs
are gone. Gods way to life is a plain way, but men that will not mind
salvation, pretend either want of means, or that they are not clear, or that
they are not powerfully administered. The method is perplexed, the notions are
cloudy, the Preacher wants life, the matter is not wholesome, the delivery is
with affectation, Somewhat or other it is, if they knew what, that lies in
their way; when indeed it is their own unsoundnesse, they will not understand,
they will not obey. They should do well and thrive, if they were under another
Ministry; a more powerful Ministry, a more godly Ministry. I grant it is a
great help, and the people are happy that have a powerful, a godly Minister.
But it may be possible that a lame man that sits still himself, may with his
very crutch point out to thee the right way; take heed that hypocrisy lurk
not in thy soul, when being unwilling to take pains to go, thou complainest
thou art not sure of the way. Examine thou the doctrine thou receivest, though
thou receivest it from a Pharisees mouth, and if it be good obey it. If thy
suit be neatly made, and fit thy body, put it on, though the Tailor that made
it, be crook'd backed and an unhandsome fellow. Take heed of shifts and excuses.
But if my Minister were a man of abler parts, clearer notions, richer gifts, I
should profit by him. This is but the coloring of thy proud hypocrisy. It is
God whom thou hear, thou drinkest of his waters, what if they run to thee
through an Earthen pipe. 't is God who opens the heart, the Minister is but the
key, what if the key be not made of gold. An Iron key will unlocke, if there be
not some fault in the wards and springs within.

2. Hypocrites give not due honor to all the ordinances.
Hypocrites give not their due honor unto all Gods ordinances; they make a
difference of them; they are for some, and others they neglect. Many regard
preaching, but they care not for prayer. Others are for prayer, but they slight
the preaching of the word: yet these two different branches, do both spring
from the same stock. It Is hypocrisy that makes men all for hearing, which is
(to some) the easy duty, while they know not how to frame their spirits to
prayer, which requires the labor of the soul, the exercise of humiliation and
brokennesse of spirit. It Is hypocrisy which makes other men all for prayer,
which is (to some) the easy duty, while they make it but as the repeating of a
lesson; while they regard not preaching, which brings the searching word too
much home unto them. Dr. Packson, Justif. Faith. sect. 2. c. 15. par. 9.
Thus out of the same ground both sorts make choice to use extraordinary
diligence about such ordinances as may not much displease them, or prejudice
their sweet delights. Some again like well enough of preaching, they have
occasion to make sale of their eloquence; but are weary of the profitable but
plain and despised way of Catechesing; Exercit. on Malach. Digres 7. on chapter 2.7.
but I have showed elsewhere that this is the wholesome way of teaching. So
also for the people, many can endure to bring their families to the Church, but
submit not to Gods order, to repeat at home what they hear, nor to take pains
in the tillage of their own fields, Deuteronomy. 6.7.
in catechizing or (as the word is in Moses) in Whetting their children and
servants. Others again there are, that will hear often, but care not for the
Sacrament, never come at that but when the force of the Law, or the custom of
the time of year bring them unto it. Not considering that St Paul's (...)
implies a (...), when he says to the Corinthians; As often as ye eat, 1 Cor.
11.26.
he means they should eat often. I have observed this in many good Churchmen
and women (as they call themselves) that is, such as scarce ever omit a day or
an opportunity of hearing, who are yet so stiff in the custom of receiving
but once in the year and that at Easter, that nothing will persuade and invite
them to more frequencie. This deformity argues some unsoundnesse at the root.
The old Christians communicated as often as they heard, then afterward weekly,
after that monthly, after that thrice in the year, which is that at which our
Church Canon sticks at, D. H. Spelm. Conc. ad An. 1032. inter leges Canuti.
teg. 19. Dr. Buckr, at Funer. p. 21.
according as it was also in our old Canons; and at last it came to once a
year, as in the cold dead Romish Church, and among our heartlesse Protestants.
For my part, I will account it among the just praises of Dr Andrews, that he
received the Communion in his own Chapel Monthly, besides occasions abroad.
The people of Christ have been wont to manifest their faith, their hunger,
their desire, In Capit. incertae edit. which I guess to have been, cica An.
1052. we have one Canon with this title, 44. Vt populus excitetur ad crebram
corporis and sanguinis Domini susceptionem. See Wrens profane Articles.
by their forwardness and frequencie about this duty; till superstition and
formalitie and coldness crept in and choakt up the spirits of lively devotion,
so that Canons were feign to be made, for the stirring up and exhorting the
backward.

I will add unto these one other instance, There are some forward enough in
public, but care not to set up the Ordinances at home, I mean, in
family prayer, and that happy but much neglected and much discountenanced
exercise of mutual conference, of speaking often together, as it is in Malachy,
and exhorting one another to love and to good works. A practice so consonant to
the Apostles doctrine, that I wonder any should be so profane as to dislike.
And truly this is one of the great discoveries of unsound and unfruitful
hearers, that no fruit at any time appears in their discourse. And here I will
take occasion to give his due honor to him who gave me life, that among many
other graces that made him shine in his private condition, this was one, that
he was conscionable of, and most profitable in private conference. He and some
select friends, judicious and godly private Christians, kept constantly one day
in a fort-night, in course, at their several houses, to confer sometimes
about wholesome Cases of conscience, sometimes upon chosen heads of Divinity,
sometimes upon controverted Points, according as they propounded the matter to
be treated upon still at their next meeting, and then had a Supper together
under a law of temperance, and a penalty if any should exceed in his
provisions. This practice I observed in my Father and his Friends for many
years, and I note to commend it unto the imitation of others, as a notable
means of their spiritual thriving. I am sure his profit by it was great, I
find the fruits of it among his papers, where many questions are so
judiciously, so fully, so clearly resolved, that they were worthy to be
communicated; as verifying that Aphorism of Solomon in a spiritual sense, The
diligent hand makes rich; and that of the Apostle, God gives grace to the
humble; and that of the Psalmist, God reveals his secret to them that fear
him. This course I suppose he took from the counsel of that reverend Father
and much experienced Divine, old Mr Ezekiel Culver-well, whose practice also it
was, and his advice to others. I will shut this up with his words, M. Culverw.
Time well spent. p. 48.
and the counsel of another godly man. Its a principal part of the communion
of Saints, to be most careful either to be doing or receiving good. The other
that I mean, is St Greenham as I remember Dr Hall calls him; whose counsel
is: In good meetings, 1. M Greenb Com. pl. published by M. Holland, p. 36.
Stay not for others to begin good speeches, but if God give us any thing in
our minds, let us in all humbleness put it forth to be examined. 2. If we
feel nothing, let us complain of our dullness and deadness, and so give
occasion. In deadness among good men, one good word may quicken many. 3. If we
can speak of nothing, let us ask somewhat. But I will not enlarge this,
because I have some thoughts to publish somewhat toward the advancement of
Christian fellowship.

CHAP. XV. More Symptoms from the carriage toward the Ordinances. The third
Symptom. Devised worships.
3. Whereas the humble devout soul stoops to Gods provision, Hypocrites not
content with Gods Institutions.
and admires and sweetly complies with the ways and ordinances that God
appoints for his conduct to Heaven; the Hypocrite will have something of his
own setting up, a worship of his own devising. They will hew unto themselves
cisternes, Jer. 2.13. Hos. 5.2. (...) Prosundarunt jugulando.
broken cisternes that will hold no water. Revolters from God are profound to
make slaughter, as the Prophet speaks. Such as leave God and forsake his
Institutes, are yet profound and witty to bring in of their own. Or when once
men neglect Gods wisdom, they sink deeper and deeper into humane imaginations
and devises; and are hardly drawn from them, as a tree is not easily plucked up
that has profound and deep rooting. There fell out a remarkable business
some years since in Warwickshire, which I formerly heard of, but since is
made public in some Books, which will be a notable instance to the point I am
speaking to. Stay against straying, Sect. 5. p. 75, 76.
John Can the Brownist relates it thus. There was a Gentleman of Warwickshire,
Mr Edward Greswold a man very religious. He and I being bosom friends, upon
just cause we both left the Parish assemblies. He afterward by means of some
crafty men, was persuaded unto hearing again. Upon this he fell into great
trouble of spirit, and could have no feeling assurance of any peace with God:
remaining thus a while, at length he sent a Letter by his servant unto me,
acknowledging his offense: among other things he writes thus; I feel my soul
no otherwise then if I were in Hell, etc. ever since I went to their
assemblies, I have observed the Lords hand against me, I beseech you, set a day
apart for me, etc. When I first read this, I presently conceived him to be a
man wedded to self-devised and superstitious imaginations. And I found that I
did not conjecture amiss. For though Can knew not it seems what became of him
afterward; yet that Reverend and godly man Mr John Ball in his learned answer
to Can, publishes it to the world: That after this he shut up himself and his
children in his house, Answer to M. I. Can. part. 1. sect. 9. p. 137.
and would come at no man, nor suffer any man to come at him, lest he should
communicate with them in their sin. He caused food to be put in at a window,
and admitted none in, when himself and children lay sick and in great misery.
The Justices at last were constrained to break open his house, and found two
of his children dead in the house, one corrupted by lying unburied, himself
sick in his bed. Mr Ball gravely and seriously censures the accident, and those
desperate principles of separation which brought him to this pass. He was it
seems a profound worshipper of the Idol of imagination, which will more appear
by this passage. The Justices found that he had mangled his Bible, cut out the
Titles, Contents, and every thing but the very Text it self. It seems he
thought all humane devices in Gods worship idolatrous, and so conceiving the
Titles of the Books and the Contents of the Chapters to be of men, he cut them
out. Truly, a lamentable and very woeful example of this profunditie the
Prophet speaks of. Rev. 2.24. (...).
These are happily the Profundities of Satan, that St John also speaks of. But
the Spirit of God disgraceth these devices, in calling them, not Sacrifices,
but Slaughters, and so the devisers not Priests, but Butchers. But especially
we find what Gods esteem of such is, by that of the Prophet, Isa. 1.11, 12, 13,
14, 15. and in another place, He that kills an Ox, is as if he slew a man,
Isa. 66.3.
he that sacrifices a Lamb, is as if he cut off a dogs neck, or killed a
dog to sacrifice. But God commanded the sacrificing of Oxen and Lambs? He
did so; but it seems those men innovated in the form of them; for that made
their sacrificing odious, and therefore it follows in the same verse, They
have chosen their own Ways, their soul delights in their abominations.
This choosing of a man's own ways, is that which the Apostle speaks of and
condemns, to be A voluntary in humility, C^l 2.18. (...). The Tragic Socks
were called (...), they were for a strutting and lofty gate. Hence (...),
Sublimem incedere, and to set foot in an others possession. (...) E^asm. Verbo
tenus speciem sapientiae. Meter in Hist. Belgic.
which is the Marginall Translation of Col. 2.18. and which I prefer; and to
be an Intruder, or as the word there, if I be not mistaken more properly
signifies, An Invader upon another right. It Is Gods right to appoint his
worship, but these voluntaries in Humility, invade upon God, or as our English
has it, Intrude into things they have not seen. In that Chapter the Apostle
excellently follows this argument, in laying open and deriding this
voluntarinesse in Humility and worship, or as he puts them into one word,
(...), Will Worship. That these things have a s^ew indeed of Wisdom, that is
but a show and no more, as Erasmus expresses it in his paraphrase; nay scarce
so much as a show of wisdom, in the judgment of some men. Meteranus the
Historian, speaking of the orders of the Capuchins, Franciscans, etc. calls it
Religiosam insaniam, a religious folly, that I may English him in his best
sense. Because the nails pierced the hands and feet of Christ, because the
whip lashed his blessed sides, because on the cross his sacred body was
stretched: Therefore the Papists will worship these things; but has it so much
as a show of wisdom? is it not Religiosa insania?

Truly, I know not whither in any thing hypocrisy do more discover it self
then in multiplying inventions about Religion and Gods worship. And those
black and foul brats of their own they do more hug and esteem, then the
truly beautiful Ordinances that are from God; and as a reverend Divine said to
How the troublesome Sectary, When they have made and set up a Calfe, they Will
dance about it. Devotion is subject unto many illusions. Men through the
abundance of idleness, pride of parts, love of their own conceits, desire of
novelty and the like, multiply inventions, and make many golden Calves: and as
the Lacedaemonians dressed up their gods after the fashion of their City; so they
will dress up devotion after their own humor. Some are all for the
artificial cast of the eye, Relat. of Engl. Fugit.
and the thumping of the breast, and as that notable Relation of the estate of
the English fugitives, written in the year 1595. speaks of one sort of those
pretenders to Religion and liberty of conscience, that go over into Flanders,
That the furthest drift of their Religion, is, to say the Pope is a good man,
and to thumpe their breasts hard when they come to Church. So I have observed a
devotion in some of our English Protestants, who take themselves to be
mavelous religious if they have got by heart the Responsals of the Church
Liturgy, and can say them with a good grace after the Minister, and kneel
demurely at the Sacrament, when they come to it, which is but seldom. I have
taken notice of some, who were profane persons, yet outgo the soundest
Professors in their Reverentiall gestures. I commend the most humble and most
trembling manner of Receiving, for it is a Royal table, and though a
comfortable, yet a dreadful presence. Yet notwithstanding, something I have
discerned in some kind of men, that makes me believe, they have some strange
conceits and apprehensions about the Sacrament, in which they are devout, but
in nothing else so, but in all their course of life, careless and mindlesse of
the power of godliness. I could never yet understand the meaning of a phrase
that the Country people have in some parts of the Kingdom, That they come at
Easter to receive their Rights or Writings (as some pronounce it.) But sure
they have some Devotion in it, built up by their own blind imagination.

Some others there are that affect an indiscreet and immoderate austerity in
some rigorous observations. Cassian col. 2. de Discret.
That old Hermit that Cassian speaks of, that threw himself into a pit,
would not be persuaded, but he did well. I remember what a religious Lady, a
woman eminent for rich parts of nature and gifts of grace, once told me of her
self, that at her first setting out in the way of Religion, she had like to
have been lost through an illusion, That no fat person could get to Heaven. So
that she almost had spoiled and wasted her body thorough too excessive and
immoderate Fasting, an ordinance above and beyond Gods ordinance.

Others have ways of Devotion to join God and pleasures together, Aug. de
Haeres. cap. 7.
like Marcellina, who hung Christ's picture with Pythagoras's; they think it
much Religion to deck a Chapel, make a litter-shop of Trinkets, curious
pictures, candle-sticks, pulpit-altar clothes, beads curiously cut, Crucifixes
neatly Wrought, Bibles richly guilt, covered and strung. I will spare other
instances; but this we may observe, that people are carried with most affection
to these their own imaginations. For matter of cost, Thucyd. Hist. lib. 2.
as Thucydides tells us the Image of Minerva at Athens had 9000lb. in golden
ornaments about it, so we read that the women parted with their jewels and
earerings to make their Calfe. Exodus 32.3.
Nothing takes so much with many, as novelty in Religion. The year before
Luther began to preach, Sebast. Franc. Chronic. Tom. 2. ad an. 1516.
one Balthazar Hubmeyr stirred up the Magistrates of Ratisbon in his Sermons,
to pull down the Jews Synagogue there, and to build a Church in the place of
it to St Mary the fair. Which being built, and a report of some miracles given
out, it is incredible what a concourse of people of all conditions and sexes,
was from all parts unto it, so that neglecting their trades, their wives, their
estates, the care of their families, there flockt so many thither, that that
large City was not sufficient to contain them. So that at last the Sonate was
forced to hinder their coming by decree. So far had the persuasions of the
Priests wrought in the people, concerning the great power of healing in that
their new goddess.

CHAP. XVI. The fourth Symptom, respecting the Ordinances. Dead preaching.
Dead hearing. Dead praying. Dead Fasts.
4. Hypocrites use the Ordinance in a dead manner.
THere is one other Symptom that I will consider under this head, that such
means of grace as Hypocrites apply themselves unto, they use in a dead manner.
Dead preaching, dead hearing, dead praying, a dead use of the Sacraments. They
perform but the outside of duties.

I named preaching first, and that I will begin with, Dead preaching.
the saving Ordinance, the soul-feeding Ordinance, the great business of
declaring the sweet mercies of God in Christ, of transacting the actual
reconciliation of sinners unto God. Alas, that such men who have so great a
matter entrusted unto them, should any of them be brought in rank with these
whom we are now dealing with. Yet it is too too evident, there may and is
sometimes hypocrisy in preaching. The matter of most men's Sermons is good;
it is but now and then that you shall hear one so impudent, as to publish his
own shame, in patronizing any notorious evil, in lashing of, and snarling
against godliness and men's zeal in religion. I make no question but Judas and
Demas and Diotrophes did preach well and had good words. But some preach out of
envy, as those at Philippi, That preached Christ of envy and strife, of
contention, not sincerely, Phil. 1.15, 16.
supposing to add assliction unto St Paul's bonds. Saint Chrysostom understood
it of the Gentiles, who that they might work more mischief to St Paul, and
kindle Nero more against him, made as if themselves also were Preachers of the
Christian Faith. Some others too understand it of the Gentiles, who perceiving
what fame Paul got by the preaching of the Gospel, increast the fame on
purpose that Nero's Court might ring of it, and by that means Paul might be
more severely proceeded against, as the chief broacher of that doctrine. But
the sense that satisfies me is this, They saw that St Paul had many disciples;
now that they might not seem inferior, they would also open a school and
call in auditors, and measuring Paul by themselves, thought it would vex him,
and make his chains lie more heavy upon him, when he should hear, that as one
nail drives out another, now the new Preachers had robbed him of his fame and
estimation among the people, and that as he had bin before, now they were the
only men. And it is well, if one Pulpit envy not another, and Lecture be not
preached against Lecture out of contention and to win the crowd. A full
Assembly I confess is an encouragement to the speaker, and he that is very
sincere may more chearefully cast down his net, where he sees most store of
Fish; and upon the other side. I must also confess that the people of Christ,
when they hear the voice of a good Shepherd will flock unto him, as the
people of Alexandria did unto Orthodox Athanasius, Theodor. Hist. l. 4. c. 19,
20.
and declined the Arrian Bishop, whom the Governor placed among them. A
sincere Preacher may be followed by the people, but if he be popular, I doubt
whether he be sincere. It was Christ's speech, directed especially to his
Disciples whom he appointed to be Preachers; Woe unto you when all men shall
speak well of you, Luke 6.26.
for so did their Fathers to the false Prophets. It seems then the false
Prophets were the popular men; they had the peoples good word, when the true
Prophets were despised.

Again, It Is apparent in too many woeful instances, that some Preachers are
hypocrites, Greenh Com. pl. p. 273.
when they give the lie at home to that which they said before the people. Such
as Mr Greenham said, That get up into the Pulpit to hew timber out of the
thick trees, but by an evil life break down the carved work as with axes
and hammers. How many have thus set us to fight the Lords battles against
sin, but themselves are but as Heralds to set us together, and then they quit
and leave the field, See Mr Fuller, Holy war.
like Peter the Hermit that drew many against the Turk, but then himself run
away. These Bells that call us, but stir not themselves; these files that
make us smooth, but remain rough themselves, what are they but egregious
hypocrites. And what shall we say or think of some bitter spirited men, whose
continual practice is to throw squibs and crackers and firebrarnds, up and
down out of their pulpit; men constant it may be in preaching, but like
Candles made of salt-tallow, they burn and give light, but never rest spetting
and sparteling so long as they burn. It Is to be doubted there is somewhat of
self in a man, that makes him so virulent, so unquiet. H. Bullinger. Epist. ad
Zanc. inter Zanc. Ep. l. 2. cp. 6. 1 Pet. 3.4.
When P. Mart. was dead and Bullinger wrote to Zanchy to come to Tigure to
succeed him, he tells him it was a chief care of their Church to have a quiet
minded man. And no wonder the quiet spirit is so acceptable to godly men, for
even in the sight of God it is of great price, as the Apostle speaks, though
he give the instance of women.

Add to these such as make the Pulpit a stage of Sedition; I have ever
suspected those that unnecessarily tell the people of the distempers of the
State, and the mistakes of government; for cui bono? To what purpose is it that
the people must needs be made acquainted with their observations. Little
comfort will such men have, when they get home, and are alone, and bethink
themselves how they have answered their commission, which was to preach faith
and repentance, and to tell the people present of their sins. It Is indeed
highly commendable, when God brings a Preacher to stand before Princes, to take
courage, and in Gods name to reprove what is amiss. It Was base and sordid
flattery and hypocrisy, in that learned, but halting Bishop of Spalato, to
deliver it, That the faults of Princes may not be taxed in public. Nay let men
speak reverently, honorably of absent Magistracy, but freely and faithfully,
and with Apostolical courage when in presence. Five words so spoken are better
then the largest declamations which are out of the hearing of them that are
concerned. Such a short Sermon as this Robertus de Licio made; Erasm de ratio.
concion l. 3.
who being prepared to preach another matter before the Pope and his Cardinals;
when he saw them come into the Church with much noise and pomp, the Pope
carried upon six men's shoulders, and all the Cardinals their trains held up and
richly attended; he only when all were quiet and expected the beginning of the
Sermon, looks on every side of him, crying out, Fie St Peter, Fie St Paul; got
him out of the Pulpit, and said no more; having in those few words said much
against the pontificiall pride.

But above all others, their baseness is most odious, who preach after the
humor of their Patrons, and according as they receive direction from those
upon whom depends their maintenance. I have ever cherished an higher esteem of
Dr Andrews in that particular, MS Supply to Goodwins Catalogue to the Y. 1608.
since I read one passage of him, in a MS. History written by Sr John
Harrington. His Patron (says mine Author) that studied projects of policy, as
much as precepts of piety, hearing of his fame, and meaning to make use of it,
sent for him and dealt earnestly with him, to hold up a side, and to maintain
certain points that he named unto him. But he that had too much of the (...) in
him to be scared with a Privy Councillors frown, or blown a side with his
breath, answered him plainly, That they were not only against his learning,
but his conscience. The Counselor seeing this man would be no Friar Pinkey
(to be taught in a closet what he should say at St Paul's) dismissed him with some
disdain for the time, but afterward did the more reverence his integrity and
honesty.

I will not further enlarge about this discovery, having occasion in some other
Symptoms to scatter here and there some other experiments and observations
concerning this sort of men. Let us next examine the Auditory. I will mention
but one particular more, that whereas all the ambition of a Preacher should be
to gain souls to God, there are some that desire to preach out of an ambition
to be seen in public and great Auditories, Cone. babita in Templ S. ^ar. Oxon.
super Deuteronomy. 32.7.
and to have their elaborate labors taken notice of. Which To by Mathews (as
then they ordinarily called him, afterward Archbishop of York) in his
Concioad clerum at Oxford, took notice of in Edmund Campian, then of the
University, that rather then he would not preach a Sermon that he had made that
smelt of the lamp at the public Act there; he took an Oath against the Popes
primacie, contrary to his Conscience.

They hear not so as to live by the Word they hear, Dead hearing.
or so as a man falls to his meat that must work hard. They hear without care
of edifying by it. They praise the Preacher, but show no fruit of their pains.
For here is indeed the trial, as Caussin said of some Ladies, H. Conct Tom. 3,
max. 9.
When was it that a dozen of Communions have taken from them one hair of
vanity? Are they less pompous, less powdered, less frizled, more reserved,
more chaste, more discreet? So I say, ye hear much and often, but what do ye get
by the means? Where are your gains? When ye hear Christ's letters read, are ye
attent to them as being concerned in them. We know there is much difference
between the hearing a Letter of news, and a Letter of special business. Many
men come to Church, but as we go to the Exchange, to hear the news; they
come to hear the new points, the new notions, the new Expositions; and apply
not themselves cordially to the means. 1 Samuel 21.7. (...) Incluserat se anle
tabernaculu, ut studio legis occuparetur.
Doeg comes to hear, he was detained before the Lord, he shut himself up
before the Tabernacle, that he might study the Law, yet you know he was an
hypocrite.

Again, Hypocrites are loath to hear all; loath to search some things too
far; they decline some truths, least they should be unwillingly convinced.
Ahab was loath to enquire Gods mind of Michaiah. There are some Preachers they
cannot relish, they pretend somewhat else, but the truth is, because they come
too close, too home, deal too strictly with the intellectual sins. Wolfgang
Capito in vita Oecolam.
Oecolampadius in his younger years was bred up in a Monastery, and when the
light shone upon him, diverse of the Monks seemed to be delighted with his
Sermons and the light: But at length there happened this very trial, that I am
speaking of. One time in a Sermon he admonished them brotherly of their
sticking too fast to humane inventions. Whereupon they brought him the Book of
the Rules of their Order, and desired him freely to re-view it, and to note
what he could find in it against Gods Word, and promised they would be ready to
reform it. He undertook the business, but when he had indeed faithfully
discovered unto them, what a foul sink of errors was in it, they soon began
to change their note, to rail at him and traduce him, and in conclusion he was
in St Paul's case, he became their enemy for telling them the truth, and could
stay with them no longer with safety, and escaped from them not without much
hazard. There are many of the same generation, See D. Iackson. Just. faith, c.
6. p. 66, 67, 70, 71, 72. Tho. Campanel: Atheism. Triumph, c. 1. Romans 1.18.
who hear quietly, till they be netled and stirred, but if ye disquiet them,
ye shall find them like a waspes nest.

Many are willing to be ignorant of some part of Gods truth, for self-respects,
least the knowledge of it should disadvantage them. This is that which the
Apostle calls, the withholding the truth in unrighteousness. They suppress
the truth, they suffer it not to go at liberty, they shut it up, (...), in
carcere iniquitatis, in close prison where their own unrighteousness is the
Goalor. They withold the truth in the custody or the hand of
unrighteousness. Some will not understand, that oppression is a sin; some
will not understand, that the glorifying of God with the outward estate, in
maintenance of the Ministry, in contributing to the necessities of the Saints,
and the like, is a duty. All Gods words do good to him that walks uprightly;
Mic. 2.7.
but hypocrites think not so, they make him smart; at least some of Gods words
do; and therefore they pull them off, or shift them off, as the Apostles
phrase is; Hebr. 12.25. (...). Dead praying.
See that ye refuse not (or shift not off) him that speaks; ye shall not
escape if ye turn away from him that speaks from Heaven.

And so as they hear, in like manner they pray, dully, coldly, and sometimes
as St Augustine before his conversion, without desire of being heard, without
endeavor to work out that sin that they pray against. They sin and then
they pray, and sin again and pray again; Souls Humil. p. 68.
this Mr Hooker calls, The Mill of prayer. And truly many there are, that keep
a course, go on in the round, keep up the custom of Family Prayer, but
break not off any of their sins, but go that round also, as well as the
other.

Let me join with these, Mock-fasts.
such as keep Mock-fasts, that fast without true Humiliation, without
Reformation; A.L. Specul. Belli sacri. c. 34. p. 209.
that as one speaks of the Hollanders and French-Protestants in their public
fasts, they had need to send for mourning women that by their cunning may teach
them to mourn. There is a Fasting which is not to the Lord, as the Prophet
speaks, Zach. 7.5.
When ye fasted and mourned says the Lord, did ye at all fast unto me, even to
me? that is, ye did not. Isa. 58. Hos. 7.14.
The Prophet Isaiah describes these hypocritical fasts; and the Prophet Hosea
calls them Howlings. Nothing pleasanter in Gods ears then humble complaints,
nothing more disrellishes him, then hypocritical howlings. H. Mason, Epicures
fast. c. 2, 3, 4.
How far the Roman Church is guilty of this hypocrisy in Pharisaicall
mock-fasts, I refer the reader to find in Mr Masons learned discourse.

CHAP. XVII. 6. Some Symptom's of Hypocrisy, from seeming graces. The first.
The second. The third. Unsound faith. Sandy hope. Pretended love.
6. THe next head that I propounded, is to discover the seeming and but seeming
graces of hypocrites, and here I am again in a wild field, and have much
business to do, to show the unsoundnesse of their faith, hope, love,
humility, chastity, holy desires, hatred of error, sorrow and confession,
mortification, zeal. These are the furroughs that I am now to plow and turn
up. I will set in upon the first of them, their unsound faith.

1. Unsound faith of hypocrites. 1 Timothy 1.5. 2 Timothy 1.5. (...)
The Scripture speaking of a faith unfaigned or without hypocrisy, implies
that there is an hypocritical and fained faith. Many have unripe and
ungrounded persuasions that they have faith, and so do themselves much hurt.
All men that are Christians, are accounted, and are in some sense believers.
They are baptized into Christ, and profess Christ, and so are of the Christian
faith. But herein is a great deceit. For as the Heathen at first refused
Christ, because of his meandness, and because they were bred and brought up to
another profession, so now many entertain the faith because they are born to
it, and because it is a profession accompanied with riches and prosperity, and
countenanced by public Laws and the favor of Princes, and because it is the
fashion and profession of the Country they draw their first breath in. Thus
many have no more ground for their profession of faith, Vide, Tho. Campanel.
Atheism. Triumph. chapter 1. vide etiam praesat. ejus.
then a Turk has for his who is bred up in the reverence of Mahomet and is
therefore zealous for him. The greatest number of men are Papists or
Protestants upon these terms, without trial or examination of the difference
of faiths. So that their faith is not choice but a kind of hap: not an
acquisition but a kind of inheritance that they enter upon in succession after
their fathers. And certainly he that is of the faith of Christ, for
neighborhood, for birth-sake, for custom, for conformity with others, for the
privilege of public liberty, ease, enjoyment of places and offices, and the
like, would as easily be of another faith, upon the like terms, or forsake
this. Well; ye profess the Christian faith in distinction to Jews and Turks,
and the Christian Protestant faith in distinction to Papists; and the Christian
Protestant holy faith, in distinction to Protestants at large; But what
operation has it upon you? No faith argues one good and sound, unless the
goodness of it work upon the heart and make it sound and good. Acts 15.9.
For true faith is a worker out of hypocrisy, it purifies the heart. Now it
may be more safe to profess the faith then it was in the primitive times, for
then persecutions, reproaches, confiscations, imprisonments, martyrdoms
attended the faith, the front of the Battle was against them. But yet now it is
as hard to be sincere in the faith as then; for if men profess the faith
according to Christ's rule, in opposition to the corrupt customs and practices
of evil men, he makes himself a prey, and meets with those dangers that they
did of old; and hereby it is that many discover the faigning and counterfeiting
of faith, that they run the same course in their lives with the most evil and
profane.

Again what do men talk of faith, when they are partial and unsound in
obedience? for true faith equally respects all the Commandments. It is the
soul of obedience; the reason or internal law of the mind which sets all on
work, and presents unto men the whole royalty of the Law, James 2.8.
it breaks inordinate passions, it rebates and turns the violence of contrary
inclinations, it persuades above all oratory, it takes men captives and
delivers them into the hand of Christ, that they become a ruled people and
walk after his Law; And these are the men that do firmly believe Gods mercy
in Christ. There are many dreamers, that have strange fantasies; They are sure
they shall be saved. I once met with a man in such a dream, he was full of
assurance, I that knew him very well, and knew nothing that could make him so
confident, dealt with him as I saw most convenient for his estate, and
endeavored to prick his bladder that he might vent that wind, and urged him
with that of the Apostle, Give all diligence to make your calling and election
sure; and with that other place, Work out your salvation with sear and
trembling. He was startled, and at length told me, I acted the Devils part
against him to make him despair. Beloved the deceit is dangerous. It Is not so
easy to believe mercy as men dream. Belief answers in proportion to fidelity
to Gods commandments. So much sincere faithfulness, so much belief. For
faith, is an obedientiall affiance, an obsequious confidence.

2. Neither is the hope that many have or pretend to have, Sandy hope of
hypocrites.
any founder then their faith. If there were a true hope of the coming of
Christ, there would be a true preparation to give him meeting; a sighing and
longing after him, even with the very languishing of the heart, according to
that of Solomon, Prove. 13.12. Romans 8.
Hope deferred makes the heart sick: a groaning within our selves, waiting for
the redemption for our bodies. But hypocrites think themselves well here, and
care not for changing: there would be a sweet joy in the soul, Rom 5.2.
a rejoicing under the hope of the glory of God, a rejoicing with joy
unspeakeable and full of glory; but hypocrites rejoice here, and have
contentment enough if the world smile upon them. There would be an endeavor
after holiness, according to that of St John, He that has this hope purifieth
himself even as God is pure; 1 John 3 2.
But hypocrites wallow in their impurity, and have no regard to be like Christ,
or fitted for those holy Heavens into which no unclean thing must enter. There
would be unweariednesse in laboring, and fortitude in suffering for Christ;
Phil. 3.13. Heb. 11.25.
a pressing forward to the things that are before, with Paul; a choosing to
suffer affliction with the people of God, with Moses; But hypocrites languish
in their undertaken ways, and are diven back with the cross and shame. There
would be a forgetting the things that are behind, and blunting of the edge of
sharp affections to the world; But hypocrites hunt for the world, desire the
world with all earnestness, hug and embrace the world as the Mistress and
Lady of their pleasures. There would be a sollicititude to promote all the
means of attaining this expectation, a diligence to remove all that might be
impediments; But hypocrites hope to come to Heaven, and yet set on the journey
in the way of life. There would be an establishment of the heart in all the
fluctuations and changes of this life, a bearing up in all the blustering and
windy weather of affliction; Job 8.11.13.14.
but the hypocrites hope is a shaken rush, a weak flag, his trust is a spiders
web; his hope shall perish and be cut off.

3. Pretended love of hypocrites.
The hypocrite pretends much love to God, and flatters him with his lips, but
his unfaithfullnesse unto him many ways appears. Those that keep not promise
with God, how can they say they love him? Jude 16.15.
as Delilah to Sampson, How can thou say, I love thee, when thine heart is
not with me? Thou have mocked me these three times. Those that cannot endure
Christ's ministry, how can they say they love him? They will not be intimate
with Christ in his ministry, they give his Gospel the fair entertainment of
a stranger; It may come into the parlour and discourse, but it must not step
with them into the closet, and see and know all as a privado: Those that
nourish secret dislikes and indignation against Gods people, how can they say
they love him. Can ye love the person, and yet not endure to look upon the
picture? Those that have a leering and wanton eye after other suitors, whose
souls are taken up with base loves, who hearken to the music and songs of
Gods corrivals, how can they say they love him? The chaste wife of Tigranes
took no notice of Cyrus, she minded none but her husband. But the hypocrite
has a close arbor, and a private postern to let in other lovers. Those that
entertain Christ, but set him not in the highest room, or set others by him,
or bring into the same place such companions as he loathes, or suffer him to be
disquieted with the noise and the revellings and loud clamours in the next
chamber, or enquire not of his servants his ministers, what he loves, what he
likes, what will please him, etc. how can they say they love him? I dispatch
these things the more briefly, because many have written fruitfully and largely
of these arguments, about the trial of the sincerity of these graces.

CHAP. XVIII. The sixth Symptom continued under other heads. The fourth.
Fained Humility. The fifth. Polluted chastity. The sixth. Holy desires
counterfeited. The seventh. Pretend hatred of vices and errors.
4. AMong other graces, Fained humility of Hypocrites. Mr. George Herberts
Poems, p. 62.
the hypocrite is most solicitous in his Courtship of Humility, that sweet and
lovely, that amiable and winning grace, that grace that wept upon and wet and
spoiled the Peacocks plume for which the other graces strove; That rich grace
that takes the lowest room, but advances him that has her above the lofty
knowers, Lord Brook Nature of Truth, c. 9. p. 63.
and is the only way to keep the poor creature in a constancy of spiritual
health. This grace wins so much respect, that to win respect, even all sorts of
hypocrites have labored to resemble her, by studying her posture, a demure and
lowly gate, Isa. 58.5.
by imitating her look with dimisse and cast down eyes, and learn as the
Prophet speaks, to hang down their heads like bull-rushes: But all this, only
thereby to work their ends, being content with the Monks of Thebais to lie upon
the threshold of the monastery for all that go in and out to tread upon them;
and to stoop low that they may through the wicket or little portall of
Humility, enter into the large and high-built Temple of honor; or like that
Monk in the story, who looked downwards toward the earth like a Mortified
person, but 'twas only to find the keys of the Abbey. Many that demeaned
themselves humbly in a low and mean estate, discover that it was but a studied
carriage by their lofty and supercilious looks when they attain unto
preferment, so that one had need write for them, Raban de Instit. Cleric.
Herman. Contract. in Chron. ad an. 1011.
what Wiligisus Bishop of Mentz wrote in his own dining-roome, Wiligise,
Wiligise, quis fueris non obliviscere; Oh forget not, forget not, what you
were, and from whence you came.

There are others that fain humility, in pretending unwillingnesse to accept
of preferment, that like a coy Virgin they may more earnestly be solicited;
It Is thought that was Cardinal Pooles humor when he was in election to be
Pope. Those that purchase a Bishopric, yet learn to say No, no, no, at their
consecration; most unlike in this to Nicholas de Farnham, Goodw. Catal. ad an.
1239.
sometime Bishop of Durham, who herein gave a singular proof of his unfaigned
humility. Being chosen to the Sea of Lichfield he absolutely refused, giving
this reason, that such a charge was a burden too heavy for him. When after this
the Covent of Durham elected him; he refused that likewise with more
earnestnes, adding then this other reason, That if he should accept it, men
would say, the hypocrite refused a poor Bishopric under color of conscience
to stay for a better. And in this mind he continued, till the famous Grofthead
of Lincoln reprehended him sharply for his backwardness, and in a manner
forced him out of conscience to take it. And there may be a denying of
preferment, not out of humility, but from ends of policy, as the Jesuits have
a rule in their Order, Estate of Engl. Fug.
not to receive any higher office or dignity, wherein as one observes, of all
other things they have the greatest policy, for otherwise their old
politicians should be from them advanced to higher promotions, which would be a
great diminution to their dignity, which as they now order the matter, is of
such credit, that they take the name of Jesuit, not to be any whit inferior to
the title of a Bishop. There may happily be the same policy in some others, who
find it more for their profit to be poor Lecturers (as they would be thought)
then fat Parsons. The heart is deceitful above all things.

But to omit other particulars, whatsoever is pretended, it appears that there
is little humility among men, because there is so little peaceablenesse; their
contentiousnesse, singularity of opinion, schism and faction, prejudice,
surmisings, censoriousnesse and uncharitableness, being all of them the fruits
of pride; whence it is also, that there is so little communion in the graces,
such an envious viewing of the gifts of others. And what is it but pride in
those envious persons, who under a seeming modesty and reservednesse refrain
discourse, lest their discoveries and notions should be vented and discovered
under another name, and so they lose the glory of their invention? Polluted
chastity. In the third head of Symptoms, Symp. 1.


5. Concerning the next grace that I propounded to consider, which is Chastity;
I have none that stand in my eye to point at for hypocrites, but the popish
Votaries. I have spoken somewhat to this point formerly; but not fully. The
Doctrine of forbidding to marry was brought in by hypocrisy. 1 Timothy 4.1, ^. Mr.
Meade, A. postasie of la times, p. 136. Vid. Christ. Iustel. Cod. Cau. Eccl.
Afri Tit. 3.4, 38. Bale, The lives of our English Votaries. Guil. Bailij
Catech. Contro. l. 1 q. 23. Andr. Rivet. Cath. Orthod. l. 1. q. 23. Bishop
Hall, Honor of the Married Clergy.
Mr Meade observes that the holy Ghost intended in that place of Timothy, to
decipher unto us the Doctors of Monkery. For prohibition of Marriage is an
inseparable character of Monastical profession, and is common to all that crew
of hypocrites (as he calls them) whether Solivagan Hermits, or Anchorit's which
live alone, or Caenobites which lived in society. This conceit prevailed
betimes in the Church, they thought God could not well be served at his Altar
by married persons. Histories are full of the pure and chaste pretenses of those
that have been the great patrons of Monkery and the Caelibate of the Clergy;
but withal they are full of the lewd pranks of those egregious hypocrites. Our
Chronicles tell us of a Roman Legate that after he had in Synod at London
spoken gloriously of chastity, was the same night after to his great shame
taken in bed with an whore. But if the reader would have plenty of examples to
this purpose, let him read Bishop Bale, for I spare to cite them. Bailey a
french Jesuit, bestows much foul language upon our Protestant Married
Ministers, and calls them Stallions, rutting Bucks, and Salacious Boares. But
besides the Learned Rivet who has undertaken him, we have that cause
sufficiently and learnedly vindicated by one of our own writers. We have much
that we can say against them, and truly too, from the testimony of their own
men, how little they have answered their vow. Let St Bernard In Cant. ser. 66.
, Alvarez Pelagious De planctu. Eccl. l 2 arr. 24.
, St Briget Preph. l. 4. c. 33.
, Gerson the Chancellor Tr. de Desect. Eccl.
, Peter Alliac Lib. de Reform. Eccl.
, Palingenius Zodiac. vitae, lib. 9.
, the Italian Poet, Espeuseus that learned and ingenious French Bishop In
Epist. ad Tit. c. 1.
, Cornelius Mus, the famous Preacher in the Trent Council Orat. habita ab
Episc. Bipat, in Conc Trid. ^ Sess. 1. Aen. Silv Ep. 15. Theodoric a Niem.
Poggius in Facetijs.
, be the witnesses to be produced, and let the reader examine their evidences
at leisure: And for the Jesuits Tute Mores Vicias, the Anagram of Secta
J^suitarium, (Cat^chis. Jesuit. c. 15.) and proved against them, is evidence
enough against them, and a Sop for the mouth of that Cerberus. What should I
speak of such as brag of their sin, as Aeneas Silvius did in a profane Letter
to his father: Or of those Bishops in Ireland and Norway, (that an Historian
speaks of) that were not ashamed to carry their Concubins about with them to
all the Churches in the Visitation of their Diocese: Or of that hypocrite in
Florence, Who pretended his frequent lusts to be for mortification. So that (as
he said of the Cross upon the garments of the Teutonick Knights) I may say of
the Monks Cowle, Joh Wolf. Lect Memor. Tom. 2. p 429.
that it is the ensign and badg of all filthiness and uncleanness. The
business is too apparent to require more words. I will only content my self
with the confession or presentment of the Cardinals appointed for Reformation
by Pope Paul the third, which came to light unhappily, the copy being got and
published against their wills. Council Delect. Cardin
In this City (say they) speaking of Rome, Whores, as if they were honest
Matrons walk the streets, are carried upon their Mules, accompanied even at
noonday with Cardinals servants and Clergymen. Nay I read the Cardinals
themselves carry them in their Coaches. Conc. Hyber. an. 450 Can. 9. apud D. H.
Speim (...). Iustel. Codex Tit. 38. Henr. Salmuth Notae, ad Lib 1. Guide.
Pancirollae de Deperditis, c de habitu Imper. Holy desires counterfeited. Numb.
23.10.
I am sure this is far from that strict old Canon of an Irish Council held by
St Patrick, that a Monk and a Woman might not dwell together, nor travel
together occasionally from one Town to another in the same Wagon; nor so much
as talk together but where some Clergy men were present or some grave
Christians, as the old African Canon required. But I have said more then needs
of these Monastical hypocrites, for I suppose the world takes them for such;
and according to the censure of Salmuth, that there is no kind of men more
luxurious, more libidinous.

6. I named in the next place, Holy desires. Who was there ever so wicked, but
desired to be good, and to come to Heaven? Did not Balaam the hypocrite desire
to dye the death of the righteous, and that his latter end might be like his?
But here is the discovery, they stick at the price that must be laid down for
the accomplishing and purchasing of those desires. A man desires a good Farm,
and I will believe he is in earnest, but he is loath to pay for it, the 500l.
or the 1000l. that he must give for a fine, that he is loath to part with. What
do hypocrites talk of Heaven, when they will part with nothing for Heaven?
what do they languish in their desires of grace, when they will not buy it
with pains and spiritual diligence? Just. Lips. de Constant. (...). Just Lips
de Constan. l. 2. c. 5.
When Charles Langius had excited Lipsius to the study of true wisdom; My mind
is to it, said Lipsius, and then he falls to wishing. What said Langius, art
thou purposing, when thou should be doing? It Is the vulgar fashion and
altogether vain. You must not think, of a fool to become a wise man, as
Caeneus in the Fable, of a woman became a man with a wish. You must endeavor
together with Minerva. (...), Col. 3.1.
The desire is not right, if it be not strong, when other things are in
competition with it. The Apostle has told us, that there must be a seeking, as
well as a minding of those things that are above; and indeed both the words
that he uses do imply endeavor, Mat. 11 12.
for (...) is to mind with the whole soul, and (...) is to seek with the
whole strength. They are the violent, the men that crowde and thrust forward,
that take Heaven. And the old zealous primitive Christians, minded the heavenly
Kingdom so effectually, and talked so much and often of it, and almost of
nothing else, that the Ethnicks began to be a little jealous of them that they
affected the Roman Empire; when alas their ambition was of another, Just. M^r.
Apol. 2.
an higher nature.

7. Among the affections, I propounded to discover, Pretended hatred of sins
and errors.
how hypocrites may seem to have a hatred of many vices, errors and opinions,
and yet be still in love with vice and error. I suppose it may go for a rule,
that the hatred of an extreme, does not presently argue the love of that
virtue that dwells in the middle. A man may hate nigardize, and yet not be
liberal, but a Prodigal. The middle partakes somewhat of both extremes, as
the liberal man is bountiful, but not profuse; and the extremes have both of
them somewhat of the mean, nigardize comes so far near Liberality that it
is not profuse, and prodigality agrees with it in this, that it is bountiful.
Hence, the inwardly profane spirited man, may agree so far with him that is
truly godly, as to hate superstition, and to love the plainest dress of
Religion, especially if he be also worldly minded and loath to be at any cost.
I will not therefore presently believe that all they who detest Idols, who cry
out against Popish Ceremonies, who are eager against the Relics of
Roman-worship, who spet at all things or persons that they conceive to be
Antichristian, are therefore truly and soundly religious; though in going so
far, they are so far commendable.

There are others, who hate those that hated Christ, their stomachs rise
against the Jews and the Romans that hated Christ and put him to death; and
yet, which ye would wonder at, these men may be found to be haters of Christ
as much as they; for they hate his will, and are offended with his Law, because
it crosses their lusts, which is as offensive unto God as the despite which
was done unto him by the Jews or Romans. Many detest the memory of Annas and
Caiphas, and so did they detest the memory of Corah, Dathan and Abiram. Yet
they resisted Christ, as those others before them had resisted Moses. Observe
what our Savior speaks of some people in his own time, who (as we read of
Clodovaeus the first Christian King of France, when Remigius Bishop of Rhemes,
being about to baptize him, read the Gospel of Christ's passion, and the Jews
treachery and malice, broke out into these words, Siego cum Fra^ cis meis inibi
affuissem eju^ injurias vindicassem. Almon.
If I had been there with my Frenchmen I would have revenged him upon them,)
built the tombs of the Prophets, and garnished the Sepulchers of the
righteous, and said, If we had been in the days of our Fathers, we would not
have been partakers with them in the blood of the Prophets: But
notwithstanding all this show of indignation against their Fathers cruelty, yet
Christ calls them hypocrites, Mat. 23.29, 30.
and ^o indeed they were, as Christ proves against them, because they that
pretended so much respect to Moses that was dead, and to the dead Prophets,
showed none to him that was a living Prophet among them, and a teacher of the
same things that Moses and the Prophets taught: Joh. 5.46.
Had ye believed Moses, ye would have believed me. Many that speak much of
their love to Christ, would yet hate him, if he were now again in the form of
a servant, and should come and preach against their particular corruptions.

CHAP. XIX. The sixth Symptom continued. The eighth head. The weeping
Hypocrite. The ninth stage-Mortification.
8. LEt us in the next place cast our eyes upon the Weeping Hypocrite; and view
him in his sorrowing for and confession of sins. There are some that are
sorry for sin, and chide themselves for sin, and yet keep it, and cherish
and maintain it, and put themselves upon the occasions of the practicing of it.
Like some indulgent and foolish father, who blames and chides an unthrifty
darling, and yet gives him still money to spend, and so feeds that lust which he
reproves him for. I knew a Minister scandalous this way, as much as in the sin
it self, whose course was after his drunken riots to whine and lament; Yea even
in the Pulpit too, and yet presently with the Swine returned to wallow in the
same mire, and haunt the same company, and follow the same sin, and that in as
constant a course as men attend their Trades. I know there are no eyes more
lovely in Gods sight, Pili oculorum ejus ex jugifletu ceciderunt. In vita Par.
par. 2. Sect. 153.
then the eyes that are full of tears: Arsenius in the ancient History is
famous for a weeper: The broken tender spirit is most acceptable unto God, it
is his Sacrifice. But most abominable before God it is, with tears and sighings
for what is past, to fetch out as it were a new license to sin a fresh.

Concerning the confessing of sin, these things among others I have observed.
1. That in public some will spend a long time, half an hour, an hour, it
may be more, in a methodicall Confession of sins in order against all the 10.
Commandments, and yet no compunction to be discerned in the breasts of them
that make that Confession, or as I should rather say, that repeat it; for such
a confessing is but the work of memory; and wrought out like an other
Discourse; whereas me thinks that man confesses best to God, that feels the
weight of every particular sin, and when every acknowledgement fetches some
blood from the heart with it, and is delivered with a trembling lip, with a
face covered with shame, though happily the words be not laid in so good an
order, nor so many things remembered, nor so much time dully spent.

2. That in private, in discourse, there are some that confess and complain of
smaller faults and defects, when it is but to be thought tender and
open-sighted, and that they may hide and cover greater errors: Like the
patient in Plutarch, that complained to his physician of his finger, when his
liver was rotten. You shall have some complain of their weak memory, their
want of understanding, and I know not what; when alas the fault lies in the
badnesse of their hearts, their want of delight and affection to spiritual
things.

3. I will add unto these Mr Culverwels observation, It Is hypocrisy in
public to dispraise ones self, seeking thereby a secret praise. And if we be
desirous to search into the manner of Popish Confessions; Holy Court. Tom. 3.
max. 9.
Caussin will inform us of the ceremonialnesse, formality and sleightnesse of
some of their devotes; who after they have told all the tales of the City to
their Confessors, and made them loose their patience in attending their
confession, do spin out other discourses, and hold them with eternal prattle.

9. Stage mortific^tion.
Because sorrow and confession are among the signs of mortification, as I have
showed the deceit of those, I shall think fit to adjoyne the Symptom of
pretended mortification; for this is one of the great Master-peeces of the
hypocritical Art, to win opinion of being mortified persons, dead to the world
and dead to sin. Some abstain indeed from sin, but it is because they are
under a constraint, somewhat it may be controules them, as a Dog snatches not
a morsel that he would feign devour, but he sees and fears the cudgel and
the hand that is over him; or as some patients that forbear a dish they love,
because they know it will increase their disease upon them, and cause an after
pain. These men dislike not the sin, they are bowls that have a strong Bias
to it, but some rub or unevenness of a hillocke casts them a side, and makes
them run the other way. In others you shall not perceive the power and force of
their lusts, because it may be they have met with no provocations, and
therefore they run smoothly like a river that makes no noise nor roaring, till
it meet with the Arches of a bridge or a damme, or some high stones that resist
the waves. It may be great sins appear not, yet does it not follow that they
are mortified; a smaller sin may govern them. It Is not the largeness of the
Dominions of Spain, and both the Indies, that makes Philip more a King, then
one that has sovereign dominion in a small Island.

But to omit other particulars, are not they mortified persons, who after the
practice of the Church of Rome do macerate and afflict their bodies, with
scourgings and other cruelties that they exercise upon themselves. Alas, there
may be much severity, and yet no mortification. Diverse of the Pharisees, proud
and hypocritical men though they were, Vid. Mont. Appa^. v^^ s. 17.
wore thorns in the hemme of their garments to prick and draw blood of their
bare heels, as they walked, to remember them of the Law, which yet in their
hearts they regarded not. But in the Church of Rome (setting aside some
frantickly superstitious persons) for the most part they practice but a
mock-pennance, Nic. Cause. Holy Court. To. 3. max 9.
and even in their very scourgings are neat and curious; so that a French
Jesuit of great note tells us, That some had their very Haire-cloathes and
Disciplines made of silver, rather to see the bright luster of it, then to
feel the smart. And I have read of some Popish Ladies, as costly about their
whips as their fannes, the handles of their scourges or disciplines, being
enchased with gold and set with pearl.

CHAP. XX. The sixth Symptom continued. The tenth head. The Deceits of Zeal.
10. The deceits of zeal.
I Have reserved to the last place the consideration of counterfeit zeal,
because I have here many men to deal with, and many cases. The most beautiful
have most suitors. Zeal is a flourishing grace, of a fresh and lively
complexion; the pure and clear flame of that fire which is kindled by the
spirit. Many therefore pretend to this, and would be counted, and would be
called zealous ones, especially when zeal in Religion is grown into credit
again, when it comes to be the fashion that most men wear, when it is for a
man's reputation to be a forward Professor, as now (God be thanked) it is. For
fashions they have their vicissitudes, their ebbs and their returns again.
Old fashions laid a side come sometimes in request again; as this that we are
now speaking of. About an 100 years ago, the profession of Religion according
to Gods pure word was in such request, that it was a fashion, and they expressed
it in the fashion of their clothes, the Princes and Noblemen and Gentlemen in
some parts of Germany, caused these five Letters, V. D. M. I. Ae. the first
letters of these words, Joh. Wolf. lect. memor. To. 2. ad An. 1549.
VERBUM DOMINI MANET IN AETERNUM, The Word of the Lord endures for ever, to be
wrought or imbroydered or set in plate, upon their Cloakes, or upon the sleeves
of their Garments, to show to all the world, that forsaking Popish and humane
Traditions, they were Professors of the pure word of God. 2 Kin. 10.16.
It is grown to that pass now, men say, Come and see my zeal for the Lord:
But here is the danger; when the waters are out, the stream carries all with
it: Hypocrites will swim down the strong tide. And as then many that wore
those letters upon their Coats, did not receive the power of the Word into
their hearts; so all that now vote for Religion, are not religious: but as
empty Carts run apace (much faster then the laden ones) and keep a great
rattling upon the stones; so do these counterfeits make the greatest clamor
for that which in truth their hearts least care for.

To descend unto particulars. 1. Some have a pretended false complying zeal.
They are zealous in what they know will be well liked. They prevent Reformation
by authority, where they know Authority will approve the fact. So some have
taken down Crucifixes, removed Altars, and the like, not it may be out of a
spirit of any great dislike, but to manifest their forwardness in that which
they know or probably gather to be in design and project. Whereas right and
genuine zeal contends with difficulties, and though it dare do nothing in
opposition to Authority, Romans 13.1.
to which it knows the Scripture has subjected every soul, yet it will do
that which is a necessary duty, MS Addit. to Goodw. Catal. by Sir Io. Harr. in
Grindals life.
though it meet with frowns. Of which true Zeal Archbishop Grindall gave an
evident testimony; who when an Italian Physician bearing himself upon the
countenance of a great Lord at Court, though he had a wife living, married
another Gentlewoman, he would not wink at so public a scandal, but
convented and proceeded against him by Ecclesiastical censures, for then it
was not made felony, as it has since been by King James. This great Lord
presently writes to the Archbishop to stay the proceedings, to tolerate, to
dispense or to mitigate the censure. When he could not prevail, Queen
Elizabeth was procured to write in the Doctors behalf, but the Bishop not only
persisted like St John Baptist in his, (...), It is not lawful to have her to
wife, but also in reverent manner required of the Queen an account of her
faith, in that she would write in a matter expressly against the word of God.
Here was zeal encountering with danger for maintenance of truth. He was
hereupon commanded to keep his house, and lay under disgrace through the power
of a malevolent party till his death.

2. Again, Many are zealous in the Religion maintained, whereas if the stream
should turn and run the other way, God knows how they would keep their
breath against tide. It Is no trial of a man's sincerity to cry out against
Papists, An. Sax Mon. Preface. Sect. 3.
when a Parliament is vigilant and severe in setting Laws on foot against
them. I shall ever honor the memory of that learned Gentleman, one of our best
Saxon Antiquaries, Mr Lisle, who publishing some Saxon Monuments against
Popery, some years since, when it was thought by many that the face of things
looked toward Rome, (...), etc. Theodor. Hist. l. 2. c. 29. Non nisi in
volucris obtectam proferebat mentem suam. Noster Christophersonus vertit suam
ex occulto promit impietatem, (...) vel ut, Christophers. and Scalig. (...)
(vel ut Christophers. emendat (...) Sozom bist. l. 2. c. 28. Hist. eccles cent.
16. l. 3. c. 28.
professed that he did the rather then show his zeal of the truth, and make
known to the world what profession he was of, partly because the Papists hoped
and looked for a day, and partly because he saw so many so covert, and bearing
themselves so warily, as if they would be still ready for a change. For this is
indeed the right guise of hypocrites, in uncertain times to walk without
discovering themselves how they incline, and to deliver themselves in general
and ambiguous terms, which may admit a fair sense either way, to serve their
turns, accordingly as things may fall out; which was the Council which
Eudoxius Bishop of Constantinople, a notable hypocrite, a close heretic, gave
to Eunonius another Bishop of the same stamp, That he would hide his opinion
and not show it to such as would accuse him from his words, but wait a time.
Which counsel he observed, and thence forth, (...), He expressed his impiety
darkely and in the Clouds, with ambages and perplexed phrases, so some render
the Text in Theodoret. This very cunning had before their time been practiced
by Arrius, of whom when the Emperor Constantine required the confession of his
faith, he was able to lap it up handsomely, he dissembled his impious opinions,
and cited Scriptures cunningly after the manner of the devil.

I know not whether I should credit Lucas Osiander, a zealous Luther an Divine
indeed, but one (as I observe in all his writings) of an implacable hatred
against all that follow Calvin's doctrine, who leaves a suspicion of such like
juggling in reverend Beza and Farell. He says that they being sent by the
French Churches, to obtain an Intercession from the Protestant Princes in the
behalf of many poor prisoners persecuted for Religion in France, came to
Worms and there gave in writing unto Melancthon, Brentius and other Divines,
who were met there for a public conference with the Papists, a confession of
their Faith, in which among other things they confessed, That the very
substance of Christ's flesh is exhibited in the holy Supper, and that they
dissented not about the thing it self, but only concerning the manner of his
presence; and in general so expressed themselves, that their Confession seemed
rather to be Lutheran then Calvinisticall. Osiander says, he saw and read the
very Original Writing signed with Beza's and Farels own hands. Clam apud se,
in scrin^o pectoris sui, duas voces, per ^idem and spiritualiter, retinuisse.
And moreover, that when the Tigurine Divines reproved them for it, they both
answered, That it was needful to use some good deceit to help their brethren;
and that in that Confession of theirs, they did reserve secretly in their own
breasts, these two words, by faith and spiritually. Truly if this relation be
all current, there was aliquid humani, there was some halting and unsoundnesse
in this point and business, in those good men.

3. Others there are that have a zeal in some things, but in others they are
cold, careless and remiss. Now as we know that the sweat of the whole body
is a sign of health, but the sweat of some one part only, shows a distemper.
Jo. Fernel. de sebribus l. 4 c. 19.
And therefore physicians do reckon such a sweat to be Symptomaticall. Such is
the zeal of many, who are sharp sighted in corruptions Ecclesiastical, but
wink at Errors political, and having nothing to say against the rapines and
oppressions of their Patrons; that are zealous against Popery, but have no
further care of Religion, which that reverend and worthy man Mr Calvin observed
in Geneva; Beza in vita Calvini.
for when he lay sick, and all the Ministers came together upon the 28th of
April to visit him, he gave them a farewell Exhortation, among other things
that he spoke to them, he told them that when he came first to Geneva to
preach, he found things much out of order, as if Christianity were nothing else
but the plucking down of Images. Such a Religion just as was among some with
us here in England in good King Edward the 6th. days, and perhaps in some in
these days of ours. They were such who in the ancient Church brought a blemish
upon Religion, Apostasy of last times, p. 148.
and provoked Eunapius a Pagan Writer to blaspheme (as I receive the testimony
from Mr Mead, for I have not seen the book it self) He speaking of some
Monks in Egypt, calls them, Men indeed for shape, but living like swine, who
yet took it for a piece of Religion to despise the Temple of Scrapis; for then
(says he) whosoever wore a black-coate, and would demean himself absurdly in
public, got a tyranicall authority, to such an opinion of virtue had that sort
of men attained.

What I say of the demolishing of Images, I may apply to the earnestness of
some in some points of controversy. Some gallants of dissolute and debauched
behavior, and sometimes Ministers of scandalous life and obnoxious, will
declaime earnestly against some errors of opinion. And methinks it is a pretty
reason that one gives of this, Jufrif, faith, Sect. 1. c. 15. p. 283.
That such men are afraid to look upon themselves without a foil, and seeing
they can hardly find others of life and conversation much fouler, they propose
unto themselves these opinions to declaime against, as a salve unto their sore
consciences, and that they may be able to say as the Pharisee, Lord we thank
thee that we are not as other men, not as these misshapen heretics. Thus it may
be possible they may rail against others faults with much earnestness, to
hide their own, like the Host in Guzman. I have observed this experiment among
others in one man especially, a man of a private condition, who set himself
eagerly against his Minister for one passage delivered, which he conceived to
tend to Arminianisme; to the wonder indeed of all, Life of Guzman, p. 50. Acts
18.17.
that knew him to be a Gallio that cares for none of these things, a man
mindlesse of Religion, and otherwise vicious. This made Abraham Bucholzer a
great Divine in Germany, Melch Adam. Vit. Theol. p. 558.
to decline all Theological conflicts, because he saw many controversies
stirred up in the Church of Christ, by those who were not warmed with the least
sparkle of Gods love; as is noted by the writer of his life. I know we cannot
too much, too earnestly contend for truth, for saving truth's; but yet we may
overstrive for truths less necessary; Brief Tract of z^ale, p. 89.
as Mr Dod observed, that many are hot about matters of ceremony, but
altogether cold in matters of substance. It Is the great commendation of Andrew
Knophius that he preached at Riga the Doctrine of Christ painfully and
faithfully; but he had a turbulent Colleague, one Sylvester Tegetmeir, D
Clytrae. Saxo. i.e, l. 10.
who went furiously to work to cast Statues out of the Churches, and remove
Tombestones and Monuments; wherein Luther writes gravely to that City, That
Christian piety consists in true faith, in sincere love to our neighbors, etc.
and not only in the abolishing of humane and external rites, which may be
tolerated without impiety and scandal. Melc. Adam. in vita Luth. p. 123.
And Luther always showed this temper, being offended with the busy humor of
Carolostadius and his doings at Wittenburg, for when he returned after his
retirement, and saw what work he had made there in his absence; he took
occasion in his Sermons every day, to show what he liked, and what he
disallowed in those alterations that were made, and blames them for many
things, Luth. Tom. 2. Epist.
not that they had done wickedly, but not in order: and as himself writes in
one of his Epistles, It displeased me that Carolostadius labored only in
Ceremonies and outward circumstances, neglecting in the mean while true
Christian doctrine; for by his vain manner of preaching, he brought the people
to that pass, that they thought themselves Christians only if they refused
confesion, broke down Images, etc.

4. There is another deceit about this zeal and earnestness for opinion: when
oftentimes the zeal is not so much for the opinion it self, as for the
reputation of the holder of it. Hence it is that there is so much violence,
saltness and censuring a mong people, that will like nothing in them, that
hold not with them in all things; Col. 2.18. (...).
such as the Apostle speaks of, being opinionative, would Lord it over other
men's faith, and would (...), become mederators in other men's tenants, being
vainly puffed up in their fleshly mind, or, rashly puffed up, as the Geneva
translates it; or, causelessely puffed up, as our old English Bible; being in
love with their own light, which they follow and boast of against all. There
may be much of self mixed in zeal, as it seems there was in Josuah, Numb.
11.28. Luke 9.14.
by Moses mild reproving of his envy toward Eldad and Medad who prophesied in
the Camp. And Christ found it out and rebuked it in his own Disciples; ye
know not, said he, what spirit ye are of. They pretended a tenderness of the
disrespect showed unto Christ, but it seems they were also but too much
sensible that they were in his company, and shared of the rudeness of those
villagers. I will not search too narrowly into it, what was the fault that
Christ spied in them, seeing it is not plainly revealed. But in others, I can
make the observation good by instances, that men may seem zealous for God,
when it is their own injury that stirs them. When Sr Robert Mortimer an
excommunicate person intruded himself into a Procession at Canterbury, Alan
the Prior of Christ-church informed the Archbishop of it once and again; but
when he saw he cognived at it, himself with strong hand cast the excommunicate
person out of the Church. Who would not take this to be pure zeal after the
esteem of those times? but peruse the Record, and somewhat of self may be
discerned in this fact; Ms. Lib Eccl. Christi cantuar. ad an. 1181.
Mortimer was excommunicate for withholding a pasture from the Church belonging
to Depeham a Manor of theirs. So that the being so nearly concerned in his
profits, we know not what to say of his zeal.

What shall we say of some that are very loud against corruptions? I will
deliver my self in reverend Mr Dods words, The Brownists are ready to burst
their bowels with crying out against all disorders abroad, Brief Tract of
zeal, p. 88.
and yet never reform their own souls at home. And he tells us in the place
that I have noted in the Margin, of some woeful experiences, of such who were
zealous till they had what they expected, and then grew worldly and sowed up
their lips. And in another page, p. 100.
of many preachers who were zealous while they wanted livings. It is not likely
that Dr Aylmer after he came to be Bishop of London was of the same mind of
which he was when he wrote; Come off ye Bishops, Mr Elmer, his Harborough for
faithful.
away with your superfluities, yield up your thousands, be content with your
hundreds. He himself would sometimes confess to his familiar friends that he
had been of another strain in his youth, Ms. Addit. by Sir Io. Harr. in life of
Eleaz.
and would answer them in the words of St Paul, Cumessem parvulus sapiebam ut
parvulus.

There are others that are zealous in reproving to get themselves a name. It
must be taken notice of that they dare speak; See Turk. Hist. p 41.
whereas they might more easily admonish in private, more seasonably, and with
better success. There was a Pharisee, one Eleasar, right of this humor; who
when Hircanus the Prince and High Priest (a great Patron of that Sect) wished
them to deal friendly and freely with him if at any time they saw any thing
amiss in him; he presently replied with much petulancy; R si gne your
Priesthood and be content with the Dukedom, for your Mother was a bondwoman.
It was a false and unseasonable slander, Joseph. Antiq. l. 13. c. 18.
and lost the wished effect, for this petulant zeal wrought much mischief to
the forward hypocrite and the whole sect of Pharise's.

Their zeal is also much like this, who are earnest in the Pulpit against the
sins of the absent; who in plain country Congregations cry out against the
pride of the times, and in the obscure Churches of Country villages inveigh
against the misgovernments and errors of the State. It Is fit that these things
be spoken against, when a people are to be undeceived, but it must be in the
Kings Court, especially in the Kings Chapel; but if Amaziah the Court
Chaplain, Amos 7.12, 13.
make the Chapel a Sanctuary (as the Hebrew also signifies) and suffer not
plain-dealing, truth-telling Amos to preach there; yet why should he send him
to flee into other places and preach there? In other places a Prophet may
mourn for and lament the fins of the Magistrate unto God; but it would be no
true born zeal to fill the people with his declamations, unless as I said it
be needful to undeceive the people.

There are yet others that are zealous and cry out against the faults of
strangers, enemies, or men of another opinion, but cannot or will not see and
find the same defects in their friends or men of their own party. Theod. Hist.
l. 2. c 24.
They prefer their own Sect though unworthy; and advance them to places; Thus
Leontius Bishop of Antioch of the Aetian Sect, but a notable dissembler of the
Orthodox faith, was discovered by his slighting of the sound, and his frequent
courtesies toward the Arrians, yea he conferred orders upon one Stephen and
Placitus, men that way addicted, though they were known otherwise to be of
dissolute lives. Much after the same manner Eudoxius of Constantinople, who was
of the same grain, showed his spirit he was of by his cold and slow proceeding
in censures against such as were Heterodox, and convented before him for the
same cause, as appeared in the case of Eunomius who was accused by the Citizens
of Cyzicum, Lib. 2. c. 29.
as it is related in Theodorets Ecclesiastical History.

There are some that do condemn those of haeresie, that have the least jarre
with them in opinion, though concerning matters of greater difficulty then
consequence; and if any there be that join not with them in their
vociferations, they censure him presently to be backward in Religion and to
comply with the adversary; thus as he that observes the due time in singing
shall be censured to be immusicall and the author of discord, because his tone
differs from all the rest, who all sing out of tune; so, he must either be mad
with madmen, or pass in their verdict for the only madman among them. If a
man comply with some men, he may vent any thing, even the very lees of haeresie
and blasphemy, all goes down with them; but the most seasoned and moderate
discourses of others, though delivered with the spirit of meekness and with
much sincerity and judgment, is yet distasted by them.

Add to these those enforced and histrionicall clamours against the times, by
some who like hired mourners are louder in lamentation then the very friends of
the deceased, who happily can scarce go for grief. It may be some whose very
souls bleed in the sense of the public corruptions, cannot make such tragical
exclamations as are hired orators, and would little lay it to heart whatsoever
should become either of Peace or Truth. I have often thought that such like men
have done the greatest dis-service to our present Parliament.

Bsides, some hypocrites may complain much of the evil times, when it may be
they are sensible only of their own evils. Like the Maids in Homer, that wept
together with Briseid, Hom. Iliad. 29. (...). Vide inter Adagia Iunij. Cent. 6.
ad 57.
as if it had been for Patroclus who was slain, when it was for their own
friends that were killed. It Is a notable discourse to this purpose which Lipsius
faignes between himself and Langius, and which will serve for a full discovery
of this kind of hypocrisy. Lipsius lamented to his friend the calamities of
Belgia, Lips^de constant. l. 1 c. 8.
and how nearly he was touched with him. But are you in earnest said Langius,
for many cloak their private grief under the public. Oh it is for my
Countries sake only, said Lipsius, for my Countries sake that I am grieved.
Langius a little shaking his head, examine thy self well, said he. If thou
be sincere in it, I am sure few are so. Most are like Polus the
Stage Player, who when he was to act a weeping part, wept indeed over the ashes
of his own son. When a Town is on fire all are busy to quench it, but it is
their own private houses that their care is for. Thou art troubled that Belgia
is wasted with War: yet if thou hear of a cruel war in the Indies, thou
art not troubled. If thy sorrow were for public calamity, thou would be
moved for that; but now thy trouble is that it is in Belgia, that is, because
it is near thee, and thou art concerned in it. Tell me, if thou could be
assured and put out of all doubt, that thy house and money and all thy estate
should be safe in the general loss and vastation; would thou yet grieve?
What you would do I know not; but many in such a case would feed their eyes
with delight in others calamities. At leastwise his grief that stands safe
upon the shore and sees a shipwreck, is nothing to his that has lost his
goods in the wreake and is himself struggling with the waves. There is one other
particular which I will yet instance, the pretended zeal that some have for
Reformation, when with all their hearts they could be content that nothing were
reformed. Luther found this in the Pope, Melch. Adam. in vita Luth. p. 148.
when he appointed a consultation of some Cardinals about a reformation, at
that time that there was much talk of a general Council to be held. Luther
wrote a little book upon that occasion in the Dutch-tounge, and prefixed a
picture before it, the Pope sitting upon an high throne, some Cardinals were
pictured about him, who with fox-tailes tied to long poles went sweeping up and
down. And in truth, that pretense proved but a foxe-trick, for the Reformation
vanished into smoke.

I have been the longer about the examination of this grace, because there is
none so much and so ordinarily counterfeited: for though some errors of zeal
show themselves in such as are not otherwise ill affected but want knowledge,
and are well meaning but ignorant, like the Batts that convert the Christ all
in humor of the eye to make large wings, and so fly and flutter abroad, but
are blind, and in others that have good affection, but have not digested things
thoroughly, in whom there may be a sickheate, Io Fernel. de Pebrib. l. 4. c. 19.
according to the Physicians, who make that sweat which is before concoction to
be Symptomaticall: Yet of many we cannot otherwise conceive, that they serve
their unworthy ends and designs by their pretense of zeal. And so much for
the sixth Symptom of hypocrisy from their seeming graces.

CHAP. XXI. 7. The Symptom of Hypocrisy, in respect of Tentations. Strong
temptations discover the Inclination.
7. BEcause we are oftentimes deceived in men, Hypocrites discovered by strong
Temptations.
who carry it fairly, having no occasion to make them discover themselves; I
will offer this observation briefly, That an hypocrite is not able to resist a
strong tentation. The influence and seasoning of his education may carry him on
a great way and a great while, that he may act the temperate man, the devout
man, notably for some respects that he has, till some stronger occasion take
him off. We have known some that for a month, for half a year, for a year,
or it may be a longer time, have been restrained by the prison of good
society, and other regards, but at length could hold no longer, but have
broken loose and flowen out into all disorder. It Is a witty and pleasant Fable
that Lucian has of an Egyptian King, who caused some Apes when they were
young to dance and keep their postures with much art, these he would put into
rich-coates, and have them in some great presence to dance to the admiration of
such as knew them not, what little sort of active nimble men the King had got;
and of such as knew them, that they should be trained up to so manlike and
handsome a deportment; but a subtle fellow that was once admitted to see them,
brought with him and took out of his bosom an handful of Nutts, which he
threw among them; they perceiving that which they naturally loved, presently
left off their dance, fell to scrambling, tore one another rich coats, and to
the derision of the beholders who formerly admired them, they showed themselves
to be right Apes, though they had been clothed, and taught their postures like
to men. Throw in the nutts among hypocrites, and you shall soon discern what
they are. They may act it handsomely while no better trade is open for them;
and that they find religious correspondencie to be their thriving way, their
best gain. But let some stronger love besiege them, they run out unto it,
forget their parts, and make sport, or rather cause grief in the godly minded
that were deceived in them. It Is so in others too, that are men of smooth
behavior, and no harm to be discerned by them; but being Guns full charged
with the powder of rancarous malice, and the bullets of a sharp, imbittered
and boisterous spirit, and hard rammed with habituated resolution, discharg
upon you with much violence, as soon as the fire comes to them: Let there be
but a tentation, and ye shall see what is within them.

CHAP. XXII. 8. The Symptom's of Hypocrisy in respect of Judgments.
Insensiblenesse under Judgments.
8. Hypocrites insensible under Judgments.
THere are also Symptoms of hypocrisy, as men are under Judgments and behave
themselves under them.

The hypocrite justifies himself under afflictions. He will not see the Angel
coming against him in the narrow way. Though he be consumed, Jer. 5.3.
he refuses to receive correction, but makes his face harder then a rock. When
King Jehoram and the two Kings his Auxiliaries were brought into a straight,
the Prophet Elisha labors to convince him of his sin, 2 King. 3.13.
Get thee to the Prophets of thy father, and to the Prophets of thy mother. He
meant to make him understand that the courses of his fathers house had brought
him into these extremities. But Jehoram would not be persuaded that they were
any other then the Accidents of war. Nay, said he, for the Lord has called
these three Kings together to deliver them into the hand of Moab. It Is a
straight incident to such undertakings as these, and we are involved in it, and
am I any more culpable then these other two? It Is an hard matter to make an
hypocrite see his sin. There were some in the Prophet Jeremies time, Jer.
44.17, 18.
who would not be brought to understand the true causes of the misery they
suffered. It was not their burning incense unto the frame of Heaven, (an
ordinary Eastern practice of Idolatry.) No, by no means, not that. They even
quarrel the Prophet for touching upon that. There is still some other Jonah
that shakes and beats the Ship. It Is somewhat else, it is not that. It Is the
Prelates sin, say the multitude; it is the disobedience of the multitude, say
the Prelates: TO is one and other, it is the sin of us all, we are all in the
fault, Lam. 3.39, 40, 41, 42.
say they that are sincerely humbled, and are ready to cry out with the Church,
Why does man murmr, a man for the punishment of his sins, let us search and
try our ways, and turn again to the Lord, Let us lift up our heart with our
hands unto God in the heavens, we have transgressed and rebelled.

There are others that when they feel or fear judgments, will make some show
of relenting; the sluggish Oxen will be made to draw by the pricking of the
goad, Hos 7.16.
and will suffer themselves at such a time to be beat, but they are deceitful
bows, Hos 10.4.
and the string soon slips again. They will speak words, like profane
Mariners that fall to prayer in a storm, and make great vows, 1 Kin. 21.27.
Psalm. 78.34, 35, 36, 37.
but they swear falsely in making a Covenant. In such cases very Ahabs will put
on sackcloth. They will seek God and enquire early after God, and then, He is
their Rock and their Redeemer, and a many good words; but they flatter him
with their mouths, and lie unto him with their tongues, their heart is not
right with him. You may see a lively example of this in the Prophet, Jer.
34.15, 16. And there are many such, who like some jades will pace, if you keep
a strict and certain hand upon them, but else they give over and shuffle in and
out.

There are some who go beyond these, Mic. 6.9.
and speak as if they had hearkened to the voice of Gods rod; but here is the
trial; are they profited by the judgments that have been upon themselves or
others. Do they leave their pilfering, Mic. 6.10.
when themselves have been in jayle, and they have seen others led forth to
execution? Are there yet the treasures of wickedness in the house of the
wicked? that is, yet after the rod? Will God count them pure with the wicked
balances? No, they are odious unto him, and he will make them sick in smiting
them.

CHAP. XXIII. 9. The Symptom of Hypocrisy from the carriage toward company.
Hypocrites comply with all tempers.
9. Hypocrites are for all compame. Plut. Paral. in vita Alcib ex verse
Cruserij, p. 320. mihi.
THe Symptom of hypocrisy that I here consider, is, that the hypocrite
complies with all company. You shall have his right character, if you take but
Pluturchs description of Alcibiades; he had the art of winning upon men, so
that he could frame himself to the studies and fashions of others, sooner and
more frequently then the Chamaeleon can change her colors, only they say he
could not change at all to the white. Whither he lived among good or bad, he
could imitate them, in Lacedaemon austere and frugall; In Jonia voluptuous and
joviall, etc. This humor was in Herod, Mat. 14.9.
he would please his company, though he displeased his conscience. Nay there
was too much of the remainders of it even in St Peter and Barnabas, who
shuffled somewhat strangely in the case of communicating with the Gentiles. I
know it will not down with some that St Peter should deservedly be so charged.
In Synop si Clem. Alex. Eusebius. Caesar.
Dorotheus and some other of the Ancients to salve the matter, understand the
place of another Peter; but that it was the Apostle, St Hierom has put it out
of controversy. The greatest bickering is between him and St Augustine,
whether he were in a fault or no. Epist. 89 ad Aug.
Hierom excuses him, and he is a strong advocate in any ones cause he
undertakes; but St Augustine in the opinion of most Divines has prevailed. De
Bapt. contr. Don. l. 2. c. 1, 2.
To me it had never been a controversy, or so much as a question, but for the
difference of those two great men, because the Text is so clear, That he was
to be blamed. (...). Greg. Naz. ad Nem.
But to examine St Peter's fact no further, I am now dealing against those
double faced Mercuries (as St Gregory Nazianzen calls them) that look either
way, those that halt upon both feet; those that sit upon two stools, as
Laberius told Cicero, when he sought to please both Pompey and Caesar; Cic
Orat. pro Celio mihi, fol. 145. b.
or such as Cicero describes Catiline to be, I think not (says he in his
Oration for Marcus Celius) there was ever such a monster in the world, made up
of such contrary and repugnant dispositions: At some times who more acceptable
to worthy men? At other times who more intimate with the wicked? Sometimes no
man a better Citizen, then he for the better side. Yet who now a bitterer enemy
to the City then he? Who more drowned in pleasures then he? yer who more
enduring in labors? Who more covetous? Who more liberal? He can bend himself
this way and that way, solemn with them that are grave, joviall with loose
companions, etc. Sr John Harrington describes Dr Kitchen Bishop of Landaffe, to
be much such a man, that he could sing, Cantate Domino canticum novum, four
times in fourteen years, and yet never sing out of tune. Alas, Socr. l. 3 c. 2.
the Church has always had such unsound halters in it. The name of Ecebolius
is famously known to all men; under Constance a zealous Christian, under
Julian again, a bitter Pagan, but when Julian was dead and Christianity
restored, he is a Christian again, an humble Christian again, and falls under
their feet and cries, (...).
Tread upon me that am unsavory salt. Such an egregious Knave (if it may be
lawful to call a Bishop) was Timothy Bishop of Constantinople under the
Emperor Anastasius the first, who when another Bishop was to be ordained by
him and refused his hands, Theod Lect. Collect. l. 2.
because (says he) thou art an Eutychian and rejectest the Council of
Chalcedon, Nay, not I, said Timothy, cursed be he that rejects it. So he
complied with the Bishop. But it seems he took too far a leap, by
professing his Orthodoxie thus, he might displease the Emperors mother; there
was an Archdeacon that stood by and heard him what he said, and told the
Emperor and his Mother of it. What must the Archbishop now do; he is not
ashamed to comply so far with the Emperor as to deny what he had said, and
in his presence to bid an Anathema to whosoever should receive that Council.
Peter Mongus Bishop of Alexandria, was first an Eutychian, then he professes
the Orthodox faith, soon after he damns the Council of Chalcedon, (...).
Evagr. Hist. l. 3. c. 13. and l. 17. c. 22.
but after that again writing to Acacius of Constantinople he approves it, and
yet once again after all this he damnes it; so that the Historian had reason to
call him, a Stage Player, a weather-cocke, a Time-server. The same Historian
tells us of 500 Bishops and Churchmen who under Zeno the Emperor were
Orthodox, but when Basiliscus the Usurper cast him out, Evagr. l. 3. c. 5.
they were Eutychians with him; and when Zeno got the Empire again, they were
his men, and returned to the profession of the truth.

To come down to our own times, I should fill the paper too much, to relate
the Stephen Gardiners, the Edmund Bonners, the Pernes, and I know not how many
of these Ecebolians. But to instance in men of other quality. What shall we say
of that Prince, who (if we believe Strada) was a Roman Catholic when he was
with Caesar, Fam Strada. de bello Belg. l. 2. p. 109.
but a Protestant when he was in Belgia. In an other place, he tells us, that
when a son was borne unto him, he caused him to be baptized after the Romish
manner, to please Margaret Duchess of Parma the Governesse of the Provinces,
but to comply with the other party, Lib. 4.
he had Protestant Princes, the Duke of Saxony, and the Lantgrave of Hesse to
be Godfathers. But I must needs profess that I receive no testimonies from a
Jesuit, but with some suspicion; nor indeed from any men of a different party
when they speak of others; which makes me not easily to assent to what I find
in a little MS. Commentary, about the controversy concerning the Lambeth
Articles, where there is some touch upon Dr Whitaker, as if he had taken upon
him the maintenance of Geneva doctrine, to comply with the friends of both his
wives, MS. Commentariolus de Cont. de Art. Lamb Of Spalato; Ne diversum
sentientes nimium offenderet. Of Montague, Propter puritanorum undique
strepentium clamores, nescio quomodo resugererit ad did inctionem. Forbes. de
Just if. l. 1. c. 3 l. 2. c. 5.
one being the daughter of Culverwell a religious Merchant of London, the
latter being the widow of Dudley Fenner. I do the rather suspect this
reflection, because I guess Dr Overall was the author of that MS, who though
a reverend man, yet we know he went another way; and I find that men are apt to
censure the least dissenting from them, (though they be men of the same side)
as a complying with the adverse party; Thus Dr Forbes of Edinburgh does not
spare to censure Spalato and even Montague himself of complying with
Calvinisme, in the points of Justification and the loss of grace. But
whatsoever become of these men, we have enough of examples, alas too too many,
of these that are any thing for any company. Some Professors when they are
among such as are profane will not stick to game, drink, swear it may be,
and revell among them, being ashamed to be bewrayed to be Galilaeans, or that
their face is toward Jerusalem. Which is most base and unworthy in those that
profess that they know and serve God. What (says St Paul) do I seek to
please men? If I yet pleased men I should not be the servant of Christ. Gal.
1.10.
Which agrees with the observation of Themistius an Ethnicke Philosopher,
recorded in the Ecclesiastical History. Socr. l. 3 c. 1. Cassiod. Hist.
Tripart. l. 4. c. 4.
Such men as accommodate themselves to the Religion of their Prince, worship
not God, but the King; and are like the river Euripus, whose course is now one
way, and then it runs the quite contrary.

I will add under this head another Symptom. That sometimes those that are
hypocrites do accompany with such as are godly for by-ends; sometimes that
they may be taken notice of, Iren. l. 3. c. 3.
as Marcian the Heretic insinuated into the compaay of Polycarpus, and have
credit by them and with them. I received it from the mouth of a reverend Divine
concerning famous Mr John Bruen of Stapleford in Cheshiere, (though it be not
set down in the Relation of his life) that he was wont to say, That he knew
his house made many Hypocrites. He did shine in the Country, and brought much
reputation to Religion, there was great refort to his house of Divines and good
people, so that probably also others might be carried by the fame of things,
to preserve his acquaintance, Arth. Hildersh. Lect. in Joh. 4.15.
and frame themselves to his course. And there may be another end, which Mr
Hildersham notes, in his Lectures upon John; That you shall have some will
confer with godly, learned Ministers, and be in their company, to get or
catch somewhat from them to maintain their lusts. Thus Ahab often sent for
Michajah, and bid him speak truth; it would have done him more good to have
laid hold upon somewhat from him then all the four hundred Prophets else.

CHAP. XXIV. 10. The Symptoms of Hypocrisy, from the general carriage.
Hypocritical Slanderers. Prying Censoriousnesse.
10. THe last kind of Symptoms that I propounded to consider, are such, as I
had not particular titles to refer them unto, but as I look upon the
Hypocrite in his carriage and conversation in general.

1. Hypocrites slanderers. Pro. 11.9.
And here first I take notice of Slanderers, being warranted by Solomon to call
such hypocrites, An Hypocrite (says he) with his mouth destroys his
neighbor. But it is done many times with a sly and privy blow; as if he were
grieved alas, and had a Ladies hand, and were loath to touch his reputation
hardly, or any ways hurt him. He makes a sigh, and an Alas, the Prologue of
his calumny. Mat. 23.
Vehementer doleo, quia vehementer diligo; atque sic cum maesto vulto, procedit
maledictio, as St Bernard describes them. These are vipers, Christ calls
hypocrites so, that have their poisonous teeth hid within their gumms. Graves
they are that appear not, but men walk over them and perceive them not, till
they slip and fall in, few men can escape the mouths of these Sepulchers; or if
they speak well at any time of others, it is but to advance themselves, Luke 11
44. C^sar dum Pomperij s^ atuas repo^^ suas slabiut.
as Cicero said when Caesar erected the Status of Pompey.

But those that I chiefly point at in this place, are that lying generation,
who for some by-respects, making themselves party to a side, endeavor to
uphold it by making the adverse side odious, by lies and slanders. Truly
Religion never got any thing by lies, nor ever will do. Let those Romish
Factors be Masters of the whetstone for those many lewd, disgraceful libels
against Luther, Calvin and other worthies. But for shame let not any of us set
up in that sorry trade. Lying Pamphlets do strongly uphold that cause which
they labor to weaken. Sure they are not our friends, who would seem to help
forward the Reformation, by loading the opposite party with senseless and
childish slanders. I am not become a Proctor for the Papists, I know their
malice and cruelty, Ireland is a woeful testimony of it; yea there is
bloodinesse even in their principles, and Rome is that Whore that is drunk
with blood; I confess we have great reason to be very wary, and for my own
part I praise God for the prudent care of our great Senate to put us into a
defense. But that which I aim at, is this, That those childish reports that
have been scattered up and down in many places, make our Adversaries much sport
at our credulous weakness, and confirm them, because they know themselves
innocent in many of those things that are reported against them. We have a
saying, That we may not belie the devil; I am fure the Papists will count
themselves little beholden to me for making such a comparison; but they deserve
it: but yet as bad as they be, we must all consider that we must account to
God for all that we charge upon them. The observation will hold in the cases of
any others, as well as them. I will show you only the face of one of these
hypocrites, if the Story be not a false gloss. Otho Paccius a Lawyer, Io.
Sleid. Com. ad an, 1528.
privately admonished Philip the Lantgrave of Hesse, to look to himself, for
he knew he said, that Ferdinand the Emperors brother, and Brandenburge and
Georg. of Saxony, and some other popish Princes and Bishops had covenanted
together to waste his and the Saxon Electors territories, and showed him a copy
(as he pretended) of the Covenant, and promised to procure him the Original.
Whereupon the Lantgrave and the Elector (as they had good reason upon such and
so credible a suggestion) provide themselves thoroughly and make ready for
war. And when all was in readiness, they publish the cause of their arming
and standing upon their guard, and disperse the copy of the pretended Covenant,
and send unto the Princes and States therein named. But all the Princes clear
themselves, and make it appear to be a malicious slander; but especially
George of Saxony, who was father in law to the Lantgrave, urges him to declare
the author of the report, or else he and the rest would believe it was devised
by himself to put Germany into a combustion. The good Lantgrave (it seems
esteeming Paccius to be an honest man, and that out of his care of Religion he
had related nothing but truth) refused to discover him, expecting still the
original draught. But when at length by the mediation of other Princes the
business was brought to an hearing, Paccius is brought before them, convicted
of forgery and slander, banished by the Lantgrave, and a few years after for
another crime he lost his head. As this story delivers him, Paccius was a
notable slanderous hypocrite, that had some ends of his own in all likelihood
to work out by this report; if it were his own slanderous invention, for it is
only upon that supposition that I put his name into this list, which I note,
because some are willing to excuse Paccius, that there was such a Covenant
hatched, and that Paccius being a Counselor to George of Saxony knew of it;
but was after suppressed, so that Paccius could not come to get the Original
into his hands, Possidon. in vita. Aug.
nor make good proof of what he had reported. St Augustine could not endure a
slanderer, but would sharply reprove any such that came into his company. It Is
said, he caused these two verses to be writ over his Table, that they might be
still in the sight of him and his guests.

Quisquis amat dictis absentum rodere vimm,
Hanc mensam vetitam noverit esse sibi.
Which I will English thus, Who so delights the absent to disgrace,
Let that man know that here he has no place.


And I wish that St Augustines practice would be taken up by great ones, and by
all, not to suffer the good names of men to be traduced and fed upon at their
tables, but to bid them observe the verse or be gone.

2. Prying censoriousnesse.
Censoriousnesse is a kin to slander, and one of the most special signs by
which our Savior directs us to know an Hypocrite. He will be meddling with the
mote that is in his brothers eye. Let us consider the place, Mat. 7.1, 3, 4, 5.
Jo. Camer. Myrothec. ad Romans 14.4.
Judge not that ye be not judged. It Is not simply forbidden unto us to judge
others, but a supercilious, severe damnatory, partial judgment. Why beholdest
thou the mote (the smaller and lesser error, the fault that like a Mote cannot
be seen, but in the Sunne-beames, Vide Cypr. Epist. 1. mihi, p. 8. ^.
that cannot be divided, that is so light it may be blown away) in thy
brothers eye (that is in thy brother) but considerest not the beam (the great,
the evident notorious fault, the great sin, that has such a bulk, that it
may be seen in the dark; so great that it may be divided, being multiplex
peccatum, a sin containing other sins in it, as a beam may be cut into
many pieces; a sin so great that it serves to the building up of wickedness,
so great that it cannot be blown away, nay scarce haled and tugged forth) that
is in thine own eye (that is in thy self:) Thou hypocrite first cast out the
beam out of thine own eye. Io Wilhel. Kirchofij Farrago.
Ye shall hardly find the man that is not curious in other men's faults, blind
in his own. A Cardinal and the Abbot of Fulda were once traveling together
toward Vlma, either of them were attended with 30. horsemen completely armed.
My Lord, said the Cardinal, do you think St Bennet who was the author of
your order went thus attended. The Abbot presently replied upon him, and
demanded if St Peter ever rode in that state as his father hood did. Thus each
of them was busy with one another eye. Life of Guzman. de Alfan. par. 1. l.
3. c. 5.
That Divine Spaniard as his Countrymen and others used to call him, in his
pleasant but most useful fiction, of the life of Guzman, makes his Rogue
wittily discourse of the unconscionablenesse of the Genowaies and their prying
in others lives, That when they are young and go first to School, they play
away and lose their consciences, which the Master finding, he lays them up
carefully in a chest, but because he has the keeping of so many, and they
mixed one with another, he gives to his Scholars when they go away such
consciences as come first to hand, which they take to be their own, but are
indeed some bodies else. Whence it comes to pass that no man bearing his own
conscience in his own bosom, every man looks and pryes into that of another
man's. I said before by way of prevention, that no man might object it unto me,
that it is but a fiction, and so let it be; but there is a good moral of it;
Ridentem dicere verum, quid vetat?
and we have need sometimes of these pleasant men to tell us the truth, that we
may understand our selves the better. But the Spirit of God that can best
discover things unto us, tells us that this censoriousnesse arises out of self
conceit, They are a generation that are pure in their own eyes, Pro. 30.12, 13.
though they be not washed from their filthiness; and out of pride, as it
follows in that place in the next verse; A generation, Oh how lofty are their
eyes, and their eye-lidds are lifted up. The Romish orders of Friars, among
others are this lofty generation, that have a good conceit of themselves, but
scarce of any else; which appears by a Picture which the Monks of Sconbuch in
the Dukedom of Wittenburg set up. Willh, Bidem. bach. in libro cui Tit.
Papatus abnegatus.
They painted a great Gally floating upon the waves, upon which they set these
words, The holy Christian Church, in the foredeck sat only the Pope,
Cardinals, and Bishops, upon the rowing seats sat Priests and Monks, with
their oars; but in the sea under the ship, were Kings, Princes, Nobles,
Merchants, Laymen of all sorts, to some few of whom some Friars let down a
cable and drew them up, the rest perished. Their meaning was, that none are
safe, or in the ship, but such as by their merits they help. These are some of
the generation whose eye-lidds are lifted up. But there are many more of this
brood besides them; Hypocritical mockers in feasts, as the Psalm speaks;
Isal. 35.16.
men partial to themselves, that put all their own faults in the bag that
hangs behind out of sight; but they are never without matter against others;
and are still complaining of the bad times, but will not be persuaded that
themselves are the men that help to make them so, which offers unto us the
observation of another Symptom; That hypocrites will not endure to be
reprehended, they will not see that ought is amiss, From the days of your
Fathers ye are gone away from mine Ordinances and have not kept them, Mal. 3.7.
Return unto me and I will return unto you, says the Lord of hosts. But ye
said wherein shall we return. Your words have been stout against me, says the
Lord, yet ye say, what have we spoken so much against thee? 1 Samuel 15.15.
Saul the hypocrite played thus with the Samuel and even would have mocked God
too; nothing was amiss with him, he had performed all the commandment: and
after he was convinced by the lowing of the Oxen, and the bleating of the
Sheep, by the beasts noise rather then the Prophets words; yet he is at it
again, in the 20th. verse, I have obeyed the voice of the Lord, and have gone
the way which the Lord sent me. So truly do we find that of the Son of Syrach
verified in Saul; A sinful man will not be reproved, Ecclus. 32.17. ver. 15.
but finds an excuse according to his will: and ye shall find a little
before, that this sinful man which he speaks of, is the hypocrite who is
offended at the Law; for as Christ speaks, Joh. 3.20, 21.
he comes not to the light lest his deeds should be manifest: Such as are
sincere, are of David's mind, Search me O God, Pal. 13^.23, 24.
and know my heart, try me and know my thoughts, and see if there be any wicked
way in me; or any way of pain and grief. It would even trouble and disquiet
me to do amiss. And he is willing to let others search him also. Let the
righteous smite me, Psalm. 141.5.
it shall be a kindness, let him reprove me, it shall be an excellent oil,
which shall not break my head. Sr Anthony Cope was of David's mind, for as in
his prayers with his family, Mr. Harris, Samuels fun^r. Epist. to Lady Cope.
he would shame himself most, in his confession of his own most special sins;
so he would desire Ministers not to favor his corruptions, but to tell him and
spare not. But the guilty hypocrite endures not this, they love not a searching
ministry, plain dealing Sermons. Ms. Addit. to Goodw. Cat. in Landoffe.
Sr John Harrington reports of Bishop Goodwin, that preaching at an Assize
before the Judges, of Dives and Lazarus, (as he was wont still to be sharp
against the vices of the times, so in that Sermon among other things) he said,
that though the Scripture had not expressed plainly, yet by his clothes and his
fare, he might be bold to affirm, that Dives was at the least a Justice of
peace, and perhaps of Oyer and Terminer. This speech was so ill taken by some
guilty consciences, that a great matter was enforced to be made of it, and that
it was a dangerous and seditious speech. Reverend Musculus found this spirit in
the Anabaptists. He was forced through poverty, when he first left the Romish
Church, for his conscience, to hire himself with a Tailor, and wrought with
him at his trade: Adam in vitae Musc. p. 373.
This man he found to be an Anabaprist, a notable hypocrite, one that pretended
much piety, but was no way answerable, but only a great talker. Musculus could
not hold, but must needs reprove him, and among other things, finding that he
was idle, and neglected his calling, he urged him with that of Paul, He that
will not work let him not eat. But the Anabaptist was too proud to receive a
reproof, and poor Musculus was thrust out of his doors.

And as in the matter of private reproves, so the hypocrite cannot endure the
severity of Church censures. Hist. Mad. Cent. 2.
Aquila the Ancient Greek Translator of the Bible, fell from Christianity to
Judaisme, being angry at a sentence of excommunication against him. It Is a
notable passage which was made known to the Commissioners in Qu. Elizabeth's
time, of one W: Dangerous positions, etc. Book. 3. chapter 18.
a Minister that was then very active in a private way for the setting up of
discipline, yet when himself had given a great scandal and was proceeded
against according to the wholesome severity of their own Orders, he brake out,
and railed against Mr Field and some other Ministers, and would not be held to
those rules that himself had had an hand in composing. Upon such an occasion as
this it was that Santangelus the Lawyer of Bordeaux fell out so foulely with
the famous Camero, and the rest of the Ministers of the Protestant Church,
Cameron. Stellitentic. in Ep.
because he was convented before their Synod for some delinquencie.

I have now done with the Symptoms, happily more pulses might be felt and more
urines viewed: but these shall serve, which may be of use to occasion in others
a more full discovery and knowledge of this great disease and dangerous; which
opens the way to the second Book, in which I am first to consider the
Prognostics.

The second BOOK.
CHAP. I. Prognostics of hypocrisy. The first. It threatens the decay of
gifts. The second. It prepares the way to Heresy.
I Have dwelt long upon the examination of the Hypocrite, and have admitted
what evidences I could meet with against him, but his case is so intricate,
that happily it may be necessary that a Melius inquirendo go out against him. I
have thus long been enquiring after him, and have told his marks, it may be he
has some other, but those will serve turn to make him known to such as meet
him. I will now lay open the bill against him, and show his vileness,
baseness, harmfullnesse, and the danger to which he is exposed; which is the
next business according to the method I propounded, to speak of the
Prognostics of hypocrisy; (...). Fernel. de Symptom. l. 2. c 7. Hypocrisy
prognosticates the decay of gifts.
which are signs also, but as the Symptoms are signs demonstrative that tell
what is; these are signs that foretell what will befall.

1. Hypocrisy is a prognostic of the decay of gifts. It eats out a man's
gifts, at least the spirit and liveliness of them. Nothing hinders spiritual
growth and flourishing more then that does. Sincerity is a fat and yiedling
soil wherein all graces take root and grow prosperously. God is strong with
the upright. Nicodemus though he were timorous was sincere, and came on
miraculously. He was a weak and tender sprig when he was first planted, he
grew in the shade, he came to Jesus by night. But he grew up, and feared no
scorchings, no frosts, no winds. This timorous disciple, becomes a confident
professor. When Christ was despised of all, and hung upon the Cross among
thieves, he comes boldly, and beggs the body of Jesus. But the hypocrite grows
weaker and weaker, and loses all. Boner was once a good Preacher, Mr. Fox, Acts
and Mon.
but at last himself confessed he had lost his gift of preaching. Trembling
Sanders, sincere Sanders, proves a brave glorious Martyr; but bold Pendleton,
that presumptuous and bragging hypocrite becomes a base Apostata, and to save
his fat carcass from frying at a stake which he formerly vaunted of, he
carried a lean and starved soul to Hell, unless God gave him repentance
afterward, which is more then we find of him. So truly is that of the Psalmist
verified, A little that a rightcous man has, Psalm. 37.16.
is better then the riches of many wicked. That little increases to a rich
stock, for sincerity is a great improver; but that riches is blown away and
comes to extreme poverty. The hypocrite is fit for no duty. He is a cup with
an hole in the bottom, he can hold nothing, he is fit for no use, but to be
laid by or thrown in a corner. An hypocrite cannot pray. He can speak
confession and petition, and with good words too it may be; for words are the
work of invention, which he may still hold, God lets out these common grounds
to wicked men, and they may till them: but he wants an heart, and it is the
heart that prays. And prayer is the holding of acquaintance with God, to whom
the hypocrite is a stranger; and the driving of a trade with God, who will not
deal with hypocrites, or trust out any of his special graces to them.

2. Hypocrisy is a prognostic of erroneous opinions, Hypocrisy a prognostic
of Heresy.
yea boiled up to the consistencie of Haeresies. They love not the truth, and
therefore cannot keep it; it dwells and remains with those that affect it
heartily. 1 Timothy 1.19.
I charge thee (says St Paul to Timothy) war a good warfare holding faith
and a good conscience, they must be kept in company, he that holds not a good
conscience cannot hold faith. Part with your uprightness and the truth will be
gone too. As it follows in that place, Which good conscience some having put
away, concerning faith have made shipwreck. He instanceth in Hymeneus and
Alexander. Hymeneus is mentioned again by St Paul in his other Epistle to
Timothy. 2 Timothy 2.14, 16, 17.
It seems he was a Preacher full of ostentation, that regarded more the praise
of his wit and subtilty, then the edification of the hearers. He was a striver
about words to no profit, a profane and vain babbler, a man whose words did
eat like a Canker or a Gangrene, as we may gather his character out of that
text. With him he joins Philetus. No wonder that such men should loose the
faith; as they did in a main point, they denied the resurrection. Chrysostom. in
loc.
They cast away the fear of judgment, and the expectation of immortal life.
Of Alexander, if he were the Jew that we read of in the Acts of the Apostles,
Acts 16.33.
as Baronius is of opinion, Baron. Annal. Tom. 1. ad an. 57. (...), Theoph.
Eus. Hist. l 5. c. 17. l 6. c. 31. Et alibi Epiphan, haer. 24. Funccij Chron.
ad an, 141. Isa. 19.13, 14. Vide Abrah. Scult^ti. Ideum. in Jesus. ad loc.
we find that he was once a forward man in the Apostles cause, and ventured
himself for the appeasing of the uproare against Paul, and allaying their fury,
not that himself was any way accused, as Theophylact observes: But it seems he
was not sound, but right of Hymeneus his temper, a good speaker it is likely
because the rest thrust him forward to try his Oratory with the rabble; but one
whose ambitious eloquence, or I know not what else, carried him into heresy.
If the reader consult Eusebius and Epiphanius, and others, he shall find this
observation plentifully confirmed, That most haeresies have had their birth,
from foul lust, avarice, ambition, or some other unsound humor that have
mastered such as have been otherwise the owners of good parts, as Valentinus
was who fell into his heresy because he mist a Bishopric, says Funccius,
whom God has justly given over to blindness, as the Lord threatened it against
hypocrites, in the Prophet Isaiah, Forasmuch as this people draw near me with
their mouth, and with their lips do honor me, but have removed their heart
far from me, Therefore I will add to do a mavelous work among this
people, The wisdom of their wise men shall perish. Which agrees with that of
the Apostle, 2 These. 2.10, 11.
Because they received not the love of the truth that they might be saved, for
this cause God shall send them strong delusion that they should believe a lie.
He that has already denied the power of Religion, will it be any wonder if he
after deny the form of it? He that will not leave his sin for his Religion
sake, will easily be persuaded to leave his Religion for his fins sake. When
once the conscience can swallow down wicked practices, it will digest wicked
opinions; when once the Ship leakes, the lading is in danger both to sink or
swim together, neither is it possible that a pure faith can be preserved in
an impure conscience, as Mr Pemble speaks in one of his wholesome Sermons. The
root of Apostasy, p. penult.
Zanchy being to treat of the Doctrine of the Trinity which was so much nibled
at by so many of the old heretics, begins with reckoning up the causes of
heresies, and among others he places Hypocrisy, Zanch. de Tribus Elohim. Tom.
1. mibi p. 380.
and says he could produce many examples of his own time, but spared them
because they were living, hoping that God might give them repentance, to the
acknowledging of the truth. And who is he that takes any notice of the
progress of truth, but has observed some examples of the fearful Apostacy
and the doting errors into which some unsound men have fallen. I will only
produce one. Bernardinus Ochinus made a fair show in the Church, and was well
thought of among good Divines; and was dear to Bullinger, but he was unsound
as appeared. Vita Bulling. p. 498.
He first fell into the defense of polygamie in some dialogues which he
published in Italian. The Senate of Tigure hereupon banished him, and Bullinger
denied him his commendatory Letters. He went to Basil, and after that into
Poland, where he broached other heresies about the holy Ghost. After this he
went into Moravia, and joined himself unto the Anabaptists there, among whom he
dyed inglorious.

CHAP. II. Other prognostics of hypocrisic. The third. Atheism. The fourth.
Hypocrisy works much mischief to the Church.
3. Hypocrisy is a prognostic of Atheism. An Hypocrite in the way to
Atheism.
They have both the same Original. There is but a graduall difference between
them. He that mocks God as the hypocrite does, knows not nor acknowledges God,
and is an Atheist in another dress. He cares not for holiness, and therefore
when he has his ends, he cares not for the show of holiness. Hence hypocrites
break forth ordinarily at length into looseness and profaneness, And no
wonder, seeing as the Apostle intimates, hypocrisy is attended with a feared
conscience, (...), 1 Timothy 4.2. consciences hard and brawny, dull and without
feeling, for (...) is to sear with an hot iron: But it signifies also to cut
off with searing as Chirurgions do rotten members: and then the Apostle
speaks of men that have no conscience left, men of no conscience at all, Dan.
Heins. exerc ad loc.
or men of stigmatized consciences, as Heinsius would have it, flagitious
branded hypocrites, no wonder that they fall into all profaneness. Hierom
Bolsec who had been a Carmelite at Paris, Beza in vita Calv.
cast off his Cowle, but kept his Monkery, and came to Geneva where he
practiced physic; where being of no esteem in that faculty, he would needs try
what he could do in Divinity, and vented some points which were strange and
sounded ill in the ears of that Church. Calvin first dealt mildly with him; but
when all would not serve, the Senate expelled him. At length he counterfeited
great penitence, and desired to be reconciled and received back into Geneva;
which they were inclined to do; but in the mean time perceiving some
troublesome times toward Geneva, he falls to the Papists, rayles bitterly
against the Protestant-Religion, and ran into such profaneness that he
prostituted his own wife to the Canons regular of Augustoduvum, in whose filthy
stable he set up. I could fit this story with some others; but I have it in
design to undertake the Atheist in a particular Treatise, Exercit. on Malach.
p. 66.
which promise I have once before intimated, and will perform, if God give
opportunity and quiet times, the encouragement of study, and that I be not
prevented by some abler pen, which I rather desire, as being a piece of work
which though I have hung upon the warpe-wall, I despair almost of putting it
into the loome, as knowing my own want of skill to weave so fine and curious a
piece.

4. Hypocrites are mischievous. Acts 20.29.
Hypocrisy prognosticates much hurt to the Church. St Paul in his exhortation
to the Elders at Miletum, speaking of such men, calls them grievous wolves, I
know this, that after my departure shall grievous wolves enter in among you,
not sparing the flock. He speaks of slye and hypocritical seducers, who as
open tyrants are called wolves in regard of their cruel forcible ravenings, so
these are said to be wolves, because of their craftiness to get the prey. Some
Naturalists say that wolves will cry like wounded men, that so they may deceive
and call forth the Shepherds, and by that means steal an opportunity to
invade the flock: and that they will come against the wind, that the dogs
which tend the fold may not sent them. Nay there is yet a further craft then
this. In some Countries where they go together in great numbers to assail a
flock of sheep by night, they set one or two of their company in the wind-side
of the fold afar off, who by their sent may cause the dogs and Shepherds to
observe them only, while the others do enter and devour the flock. It may be
possible to raise the cry against one Heresy, that another may have
opportunity to enter, to sent out and hunt away superstition, that while men
are busy against that which is odious, irreligion and profaneness may have
opportunity to get ground. So cunning Soldiers are the Devil and his agents,
to make a false Alarm at the gate where they mean not to enter, that the
other may be left naked. How fitly does this agree with that which St Peter
speaks, There shall be false teachers among you, 2 Pet. 2.1.
who privily shall bring in damnable heresies. And when they are got in, what
harm, what mischief will they work, how will their very breath infect? we
read of a Wolf taken in a snare, which when a man went about to kill with an
hunting spear, the Wolf breathed in his face, Joh. Alsted. Theol. Nature. par.
2. c. 28. p. 527.
and poisoned him so that he presently began to swell, and was hardly preserved
alive. What is this but the contagion which the soul of the hearer receives,
by the doctrine the breath of the seducers mouth? Yea their word will eat as
does a canker. 2 Timothy 2.17.
They will eat out the very heart of Religion; and spread from one to another,
so that an whole Church may be infected and poisoned by the opinions of one
hypocrite among them, and as he says, Vsque malum late solet immedicabile
cancer.
Serpere, and illaesas vitiatis addere parts. Cypr. Ser. de lapsi^.



Hence St Cyprian, alluding to this Text, compares heresy unto the pestilence
and poison; and both he and Gregory Nazianzen, Naz. Orat. de fide. Naz. Orat.
de pace. Niceph. Hist l. 8 c. 18. Niceph l 7 c. 9. Livi. Hist Romans l. 10.
Decad. 4. Plat l. 7. de legibus.
as it is here, to a Canker. Nazianzen also calls the books of Heretics, the
eggs of Aspes. Therefore the Nicaene Council decreed the books of Arrius to
be burnt; as of old the books of Severus the Heretic were forbidden to be
read under a great penalty. Wherein they went no farther then the wisdom of
the very Heathen led them the way, and was thought worthy to be a law by Plato.

The mischief that may be wrought in the Church by one Hypocrite, may
sufficiently appear by one instance out of the Ecclesiastical history. Sozom.
l. 3. c. 1. Socrat. l. 2. c. 2.
Constantia the widow of Licinius sister to the Emperor Constantine the great,
entertained in her house a certain Presbyter, who professed the Orthodox
Religion for fear of Constantine, but was in secret an Arrian. Eusebius of
Nicomedia and other Bishops of the Arrian Sect made use of this man to promote
their cause by his sly dissimulation. At length Constantia dying, when on her
death bed her brother the Emperor came to visit her, she obtained of him to
entertain that Presbyter into his Court. He soon grew into great credit and
favor with Constantine, so that when he dyed he entrusted him with his
last-will, whereby he had an opportunity to make himself gracious with
Constantius the Emperors son and successor, and was not slow to improve the
authority he had with him. He first corrupts one Eusebius an Eunuch the new
Emperors chief Chambelaine, and by his means other Courtiers, and then the
Empress, and at length the Emperor himself, and by degrees brought him to be
a Defender of Arrianisme, and a great persecuter of the truth, which his father
had professed, and which himself had been brought up in. Eusebius. de vita Constable.
l. 4. c. 54.
Nay, it seems by the Panegyrist who wrought Constantines life, that he also
though he fell not from the truth, yet received some blot (...).
in his old age, being too much wrought upon by some lewd Knaves (...).
, as the Historian calls them who counterfelted Religion, who persuaded him that
the controversy with Arrius was but a strife of words, and might be reconciled
and admitted without disturbance of the Churches peace: by which subtilty they
brought him too much to connive at the growing faction, which then had some
footing in his Court.

It may be proved also out of Story; that even the Apostasy of the whole
visible Church came in by the management of those, who either professed or
doted upon monastical hypocrisy. See Apostasy of last times. part. 2. p.
112, 114. Page 116, 117, 120, 122, 146, etc. Vid. Dan. Cha. Panstrat T. 3 l.
16. c. 7.
They were hypocrites, fainers and liars, that obtruded upon the Church those
practices, which the Apostle mentions, 1 Timothy 4.1, 2. as Mr Meade englisheth
the Original with the best congruity of construction, Some shall revolt from
the faith attending to erroneous spirits and doctrines of Demons, through the
hypocrisy of liars, forbidding to marry and commanding to abstain from
meats. Mr Meade will satisfy the Reader concerning the hypocrisy of liars.
1. In lying wonders, lies of miracles; their forgery, illusion,
mis-application. 2. Lying Legends, fabulous legends of Saints and Martyrs. 3.
Their belying of the Ancients; counterfeiting writings under their names: by
all which means the Church came to be abused and much corrupted.

CHAP. III. Other Prognostics of Hypocrisy. The fifth. Hypocrites loose their
comfort. The sixth. Hypocrites loose their courage.
5. Hypocrisy is a prognostic of the loss of comfort. Hypocrites loose
comfort. Job 8.13, 14. Job 20.5.
The hypocrites hope shall perish, his hope shall be cut off, his trust shall
be a Spiders web. Yea the tryumphing of the wicked is short and the joy of
the hypocrite, but for a moment. There can be no feast within, Gislebert, in
vita. S. Bernh.
when a man is conscious to himself of dallying with God. Integrity is that
which furnishes out the sweet banquet and heavenly repast of joy. In a great
festival, when the expectation was not less then the concourse, both very
great. St Bernard having preached an eloquent Sermon, (as that heavenly tongue
was able to speak beyond expectation) while the people admire and applaud, the
Abbot walks sadly with a mind not ordinarily dejected. The next day he preaches
a lively Sermon of profitable truth, plain and without ornament. His good
Auditors went away contented, but curious ones found not what to applaud; but
he walks cheerfully, with a mind more then ordinarily pleasant. The people
wonder that he should be sad when applauded, and when not, merry, but he
returned this answer to some of his friends, Heri Bernardum; hodie Jesum
Christum, Yesterday I preached Bernard, but to day Jesus Christ. He shall have
most comfort that preaches Christ, and so shall he that lives to Christ, when a
Wolsie, Acts and Mon. in life Wols.
whose conscience tells him he served the King his Master better then God, and
more faithfully, shall languish away in discontent. Tom. 1. ep. Luth.
As it was with Tecelius who died sick of a sullen, when a Courtier of the
Popes frowned upon him, poor man he had nothing to hold up his heart, though
Luther to whom he had been a bitter adversary commiserated him, and wrote
comfortably to him. We have many lamentable examples of the horrible despair
into which such men have fallen that walked not according to their light. Jo.
Wolf. Lect. memor. To. 2. ad an. 1547.
Wolfius tells us of one John Hofmeister that fell suddenly sick in his Inn,
as he was traveling toward Auspurge in Germany, and grew to that horror,
that they were feign to bind him in his bed with chains, where he roared out,
That he was for ever cast from before the face of God, and could receive no
comfort by the promises remembered unto him, and all this, Andr Hondor. in Spec.
Histori. ali.
because he had wounded his conscience. We read of the like horrors that
seized upon one Tho. Blaer a great Counselor in Scotland, who as he
confessed, had pretended Religion, but only to gather wealth. But above all
most fearful was the case of Francis Spira, a Story so well known, that I
shall not need to relate. It may be all hypocrites are not thus terrified,
happily some may be cauterized; P. Charron of Wisd. l. 3. c. 10 v 7.
however they cannot have those sweet and heavenly comforts that the sincere
humble soul is refreshed with; but are accompanied with some kind of pain and
disquietnesse all their time for fear of being discovered; There cannot be
pleasure in so much pains as they must be at to counterfeit and live under a
Canopy.

6. Hypocrites loose their courage.
Hypocrisy prognosticates the decay of courage. It is Salomons observation,
The wicked flee when no man pursues, but the righteous are bold as a Lion. How
are the self-guilty startled at a Petition or Articles of Accusation, how do
they fear the tribunal of a Judge! How do they tremble at the very
apprehension of a Parliament-barre? The innocent dare appear in any presence,
and dare stand to, and maintain all their actions; yea Job did dare to appear
before God himself in the matters that he stood accused of. Job 31.35, 36.
Behold my desire is that the Almighty would answer me, and that mine adversary
had written a book, surely I would take it upon my shoulder (it should be no
great burden to me, nor would I go about to hide it under mine arm) I would
bind it as a crown to me; (I would wear their accusations upon my forehead
without shame) I would declare unto God the number of my steps; (I would not
conceal any thing, but even prevent their accusation by ripping up my whole
life) as a Prince would I go near unto God (with an undaunted courage, not
trembling as Delinquent.) But as the Prophet speaks, The sinners in Sion are
afraid, fearefullnesse surprizeth the hypocrites. Isai. 33.14.
Let us view the upright and the hypocrite in parallel, and see the difference
of their spirits. The righteous how are they bold as Lions? Illyr. Catal. Tes.
verit. l. 19. Not. Dress. in Millenar. 6. Hennirgus Augustinian. inporta Culi.
One Andreas Proles a godly aged Divine somewhat before Luthers time, taught
many points soundly, according to his light then. He was called to a Synod held
at Millain and after in the Lateran, where opposing a Proposition of the Pope
about burdening the Church with a new holy day; he was brought into much
danger, and escaping from Rome very narrowly, he bought him Bow and Weapons.
But as he was riding he began to bethink himself, that the cause was not his,
but Gods, and not to be maintained with Sword and Bow, and if it were, yet what
should such a decrepit old man do with weapons. Hereupon he threw away his
weapons, committed himself, his cause and his journey to God; and soon after
died peaceably in his bed. Abrah. Musc. in narrat. de v^ta patris.
This bravenesse of spirit appeared also in Wolfgangus Musculus, he had many
enemies, because of his forsaking of Popery. But his resolution was discovered
by an accident rather pleasant then dangerous. There was a Nobleman one
Reinard a Rotenburg that much loved him, and was very tender of his safety, who
knowing that he was gone abroad (as his use was) into a village to preach, he
disguising himself, because he would not be known, and taking many of his
horsemen with him, came rushing in at the Church door, and in a threatening
manner bids him come out of the Pulpit. Musculus thinking they had been the
servants of a Popish Bishop, who was his violent persecutour, desired he might
have leave to finish his Sermon, and then he would go whithersoever they would
carry him; and so he went on so readily that he showed no sign of fear, but
in conclusion he exhorted them to constancy in the faith, and with all to
help him by their prayers, who was now (as he thought) in the enemies mouth.
When Sermon was done, the Nobleman discovers himself, takes him in his arms,
admires his courage, tells him he did it to try his spirit, and withal to warn
him how easily he might be endangered. See here the courage that grew out of
sincerity. But on the other side, how do the wicked fear where no fear is. 1 Samuel 18.14.
Saul that dissembled with David, how causlesly does he tremble; when he saw
that David behaved himself wisely, he was afraid of him. But he had no reason
for it, but his own selfe-accusing heart. Tecelius that I mentioned but even
now, as he lost his comfort, so his courage too; when the Popish party saw that
the preaching of Merit and carrying abroad Indulgences had raised such a tumult
that they were not able to quiet again, it seemed fit to the Court of Rave
somewhat to decline the odium of the business, and lay it upon others. Charles
Miltitius a Knight an officer in the Popes Court is sent into Germany, where he
calls Tecelius the Pardoner before him, takes up the poor Friar roundly, rates
him as the anthour of the whole Tragedy, lays all the blame of the mischief
upon his back, and so broke the heart of the poor man that he had not the
courage to defend himself, and reply (as he might have done) that all he did
was by special Commission from the Pope, but his heart failed him, he sunk
under the burden and pined away miserably, Sir Tho. More in life of K. Edw. 5.
till he dyed; as Doctor Shaw also did after his glozing Sermon to claw
Richard the Usurper, as we read in our own Chronicles. Thus the Hypocrite
has nothing left to sustain him, when his legs grow faint; nothing to cover
him, when the Cloud breaks upon him. Yea before any actual trouble, he makes
fears to himself, and trembles at every motion: Like that Gentleman that the
Lord Montaigu and his Brother met with in their Travels, Montaigu. Essays, l.
2. c. 5.
who being of a contrary Faction, but dissembling it, and putting a good face
upon the matter all the way that he rode with them, was yet notwithstanding
all his counterfeiting discovered unto them by his often trembling. Whereas the
sincere may march ever with his head aloft, with face and heart open, Mont. l.
3. c. 1.
as he speaks.

CHAP. IV. Another Prognosticke. The seventh. The first part of it. The
Hypocrite hated of men, bad and good.
7. Hypocrites hated of evil men.
Hypocrisy is a prognosticke of hatred both from God and man. It is odious to
both.

1. Hypocrisy is odious unto other men. 1. Even to Heathen men, wicked men,
yea to hypocrites themselves. Non tu desines virtutis stragula pudefacere.
When the Cynick Philosopher saw one that he knew to be a coward wear a Lions
skin, he cried out against him, as if he had dishonored virtue it self by
presuming to wear her livery. Reason will teach a man thus much without any
farther light. Plut. Parall. in vita Solon. To 1. mihi, p. 134 D.
Solon was a mere Ethnicke, but what a detestation does he express against
dissimulation, for when Thespis the Tragedian first brought into Athens the use
of Stage Plays, and acted some dissimulations, Solon calls him, and asks if he
were not ashamed to bring forth such stuff before the people; when Thespis
answered such things might be spoken and done in play: The old man striking his
staff angrily upon the ground, But shortly, said he, those lies which we laugh
at in play will be brought into use in our contracts and serious affairs. But
most remarkably does this appear in that famous and well known instance of
Constantius father to the great Constantine, who being no Christian himself,
yet accounted those most odious that were not sound Christians. The Story is
related both by Eusebius and Sozomen, Eusebius, de vita Constable. l. 1. c. 11, Sozom.
Hist. l. 1. c. 6. (...).
one of them calls it an incredible and very admirable fact. He made this trial
of his Courtiers, that such Christians among them that would sacrifice to his
idols, should continue with him and enjoy their honors and offices, otherwise
they should be banished his presence and the Court. Some resolved to forsake
all, and to loose their places; but many complied with the conditions he
propounded, and preferred their offices before their Christianity. But then he
discovering himself, commended the sincere, though in profession differing
from himself; but the others, the base hypocrites who had deserted their faith
for him, he deserts them, and banishes them the Court, telling them they would
not be true to him that had been false with God. Tit Live. l. 1. Dec. 5.
The Reader may find in the Roman History to this purpose, how much the Senate
condemned the dealing of one of their own order, who gave them an account at
his return, how he had entertained Perseus of Macedon under pretext of peace,
and had fed him with fair words. I might be plentiful in other examples, that
the light of nature has dictated to the souls of Infidels to hate all manner
of deceit. I might add also some instances of this loathsomenesse of
hypocrisy in the eyes of the very enemies of the truth; Melch. Adam in vita
Bulling. p. 498.
I will content my self with one, of the Cardinal of Lorraine a bitter enemy
to Geneva and the Reformed Churches, who yet when that hypocrite Bernard Ochin
us meeting him, began basely to insinuate into him, and to offer his service to
write against the Reformed Churches, he slighted him and gave him cold
entertainment.

2. Hypocrites haced of good men. Psalm. 101.6, 7.
If hypocrisy be thus odious even to evil men, no wonder that it appears
loathsome to such as are good and godly. David professes he could not endure
an hypocrite in his sight, or to be in his house. Mine eyes (says he) shall be
upon the faith full in the land, that they may dwell with me, he that walks
perfect in the way he shall serve me: He that works deceit shall not dwell
within my house, he that tells lies shall not tarry in my sight. David would
not suffer hypocrites to come into his house, The Apostles it seems would not
come into an hypocrites house, if they knew or suspected him to be such. Me
thinks we may gather it from that speech of Lydia the Shopkeeper, Act. 16.15.
but an excellent woman, she besought the Apostles, saying, If ye have judged
me to be faithful to the Lord, come into my house and abide there. She
constrained them; but it was surely because they judged her faithful, else
they would not have been her guests; for what the Apostolical spirit was
appears plainly enough in the cases of Ananias and Saphira, Act. 5. Act. 8.
and of Simon Magus. We shall see the same spirit of indignation against the
unsound in other godly men. I will produce testimony out of the ancient and
modern story. In the ancient Church we read, Socrat. Hist. l. 4. c. 29.
that a people of the Saracens being newly converted to Christianity, Mavia
their Queen desired one Moses, a man of an Heremiticall life, but of
remarkable holiness to be Bishop of them. He being brought out of the Desert,
but very unwillingly to Alexandria to be ordained, he would not suffer Lucius
the Bishop there so much as to lay his hands upon him, and said openly, I am
unworthy of this office, but if I be forced to take it I will not endure Bishop
Lucius to confer Orders upon me. Lucius being much moved told him, that he
being but a new convert ought of him to be instructed in the right faith. But
Moses answered him roundly, 'twas true he professed himself a Christian Bishop,
but showed himself no Christian by his persecuting and banishing the Orthodox;
and that he talked of faith, (...). Socrat. Sozom. l. 6. c. 38.
but for his part he would have faith that might be seen rather then heard.
Sozomen relates his words somewhat larger. As for these latter times, in which
I suppose there have been many experiments of that same zeal and indignation
against the unsound; among others Calvin is a pertinent example, in regard of
his sharp sightednesse and resolute opposing of a notable hypocrite, a kind of
wandering fellow that came to Geneva, where he pretended much sanctity of life,
and was cried up by many as a great holy man, as we find the passage in Beza's
relation of his life.

CHAP. V. The seventh prognostic. The other part of it. Hypocrites very odious
to God.
2. WE have seen how odious hypocrisy is unto men, Hypocrites hated of God.
it is more odious and hateful unto God. Though he bear much with them that
are sincere, as the husband does with the frowardness and peevish humors of
his wife whom he knows to be chaste and faithful to him, yet he will not endure
the fly and flattering insinuations of a false and an adulterous wanton.
Sincerity hides many imperfections, it is the girdle of truth, Ephesians. 6.14.
which like the Soldiers broad and studded belt covers all the chinks and
unseemly joyntings in the armor: but God sees all that is unsightly in the
hypocrite, he has no girdle, no belt to cover them. Psalm 119.1^
The sincere is perfect, as the troops of Zebulon that came to David are
described to be, being not of an heart and an heart; but the hypocrite is an
imperfect creature, and how then can the perfect God but abhor him? Yea how
can he but abhor him, who is so directly contrary to his nature: Hab. 1.13.
Mat. 5 8. Psalm. 73.1.
for, God is pure; he blesses the pure; he is good unto the pure; but the
hypocrite is adulterate and mixed, wickedness is woven into the texture of his
heart, his scumme is sodden into him and thoroughly mingled. Ezekiel. 24.12. Mat.
6.22.
God is single, and delights in a single eye; but the hypocrite has a double
eye and a doubld heart. God is perfect; but hypocrites are like fair Apples
rotten at the core, like cups without a bottom, like the people in the Prophet,
who turned not to God with their whole heart. Ier. 3.10.
There is no likeness between God and such men; a straight and crooked measure
will never meet and join in all the parts. They are vile persons, such as Gods
soul will hate. Isa 32.6.
The Prophet Esaias calls them so, The vile person will speak villainy, and his
heart will work iniquity to practice hypocrisy? Ier 23.11. Sept. (...),
Polluti sunt. (...) Ier. 23 15. (...). Nubes, (...), Nebulosus, hinc Nebuto
Hebr. Canaph, velatua est, nubilus est. Hence some derive our english, A Knave.
Isa. 57.3. Mat. 12 39. Putrida tabes hypocrisis. Bern. I. Abern, Physic for
soul, c. 12. Prove. 10.20. Aelian. l. 1. c. 37.
and in the Prophet Jeremie they are called profane; In my house have I found
their wickedness, both Prophet and Priest are profane, or polluted, as the
Septuagint turn it. From the Prophets of Jerusalem is profaneness gone forth
in all the Land: in the Margin there it is, Hypocrisy; in the Septuagint,
Pollution. So then, the hypocrite is profane and polluted, a black cloudy
fellow. Both the holy tongues express this. In another place of the Prophet
Esaias they are termed, The sons of the sorcerer, the seed of the adulterer and
the whore. To which our Savior seems to allude, when he calls them an
adulterous generation. They are foul diseased persons; one calls hypocrisy a
rotten impostume. And Abernethy who gives several titles to other sins, as
pestilent self-love, the Tympany of pride, the Gangrene of haeresie, he
disgraceth this by terming it, putrid hypocrisy. He is a thing of nothing, of
little worth, according to that of Solomon, The tongue of the just is as choice
silver, the heart of the wicked is little worth. There is a choycenesse and
excellency in the righteous, but these are worthless; perhaps their houses
and lands and rents may be of good worth, but they themselves are of none at
all, like Foxes whose skins are better then their flesh. And if they have any
good gifts or parts, hypocrisy blemisheth all in them, and takes away the
luster of them. There are some men like the Lampreis, a fish of most delicious
taste, and highly esteemed among the Ancients, but it has a sting of poison
running quite through them. They have excellent parts, but this sting of
hypocrisy marrs all and makes them dangerous. It embaseth metals, and turns
gold into lead. If a man be a Magistrate, a Preacher, a sufferer; if he be
active, if he be eloquent, if he be courageous, yet hypocrisy marrs the beauty
of all. The Priest at the high-Altar in his most solemn ministration, if he be
an hypocrite, is less glorious, then the poor dore-keeper at the porch in the
meanest office if he be sound. I called Lydia a Shopkeeper once, but she was
glorious in the mean way of Shop-keeping, and Judas inglorious in the high
office of Apostleship. God takes pleasure in nothing that the hypocrite does,
but he helps the very infirmities of the sincere. It Is sweetly expressed by Mr
Herbert, Mr. Herberts Sacred Poems. p. 163.


My joy, my life, my crown!
My heart was meaning all the day,
Somewhat it feign would say:
And still it runs muttering up and down,
With only this, My joy, my life, my crown.
Yet slight not these few words:
If truly said they may take part
Among the best in art.
The finenesse which a Hymn or Psalm affords,
Is, when the soul unto the lives accords.
He who craves all the mind,
And all the soul, and strength, and time,
If the words only rhyme,
Justly complains that somewhat is behind,
To make his verse, or write an Hymn in kind.
Whereas if the heart be moved
Although the verse be somewhat scant
God does supply the want,
As when the heart says (sighing to be approved)
O, could I love! and stops; God writes, loved.
The Compositions of hypocrites are harsh in Gods ear, they cannot make a
smooth verse; they cannot make an acceptable prayer. He is taken with the
humble and broken oratory of his servants. Oh my dove (says he) let me see thy
countenance, Cant. 2.14.
let me hear thy voice, for sweet is thy voice, and thy countenance is comely.
But an affected dove-like mourning voice, he likes not; a counterfeit face of
sorrow and devotion he will not endure to look upon. A painted Jezabel, of the
two is better then a painted Pharisee. Homil. 6. in Math.
It is St Chrysostoms observation, That she that paints tears and blubbering,
is worse then a wanton woman that paintes to seem fair. Joh. 9.31. Iam 4.8.
Job 13.16. Job 27.3.
He hears not these sinners; he will not draw nigh to these foul handed,
corrupt hearted, double minded sinners; An hypocrite shall not come before him;
God will not hear his cry when trouble comes upon him.

I do but point at things that might be enlarged, I know not which way to
bring in all the testimonies of Gods hatred of hypocrites. They during that
condition are out of the proclamation of pardon. We have heard it often, how it
runs; Blessed is he whose transgression is forgiven, Isal. 32.1, 2.
whose sin is covered; Blessed is the man to whom the Lord imputes not
iniquity, and in whose spirit there is no guile. He then in whose spirit guile
is found, partakes not of this blessedness, has nothing to do with this
pardon. They can have no hope; Job 27.8. Ier. 7.4.
They trust but in lying words; They shall have no reward; for they have all
here. Verily I say unto you, they have their reward, Mat. 6.16.
says Christ concerning hypocrites. Receperunt: They have received, they are
to look for no more. And what can be an extreamer misery then this? Recipere
mercedem hic, paena est.
It was that cold comfort which was sent to Dives, Remember that thou in thy
life time receivedst thy good things. There Is Recepisti too, still in the
Preter-tense, Thou have already received, there is no more due, thou art cut off
from further claim. The praise and applause and popular estimation which they
may happily have, is the poor sorry trifle that is given them, like a
little-legacie to an ungracious son, to cut them off from any further title
to share in the inheritance of the children. They have their habitation on this
side the river, but no portion beyond Jordan in the Land of promise. Blow not
the trumpet, says Christ, as hypocrites do when they give alms, that they
may have glory of men. Verily they have their reward. Love not to pray, as the
hypocrites, that they may be seen of men, verily they have their reward. Be not
of a sad countenance, as hypocrites, that they may appear unto men to fast;
verily they have their reward. A poor reward, a poor happiness; yet
sometimes they miss of that too, Joh. V^saeus in Chronic. Hispan.
as that vainglorious and hypocritical Spanish Bishop of whom we read, who
endeavored to procure a great esteem of holiness unto himself by lying
wonders, when because of his fame the King desired to see some miracle, he
hired a poor man to feign himself blind; but when the Bishop came in a solemn
manner to lay his hand upon the poor man's eyes, and uttered those words in
imitation of Christ, According to thy faith be it unto thee: By the just and
remarkable judgment of God, the poor man that saw well before, in that
instant lost his sight with great pain; and revealed the compact to the great
shame and confusion of that glorious hypocrite. Socrat. Hist. l. 1. c. 37.
Theodor. l. 1. c. 14. Lev. 11.18. See, Job. 13.16.15.34. Luke 16.15.
The public shame that God brought upon Arrius is an history so well known
that I need not relate it. God so hates hypocrisy, that some think he forbad
the use of some creatures to the Jews, as being Emblemes of hypocrisy, as the
Swan which has black flesh under white feathers; the Ostrich, which has large
wings but makes no flight. But we need not rest upon such dark significations
of his hatred, when the Scriptures are so full and clear. Every one which
seperateth himself from me, Ezekiel. 14.7, 8.
and sets up his idols in his heart, and comes to a Prophet to enquire of
him concerning me, I the Lord will answer him by my self. He shall understand
well enough that I discover him and how I stand affected to him. And I will set
my face against that man, and will make him a sign and a proverb, and I will
cut him from the midst of my people, and ye shall know that I am the Lord;
(that I cannot be blinded, and will not be dallied with.) And as the Lord will
not endure them in his Kingdom here, in the glory of his Church, in that happy
time when Satan shall be bound up. Mr. Archer of Christ's Reign, p. 28.
So much less in Heaven; but will cast them out into the extremest and
bitterest torments. Which that they do deserve, the light of nature did
apprehend, Plutar. De his qui sero puniuntur, mihi, p. 203.
as appears by Plutarch an Ethnic, who brings in Thespesius relating what he
saw in Hell, That hypocrites are worse punished there then such as lived openly
wicked. And our Savior seems to intimate so much, That the evil servant shall
have his portion with hypocrites; Mat. 24, 51.
that is the extremest and sorest punishment. I might add the consideration
of those words threatened by Christ against hypocrites, eight times repeated in
one chapter: Mat. 23.
but enough has been said how hateful they are; and shall suffice to have
been said concerning the prognostics.

CHAP. VI. The Causes of Hypocrisy. The first Cause. Entertainment of Religion
upon slight grounds. The second. Hypocrites know not, nor believe in God. The
third. Hypocrites want resolution.
I Hasten to the most needful business, Hypocrites enter Religion fleightly.
to the cure of this general and dangerous disease, which will more easily be
made, after we have sought into the causes, which is the next head of discourse
I propounded.

1. One cause of Hypocrisy in some is, that they took up a course of
profession of Religion upon slight grounds, never being foundly converted.
They are cloth not well wrought in the loome, and therefore shrink, and
neither wear well nor long. They began unsoundly in Religion; their hearts
being never thoroughly broken and humbled. That man who is brought to a full
sight of his sins, and sense of his state, and to see that he needs Christ or
else must perish without him, and is set up by Christ, and has received grace
from him; he it is that will live unto him. The broken hearted penitent comes
to be the most faithful and obsequious servant. Such a one knows what he owes
to Christ, how much he is beholding to him, 2 King. 18.6.
and counts him a good Master with whom he will stay for ever, he will cleave
to the Lord, and not depart from following him, as it was said of Hezekiah. But
for hypocrites, Job 17.9.
they never gave themselves fully up to God: they never thoroughly washed their
hearts and hands, and therefore they hold not on their way; but whereas he that
has clean hands waxes stronger and stronger, these do more and more decay.
Many of these have unripe resolutions, they set on too forwardly, before they
are trained up and acquainted with the ways of God. Senec. Ep. 20.
Grace is among those rare things that last long, but ripen leisurely. Such as
will be in the Accidence before they are out of the Primmar, never read well.
Hypocrites were not well principled, the foundation was not well and surely
laid, the truth had not rooting in them. Truly this is a great mischief and
misery, we observe it in many, that take up Religion for ends, or by example,
or through imitation, or upon some sudden acquaintance with some notions that
for the present win upon men's good likings, like some people that will be
presently acquainted and familiar and become sworn brothers; but it is a frothy
amity, begun it may be in one Tavern and will end in the next. Many there are
that being well and religiously educated, civilized and more then so,
habituated to the practices of Religion, mistake themselves at first it may be,
and think it is out of choice and love that they take that way which their
fathers went, and themselves went with them in their hand, when it is indeed but
custom and use. Others when they first set out meet with good neighbors,
acquaintance and friends, who carry them along with them, and so they become
religious for company; now it is easy for all these to prove hypocrites, being
so unsound in their first undertakings and the grounds of it. This is I suppose
the most ordinary cause. Others there are that are set by their Parents to the
trade of profession, as some children are put out to trades that they have no
mind or inclination unto; who are in a manner forced to follow those trades,
because they have no skill in any others, but they prove but bunglers and
seldom thrive in them; so it is with such as are religiously brought up, but
their hearts are not seasoned with it, they prove hypocrites, they keep up that
profession, but are but bunglers in it, and grow not rich in grace; yet they
must make as fair a show as they can, lest if they break, or but give
occasion to have their states suspected, they lose their reputation.

There are others I believe that are more wicked, that begin to set up in
religion out of worse respects, that have skill enough to turn themselves to
many trades, but find this to be most for their advantage, to bring them
custom, to beget reputation, to bind some good friends unto them, and so become
religious for ends. But all these sorts are alike in this, that they are reeds
growing in sands, and are not solid as oaks, but filled with a light pith,
whence it is that they can neither be lasting nor strong. And all of them are
like that young man we read of, that was hasty it seems to follow Christ, he
had a linen cloth cast about his naked body, it seems he took not time to
dress himself. Mar. 14.51, 52.
And the men laid hold on him, and he left the linen cloth, and when Christ
was apprehended and in trouble, he fled away naked. These men that stay not,
nor regard to be thoroughly dressed, but put on the loose garment of Religion,
no marvel they discover themselves hypocrites, and flip it off again if
occasion serve, that they may escape danger, which they will not engage
themselves in.

2. A second cause of hypocrisy is, because men know not God, and they want
faith. Icr. 9.3, 4, 5, 6.
In the Prophet Jeremie we find this very cause, why men are not valiant for
the truth upon the earth, They know now not me; says the Lord; and thence it
is also that they supplant their brethren and walk with their neighbors with
slanders, Psalm. 9.10.
and teach their toungs to speak lies; Through deceit they refuse to know me,
says the Lord. If men knew Gods Name, they would put their trust in him, and
observe him, and live to him. It Is because that this faith or trust in God is
not rightly planted in their hearts, that men are so uneven in their courses,
and betake themselves so much to their base and unworthy shifts and complyings
with others. Zeph. 3 12, 13.
They that trust in the Name of the Lord will not do iniquity or speak lies,
nor shall a deceitful tongue be found in their mouths, for they shall feed
and lie down and none shall make them afraid, as it is in the Prophet
Zephanie. This trusting we see cures those things that put men to their shifts,
they would feed and be at ease and be secure, and that it may be so they are
for any way or course to advantage those ends, and therefore will flatter,
comply and be any thing with any side: but trust makes them constant unto God
from whom they are assured of maintenance and safety. But the most of men have
not this trust in God, as does appear when it comes to the trial. They
believe generalities, that God Is, and that he is a rewarder of them that seek
him, and that it is better to obey God then man; yet they fail in the
particulars, because their assent unto these is weak. They assent unto these
propositions as being true and good, while they are considered abstractly and
in the absence of other good or tentations to the contrary; but their assent is
not well rooted to hold them firmly unto them, when they see hopes of more
advantage in another course, and more profit in another service. Hence it is
that contrary affections of Fear, Hope, Love, and the like, get head against
this assent, and make a Major-part against it; and so that trust or assent like
a weak King may exhort, but cannot command in them. There is some other
powerful Star in the Court, which wants nothing but the Title of a King,
whose Aspect they regard, and so decline the Regal Commands. Somewhat else
persuades them or awes them, and makes their hearts melt, Josh. 14.8. Ephesians.
4.14. (...).
and it is only the believing Caleb that wholly follows the Lord, when others
are tossed to and fro, like small Barks without the ballast of faith, and
carried about with every wind, like light strawes and leaves, which are soon
removed from their resolutions and yield to every blast; they are not tied unto
the Earth with the spreading roots, nor fastened with the Cables and Anchors of
the precious and assured Promises concerning them that obey faithfully, and of
the terrible and most certain threatenings against those that go aside. It is
this evil heart of Unbelief that makes men depart from the living God. Heb.
3.12.


3. A third cause of Hypocrisy much agreeing with the former, Hypocrites
unresolved.
is, that men undertake a profession before they are truly resolved for it.
These men are tied of a sliding knot that soon unfastens. They are as Cicero
not thoroughly satisfied in themselves, whom it were better and safer to
follow, Pompey or Caesar. They see not Gods all-sufficiencie, Quem sequar
nescio.
nor are convinced that it is best wisdom to cast themselves only upon him.
They think it were good to have two strings to their Bow. We see faith works a
resolution in St Paul; When it pleased God to reveal his Son in me, Gal. 1.15,
16. (...). Heins vertit, non provocari ad c^rnem and sanguinem. Prove. 11.14.
that I might preach him among the Heathen, immediately I conferred not with
flesh and blood; that is, presently I went about it, to preach without advising
with carnal counsel, whether it were safe or unsafe. I obeyed the warrant and
trusted him that gave it me. But now a days men will be wiser then St Paul,
and think in this sense that of Solomon is true, In the multitude of
Councillors there is safety. But this overmuch wisdom of theirs makes them
hypocrites. It seems by P. Martyrs letter to Calvin that Molinaeus the Lawyer
was such an one; P. Martyr knew not what to make of him, nay it seems he knew
not how to dispose of himself, a man of good parts, P. Martyr, ep. 19. ad Calv.
and that vvrote well against the Papist, and yet not a thorough Protestant.
There is a fable that Inconstancy would needs have her picture drawn; but
none would undertake it, because her shape and face altered so often. But at
length Time took a Pensill in hand, and because he had no other table to do
it upon, he primed her picture upon man. It Is true that all men have too much
of her resemblance, but such men as these have her very face to the life; They
will be religious, and they will not be religious, we know not what they will
be.

This comes to pass sometimes also, because of those engagements that men have
to others besides God. It may be they have had some Convictions, and after them
some refreshments through the promises of life, and these make them think of
enclining to God, and they have apprehension that his is a good service; but
withal it is no wisdom to slight beneficial friends, acquaintances that are
able to do them good or harm; and thus they become like a piece of iron
between two equal load-stones. God draws, and terrors partly, and partly the
promises moove them toward God, and particular interests and considerable
respects; but then withal the world draws likewise, and they have propensions
thitherward too, and thus being of divided soul, Jam. 1.5.
double-minded men as St James calls them, no wonder they be, and prove to be
hypocrites.

CHAP. VII. Other causes of Hypocrisy. The fourth. Hypocrites have not a right
fear. The fifth. Hypocrites are of a base spirit.
4. Hypocrites have not a right fear.
A Fourth cause of hypocrisy is the want of Gods fear, and the too much fear
of men. David says of the wicked man, that the words of his mouth are iniquity
and deceit, and he had given the reason before, There is no fear of God before
his eyes. St Paul alleges something out of this Psalm, Psalm. 36.1, 3.
Their throat is an open sepulcher, with their tongues they have used deceit;
their speech which is made by the help of the throat tends unto the ruin Romans
3.13.
of others; The poison of Aspes is under their lips; Inbiare aliorum exitio.
Ptyas. (...).
they sharp their tongues and spet forth poison, like the Aspes which are
small, and blind Serpents which yet do spet forth poison a far off, and have
their name from thence, as some think. And he assigns the same reason that
David does, There is no fear of God before their eyes. It is by the fear of
the Lord that men depart from evil: Prove. 16.6. Genesis 39.9.
Joseph would not sin in secret with his Mistress, though the doors were
shut and none were in the house, because he feared God. They that do not so,
will make bold with hidden and safe sins, as is intimated by that law of God,
Thou shall not curse the deaf, Levit. 19.14.
nor put a stumbling block before the blind, but shall fear thy God, I am the
Lord: that is, I hear though the deaf cannot, though the blind cannot, yet I
see. The not considering of this, brought that profane speech into use and
request, Caute si non cast, a rule more carefully learned and duly observed
among the hypocritical Monkish fraternities, then any rule of their order.

I add to this the too much fear of men. Worldly fear prevails with many
for shows, as much as worldly ambitions. Ecclus. 2.12, 13 P, Charron. of Wisd.
l. 3. c. 10. n. 6.
It is the observation of the wise author of the book of Ecclesiasticus, Woe
be to fearful hearts and faint hands, and the sinner that goes two Ways; Woe
unto him that is faint hearted. And a great admirer of wisdom has seconded
the same observation, That it is a cowardly and servile humor that makes men
disguise under a mask. Such an one was Menophantes Bishop of Ephesus, who in
the Nicene Council began to defend Arrianisme, Athan. 2. Apol.
but being terrified by the joint consent of the Orthodox, he also subscribed
the Decree against Arrius, though against his mind, as it afterward appeared.
Upon such experiments as these, he spoke yet more confidently, who said, Tho.
Campanel. Athe^s. Triumph. c. 1. n. 3.
It is impossible that a coward should be an honest man or a true friend. And
for my part I think he spoke true, for present some terror to such a man, and
he will relinquish his friend and honesty to save his skin. And that Religion
which he takes up upon fear, not examining the arguments adversant to the
faith he professes, because of the awe he stands in to the Sword and tribunal,
to the inquisition and penalty of Laws; he will lay down again upon the like
motives, without entertaining the weighty reasons that might be for his
continuance in it. Great fortitude is requisite for the attaining of honesty.
They are of no worth nor sincere, who dislike the matter, and yet subscribe the
petition, rather then displease.

5. Baseness of spirit in hypocrites. Pro. 2^.23, 24. Prove 27.6. 2 Samuel 15.6,
12.
It is somewhat like to this, which I will add as a fifth cause, and that is,
Baseness of spirit or flattery. These potsheards covered with silver dross,
will dissemble with their lips, and lay up deceit within them. Their kisses of
compliance are deceitful. Yet often times these Absoloms steal away the
hearts of them that go in their uprightness or simplicity. I knew an ancient
Gentlewoman of so right and sound intentions her self, that was often beguiled
this way by her children, who after their exorbitances and extreme riots, had
learned to pretend remorse and tears, which she would call repentance and
conversion, after one, two, three, it may be twenty times finding they did but
insinuate with her, that they might eat her bread. How successefully then may
such a trade be followed by such an one that was never known to break; he may
hold on with credit a long time among the godly and charitable minded. Mar.
14.45.
Had not Judas carried it handsomely, that in the last Act he could be
confident he was not yet discovered to be false. It seems to me by that
passage, of his running hastily to Christ, and his vehement expression, Master,
Master, and his kissing of him; that it had been his custom to keep more ado
about Christ, and express more glavering observancie of him then the rest. I
knew a fellow that had some occasions frequently to resort to the family of a
reverend Divine, where because of his ordinary repairing he was admitted many
times to prayers, and to partake in the private exercise of that Family about
the Exposition of Scripture; who would when all was done, come as he might, and
kiss the Bible and a little Cushion, that the good man used to rest upon, and
be ready to be so officious as to have licked up the dust under the feet of
some godly in that house; who yet was discovered this while to keep a queen,
and soon after discovered himself by his open lewdness. Dixit Anaxegoras
atram esse nivem, Haec^aetas mul tos vidit Anaxagoras. Ezcit ^3.10. Ier. 6.14.
These base spirits will be any thing with any people, and for that cause will
be religious with the religious. Some are so gross, men may see their meaning
without spectacles. Some spi^ finer, write in smaller hand. Ezekiel speaks of
an Art of dawbing, and Jeremy of an art of skinning. I know nothing nearer of
blood to hypocrisy then flattery. The trencher flatterer, what will he not
speak or practice, that he may be fed. The Psalmist calls them hypocritical
mockers in feasts. Rehum the Chancellor and Shimshai the Secretary, are not
ashamed that they were tied by their teeth to Artaxerxes, because of his table,
Ezra 4.14.
Because we have maintenance from the Kings palace, or as it is in the
Chalde, because we are salted with the salt of the palace, therefore have we
sent and certified the King. And are there not some that will deliver new and
nice doctrines, and so become Preachers to a Sect or a party for the same
cause? The Apostle plainly speaks of such, and that they serve not our Lord
Jesus Christ, Romans 16.17, 18
but their own belly, and by good words and fair speeches deceive the hearts
of the simple. The Councell-table flatterer, what will he not allow of or
consent unto, when the Kings disposition is his Pole-starre? When King Hen. the
8th cast off the tyrannous authority of the Pope, who more forward then many of
his Nobles, that I speak not of Stephen Gardener and some other Bishops, who
yet as the saying is, had every one a Pope in his belly. Right Memucans that
will be sure to find good reason for the Kings will. Est. 1.26. Mat. 22.16, 17,
18.
The Case of Conscience-flatterers (as I may call them) how they will
insinuate, we may read in the example of the Herodians and others that came to
Christ. Act. 23.4. Act 24.1, 2. Laudavit niveas corvi vulpecula penna^. Io.
Geminian de exemplis. l. 5. c. 43. and 72.
The Consistorie-Court-flatterer will be sure to be of the same mind with the
prime Lords of the Commission, as we see in St Paul's trial. And we may join
Tertullus the Barre-flatterer with them. I might instance other particulars.
they are all alike, they answer not their seemings, but most commonly like some
druggs, hot in the mouth, but cold in operations. These base men are compared
by some Friars, that were at leisure to examine the resemblances, to
Crocodiles, Panthers, Cankerwormes, Butter-flies; to field-mice, Foxes and the
like; which I think not worth my time now to declare.

CHAP. VIII. The sixth cause of Hypocrisy. Hypocrites are indulgent to their
corrupt affections. Envy. Popularitie. Ambition. Love of riches.
6. Hypocrites indulgent to lust.
THe maine cause of Hypocrisy, is Indulgence to corrupt affections. This is
the common root both of Hypocrisy and Atheism. In the general, the carriage
of Johanan and his confederates, related in the 42. Chapter of Jeremy, to the
7th verse of the 43. Chapter, is an example of this observation. When men have
not learned to deny themselves, they make Self the supreme Law, to which the
very will of God must yield, and for the maintenance of which they will shuffle
any way. Such men as have not made over all their interests in life or
whatsoever else is dearest unto them unto God, there will be no holding of them
to any resolution, Necesse est honestum fit ei vile, cui cerpus charum est.
Senec. Envy makes Hypocrites.
but they will break with any profession or vow, for the advantage or safety
of those interests; and thus Self being dear unto them, honesty will be
cheap, and they will part with it easily. I descend to particulars.

1. Envy makes hypocrites. We see it in the Preachers at Philippi whom Envy
thrust into the Pulpit. This made Licinius partner in the Empire with
Constantine, to dissemble with him in matter of Religion, and granting liberty
to the exercise of Christian Religion: He saw that all men's mouths were full
of graciousnesse and lenity of Constantine. To me it seems that it was Envy
which brought him on, as it was Envy which took him off again, which he was
not so wise as to conceal, for when he recalled some Edicts for liberty, he
gave this reason, Because the Christians prayed for Constantine not for him,
Eusebius. l. 8. c. 23. l. 10. c. 8, 14.
or more then for him.

But this Envy appears in none more then in Orators and Writers. We have many
that in pleadings and Sermons and writing of Books, aim not at the search of
truth, but to contradict the opinion that has gotten the start of fame. Alex.
ab Alex. Ge. l. 1. c. 23.
Such was he that Alexander Neopolitanus speaks of, who was wasted and pined
in himself at the Lectures of Francis Philelphus, and therefore took a small,
a no-occasion to contend with him. Some cannot endure that what is spoken or
writ should come off fairly and with clear allowance. Hence some study the
Art of making eminent men to clash with one another; a conjuring Art, to raise
up the spirits (as we may say) of the dead against the fame of the living, or
to blurr the reputation of such as died with fame; which practice Philip Pareus
observes to have been used by some, who to blemish his father published some
posthume Epistles of Joseph Scaliger. In this, like that paltry fellow that
Pausanias speaks of, Narrat. Hist. de vita. D. Parei p. ult.
who being never able to get the Mastery in his life time of one Theagenes a
famous wrastler, came many a night after he was dead and scourged his Statue
which was erected in honor of him. It is out of the same corrupt envious
disposition, that others who would be held great reverencers of the Ancients,
do yet find somewhat to say against that which is spoken by men of their
times, though it be the same matter and in the same words. It was an handsome
policy in that Preacher, who being to speak (I think it was) against wanton
dances, only englished St Chrysostom to the Auditory. Another Preacher objects
against the Sermon, as savouring of Puritanisme, and new invented preciseness
and rigidnesse, contrary to that latitude of liberty, which Christ had left
unto us. But had no more to say, when St Chrysostomes Homily was showed unto
him, Esse quid hoc dicam vivis quod sama negatur,

Et sua quod rarus tempora lector amat. Hi sunt Invidiae nimirum (Regule) mores
Praeferat antiques semper ut illa novis. Martial. l. 5. Epigr. 10.


and that his words had been only translated without the least alteration. The
truth is, this partial and perverse judgment springs not so much from a due
respect to the Ancients, as from an envious disesteeming of the present. Put a
modern name upon the title of one of St Paul's Epistles, and happily it shall
scarce go for sound. St Paul had experience of somewhat to this purpose in
himself, he could not please some men, while he was among them, His bodily
presence is weak and his speech contemptible. Somewhat there is amiss in
every man's doctrine, or in his speech, or in his presence, or somewhat they
know not well what; when the fore that causes all the smart is their envy that
it is not more amiss with them.

2. Popularity is another of those corrupt affections, Popularity makes
hypocrites.
which rising out of the same stock that Envy does, may be, and is often times
a cause of hypocrisy. The Monk in the Story could fast frequently and long
together in a City, where he might grow fat with reputation; Est quaedam sagina
laudis.
but would presently be extreme hungry in the desert where he had neither
bread nor praise to feed in. To be looked at, to be talked of, is the poison
that destroys many a soul; men's eyes being oft-times the Basilisks that kill
good works with looking on them. Digito monstrari and dicier, hic est.
Men may do much and suffer much too out of pride. To be a sufferer in and for
the truth, I must needs say is to be glorious. Mat. 5.10, 11, 12. Basil.
Praefat. ad Ascetica.
Blessedness is promised to it, Blessed are they that suffer for
righteousness sake. To be a sufferer for Christ is to be a conqueror with
Christ; Yea though thou be killed (says St Basil) thou shall more then
conquer. Hence there was in the ancient Church such an ambition after
Martyrdom, that they sought death more earnestly, then others afterward
sought Bishoprics and preferments. Sulpitiusin hist. sacr. l. 2.
I might say much in the due praise of suffering; but here is the great deceit
and mischief, that there may be suffering out of desire of praise. Popularity
may carry a man to the Scaffold and the Stake; 1 Cor. 13.3.
there may be a giving of the body to be burned, and yet not accepted. Is there
not a pride in suffering, when men put themselves upon trouble without a
calling? The gracious humble heart fears and ventures not till it be sure it
hears God call; Mat. 14.28, 29.
but then Lord if thou bid me come, I Will cast my self with Peter into the Sea.
But what shall we say to such as stay not till Christ say, Come! It Is to be
suspected that they seek the praise of their forwardness. Is there not a pride
in suffering, when men only mind that one Cause in which they suffer, as if all
Gods honor lay at that one stake? They cry out, Gods honor is not regarded,
if men side not with them, run not their way, (though happily they have as
great designs of good as themselves) applaud not their doings. Is it not to be
suspected, that while they are loud in calling for Gods glory, they are busy
Merchants for their own? What would they do if their names were laid aside,
and that they became forgotten men, and were rendered odious and ignominious,
could they suffer ignominy and the laying of their reputation in the dark, as
well as they did the public and solemn Combat? Ioh Picus Com. Miran. Epist. ad
Francis. P^cum.
Truly, to me this is the sincere trial of suffering, To be able to rejoice
(as that noble learned Earl writ to his Kinsman) that Gods glory may be set
forth in our ignominy. Again, such as are sufferers, how do they thrive by
suffering, what nourishment have they received from the bread of affliction;
have they learnt to walk more humbly, more conscientiously, more watchfully?
more evenly with the world? more close with God? What calmnesse, meekness,
sweetness of spirit does there appear in them? If they be bitter and swell,
and fume, and chafe, and be impatient at any small thing that they call affrent
and disrespect? It Is to be doubted 'twas not Christ's hand, but some bladders
that they had got about them that kept them from sinking when they walked upon
the sea of trouble. Besides, how stands their hearts affected for reveng; could
they eat them up without salt, as we say, by whom they suffered, when they
have recovered advantage against them? Sure this is not the Spirit of Christ.
He prayed for his enemies, and bids us do so; and Steven did it. The Ancients
followed this rule; Origin bids us love them and take pity on them. Orig. in
Ezekiel. Hom 13.
And we read of one, that prayed not only for their pardon but a reward of
eternal happiness upon them, Lansperg. in pharetra Divin. Amor p. 77.
(though his expression be somewhat strange) because (says he) they were the
instruments of thy eternal dispensation and providence. The banner over a
gracious heart in all the troubles that befall it, is love; and therefore
whatsoever the wrongs be that are offered to such, there is still preserved a
spirit of love in it, says a Divine (now living) sweetly, Ier, Buroughs Moses
self-denial, ch 14. p. 2^4. read the Chap. throughout.
whose words I the rather note, because himself was also a sufferer. And he
observes further, that he who suffers out of pride and for praise and
vainglory, loves to make his sufferings known, and boasts much of them. I
will not adjoyne any example to his observation, time may discover some to set
it off. But I will mention the due honor of Eusebius Bishop of Samosatenum for
the contrary, who was a stout sufferer, for when Constantius threatened to cut
off his right hand, unless he yielded to him, Hist. Magd. Cent. 4 c. 10.
('it was in a dishonest business) he offers him his right and left too, rather
then he would do it: This man being afterward commanded into banishment,
received his sentence with so much moderation, that he desired the Officers to
make no words of it, but to lead him away quietly and in secret: It is thought
the people else would have relcued him, and done some outrage to the Officers.

What I have spoken of suffering, may be said also of doing; how much does the
desire of popular opinion prevail with many. Nothing more foolish then to
esteem their opinion, whose judgment we do not approve. An quidquam stultius
quam quos singulos contemnas, eos cliquid put are esse universos, Aelian,
A thousand blind-men see no more then one; and yet as if there were some great
matter in the common cry, we take many times that course that is voiced up by
them, whom yet single we account not able rightly to judge. This is the
weakness of many, they leave the good way, the right way they are in, because
a crowd of people cry after them and say, That is the wrong way, you must turn
upon the other hand. They that are sincere and resolved will go the way that
they know to be right, Gloria nostra est, testimonium conscientiae nostrae, Aug.
as counting it their glory to have the testimonies of their consciences with
them, if they have company they are better pleased, but if not, yet they will
go alone rather then go wrong. But the most follow the multitude. Hier. Ep ad
Julian. Animalia gloriae, popularis aurae vilia mancipia.
St Hierom calls them Creatures of glory, Slaves to popularity. How will some
of the wiser and sober Heathens condemn these men, and rise up in judgment
against them. One of them said, One is to me instead of the people, and the
people to me are but as one man. Another, when his friend asked him why he used
so much exactness in composing a discourse that would come into few hands, A
few (said he) will serve, one will be enough, no matter if there be none that
see it. Another to his friend. Senec. Ep. 7.
I write not this for many but for thee, we are a great audience to one
another. Seneca that recounts these, would be now adays esteemed a strange
kind of man, who in another Epistle, writes thus to his friend, Epist. 32.
Thou inquire what it is that pleases me most of those things which I hear
concerning thee. It is this, that men do not talk of thee at all, and that
when I ask after thee, most men know not what thou do. Our times are of
another temper, men would feign be the Town-talke, and do somewhat that may be
carried down into the Country every where by the runningpost.

3. Hypocrites Ambitious.
Another corrupt affection to which while men are indulgent they lose their
integrity, is ambition. Where that boyles in a man's heart it will make him any
thing for his ends. Opta^ Milev. adv. Par^^ l. 2. ver^ fin.
Optatus lays it to the charge of the Donatists (as rigid as they were) that
they were ambitious and gaped after preferments. Jacob will put on his elder
brothers clothes to get the blessing. This is right Macciavellisme as they call
it. They say one of his principles was; That the appearance of virtue is only
to be sought, because the use of it is a trouble, but the credit of it an
help. Cardinal Granvell assured the Prince of Parma in his letters, that N.
Prince of N. Fam Strada de Bell. Belg l. 2. Dec 1.
was much addicted to the reading of that Author. If he were so, and sucked
such principles as these from him, he could not be sound in religion. Asterius
the Sophister was perfect in them; Athanas. Orat. 2. contra Arrian.
he pretended himself a Christian, but in the tenth and last persecution, he
sacrificed to the Idols to save his skin; when peace was restored, he again
became a Christian, but still minded his game to rise; and therefore after
Constantines death, Niceph. Hist. l. 8. c. ^3.
he upholds the Arrians side, in hope by their means to get some rich
Bishopric. He would be any thing for a fat preferment. 1 Cor. 13.7.
Ambition is the ape of charity, and bears all things, it can stoop, and
drudge, and comply to rise. Petrus Blesensis, Petr. Bles. Ep. 4.
an Archdeacon that was sometime Chancellor of Canterbury, but being a
Court-chaplain had occasion there to attend and observe, writes to his friend
the miseries of expectants, and the base and sordid way's taken for preferment;
right hypocrites, ready to act any part, yea the part of slaves that they may
come to rule. Vt dominetu^ alijs prius servit: curvatur obsequio ut ^^nore
donetur.
Within a few years after the Church enjoyed peace and wealth, there were so
many allurements to religion, that no marvel if many unsound men joynd
themselves to that profession, especially to get the favor of Princes, and the
dignity of an Episcopall-chaire; for indeed they soon turned it from a burden
into a dignity, and coveted Lordly titles. Even in Tertullians time, Bishops
gate the title of Chief Priests; Tert l. de Bapt. Optat. adv. Par. l 1. Cod.
Can Afric. Can. 39.
in Optatus, Princes of Priests. So that the Counsels of Africa were forced to
decree against them. But no Canons or Coercive Laws were ever able to restrain
the violence and rage of this humor. It has taught men to abuse religion it
self, and the pretenses of tenderness. Hubert Walter Archbishop of
Canterbury, Goodw Catal. of Bishops in Hubert. An. 1133.
and at the same time Lord Chancellor and Lord chief Justice, (places very
inconsistent and improper to be joined together in one man) pretended a
weariness under that double burden, and that the charge of his Church was
sufficient; but it was (says mine author) because he thought the King could
not want him, and would entreat him to hold those Offices still. A man can
hardly be sincere that has aspiring thoughts. It Is the contented man that
probably is most incorrupt. Bolton, Qu^tuor Noviss. p. 165.
Such an one as Justice Nicols was; whom K. James would usually call, The Judge
that would give no money. The man of high thoughts will give money and
conscience too rather then loose the place. Some that have no money to give,
buy preferment with zealous preaching, loud invectives against the sins of
the times, pretended sufferings for conscience. Jerard Ruff a Sorbonist was so
hot in the Pulpit, that the Papists pulled him out of it. But it appeared he had
an eye to his advantage out of it. By this suffering he wrought himself deeper
into the liking of the house of Navarre. He saw a better door open, then to
languish away in the Sorborn College, and goes over to Calvin's side; but when
he had got an Abbey and afterward a Bishopric, he had what he gaped for, and
then grew remiss in his former course, Beza in vita Calv.
as Beza notes, and forsook the part of the Queen of Navarre his old Lady and
Mistress, he had then gotten belike a better Master.

4. Love of riches a cause of Hypocrisy. Mar. 10.17, etc.
I have but one instance more, and that is that the corrupt affection of a
worldly mind, or the love of riches, is in many the cause of hypocrisy. There
is one that we read of that was very forward to come to Christ and to enquire
after Heaven, He came running, and kneeling to Christ, asked him, Master what
shall I do that I may inherit eternal life. But for all this forwardness,
and this questioning, he was no fit man to make a Disciple of, for he had a
worldly mind, he was all for what he could get, how to inherit; but would not
part with what he had; One thing is lacking, go sell that thou have and give
to the poor. But he would not hear of such a religion. A religion that a man
may gain by, shall have many followers. But talk of parting with, and he is
gone. He went away sorrowful, for he had great possessions. Rich Christ many
are willing to follow, and him it is that the Popish Monks serve, whatsoever
pretense they make of a vow of poverty. This the Monks saw in one another,
though they would not see it in themselves. The Dominicans who perceived that
the Franciscans brought all the grist to their own mills, Joh. Vitoduranus in
Chron. apud Hospin.
in hatred and extreme indignation against them, use sometimes to paint the
Franciscans god (as they called it) in their Churches, the image of the crucifix,
not Christ naked upon the cross and crowned with thorns, but crowned with
gold, and clothed with scarlet and purple richly embroidered, with a girdle
set with precious stones, and his very feet covered with gold wrought slippers
resting upon a footstall, not peirced with nails, and so stretched forth upon
the cross. To show what a Christ it was they served. And in other places, to
discover further what they thought of that Order, that their endeavor was not
to enrich Christ or cloth him, but to use the devise of much devotion to get
money to themselves, they expressed their conceit by picturing naked Christ upon
the cross, with one hand nailed, but the other hand in a purse which hung by a
girdle about his middle, with a company of Franciscans standing at the foot of
the cross to receive the money from his hand. These are counterfeiters of
strict devotion, deceitful workers, earthly minded Hirams that work in
copper, which has no more then a show like gold. Jesus has many lovers of his
Kingdom, Gemin. de Ex. l. 2 c. 17. Th. a Kempis de imitctione Christi. Eusebius.
Hist. l. 6. c. 34 1 Timothy 6.9, 10.
but few bearers of his cross; many that love his table, few that imitate his
abstinence. All would rejoice with him, few that will suffer any thing with him
or for him. Many follow Jesus to the breaking of bread, few will pledge him in
the cup of his passion, as a devout author complains. They were the rich men
among the Christians that soonest shrunk from Christ in the time of persecution
under Decius; so true (says Eusebius) is that of our Savior, A rich man can
hardly be saved. The Apostle gives us the reason of it; They that will be rich
fall into temptation and a snare, and into many foolish and hurtful lusts; for
the love of money is the root of all evil, which while some coveted after,
they have erred from the faith. Men err to the faith and from the faith, for
money sake. They are backward and forward as they see their gain lies. Hist.
Magdeb. Cent. 4, c. 11.
Like Eustathius Bishop of Sebaste, who held either with the Homousian or
Homoiusian confession, as he saw would fit his turn best, and so that he might
make sure work to hold his Bishopric. This thing the Author of the MS.
History of some late Bishops, whom I have often mentioned, pleasantly but yet
truly notes of Dr Kitchen Bishop of Landaffe. You shall have the story in his
words, In the 37th. of Hen. 8. Dr Kitchen being made of an idle Abbot, a busy
Bishop, and wading through those hazardous times that ensued till the first
year of Qu. Elizabeth, to save himself was content to spoil his Bishopric,
Satan having in those days more care to sift the Bishoprics then the
Bishops. Else how is it possible for a man of that rank to sing, Cantate
Domino canticum novum, four times in 14. years and never to sing out of tune,
if he had not loved the Kitchen better then the Church. I will content my self
with this instance alone to the point I have in hand, that covetousness made
him an hypocrite, so that he could dissemble all religions with the time, to be
the Popes sworn servant while he was an Abbot, an half-pupist when King Henry
had cast off the Pope, a Protestant under Edw. 6. a downright Papist with Q.
Mary, a Parliament-protestant again when he took the oath of Supremacy under
Qu. Elizabeth; Cambden calls this man the calamity of his See. A man truly
very odious, and so are all they, who account gain to be godliness, and there
are not few that do so. I delight not to dwell with such base company, and
will therefore shut up this matter, and hasten to that which only now remains,
The cure of Hypocrisy.

CHAP. IX. Of the Cure of Hypocrisy. The difficulty of the Cure.
I Have endeavored according to my poor skill, Hypocrisy hardly cured.
to reveal unto my patient what his disease is, and happily some things that he
knew not by himself, Hypocrat. l. 1. Prognostic. n. 2. Ioh. Damascen. Aphorism.
certe in medicina immensa prosunditas est. Operari autem secundum libros absque
persecta ratione and so^ lerti ingenio molestum est. Hos. 6.4, 5.
and therefore by the rule of Hypocrates the father of Physicians, I should be
trusted with the cure: I Will promise faithfulness in the undertaking, and to
be careful, and will call in others to assist and advise. And this is all I
can promise; seeing he that said, there is a great depth in this Art, and that
it is not enough to work by books, has made me almost despair. But most of
all because I find hypocrisy so hard to be cured, that God himself is upon a
consultation what to do in the case. O Ephraim what shall I do unto thee? O
Judah what shall I do unto thee? we see the difficulty by the doubling of the
words, what shall I do? what shall I do? the disease in them was hypocrisy,
their goodness was as a morning cloud, and as the early dew it went away. God
had tried many courses with that people. He had applied forcible things, of
strong operation, and yet they would not prevail. They were rough and uneven
timber, hardly to be squared and brought strait. I have hewed them by the
Prophets. The original word there signifies to dig as they do in quarries,
(...) Chatzabh, To Dig, Deuteronomy. 6.11. To Cut, Isa. 51.9. To Hew, Pro. 9.1.
to cut as they do stones prepared for a building, to hew as they do timber.
The Lord had dug and cut them, but they would not be square and polished.
Openly profane persons are better wrought upon then hypocrites. These gritty
stones of a broken quarry are not smoothed so easily as the hard marble. They
are timber full of knots and crooked, fit for ship-work it may be, to play with
all weather upon a tossing and beating sea; but not easy to be made plain and
handsome for Church-work which is Gods building.

The cure is also the harder for this reason, Joh. Fernel. de Abditaer. cause.
l. 2. c. 17.
because as Physicians observe, some medicaments which they call benigna, kind
and favorable medicaments, if they be any way hindered of their end which is to
purge, they turn to the aliment of that humor which they should cleanse; so
those kind and gentle remedy's, the sweet promises of mercy in the saving blood
of Jesus Christ, which are the most effectual to work upon the hardest and
most stubborn sinners, yet do ordinarily lose their effect upon hypocrites,
and do unhappily serve to the nourishment of their misperswasions or worse and
tougher humors.

I will apply of both sorts, some more mild, others more cutting; and after the
giving of some preparative, I will fit the medicaments to the causes of the
disease, according to the method which I considered in the discourse we last
parted from: Avicen L. Canonis, versus ab Arabico, per Gerard. Cremonens. l. 1.
Fen. 4. c. 31.
for this I find to be a rule in Avicen, first to cure that which is the cause,
without which the disease cannot be cured, as an oppilation must be remooved
before the fever. I will also observe another direction of the Physicians,
which is, That ^edicaments must be made pleasant, so that the virtue of them be
not hindered, Fernel. Meth. Cur. l. 4. c. 7.
they must be pleasant in their color, smell and taste, because distasteful
things are not easily taken or kept. I will make them pleasant by inserting
here and there some histories and similitudes as I have done all along; but
more sparingly, because the virtue of the former discourses was heightened and
strengthened by histories and experiments, which were therefore necessary,
Flostuli medicinales, ex l. 1. Cornel. Celsi. Morbi non eloquentia sed remedi^s
curantur.
but here they will serve but for taste and color, the virtue being in the
wholsomenesse of the receipts, which I must not be curious in, but plain,
remembering that of Celsus a famous Physician, That diseases are not cured with
cloquence but with remedies.

CHAP. X. The preparative to the medicaments for the cure of Hypocrisy. The
praise of Sincerity.
I will offer nothing to be taken for preparative before the applying of other
medicaments, The preparative to the cure of Hypocrisy.
but only that I desire a serious consideration of the loathsomeness,
deadliness and danger of the disease, and the sweetness, comfortablenesse and
preciousnesse of the health of Sincerity. Concerning the former of these, I
will say no more, but to send back my reader to the Symptoms, but especially
the prognostics already declared. But for the other, what can be said
sufficient to commend health, I mean sincerity. We may break forth in this
as he did; Tho. a Kempis, de I mit. Christi^ l. 3. c. 10.
I will speak once again unto thee O Lord and will not keep silence; I will
speak in the ears of my God, my Lord and my King who dwells on high. O what
sweetness O Lord have thou provided for them that fear thee, for them that
serve thee with their whole heart? It Is great honor, great glory to serve
thee, and to contemn all things for thee. They shall find the most sweet
consolation of thy holy Spirit, who for thy love cast away all carnal delight.
They shall obtain great freedom of spirit who for thy sake enter the narrow
way and neglect worldly cares. O acceptable and sweet service of God, whereby a
man is made truly both holy and free. O holy state of religious service,
whereby man is made equal to Angels, acceptable to God, terrible to Devils,
welcome to all the faithful. O much to be desired and embraced condition,
whereby we attain the chiese good, and joy never to end. Sincerity is the
very Queen of virtues, she holds the throne and will be sure to keep it. The
calm bright day ends at night, the brave fresh rose withers and dies in his
hand that holds it, but as Mr Herbert sweetly sings, Divine Poems, p. 80.
Only a sweet and virtuous soul,
Like seasoned timber never gives,
But though the whole world turn to coal,
Then chiefly lives.


Sincerity is so acceptable and pleasing unto God, that he loves all them in
whom he finds it, and passes by many failings in them for it. Genesis 5.22. Genesis
17.1. Lepama. LXX. (...) Joh. 3.21. Col. 1.10. Ps. 119.80. 2 Cor. 11.3. 2 Cor.
1.12.
King Asa was a man full of infirmities and some gross ones too, yet God
counted him a perfect man; he had a good and honest heart. God loves them; for
they walk with God, or before him, in his face, as both the Hebrew and the
LXX. express it; They do the truth, as Christ phraseth it, or as the Apostle,
They walk worthy of the Lord; their hearts are sound in his precepts, so that
they need not be ashamed; They follow the simplicity that is in Christ, that
is, they look at the truth of Christ's Gospel, apprehend and judge of it
without all mixture or corruption of fleshly conceit and wisdom. They have
their conversation in the world, in simplicity and godly sincerity; doing good
without squinting at ends of credit, ease, gain or content. Rev. 2.13.
Though they dwell where Satan's seat is, they hold fast Christ's Name and deny
not his faith. And such as these he trusts, as we use to say, we dare trust a
faithful servant with untold gold, that is, in the midst of great temptations;
for they will not betray that trust, Act. 16.15. (...). Adag. seu aenigma quod
Plutarchus tribuit Numae. Judge. 9.13.
nor revolt from him. He causes his servants and people to respect them and
judge them faithful. They offer unto God the pure Grapes of a pruned Vine, and
such wine cheareth both God and man. How God accepts it appears by all that I
have said, how precious the name and memory of such a man is among men, though
I might fetch many examples out of the holy Scriptures and other Histories, I
will only content my self with that one of that renowned Poet Francis Petrarch;
Hieron. Squar. Zaphicus in vita Petrarche.
he had a very beautiful sister about 20. years of age, whom Pope Benedict the
12. did most vehemently affect, and solicited her brother Francis to procure
for him, promising him many honors, yea and the dignity of a Cardinal, but he
having God before his eyes (says mine Author) to whom nothing is hid, before
whom nothing can be dissembled, told the Pope with indignation, That he would
not wear an hat bought with so foul a price. And when afterward the Pope being
impatient in his lusts, bribed her other brother Gerard, and by his means
obtained her, he left Avinion where then the Popes Court was, and his
preferments too, and all his hopes, rather then he would endure to have his
conscience stained. Me thinks this one Act of preserving his integrity makes
him more to shine then all his famous verses and other books though excellent
in their kind. Sincerity is a man's honor, and who would not be spiritually
ambitious of this honor. Whereas on the contrary, the hypocrite when he is
discovered is odious both to God and man. I will only show it in one example.
Epist. Calv. ad Grynaeum.
Peter Charles, being expulst the Sorbonne, came first to Geneva, then to
Lausanna and other places; but being found out every where that he came, that
he was not right, and so receiving no encouragement, he went back and
reconciled himself to the Romish Church; but yet after this stepped over to our
side, but then presently falling foul upon Farel, Calvin and Viret, and
nibling at their doctrine, a Synod held at Berne condemned him as a slanderer.
Hereupon he betakes himself into the parts of Brabant, where he fell to open
railing against the Protestants. Upon which service he went to Rome, in hope of
a fat morsel, as the reward of his barking and snarling, but there he was
received with scorn and contempt, and being oppressed with extreme poverty, and
the loathsome French disease, with much ado obtained room to die miserably in
an Hospital. Thus we have before our eyes a wretched spectacle of a man
neglected both of God and man, received of no side, because not constant to
himself. They say Roses grow the sweeter when they are planted by Garlic;
let the odiousness of hypocrisy make us more sensible of the excellency of
sincerity. Dan. 1.4.
The sincere ones are those men without blemish that are fit to stand before
the King of Heaven; when those others he will not endure in his sight. The
world takes notice that the upright are Gods favorites. Luther was known to
pray often with intention of mind and zealous fervency, that so long as he lived
Germany might be quiet; and had often professed that he firmly believed it would
be so, that Gods word might have a little space and freedom to spread it self;
whereupon one Nicolas Mark a godly Citizen of Frankfort was wont as often as he
heard any rumors of war, to say, I fear it not so long as Luther lives. See
what an esteem there was of honest hearted Luther, men thought God would deny
him nothing. But for the hypocrite he will do nothing, his very prayers are an
abomination. Let these two considerations be first taken down by way of
preparative.

CHAP. XI. The first Medicament. Faithful attendance upon wholesome Preaching.
A powerful and searching Ministry.
1. Hypocrisy cured by an wholesome and searching Ministry. Hos. 6.5. Ezekiel.
3.17.
BEcause hypocrisy is caused by an unsound entrance into the profession of
Religion; attend upon the Ordinance appointed for thorough Conversion, the word
in the powerful Ministry of it, which serves for the convincing of the soul;
the word in the mouth of the Prophets, which cuts and hewes the conscience. The
Lord has set his Prophets to be watchmen to receive the word at his mouth,
and to warn men from him, that they may save their lives; 1 Kin. 6.7.
to be worke-men to use their hammers and axes and tools of iron, for men are
not as the stones for the Temple made ready before, but must be hewed and
smoothed by their ministry. Submit your selves to their ministry, to the edge
of their word, Romans 7.7.
to the sharp law preached for the awaking and rowsing the sleepy conscience,
the unbroken heart. Wait on the Ministry of the Law, which will work in you
the knowledge of your estates and of sin, that the secrets of your hearts may
be made manifest, that ye may fall down on your faces and worship God, 1 Cor.
14.35. Heb. 4.12.
and report that God is in them that speak. Receive the wound of that sharp
and two-edged-Sword, which pierces between the joints and marrow, which
pricketh the heart; Act. 2.38.
that Word which beats the soul from all her subtle shifts, washes off her
colors and dawbings, convinces her thoroughly, shows her what a desperate
service she is in while she serves sin, but that the service of God is
perfect freedom. The man that is thus convinced knows what he does, when he
enters into Christ's service, and having his ear bored will abide with him for
ever.

Wait also upon the entrusting word, that ye may learn skill in the trade you
take up and profess, that ye may thrive in it. Resolve to follow the counsel
of the word, as David did, Psalm. 73.24.
Thou shall guide me with thy counsel, and afterward receive me to glory. Our
own counsels will be our confusion, his counsels will bring us to glory. Psalm.
106.13. Psalm. 107.11.
But proud and self-wise hypocrites, will not wait for his counsels; nay more,
they contemn the counsel of the most high. That people whom the Lord so
complains of, were the Jews who had and boasted of the Law, it was read daily
in their ears, they would come and sit before the Prophets, Ezck. 33.30, 31
and say to one another, Come I pray and let us hear what is the word that
comes forth from the Lord; but they are like Princes that have a Council of
State, but they count that but a mere formalitie of estate; but they have a
Cabinet council, a closet council besides, a Council of Privado's of men in
all things under the same interests, and these only have their ear and their
advise is observed. So it is with hypocrites; and while it is so, that men have
their whispering, privy-staire Councillors, Satan and the world, men will be
hypocrites. But as Elihu excellently to Job, Surely it is meet to be said unto
God, That which I see not teach thou me, if I have done iniquity I will do no
more. Lord do thou direct my errors, do thou correct my miscarriages, that
which I miss and fail in do thou give me light in, and set me right; I
resolve to follow thy advises, and if I have offended, yet it displeases me
that I have done so, when thou reclaimest me I will do so no more, and if I
mistake the way, when thou tellest me of it, I will turn and take the other
path. This is the mind of the sincere, and this will keep a man in the path of
righteousness. A learned Divine reports it of Sr Thom. Thin, that he was so
tender that he would undertake no business before he was fully persuaded of the
lawfulness of it, both by clear Texts of Scripture and the approbation of
most learned, and conscientious Divines, he made scruple not only of committing
the least known sin, but of imbarking into any action which was questionable
among those that love the truth in sincerity. This showed him to be sincere,
and made and kept him so, and preserved him in the integriry of his ways. O
take heed that ye be answerable to your profession and to the word that ye are
hearers of; as ye carry a Bible in your hands, so let that be your Master, as
St Cyprian was wont to call Tertullians works, and while ye hold that in view,
listen not to the close whisperings of the Jesuit at one ear for matters of
Religion, nor to Nicolas Macchiavel at the other for businesses of policy.
Forraignes when they come into any Court use to inform themselves of two
things especially in a State, of the Counsel of State, and of the Kings fool:
if the counsel be wise and virtuous, and the fool simply plain and honest,
thence they gather evidences of a well-governed State: but if the Counsel be
shallow and corrupt, and the fool more knave then fool, thence they collect
the weakness of the State. Your soule-state cannot be safe, if ye hearken to
the fool and to rotten counsel that follow private Interests. Those counsels
will destroy a man, D. The Mori Vtopia l. 1.
though they have the shows and colors of profit, as Sr T. More in his pleasant
and witty fiction, makes his friend Raphael discourse concerning those counsels
that are given to Princes to enrich themselves by the enhanching and imbasing
of coins, questioning upon old and forgotten penal Statutes, selling of
licenses for Monopolies and the like. They will make the people poor first,
and then afterward the Prince too. Gods counsels are counsels of equity and
righteousness, and enriching and establishing counsels. Walk therefore after
the word, credit it, esteem the wisdom of it, honor the Soveraigntie and
Royalty of it, set up no law against that law; maintain not a close counsel
to contradict the results of this counsel; keep in your bosoms the Aviso's
of this holy and wise board; lock up the maxims of the Scripture in your
breasts. See my Exercit. on Mal. Digres. on Chapter 4.4.
Remember the Law of Moses, delight and meditate in it. It will advise you
against the consultations, and preserve you from warping to the corruptions of
the Malignant; as David found it in his experience; Psalm. 119.23.
Princes did sit and speak against me, but thy servant did meditate in thy
Statutes. Let your secret meditation exceed your table-talk discourses. You
shall praise your counsel best by following his advise. Believe not the
prating-sollicitor who takes you off from the course prescribed by your learned
counsel, as if he had found out a more compendious and expedite accommodation;
assure your self he will gull you, and lead you a great way about. The
straitest way is the nearest way, I mean the equal and upright way; and all
Gods ways are equal. If Jacob had been content to have kept that way, and
kept his honesty, he had sooner and more easily obtained the blessing, which he
was like to have lost, through too much haste and greediness to catch it. He
hearkened to his mothers counsels, and it would have had a desperate issue, but
that God was careful of him, and turned all to the best.

CHAP. XII. The second Medicament. The right knowledge of God and believing in
him.
2. Learn to know God aright, To know God aright, cures hypocrisy. Heb. 11.2,
6.
and to believe in him. Faith will marshall and order every action and
affection. By it the Elders obtained a good report; without it it is impossible
to please God, for he that comes to him must believe that he is, and that he
is a rewarder of them that diligently seek him. As they say, there is no
service to the Kings, be assured there is none like to that of God. Be
persuaded of, and get as many experiments as ye may of the Divine Providence.
Isal. 75.6.
Could men believe that promotion comes neither from the East nor from the
West, nor from the South, but that God the Judge puts down one and sets
up another; That life it self (for which all promotions are sought) depends
not on nature, but is in Gods hand; this would take them off from all servile
dependances and respects, and make them profess his name boldly, and evenly,
and without halting. Faith being seated in the heart would cleanse the whole
heart, and diffusing it is virtue as a leaven would season every affection,
alter the taste of every appetite, strengthen every propension to good,
fortify the soul against all evil. Nothing else will be able to do so much
work. Opinion let into the understanding may be against one sin; a fancy
taken against another; a customary life against a third; but happily all this
while, while one sin is shut out, another may be let in; perhaps vanity may
be banished, but in the place of it, covetousness embraced. The Philosopher
when he would persuade his King to settle his Court and place of habitation in
the heart of his dominion, laid before him a Bull-hide ready tanned, upon which
when he stood upon any one side of it, and so kept down that, the other side
would rise up; when he removed to the side that rose up and kept down that,
then the side which he came from would rise as high; but when he stood in the
middle, he kept down all alike: So is a King whose Court is in some reasonable
equality of distance from all the confines of his dominions: Faith is this
King, which dwelling in the heart makes provision against every rebellion,
keeps down every mutiny. Ulric. ab Hutten, eques in Epist, ad Card. and Episc.
apud Wormuciam.
Faith will carry men thorough duties with courage and cheerfulness, stopping
their ears against allurements, and guarding their hearts against terrors.
Which appeared in that resolute Germane Knight, who undertook Luthers cause,
who among other things thus writes to the Cardinals and Bishops assembled at
Worms against Luther: I will go thorough with what I have undertaken against
you, and will stir up men to seek their freedom: Such as yield not to me at
the first, I will overcome with the importunity of my wholesome admonitions. I
neither care nor fear what may befall me; being prepared for either event,
either to ruin you to the great benefit of my Country, or my self to fall with
a good conscience. Therefore that ye may see with what confidence I contemn
your threats, I do profess my self to be your irreconcilable enemy, while
ye persecute Luther or such as he is. No power of yours, no injury of fortune
shall alter this mind in me. Though ye take away my life, yet this well
deserving of mine toward my Countries liberty, shall not die. Ye may hinder my
design for the present, and prevent it for the future, but ye cannot hinder,
but I shall be remembered unto posterity. I know that my endeavor to remove
such as you are, and to place worthy Ministers in your room, is acceptable
unto God. And in the last judgment I trust it will be safer for me to have
offended you, then to have had your favor. With much more of such language as
this he goes on in his large Apologeticall letter for Luther against the
Pontifical Clergy. Faith sings the same note in all estates. When David was in
the Cave, whither he fled from Saul, Psalm. 57.7.
he sung the 57th Psalm which he then composed; My heart is fixed O God, my
heart is fixed, I will sing and give praise. And afterward when he tryumphed
over Hadadezer the King of Zobah, he composed the 108th Psalm, and sung the
same words, O God my heart is fixed, I will sing and give praise. Psalm. 108.1.
Faith taught him the same Song in the Cave, and upon the throne, still in
those so much different conditions, My heart is fixed O God, my heart is fixed
or prepared. And so was Luthers heart fixed by faith, not to be shaken with
those threats and troubles which made Melancthon tremble; for which he
friendly, but yet very roundly chides him in his Epistles; In private troubles
I am weaker and thou art stronger; Epist. ad Melan, An. 1549.
Thoudespisest thy own life, but fear the public cause; but for the public
I am at rest, being assured that the cause is just and true, yea that it is
Christ's and Gods cause. I am well nigh a secure spectator of things, and
esteem not any thing these fierce and threatening Papists. I beseech thee by
Christ, neglect not so the divine promises and consolations, where the
Scripture says, Cast thy care upon the Lord, wait upon the Lord, be strong
and he shall comfort thy heart. And in another Epistle, I much dislike those
anxious cares, An. 1530.
which as thou writest, do almost consume thee. It Is not the greatness of the
danger, but the greatness of thy unbelief. John Hus and others were under
greater danger then we. And if it be great, he is great that orders it. Why
do you afflict your self? If the cause be bad, let us renounce it; but if it
be good, why do we make him a liar who bids us be still. As if you were able
to do any good by such unprofitable care. I beseech thee thou that in other
things art valiant, fight against thy self, thine own greatest enemy that putst
weapons into Satan's hand. I might add more out of him, but I am too long in a
particular; faith is of general virtue, to order the whole life in holiness;
1 Co. 1.30.
Christ is thereby made unto us Sanctification; our corruptions are thereby
mortified, the strong walls of Jericho fall down before it. Heb. 11.30. Isa.
40.31.
Faith fetches assistance from God for all duties; these waiters upon the Lord
renew their strength, they mount up with wings as eagles, they run and are not
wearied, they walk and do not faint. Faith inables us to use all the holy
ordinances for our strengthening lively and profitably. The word profits,
when it is mixed with faith in them that heard: the Sacraments comfort and
confirm and make us to grow, when they are received in faith. It Is weakness
that makes hypocrites; but faith feeds us with both these breads. Acts 15.9.
They are foul humors that breed hypocrisy; but faith purifies our hearts.
Faith keeps a watch and a guard upon the soul, that foul and diseased things
enter not. It is folly and blind conceit that makes hypocrites, they childishly
think it is good to have two strings to the bow, two stools to sit upon, two
friends to trust in; faith shows us the fulness of God, the fulness of his
promises. This it is we must labor for, to believe matters of salvation, that
is, to assent unto them, as good, as necessary, as worthy to be embraced; not
only considered in themselves and without encombrance; but while compared with
present loss of sensual good or present infliction of any sensible evil.
Then we shall not faint (as hypocrites do thorough the want of this clear
assent) but though our outward man perish, Cor. 4.16, 18.
yet the inward man is renewed day by day; while we look not at the things
which are seen, but at the things which are not seen; for the things which are
seen are temporal, (and these are the things that work upon the weak and
poor thoughts of hypocrites,) but the things which are not seen are eternal;
(and the sight of these things will make us sincere.)

CHAP. XIII. The third Medicament. Resolution for God and the truth.
3. BE thoroughly resolved for God, Resolution an help against Hypocrisy.
and for the truth which ye take up to profess. Let resolution chain ye as
Ulysses was to the mast of the ship, that he might be secured from the
chauntings and enticings of the Sirens. It Is because men are not tied to God,
that they leap over-boord so often; being fondly allured to leave God and
hasten to the embraces of seeming beauties. Remember therefore frequently the
vow made in Baptism. A triple cord that was which would not be easily broken
if men would tie it hard upon them. Ye then were bound, to faith, to obedience,
to renounce the Devil, the world and the flesh. Tit. 2.12.
The Gospel calls upon you to do it again. The grace of God which has
appeared unto you, teaches you to deny ungodlines and worldly lusts, to look
as strangers upon them, to shake hands with them, (...).
to be of a denying behavior and to say no to all such like provocations.
Renew covenant often with God, get stronger ropes and tie them with a sure knot
that they may not slide. We bind men because their words are not to be trusted.
Hypocrites do break their words. They are full of proffers and professions of
love and honor and service. They offer as Zarah did, but they draw back their
hand, Genesis ^8.28, 29.
yea though a scarlet thread be tied about them, though there has a sensible
notice been taken of them. Be so resolved as to take an oath upon it, Psalm.
^19.106.
with David; I have sworn and will perform it, that I will keep thy righteous
judgments. See how solemnly they lift up an oath in Ezra's time; Let us make a
covenant with our God according to the counsel of my Lord, Ezra 10.3, 5.
and of those that tremble at the commandment of our God, and let it be done
according to the law. And they swear. But if as that profane man said, oaths
may be played with as children do with chuckstones; then there must be some
signal ratification; We make a sure covenant and write it, and our Princes,
Levites and Priests seal unto it: Be resolved, be of Luthers mind, to go
thorough howsoever; or else you will be driven in with the next storm, and run
away at the sight of the first enemy. Be ballasted with resolution, and then
ye may endure the beating waves. Resolution keeps Ruth with her mother, Orpah
is the hypocrite that complements with God, but likes Moab better where she saw
a certainty. Resolution makes a man a rock that beats back the darts of
tentation shot against him, a rocky promontory that washes not away though the
surges beat upon him continually. What a strong rock was St Basil the great
when the Emperor Valens had brought over many Bishops to Arrianisme, partly by
fair words and preferments, partly by imprisonments and others terrors, only
Basil would not turn. He sent a great Courtier to him, who advised him to
yield to the time, and not slight the friendship of the Emperor, nor the
greater preferments he might have. Socrat. Hist. l. 4. c. 26. Sozom. l. 6. c.
16. Theod. l. 4. c. 19.
To that, Basil answered, That 'twas for children to be won with such toys,
and as for the Emperors friendship, it was not to be accounted of, if it must
be bought with impiety. The great man being moved, began to threaten him with
banishment, tortures and death. Basil answered, the earth is the Lords, and the
fulness thereof; as for tortures what can they do upon such a poor thin
body as mine, nothing but skin and bone. Another time, Eusebius Governor of
Pontus being much enraged against this same Basil, told him he would tear his
very liver out of his bowels: Truly, said St Basil, You shall do me a very
good turn in it, to take out my naughty liver which inflames and diseaseth my
whole body. And this resolvednesse is much fortified by vows, which bind men
strongly, as we see in the case of the Gibeonites, Josh. 9.19, 20.
and of the Benzamites; because vows or oaths made before God, Iud. 21.2, 6,
7, 14, 19, 20.
which may not wilfully be broken without incurring Gods great displeasure, and
the judgments under which he that swears lays himself, in case he breaks his
oath; for vows are deliberate and resolved promises, according to the
definition of them which we find in the Casuists, Fred. Balwin. de Cas. l. 2.
c. 8. Azor. To. 1. Instit. l. 11. c. 14.
That they are promises made to God out of the judgment of reason and purpose
of the will: So that these three things are in a vow, deliberation, purpose and
a promise; they do therefore most strongly bind such as enter into them. There
are some that have doubted whether we may vow at all to God, because God loves
and requires a free service, not necessitated by vows, because men
unnecessarily by them put themselves into a further snare, because we owe all
to God without vow. But though we owe duty, we are many times slow in
performance, and we may with Jacob quicken our selves by vows; Genesis 28.21.
neither do they hinder us from performing a free service, for they are to be
made ex proposito voluntatis, with our own will: neither are we further
ensnared by them, then by the precepts of God, when we make them in Gods
strength and expectation of his grace to assist, and but for a time, and in
things lawful and possible unto us. We had need to fortify our selves
strongly, because of many assaults against our sincerity; to set our foot
fast, because of the many shuffles the world will put upon us. And that we may
resolve for God and truth, labor with good judgment to see reason, to choose
that side, and then to rest in the choice made. Be not always in choosing,
pitch some where. And what is more lovely, more worthy of choice then God and
his truth? Let our desires therefore be toward God and his name, and then even
dangers themselves will not remove us from him, or make us unfaithful; as we
hear the Church speaking in the Prophet, Isa. 26.8, 9.
Yea in the way of thy judgments have we waited for thee, the desire of our
soul is to thy name and to the remembrance of thee: with my soul have I desired
thee in the night, yea with my spirit within me will I seek thee early. Let our
by as be to God. The hypocrite when he makes fair toward God, runs against by
as. All outward acts of approaches and addresses to God may be made by
hypocrites; there is no external thing but a Painter may draw it and color it
with his pencill; But love, unfeigned love, which will bind steadfastly and make
the soul cleave unto the Lord with full purpose, is above and beyond the art of
painting. Cant. 8 7.
Many waters cannot quench love, neither can the floods drown it; If a man
would give all the substance of his house for love, it would utterly be
contemned. See God worthy to be preferred, and love him truly; and that love
will keep you true to him; so that if the world do offer her self with her
rich dowry, and show you her beauty and her wealth, she shall not be able to
entice you from him, or win away your love and your hearts. David made this
choice, Psalm. 73.28. 2 Samuel 6.22.
It is good for me to draw near to God. And he kept to this choice, though he
were scoft at for it; If this be vile, to serve and honor God who advanced me,
I will yet (said he) be more vile then thus. He was not, he would not be
ashamed of his zeal. I will only remember the carriage of another Prince to
bear him company, who ran thorough greater discouragements then flouts, that
he might hold to his choice. I mean John Duke of Saxony, Cyriac. Spangenberg.
in Chron. Mansfield. ad An. 1531.
who to use my authors words, might have had all that the world could afford,
if he would not have been a Christian, but not respecting many calamities, yea
the danger of death it self, he heroically defended the sincere religion,
against all the Devils and the Pope, in three puhlike Imperial assemblies. And
when it was told him he should loose the favor of the Pope and the Emperor,
and of all the world, if he stuck so fast to the Lutheran cause; Here are two
ways, said he, I must serve God or the world, and which of these do ye think
is the better. And so put them off with this pleasant indignation. Neither
would he be ashamed to be seen which way he chose to go, for when at the
public assembly of the States of the Empire, It was forbidden to have any
Lutheran Sermons, he presently prepared to be gone, and professed boldly, He
would not stay there where he might not have liberty to serve God. He was
resolved for God. And I brought the example for a probatum est upon this
Medicament, that resolution will keep us close to God.

CHAP. XIV. The fourth Medicament. The thorough fear of God.
4. GEt Gods fear planted in your hearts. The fear of God will cure
Hypocrisy, 2 Cro. 19.9.
There is nothing more effectual then that for the present cure. King
Johoshaphat knew that this would preserve his Officers in their uprightness,
and startle them if they were not so. Those whom he set for judgment and for
controversies, he charged them, Thus shall ye do in the fear of the Lord
faithfully and with a perfect heart. Solomon knowing this the most necessary
point of all his Sermons to be remembered, delivered it in the end of all,
because he would have it to dwell in the freshest thoughts of men; Eccles.
12.13. Psalm. 112.1. Psalm. 128.1.
Let us hear the conclusion of the whole matter, fear God, and keep his
Commandments. They are well joined together, for that blessed man that fears
the Lord, will delight greatly in his Commandments, and will walk in his
ways; it is the beginning of wisdom, that wisdom which is in obedience;
which the Psalmist calls, A good wisdom or understanding; Psalm. 111.10.
The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom; a good understanding have
all they that do his Commandments. Pro. 8.13.
It is that which will nourish and increase an hatred of sin, The fear of the
Lord is to hate evil. It kept Joseph from wronging his Master, and made him
faithful concerning the Kings storehouses and treasure. Job 31.21, 22, 23.
It held him within the bounds of righteousness, where he had strength and
opportunity to break thorough. It hinders the delighting in sin, by which the
integrity of some men is lost; Delight cannot dwell with fear. It makes men
despise other fears whereby some men are terrified from their constancy.
Jeremiah was not dismayed at the faces of the Princes, Ier. 1.17, 18.
Priests and people, because Gods fear made him a defenced city, and an iron
pillar, and brazen walls against the whole land. This cuts off base and
unworthy complyings, he will not say, a confederacy, to whom the people say a
confederacy, Isa. 8.12, 13.
nor fear their fear, who sanctify the Lord of Hosts himself, and take him
for their fear and their dread. A greater fear will swallow up a lesser.
Christ improves this argument upon his hearers, Mat. 10.28.
that they should not fear him that can kill the body, (and that is all they
can do, and the worst of their spite) but that they should fear him that can
cast body and soul into Hell fire. The Ass a dull and slow creature fears the
spur or the whip, and will drive on roundly, but if it come to a fire, he
fears that so much, that the spur may fetch blood, and the whip be spent and
worn with lashing, yet he will not be forced to go forward. Here is fear
conquering fear. You fear men, they frown and threaten, and bear a sword;
but offend not God to please them, for in his frown is death, his sword is
sharper and his arrows ready. Ecclus. 1.15, 16, 17, 18.
This is finely urged by an Apocryphal author; They that fear the Lord will
not disobey his word, and they that love him will keep his ways. They that
fear the Lord will seek that which is well pleasing unto him; and they that
love him shall be filled with the Law. They that fear the Lord will prepare
their hearts, and humble their fouls in his sight, saying, we will fall into
the hands of the Lord, and not into the hands of men; for as his Majesty is so
is his mercy. The force of this fear the receipt that I am now commending,
Antonin. Ep. Florent. Hist. Til. 26 part. 2. c 4.. 3.
I shall think fit to manifest in one experiment. The Emperor Henry the third
had a Chaplain, who one might entertained an Harlot into his bed, the Emperor
by some means knew of it, but making as if he knew nothing, he commanded him
the next morning to officiate in the holy servica. The Chaplain it seems having
remorse, and daring not so highly to profane the name of God, being conscious
to himself of his sin, refused to do it. The Emperor urged him much; it was
it seems to try him thoroughly. But he still refusing, the Emperor said he
should either do it or be banished. He obeyes the sentence and leaves the
Court. The Emperor sends after him, and his officers bring him back bound as a
delinquent and ready to suffer, rather then to pollute the service of God as he
esteemed. But the Emperor took him, and highly commending his honesty, that he
feared Gods wrath more then his, presently bestowed a choice Bishopric upon
him, and held him ever after very dear unto him.

This fear is in other phrases called in the Scripture, The setting of God
before one, or the walking with God. And that will make a man sincere. Genesis
17.1.
Walk before me, says God to Abraham, and be upright. And thus it was that
Enoch walked with God. Genesis 5.
We are sure his ways were sincere, for the Scripture testifies that they
pleased God. This will crush the first risings of hypocritical thoughts; Heb.
11.5.
God sees, shall I then dally, shall I mock God? We would not do many things
that we do, if but a child saw us; and shall we not respect Gods eye? or do
we think God is blind? The Church in the Psalm, observes this effect to her
self of this medicine. Psa. 44.17, etc.
All this is come upon us, yet have we not forgotten thee, neither have we
dealt falsely in thy covenant; Our heart is not turned back, neither have our
steps declined from thy way. But how came she to be thus healthy? It follows;
If we have forgotten the Name of our God, or stretched out our hands; to a
strange god; shall not God search this out? for he knows the secrets of the
heart. This had a right operation in the Apostles, 2 Cor. 2.17. (...).
We are not as many which corrupt the word of God, or, which deal deceitfully
with the word, but as of God, in the sight of God, speak we in Christ. We
consider that our commission is from God, and that our work is done and
discharged in his eye. And in the same manner the Apostle speaks to the
Thessalonians; Our exhortation was not of deceit, 1 These. 2.3, 4.
nor of uncleanenesse, nor in guile; But as we were allowed of God to be put in
trust with the Gospel, even so we speak, not as pleasing men but God, which
tries our hearts. Even idle and wastfull servants when their Masters come
home, compose themselves and are double diligent. But our Master is never
absent; Pro. 5.21.
The ways of a man are before the eyes of the Lord, and he pondereth all his
goings. Therefore David like a good servant bestirred himself at all times; I
have kept thy precepts and thy testimonies, Psalm. 119.168.
for all my ways are before thee. And no wonder that Paul and David have been
thus wrought upon, for we find this physic to have prevailed with the strong
constitution and tough humor of Heathen men. Senec. Ep. 10. Sic vive cum
hominibus tanquam D^us vldeat, sic loquere cum Deo, tanquam bomines audiunt.
Ep. 32.
Seneca gave it among his advises to his friend Lucillius; That he should live
with men as if God saw him, and pray to God as if men heard him. And in another
Epistle; live thou so (says he) as if I were by to hear and see all that thou
do. Truly it is much that some men will do, and much that they will forbear
and restrain themselves in, because some men are by whose presence they
regard. I knew one who was said to be an extraordinary swearer, and yet in
diverse months together when he had occasion to live under the same roof, I
never heard him swear an Oath. And so it is with many ordinary drunkards and
wantons, they will curb themselves most strangely in the company and presence
of the good. I have sometimes been thinking that this may be a reason why many
retired godly, grave Ministers cry not out so much in their Pulpits against
such and such sins, because their souls come into none of their secrets,
they have such foul sins, but by hearsay, they know them not. I remember J
once heard that inward liver, that spiritual Divine Dr Sibbs speak somewhat to
this purpose in conference. But what Atheistical wretches are they that
respect a man's presence, and have no regard to the eyes of the all-seeing God?
O let them not think to hide any thing from his sight or knowledge, Pro.
24.11, 12.
to whom their very thoughts, their base and deceitful thoughts are known. If
thou forbear to deliver them that are drawn to death, and those that are ready
to be slain; If thou say, Behold we knew it not, does not he that pondereth
the heart consider it? And he that keeps thy soul does not he know it? Is thy
soul and all the windings of it in Gods hand, and is there any thing in it,
that he is not acquainted with?

CHAP. XV. The strengthening of the fourth Medicament by putting in another
Ingredient. The thoughts of our great account before God.
I Remember a rule of the Physicians, The remembrance of our account, a cure of
hypocrisy Fernel de Meth. cur. l. 4 c. 7.
that if a Medicament be slow and sluggish in working, the virtue of it is to
be stirred by putting in somewhat else. Now though this that I have last named
be strong of it self, yet because I would be sure to have it work, I will
add unto it, The remembrance of that account that is to be made unto God. Sure
this will have its operation in the most rebelling diseases. Will they loyter
that must show their work to their Master at night, when he will not fail to
require their task? God will be sure to call to a reckoning. He did so at the
beginning. Adam, Genesis 3.9, 11.
where art thou? Have thou eaten of the Tree, whereof I commanded thee that
thou should not eat? He did so with Ahab. 1 Kin. 21.19.
when he was secure; he sent his Prophet as his steward to him, Thus says the
Lord, Have thou killed and also taken possession? And what said the Lord to
Moses, I have seen, Act. 7 34.
I have seen the affliction of my people, which is in Egypt, and I have heard
their groaning, and am come down to deliver them; And now come, I will send
thee into Egypt. O let them that forget God, Psai. 50.21, 22.
consider what he says, These things have thou done and I kept silence; but I
will reprove thee and set them in order before thy eyes. Eccl. 3.16.
Solomon showed himself a wiseman, that he considered this; I saw under the
Sun the place of Judgment, that wickedness was there; and the place of
righteousness that iniquity was there; I said in my heart that God shall judge
the righteous and the wicked. Oh let us say in our hearts so also; or let us
commune with our hearts upon our beds, as David speaks. Let us review our
works, that they may be ready for Gods view. The Ancients used to take this
stomack-pill of selfe-examination every night. Climac. grad 4 apud Bibl patr.
To. 6. par. 1.
Some of them as Climacas reports, used little-bookes, which they tied at their
girdles, in which they kept a memorial of what they did against their night
reckoning. There are some I suppose, though but few I doubt, that keep up such
a like practice now a days. I have seen a Memorial in M S. to that purpose
of Sr Peter Carews, a man active in Religion about the beginning of Qu.
Elizabeth's time. Hugh Pet. Rel^t. of Sir Ed. Har.
We find it in a late printed Relation of that worthy man Colonel Harwood,
that he kept a Dyary of Slips, infirmities and passages of Providence. But such
things come not usually to light, nor are they very fit they should. Yet a
Germane some few years since, Seb. Heintico Otium delittosum in quo objecta
vel in action, vel in lectione, vel in visione ad singulos d^es anni 1029.
ebservata representantur E farit in 12. Athan. Orat. 1. contr. Arr.
one Sebastian Heinric was bold to publish for the course of one year,
whatsoever he did read or saw every day in that year. But these are for our
closet, and should be private helps 'tweene God and our conscience. And sure he
that is most busy with his conscience, keeps his conscience cleanest. The
remembrance of the great Audit especially, the great day of account, me thinks
should be very effectual to recover those that are farthest gone in the
sickness of Dissimulation. The Emperor Constantine thought so of it, who when
he doubted whether Arrius spoke true or not, he put it to this issue with him.
If thy opinion be right (said he) thou have done well to swear, but if it be
heretical, and yet thou have dared to swear, Sozom Hist. l. 2 c. 8.
know that God will revenge thy perjuries, and show his judgment from Heaven
upon thee. He thought that might prevail to make him sincere. It did so in one
Patient, whom I will instance in, for the approbation of this Ingredient in the
medicament which we are ministering. When Sapores the King of Persia raised a
violent persecution against the Christians, Vsthazanes an old Nobleman a
Courtier, that had been Sapores Governor in his Minority, being a Christian
was so terrified that he left off the Profession: But he sitting at the
Court-gate, when Simeon an aged holy Bishop was led to prison, and rising up to
salute him, the good Bishop frowned upon him and turned away his face from him
with indignation, as being loath to look upon a man that had denied the faith.
Vsthazanes fell a weeping, went into his Chamber, put off his Courtly garments,
and brake out into these like words, Ah how shall I appear before God, whom I
have denied, when Simeon a man will not endure to look upon me. If he frown,
how will God behold me, when I come before his Tribunal. This physic so
wrought with him, that he recovered not only health, but spiritual strength,
went and boldly professed himself a Christian, and dyed a Martyr gloriously. O
let us all consider it, that we must stand before that bar, and if we have
been unsound, we shall be made a shame before God and the holy Angels, and
infinite multitudes of men. He whose hatred is covered by deceit, Prove. 26.26.
Isa. 29.15, 16.
his wickedness shall be showed before the whole Congregation. Woe to them
that seek deep to hide their counsel from the Lord, and their works are in
the dark, and they say, who secth us? and, who knows us? Surely your turning
of things upside down, shall be esteemed as the Potters clay; for shall the
work say of him that made it, he made me not; or shall the thing framed, say of
him that framed it, he had no understanding? Think not but God understands all
your devises; if ye turn your selves downward to be hid, he can and will turn
the down-side upward, the inside outward. This is the shame whereby Hypocrites
shall bepunish'd, which was Plutarchs conceit where he brings in The spesius
returning from hell and relating the several kinds of punishments there, Plut.
de his qui sero pun p 203. mihi.
he makes him tell that Hypocrites are plagued by turning up and down, and some
that they had their skins drawn off. Yea this shame is not always reserved to
the judgment of the great day, but sometimes God lays it upon hypocrites, even
here in this life; Eusebius. Hist. l. 5. c. 1. mihi. p. 118. e f g.
as Eusebius notes it, speaking of the persecutions under Verus: Those that
being apprehended denied the faith, were not only led to prison with the rest
(for their poor denial would not serve their turn) but forced also to suffer
the same torments: and as they who freely professed what they were, were laid
in prison with no other crime objected against them, but only that they were
Christians; but those denyers were put in as homicides and flagitious persons;
and sustained a double punishment. Those upright ones were full of joy; but
these crushed down with the great and heavy weight of conscience, so that as
they were led through the streets, men might discern them by their
countenances, demisse, abject, deformed with the foul blot of their baseness,
contemned and scorned even of the Gentiles as base and effeminate cowards. But
especialy I say, at the great day, Hypocrites shall be made a spectacle of
shame, though possibly they may have ways here to keep themselves undiscovered
and hide their blemishes, as men that wear white Gloves upon foul hands, or
as the crookedness of the body may be hid under a stuff and bolstred Gown;
but what will they do when the Glove must be pluckt-off, and the body showed
naked, for all things are naked in the eyes of him with whom we have to do, as
one said to an old man with gray-hairs, who dyed his head and his beard of a
youthful color, Though thou could deceive the world with thy false hair,
Scit te Proserpina canum, Death knows well enough that thou art gray. Thou
keep thy book shut, clasped, tied up; but what will thou do when it shall
be untied and opened, then the heresies that are in it that thou studiest, the
wanton lives that thou spendest thy time to read, the lascivious and filthy
pictures that thou usest to seed thine eyes with, shall all be known. Thou
may deceive all the world like that counterfeit Alexander in Josephus his
Story, but Augustus will not be deceived, he has quicker and more piercing
eyes. God will not be mocked, and ye shall find, that the hidden things of
dishonesty will be the hidden things of shame: one and the same Greek signifies
and expresses both: both dishonesty and shame. 2 Cor. 4.2. (...) Romans 6.21.
Dishonesty is shame in the Act, and will be shame in the event. What fruit
(said the Apostle) had ye of those things, whereof ye are now ashamed. At least
if they be past shame here, they shall be forced at last to confess their
shame; and as the ancient Author of the book of Wisdom speaks, Wisd. 3.1, 2.
The souls of the righteous are in the hand of God, though in the sight of the
unwise they seem to die, and those unwise ones shall be forced to confess
themselves fools, when they shall say concerning the upright man; Wisd. 5.4, 6.
We fools accounted his life madness; but we are they that have erred from the
way of truth. Let me therefore renew unto these men the words of our blessed
Savior, Beware ye of the leaven of the Pharisees which is hypocrisy; Luke
12.1, 2, 3.
for there is nothing covered that shall not be revealed, neither hid that
shall not be known; Whatsoever ye have spoken in the darkness, shall be heard
in the light; and that which ye have spoken in the ear in closets, shall be
proclaimed upon the house tops. This consideration may be effectual to purge
unsoundnesse, as it has been powerful to preserve others in their
uprightness; as in St Augustine, Behold all mine iniquities shall be laid
naked before thousands of people, before many troops of Angels shall all my
faults appear. For this was the opinion of many Ancients, Aug l. medit. c. 4.
L. de extr. Jud. c. 1. Ambr in Ps. 43 Jer in Dan. 7. Olimpiod in Eccl. 12.
Thom. in 4. Sect. did. ^3. Bonav. art. 2. q. 2. Dom. Sote. did. 47. q. 12.
besides St Augustine, that even all that the godly has done, shall also be
laid open, as of Ephraem, Ambrose, Jerome, Olimpiodours; and of the
Schoolmen, Aquinas, Bonaventure and Soto: And for my part I subscribe to
them, but with that distinction that passes among them, That all the actions
of the godly shall be opened to be under the judgment of approbation; but
those of hypocrites as of all other wicked men, under the strict scrutinie and
judgment of condemnation. Thus having heightened this 4th Medicament by putting
in this other ingredient, least it should yet miss it is effect, I proceed to
prepare and make ready some more.

CHAP. XVI. The fifth Medicament. The exalted thoughts of our Christian
Dignity.
5. High thoughts of Christian dignity cure hypocrisy.
BEcause baseness of spirit makes hypocrites, they are Faex populi, a low and
for did flattering generation; let us get raised and exalted minds. The lowest
of the people were fit to be Priests to Jeroboam, they would say as said, and
serve his turn best, because they would serve his humor, and make even
Religion it self a state business for the settling of his new crown. But let us
remember that though we are the Kings people and our friends friends, yea and
their servants too in all offices of righteousness and love; yet we serve also
an higher master, the Lord Christ. He that published the sweet Poems of that
happy man Mr George Herbert, says of him, that to testify his Independency
upon all others, and to quicken his diligence in Gods service, he used in his
ordinary speech, when he made mention of the blessed name of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ, to add my Master. If men were unfainedly of his mind,
their respects would be to Christ's commands, to Christ's will, to Christ's
pleasure. Ps. 123.1, 2.
If we could lift up our eyes to God, to him that dwells in the Heavens, then as
the eyes of servants look unto the hand of their masters, and as the eyes of a
maiden unto the hand of her mistress; so would our eyes wait upon the Lord our
God. We are Gods special people, peculiar, precious to him, a purchased
people, 1 Pet. 2.0, 10.
and therefore to refer all our ways to his liking, to show forth the praises
of him, who has called us out of darkness into his mavelous light; which in
time past were not a people, but are now the people of God. They are nullius
nominis, scarce to be called so much as a people, who are the worlds people,
who are every bodies people, who are and will be whatsoever you will have them
to be. We become a people, when we become the Lords people, else we are none; O
let the thoughts of our dignity elevate and take us off from base dependancies.
True godliness will enoble men's spirits, contrary to that slander which
profane men cast upon it in Salvians time, Salv. de Guber. Dei l. 4. Prove.
17.27. Bern. Ep. 42.
that Christians lost the honor of Nobility. Solomon a King was of another
mind, That a man of understanding is of an excellent spirit. And so was St
Bernard, that such a man cannot but mind glorious things. Such an one enjoyes
freedom as his patrimony. Hypocrites are the poorest sort of slaves, but where
the Spirit of the Lord is there is liberty. 2 Cor. 3.27.
Such have a holy scorn to be at the beck of every base and unworthy humor,
and with the Courtiers of Dionysius to lick up his spettle and swear it was
sweeter than Nectar. The world thinks of the religious that they are dull,
heavy, drossie, stupid fools; whereas indeed they have the only bravenesse of
mind; for this is it which perfects a man, Greg. Niss. de vita Mosis.
to imitate God, as Nyssen observes; or as others, to know God aright: every
kind of knowledge gives some excellence. Aug. ep. 130.
Polemon hat St Augustine speaks of, who was all for wine and play, became a
braver man when he came acquainted with the Philosophers school. But divine
knowledge gives yet a fairer luster. The learned man excels the ignorant, Fr.
Petrarch. de Remed. utr. fort. l. 1. dial. 16.
the godly man the learned. The noblest blood runs in the veins of religious
men. They are specially and principally Gods offspring. Other differences of
blood, and the boasting of it, Petrarch calls fooleries. All blood is of the
same color, noble birth makes not a clearer skin but sound constitution. I
will not insert more out of that dialogue of Petrarch, least I should be
thought to diminish and disgrace Nobility; no, I honor it, and am not of their
Counsel of Confusion, who would have these hills levelled with the low valleys
of the people, only I prefer the heavenly Nobility, Sion is the most pleasant
hill, and one of the sons of God more noble then all the sont of Adam that are
not so. Who will not easily grant me, that a mean private Christian is in this
respect more innobled then the great Ottoman, or the mighty Cham of the
Tartars? That soul which drinks the largest draught out of the cup of spirits,
Merc. Prismeg. in Cratere.
according to the fable of Antiquity, is most pure and noble. Only let this
consideration work so upon us, as to make us answer our worth, and not
degenerate from that nobility. How do Nobles stand upon their honor, what
dangers will they not meet with, and expose themselves to, for the clearing of
their reputations, or illightning their names. How many bloody duels have been
fought in the cause of wronged honor, how tender is it, like the eye, of the
least dust of disparagement; and shall we stain our dignity and betray it? Mart
Cromer. d^ r^^. Polon. l. 5
But as Boleslaus King of Poland, when he was to speak or do any thing of
importance, would take out a little picture of his father, that he carried
about him, and would kiss it and say, Dear father I wish I may do nothing
unworthy of thy name: So let us do nothing that may disparage our God, whom we
serve, our father from whom we descend. We have a most notable probatum est
upon this medicament, delivered by an Apocryphal Writer, but very worthy of
our taking notice, in one Eleazar, ^ Mac. 6.18, 19, etc.
who suffered under the persecution of Antiochus, they would have forced open
his mouth to eat Swines-flesh, but he chose rather to die gloriously then to
do any thing so contrary to the Law. Then some pretending friendship and old
acquaintance with him, took him a side privately and desired him to take other
flesh into his mouth, and make as though he had eaten the flesh of the
Sacrifice appointed by the King, that so he might escape death. But he began to
consider his age, the honor of his gray-haires, his conversation from his
childhood, but especially the Law of his God, and therefore resolved not to
yield to them, So the Geneva trans^ation reads.
but told them it became not his age to dissemble, to make others think that
Eleazar of 90 years of age were now gone to another Religion; and so (said he)
through my hypocrisy for a little time of transitory life, they might be
deceived by me, and I should procure malediction Abominan. dam maculam. Gr.
Abominationem and maculam. Fr. Jun. ad loc Basil. Serus in Gord, Mart.
and reproach to mine old age. I will show my self such as mine age requires,
and will leave a notable example for such as be young to die willingly and
courageously for the honorable and holy law. I will parallel this brave Jew
with as grave and resolute a Christian: The famous Gordius so much commended by
St Basil, he being a Commander of the Army under the Emperor Galerius, for
love to Religion cast away his Belt and went into a Desert; but coming one day
into the City, when the feast of Mars was celebrated, he could not contain his
spirit, and being discovered was adjudged to the fire: His friends wept about
him and advised him at least in word to deny Christ, though in heart he
believed in him. But he suddenly repeating that of the Apostle, with the heart,
etc. Romans 10. went from them courageously to the Stake. O let us seriously
entertain the same consideration to keep us from being blotted with
hypocrisy. As profession makes us eminent: so it will make our sins more
evident.

CHAP. XVII. The sixth Medicament. The cure of corrupt affections. Of Envy.
The folly of it. Of Popularity. The poison of it. Of Vainglory. The
deceitfulness of it. Of Worldliness. The vanity of it. The Conclusion.
6. LAstly, because the main cause of hypocrisy is indulgence to corrupt
affections, four of which I took notice of, I am to propound somewhat for the
cure of them.

1. The cure of Envy. Eccl. 4.4, 5. a Sam. 7.23.
Envy is the sign at which the fool dwells. Solomon is bold to give him that
name: I considered (says he) every right work, that for this a man is envied
of his neighbor, The fool foldeth his arms together and eats his own flesh.
Was not Ahitophel a fool to hang himself, Esth. 5.13.
because another man's words were received with more applause? Was not Haman a
fool, who could receive no comfort in his own great preferments and places of
honor, because another man, Job 5 3.
namely Mordecai was a Courtier? Solomon called such men fools, as well he
might, and Eliphaz calls them silly ones, Wrath kills the foolish man, and
envy slays the silly one. It Is indeed a corrupt and rotten humor, The
rottenness of the bones, Prove. 14.30.
and therefore by all means to be purged forth. But you must purge out pride
first, for the proud fool is the envious one; He is proud, 1 Timothy 6.4. 1 Cor.
13 4.
knowing nothing, but doting about questions and strifes of words, whereof
comes Envy. After purging use strengtheners, sincere love, rejoice in others
good, communicate good with them. Some wrap up their talent and will not
improve it, lest others should share in some gain with them; out of these
flints, ye shall get no fire, unless ye strike them hard. They will call this
reservednesse wisdom, Sonec. epist 55.
modesty; but it is in truth a rotten envious churlishnes. Vacia that Seneca
speaks of and makes a witty Epitaph upon him, laid himself up in the country
in a retired life, among other reasons for this, that he could not endure to
see men happy. But they are most like God that are most diffusive. Let us be
content to shine to others, and to let others shine. Rejoice in others gifts.
St Paul did so with the Philippians; Phil. 1.3, 4, 5.
I thank my God upon every remembrance of you, always in every prayer of mine
for you all, making request with joy for your fellowship in the Gospel. And
with the Colossians, We give thanks to God, Col. 1 3, 4.
since we heard of your faith in Christ Jesus, and of the love which ye have to
all the Saints. And if we cannot pattern this copy in St Paul, unless we have
some to hold and direct our hand; let us consider that God uses his
Sovereignty in bestowing of gifts, and we must submit unto his high pleasure;
but he is pleased withal to manifest his infinite wisdom in the distribution,
that we might stand in need of, and serve one another in love. I will not
pursue this argument, it being wholesomly and fruitfully done already in some
Tractates extant.

2. Banish popularitie, and complying with opinion. The cure of Popularitie.
Entertain not greedily the applause and affection of the multitude. It may
prove to be poison to them who are yet very sound. I know that Chrysostom is
accused to have been popular. It Is true, he preached with much freedom against
the Court, which ordinarily is well taken and thought of among the people: But
to me it seems this popular favor was beside his endeavor, because I find,
where he might have made use of it, he declined it. For when a potent faction
of errouious and some hypocritical Bishops had procured a sentence of
banishment against him, Erasm, in vita Chrysostom. ante 1. To Oper.
which was for nothing indeed but his honest zeal, yet durst not execute the
sentence for fear of the people, to whom Chrysostom was very dear. But he to
avoid tumult, secretly came and delivered himself into the officers hands, and
suffered his horses to stand at one gate of the City, that while the people
flocked thither, expecting that there he should take horse, he went out
privately at another. To me it appears by this act, that he was and maintained
himself sincere, and that he fled from that popularity, which without his
seeking, followed him. Know that your account is due to God, rather then to the
world. Go not in the crowd. It Is good, yea sometimes necessary to be singular.
Choice plants grow but here and there, they grow not up like nettles. The best
are so few, that in many places they are alone, like here and there a wheat
stalk in a field of barley, so above all the rest that they may be told and
counted by one that stands afar of. Gods people have other principles, other
hopes, other ends, another way then the world has. Horat Satyr. lib. 1. Sat.
1. Vt quidam memoratur Athenis Sordidus ac dives, populi contemnere veces Sic
solitus: Populus me sibilat, at mibi plaudo Ipse domi: simul ac nummos
contemplor in Arca. Ephesians. 2.2. Mat 7. Pro. 2.10.
Even that wretched worldling in Horace, who cared not what the people said so
his bags were full, he will shame us, if we be so weak as to value the common
voice, and do not hug our own choice and singular felicity, that we are
entrusted with a treasure from God, It Is the condition of natural men, and
Gods enemies to live, as the Apostle speaks, after the course of the world;
for that is to obey the spirit that rules in the children of disobedience.
There Is no fault in singularity, so that it be not proud, humorous,
fantastical. Gods way lies out of the commonroade, it is not much beaten, few
there be (says Christ) that find it. Good men and righteous men have a way of
their own, that is called also their way for distinction sake. The good man's
way, or the righteous man's way. There is mention of it in the Proverbs, Walk
thou in the way of good men, and keep the way of the righteous. Be not laughed,
and mocked, and flouted out of the way, resolve to do that which is right and
just, whether it be liked or disliked by the people. I will say no more to this
point, but commend it in the counsel and the words of our divine Poet,

Do all things like a man, Sacred Poem. Perfirrbant. p. 5.
not sneakingly:
Think the King sees thee still; for his King does.
Simpring is but a lay-Hypocrisie:
Give it a corner and the clue undoes.
Who fears to do ill, sets himself to task:
Who fears to do well, sure should we are a mask.
3. The cure of vain glory. Mar. 13.13.
Shun vainglory and ambition. Be of John Baptists mind, to be willing to
decrease that Christ may increase, to be willing to be hated of all for Christ's
name sake. Be hearty for Gods glory. Exalt God into the throne. Lift him up
above thine own interests and ends. 2 Cor. 4.5.
This was faithfully observed by the Apostles; We preach not our selves, but
Christ Jesus the Lord, and our selves your servants for Jesus sake. And this is
the way to advance a man's own interests, for as Solomon speaks of wisdom,
Exalt her and she shall promote thee. Whereas Jehu and the Pharisees who served
their own praise, Prove. 4 8. Romans 2.29.
became vile. Respect Gods allowance before humane praise. The true Jew is he
whose praise is not of men but of God. No matter though ye he hid to all but
God. Worthless dayses grow in sight upon the surface, but precious richest
rarities are hid within the bowels of the earth. The Sun would shine bright
though all men were asleep at high-noone, and no eyes open to see the glory of
his beams. St Augustine tells us of an old Comaedian, Aug. de Civ. Dei, l. 6.
c. 10.
who having no other spectators, went usually into the Theater and acted before
the statues of the gods. No matter if the people take no notice, if we be in
Gods eye. I had thought to have enlarged these points, about the denial of our
selves in our own honor and reputation, but that there lately fell into my
hands a Treatise usefully and very wholesomely penned by Mr Buroughs, of Moses
his self-denial, to which I refer my reader, and commend the book unto him, as
being very pertinent to this matter in hand.

4. The cure of worldliness. Mat. 16.24.
The most prevailing of all other inordinate affections is that of worldliness
or worldly-mindednesse. Against which that it may not make us warpe to any
uneven and crookedcourses, we must especially practice self-denial, without
which we cannot be disciples after Christ. To this end, endeavor to dry up, or
divert the spring of self-love; in the corrupter sense and use of it I mean;
for self-love is a plant which Gods hand has set in man's nature, and grace
pulls not up what God planted, and nature as a fresh soil yeildeth. We are to
love our neighbors as our selves, therefore our selves first as the measure of
the other. But when self-love keeps no measure, and comes to deserve its name,
because self only is loved and neither God nor neighbor; Romans 14 7.
then it is turned to a weed which must be plucked up, for, None of us lives to
himself. But let us love our selves so, that instead of loving we do not ruin
our selves. He that thinks his happiness is laid up in any thing but God, that
hugs the world as his treasure, and will leave his hold to take the world with
both hands, is in the way to undo himself, and kill himself with plenty, like
that Roman Lady which was crushed to death with the load of those bracelets
which she coveted, and were heaped upon her by the soldiers with a cruel
liberality. Be not taken with the worlds beauty, it is as fading as a woman's, 1
Cor. 7.30.
the fashion of it, as the Apostle speaks, passes away. Let it not then
engage you too far. Be to the world, as worldly men are to heavenly things;
they hear as if they did not hear, they pray as if they did not pray; or as
thrifty good plodding husbands, are in games, they play as if they did not
play, and care not whether they win or lose, because they will never play for
much; so, Use the world as though ye used it not, sorrow as though ye sorrowed
not, rejoice as though ye rejoiced not; and then the world can never prevail
to engage to the betraying of your consciences and peace. St Basil the great
had this indifferency to the world and all worldly comforts. His mind it seems
was not set upon the world, for when Modestus the governor threatened him with
confiscation of his estate. Alas (said he) do you think that can trouble me
who have nothing to lose but a threadbare gown and a few books, and yet he was
a most famous Bishop. He cared not for the world, and therefore the world could
not make him warp. For the strengthening of this, I will only commend two
things, and then make an end. 1. Get the love of Jesus Christ into your hearts,
which will be sure to keep possession and to command forth worldly love. It
will stamp and imprint it self, as they say Calais was in Q. Mary's heart,
which she told them that were about her, they should find engraven in legible
letters, if they opened her heart when she was dead. They say, the word Jesus
was found in the heart of St Ignatius, Socrat. Soz. Theod.
I bid no man believe that, but I am sure the love of Jesus wrought strongly
upon his heart, so that he despised the world both in her allurements and
terrors for his sake. Sacred. Poem. p. 105.
It Is a sweet conceit of our Poet whose words I will once more venture to offer
unto my reader.

JESV is in my heart, his sacred Name,
Is deeply carved there: but the' other week
A great affliction broke the little frame,
Even all to pieces: which I went to seek,
And first I found the corner where was J
After, where ES, and next where U was graved.
When I had got these parcels, instantly
I sat me down to spell them, and perceived
That to my broken heart he was J EaSe yoU
And to my whole is JESV.
Court all the smiling and flattering contentments the whole world can afford
you, and see if any thing else can give ease and relief in a broken estate. 2.
Maintain heavenly hopes, to overcome present hopes and pleasures. Get ravished
thoughts of the beauty of the new Jerusalem. When preferments happily begin to
smile upon you, and to entice away your integrity, consider there are higher
preferments, a Kingdom prepared from the beginning of the world. There are
things above worthy of all our pains and of our utmost resistance of the
strongest and most winning tentations. Mat. 25.34.
There is more then within the reach of our eye. Alexanders vast mind enquired
if there were any more Worlds: we are assured there is another. This assurance
kept Abraham right, Heb. 11.10.
who looked for a city which has foundations whose builder and maker is God;
and the rest of the Patriarks right, who died in faith not having received the
promises, but having seen them afar off, and were persuaded of them, and
embraced them, and confessed that they were strangers and pilgrims, on the
earth; for they that say such things, declare plainly that they seek a country;
and truly if they had been mindful of that country from whence they came out,
they might have had opportunity to have returned; but now they desire a better
country, that is, 2 Match. 7.2, 9, 10, 12, 14, 16, 18, 19, 20, 22, 27, 28. Jos.
in Orat de Maccab. Chrysostom. To. 1. p. 551.
an heavenly. In a word, This it was that kept the seven brethren right, whose
glorious martyrdom is recorded in the history of the Maccabe's, and by
Josephus, and is amply commended by St Chrysostom in a peculiar Homily. I will
not presume to add any more, after I have commended unto men the hopes and
expectations of the heavenly inheritance. I shall give over the cure as
desperate, if the thoughts of Heaven work not. I have only to request the
serious consideration of these things, and that men would for a while compose
their thoughts in quiet, that the medicaments might more kindly work; which is
after the counsel of a good Physician, Fern. de Meth. Our. l. 3. c. 14.
who would have the patient sleep a little after he has taken a medicine.

FINIS.
The Table of Historians and other Authors alleged. The first figure shows
the Book. The second the Chapter. The third the Section.
A
Jo. Aberneath. Phys. for soul. l. c. 2.5.1 Melch. Adam. in Vit. Theolog. l. c.
1-7-1 l. 2-c. 10- l. 1.c. 12- 1- l. a c. 4- 1 Aeneas Sylv. in Epist. l. c.
1-18-2 Aelian, l. c. 1-5- l. 2. c. 5- 1. l. 2-c. 8- 2 Armonius. l. c. 1-18-4
Ainsvvorth Annot. l. c. 1-7-1 Alex. ab. Alex: Genial. Dier. l. c. 2-8-1 Pet:
Aliac. de Reform. l. c. 1-18-2 Jo: Alsted. Theology. Nature. l. c. 2 2-2
Paratitila. l. c. 1-2-1 Theolog. Cas. l. c. 1-2-2 Ambros. in Psalm. l. c. 2 15
in Lucann. l. c. 1-14-1 Sermon. de Abrah. l. c. 1-11-1 D. Andrews, Sermon. l. c.
1-11-1 Antonin: Florent. Hist. l. c. 2-14- Aquinas in Sent. l. c. 2-15- in
Summa. l. c. 1-^-1 Arab: Versio Bibl. l. c. 1-6-1 Archer, Christ's Person.
reign. l. c. 2-5-2 Athanas. orat. contr. Arrium. l. c. 2-8-3 2-15- Avicen: Lib.
Can. l. c. 2-9- August: Sermon. D^m^in Monte. l. c. 1-2-1 August: Sermon. ad
fratres in Eremo. l. c. 1 11-1 August: De opere Monacherum. l. c. 1-9-2 August:
In Psalmos. l. c. 1-12- August: De Here Is. l. c. 1-15-1 August: Contr: Donatist.
l. c. 1-23- August: Lib: Medit: l. c. 2-15- August: De Civitate. l. c. 2-17-
Azo^ij Institut. l. c. 2-13-
B
Jo: Bale, Lives of Engl: Votaries. l. c. 1-11-1 1-18-2 Jo: Ball Answ: to
Can. l. c. 1-15-1 Balzac Epist. l. c. 1-11-1 Guil. Bail: Catech. Controv. l.
c. 1-18-2 Baron: Annal. l. c. 2-1-2 Breder: Baldwin. de Cas. l. c. 2-13- Basil:
Praefat: ad Ascet. l. c. 2-8-2 Sermon: in Gord. l. c. 2-16- Bernard. 1-24-1 in
Cantic. l. c. 1-18-2 Theodor. Bez: Annot. l. c. 2 5-1 Vita Calvini. l. c.
1-20-3 Bibliorum Versio. Sec. LXX. l. c. 1-6-1. l. 2-5-1 Bibliorum Syrianca. l.
c. 1-6-1 Bibliorum Arabica. l. c. 1-6.1 Bibliorum Tremelliana. l. c. 1-6-1
Bibliorum Editio Romans l. c. 1-6 1 Bibliorum Complutens. l. c. 1-6-1 Bibliorum
Basiliens. l. c. 1-6-1 Bibliorum Venet. l. c. 1-6-1 Bibliorum Plantin. l. c.
1-6-1 Biz zer: Summa. l. c. 1-3- Pet: Blesens Epist. l. c. 26-8-3 Will:
Bidembach. Lib. cui Tit. Papat. ab. negat. l. c. 1-14-2 Brigettae Prophet. l.
c. 1-18-2 Mart: Bresser de Conscient. l. c. 1-10- Casp: Brockmond. System l. c.
1-2-2 L. Brook, Not. of Episcop. l. c. 1-11-1 Not of Truth. l. c. 1-18-1 Mart:
Bucer, in Commen. l. c. 1-6-2 Abrah: Bucholzer. Chronic, l. c. 1-12-1 D.
Buckridg. Funer: of D. Andr. l. c. 1-14-2 Bonavent. in Lumbard. l. c. 2-15-
Bolton, Quatuor Novissima. l. c. 2-8-3 Bullinger. Vita. l. c. 2-1-2 Bullinger.
Epist. l. c. 1-16-1 Jer: Buroughs, Moses self denial, l. c. 2-8-2 Lord of
Hosts. l. c. 1-9-1
C
Cajetan Cas. l. c. 1-3- Cameron Myrothec. l. c. 1-24-2. l. 8-c.1-s. 1
Stelliteuticon. l. c. 1-9-2 Th: Campanell. Atheism Triumphat. l. 1. c. 16-s.
17- l. 2-c. 7. s. 1 Dan: Chamier. Panstrat. l. c. 2-2-2 Calvin. Epist. ad
Grynae. l. c. 2-10- P. Charron. de Sapient. l. c. 1-4- l. 2-c. 3-s. 1. l. 2. c.
7-s. 1 Chald Paraphr. l. c. 1-6-1 Jo: Can, Stay against straying. l. c.
1-15-1 Cassian. Collat. l. c. 1-15-1 Cassiodor. Hist. l. c. 1-23- Capitula
Incertae Edit. apud Spelm. l. c. 1-14-2 Wolfgang. Capito in vita Oecolamp, l.
c. 1-16-1 Catechism. Jesuit: l. c. 1-18-2 Ludov. Capell, Spiceleg. l. c. 1-8.1
Caussin, Holy Court. l. c. 1-16-1, l. 1-19-5 Caesarius. l. c. 1-23- Lib.
Ceremon. l. c. 1-11-1 Christophers. Edit. Eusebius. l. c. 1-11-1 Chrysostom. Hom. in
Tim. l. c. 2-1-2-l. 2-c. 17- In Math. l. c. 2-5-1 In Luc. l. c. 1-9-2 D.
Chytrus in Saxon. l. c. 1-20-3 Cicer. Paradox. l. c. 1-6-1 Orat. pro. Caelio.
l. c. 1-23- Climac. Grad. l. c. 2-15- Clemen. Alex. l. c. 1-23- Cornel.
Celsusi. Medicinal l. c. 2-9 Herm. Contract. Chron. l. c. 1-18-1 Council.
Delect. Cardin. l. c. 1-18-2 Council. Hybernic. op. Spelm. l. c. 1-18-2 Hist. of
Coun. of Trent. l. c. 1-11-1 Jo. Coch. in not. ad N.T. l. c. 1-8-1 Mart. Cromer
de reb. Polon. l. c. 2-16- Cruserij. Plutarch. l. c. 1-23- Culvervvel, Time
well spent. l. c. 1-14-2 Cyprin Epist. l. c. 1-11. 1. l. 1-c 24-s. 2 Cyprian
Sermon. de Laps. l. c. 2-2-2.
D
Jo. Damascen. Aphorism. l. c. 2-9-1 Dangerous Positions, etc. l. c. 1-24-2
Davenant. Determine. l. c. 1-11-1 Ludov. de Deiu ad N.T. l. c. 1-8-1 Dod, Tr. of
zeal. l. c. 1-20-3 Dorotheus in Synopsi. l. c. 1-23- Math. Dresser. in Millen.
l. c. 2-3-2
E
Elmer, Harborough for Faithf. l. c. 1-20-4 Epbraem. lib. de extr. Iud. l. c.
2-15- Epiphan. de Haeres. l. c. 2-1-2 Erasm de ratione Concion. l. c. 1-16-1
Colloqu. l. c. 1-9-2. l. 1. c. 11-l. 1 Paraphr. in N.T. l. c. 1-15-1 In vita
Chrysostom. l. c. 2-17- Erpenius in edit. N.T. l. c. 1-6-1 Espensaeus in Tit. l.
c. 1-18-2 Eusebius Hist. l. c. 1-11-1 Et passim. de vita Constant. l. c. 1-12-1
Evagri. Hist. l. c. 1-23-
F
Fernel. de febribus. l. c. 1-20-3, 4 de Symptom. l. c. 2-1- de Abdit. rer.
Cause. l. c. 2-9- method. Curand. l. c. 2-15- 2-17- Fuller. Answ. to D. Fern. l.
c. 3-c-1 Fox, Act. and Mon. l. c. 2-1-1. l. 2-c. 3. s. 1. Forbes. de Iustif. l.
c. 1-23- Sebast. Franc. Chron. l. c. 1-15-1 The Fuller. Holy war. l. c.
1-16-1 Barth: Fumi, Armil. Aur. l. c. 1-2-2 Francij Chronol. l. c. 2-1-2
G
Ju: Gemenian de Exemp. l. c. 2-7-2 2-8 4 Genev. Mar. 1 4- l. 1 c. 6-s. 1 Jo:
Gerson, de defect. Eccl.l. c. 1-18-2 Gissebert. in vita Bern. l. c. 2-3-1
Goodwyn, Catal. of Bishops. l. c. 1-18-1 2-8-3 Greg. Nazien. ad Nem. l. c.
1-23- Greenham, Comm. pla. l. c. 1-11-1 l. 1-c.14-s 7. l. 1-c. 16-s. 1 Guzman.
de Alfar. l. c. 1. 20-3. l. 1. c. 24. s. 2
H
D. Hall, Charact. l. c. 1-7-1 Hon. of Mar. Clerg. l. c. 1-18-2 S. Jo.
Harrington, MS. Hist. of Bishops, l. 1. c. 16-s. 1. l. 1-c. 20-s. 1 l.
1-c.20-s. 4- l.2-c.8-s. 4 Sebast: Heinric. Otium delit. l. c. 2-15- Dan:
Heinsius in Exerc. l. c. 1-8-1 l.2-c.2-s.1. l.2-c.6-s.3 Harris, Sermon. l. c.
1-24-2 Henning. August in port a Caeli. l. c. 2 3-2 Geo. Herbert, Sacred Poems.
l. c. 1-18-1 l. 2-c. 5-s. 1. l. 2-c. 10. l. 2. c. 17 Tho. Herbert, Descript. of
Persian Mon. l. c. 1-6-2 Sigism. ab Herberstein, de Reb. Muscov. l. c. 1-7-1
Hieron. ad Julian. l. c. 2-82 In Dan. l. c. 2-15- In Epist. l. c. 1-23-
Hildersheim in Job. l. c. 1-23- Jac: Heerbrand in refut. Jesuit. l. c. 1-9-2
Hist Tripart l. c. 1-23- Homer. Iliad. l. c. 1-20-4 Hooker, Souls Hunil. l. c.
1-16-1 Horat. Satyr. l. c. 2-17- Andr. Hondorp. Spec. Hist. l. c. 2-3-1 Rodolph
Hospinian, de Monach. l. c. 1-8-2 Huntley, Breviat. l. c. 1 9-2 Vlric ab
Hutten, ep ad Card. l. c. 2-12- Hypocrat. Prognostic. l. c. 2-9-1
I
D. Jackson, Iustif. Faith. l. c. 1-14-2 Illyric. Catal. Test. l. c. 2-3-2
Joseph. in Orat. de Maccab. l. c. 2-17- de Bello Iud. l. c. 2-15- Antiq Iud. l.
c. 1-20-4 Johnson. Relat. of Kingdom. l. c. 1-6-2 Irenaeus. l. c. 1-23- Fr:
Junius in Apocr. l. c. 2-16- Junij Adag. l. c. 1-20-4 Christ. Justell. Cod.
Can. l. c. 1-18-2 2-8-3 Isidor. Etymol. l. c. 1-2- l. 1-6-2
K
Th. a Kempis, de Imit. Christi. l. c. 2-8-4 2-10- Jo. Willhelm. Kirchof.
Farrago. l. c. 1-24-2 Knolls, Turk: Hist. l. c. 1-20-4 Jo. Knox, Hist. of
Scotl. l. c. 1-^-2
L.
A.L. Spec. Bell: Sacr. l. c. 1-16 Lansperg: in Pharetra, etc. l. c. 2 8-2
Lindan. Dubitant: l. c. 1-9-1 Just. Lipsius de Con. l. c. 1-18-2. l. 1. c. 20.
s. 4 Lisle, Ant: Sax: Mon. l. c. 1-20-1 Livij. Hist. l. c. 2-2-2. l. 2. c. 4.
s. 1 Lucian: Dialog: l. c. 1-11-1. l. 1. c. 21 Luther Tom. l. c. 2. 1-20-3
Epist. l. c. 2-3-1
M
MS Comment: de Artic. Lambeth. l. c. 1-23 MS. lib Eccl. Christi Cantuar. l. c.
1-20 4 Magdeburg: Centur: l. c. 1-7 l. 1. c. 20 s. 2. l. 1 c. 24, 2. l. 2. c.
8. s. 2. l. 2. c. 8. s. 4. D. Tob: Math Cone. l. c. 1-16-1 Martial: Epigr. l.
c. 2-8-1 Just. Martyr: Apol l. c. 1-18-3 Per. Martyr: loc com. l. c. 1-2-2 In
lib: Reg. l. c. 1-8-2 Epist: l. c. 2-6-3 Mason, new art of lying. l. c. 1-2-2
Hear. and doing. l. c. 1-8-2 Epicures fost. l. c. 1-16 Exercit. on Malachi. l.
c. 1-14-2 l. 2. c. 2. s. 1. l. 2. c 11. Meade Apostacy of l. times. l. c.
1-18-2 l. 1. c. 20. s. 3. l. 2. c. 2. s. 2. Merc. Trismeg: in Cratere. l. c.
2-16 Meteran: Hist. Belg. l. c. 1-15-1 Montacut: Appar: ad Orig. l. c. 1-7-1 l.
1. c. 10. l. 1. c. 19. s. 2. Monta^g: Essa. l. c. 2-3-2 Sir Tho. More, life of
Edw. 5. l. c. 2-3-2 M: Mores large map of Can: l. c. 1-9-1 D. Th. Mori Vtopia.
l. c. 2-11 Abr: Muscul: in vita Wolfgang. l. c. 2-3-2 Corn: Muss. orat. l. c.
1-18-2 Mylius ap. Wolf. l. c. 1-4
N
Greg. Nazien: orat. de fide l. c. 2-2-2 orat. de pace. l. c. 2-2-2. l. 2.9.3
Niceph or. hist. l. c. 2-2-2 Greg: Nissen. de vita Mosis. l. c. 2-16
O
Oecolamp Epist. l. c. 1-7-1 Olimpiador: in Eccles: l. c. 2-15 Optat. Milev:
adv Parm: l. c. 12-8-3 Origin. Hom: in Ezekiel. l. c. 2-8-2 Osiandri Centur: l. c.
1-12-1
P
Palingeu: Zodiac. vitae. l. c. 1-1^-2 Pallad: in vita Isid: Presb: l. c.
1-12-1 Pamel: Edit: Cypr. l. c. 1-11-1 Guide: Pancirol: de reb: memor. l. c.
1-13-1 Phil: Parei narrat* Histor: de vita patris, l. c. 2-8-1 Com. in Iud: l.
c. 1-9-1 Pausanias in Attic. l. c. 2-8-1 Alvar. Pelag de planct: Eccl: l. c.
1-11-1 1-18-1 Pemble, Root of Apost. l. c. 2-1-2 Fr: Petrarch: de Remed: l. c.
2-16 Pic. Mirand. ep. l. c. 1-11-1. l. 2. c. 8. s. 2. Plato de legibus. l. c. 2
2-2 Plin: Hist: Not: l. c. 1-5 Plutarch: Paral. l. c. 1-23. l. 2. c. 4. s. 1.
De his qui sero pun. l. c. 2-5-2 2-15 Possidon. in vita Aug. l. c. 1-24-1
Poggius in Facetijs. l. c. 1-18-2 Potho promiens. de stata domus Dei. l. c.
1-11-1 Gabr. Prateol. Elench. Haer. l. c. 1-9-1 D. Preston. new Cov. l. c.
1-6-2 Gilb. Primros. carm: ad stellit. l. c. 1-9-2
R
Raban. Instit Cleric. l. c. 1-18-1 Reginald. Praxis Fori. l. c. 1-2-2. l. 1. c
3. Relat. of Engl. Fugit. l. c. 1-15-1 Andr. Rivet. Cath. Orthod. l. c. 1-18-2
Rituale Sec usum Sar. l. c. 1-11-1 Cael Rhodig. lect. Antiq. l. c. 1-2-1
S
Salvian: de Gubern: Div. l. c. 1-9-2 l. 1. c. 11. s. 1. l. 2. c. 16. Sanders
Hon of Imag. l. c. 1-11-1 Hen: Salmuth, not: ad Paucin. l. c. 1-13-1 1-18-2 Ad:
Sasbout in Iud. l. c. 1-9-1 Abr. Scultet. in Isa. l. c. 1-1-2 Script and Reas.
l. c. 1-9-1 Seneca in Ep. l. c. 1-6-1. l. 2. c 6. s. 1. et passim Jo Sleidan
Comment. l. c. 1-9-1. l. 1. c. 24. s. 1 Sozomen Hist. passim. Socrat. Hist.
passim. Dom. So to in Did. l. c. 2-15 Solom Iarchi, Rab. l. c. 1-9-1 D.H.
Spelman: Council. l. c. 1-14-2 Cyriac. Spangerberg. in Chron Mansfield l. c.
2-13 Hier. Squarzavic in vita Petrarch. l. c. 2-10 Stat. cur. Ferdin: l. c.
1-8-2 R. Stock on Malach. l. c. 1-13-1 Fam: Strada, de Bell. Belg. l. c. 1-8-2
l 1. c. 9. s. 2. l. 1. c. 23. l. 2. c. 8. s. 3 Sulpit. Hist Sacr. l. c. 2-8-2
Syriaca Versio. l. c. 1-6-1
T
D. Tailor, Com. on Tit. l. c. 1-3 Regula vitae. l. c. 1-9-2 John Tarn. in Hos.
l. c. 1-6-2 Tertul: de cultu Faem. l. c. 1-11-1 de Baptismo. l. c. 2-8-3 Tharg.
Ionathae. l. c. 1-6-1 Theodoret: Hist. passim. Theodor. a Nicem. Hist. l. c.
1-18-2 Theodor. lector Collect. l. c. 1-23 Theophylact. in Acta. l. c. 2-1-2
Tollet. Instit. sacerd. l. c. 1-2-2. l. 1. c 3. Alph. Tostat. in Math. l. c.
1-14-1 Rich. Tomson, Elench. Resut. Tort Torti l. c. 1-11-1 Tremel. not. l. c.
1-6-1 Thucyd Hist. l. c. 1-15-1
V.
Jo. Vasaeus in Chron. Hisp. l. c. 2-5-2 D. Verulam. medit. sacr. l. c. 1-13-1
Vincent. Spec Hist. l. c. 1-5 Vitae patrum. l. c. 1-19-1 Jo. V^oduran. in
Chron. l. c. 2-8-4
W
D. Whitaker de Script. l. c. 1-11-1 Wygand Syntagm. l. c. 1-2-2 Jac.
Wimphiling. Chron. l. c. 1-11-1 Jo. Wolf. lect. memor. l. c. 1-9-2 l. 1. c. 18.
s. 2 l. 1. c 20 s. 1. l. 2. c. 3. l. 1 B. Wrens, Artic. of visit. l. c. 1-14-2
Z
Zanch. de tribus Elohim. l. c. 2-1-2 In Hoseam l. c. 1-4 Tom. 4. l. c. 1-3
A Table (omitting other Scriptures, which are only quoted) of such Texts, as
occasionally are illustrated. The first figure signifies the book; The second
the Chapter; The third the Section.
L. C. S. Genesis 42.7. 1.2.2. Exodus 32.15, 16. 1.13.1 Levit. 11.18. 2.5.2. 19.14.
2.7.1. Numb. 2.10. 1.9.1. 3.28, 30. 1.9.1. 16.1, 10. 1.9.1. Deuteronomy. 6.7. 1.14.2.
Josh. 14.8. 2.6.2. Judge. 9.13. 2 10. 1 Samuel 10.27. 1.2.2. 15.15. 1.24.2. 15.30.
1.7.1. 18.14. 2.3.2. 21.7. 1.16.1. 2 Samuel 3.18. 1.8.1. 15.8. 1.8.2. 2 King.
3.13, 1.22. 10.15, 16. 1.7. 17.33, 34. 1.13.1. 18.6. 2.6.1. Ezra 4.14. 2.7.2.
Job 5.3. 2.17. 17.9. 2.6.1. 31.35, 36. 2.3.2. Psalm. 9.10. 2.6.2. 32.1, 2.
2.5.2. 36.1, 3. 2.7.1. 35.16. 1.24.2. 37.16. 2 1.1. 44.17. etc. 2.14. 78.34, to
38. 1.11.1. 116.11. 1.4. 119.1. 2.5.1. 139.23, 24. 1.24.2. Prove. 2.20. 2.17.
10.20. 2.5.1. 12.16. 1.2.2. 13.7. 1.11.1 29.11. 12.2. 30 12, 13. 1.24, 2 30.29.
1.5. Eccles. 4 4, 5. 2.16. 12.13. 2.14. Cantic. 2.14. 2.5.1. Isaiah 9.17. 1.4.
26.8, 9. 2.13. 29.13, 14. 2.1.2. 29.15. 1.5. 29.15, 16. 2.15. 32.6. 2.5.1.
44.5. 1.1.2. 48 1, 2, 4. 1.11.1. 57.3. 2.5.1. 58.1, 2. 1.11.1 66.3. 1.15.1.
Jer. 9.3, 4, 5, 6. 2.6.2. 23.11, 15. 2.5.1. 44.17, 18. 1.22. Ezekiel. 17.7, 8.
2.5.2. Hos. 5.2. 1.15.1 6.4. 1.6.2. 6.4.5. 2.9.1. 6.7. 1.4. 10.1. 1.6.1. 11.12.
1.11.1. Micah 2.7. 1.16.1. Amos 7.12, 13. 1.20.4 Zeph. 3.12, 13. 2.6.2. Zachary
7.5. 1.16. 2 Match. 6.18.19, etc. 2.16. Matthew 6.7. 1.7.1. 6.16. 1.7.1. 6.16.
2.5.2. 7.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. 1.24.2. 8.19, 20. 1.12.1. 10.28. 2.14. 12.39. 2.5.1.
16.1, 2, 3. 1.14.1. 16.24. 2.17. 23.29, 30. 1.18.4 23.33. [1.2.1. 24.51. 2.5.2.
Mark 7.3. 1.10. 7.10, 11, 12. 1.8.1. 10.17, 18, etc. 2.8.4. 11.12. 1.18.3
14.45. 2.7.2. 14.51, 52. 2.6.1. Luke 6.26. 1.16.1. 9.54. 1.20.4. 11.42. 1.11.1.
13.15. 1.10. 20.20. 1.2.1. 1.10. 20.47. 1.9.2. John. 6.14, 15. 1.9.2. 12.5, 6.
1.9.2. 15.2. 1.6.1. Acts 16.15. 2.4.2. 19.33. 2.1.2 20.29. 2.2.2. Romans 1.18.
1.16.1 2.20, 28, 29. 1.11.1. 3.4. 1.4. 3.13. 2.7.1. 6.21. 2.15. 14.7. 2.17.
16.17, 18. 2.7.2 1 Corinthians. 7.30. 2.17. 11.26. 1.14.2. 2 Cor. 2.17. 2.14. 4.2.
2.15. 4.16, 18. 2.12. Galat. 1.15, 16. 2 6.3. 2.11. 1.23. Ephesians 2.2. 2.17.
4.14. 2.6.2. 6.14. 2.5.1. Philip. 1.16, 17. 1.16.1. Col. 2.18. 1.15.1. l. 1.20
4. 3.1. 1.18.3. 2 Th. ss. 1.10. 1.7.1. 2.10, 11. 2.1.2. 1 Timothy 1.19. 2.1.2.
4.1. 1.18.2. 4.1.2. 2.2.2. 4.2. 2.2.1. 6.4. 2.17. 6.9.10. 2.8.4. 2 Timothy 2.14,
16, 17. 2.1.2 2.17. 2.2.2. 3.5. 1.11.1. Tit. 1.16. 1.11.1. 2.12. 2.13. Hebr.
12.25. 1.16.1. James 1.5. 2.6.3. 1.26, 27. 1.11.1. 2.1, 2, 4, 9. 1.13.1. 1 Pet.
2.9, 10. 2.16. 2 Pet. 2.1. 2.2.2. 2.17. 1.11.1. 1 John 2.19. 1.6.2. 2 John 8.
1.6.2. Jude v. 8. 1.9.1. Revel. 2.24. 1.15.1. 3 9. 1.11.1.

FINIS.

