THE FEMALE DUEL, OR The Ladies Lookingglass REPRESENTING A Scripture Combat
about business of Religion, fairly carried on, between a Roman Catholic Lady,
and the wife of a Dignified person in the Church of England. TOGETHER With
their joint answer to an Anabaptists Paper sent in defiance of them both:
Entitled the Dipper Drowned. New Published by THO. TOLL Gent.

Matthew. 11.25. God has revealed these things unto babes and sucklings, and
concealed them from the wise, etc.

London, Printed by H. Bell, and P. Lillicrap. 1661.

TO THE ROYAL HIGHNESS Of the most Peerless Pair of PRINCESSES Daughters of
Great Britany, France* and Ireland.
HAd I not fully known (most incomparable Princesses) by a long experience in
your most Royal Family, that Clemency; Mercy and Pardon, were your apparent
Birthrights, by Lineal Traduction from your great Progenitors, especially from
that glorious Martyr for his people, your most Royal Father of eternal memory,
and that incomparable Confessor your blessed Mother, (whose sufferings for her
King and Conscience deserve to be written with a Pen of Adamant, in the Temple
of Eternity) I had not dared to address these poor homespun Papers, wrought by
true spinsters hands, to your most Princely view, much less present them as a
New-years-gift, or make them to appear in the world, under so great a
Patronage. Now the greatest aggravations (most Seraphical Sisters) that can be
alleged against me, are: First, that I should presume to present any thing,
that carries with it the scratching of women's controversies, (for so most of
their disputes do usually determine) or that does so much as sound like a jar,
to such serene Pacifick spirits, as your highborne souls are known to be, whose
very looks are capable to quiet the most tempestuous and troubled seas, and
words to calm the rage of Tigers, and the fury of the most tumultuous and
stormy breasted Monsters of Mankind, in whose bosom the very Unicorn would be
ambitious to fall asleep, and Lions themselves rejoice to lick your Princely
feet. Nay, that I should dare to offer so much as the sound of a Duel to two
such sublime Personages, and that are so much one in affection, though
different it may be in some persuasion; and are by that great example of your
most serene Mother the Grand Mistreses of Peace, Piety, Modesty and Humility to
all Womankind. But indeed my fault is not so grievous in this neither, as at
first blush it may appear to be, for this Paper Duel is without a disturbance.
This Scripture Combat without a quarrel, and this fair dispute is almost
without a difference, I am sure without an uncivil word, and though it was
managed (as can be proved) only by women, yet it may serve to direct into the
true mode, and method of arguing, the most dextrous Doctors, and Disputants in
the world, and teach them to improve their arguing unto edification. But the
greatest aggravation (most excellent Ladies) that ca^^ rise in judgment
against me, is yet behind, (as Timourus Penitents use to have their most crying
sins to bring up the Rear) which is that I should presume to present any
actions of inferior Persons, as Looking-glasses to their Princes, especially
to such as you (most incomparable Pair) are known to be; your selves being the
matchless Mirrours of all perfection. Mirrours said I? nay, most pure and
Christialine Fountains that show not only to all the Ladies in the world, their
deformed spots, stains and blemishes, but likewise how to wash them off, and
wherewithal to clear themselves from them: which truth has been most plainly
proved and confirmed to us, by that strange and almost miraculous reformation
of our Women's manners, since the splendour of your most Princely virtues, has
appeared amongst them, for which I am sure both Sexes do owe most immortal
obligations, to your Royal Highneses, as for a new Conversion of the Nation.
Nay, give me leave to affirm, that the blessings we have received in order to
that, ought to be put into the Balance with any of those other great ones, that
^is Sacred Majesty has been so graciously pleased, to power down upon us in his
coming to us, and redemption of us from a life of sin and slavery. For truly
the Mankind here were not depraved into Sedition, Treason, Rebellion and
Irreligion, turning all faith into faction, making truth it self to lie, all
Loyally to be Treason, Religion to be Rebellion, and pulling down of Churches,
the edification of Gods house, by any instigation so great, as that they
received from their wicked women. The Seas were less furious, a Thunderclap
less dread full, the gall of Dragons and poison that swells up the necks of
Asps, was much more tolerable, than their malice. Nor were they only so guilty
in making of their Husbands become Traitors to their God, King and Country,
but they did study likewise to appear as unnatural Traitors to the honor of
their whole Sex in England (which was as famous as St. Paul magnifies the faith
of the Romans to be spoken of over all the world) flying out into such
prodigious pieces of impiety and debaucht lewdness, that Heathens themselves
have abhorred, and very Turks trembled at. From all these horrid infamies, and
national scandalls, your very presence here has ransomed our Country; and by
your all healing examples set a new fair, and reformed face upon all our
Womankind. The one being the highest Patroness of all conjugal and vidual
Honor, and the other the most pure pattern of all Virginal sweetness and
chastity, and both appear to be no less, than two Intelligences that have left
the Heavenly Orbs, and vouchsafed your selves to be inchased in those
beautiful bodies for the benefit, and glory of your Sex. To whom therefore
could this Ladies Looking-glass be more properly presented, than to your Royal
Highnesses, to whom all that is good in the whole Sex amongst us, must be ever
attributed, as Rays only reflected from your perfections. This is my humble
Plea, most incomparable Princesses, according to which joined with my clear
acknowledgement, and most dutiful Confession I doubt not, but your Princely
goodness will proceed to absolution, and dispense a pardon to

Most Peerless Princesses, Your Royal Highnesses most devoted humble Vassal,
and loyal Servant, of your Royal Family THO. TOLL.

THE PRINTER TO THE READER.
YOu may please to take notice, that this Epistle Dedicatory, was past to the
Press, before the loss which the whole English Nation sustained in the death of
that most incomparable Princess, Mary princess Dowager of Orange, and as the
Publisher left it, so I am obliged to prosent it.

The Publishers PREFACE To the Gentlemen, Readers of the FEMALE DVEL.
I Have already understood a grand exception against me, for charging so much
devotion and divinity, upon the sex of women who are the Actors in this Scene,
and the Authors of this discourse, it is true upon the first perusual of these
papers, I my self did little expect to find such Masculine vigor in them: and
truly, I dare boldly affirm, that the sum of all the controversies, that our
English Schools have been wrangling, and the Pulpits railing about this hundred
years, is here perfectly represented on both sides; nor is it to be wondered at,
that women should arive to such a perfection in divinity in this age, wherein
all learning is almost become prostitute, when above a thousand years ago, we
find one of the curiousest pieces of divinity, written by Athenais, who seemed
to be that, which the Poets feigned of Pallas; she was bred in Paganism,
better acquainted with the Theogony of Hesiod, than the genealogy of Jesus
Christ; better skilled in Homers Illiads, then the books of the Gospel, and
better in the Apothegmes of Pythagoras, then the commandments af God; but she
became afterward so skilful in the Christian Law, that she wrote in Homerick
verses, the principal Acts of Jesus Christ, and even as the blessed Magdalen
with the same hair, wherewith she had weaved nets for wanton love, did
afterward turn into a Towel, to wipe the feet of our Savior, so she
consecrated all the Graces of her wit and learning, which she had before
misimployed in vanities, to the Trophy of Jesus. Then as to the devotion of
that sex, I conceive it less questionable, when women are right set, none can
go beyond them for that. The Church has always given to them, the title of the
devout sex, Their blessing is in the dew of Heaven: they resemble Bees which
are born in honey: or rather those birds of the fortunate Islands, that breath
no air but perfumes, and are only nourisht with incense: they grow wholly
Angelical insomuch as forgetting their sex, and all their natural
imperfections, they furnish themselves with the most perfect Ideas of divinity,
and scarce retain any thing in them, common with matter. We find likewise, that
great privileges and prerogatives are given to them by our Savior, for as the
chaste womb of a woman, served him for a lodging, at his first entrance into the
world, so when he was to issue out of it, amongst so many horrors, and terrible
images of death, when stones were rent in sunder for grief under his feet, and
heaven it self distended with sorrow, over his head, women also were found near
to the Cross, as witnesses of his last words, and survivers of his blood; nay,
they were the first likewise, that he would do the honor to appear to after
his resurrection. Now I must confess, that the prejudicators of this piece and
all the devotion and divinity of that sex, carry with them a great deal of
reason too, for there is a sort of fisking Gossips, who imagine devotion to he
nothing but an ordinary practice of motions, and gestures, such as little
puppets would make, if annimated with a quantity of Quicksilver, whilst the
true virtues of devotion, we know according to S. Thomas, is nothing else but a
prompt will to the service of God. others there are of them, whose devotion is
altogether silken, and very fine forsooth in all things, so coy and curious
they will be in the choice of persons, that Sacraments themselves are good for
nothing, if they he not tied to such and such hands, where vanity seeks its
interests, nay forsooth their dovotion is such, that they will plant their
pretty petite pride upon the very hair cloth of Penance, and if God would
chastise such creatures to their liking, he must be forced, to tie up his rods
with silk, or else they will never receive correction from his hands. Though
they rise not till noon, yet as if they feared the vapors of the serain, they
must be armed before they come out of their beds, with restoratives from the
Kitchen, to keep their colors more fresh. Then they will set themselves down
to be clothed, with their Lookingglasses before them, as if their fingers were
too good to touch their own clothes, and yet will be dressed up like Idols, and
so adored too by their servants, who are to stand about them, admiring of their
beauty, which they have more ado too to preserve, then the Vestals of Rome, had
to maintain the sacred fire, one presents their Ladyships, with white, another
with red: this with some Serous, that with some Fucus, another attends the
Looking-glass to hold it, or remove it at their Ladyships pleasure, whilst
another stands behind to he the tell-clock, but dares not tell their Ladyships,
that the hour of the Curch is ready to be past, whilst their Ladyships are
fastening on their Pennons, Necklaces, or Bracelets, yet must the Canons of the
Church be as easily broken, as a glass, to obey the humors of these women, and
the celebration begin, when it is to be doubted, whether the Sun begin not
then, to bend toward its setting: prayers in the Church must be past over with
making of some sour faces, and looking scornfully with a good grace, with some
slight ceremonies of devotion it may be, which go no further neither then the
outward parts; There it is, where resolutions are made of entertainments of
time, to be chosen for the next day: then follow visits, gaddings, coachings,
dancings, etc. besides what passes behind the Curtain; their husbands in the
mean time, are very uncivil, as they say, if they give them not permission to
do any thing: and as it is said of the Moon, that she never agrees in qualities
with the Sun, but when she has ecclipsed him: so they find no concord in
marriage, but in the diminution of their husbands authority. These are the
Lady-birds that will make their husbands sell a large patrimony, to buy them a
little Cabinet, lay out thousands of pounds upon a rope of Pearl, to wear about
those necks that do better deserve a halter, nay their very ears, which they
take a pride to show little and slender, yet they must have whole Lordships
hanging upon them. A man would say, to see how they pamper their bodies, that
they were descended from heaven, and that thither they intended to return,
without passing through the sepulcher, so they deifie their flesh, and to
fatten and gild a dunghill covered with snow, they sport with the blood and
sweat of men, what a sight it is, to see these Ladies groan as at a torture,
under the weight and straightness of their garments, and yet for all this, will
court and adore their own punishments. He that will take the pains to examine
well the furniture of them, will think that they resemble those birds, that
have no body almost under a great deal of feathers, then their apparel is made
rather to sell their bodies, then to cover them. I know not for my part, what
may be reserved for the eyes of their husbands, when through all the streets
and markets, the secret parts of their wives bodies are exposed as open, as if
they were ready to be delivered over to the best bidders. Then the clothes they
wear, are so extravagant, in their head dressings, flying elbows, great
gorgets, and farthinggals, that the Church doors must be made wider to receive
them. These are the devotes of this age, that spend a fourth part, of their
life, in dressing and besmearing themselves, to make themselves gross in one
part and little in a another, to raise terrets on their heads, and shackles on
their hands and heels, to be as solicitous about adress, as if they had a
Venetian Commonwealth to manage. Then they are so imperious and proud withal,
that they must be no more offended, than those Stars, which are thought to send
tempests, upon such as have not humbly saluted them. So many hundred Communions
and exhortations have not taken off, one hair of their vanities: they will eat
the immortal Lamb, once or twice a week it may be, and yet daily upon all
occasions they will become Lionesses, in their houses. They will lay the holy
Eucharist on their tongues, as the seat of the spouse, and yet will not bridle
or restrain them from one evil word, and will speak more slanders in one dinner
time, then they eat morsels. This was the reason sure, that Solomon so divinely
assures us, Prove. 19. domus and divitiae dantur a parentibus, a domino autem
uxor prudens, houses and riches come from Parents, but a wise and virtuous wife
from the hand of God: and such doubtless as Solomon speaks of, were our divine
Duelists here, as for the Doctors wife here, she was not after the rate of
other Parsons wives, who must always be the best women in the parish, and take
place of their Landlords and Patrons wives, if they be not Ladies forsooth, and
wear better cloths two then they; no her husband was not of the common rate of
Churchmen neither, who take a pleasure to employ the patrimony of Jesus, the
sweat and blood of the faithful, in good cheer, excess and play, and suffer
their Churches to fall to decay, the Altars to become naked, the windows
shivered to pieces, the walls to weep, and Spiders there to spin their webs,
Rats to run up and down, and the poor of their parish famish, whilst I know
not what little wives, or wenches, drag silk at their heels, at the charge of
the Crucifix. Nor was our Roman Catholic Lady here, of a much different make,
being a true widow indeed, and wholly taken up with hospitalities and
charities, notwithstanding she was always under a most severe persecution here,
for her conscience. Vinegar is said to be used for precious stones, which have
their fire frozen over, and their luster ecclipsed, so she was to have a little
touch of acerbity to enlighten her virtues: she was indeed like a Pearl that
comes from the salt sea, and beheld her self involved almost from her birth, in
great perplexities and horrible confusions of the age, from whence she always
arose with so much luster, as she made still her adversities, to be steps to
the Temple of glory. Sports and feasts were punishments to her, she was seldom
found in the company of men, unless it were some beggars, whose miseries she
relieved, and persons assisted in sickness and in health. Her whole heart went
toward God, her feet to the divine service, her hands to alms, her eyes to
reading books of devotion, her arms to the exercise of huswifry, and works of
her sex, and her whole body to the sacrifices, and victims of her soul. Thus
because I was obliged not to publish our Duelists names, I have been bold to
give you an imperfect character of some of their qualities, which I hope will
discharge you of a prejudice against their following discourses; and obtain at
least a pardon from them, if not acceptance from you, which I should most
humbly beg likewise, that your candor would please to bestow, upon the
Publisher.

Your most humble Servant THO. TOLL.

THE FEMALE DUEL, Or the Ladies LOOKINGLASS Representing a Scripture combat,
about business of Religion.
THe occasion of this feminine encounter, is related thus; Mirs. N. wife to a
Dr. of Divinity, and a dignified person in the Church of England, (a woman
highly honored by all her neighbors, for her Religion, virtue, and discretion)
came one day, to visit my Lady M. of the same Parish, though of another
persuasion, yet equally esteemed, for her great piety and prudence, a Person
wholly made up of charity and good neightbourhood, and was truly that widow
indeed which S. Paul would have: Now after the common complements of such
visits, were past between the Doctors wife was pleased to assault her Ladyship
with these, or the like words.

Mrs. N. Madame, it would prove I fear, but a pitiful piece of flattery, I me
sure impertinency, to tell your Ladyship how much you are beloved, and honored
by all your neighbors, for those great charities, and hospitalities, that your
goodness is pleased here daily to dispense amongst us, for your Ladyship cannot
but know it your self. But one thing now I must be bold to tell your Ladyship,
which it may be you yet know not, and I presume your excellent good nature,
will not be offended at it, for I am sure it proceeds from a true zeal to your
Ladyships service.


Lady M. Truly Mirs. N. you needed not have troubled your self with so much
apology, to usher in your discourse, you know that I love nothing like a
friendly, neighbourly freedom; and faults as I know, I have enough, so I
desire to hear, and to amend.


Mrs. N. Nay Madame, it is no fault, that by your Ladyships favor, I am about
to tell you, but a mere misfortune only, and so it is humbly conceived by all
those, that as I said before, do so cordially love and honor your Ladyship,
and might be with as much ease and happyness to your self, remedied, as we all
do apprehend.


L. M. Deer Mrs. N. I prithee make have to take me off the thorns of my longing
expectation to know the issue of your desires, and I Will promise you faithfully
my best endeavors, to the very utmost of my power to render you, and all the
world besides, what satisfaction is desired in that particular.


Mrs. N. O madame, that you would so say, and hold, I should then be the
happiest woman in the world.


Lady M. Why Mrs N. I hope you never yet found me worse then my word, I pray
you therefore be clear with me, and you shall be sure of an equal return.


Mrs. N. Why then dear Madame, give me leave to say, that I am but the voice of
many thousands more, who have so perfect a love and honor for your Ladyship,
that they would think their lives too little to serve you, and are doubly
troubled; first, for your Ladyships sake, whom they take to be the pattern of
all noble goodness, and so perfectly amiable in your self, that you should yet
remain in such an odious and idolatrous Religion; then for themselves, that
they cannot have the happiness to enjoy your Ladyships company and family in
our Churches, as well as in our Markets, and that our souls do not meet in a
spiritual, as well as civil conversation, which heavenly content, if your
Ladyship would once please to give us, we should all think our selves arrived
at a blessedness, beyond any people in the earth.


Lady M. O Mrs. N. I do very much acknowledge my self indebted to you, and all
my good neighbors here, for your great respects toward me, and I Will assure
you I shall be always willing to impart my estate amongst them, for their
worldly advantages, but much more for their souls good, aod that we may be all
again reduced into one, I mean, that old blessed communion, which was not full
two ages since, apparently perfect amongst us all here, but since our breaches
now, are grown so great, and that happiness, without an extraordinary miracle,
is not to be restored to us, you must give me leave, to keep my own soul to God
and his Church; for my Faith, which you are pleased to call so odious, and
Idolatrous, words that I must confess, I little expected to hear fall from you,
is built upon such a foundation, as can never fail, no not though heaven and
earth should, or an Angel from heaven, should preach another doctrine, as the
Apostle forewarns us.


Mrs. N. Deer madame; in consideration of the integrity of my heart toward
you, I hope your Ladyships goodness, will pardon that rudeness of any words,
that may fall from me. But sure sweet madame, there can be no such foundation,
as you speak of, unless in the undoubted word of God, which you have most
clearly, and entirely against you in all particulars, and therefore your
Church, does all it can to blind you by keeping that from you, so leading you
on still in errors, by an implicit faith in its doctrines, which are mere
humane inventions.


Lady M. Indeed Mrs. N. you are very much mistaken, in the whole drift of your
discourse, and that, I conceive occasioned by the continual slanders thrown
upon us, both from your Prints and Pulpits. For our Church hinders none from
reading the Scripture, that can satisfy their Pastors, that they have a temper
fit for it, and humility enough, to resign up their faith to mysteries, that
will not make such use of it, as most of you do, by giving of your own shallow
interpretations to it, and opposing your single sense, against the current of
the Church. As for my part, I have a liberty, as much as I would desire, to read
the holy Scripture, and am, I thank God conversant in it, both day and night, I
do likewise find unexpressible comfort by it, and a confirmation of my faith,
every day more and more.


Mrs. N. Why then it seems, your Ladyship reads it with strange prejudice and
partiality, for other wise, it were impossible, but you should find the
grossness of those errors, that are delivered to you for matters of faith, and
if you shall please, good madame, to give me leave, I will be bold to offer
some collections of my own, out of Scripture, to save your Ladyship a further
trouble in the search, and as I shall from time to time have occasion to wait
upon you, so I shall communicate them to your Ladyship, and make that the whole
business of our future discourse, till we shall be otherwise satisfied, and
I Will promise you, my husband shall not be knowing to it.


Lady. M. Mrs. N. I do most willingly accept your offer, but care not much
whether your husband be assistant to you, or not in the matter, for I am sure
its not in the power of men or devils, to change the word of God, however they
may pervert the sense of it for a time, and so possess the souls, of their
unhappy disciples.


Mrs. N. Well then madame, I shall be bold to wait on you again within these
few days, and show you some Scriptures, that shall quite overthrow your so much
fancied foundation, and I hope by consequence bring your Ladyship into our
Religion.


Lady M. I pray you do sweet Mrs. N. and I shall promise only this, that you
shall find my reason not at all refractory to any thing, and we will manage
this controversy, as you say, by our selves, and as women in labor use to do,
never cry out for the help of man, till we shall be highly enforced.


Mrs. N. Indeed Madame, I doubt not but you will find the business so clear,
that we shall never need to come to that. So the combat being mutually
embraced on both sides, with very great kindness they at that time parted: some
days after, Mrs. N. came again to visit my Lady, and brought her weapons with
her, and so began again to accost her. Madame, the greatest things
indifference, as I humbly conceive between us, is about that which is indeed
the greatest concernment of our salvation, the most holy Sacrament, of our
Lords Supper, wherein your Church has brought so many visible and palpable
abuses, and against known Scripture, that when your Ladyship shall be once
satisfied in those, I hope we shall not need to proceed much further. I have
here reduced those abuses into four heads; as first, your doctrine of
Transubstantiation, and affirming your Eucharist to be the very body of Christ.
Secondly, your giving half the Sacrament to the people, and depriving them of
the Cup. Thirdly, making your Mass a sacrifice; and Lastly, for saying your
Mass in Latin, and not in English, or other mother tongues: and to all these
particulars, I have brought you as I conceive such apposite Texts, and here in
order set down in this paper, that I doubt not will give your Ladyship just
reason to suspect the frauds, and gross collusions of your Church, in all
things else.


Lady. M. Well deer Mrs. N. I thank you heartily for this favor, and I promise
you faithfully that I will very carefully and impartially, examine this paper,
which if upon a just consideration I shall not be able to answer, I will then
very fairly and honestly declare my submission to it within three or four days,
I will by Gods help repay your kind visit, and bring you the best satisfaction
I shall be able to do, and so I pray God to enlighten us both to see his faith
and truth, so for the present they parted, and the Lady fell to the perusual of
the paper, that Mrs. N. had left with her, which was to this effect, as
follows.


That the very body of Christ is neither in, or under the Eucharist or
Sacrament of the Lords Supper, is apparent by these few texts taken out of, and
reasons deduced from Scripture.
Matthew. 29. For ye have the poor always with you, Mat. 26.11.
but me ye have not always. Now if he were, as you believe you have him in the
Eucharist, we should have him always.

John 6. It is the Spirit that quickneth, John 6.63.
the flesh profits nothing, if therefore the flesh profits nothing, what
need is there of that great contention, you make to have it in the Eucharist?

Psalm.
that the heavens must contain him till the last day: otherwise there would be
a falsification of no less then three Articles of our Faith. Apost. Creed.
He ascended into heaven; He there sits at the right hand of God the Father,
From thence he shall come, etc. Now if he be corporeally in heaven, how shall
he be upon the Altar, for the same body cannot possibly be in two places.

Four Gospels
but take bread, nor is it to be imagined, that the nature of it can be changed
by the blowing and mumbling a few words, from a Priests mouth. Besides when
Christ instituted his last supper, he had a mortal body, now being immortal,
how can it be said, this is my body which shall be delivered up for you.

Gospels Acts 2.41. 1 Cor. 10.
we find in the Acts of the Apostles said, how they continued steadfastly in
the Apostles doctrine, and fellowship, and in breaking of bread, etc. then in
S. Paul to the Corinthians, the bread which we break, is it not the communion
of the body of Christ, and again in the next Chapter, so let a man examine
himself and so let him eat of that bread and drink of that cup: Thus currently
in Scripture is the Sacrament called bread, and yet your Church, will have no
bread left in it.

Mat.24 of those deceivers, Mat. 24.5.
that shall come and say in his name here is Christ, and there is Christ, and
shall deceive many, we are not therefore to believe those that say that Christ
is in this, or in that Host.

That it is Impious, to deprive the people of the cup, is proved thus.
Mat. 26.
and communicated both to his Apostles, and gave a command absolutely to all,
drink ye all of this.

John 6.53.
that he who drinks not his blood, as well as he that eats not the flesh of
the son of man, has no life in him.





That your Mass is not or can be made a sacrifice, is clear by these sacred
Texts.
Paul speaking of the true sacrifice of Christ, Heb. 10.10.12.14.
says, That we are sanctified through the offering of the body of Christ, once
for all, again this man after he had offered one sacrifice etc.

Then afterward the Apostle, repeats, and refers thus, for by one offering be
has perfected for ever them that are sanctified.

Heb. 7.26. and 27.
For such an high Priest became us, etc. who needs not daily as those high
Priests to offer up sacrifice, first for his own sins, and then for the
peoples, for this he did once when he offered up himself.

Heb. 9.
enter into the Holy of Holies, for our eternal redemption, 26.
and toward the latter end of it expressly says, verse. 26. that now, once at
the end of the world, has he appeared, to put away sin, by the sacrifice of
himself.

Mat. 26. Luke 22.20.
This is my blood of the new Testament, so S. Matthew, and S. Luke gives them
thus, This cup is the new Testament in my blood, which is shed for you, now I
would fain know how a sacrifice can be made out of a Testament.

but do this in remembrance of me, and again so often as you shall do this, do
it in remembrance of me, no word of sacrifice, or offering.

That your Priests, saying Mass in Lattine, and not in English do offer abuse
to God and his Church is proved thus.
Cor.is to forbid the Corinthians and consequently all others, 1 Cor. 14
the use of unknown tongues in Churches.

Verse. 19.
that whatsoever is done in the Church publicly must be done to the
understanding of the people, but when your Mass is said in Lattine, it is
impossible for all the Laity to understand your service.

1 Cor. 8. 1 Cor. 10.23. 1 Cor. 14.3. verse. 26.
all things to be done to edification, but where there is no understanding,
there can beno edification, so by consequence, no more fruit can follow upon
the hearing of one of your Masses than the amendment of a wall is to be
expected from an excellent Sermon, that is made to it, for that purpose.

Thus I have been bold to trouble your Ladyship, but with a few texts, yet
those are pregnant ones to your purpose, and so I pray the Lord, to give you
understanding in all things.

The Lady within three or four days, sent a servant of hers with this Answer.
Sweet Mrs. N. being hindered now by very extraordinary occasions, from paying
your last kind visit, I thought my self never the less obliged, to send you
the best satisfaction I could, to the Paper, you left with me, and so I have
endeavored to do, as you will find by the enclosed, and as punctually as I
could, to every particular.

To the first.
To what you allege out of S. Matthew, against the mystery of the blessed
Presence, I answer, Mat. 28.20.
out of the last words of the same S. Matthews Gospel, And lo I am with you
unto the end of the world, it is plain therefore that when our Savior says, me
you have not always, it is to be understood, of his corporeal presence,
inhumane conversation, for now he is not to be anointed washed, and dried, as
then, when he spoke those words, he was to be, by the blessed Magdalen.

To the second.
To what you allege out of S. John, that the flesh profits nothing, I say
first, that if the flesh profits us Catholics nothing, I am sure, the bare
bread must profit all Heretics less. Nor indeed do I remember; that I ever
heard of any Heretic so impudent, as to say, that the flesh of Christ upon the
Cross profited nothing. Besides, is this a consequence, the flesh profits
nothing, therefore it is not in the Sacrament, truly if that be good Logic, it
may as well follow in my judgment, that the flesh of Christ profits nothing,
therefore it is not in heaven, over and above all this, it is plain our Savior
speaks not there of his own flesh, for he says not, my flesh profits nothing,
indeed some of the Jews there, had such a foolish oppinion, as to think upon
our Saviors mystical words, that the very flesh of Christ should be visibly,
under the species of flesh torn by men's teeth, that sottishness of theirs, our
Savior only reproves.

To the third.
To what you allege out of Scriptures, and Articles of Faith, I answer, and
acknowledge our Lord and Savior to be in heaven, and fitting on the right hand
of his Father in visible and quantitative form, yet he may lie invisibly and
sacramentally, under the species of Bread. Nor does the verity of our
Eucharist, clash at all with the verity of our Articles of Faith: for we know
as the Scripture tells us, that with God nothing is impossible, His Almighty
word sure can as easily make a body to be in diverse places, as nature his
servant can make the essence of a soul, to be in diverse members. Nay we see it
plainly and positively said so, nor can it choose but be so, for Jesus Christ
who as we said is eternally to be at the right hand of his Father, yet appeared
upon earth to S. Paul, Acts 9.22. and 1 Cor. 15.

To the fourth.
To what you allege out of our Saviors institution, I utterly deny that he
said, take ye bread, but taking bread, he said, take and eat, this is my body.
Now I would fain know what difference there is betwixt saying, take my body,
and taking bread to say, take, this is my body; nor is it the mumbling or
breathing of the Priests mouth, that makes this miraculous change; but Christ
himself, when the Priest according to his institution, speaks the words of
consecration, is pleased to assist with his divine omnipotency, and convert the
substance of bread into his very body, and wine into his blood. Now this power
was delivered by Christ to his Apostles, when he gave them Commission to do the
like, and bid them so often as they did it, to do it in remembrance of him, and
so the Apostle Paul tells us, that what he received from the Lord, that he
delivered to us. Then as to the impassibility of the body of Christ, we do most
humbly acknowledge it, nor do our Priests say, (who know that our Savior dies
no more) that his body shall be delivered, but they relate only that our
Savior did use those words at his last Supper, which is Truth, for then his
body was to be delivered, and his blood to be shed.

To the fifth.
For the Evangelists calling it bread, it is always understood before
consecration, but that being done, they do all unanimously call it the body of
Christ. In like manner the Apostles, and Fathers might sometime call it so,
because before its change, it was so, as a Serpent in Scripture was called a
Rod, because it was a Rod, but Aarons Rod, devoured their Rods: Exodus 7.
then because the figure of bread, and all its other accidents remain, as
things are sometimes called from their representations, 1 Kings 10.
so Solomon was said to make oxen, and little Lions, because he made the images
of them. Then the Eucharist may still be called bread, because in it is the
living bread which came down from heaven. John 5.


To the sixth and last.
To what you allege, out of the 24th. of S. Matthew, I answer, that you are
mistaken clearly in the Text, for those words you make to be spoken of the body
of Christ, are clearly meant of Christ's kingdom of Faith. His divine Majesty
clearly foresaw, that the Hussits would have one Christ to stand for them, the
Lutherans one Christ to be for them, the Annabaptists one for them, the
Calvinists one for them the Arminians one for them, and Socinians one for them,
and the like: of such bold challengers of Christ, as those, and other Heretics
are, our blessed Savior gives us a fair warning to beware, which good Mrs. N.
God give you grace to do.

Thus I have bri^fly, and punctually as I could, answered your alligations out
of the Scripture against the mystery of Christ's Real Presence in the
Sacrament. Now give me leave to mind you of some places of Scripture, that do
most expressly assert the Catholic doctrine against you.

First, the words of our Saviors institution in all the four Evangelists, are
most significantly harmonious to a letter: Mat. 14.26, 27, 28.
as first in S. Matthew, And as they were eating, Jesus took bread and blessed
it, and brake it and gave it the Disciples and said, take, eat, this is my
body, and he took the cup, and gave thanks, and gave it to them saying, drink
ye all of it, for this is my blood of the new Testament, which is shed for
many, for the remission of sins.

S. Mark has it thus; And as they did eat, Jesus took bread, Mark 14 22, 23.24.
and blessed, and brake it, and gave to them and said, take, eat, this is my
body, and he took the cup, and when he had given thanks, he gave it to them,
and they all drank of it, and he said unto them, this is my blood of the new
Testament, which is shed for many. Luke 22.19, 20.
St. Luke thus, And he brake bread, and gave thanks, and brake it, and gave
unto them, saying, This is my body, which is given for you; this do in
remembrance of me: Likewise also, the Cup after Supper, saying, This cup is the
New Testament in my blood, which is shed for you.

St. John in his sixth Chapter, Joh. 6.51.53, 54, 55, 56, 57.
makes it his whole business to show how our Savior did endeavor to explain
this mystery; and therefore is pleased expressly to say, I am the living bread
which came down from heaven, if any man eat of this bread, he shall live for
ever; and the bread that I will give is my flesh, which I will give for the
life of the world: Then upon the Jews murmuring, he adds, Verily, verily, I say
unto you, except ye eat the flesh of the Son of man, and drink his blood, ye
have no life in you; whosoever eats my flesh, and drinks my blood has eternal
life, and I will raise him up at the last day; for my flesh is meat indeed, and
my blood is drink indeed: He that eats my flesh, and drinks my blood,
dwells in me, and I in him. As the living Father has sent me, and I live by
the Father: So he that eats me, even he shall live by me, etc.

The Gospels themselves are yet more clearly explicated by St. Paul, who tells
us thus, 1 Cor. 11.23, 24, 25.
For I have received of the Lord, that which I also delivered unto you, that
the Lord Jesus, the same night in which he was betrayed, took bread; And when
he had given thanks, he brake it, and said, Take eat, this is my body, which is
broken for you; you, this do in remembrance of me; and after the same manner
also, he took the cup, when he had supped, saying, This cup is the
New Testament in my blood, etc. And then to set the business out of all doubt
concludes, He that eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks
damnation to himself, not discerning the Lords body. Can any thing be more
plain?

Then further, St. Paul, begins with a Preface, I speak as to wise men, 1 Cor.
10.15, 16, 17.
judge ye what I say, The cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the
communion of the body of Christ? The Bread which we break is it not the
communion of the body of Christ? For we being many, are one bread, and one
body; for we are all partakers of that one bread. Does not the Apostle here
most clearly, and expressly show that in every particle of the consecrated
bread, the whole body of Christ is communicated: and as he thought them only
wise that could understand that mystery; so we must think them stupid that
will not, and worse then Jews that go about to pervert and torment this and
other Texts, to any other sense.

Over and ahove all this, consider a little more upon that Text before cited, 1
Cor. 11.28, 29.
But let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of that bread, and drink of
that Cup; for he that eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks
damnation to himself, not discerning the Lords body. Here it is clear that by
reason of the presence of the body of Christ, the unworthy Receiver is damned,
because he sins against that body. There is no man can deny, but the unworthy
eater, be it what it will that is eaten, must be guilty of that which is eaten.
Here St. Paul most clearly instructs the Corinthians, that it is no simple
bread, or ordinary nourishment, that is set upon the Altar, but the very body
of Christ, that who ever eats thereof should be guilty of it; therefore the
Apostle adds, not discerning the Lords body, that is, not distinguishing it
from other food. This I am likewise informed by the Learned, to be the sense of
the Church in all Ages; no Primitive Christian ever daring to oppose the
clearness of so much express Scripture, till one Berengarius, as they call him,
had the impudence to do it, but afterward recanted, and abjured it before the
Pope, thirteen Archbishops, and an hundred Bishops, which God grant all those,
that have followed his footsteps, to do likewise.

Now that this Transubstantiation, Genesis 2.
or transelementation is no way impossible to be done, no nor for you to
conceive, as you allege, see what God has done in the like kind; first in
the beginning of the world, God formed man of the dust of the earth, here God
changed dust into flesh; in the same chapter we find how God turned the rib of
man into woman, a bone into flesh. Genesis 19. Exodus 4.
Then Lots wife looking back is turned into a pillar of salts then Moses threw
down his Rod, and it was turned into a Serpent.

Then I will strike the water of the River with my Rod, and it shall be turned
into blood, Exodus 7.
and diverse more such mutations there are in the Old Testament. As for the New,
we find that our Saviors first public miracle was to turn water into wine;
and this great omnipotency of his, the Devil full well knew, when he to tempt
him said, If thou be the son of God, turn these stones into bread. Thus you
dispute that power in him, which the Devils themselves acknowledge: Now as
Christ with five little Breads, did feed five thousand men, by making of bread
by his Almighty multiplication; so now he feeds his whole Church of the
faithful, with one Bread, that is his body Sacramentally.

Then, that Jesus Christ did do some things miraculously with his body, whilst
he was upon the earth, which we cannot do with our bodies, nor can any humane
reason comprehend, you will not dare to deny, as that he pierced the grave and
Tombstone, afterward when he rose from the dead, that he pierced a house, the
doors and windows being shut, and that he pierced the Highest Heavens with his
body, when he ascended; all these things, I say, you will not dare to deny; yet
this which is enjoined you by the same Authority to believe, you are pleased to
dispute. What is this, but to pick and choose what you please your selves to
believe? and from being such a chooser in matter of Faith, shall be ever a part
of my Letany, Good Lord deliver me, for that, I am told, is to be a true
Heretic.

To what you allege of Impiety against the Church of Rome, for depriving the
people of the Cup, I answer thus.
To the first Argument.
I shall clearly grant what you say, that Christ being then to Consecrate did
Institute the Sacrament under both kinds, and gave it to his Apostles in both
kinds, who now were Priests; Therefore the Priest to this day that celebrates,
takes it likewise in both kinds, but what is this to the Laity? For those
words, Drink ye all of this, was said only to his Apostles and Priests, who do
it still, that is, Consecrate in the Commemoration of Christ; for no other were
present at his most holy Supper, but the Apostles, no not his own blessed
Mother, as it is clear out of all the Gospels. Nay St. Mark tells us, Mar. 1^.23
that they all drank of it, which shows clearly, that that all was only meant
of the Apostles, for it was impossible to be true of the Laity.

To the second.
I shall likewise grant, that he that drinks not his blood, as well as he
that eats not his flesh, has no life in him; but to a Sacramental eating and
drinking, there is required still a Spiritual intelligence, according to what
our Savior himself said, the words that he spoke they were spirit, and they
were life. From whence we may conclude, that since the whole Christ, both body
and blood is comprehended under one Species, a Lay man may be said to drink the
blood of Christ, though not under its proper species, yet under the species of
Bread. Again, our Savior in that Chapter of St. John's Gospel, treats
principally of our incorporation into him, which is sufficiently effected by
our Communion in one kind, the whole Christ being there, and the other Species
is not at all to be said necessary to that incorporation with Christ.

To the third.
I shall grant likewise, that it has been permitted to the Laity, to
participate of the blessed Sacrament under both kinds: and yet that use was not
universal neither, as it appears in the second chapter of the Acts, where it is
said that the people continued steadfastly in the Apostles Doctrine, Acts.
2.4^.46.
and fellowship, and in breaking of bread and in prayers: and verse 46. And
they continued daily with one accord in the Temple, and breaking bread: there
is no mention made at all of the Cup. But howsoever the use was then, and
there, we are sure in the Western Church the Cup was never permitted to the
Laity, and that for many reasons; First considering the multitude of
Communicants, some old, some young, some weak, and some strong, there would be
great danger of spilling that most precious liquour. 2. It would be very
difficult to find a commodious Vessel, to contain a quantity equal to such a
multitude, from whence it might be taken without danger of effusion. 3. The
Sacrament under the species of Wine, could not easily be conserved for the use
of the sick, because it would be apt to grow sower, and corrupt, to the moving
of a nauceousness and a vomit in the Receiver. 4. Without great danger of
effusion it could not be easily carried from place to place, as it should be to
the sick. 5. It would happen sometimes that some high irreverencies would be
offered to that most celestial and worthy Sacrament. 6. We have it related and
attested from some most holy and learned persons, that some Religious men,
though Lay Brothers, were importunate to receive in both kinds; whilst the
Priest was in the action of the Sacrament, the Patin or Plate where the sacred
Host lay appeared full of blood, to the astonishment and satisfaction of all
the beholders; and the Petitioners gave off the importunity of their former
request.

Over and above all this, we are to believe, that it was a most ancient custom
in the Primitive Church that the Laity should communicate but under one
species: Nay, that it came from the very Tradition of the Apostles, because the
beginning of it could never yet be showed, nor can by any man.

Besides, we know that there were some amongst the Jews that never did, nor
could drink Wine; and in some Christian Countries there is a great difficulty,
and at some times almost an impossibility to get any Wine.

Now as for your inference, that if the Church could take away one species, it
might as well take away both, I utterly deny; for the whole Christ being no
less under one species than under both, and as much fruit of comfort and
spiritual nutriment, to be had from one, as well as the other, the Church
neither does, nor can deprive any Christian of the Benefit of the whole
Sacrament.

To the fourth and last.
I grant again, that the Priest who is to consecrate, does and ought to
consecrate both species, because he is to perform the representation of our
Lords passion, therefore the body and blood together are consecrated under both
their proper species; and the Priest in the person of the whole people present
offers, and takes it under both species, and the whole people in the person
of the Priest, do, or ought to believe, that they receive and drink the very
blood of Christ by a spiritual kind of taking, which is very sufficient for
them, so there can be in them no guilt of omission at all.

Now here again give me leave to return to you some Texts, that you may be
pleased to consider of, and I hope you will receive the same satisfaction that
I have done, in the full right and reason of the point, that it is sufficient
for the people to receive the Sacrament under one kind only.

First, be pleased to examine thoroughly the sixth Chapter of Saint John's
Gospel, where our Savior so often calls himself the bread of life. Joh. 6.3^,
33, 34.
My father gives you the true bread from heaven: For the bread of God is he
which comes down from heaven and gives life unto the world. Then again, Jesus
said unto them, I am the bread of life: 48.
And again, I am the bread of life: Again, 50.
this is that bread which came down from heaven, that any man may eat thereof
and not dye. And again, I am the living bread which came down from heaven, if
any man eat of this bread, he shall live for ever; and the bread that I will
give is my flesh, which I will give for the life of the world. Here our Savior
is ple^s'd to mention nothing but Bread.

Secondly: St. Luke assures us, Luke 24.30
that our Savior gave the Sacrament himself but in one kind to the two
Disciples going to (...): And it come to pass as he sat at meat with them, he
t^^k bread and blessed it, and brake, and gave to them, and inmediately their
eyes were opened, etc. And this was the only time, that our Savior gave the
Sacrament to the Lairy.

Our Savior therefore taught us in St. Mat. 6.11.
Matthew, to pray daily for our substantial Bread; no mention at all of Drink.

Then we find in the Acts of the Apostles, immediately after the Ascension of
Christ, that the people continued steadfastly in the Apostles doctrine and
fellowship, and in breaking of bread, Act. 2.42.46.
and in prayers. And again: They continued daily with one accord in the Temple,
and breaking of bread, etc.

Now for a further confirmation of all this, St. Paul makes this inference: 1
Cor. 5.7, 8.
For even Christ our Passover is sacrificed for us; therefore let us keep the
feast, neither with the leaven of malice and wickedness, but with the
unleavened bread of sincerity and truth. And in the tenth Chapter explains it
thus: For we being many (meaning Priests and people) are one Bread and one
body; 1 Cor. 10.17.
for we are all partakers of that one Bread. All these Texts, as I am informed,
the Holy Fathers of the Primitive Church understood as the Church does now; and
being at the point of death themselves, would never communicate but in one
species.

To the Proofs that you are pleased to produce against the Sacrifice of the
Mass, I answer thus.
To the first.
Those Texts of the Apostle which you urge, are clear to another sense than
what you propose: For you are to understand a twofold offering of Christ, yet
both real and true; for in both Christ is truly offered and sacrificed. The
first way of offering is that with which he once offered his living body and
blood to God the Father upon the Altar of the Cross for the sins of the whole
world, and salvation of mankind; and of that great offering the Apostle only
speaks there, showing the excellency of that sacrifice above the sacrifices of
the Law. Of which sacrifice speaking likewise to the Ephesians, Ephesians. 5.2.
he says, he has given himself for us, an offering and a sacrifice to God for
a sweet smelling sav^n. Now this grand oblation is represented by our holy
Mother the Church but once in the year, and that is Saturday in the holy week;
neither is there any consecration at all made that day of the Sacrament: But
the Eucharist that was consecrated the former day, is then received, lest the
Church of Christ should remain deprived of the comfortable fruits of our Lords
Passion. The other way of Oblation is clearly Sacramental, and yet nevertheless
real, by which Christ is daily offered in the Church, and received by Priests
in the Sacrifice of the Mass, under the Sacrament, in commemoration of the
Passion, Dead, and that former Oblation once made upon the Cross: So that the
Priest in the person of the whole Church, does present to God the Father the
Oblation made by the Son upon the Altar of the Cross, and him offered; and
that is the Offering according to the order of Melchisedech. However this
Oblation may be but rightly called commemorative; not that Jesus Christ is not
rightly and truly offered, but because he is offered here under a Sacrament,
invisibly and recordatively, in remembrance of his former Oblation, by his own
command, Numb. 28.3.
and according to his own Institution. And this is the oblation that was
signified by the continual burnt-offering in the Old Law, in which there was a
Lamb without spot to be offered every morning and every evening. This second
Oblation, I say, the Priests of Christ do make daily by the command of Christ
himself, Luke 22.
grounded upon those words, Do this in remembrance of me: For this word do
cannot refer only to a bare sumption, or taking of the Sacrament, as you
would have it, but an Action and Oblation; otherwise they should not have had
the power of Consecration by those words. Christ perfected at once the Oblation
of himself upon the Altar of the Cross in one bloody Sacrifice, and by the
frequent repetition of this unbloody one, the fruits and effects of the former
are daily derived to us: So that the Mass is not only a representation of our
Lords last Supper, but of his Passion, Death, and Oblation of himself; and
therefore our Eucharist is not only a Sacrament, as you say, but it is also a
real Sacrifice; a Sacrament truly it is, as it does represent, and is taken;
but a Sacrifice it is, as it is offered and sacrificed to God; and by this
reason our Mass, in which this great Sacrifice is celebrated, is called a
Sacrifice too.

To the second and third.
In the like manner, I shall answer both your following arguments; for those
Texts do clearly speak of the first Oblation that Christ made of himself; our
Sacrifices here are but examples of that, and ye^ we offer still the same
thing, not as in the Old Law, to day one Lamb, and to morrow another, but
always the same, so it is still one Sacrifice; for as he that is offered is
one body, not many, so is our Sacrifice still but one. Behold how we offer
daily one Sacrifice, which once was offered, though (as is aforesaid) there is
great difference in the manner of offering; the one by a real bloody oblation,
the other by recordation and representation.

To the fourth.
That our Savior did say, that his blood was the New Testament, etc. I grant;
but deny that therefore the Mass should be so; for that which he spoke was
only to confirm our Faith in the New Testament; Exodus 24.8.
for as Moses being to confirm the Old Testament, took the blood of Calves and
Geats, etc. and sprinkled the people, saying, this is the blood of the Covenant
which the Lord has made with you, concerning all these words: So Christ with
his own blood confirmed his New Testament unto us, and entered into the Holy of
Holyes. Besides, there be many things of the New Testament, that belong not at
all to the Mass, as Baptism, the Power of the Keys, etc. Nay, over and above
all this, it does not follow, Heb. 9.
that if the Mass were a Testament, it should be therefore no Sacrifice; for a
Testament, according to that of the Apostle, includes the death of the
Testator; and the Mass being a Testament, does imply the death of its Testator
Jesus Christ, and so by consequence must involve the Oblation.

To the fifth and last.
I shall clearly grant you again, that the Mass is a recordation or remembrance
of the Passion of Christ, but not so nakedly, as when a Lay person does simply
communicate; but it is a remembrance after this manner, as it is the
representative action of the whole Passion. And this Jesus Christ said, do ye,
not only take ye, but do ye: that is (if we join the precedents and
sebsequents together) consecrate. offer, take: therefore that part of the Mass
is called Action. So therefore, as there was a continual Sacrifice in the Old
Testament; so in the Law of Grace is Christ our Savior made our continual
Offering, and shall continue so for ever, till Antichrist shall come, as our
Doctors do affirm, and then it shall cease for a while.

Now give me leave again to return you some proofs out of the Scriptures, of
the congruity, and necessity, that the Mass should be a Sacrifice.

First, Lev. 5.6.9.14.
it is manifest that in the Old Law there was to be an offering for the sins of
the people, and it was always the duty of the Priests to offer for their
ignorances and sins, and for their cleansing: And what Religion was there ever
so stupid, as to pretend to the service of a Deity, without some Sacrifice,
except some novel Christians, to the very scandal of Jews and Turks.

Secondly: Malach. 1.10, 11.
The Prophet Malachy does most plainly Prophecy of our great Sacrifice, when
he brings the Lord speaking to Israel, I have no pleasure in you, says the
Lord of Hosts, neither will I accept any offering at your hand: for from the
rising of the Sun to the going down of the same my name shall be great amongst
the Gentiles; and in every place Incense shall be offered unto my name, and a
pure offering; for my name shall be great among the heathen, says the Lord of
hosts. Is not this a most plain Prediction of the Cessation of the Sacrifices
of the old Law, and the Institution of the Sacrifice of the new Law? Nor can
this be meant of that Sacrifice which Christ offered once upon the Cross,
because the Prophet speaks of a Sacrifice to be offered in every place, and
speaks but only of one oblation; and that is nothing, nor can be, but the pure
Sacrifice of the body of Christ, so often repeared upon in our Masses, and upon
our Christian Altars.

Nay yet examine a little further in this great Prophet, Malath. 3.1, 2, 3.
and you will find yet a clearer evidence for our Christian sacrifice; for
being about his prophecies of the Messiah to come, and having foretold the
coming of the Baptist before him, says plainly that the Lord shall suddenly
come to his Temple, even the Messenger of the Covenant, whom you delight in,
says the Lord of Hosts, etc. And he shall sit as a refiner and purifier of
silver; and he shall purify the sons of Levi, and purge them as gold and
silver, that they may offer unto the Lord an offering in righteousness: Then
shall the offerings of Judah and Jerusalem be pleasant unto the Lord, as in the
days of old, and as in former years. What can be more plain then this Prophecy,
that the Savior of the world should purify his Priests, that is, our
Evangelical ones, to offer Sacrifices, not in blood, but in righteousness;
which can be nothing but our most holy Eucharist.

The Prophet Daniel comes, yet if possible, Malach. 3.1, 2, 3.
closer to the purpose, saying, Many shall be purified, and made white and
tried, but the wicked shall do wickedly, and none of the wicked shall
understand, but the wise shall understand: And from the time that the daily
sacrifice shall be taken away, and the abomination that makes desolate set up,
there shall be a thousand, two hundred and ninety days. This is a clear
Prophecy of the coming of Antichrist, and how long he shall reign, during which
time the continual, Matthew. 24.
or daily Sacrifice, and this our Savior himself affirms shall be sulfilled,
that upon the coming of Antichrist, there shall be an universal Cessation of
our great sacrifice, for almost four years, and nothing but desolation of
Churches. Let them look to it therefore, that are hinderers of this glorious
and continual Sacrifice from being offered in private Churches, least they be
convinced to be the forerunners of Antichrist.

But yet more plainly let us hear what St. Heb. 5.1, 2, 3.
Paul says in the Epistle to the Hebrews; For every High Priest taken from
amongst men, is ordained for men in things pertaining to God, that he may offer
both gifts, and sacrifices for sins. Who can have compassion on the ignorant,
and on them that are out of the way; for that he himself also is compassed with
infirmity: And by reason hereof, he ought as for the people; so also for
himself, to offer for sins. Can any thing be more plain? here the Apostle being
to define the duty of a Priest; declares it to be principally to offer for
sins; and whereas you say, that no one man can offer for another; St. Paul sure
was of another Religion; for he says the Priest ought to offer for the Peoples,
as well as for his own sins; and to this purpose I have been told by those that
are skilled in Antiquity, that it has been called the Sacrifice of the Mass,
ever since the beginning of Christianity: So enough I conceive said, as to this
point.

To what you allege of abuse in our Church, by our Mass being said in Latin,
and not in English, I answer thus.
To the first.
I shall for your satisfaction reserr you to the current of that whole Chapter
of St. Paul to the Corinthians, which you so urge against our Mass, where it is
plain that he speaks of Prophesying, that is, of preaching, interpreting, and
expounding the Scriptures; and sure it would be a very absurd thing, that any
man should undertake to preach to the people in an unknown tongue; therefore
the Apostle in the 19. verse, explains himself thus, Yet in the Church I had
rather speak five words with my understanding, 1 Cur. 14.19.
that by my voice I might teach others also, then ten thousand words in an
unknown tongue. I pray you mark those words, that I might teach others, which
must be understood of Preaching, not of celebration of the Mass, or public
Liturgy of the Church.

To the second.
I answer as before, that the understanding so required by the Apostle, is
principally meant of prophesying and preaching. As for praying, I shall not
enter into the dispute; for it is too nice a one for me, whether prayers though
not understood, be not profitable and meritorious; I am sure some of the most
Learned Doctors have concluded that they are. But to our present purpose. I
say, that though the Laity, do not all of them understand the words of the
Mass, yet they do perfectly all the Mysteries of it, which they learn from
their Cradles* either by instruction of their Parents and Masters, or by the
preaching and catechizing of their Pastors and Curats; then having the words of
the Mass in their own Mother Tongue, delivered to them in their private Primars
and other books, they perfectly understand by those mysterious actions and
Ceremonies that the Priest uses, whereabouts in the Mass he is, and what words
he is about to say: and this is manifest by the peoples actions there, who
sometimes kneel, and sometimes stand up, sometimes bow, sometimes beat their
breasts, and other times sign themselves with the sign of the Cross, as the
several passages in the Mass shall require. By which external actions of theirs
it is notorious that they understand more of the mysteries of the Mass, then
the most Learned Latinist in the world could, not being instructed in the
mysteries.

To the third and last.
As to this I might refer you for further answer, to what has been said before:
for all your arguments upon this point, touch but upon one string; but I will
yet show you, how much use and edification more, the people do receive by our
Mass, though in Latin. First, there is very much of the Holy Scripture in it,
and by that the Holy Ghost speaks, and instills instruction into our hearts,
though delivered in any tongue. Then the scope of the whose Mass, is unknown
to no body, though never so ignorant; for the end of the Mass, and principal
intention of the Church, who ever hears must know, whether he understand the
words more or less, to be the offering of the sacrifice, for the living and
the dead, in the memory of the passion and death of our Savior, to the glory
of God, edification of his Church, and the honor of our Blessed Lady, and all
his Saints: And why should not so much understanding in a Lay person be enough
to his edification? Nay I I am confident, that by their scantling of
understanding their devotions are usually raised to a greater height, than the
most learned and intelligent Auditors, who please themselves with a dry
understanding of the words. Nay it is evident, that the devotion of a man, may
be very much hindered, by too much attention to words. So much I conceive
enough to your Arguments, and to conclude a Latin Mass to be sufficient for
the people; but yet if this were all in difference between us, I am persuaded
the Church would easily permit you to have it in your own Mother tongue; for in
what language it is said, is only matter of Discipline: But yet I have thought
good to send you some Arguments likewise to convince you of the congruitie and
conveniencie, if not necessity, that the celebration of those Divine Mysteries
should be still in Latin.

The Scripture tells us throughout Exodus, Leviticus and Numbers, with what care
the people of the Jews were kept off from the holy place at the celebration of
their Sacrifices; how many Veyles and Curraines there were to be between the
Tabernacle and them; and none but the Priests suffered to enter; is not our
great Christian sacrifice then to be attended with as much reverence?

Nay the Priests themselves went only into the first Tabernacle; but into the
second went the High Priest alone; and that but once every year, not without
blood, which he offered for himself, and for the errors of the people: Are
not the Mysteries of our Faith more sacred? I Am sure all their Sacrifices were
but types of ours; and all those reverences which they paid then, were but to
teach us our humble distance, and how to behave our selves before our
dreadful, and most mysterious sacrifice now.

We find our Savior in the Garden, withdrawing himself from his Disciples, and
praying filently, and secretly, as you may see both in Saint Matthews and Saint
Lukes Gospels. He prayed, undoubtedly, for all the world, but his prayers were
not heard, much less understood by any.

Now that you may be better informed in this point of Discipline, I must tell
you that our Church has been ever careful to pay equal reverence to those
most sacred Mysteries, insomuch as from the beginning of Christianity, the
people, nor yet Princes were ever suffered to come within the Rail before the
Altar; and where there is no Rail, the people are forbid to press up toward
the Altar, for fear of disturbing him in his great celebration. Nay in the
Primitive Church the Christian Altars were covered with as many Curtains and
Veyles as the Jewish formerly were; and those Curtains never drawn, but at the
time of Elevation; and the people were kept at such a distance, as they could
not only not hear, but not see: what would you say to such a reverence as
that? And truly we are but children to those Primitive Christians, as well in
devotion, as in time.

Now it would be worth your knowing likewise, how the three principal
Languages that were in our Saviors time were these three, Hebrew, Greek, and
Latin, which is clearly by the Title affixt upon the Cross of Christ, that
Pilate caused to be written in those three Languages, questionless not without
a Mystery: for as his Divine Majesty was pleased, to suffer his name then to
be glorified by that Triumphall Title, in those three Languages; so his Church
has ever since thought fit to glorify it, and to perform divine offices
principally in those tongues: and therefore in our Mass is retained the Hebrew
Allellujah, Osanna, Eya, Sabbath, etc. Then the Greek, Kyrie Eleyson, Christ
Eleyson, Agios, Otheos, Yskyros, Athanatos, Cleyson, Emas; which words are as
well now interpreted, and made known to the vulgar, as if they were words in
their own Mother-tongues.

Then it will be worth your while to take notice, that it is not in the power of
any man to find out, that ever divine service was celebrated in any part of the
Western Churches, but in Latin. For as we Western Christians received our
Faith from Rome; so we have their Language still in divine service; and indeed
so speaking, Latin may be called our Mother Tongue, for so it is of our faith;
and what a confusion would follow upon a change of Language in divine service!
how should Italians, Spaniards, French, Dutch, Bohemians, Hungarians, etc.
Communicate with us, if our Masses were in English; all Christian Nations would
seem Barbarians one to another, and the sacred Mass it self, would fall into
contempt: whereas now all Nations, as if they were of one Parish, hear service
in the same Tongue every where; which may therefore, as I said before, be truly
called our Mother Tongue, because it belongs to so many eminent Nations, and
proves such a common benefit to: all you may please to add, all this, to that
upon reducing of the Mass into vulgar Languages, there would not only follow a
confusion upon diverse Nations, but a terrible scandal in each particular
people and Nation. For let us look no further, than our own little England
here, and examine the variety of Language in it, we shall find that some use
the same word one way, and others another way, and the same word will signify
honestly and well, in one part of the Nation, and knavishly and vilely in
another. Then we know that there is such a diversity in Tones and
pronunciations amongst us, betwixt North and South, East and West; that these
sacred mysteries, falling into such vulgar mouths, that would not only
endanger to induce by their ridiculous dissonancy, a Babylonish confusion
amongst us, but likewise expose that most sacred thing in Christianity, to a
contempt.

And yet after all these necessities and conveniences are considered, if you
will remain obstinate in your opinion, nor will otherwise be Catholic, but
upon such an account as this, that you may have our Mass said to you in
English; I tell you again that I dare assure you, your whole Church may have it
so; for I have been fairly informed, that it has been already proffered by the
Pope, toward an accommodation: for that, I am sure he may for a greater good
dispense withal, it being but a pure point of discipline.

Thus Mistress N. I have been bold to send you the best satisfaction I could
to your ingenious Paper, and I beseech you be pleased to examine what I have
here returned, with the sameunbyassed judgment, as I have done what you
brought me, and I doubt not but we shall quickly find our selves at the end of
our controversy. So praying God to bless you and yours, I remain your true
friend to serve you, M.
I pray you be pleased to take notice by the way that I do not refuse to fight
with you at your own weapon, that is your own Scripture, clearly waving all the
advantages that the difference of our Translations might give me.

POSCRIPT.

The Messenger my Lady sent with this Paper sealed, having delivered it to
Mistress N. her own hands, she received it with great humility and kindness,
desired him to stay a little whilst she returned a word in answer, which she
did, and sealed it up with some papers enclosed; the Contents whereof were to
this purpose.

Sweet Madam, I have received the favor of your Ladyships answer to the paper
left with you; but as yet I have not had time to peruse one line of it; but I
will promise your Ladyship that I will do it with the greatest candor,
ingenuity and integrity that I can. Now Madam, during the time that you have
been drawing up your return to my last Paper, I have been bold to prepare
another trouble for you, which I hope your Ladyship will accept likewise and
pardon the boldness that I take to make you work: but it is from the
encouragement your Ladyships own goodness has given me, and I Am sure your
thoughts cannot be employed upon better things; so the Lord give a blessing to
our endeavors: and sweet Madam be pleased to continue me, in the quality of,

Madam, Your most humble Servant, N.


The Messenger Arriving speedily back at my Ladies House, and delivering the
Letter, with the enclosed papers, her Ladyship finding the Contents, fell to
the work iw mediately, which you shall hear as follows.
Madam, the Doctrine that your Church delivers, concerning good works is a
Mother most strange erro^s and abuses of Christianity; as confession, free
will, etc. Which gives me the boldness to make my address to your Ladyship
wholly to that purpose. So I shall first endeavor to overthrow your
foundation, that is your Doctrine of good works.

That good Works signify nothing to the Justification, much less to the
salvation of a Christian, by any way of merit, i^ most manifest out of
Scripture.
1. The Prophet Habakkuk tells us plainly of him that seeks his Justification
by his Works, that his soul which is lifted up, Hab. 2.4.
is not upright in him, but the just shall live by his faith. The same is
insisted on by our Savior, Joh. 3.36.
He that believes on the Son has everlasting Life; and he that believes not
the Son shall not see life, but the wrath of God abides on him. And St. Paul,
quoting the Prophet, tells the Romans; For therein is the righteousness of God
revealed from faith to faith, as it is written, Romans 1.17.
the just shall live by faith. And again, Gal. 3.11.
to the Galatians, ^ut that no man is justified by the Law in the sight of God
it is evident; for the just shall live by faith: And again to the Hebrews, Now
the just shall live by faith: What then is become of your grand confidence in
good works?

Our Savior tells the woman diseased with an issue of blood, Matthew. ^.
that her Faith has made her whole: And in the same Chapter, assures the blind
men, because they believed that he was able to restore their eyes to them, that
therefore they should see, and saying, according to your Faith be it unto you,
their eyes were opened; by this you may see the value that Faith has in the
esteem of God.

3. The Scripture expressly tells us, that Abraham believed in the Lord, Genesis
15.6. Romans 4.^.
and he counted it to him for righteousness: the same thing St. Paul repeats to
the Romans and to the Galatians; Gal. 3.6. Jam. 2.22.
and so St. James; by all which it is plain, that Faith is the only thing that
justifies, and gives the reputation of righteousness before God.

4. We find in St. Lukes Gospel, that our Savior bids us to say, when we
shall have done all things that are commanded us, that we are but unprofitable
Servants, Luke 11.43
we have done that which was our duty to do. What is become of your doctrine of
works? Where is your merit in them, by them, or for them? when after you have
done all things, filled the world with Hospitals, Colleges, Churches and
Monasteries, given all your goods to the poor, mortified and macerated your
bodies, you are yet so far from meriting, that you are but unprofitable
Servants.

5. Our Savior tells us clearly, and with a vertly, verily, I say unto you, he
that hears my word, Joh. 5.24.
and believes on him that sent me has everlasting life, and shall not come
into condemnation, but is passed from death unto life: Can any thing be more
plain then this, that by Faith alone we are to gain everlasting life?

6. Charity it self is but a fruit of Faith, so that it is plain, Faith alone
may suffice to our justification; and our Savior takes frequently works for
Hypocritical, and pronounces a woe to such as depend upon them.

7. Then it is plain there neither is, or can be any such thing as good works,
and whosoever pretends to that righteousness is a hypocrite; for the Prophet
Isaiah tells us, Isa. 54.6.
that we are all as an unclean thing, and all our righteousnesses are as filthy
rags: And again, the Scripture tells us, that there is not a righteous man upon
the earth who does well, Eccl. 5.
and sins not. And the Prophet David cried out, Psalm.
though a man after Gods own heart, Enter not into Judgment with thy servant,
O Lord, for in thy fight shall no man living be justified: Where is then your
Justification by works? And St. Paul that great Vessel of Election, complains,
Romans 7.15.23.
that he was sold under sin; for that which he did, he allowed not; he did not
what he would, but what he hated, that he did; and that he saw another Law in
his members, warring against the Law of his mind, and bringing him into
captivity to the Law of sin, which was in his Members: what then must become of
us poor creatures, if we confide in our own works?

That Auricular Confession of Sins to a Priest is so far from being a good
work, and acceptable in the sight of God, that it is merely to be esteemed
Will Worship, and humane invention, is proved thus.
It is plain out of the very Text, which you so much urge for your opinion,
Joh. 20.23.
which is in St. John, Whosoevrr sins ye remit, they are remitted unto them,
and whosoever sins ye retain, they are retained, That Christ commands nothing
there concerning confession, but only requires Priests to give their absolution.

2. And St. James when he seems to command Confession, speaks only of a
brotherly Confession, Confess your faults one to another: Jam. 5.16.
there is not a word of confession to Priests.

3. Then our Savior said not to the woman taken in adultery, go and confess
thy sins to a Priest, but go and sin no more.

4. Again, we read of Peter's tears, and great repentance, how he wept most
bitterly; but we read not a jot of his going to confession, and yet his sin was
most undoubtedly pardoned.

5. Then I have read in Ecclesiastical History, that Confession was in one Age
wholly abrogated and forbidden in the Church.

That your Doctrine of satisfaction for sins, is most dangerous, if not
desperate for Christian souls, is proved thus.
1. St. John the Baptist being sent to be a Preacher of Repentance to the
people, taught only the observation of the Commandments of God, expressly
forbidding them to do more, then what was appointed for them to do; nor makes
he mention at all, of any satisfaction for sins.

The Lord himself declares, by his holy Prophet Ezekiel, Luke 3.13.
that if the wicked will turn from all his sins that he has committed, and
keep all his statutes, and do that which is lawful and right; Ezekiel. 18.21.
he shall surely live, he shall not die. Here is nothing imposed upon a
penitent, but to do Judgment, and righteousness, etc. not the least word of
satisfaction.

The Prophet Micah does most plainly deride all those that seek to make a
satisfaction for their sins, Micah 6.6.
by pretended good works, in this Pathetical expostulation. Wherewith shall I
come before the Lord, and bow my self before the high God? Shall I come before
him with burnt offerings, with Calves of a year old? Will the Lord be pleased
with thousands of Rams, or with ten thousands of Rivers of oil? Shall I give my
firstborn for my transgression, the fruit of my body for the sin of my soul?
Then the Prophet concludes immediately, He has showed thee, O man, what is
good; and what does the Lord require of thee, but to do justly, and to love
mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God? What can be more evident then this, to
show, that God Almighty requires nothing of a sinner, but a faithful return
to his Duty: Where is then your pitiful satisfaction?

Our Savior Jesus Christ did most sufficiently satisfy for our sins, by his
own most bitter passion and death, as is abundantly clear in Scripture: nor was
his precious Passion sufficient only to take away the sins of the whole world;
which (it may be) you will willingly grant; but also to take away the pains and
punishments due to us for them; for the Prophet, I say, affirms it thus, surely
he has born our griefs, and carried our sorrows: Isai. 53.4, 5.
and again, he was wounded for our transgressions, he was bruised for our
iniquities, the chastisement of our peace was upon him, and with his stripes we
are healed. Thus it is plain, as well the punishment of sin, as sin it self, was
taken away by him, without any piece of our satisfaction required. And Jesus
Christ, the great Physician, he always makes a perfect cure of sin and
punishment; what need then is there of our satisfaction?

That the Root and foundation of all these your doctrines is extremely false,
and that Man has no free will at all, is proved most plainly thus.
The Blessed Baptist assures us that man can receive nothing, except it be
given hipe from Heaven. Saint James likewise tells us, John 3.27.
that every good gift, and every perfect gift, Jam. 1.17.
is from above, and comes down from the Father of Lights, etc. Saint Paul yet
more plainly, 2 Cor. 3.5.
that we are not sufficient of our selves to think any thing, as of our selves,
but our sufficiency is of God. 1 Cor. 4.7.
And to the same Corinthians says, What have thou, that thou did not
receive; now if thou did receive it, why do thou glory as if thou had not
received it? With the truth of all these Texts, how can your Doctrines of
Free Will stand?

2. Romans 9.19.16.18. Isa. 63.17. Jerem. 10.23. Prove. 16.1. Prove. 30.
Again, Saint Paul to the Romans quctes the Words of the Lord to Moses: I will
have mercy on whom I will have mercy, and I will have compassion on whom I will
have compassion; and from thence draws an Argument himself against your
Free Will, to then it is not of him that wills, nor of him that runs, but
of God that shows mercy; Therefore he has mercy on whom he will have mercy,
and whom he will be hardneth. what now will become of your Free Will.

The Phophet Isaiah expostulates somewhat strangly with God about this. O Lord
why have thou made us to err from thy ways, and bardned our heart from thy
fear. What can man do then with his Free Will.

4th. The Prophet Jeremy declares it for a truth of his own knowledge: O Lord I
know that the way of man is not in himself, it is not in man that walks, to
direct his steps. Solomon assures us likewise that the preparation of the heart
in man, Jerem. 10.23. Prove. 16.1. Prove. 20.24.
and the answer of the Tongue is from the Lord; and again, man's goings are of
the Lord; how can a man then understand his own way? if he cannot understand
it, he can sure left direct it.

The Prophet Isay, and S. Paul tells us, Isay 45.9. Romans 9.20.
that it is an extravagant thing, for the thing formed, to say to him that
formed it, why have thou made me thus? and the Apostle in the same Chapter,
says, that God of his free grace, and mere election faves some, and not for any
thing of their works, or freewill, that is exprelly said in the Text, if it
were not, it would however follow from reason, for otherwise grace would not be
grace at all; and then concludes as a foresaid, that it is not of him that
wills, nor of him that runs, but of God that gives mercy: what could be
said more clearly against your Churches doctrine?

Mat. 10.19. Mark 13.11. Luke 12.11.
that they should take no thought how, or what they should speak, for it should
be given them in the same hour what they should speak; for said he again, it is
not ye that speak, but the spirit of your father which speaks in you: if then
our ability be so short to speak, how much less must it be to do his will?

Matthew again tells us in the same Chapter, Mat. 14.29.
how our Savior argues the matter with them, are not two sparrows sold for a
farthing; and one of them shall not fall to the ground without your Father: if
a Sparrow fall not without him, how shall a thought, word or action of ours?

S. John's Gospel thus, John 6.44.
no man can come to me, except the Father which has sent me draw him, and I
will raise him up at the last day, what can poor we do then, with all the
strength of our will, or works? so I beseech the same Father to draw your
Ladyship, and all erring Christians to himself.

This paper my Lady had no sooner read, but she sent a messenger with a letter
back to Mrs. N. to thank her for the favor of her paper, and to assure her of
the best satisfaction, she should be able to give to it, but chiefly to defire
her for the future, to forbear Scholastic questions, least by their little
skill in those nicities, they might before they were a ware, engage themselves
in Blasphemy or Heresy. So Mrs. N. returned thanks to her Ladyship for her
kind caution, and promised to avoid all speculative disputes, and to proceed
upon things more moral and practical, with which the Lady was satisfied, so
fell to work upon the papers thus.

To what you allege against our doctrine of goodworks, and for your
justification by faith alone, I answer thus.
To the first.
We do humbly believe, acknowledge and profess, that the just must live by
faith, for faith is the foundation of the spiritual building, Heb. 11.
and the substance of all things hoped for; as the Apostle tells us; But what
you do from thence gather, of your faith alone, is a mere tearing, and a
falsifying of all those texts, out of the Prophets Apostles and Evangelists.
For it is no where said, that the just shall live by faith alone. Now to
believe truly in God, according to the received use of Scripture, is to adhere
to him by love, and this our Divines call a formed faith, which can never be
without charity, as S. Paul most amply explains to his Galatians. Gal. 5.6.
For in Jesus Christ says he, neither circumcision, avails any thing, nor
uncircumcision, but faith which works by love. Here S. Paul assures us, that
it is not every faith that is sufficient to justify us, but only that which
works by love.

To the second.
You might be satisfied in this, by the answer before, but I shall add, that
such a faith, as that of the woman with the issue of blood, and of the blind
men in the Gospel, might obtain such a temporal benefit, as the curing both of
the one and the other, I say, temporal benefits may be procured by an unformed
faith, as the Romans and other Heathens have visibly found Gods blessings to
follow them, for their many virtues, and this S. Paul intimates, when he tells
the Hebrews, that by faith the Harlot Rahab perished not with them that
believed not, when she received the spies with peace, here was a good work too
went along with her faith. Heb. 11.31. Romans 4. Heb. 11.
And there is no doubt, but an unformed faith, accompanied with charity,
humility, and devotion, may obtain by grace, a justification from sin; and
whosoever does believe in Jesus Christ that he can justify a sinner, it shall
be imputed to him for righteousness; for without faith, it is impossible to
please God.

To the third.
What you urge out of Genesis, S. Paul; and S. James, is sufficiently
explained, and answered by the foregoing words of the said S. James 5.21.22.
James, was not Abraham our father justified by works, when he had offered up
Isaac his son upon the Altar? see thou how faith works with his works, and
by works was faith made perfect, and in the verse immediately following that
which you urge against us, he concludes, ye see there, how that by works a man
is justified, Ver. 24.
and not by faith only: for as the body without the spirit is dead, so faith
without works, is dead also.

To the fourth.
What you urge out of S. Lukes Gospel, is to be understood as the context
shows, of servants, that do what they are commanded only to do, and that is
but their duty, and no thanks are due to them; in like manner those that keep
the commandments of God, do but their duties: our Savior says nothing, by your
favor, of those that observe the Evangelicall counsels, as the building of
religious houses, giving our goods among the poor, or mortifying of our bodies,
which you seem to draw into the same conclusion. Besides, as to the keeping of
the commandments, do you think, the meaning of that text is, that there is no
merit at all due to that: it cannot possibly be so understood, must the case be
the same, between him that does his duty well, and him that does it not at all,
for so it must be as you seem to understand it; for at the worst they can be
but unprofitable, and at the best you would have them be so too; and this would
not only throw confusion into all divinity, but would be the destruction of
all civil government, and humane conversation. It is true what our Savior
says, when we have done all that is required of us, we are unprofitable
servants, that is to him whom we serve, we are unprofitable, what does the
Almighty and infinite creator, get by the salvation of his creature, nothing
can be added to him. But the text tells us not, that in so doing we are
unprofitable to our selves, God forbid, for that would be to discourage all
virtue, piety, and Christianity it self.

To the fifth.
I answer perfectly as to your first, for that text of S. John, cannot be
understood of a bare belief, but such a one, as is accompanied with charity,
for it is impossible, that a good faith, should be without it.

To the sixth.
I say you are most clearly mistaken, for charity is not a fruit of faith, but
a fruit of the spirit, as indeed faith it self, is no less, as S. Paul
instructs the Galatians, Gal. 5.22.
The fruit of the spirit, is love, joy, peace, longsuffering, gentleness,
goodness, faith, meekness, temperance, etc. And that our Savior taxes
Pharisaicall works for Hypocritical, is granted, who planted all their Religion
in Ceremonies, and neglected the weightier matters of the law, which were the
true good works and always commanded, not censured by him. Besides our Savior
charge us expressly in these words, Mat. 5.16.
Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good works, and
glorify your father which is in heaven.

To the seventh and last.
To what you allege first out of the Prophet Isaiah, I answer, that the
Prophet there speaks comparatively, between the righteousness of the Law, and
that of the Gospel, for the legal purity compared to the Evangelicall, is
impurity it self, as our righteousness compared to Gods, is no righteousness,
so our Savior tells us, Luke 18. Mat. 19.17.
that none is good but one, that is God, because our goodness compared to Gods
goodness, is no goodness, is no goodness. To your next text I answer, that it
only infers, that there is none so righteous, but at sometimes sins, not
that a man when he does well sins. Then to what you allege out of the Psalms,
it is very plain, that the prophet David begs of God that he would not judge
him, according to his own divine righteousness, that is so absolutely pure, and
without sin; for so, says he, Psalm. 25.21.
no flesh living can be justified, for he says in another Psalm, let integrity
and uprightness preserve me, for I wait on thee. Last of all, to what you urge
so hard out of S. Paul to the Romans, S. Paul himself answers in the beginning
of the next Chapter; There is therefore now no condemnation to them which are
in Christ Jesus, who walk not after the flesh but after the spirit, for the law
of the spirit of life, in Christ Jesus, has made me free from the law of sin
and death, that is both from sin, and the punishment of it; Romans 8.
and so proceeds to show, that though there be a repugnancy in the Law of the
flesh, to the Law of the spirit, yet they that mind the things of the spirit
shall be judged accordingly, and no sin imputed to them, which I conceive clean
contrary to the sense that you would impose upon the Apostle.

Now Mrs. N. I must desire you to give me leave to follow my former method, and
to return to you some Texts, that as I conceive do expressly conclude our
Churches doctrine, which is that faith does not, nor can suffice without works,
and that works are something in the sight of God, that is, meritorious of
eternal life, by the grace of God accepting them, as it had before pleased to
assist in the doing of them: All which I prove by these express Scriptures.

God commands Abraham to walk before him, and be perfect, Genesis 16.
and he will be his exceeding great reward.

The Prophet Esaias says of God, Isay 40.10. Jer. 31.16. Prove. 11.28.
that his reward is with him.

The Prophet Jeremy tells us thus, for thy work shall be rewarded, says the
Lord.

The wise King Solomon assures us, that the wicked works a deceitful work,
but to him that sows righteousness, shall be a sure reward.

The Lord recompense thy work, Ruth 2.12.
and a full reward begiven thee of the Lord God of Israel. Out of these and
infinite more places in the old Scriptures, it is plain that God does promise
and assure rewards to those that do well; But the Evangelicall Scriptures are
yet more full.

He that reapeth receives wages, John 4.36.
and gathers fruit unto life eternal (that is man) so that he that sows
(that is God) and he that reapeth may rejoice together.

Our Savior in his Sermon in the Mount, Mat. 5.12. Luke 6.22.23.
to encourage his disciples against persecution, speaks plainly thus, Rejoice,
and be exceeding glad, for great is your reward in heaven; in like manner S.
Luke relates it, Blessed are ye when men shall hate you, persecute you, or
reproach you for the son of man's sake, Rejoice ye in that day, and leap for joy,
for behold your reward is great in heaven, etc. Here reward is plainly
promised, now we know that reward, and merit are such relatives, that one
cannot be understood without the other.

Not every one that says unto me Lord, Mat. 7.21.
Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven: but he that does the will of my
father which is in heaven. Thus clear it is, that is not enough ^o believe in
the Lord, that we may enter into life, but we must do his will.

Again, Mat. 10.42.
Whosoever shall give to drink to one of these little ones, a cup of cold water
only in the name of a disciple, verily I say unto you, be shall in no wise
loose his reward. Yet again the same Gospel tells us, that all the laborers in
the Lords vineyard were to receive their reward, Mat. 20.7, 8, 9.
from the last unto the first, and so they did, every one their penny, and adds,
whatsoever is right that shall ye receive, observe how the Lord makes the
reward of man's works, a piece of his justice. The same S. Matthew still tells
us, Mat. 19.17.
how our Savior charge the young man in the Gospel, if he will enter into
life, to keep the commandments, something therefore is to be done on our parts.
But above all, the same Evangelist in another place quite states the question.
Come ye blessed of my father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the
foundation of the world, Mat. 25.34, 35, 36.
for I was a hungry, and ye gave me meat, I was thirsty, and ye grve me drink,
I was a stranger and ye took me in, naked and ye clothed me, I was sick and ye
visited me, I was in prison and ye came unto me. Here our Savior was pleased
to instance in all the works of charity, to show how they are all, and every
one of them meritoriously accepted by him.

Does not S. John likewise plainly tell us, John 5.28.29.
our Saviors express words, that those that are in their graves shall hear his
voice, and shall come forth they that have done good unto the resurrection of
life, and they that have done evil, unto the resurrection of damnation; and
again, you are my friends if ye keep my commandments; can you yet think that
there is nothing due to good works.

Will you hear what S. Paul tells you, that God will render to every man
according to his deeds, Romans 2.6 10.
glory, honor and peace to every one that works good, etc. and then
concludes, that not the hearers, but the doers of the Law shall be justified.

Again, 1 Cor. 3.8.
to the Corinthians he says, every man shall receive his own reward, according
to his own labor, and in his second Epistle to the same Corinthians he tells
them thus, 2 Cor. 5.10. 1 Cor. 9.17.
For we must all appear before the judgment seat of Christ, that every one may
receive the things done in his body, according to that he has done, whether it
be good or bad; again, if I do this willingly, I have a reward, 1 Cor. 15 58.
and at last concludes that great Chapter concerning the Resurrection;
Therefore my beloved brethren, be ye steadfast, unmovable, always abounding in
the work of the Lord, for as much as you know, that your labor is not in vain
in the Lord.

The same Apostle forewarns the Galatians not to be deceived, Gal. 6.7.
God is not mocked, for what soever a man sows, that shall he also reap.

The same Apostle prays heartily for the Collosians, Colos. 1.10. Colos.
3.23.24.
that they might walk worthy of the Lord, unto all pleasing, being fruitful in
every good work; and then afterward tells them plainly, that whatsoever they
do, they should do he artily as to the Lord, and not unto men, knowing that of
the Lord they shall receive the reward of their inheritance, etc.

To the Hebrews he says plainly, Heb. 6.10.
For God is not unrighteous, to forget your work and labor of love, which you
have showed toward his name, Heb. 13.16.
in that ye have ministered to the Saints, and do minister; and in another place
advises them, that to do good and to communicate they forget not, for with
such sacrifices, God is well pleased.

S. John in his second Epistle general advises all the world to look to
themselves, 2 John ver. 8.
that they loose not those things, which they have wrought, but that they
receive a full reward.

S. Peter is no less clear in this sense, 2 Pet. 1 10, 11.
as you may see by the Counsel general that he gives, wherefore the rather
brethren give diligence to make your calling and election sure, for if ye do
thus ye shall never fall, for so an entrance shall be ministered unto you
abundantly, into the everlasting kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.
And then in his first Epistle, he exhorts to an honest conversation etc. that
the world may be convinced, by the good works which they shall behold, and
glorify God in the day of visitation.

Then that faith is utterly vain without works, James 2 14. ver. 17, 18, 19,
20, 21, 24.
see how thoroughly the blessed Apostle S. James delivers it; What does it
profit my brethren though a man say he has faith, and has not works can faith
save him? then a little after tells us, that faith, if it has not works, is
dead being alone, then says the Apostle, I will show my faith by my works, thou
believe there is one God, thou do well, the devils also believe and
tremble, but will thou know O vain man, that faith without works is dead? was
not our father Abraham justified by works, etc. and after the Apostle had upon
the matter, stated the whole question, he concludes, ye see then now that by
works, a man is justified, and not by faith only. Can any thing be more clear
then this? yet see how S. Matthew justifies this doctrine, relating our
Saviors last charge and Commission to his Apostles thus; Mat. 28.19.20.
Go ye therefore and teach all nations, baptizing them in the name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost: teaching them not only to
believe, Johu 9.6.7.
but to do and observe all things, whatsoever I have commanded, etc. S. John
relates how our Savior would not cure the blind man, with that omnipotent
salve, the clay made of his spittle, but he would enjoin him, to go and wash in
the pool of Siloam, something he would have done on his part; Then S. Paul
assures us that if he has faith to a perfection, nay so much as to remove
mountains, and has not charity, he is nothing, what then are we without it.
Nay S. Paul teaches Timothy how to press the matter, 1 Timothy 4.
that they do good, that they be rich in good works, ready to distribute
willing to communicate, laying up in store for themselves a good foundation,
against the time to come, that they may lay hold on eternal life, etc. and
concludes of himself, I have fought the good fight, I have perfected my course,
I have kept the faith, from hence forward is laid up for me a crown of glory,
which the Lord the just judge shall render to me in that day, here S. Paul
clearly expects from the justice of God, a retribution to his merit.

Now over and above all this, John 8.
it is plain that faith it self is a work, for to the question that was asked
our Savior, What shall we do, to do the works of God, he answers presently,
this is the work of God, to believe on him, whom he has sent, and again, says
he, Genesis 15.
if ye are the children of Abraham, you would do the works of Abraham, now the
principal work of Abraham, was his faith, for Abraham believed, and it was
accounted to him for righteousness, see faith is plainly to be reckoned up
amongst works, now if a man by faith be to be justified, then he is so by works.

Last of all, what you seem in all your discourses to infer, that the best
works are full of sin; so by consequence cannot justify: observe I beseech you
what S. John says to you; 1 John 3 7, 8, 9.
little children let no man deceive you, he that does righteousness, is
righteous, even as he is righteous, he that commits sin is of the devil etc.
whosoever is born of God does not commit sin, for his seed remains in him,
and he cannot sin, because he is born of God. Note here if you please, that he
cannot sin, that follows the inclinations of charity, according to which a man
is said to be born of God: For S. Paul assures us too, that charity does
nothing amiss.

Thus if I have not darkened this truth, with too thick a cloud of witnesses, I
presume it must be clear as light it self, that your doctrine of only faith,
and depressing of good works is not only against the whole stream of
Scripture, and so unchristian, but also against all the rules of humane reason,
so impertinent and unpolitick, to the destruction of all civil conversation:
and therefore I am bold to insist the longer upon it, which I desire you to
pardon, and I will make a speedy amends, in the contraction of my self upon the
other heads.

To what you are pleased to allege against our Auricular Cenfession, I answer
thus.
To the first.
It is true, that in that Text of S. John there is no confession mentoned, but
sufficiently, implied in the power of absolution. It is enough to satisfy any
reasonable Christian, that our Savior has so clearly declared that high power
and prerogative, which he conferred upon his Priests, and to show us our
Physicians and remedy, that we may have recourse to them for our health, if we
so please, but if we will not confess we are sick, we have no need of a
Physician, at least he cannot be at all useful to us. Now that use and
practice of this high power and prerogative of remision of sins, the Church has
learnt and derived, from the very times of the Apostles; by the conduct of the
holy Ghost, as you shall see more hereafter.

To the Second.
I must likewise grant S. James not precisely to determine in that Text, to
whom we should confess, nor was it at all needful, for it was to be presumed
that no man would confess, but where he thought to find a pardon, now that
power of pardoning, was apparently in the Apostles hands then, and in their
successors continues since. It was enough therefore for the Apostles to express
so much, as was necessary to that great business of absolution, that is
confession, without pointing out that particular person to whom to be made,
indeed it is, as before, sufficiently employed.

To the Third and fourth
I do acknowledge that our Savior said no more to the woman taken in adultry,
but go and sine no more, but there the power of absolution was not settled in
the Church, how then could the adultress and the Magdalen and Peter be obliged
to confession, before confession was instituted. Besides these were miraculous
pardons of sins, not by any former prescription, for we know that the
indulgence of a spiritual privilege to any one, is not to be drawn into a
consequence for others, or made a general rule of, by us.

To the Last
I do utterly deny that confession was ever abrogated in any one age, something
I remember in ecclesiastical history, that public and open confession was
solemly forbiden, but never private, and auricular; on the contrary give me
leave to prove the necessity of it, by Scripture against you.

David confesses his sins and is pardoned by the prophet Nathan. 2 Samuel 11.13.


S. Matthew tells, how our Savior enstated Peter in this power of the keys, the
other Evangelists speaks of his disposing of it amongst his Apostles, by all
which it is plain, that to deny the power of the keys to be given to the
Church, is to deny that our Savior never had them in his custody, which I take
for blasphemy.

The text you urge out of S. James 5.16.
James, is alleged for our doctrine against you, by all our divines, as I am
cold, I am sure it is clear, as to me.

This great duty of a Christian, was absolutely taught and prefigured in the
Baptism of John, for S. Mat. 3.6
Matthew tells us how all the people round about flockt to him, And they were
baptized of him in Jordan, confessing their sins.

The wise Solomon assures us that he that conceals his wickedness shall not be
directed, Prove. 8.
but he that confesses it shall find mercy.

That this duty of confession was both preached, and practiced in the Apostles
days, is plain by that express place, And the name of the Lord Jesus was
maguified, Acts 19.28.
and many that belived came and confessed and showed their deeds.

No less express is that text of S. John if we confess our sines, he is
faithful and just to forgive us our sins, and will cleanse us from all
wickedness.

To figure out this great^duty of confession to us, our Savior charge the
Leper; whom he cleansed, Mat. 8.
to go and show himself to the Priest, and offer the gift that Moses commanded.
Luke 17.
In the like manner he commanded the ten lepers, and says to Lazarus when he
had raised him from the dead, loose him and let him go. These things I say are
clear prefigurations, of this duty of confession, which was afterward to be
established, in the Christian Church, and has been ever since the Apostles
times, most universally practiced.

To what you allege against our doctrine of Satisfaction for sins I answer
thus.
To the first.
I do absolutely deny, Luke 3.11. Mat. 3.
that the Baptize taught no satisfaction, for he taught alms and works of
mercy, for him that had two coats, to impart to him, that had none, and him
that had meat to do likewise. They that came to him for batisme, were to
confess their sins, as I said before, that according to their qualities, they
might have several penitencies imposed upon them, Luke 3.8.
and therefore exhorts them to bring forth fruits worthy of repentance which
fruits, are the works of satisfaction understood by us: by this it is plain,
that the holy Baptist enjoynes us more then our duty: and besides those words
which you quote, were spoken to the Publicans, whom he bids to exact no more
than what was appointed them, you have strained the text hard to bring it to
us, that we should do no more than we are commanded to do.

To the Second.
I answer, that the Prophet speaks there of the life of grace only, which to
attain, if satisfaction be not performed before, it is required to be in
purpose and intention, and is necessary to the preservation of that life of
grace, when it is acquired. Besides, though there should be no mention at all
of satisfaction in these words of the Prophet, that you quote, does it
therefore follow that there is no such thing required, or that the prophet has
deceived us, God forbid, for we find, what is wanting in one place, abundantly
supplied in other Scriptures, as here the Prophet mentions nothing but justice,
says not a word of fortitude, temperance, chastity etc. which we know are
equally requisite, and su^iffiently laid down and commanded in other Scriptures.

To the Third.
I answer, that the Prophet Micah in those words you quote, does not seclude,
but rather include works of satisfaction, for by doing judgment and justice is
to be under stood a severe censure and condemnation of our selves, by loveing
of mercy, are understood those works of mercy, alms and piety, that are to be
exercised upon the poor, by charity, and to walk humbly with God, what is it
but resignation of our selves to him, and perfect submission to his will,
joined with an exact care to keep his divine precepts, in this point of
penance, we are req^ired to show all the severity in the world against our
selves, that we being judged of our selves, be not judged of the Lord, as the
Apostle tells us. Besides the Prophet Micah there, rebukes not those, that go
about by good works to sati^fy for their sins; but those that foolishly
thought, by their pitiful sacrifices, and burnt-offerings with the blood of
Rams and Bulls and Goats etc. to satisfy the divine wrath for sins.

Now that was impossible as S. Paul tells us, Heb. 10. Isay 1.
and the Prophet Isay assures us, that those things were not in themselves
acceptable to God.

To the Fourth and Last.
I do answer and grant, that the passion of Christ is sufficient to take away
all sin, and the guilt of punishment, as well temporal, as eternal, it
follows not therefore that nothing is required on our parts to be done; for in
the Sacrament of penance, we partake of the virtue of the passion of Christ, by
a method of some proper acts, which are the matter of penance, wherefore the
Apostle Paul exhorts his penitents thus, not to yield their members as
instruments of unrighteousness unto sin, but to yield themselves unto God, as
those that are alive from the dead, and your members as instruments of
righteousness unto God. Now to what you imply of argument in that Christ Jesus
is the great Physician, and so likely to make a perfect, cure as well from
guilt of the punishment, as from the guilt of the sin it self. I do acknowledge
him to be the great Physician of our souls, and to cure perfectly as you say,
yet very differently, Luke 4.
and sometimes suddenly, and all at once, as Peter's wifes mother, who was
perfectly restored to perfect health, sometimes again he is pleased to cure
very leasurely, as when he cured the blind man, first he was pleased to restore
him to an inperfect use of his sight, Mar. 8.
as to see men like trees walking, then he was pleased afterward to perfect
his cure, and make him to see clearly all things; just so he is pleased to pass
his spiritual cures upon us, sometimes he is pleased to turn the heart of man,
with such a power, that it shall presently enjoy a perfect spiritual health, as
he did that of the blessed Magdalen; sometimes again he remits the sin, by his
operating grace, and afterward works so with his cooperating grace, that in
process of time, he takes away all the guilt of punishment, and all the other
relicts of sin; it is not therefore to be proved by any of Christ's corporal, or
spiritual cures, that the sin being remitted, all the punishment is remitted
likewise, but rather the contrary, and I shall proceed further to prove it thus.

The Catholic doctrine that I am to prove now against you, is this, that sins
being by contrition, confession and absolution perfectly forgiven, the penitent
ought yet to satisfy for the temporal punishment due to them.
Adam without doubt repented himself of his sin, Genesis 2.17.
notwithstanding he was not presently absolved from the punishment that was
threatened by God for it; which was this, for in theday, that thou eatest
thereof, thou shall surely dye. Nay after the transgression of the divine
precept, beyond the business of death, which was before threatened, God adds
others, saying to Adam, Genesis 3.17.
because thou have hearkened unto the voice of thy wife, and have eaten of the
tree, of which I commanded thee saying, thou shall not eat of it, cursed is
the ground for thy sake, in sorrow shall thou eat of it all the days of thy
life. Thorns also and Thistles shall it bring forth to thee etc. Genesis 3.16.
in the sweat of thy face shall thou eat bread, till thou return unto the
ground, for out af it wast thou taken, etc. Then he said unto the woman, I will
greatly multiply thy sorrow, and thy conception, in sorrow shall thou bring
forth children, and thy desire shall be to thy husband, and he shall rule over
thee, etc. Romans 5.
and as in Adam all sinned so all in him are to die, as the Apostle tells us.
Therefore it is plain, that though the guilt of original sin be taken away by
repentance, and baptism it self, there remains still a punishment of death,
and diverse other penalties inflicted.

Mariam the sister of Moses, Number. 12
after the sin o murmuring against Moses was committed, was struck with a
Leprosy, but she was not presently cured, no not by Moses his prayer to the
Lord for her recovery, but she was cast out of the Tents, by the Lords command,
for seven days, for the punishment of her sin, though the guilt was forgiven
her, and she remained all that while in her Leprosy.

God forbid Moses and Aaron, Number. 20
the going in, and leading of their people with them into the land of Promise,
for their sin of unbelief, at the water of Strife, though without doubt God
Almighty had forgiven the sin to those holy men.

So the sons of Jacob, Genesis 41.21.
for their offense committed against their brother Joseph, conceived what they
suffered to be very due to them; and David after he had confessed his sin of
adultery and murder, 2 Samuel 12.13, 14, 15.
and was pardoned by the Prophet Nathan in these words, the Lord also has put
away thy sin, thou shall not dye: yet adds, howbeit because by this deed thou
have given great oncasion to the enemies of the Lord, to blaspheme, the child
also that is born unto thee, shall surely dye, and the Lord struck the child,
that Vriahs wife bare, etc.

See the punishment of Eli and his house, after the sin was pardoned. 1 Samuel 3
12, 13, 14.
In that day I will perform against Eli all things which I have spoken
concerning his house, when I begin, I will also make an end, for I have told
him, that I will judge his house forever, for the iniquity which he knows,
because his sons made themselves vile, and he resprained them not, and
therefore I have sworn unto the house of Eli, 1 Samuel 4.14. etc.
that the iniquity of Eli's house shall not be purged with sacrifice, nor
offering for ever. All this must undoubtedly be understood of a temporal
punishment only; accordingly Hophni and Phinehas were slain, Eli falling
backward, brake his neck, and Phinehas's wife dyed in travel.

David we know had his great sin pardoned him for numbering of the people, 2 Samuel 24.18. etc.
yet he was punished with a most grievous pestilence, to the destruction of so
many thousands, and yet at last was commanded by the Prophet Gad, to make a
further satisfaction, to rear an altar unto the Lord in the threshing-floor of
Araunah, etc. and his offering cost him fifty shekels of filver.

We find that the Ninivites at their grand repentance, fasted, and put on
sackcloth, Jonah 3.1 Kings 21.27.
Ahabrent his clothes, and put sackloth upon his flesh, and fasted, and lay in
sackeloth and went softly, by which humbling of himself he did in part,
satisfy and pacify the divine wrath conceived against him. Jerem. 18.8.
This the Prophet Jeremy most clearly expresses, saying in the person of God,
if that nation against whom I have pronounced, turn from their evil, I will
repent of the evil that I thought to do unto them, and according to the measure
of the fault, so ought the measure of the punishment to be, as we read in the
book of Deuteronomy. Deuteronomy. 25
All this is clearly confirmed by S. John in his Apocalypse, saying, how much
she has glorified herself, and lived deliciously, Revel. 18 7. John 5.14.
so much torment and sorrow shall be given her, but above all we find it clear
in the Gospel, where our Savior after he had cured the man that was sick of
the Palsy eight and thirty years he said unto him, behold thou art whole sin
no more, least a worse thing come unto thee, plainly intimating, that this
great and long infirmity, was inflicted upon him for his sins, and though those
sins were probably pardoned before, by the great mercy of God, and patience of
the person suffering, yet the punishment lasted still upon him.

Now that prayer, fasting, and alms, which are enjoined to penitents, are
necessary to the Sacrament of Penance, appears plainly by these Scriptures.

We find in Leviticus how God commands several sorts of Sacrifices to be
offered for the sins of the Priests, Levit. 4.5.6.
Prince and People. I pray you then observe how the Prophets call upon us for
these duties, therefore also now says the Lord, turn ye even to me with all
your heart, and with fasting and with weeping, and with mourning. So the
Prophet Joel. Then the Prophet Daniel says, more clearly yet to Nebuchadnexzar,
wherefore O King let my counsel be acceptable unto thee, and break off thy
sins by righteousness, and thine iniquities by showing of mercy to the poor, it
may be a lengthening of thy tranquillity etc. We sinde again how the Ninivites
repenting at the preaching of Jonas proclaimed a fast, and put on Sackcloth,
from the greatest even to the lest of them. The King himself arose from his
throne, laid by his Robe, and covered himself with sackcloth and sat in
ashes, crying all mightyly unto God, and turning from their evil ways, and the
violence in their hands. And God saw their works that they turned from their
evil way, and God repented of the evil etc. is not here a plain fatisfaction
performed by the Ninnivites, and so accepted by God, and as clearly expressed by
the Prophet? and is not this repentance, and satisfaction of the Ninivites
highly commended by our blessed Savior? saying the men of Ninnive shall rise
up in the judgment with the men of this generation (that is obstenate
impenitent siners, Luke 11.32.
such as refuse to satisfy for their sins) and shall condemn it, for they
repented at the preaching of Jonas etc.

That great preacher of repentance, Mat. 3. Lxke 3.
the holy Baptist, cries out to bring forth fruits worthy of repentance: does
not our Savior plainly pronounce a woe unto Chorazin and Bethsaida for their
impenitence? Mat. 11.21, 22.
assuring them that if those mighty works he did there, had been done in Tire
and Sidon, they would have repented long ago in sackcloth and ashes, and
therefore concludes, that it shall be more tolerable for Tire and Sidon in the
day of judgment, then for them, and in another place tells them, that unless
they repent, Luke 15.
they shall all likewise perish, as those upon whom the tower of Siloam fell,
and to conclude all this, least I again endanger to bring an obscurity upon
this truth, by too great a cloud of witnesses appearing for it, S. Paul exhorts
us all to approve our selves as the Ministers of God, in patience, 2 Cer. 6.4.5.
in watching, and in fastings, so I presume you will not still deny, that
satisfaction is very requsite nay necessary to a perfect penitent.

To what you allege against the doctrine of our Church, in point of the
Liberty of the will, I answer thus.
To the first.
I answer, by granting that all good comes from God, the donor, but some of
those good things he gives, through the action of our freewill, and others he
gives clearly without it. So we humbly confess our merits to be the gifts of
God, and given by God, preventing cooperating, and following us, in all our
thoughts, words and actions, but this does not at all follow, that therefore
our freewill cannot actively concur, to make a merit.

To the Second and Third.
I say in like manner, that God of his great mercy prevents our freewills, by
moving them and mercifully cooperates assisting them, and our Church prays,
Prevent us O Lord in all our actions, etc. so that when people do sin, God
Almighty cannot be made to be the Author of the sin, or error, and when we
read, the text you urge, thou have made us to err, it is to be understood,
thou have suffered us so to do; or that thou have hardened, it is to be
understood, thou have permitted our hearts to be hardened, and by this the
activity of the freewill is so far from being hindered, or deprived, that is
plainly implied and proved.

To the fourth.
I must most clearly acknowledge with the Prophet, that the way of a man is not
in himself, as to the executions of all his elections, in which whether he will
or no, he may be many ways hindered, but the elections themselves, are in man,
with the supposition of divine help, and therefore man's will is said to be
free, not of his actions, but action, which consists in his judgment, and his
determination to do, or not to do.

To the fifth.
I confess it to be an extravagant thing, for a man to rebel against, or
expostulate with his Creator, as for any thing formed to do the same thing,
with or against the workman, that formed it, or an instrument with the
Artificer, for every creature is an instrument of the divine power, but by all
this I cannot see, how the liberty of man's actions in a concurrence with the
Creator, is at all infringed, but seems to me rather confirmed, the Creator
making the Creature instrumentally to cooperate with him.

To the sixth.
What our Savior there advises, not to take thought how, or what to speak,
for it should be given in the same hour etc. was only to take away all
anixiety, and solicitude of fore thniking. Now the case of the Apostles
knowledge, and ours are very different, for theirs was altogether infused, and
their freewill was merely passive, in the execution of divine dictats, it is to
be understood far otherwise with us, who are bound by our good works, freely to
cooperate with divine grace.

To the seventh.
I humbly conceive that text of the falling of sparows, not to concern the
matter of free will at all: but only that our Savior, would have us clearly to
understand, and believe, how all things are Subject to the providence of God.

To the eighth and Last
We must grant that there is no man saved but by grace, not by his works,
excluding grace, because works signify nothing without grace. For as S. Paul
tells us, Romans 8.
the sufferings of this present world are nothing to the future glory, that
shall he revealed in us. And to that text, that none can come to him, unless
the father draw him, we do acknowledge, that there must be such a drawing, by
the divine grace, preventing, and coopperating but how to acquiesce in, and
submit to, that divine drawing, and not to harden our hearts, against his
divine drawing, nor to shut our ears, if we mean for to hear his voice calling
to us, that is the part of our own freewills. So I beseech you good Mirs. N. to
have a care least you be found resisting to those divine ealls, and
attractions, which his divine grace is always offering to you, and consult with
those clear texts of Scripture, that I shall here recommend to you.

We find the Lord saying to Cain, Genesis 4.6.
why art thou wroth? and why is thy countenance fallen; if thou do well shall
thou not be accepted and if thou do not well, sin lies at the door etc.
does not our Lord, her clearly convince Cain of his freewill.

How more plainly yet does God Almighty expostulate with the Isralites and
require their obedience to his law, Deuteronomy. 30.10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15.
and the freedoms of their wills. For this commandment says he which I
command thee this day, is not hidden from thee, neither is it far off, it is
not in heaven that thou should say who shall go up for us etc. neither is it
beyond the Sea etc. But that word is very nigh unto thee, in thy mouth, and in
thy heart, that thou may do it. See I have set before thee this day: life and
good, and death and evil etc. can any thing be cleerer for the liberty of man's
will; The Prophet Jeremy tells us, Jerm. 5.
that these which remain of this last and worst generation, shall choose death
rather than life.

There is choice given to the Jews whether they will serve the Lord, Josh.
24.15.21. 2 Samuel 24.13. Number. 30
or no, and the people said nay but we will serve the Lord.

There was a choice given to David, which of the three plagues he would have.

There was a choice given to the husband in the old law concerning the vow of
his wife, now there can be no choice at all, without liberty of will.

Job tells us, Job 5. Numb. Deuteronomy. Psalm. 107 108, 118
that the righteous shall be saved but in the cleaness of his own hands. How
much do we read of the freewill offerings in the old Testament? and David
declares that he will freely sacrifice to the Lord, again, my soul O Lord is
always in my hands, my heart is ready, O Lord my heart is ready, and nothing
more frequent than such expressions clean throughout the Psalms.

The Prophet Isay yet more largely speaks to this purpose, Isay 1.16. v. 19.
wash ye, make ye clean put away the evil of your doings from before mine
eyes, cease to do evil etc. and then presently after, if ye be willing and
obedient ye shall eat the good of the Land but if ye refuse and rebel, Isay
46.12.
ye shall be devoured with the Sword etc. and again, hearken unto me ye stout
hearted, that are far from righteousness etc.

The Prophet Ezekiel declares, Ezekiel. 18.27.28.30.
that when a wicked man turns away from his wickedness that he has committed
and does that which is lawful and right, he shall save his soul alive etc.

Therefore, Ezekiel. 18.31.32.
I will judge you O house of Israel every one according to his ways etc. Repent
and turn your selves from your transgressions, so iniquity shall not be your
ruin, cast away from you all your transgressions, whereby ye have transgressed
and make you a new heart and a new spirit: for why will you die O house of
Israel. For I have no pleasure in the death of him that dies, says the Lord
God, wherefore turn your selves and live ye, does not God Almighty here plainly
require the operation of his peoples wills toward their own good, and this
sense runes at large, through all the Prophets calling us to turn to our God,
and then assuring us, that he will turn to us.

But the new Testament is yet more full of this sense. Mat. 23.37. Luke 13.34.
Mat. 11.
Our Savior in those bleeding words, he utters over Jerusalem, speaks it out
thus. O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that killest the Prophets and stonest them
that are sent unto thee: how often would I have gathered thy childeren together
even as a hen gathers her chickens under her wings, and ye would not etc.
Here it is plain, that God was willing, man only unwilling, and resisting to
his own ruin. Our Savior advises freequently, that if we would enter into
life, we must keep the commandments: and such like expressions are abounding
in the gospells, but in the parable of the Talents, Mat. 25.16.17.
when he that had received five Talents, went and traded with the same, and
made them other five Talents, and so he that had two did likewise, now the
servant could not be said to gain, unless his freewill had actively concurred
to the gaining of them, other wise he should only have said, that he had
received his ten Talents.

S. Paul speaks it plainly to the Corinthians I have planted, 1 Cor. 3.6, 7, 8.
and Apollo watered, but God gave the increase, but here is a working still
with God nay the Apostle expresses it in the next verses, for we are laborers
together with God. And every man shall recieve his own reward, according to his
own labor etc. and this doctrine he perfectly explaines in the other Chapter
where he tells them, 1 Cor. 15 10.
that the grace which was bestowed on him, was not in vain, but that he
labored more abundantly then they all, and yet not he but the grace of God
which was with him, so then grace may very well cooporate with the freewill of
man. Nay yet more punctually the Apostle professes this great truth, 1 Cor.
7.37.
in another chapter of the same epistle. Nevertheless he that stands steadfast
in his heart, having no necessity, but has power over his own will and has
so decreed in his heart, that he will keep his virgin, does well. etc.

S. John S. James S. Jude S. Peter, 1 John 2.3. 1 Pet. 1.22, etc.
and all the rest of Apostolical writtings, are full of nothing more than,
persuasions to a good life, to turn from sine, to purify our selves, as he is
pure, to be righteous as he is righteous, now to what purpose were all this, if
man had not a power to cooperate with divine grace, by the freedom of his will.

To conclude all, 2 Timothy 3.16, 17.
S. Paul tells us that all Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is
profitable for doctrine for reprofe, for correction, for instruction in
righteousness, that the man of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished to all
good works. Now if all our actions be by necessity, and constraint, to what
purpose is it to teach, reprove, correct, or instruct? if a man have not some
liberty of will, how should he be furnished to all good works, Phil. 14.
and the same Apostle tells Philemon that he would advise him nothing against
his consent that his benefit should not be as it were of necessity, but
willingly, I could produce infinite testimonies more to establish this truth,
but I fear I have been too large already, in a business that common sense it
self me thinks were able to convince, for if all things do come to us by an
absolute necessity, and our wills have no power of action, there will be
nothing lest to be done by the power of prayers, preachings, counsels, public
governments: There would be no rewards due to virtue, or punishment to vice;
all Laws, Statutes, Orders, Precepts, must be to no purpose, all admonitions,
reproves, persaw asions must cease, for all these require a liberty to be
understood, and are utterly nullified by a necessity; and in short, it would
amount to this, that all wickednesses, blasphemies, and villainies would be cast
upon God. For who can justly tax Judas of his wicked treasons, if he did commit
it by an inevitable necessity? But these are the most difficult questions, that
we can pick out of the whole body of Divinity, so I shall be bold to desire
you, good Mrs. N. not to offer any more of these subtilties to me, and though
in order to your commands, I have endeavored to satisfy your doubts, yet I
must tell you, that it has been full sore against my will, and if I have by
this bold adventure committed any errors, as I fear I have too many, I do
humbly beg God, and his holy Church to pardon me.

This Paper was no sooner perfected, but my Lady called for her Coach, where
her Ladyship was no sooner sat, and the welcome of the house presented, but
they thus fell into their old discourse: and my Lady began after this manner.

Lady M. I am come now dear Mrs. N. to wait on you, and to make you a double
payment, first, for your late kind visits, which have not lain in my power
since to return, then to make a payment of the thanks, and best satisfaction
that lay within my power, for your last too learned paper; though sweet Mrs N.
I must beg your pardon, if I never do the like again, for in earnest it is too
hard a task for us, to engage in those sublime points, that the learned
Doctors in the world of one side or the other, may be foiled in, and sure we that
cannot swim as those divine Doctors can, must not dare to wade in those
unfathomable depths.


Mrs. N. I most heartily thank you, sweet Madame, for your kind correction of
me in this particular, and I faithfully promise, never to offend in that more.
And truly Madame, if I had read your first paper before I had sent my last, I
had not given your Ladyship any further trouble at all, for indeed I have
perceived enough by that to convince me of some errors, that I was before
possessed of, the one was that you Papists especially women and Lay people, were
not at all conversant in Scripture, the second was, that you did over vilify
our translations, and would be judged only by your own editions of Scripture,
which we are informed are false, and framed only to your own intents and
purposes, but I find your Ladyship quotes no Scripture, that is not word for
word in our Bibles. Then thirdly, I am already satisfied that you have more
reason for your Religion, then I before immagined, if those Scriptures which
you produce, have had such an understanding in the universal Church as you
allege: and Lastly, that it will be utterly impossible for us to make an end
of the controversy, without some learned Moderator, for otherwise it will be,
but your sense upon Scripture and mine, and we both abounding in our own, as it
is too much given to us women to be, I am in despair of the good end, Madame,
that I proposed.


Lady M. For the first three things, that you pretend to be satisfied in, I
cannot believe, dear Mrs. N. but you dispose your self rather to Rallery then
to deal really with me: but as for the last I do most cleeply concur with you
in opinion, that it will be necessary for us, to have some Learned Arbitrator,
or otherwise we shall but beat the air, and bring nothing to conclusion.


Mrs. N. Why then deer Madame, how shall we agree in the choice of him, for it
is neither fit for your Ladyship, nor for me alone to have the nomination, and
it will be very difficult to find one, that may be so indifferent, as to
please us both.


Lady M. Why truly your self, Mrs. N. if you please, shall make the choice, and
for my part I think none fitter than your own husband, if he please to accept
the trouble, for I take him to be a very learned, prudent, and impartial
person, thourgh by his profession he may appear engaged against us; but I am
confident, that will not so much over by ass his judgment, as to say a
malicious untruth.


Mrs. N. Well then since your Ladyship is pleased to offer so fair in that
particular, I must tell you yet a further difficulty, that occurs to me,
whether I should make a present rejoinder with your Ladyships replys (for that
is I perceive your intended method) or proceed still to object, and refer all
my answers to your Ladyships replies till the very last, for though the the
first will be more to your Ladyships present satisfaction, yet the bestwill a
void much of both our trouble, for I humbly conceive, I shall be able to wipe
off many of your Ladyships arguments, upon several occasions, with one
compendious answer.


Lady M. In that do as you shall please, good Mrs. M. for either shall be
indifferent to me.


Mrs. N. Why then sweet Madame, I shall proceed to object against some of the
most practical points of your Religion, as your Ladyship has required me,
avoiding all subtilties, relating to the Schools, and so I have accordingly
prepared another paper for your Ladyships view, and I shall not be bold to
offer above one, or two more, and then I shall endeavor to rejoyn, and humbly
refer to better judgments.


So after many mutual thanks and particular kindnesses were passed on both
sides, my Lady being attended by Mrs. N. to her Coach, departed away with her
third paper, which coming home and opening, her Ladyship found to this effect
as follows.

That your Church has so overladen the souls of Christians with their own
Traditions, and humane constitutions, that it has not only abridg'd Christian
liberty, but hardly left room for the observation of divine precepts, I prove
thus by express Scriptures.
We find in Deuteronomy, Deuteronomy. 4.2
how God does absolutely command his people by the mouth of his servant Moses,
not to add unto the word, Josh. 1.7.
which he commanded them, nor to diminish ought from it. The like was commanded
by the mouth of Joshuah, that from that law, which they had read, they should
not turn neither to the right nor to the left. The wise King Solomon gives the
same caution, Prove. 30.5.6.
every word of God is pure etc. and then proceeds, Add thou not unto his
words, least he reprove thee, and thou be found a liar, and S. John assures us,
That if any man shall add unto the words of his prophecy, Revel. 22 18.19.
that God shall add unto him the plagues that are written in that book, and if
any shall take away etc. God shall take away his part out of the book of life,
and yet notwithstanding these clear commands, and terrible threatenings, your
Church dares to do those things daily, by ading of mere humane inventions.

S. Mark 7.6, 7, 8, 9.
Mark tells us plainly, how our Savior did severely rebuke that kind of
Religion, and professes plainly, that in vain such do worship him, who teach
for doctrines the commandments of men, saying immediately before, how such do
honor him with their lips, but their heart is far from him, and so proceeds
sharply inveighing against men's Traditions, yet your Church does nothing but
over-load men with them.

3. S. Paul give a most strict warning to the Corinthians and so to us, 1 Cor.
7.22.23.
to avoid any captivity of that kind, for he speaks to all that are called;
who are the Lords freemen, and therefore concludes, ye are bought with a price,
be not ye the servants of men, that captivity I am sure none can avoid that is
of your Church.

4. Gal. 5.18.
Again he tells the Gallatians yet more plainly, that if they be led of the
spirit, they are not under the law, so then we Christians, are subject to no
humane constitutions whatsoever.

5. Again the same Apostle tells us, 1 Timothy 1.9.
that the Law is not made for a righteous man, but for the lawless,
disobedient, ungodly, etc. what then are good Christians concerned in your
newfangled Laws? and again he tells the Romans, that the Law works worth,
Romans 4.15.
what then have we Christians to do with it?

6. Lastly, 2 Cor. 3.17.
the same Apostle assures the Corinthians that where the spirit of the Lord is,
there is liberty, and largely relates to the Gallathians, how Jesus Christ did
purchase this liberty for us, Gal. 4.
and that we are no more under the law, nor sons of the Bond woman but of the
free, why then should your Church, by its devises, endeavor to reduce us into
bondage again?

That amongst the rest of your new inventions your commanded days of fasts, and
abstinence, especially a whole lent together, is a burden insupportable, and
abusive to our Christian liberty, I prove by Scripture thus.
1. Does not our Savior in S. Matthews Gospel, call the multitude expressly
about him, Mat. 15.10, 11.
to teach them this piece of doctrine, and bids them hear and understand, not
that which goes into the mouth, defiles a man, but that which comes out of
the mouth, this defiles a man etc. why does your Church then, tie up men's
mouths from meat at any time?

2. 1 Timothy 4.1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
S. Paul tells us, that now the speaks expressly, that in the latter times,
some should depart from the faith, giving heed to seducing spirits, and
doctrines of Devils, speaking lies etc. forbidding to marry, and commanding to
abstain from meats, which God has created, to be received with thanksgivings,
of them which believe, and know the truth; for every creature of God is good,
and nothing to be refused, if it be received with thanksgiving, for it is
sanctified by the word of God, and prayer. Here the Apostle plainly calls it a
doctrine of Devils, and mere lies, to command abstinence from any meat which
God has created for the use of the faithful, to be taken with thanksgiving.

3. Tit. 1.14 15.
Does not the same Apostle forewarne us, not to give heed to such doctrines as
those, which he calls the commandments of men, that turn from the truth, and
gives this reason that unto the pure, all things are pure, but unto them that
are defiled, and unbeleiving, is nothing pure etc. How dares your Church then
impute iniquity to any thing of meat, or make such a distinction between meats,
as you do.

4. Colos. 2.16, 17.
Does he not command the Colossians thus. Let no man therefore judge you in
meat or in drink, or in respect of a holy day, or of the new moon, or of the
sabbath days, which are but a shadow of things to come etc. yet you are pleased
to make your ceremonies, to be the very substance of your Religion.

5. Again he tells the Romans thus, Rom 9.
If by the Spirit, you shall mortify the deeds of the flesh, ye shall live, he
says nothing of mortification by fasting, therefore that must be, purely your
invention.

6. Lastly we may say to you, as S. Acts 15.10.
Peter in the Acts, why tempt you God, to put a yoke upon the neck of the
Disciples, which neither we, nor our Fathers were able to hear; Christian
liberty endures no such burdensome bondage, for Christ himself never made any
distinction of meats or commanded any such observations, why then should
Christians, his faithful people be subject to them.

That your making and observing of v^^s, especially of chastity and single
life, though in your Priests themselves, is another intolerable abuse and
burden laid upon Christianity, I prove thus.
1. It is plain, that Jesus Christ our Savior bestowed a freedom upon us,
which we call Christian, Deuteronomy. 4.2. Revel. 22 18. etc.
why should vows then reduce us into bondage, Nay our Savior clearly showed
that he would have all his counsels free, and yet your votaries make them
necessary as commandments, These vows therefore, are those humane inventions so
much spoken of forbiden and reproved in Scripture, by consequence most
unlawful.

S. Paul forewarns Timothy from all those external works of piety, which are
not capable to renew a man, but are fit rather to make men hypocrites, than
saints, and in such words as seem almost pointed at old Nuns, 1 Timothy 4.7, 8.
But pr^fain and old wives fables refuse, excercising thy self rather unto
Godliness, for bodily exercise profits little but godliness is profitable unto
all things, having promise of the life that is now, and of that which is to
come: by this it is plain that it is the exercise of the soul, which God
deligheth in, and not those vowed bodily observancies.

3. Nay all those external works must of necessity be enemies to Christianity,
for they extinguish faith, weaken hope, and cause men to repose their
confidence in them, more then in the mercies of God: and it is plain that your
late votaries, like those old Pharisees, that our Savior reproves; do value
more such empty traditions, then they do the commandments of God, to whom he
pronounces a woe for no other reason, Luke 11.42. etc.
but for tything of Mint, Rue, and all manner of herbs, and passing ore
judgment, and the love of God, etc.

4. Over and above all this the grand presumption of your votaries appears in
oblieging themselves to a straiter rule of liveing, than the Evangellicall
rule, to which every faithful Christian is tied in Baptism when it is plain,
that by all the endeavors that a Christian can use, he cannot attain to a
greater perfection, and very hardly perform so much as is required.

Then as to your vows of chastity, and restraining of Priests from marriage, I
prove the absurdity of all that thus.
1. First it is plain by the old Testament, that the Priests, Genesis 1. and 2.
of the old Law might marry and had wives, then the Greeks and diverse other
Christians, ever had, and shall have their wives.

2. Your vows of Chastity, and restraints, from marriage, are most plain
oppositions to a divine precept, which God so often inculcated into all
creatures, and particularly to man, be ye fruithful and multiply.

3. S. Paul foretells, that in the latter times, 1 Timothy ^.1, 2, 3.
some shall depart from the faith, giving heed to seducing spirits, and
doctrines of devils etc. forbiding to marry etc. who should this be but, you,
for no other Churches else does it.

4. Tit. 1.5.6.
The same Apostle commands Titus, that amongst the rest of the things, which he
was to set in order, as he had appointed him, he should ordain a Bishop the
busband of one wife, and having faithful children, by which it is plain that
Priests might marry then.

5. 1 Cor. 7.9.
Chastity is, and ought to be free, but your vows, and invented traditions make
it to be necessary, notwithstanding that S. Paul says plainly, that it is
better to marry then to burn, and bids all men if they cannot contain
themselves, to marry.

6. 1 Cor. 7.28.
And a little after in the same Chapter, he says positively to all; but and if
thou marry thou have not sinned, and if a virgin marry she has not sinned etc.
and your Church is pleased to make it worse than the breach of a commandment.

7. In fine there can be nothing more clear, than that vows of virginity are
vain and in plain English foolish, because impossible; it were the same thing
to obliege a man to live without meat or drink; and your Pope pretends by his
humane traditions, to mortify men's flesh, when it is impossiple to do that
without a constant recourse, to the grace of God.

But abive all the Abuse of your Church it manafest in multiplying of
Sacraments, and making them out of mere humane constitutions, which I prove in
short thus.
1. All Sacraments ought to be of our Savior Christ's own institution, but your
supernumerary Sacraments, are after constitutions of the Church, therefore they
cannot be Sacraments.

2. As for your Sacrament of Penance, I have showed sufficiently already in my
last paper, upon those two parts of it, confession and satisfaction, which
being proved to be impertinent, your Sacrament of Penance must needs fall.

3. Then for your Sacrament of Orders; and confirmation, it is plain that there
was nothing of them instituted by Christ, but constitutions of the Church
afterward established them, how thou can they be reputed Sacraments?

4. For matrimony, there can be no pretense to make it a Sacrament, (but out of
a few mistaken words of S. Paul, Ephesians. 5.32.
who had no power to make a Sacrament neither) for when he says marriage is a
great Mystery, you read as I am informed, that it is a great Sacrament; nor
does the Apostle say absolutely; that it is of it self a great mystery or
Sacrament, but only in relation to what it signifies between Christ, and his
Church.

5. Then last of all, for your extreme Unction, there is a less pretense, James
5.14.15.
for first, at most there can be but an Apostolical authority for that, and no
Apostle as I said before, had power to institute a Sacrament, besides there is
a great dispute, amongst the learned, about the authority of that Epistle, and
some very principal persons, have agreed, that it should be thrust out of the
Canon of the Bible.

Thus have I been bold to make it the business of this paper, to show you, how
your Church abuses you with their own inventions, and would obtrude them upon
us, for divine institutions.

To what you allege against our Church for over lading the souls of
Christians, with Traditions, and humane corstitutions etc. I answer thus
To the first.
I acknowldedge it to be, as you say, both wicked and damnable, to add any
thing to, or diminish from Scripture, that is of the essence, and being of
Scripture, or shall go about to corrupt, or deprave it; otherwise if the
Church, or any civil power shall promote any thing, that is not literally
there, so it be but consequentially it is enough, or if it be to advance, what
is commanded or consulted of in Scripture, Now all the Churches constitutions,
even those you most tax, though they are not expressly and in proper form to be
found in Scripture, yet they are all clear emanations from thence, as I shall
plainly prove hereafter. Again that Text you quote out of the Proverbs cleers
all the rest, Prove. 30.5.6.
add not unto his words least thou be found a lier, so it is not every simple
addition that is forbidden, but only such as is false and lying, that is either
to the corruption, or adulteration of the Text.

To the Second.
It is plain that our Savior does not there in that Gospel, reprove all
Traditions of men absolutely, but only such as they made contrary to the law of
God, or such as swerved from it, for so we find by the context of the same
chapter, Mark 7.8, 9.
as for laying aside the commandment of God hold the tradition of men, etc. and
then agin fullwell you reject the commandments of God that ye may keep your own
tradition in the same manner S. Matthew delivers it, Mat. 13.
which two Gospells S. Paul sufficiently explains thus, not giving beed to
Jewish fables, 1 Tit. 14
and commandments of men that turn, from the truth, so it must be only such as
those, that our Savior finds fault withal, and not simply all humane
constitutions. And hence it is that the woes of eternal damnation are threatued
by God, and pronounced by the Prophet, against the makers of such wicked
constitutions and traditions, Isay 10.1.2.
in these words. Woe unto them that decree unrighteous decrees, and that write
grievousness which they have prescribed, to turn aside the needy from
judgment, and to take away the right from the poor of my people, and that they
may rob the fatherless etc. But this makes nothing at all to your purpose, for
the constitutions of our Church, are so far from being guilty of that, that
they are acknowledged by all temperate persons to be the greatest promoters and
advancers of divine worship, the greatest restrainer of the concupiscencies of
the flesh, and do dispose men to the keeping of Gods commandments a more
expeditious and clear way, inflaming all men to brotherly kindness, and charity.

To the Third.
S. Paul it is true forbids us, to be servants of men, that is as you will
find by the context, not to make schisms in the Church, by pretending to
follow some leading men, for one to say. I am of Cephas, and another, I am of
Apollo; this is to rebuke an error of yours, and nothing at all of ours, for we
endeavor to keep our selves within the bonds of Catholic unity, and you do
all you can to break those bands, and fall into the captivity of private
opinions, by rendering your selves servants, nay slaves to some single Doctors
of your own, that best agree with your fancy, but you had best take heed of
that according to S. Paul's warning, which you urge here against us.

To the fourth.
What the Apostle tells the Gallatians, that they which are led of the Spirit,
are not under the Law, we acknowledge, but it is to be understood that he
speaks of the Mosaicall and coercive Law, which they that are perfectly led by
the spirit, need not at all, but he cannot mean the divine and directive Law,
which must last to govern faithful Christians, for Adam himself had such a law
in Paradise.

To the fifth.
We say not that the law is made for the righteous, as he is righteous, and
governed wholly by the Spirit of God, but for so much as the flesh lusts
aginst the Spirit, he ought to have a reforming law; or indeed the former
answer, to your fourth argument, might have served the turn so far, and as for
what you allege all out of the Romans, that the law works wroth, it must be
understood of the Mosaic law, which works wroth indeed, if we be not
releived by divine grace, but we are helped by grace and Truth by Jesus Christ.

To the sixth.
You must give me leave to tell you here, that you very much mistake Christian
liberty, for by that, we are not exempted from the power of, and obedience to
our superiors, but that liberty opposes it self only against the servitude
of the Mosaicall Law, and slavery of sin, it cannot possibly be meant that it
should free us from the wholesome constitutions, and commandments of the Church,
which are all made for the advancement of godliness, Gal. 5.13.
this S. Paul sufficiently explains thus, for brethren you have been called
into liberty, only use not liberty for an occasion to the flesh, but by love
serve one another; 1 Pet. 2.16, 13, 14, 15. Romans 6.7. and 8.
and S. Peter notes, when he says, as free and not using your liberty for a
cloak of maliciousness but as the servants of God, so he charge them, to
submit to every ordinance of man for the Lords sake, etc. and assures them that
that is the will of God. In fine it is plain that the true Christian and
evangelicall liberty is nothing else but as S. Gal. 5.
Paul pleases to define it, a redemption, or absolution of us from the
servitude of the law and of sin, made for us by Jesus Christ, and by which as
he says in another place, being dedicated to God, and righteousness, we receive
the adoption of sons, John 8.36.
and of this freedom it was that our Savior spoke in S. John's Gospel, if the
son therefore shall make you free, ye shall be free indeed: and that freedom
God of his mercy bestow upon us all.

Now that Humane Constitutions, the commands of Councils, and Bishops are to be
kept, and all Ecclesiastical rites and ceremonies duly observed, I prove by
express Scriptures thus.
S. Luke recites our Saviors words thus, speaking to the seventy that he sent
out, Luke 10.16.
He that hears you, bears me, and he that dispiseth you, dispiseth me, and
he that despises me, dispiseth him that sent me. Observe I pray you, how he
that despises the Prelates, and Ecclesiastical constitutions of Christ's
Church, is judged by Christ himself to despise him, and his holy Gospel.

S. 1 Thessalonians. 4.2. and 8.
Paul speaks home to the Thessalonians in this point, first tells them of the
commandments that he had given them, then afterward, be therefore that
despises despises not man but God, who has also given us his holy Spirit.

Moses and Aaron when the people murmured against them, told them frequently,
Exodus Levit. Numb. Deuteronomy.
that they heard their murmuring against the Lord, and again, what are we, your
murmuring is not against us, but against the Lord.

Observe what S. John says, We are of God, 1 John 4.6.
he that knows God hears us, he that is not of God hears not us, hereby
know we the spirit of truth from the spirit of error; you had best therefore
have a care of your selves. Nay S. Paul proceeds a little more terribly in the
point, Let every soul says he, Rem. 13.1, 2.
be subject to the higher powers, for there is no power but of God, the powers
that be are ordained of God, whosoever therefore resists the power resists
the ordinance of God, and they that resist shall receive to themselves
damnation.

Now that men have power to make Laws and Statutes to obliedge consciences, it
is plain by the president of the Apostles, Acts 15.19.
who commanded the Christians then, to abstain from things strangled, offerings
unto Idols, and from blood, with diverse other Acts, which they have left us.
Then we find how S. Paul himself made Laws, that you will not dare deny
obedience to: as for the constituting of Bishops, concerning widows, and women
to be veiled, and not to preach in Churches, of not for saking the unfaithful
husband, or wife and of many profane and mere secular things and judgments,
as to be seen throughout in his Epistles, and the Acts of the Apostles, and yet
S. Paul himself was but a man.

Nay it is plain the Priest of the old Law had power of making and altering of
Laws, Deuteronomy. 12. 1 Samuel 7 1 Kings 18.
in matter of discipline, we find in Deuteronomy, how the Lord commanded that
no Altar should be set up but where was the Ark of the Covenant, and yet Samuel
whilst the Ark remained in Shilo, set up an Altar at Masphar, and Elias did
the same thing in mount Carmel.

All this is abundantly confirmed by our Savior Christ himself who bids us,
Mat. 18.17.
if one shall neglect to hear, to tell it to the Church, but if he neglect to
hear the Church, let him be unto then as a heathen man and a Publican.

Then for Traditions it is altogether as plain that they are to be observed,
first S. 2 Thessalonians. 2
Paul tells us, that we must hold fast the Traditions we have received as well
by his word as his Epistle.

Then that the Church of Christ has been, and is to be governed by custom, is
plain by-another text of St. Paul's, where he says, we have no such custom nor
the Church of God.

Again to the Philipians he says finally Brethren whatsoever things are true,
Phil. 4.8.9.
whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things are just, whotsoeverthings are
pure, whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever things are of good report, if
there be any virtue, and if there be any praise, think on these things; Those
things which ye have both learned, and received and hard, and seen in me do
etc. Now what are all these things but Traditions, and ecclesiastical
constitutions? Acts 15.41.16.
We find in the Acts how Paul and Silas went through Syria and Cylicia
confirming the Churches, Acts 15.41; and so afterward we find how Paul, Silas
and Timothy passed through cities delivering the Doctrines and ordinances which
were decreed by the Apostles and Elders that were at Jerusalem, observe that
ordinances, or decrees not one decree only of the cessation of the legal
rites, and ceremonies.

Our Savior not only gave a power to plant his Church by preaching, but also
governing which includes the power of making laws, Acts 21.28.
with out which there can be neither living, nor governing, and that is plain
likewise out of the Acts, take heed therefore unto your selses, and to the
flock over which the Lord has made you overseers to feed, as your translation
reads it, but ours, to govern the Church of God, and indeed what is a Bishop or
an overseer made for, unless to govern, the preaching part may be performed by
other inferior priests and Deacons.

And does not Paul to the Hebrews call them Rulers, Heb. 13.7.17.
as in one place, remember them which have the rule over you and again, obey
them that have the rule over you, and submit your selves, for they watch for
your souls, as they that must give account, that they may do it with joy, and
not with grief for that is unprofitabele for you.

Then the same Apostle requires the Corrinthians that all things de done
decently and in order, 1 Cor. 14 40.
now it is plain that order supporteth a law, and rule, which the Church of
Christ is, or ought to be governd by.

Lastly, St. Paul may very well conclude this business and dispute of Tradition
which his positive command to the Thessilonians. 2 Thessalonians. 3.6.
Now we command you Brethren in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye
with draw your selves, from every Brother, that walks dissorderly, and not
after the Tradi, tion, which he received of us, if this be not clear, I declare
for my part, that I can see no light.

To what you Allege against our days of fasting, and abstinence and especially
the holy fast of Lent, I answer thus.
To the first.
I say that our Savior in the Gospells that you cite, says not one word of
fasting, but endeavoring to take away that Jewish error and superstition,
which was, that to eat meat with unwasht bands, made the meat unclean and the
eater two, tells them, that not that which goes into the mouth defiles etc.
This I say was only to rebuke that foollish error of theirs, for he could not
mean it absolutely, otherwise they that in the Apostles time, should have eaten
meats offered to Idols, things strangled, or blood, or poison willingly and
knowingly, should not have been defiled, but so we know they were, Over and
above let it be granted that all meat whatsoever, which enters the mouth,
passes into the belly, and is cast out into the draught, does not defile a
man, Yet when a man shall against the commandment of God and his Church, or the
custom and Tradition of it, or against his own vow, or with the scandal of
his neighbor, take any meat whatsoever, it does, and must of necessity defile
him, for this proceeds out of an evil, and malicious heart, that is from a
plain contempt of God and his Church, in so slighting their precepts, Thus if
the Rechabites had drunk wine, though in it self good, they had defiled
themselves, because it was against the command of their father. And it is plain
that God approves their abstinence for that very reason, and pronounces a
blessing to the whole family, for being obedient to the precepts of Jonadab
their father^

In the like manner the Angel Gabriel foretold of John the Baptist, Luke 1.
Mat. 3. Mark 1. Luke 3.
that he should neither drink wine, nor any strong drink, and that his fool
should be Locusts and wild honey, Now I would ask the question, whether if the
Baptist had transgrest that rule, he had offended, or not, but enough of this.

To the second.
I say the Apostle, in those words, that you so much insist upon, means only
that he would not have such a judicial observance, continued amongst
Christians, as to hold some meats absolutely, unlawful, and perpetually
forbiden, as swines flesh, excepting only what was decreed against in the
Council of the Apostles. Acts ^.
But the Church of Christ beleives every creature of God to be good, though
for a while, and to mortify the old man's, he commands an abstinence from some.
Again the Apostle speaks not here at all of fasting or mortification of the
flesh, but because certain heretics there were, that held some creature to
proceed from an evil principle, the Apostle goes about to beat down that
opinion, and tells them, 1 Timothy 4.
that every creature of God is good to be received with thanks giving, and that
is our religion, though we hold not that every good thing is good at all times,
and seasons, nor does the Apostle here command it should be so.

To the Third.
You are to understand that by the old law some creatures were unclean, but
that Typically and by signification only, though the Jews were so sottish, as
to believe that they were so in their one nature; This error the Apostle goes
about to destroy, saying to the faithful all things are pure, and so by
consequence to be eaten in their seasons but that it is not lawful, to abstein
from a sort of lawful meat, for a certain time, is a wonder to me how you
could draw into that Apostles sense who was himself, as he says so often in
fastings, and some of the fathers, as I have read in story, never drank wine,
or eat flesh in all their lives.

To the Fourth.
I answer in the like manner, that the holy Apostle would not have his
Collosstans nor any other faithful Christians, judged about meat and drink and
holy days, after the old Jewish fashion, and not a word of fasting there.

To the fifth.
I shall freely grant to you that it is by the spirit that we are to mortify
the deeds of the flesh, but I must tell you again, that the spirit receives
strength from the weakening of the flesh, and crusifying of it with fasting, as
the Apostle himself whom you urge, explains it to the Gallatians, Gal. 5.23.24.
when he first tells them that Temperance is the fruit of the spirit, and after
assures them that they who are Christ's, have crucified the flesh, with the
affections and lusts etc. but above all I pray you observe, what he says to the
Corinthians, 1 Cor. 9.25, 26, 27.
And every man that striveth for the mastery is temperate in all things etc. I
therefore so run not as uncertainly, so fight I not as one that beats the
air: but I keep under my body and bring it into subjection, least that by any
means when I have preached to others, I my self should be a cast away. Thus it
is plain that S. Paul thought that he advanced the vigor of his spirit, by his
subjugation of his flesh.

To the sixth and Last.
As for your pretense of Christian liberty I have showed you plainly before,
that it pertains not a jot to this purpose. As for what you say that Jesus
Christ himself never made any distinction of meats, nor commanded any such
thing, I grant it for he employed himself whilst he was on earth, in matters of
greater moment to our Salvation, and left those things which were to expedite,
and promote our way to heaven, to the direction and government of his holy
Spirit, that was to animate his whole Church. Besides though our Savior says
nothing of destinction of meats, he does not withstanding much of fasting, and
to give us example did most miraculously practice it in his own person: so now
I presume you will give me leave to prove my part.

And first I prove that the Church does lawfully forbid certain meats, for
certain times, by express Scriptures thus.
First the Apostles themselves being assembled in counsel, laid an injunction
upon all Christians Solemnly so to do, in these words: For it seemed good unto
the holy Ghost and to us etc. Acts 15.28, 29.
that ye abstein from meats offered unto Idols, and, from blood and from
things strangled etc.

S. Romans 14.20, 21.
Paul declares freely to the Romans, that we ought not for matter of meat,
destroy the work of God, all things indeed are pure, but it is evil for that
man who cateth with offense: it is good neither to eat flesh nor to drink wine,
nor any thing whereby thy Brother stumbleth, or is offended, or is made weak
etc. here is a perfect abstinence commanded for certain times, and particular
reasons. Again he says to the Corinthians, that meat commends us not to God,
for noither if we eat, are we the better, neither if we eat not are we the
worse etc. and then concludes, wherefore if meat make my Brother to offend, I
will eat no flesh whilst the world stands, least I make my Brother to
offend; here again is abstinence for certain time and certain reasons.

Then that such an abstinence is acceptable to God, see the express words of
the Prophet Daniel speaking of himself. Dan. 10.2.3.
I Daniel was mourning three full weeks, I eat no pleasent bread, neither came
flesh nor wine into my mouth, neither did I anoint my filf at all etc. Then
said the Lord unto Daniel, fear not, ver. 12.
for from the first day that thou did set thine heart to understand, and to
chasten thy self before thy God, thy words were heard etc. here you see how the
Prophet Daniel did abstain from meat, and wine, and God reproved and loved him
for it.

In the like manner I shall prove fasting to be a holy institution, for the
maceration of the body, the explusion of the evil Spirit, the imploring of
divine grace, and the imitation of Jesus Christ, by express scripture in S.
Math. Gospel thus
First our Savior says, Mat. 9.15.
can the Children of the Bride-chamber mourn, so long as the Bridegroom is with
them, but the days will come, when the Bridegroom shall be taken from them,
Luke 5.35, 36.
and then they shall fast, and in S. Lukes Gospel he says, can ye make the
Children of the Bride-chamber fast whilst the Bridegroom is with them, but the
days shall come etc. and then shall they fast in those days. And these words of
our Saviors were abundantly fullfiled by the Apostles, as you may see in the
Acts. Acts 13.2.3.
first as they ministered unto the Lord and fasted the holy Ghost said etc.

And again, when they had fasted, and prayed etc. Acts. 14.23.
And in the next chapter it is said, and when they had Ordained them olders in
every Church and had prayed with fasting, they commended them to the Lord etc.

S. Paul declares to the Corinthians, how he and others that were engaged in
the service of the Church should behave themselves thus. 2 Co^. 6.4.5.
In all things approving our selves, as the ministers of God etc. in watchings
and in fastings.

And that this duty of fasting was acceptable to God even before Christianity,
Jonah 3.5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10.
we may see in the example of Ninniveh. So the people of Ninniveh believed God
(that is the word which was preached to them by the Prophet Jonah) and
proclaimed a fast, and put on sackcloth from the greatest of them even to the
least of them, and it follows, it was decreed by the King and all his Nobles,
saying, let neither man beast, heard nor flock taste any thing, let them not
feed nor drink water but let man and beast be covered with sackcloth, etc. And
God saw their works and that they turned from their evil way, and God repented
of the evil that he had said, that he would do unto them and be did it not.
Thus you may see how acceptable to God, this solemn fast of the Ninnivits was,
and yet you will question that duty.

But to sum up all this in a few words, Mat. 6.16, 17, 18.
I pray you observe what our Savior says in S. Mathews Gospel. Moreover when
ye fast, be not as the Hypoerites, of a sad countenance, for they disfigure
their faces that they may appear unto men to fast, verily I say unto you, they
have their reward but thou when thou fastest, anoint thy bead, and wash thy
face, that thou appear not unto men to fast, but unto thy father which is in
secret, and thy father which sees in secret shall reward thee openly. Here our
Savior does not only implicitly commend, this duty of fasting to us, but
prescribes us the manner of it, and assures us it is meritorious, for he says
that God shall reward it openly; I think this should be enough to satisfy any
reasonable Christians.

Why then should our lenten fast so much offend you when it is so ancient in
the Church as I have been informed, ever since the Apostles times and ordained
in humble imitation of our Savior, who as the scripture tells us, when he had
fasted forty days and forty nights, Mat. 4.2.
he was afterward an bungred, can we perform think you a more Christian,
duty, Deuteronomy. 9.
than to follow so great an example, so far as we can?

Again we find that Moses fasted forty days, and forty nights.

And that the Prophet Elijah did the same. 1 Kings 16.


Nay how much this duty of fasting is pleasing to the Lord, we may find in the
Prophet Joel who cries out, Joel 2.15, 16, 18.
blow the Trumpit in Sion, fanctify a fast, call a solemn, assembly gather the
people, sanctify the congregation, assemble the elders, gather the Children,
and those that suck the breast, let the Bridegroom go forth of his chamber,
and the Bride out of her closet etc. Then will the Lord pity his people etc.

The Prophet David frequently acknowledges that he did humble his soul with
fasting, Psalms
and the Scripture throughout is full of nothing more then that God did accept
of that humiliation still when it was hearty, 1 Kings, 21. Tob. 12. Luke 2.
as Abab, Hezekiah, Tobiah, Judith, Hester, Daniel, the Niunivites, Ann the
widow, and agreat many more, that would be infinite to recount. So for a close
of all I shall only put you in mind, that there were a sort of Devils, of
whom our Savior himself says, Mark 9.29.
that that kind is not to be east out but by prayer and fasting who then shall
cast out Devils, from them that are enemies Professed, against that great and
holy duty of fasting.

To what you allege against our Vows, especially those of Chastity and
single-life though in one Priests themselve.
To the First, I answer that.
I grant indeed that Vows do reduce us into Bondage, but it is only to Christ,
and such a slavery, is the nighest libercy. It is such a servitude as the
Apostle speaks of, being freed from sin ye are made the servants of
Righteousness and to God, and to serve God is to Reign with him: from whence
it is plain, that our obligation to pay our Vows, does in nothing repugne or
Streighten our Christian liberty, no more then our obligation to keep the
Commandments does: and just so as the Transgression of the Commandments
throws us into the servitude of sin; so does the breach, or not observance of
our Vows. It is true, the Evangelicall Counfells are at first free, but after a
promise is once made, they become Obligatory; shall we make a conscience to
observe our Contracts with men and violate our Covenants with God? God forbid.
The Lord commands us not to make Vows, but to pay and render them when they are
made: as Matrimony before a Contract, is free, but when the Contract is once
made, it is then firm and indissolveable, and therefore impossible (unless in
our Saviors case) to procure a Divorce. At first every man has in his
Free Will to vow, or not to vow, but to pay the vow being once made, is so
necessary, that a man cannot recede from it, without hazard of his salvation.
Our Savior says, That no man setting his hand to the Plow, and looking back,
is fit for the Kingdom of God. And again, Remember Lots Wife, Luke 9.17. Genesis
19. Matthew. 10. chap. 24. 2 These. 2.7. Prove. 20.25. Matthew. 22.31.
who looking back was turned into a pillar of Salt. Again, he that perseveres
to the end shall be saved, that is, till death. The wise King Solomon assures
us, it is a snare to the man who devoureth that which is holy, and after vows
to make inquiry; Our Translation reads it thus, It is a ruin to man to devour
the Saints, and after vows made, to retract them. Let all pious Votaries
therefore, according to our Saviors Words in St. Matthews Gospel, Renden unto
God the things which are Gods, that is their Vows, that through his mercy, they
may deserve to be saved.

To the second.
I freely grant that Vows of themselves, and all the external works of piety,
dictated from the severest Rules of Monastic life cannot renew the inward man,
yet doubtless they are very helpful to the spirit, and keep the body from too
much oppressing the soul; nay I Will grant too, that if those external works, as
you call them, be done that they make seen of men, they are Hypocritical, if
done clearly to the glory of God, you must sure grant them, at least to be
laudable: Besider, the Apostle says not, that bodily exercise profits
nothing, but grants that it profits a little, if it be employed to piety.

To the Third.
Whereas you say that external works are enemies to Christianity, and do
extinguish faith, and weaken hope etc. They are so far from that, that they are
the very life and nourishment of faith, for St. James tells us, that faith
without works is dead; Jam. 2.
and it must strengthen his hope, for by works both his faith and he must be
justified, as was sufficiently proved to you in my last Paper: Luke 17.
But indeed if he dare to presume in his works, then he is not only guilty but
condemned already, For when we have done all that we can, we must say that we
are but profitable Servants,

To the Fourth.
Whereas you say it is grand presumption in our Votaries, to oblige themselves
beyond the Rule of Baptism, and the Evangelicall Rule, etc. It is plain, that
they make their Vows to no other intent or purpose then to dispose themselves
to perfect the Evangelicall precepts, and what they promised in Baptism with
more commodiousnesse and greater facility; they undertake their Rules only to
promote in their way to perfection, and to enable themselves with more
expedients in the service of God.

To what you allege against our vows of chastity, and restraining of Priests
from Marriage, I answer thus,
To the first.
I grant that it was indulged to the Priests and Levites in the Old Law to have
Wives, because they had a long time of vacancy from the exercise of their
Ministry or Priesthood. For there was a great multitude of them, and they
served by course; The case is not the same now, for our Priests are in daily
service of the Altar, and commanded to be always ready, and without delay to
attend their Ministry; so it would be very inconvenient for them to be clogged
with Wives, besides the indecency of it. Again they were to be only of one
Tribe, the Tribe of Levi, that were to be taken into their Priesthood, it was
therefore necessary for the conservation of the Tribe, and propagation of the
Priesthood it self, which otherwise in one age would have failed that their
Priests should marry. Besides we find that those that were to sacrifice in the
Old Law, did abstain sometime from their Wives likewise: so that St. Luke
testifies of Zacharias, And then it came to pass that so soon as the days of
his Ministration were accomplished, Luke 1.23.24.
he departed to his own house, and after those days his Wife Elizabeth
conceived, etc. Over and above all this the Priests of the Old Testament did
handle but their proposition bread, with the flesh of Goats, Oxen, Lambs and
the like, but ours do daily handle the precious body and blood of Christ.

As to the other part of your Argument, that the Greeks and other Christians
have a liberty for their Priests to marry. I say you are mistaken, for no
Priest amongst them is permitted to marry, after he is a Priest, but one that
has taken a Virgin to Wife, may be afterward made a Priest, and if his Wife
dye he must remain single. So a married man may be made a Priest, but no Priest
can be made a married man:

To the Second.
That command of the Almighty which you insist upon, to increase and multiply,
was given when the earth was to be replenished, and heaven too for then then
there were but few to procreate, now they are innumerable. Therefore that
command is not to be taken amongst those permanent Laws, which were to oblige
all Mankind, and every particular person, for then St. John the Baptist had
been a sinner, who lived and died a Virgin: Our blessed Lady had sinned, who is
the grand Example of Virginity. Paul himself had sinned, who was the great
Counselor of Virginity: and out Savior Christ had never commended Eunuchs
for the Kingdom of Heaven. In like manner that precept, and repeated by our
Savior, Whom God has joined let no man separate: concerns not sure every one
in the World, though it be given to every one multitude of, the World. So the
command concerning Tillage and Husbandry, does not make it necessary that all
the World should be Husbandmen, though some must be. Neither is it necessary
for every individual of mankind to employ himself in procreation, though it is
necessary that some must make it their business to propagate. And so it is in
an infinity of other things, that are necessary for a whole community, and yet
not at all for every single person; but it suffices, that it be done by some.

To the third.
I deny perfectly that the Church forbids marriages at all; but when any man is
tied by his own voluntary Vow to the contrary, the Church prohibits the
violation of that Vow, for before his vow it was as free for him to marry, as
for a married man, it is impossible to contract again. The Church takes a care
in this point only, that he whosoever he is that vows shall not deliver up
the power of his body to another, which was before delivered up to Christ. And
the Heretics which you speak of, Mark 15. 1 Cor. 10.
which Saint Paul mentions, were those that succeeded presently after, as I am
informed, that did absolutely condemn Matriages for unlawful.

To the Fourth.
That Saint Paul commands Titus to choose a Bishop that was the Husband of one
Wife we do not deny, but sure you do not believe, that he commanded, that a
Bishop should of necessity be a married man, for then neither he himself nor
Titus neither had been Bishops, nor many of your own, whom you would take it
ill, if we should deny to be Bishops, and yet have very conscientiously avoided
marriage. The Apostle would not therefore, that a Bishop should be found guilty
of so much carnality as to be husband to two Wives, and the Church taught by
Saint Paul has forbid bigamy ever since, and St. Paul only here lays down the
Rule of a Bishops continence, that h^^ should not take a second Wife.

To the Fifth.
I grant chastity to be free, but necessary after it is vowed, and then
commanded, nor does that at all oppose the liberty of the Spirit, but promote
it, for God himself does freely and yet necessarily produce the holy spirit.
It is true likewise what the Apostle says that it is better to marry then to
burn, but the same Apostle tells you likewise, that it is good for a man not to
touch a Woman. St. Paul would not have a man burn, that is tempted of the
flesh, but he is burnt that is overcome with the flames of concupiscense, and
for such a man, says he, it is better to Marry, than to be always wallowing
in the mire: if you will put any other sense upon St. Paul's words, you will make
St. Paul himself to marry, because he had a Prick in his flesh, etc. I do
confess that I believe it to be very difficult to contein, but the Kingdom of
Heaven suffers violence, and the violent take it, as our Savior assures us,
and St. Paul tells us, That though we are tempted of the flesh, yet God is
faithful who suffers not to be tempted above that we are able, and will be
always present to support us, if we implore his help.

To the Sixth.
To what you urge out of the same Apostle to the Cor. That if thou marry, thou
have not sinned, etc. I answer that St. Paul speaks plainly there of one that
was free to marry or not to marry not I say of the Virgin that has dedicated
it self to God already, but of that which is free, and at it is own dispose.

To the Seventh.
Whereas you say that our vows of Virginity are vain and indeed foolish because
impossible; I do truly grant, as to nature, an impossibility, and so are many
other things that are absolutely commanded. But if you consider the assisting
grace of God, nothing is impossible: and every man is capable to receive that
whom God shall think worthy to bestow it upon: and neither the Pope nor any of
his, do trust in their external mortifications at all, but that God will please
to assist those their endeavors, with his Almighty grace, which he never
denies to those that so dutifully and instantly ask it, as they do. There is
something else, that you say in your argument, which though it be sufficiently
answered, I must desire you yet to advise better upon, and think whether it was
so well said of a woman; for which very words, Luther himself as I am informed
lost much of his credit with his own Disciplcs.

To what you allege against us for multiplying of Sacraments, and making them,
as you say, out of mere humane inventions, I answer thus.
To the First.
Whereas you are pleased to begin so briskly with me, and as I take it, with a
syllogism: I profess I know not whether it be true or false in the form; but
one proposition I am sure is false: First that we have any supernumerary
Sacraments, or any Sacrament that was not of Christ's own institution; as you
shall see how I will prove anon.

To the Second.
Whereas you say you have sufficiently already convinced the Sacrament of
penance to be none, by overthrowing the parts of it, Confession and
Satisfaction: I answer, that I humbly conceive that I have sufficiently in my
reply, restored that Sacrament, both in whole and in it is parts, so shall
insist upon it no further neither.

To the Third.
Whereas you say, that our Sacraments of Confirmation and order are but mere
constitutions of the Church, and not of Christ. I have but your bare word for
it, and so you must give me leave to deny it.

To the Fourth.
As you are pleased to give me something like an Argument, so I shall give you
something like an answer. You say there can be no pretense for to make
Matrimony a Sacrament, but a few mistaken words of Saint Paul, who had no power
to make a Sacrament neither, etc. I concur with you that Saint Paul had no
power at all to constitute a Sacrament, nor any but our Savior Jesus Christ
and that it was he who constituted it a Sacrament; I shall prove ^non. As for
the mistaken words in which you pretend, Sacrament for Mystery; I do confess
that Matrimony is a mystery but how dare you therefore infer that it is no
Sacrament, when we know that all Sacraments are mysteries, and so the Greeks
(as I am informed) do generally call all the seven. Then that it is a great
Sacrament in Christ and his Church, as the Apostle tells us, does it therefore
follow that it is e're the less a Sacrament? on the contrary the Apostle here
explains how it is a Sacrament, that is how it coms to be the sign of a holy
thing and that not of grace only, as all the others are, but of something more,
that is of the union between Christ and his Church: so upon the matter, it is
so far from being no Sacrament, that it may be well reputed as a double one,
with Reverence be it spoken.

To the Fifth.
Whereas you say, we have a less pretense for our extreme unction to make it a
Sacrament, I do in one sense submit to it, for it is not so literally
constituted a Sacrament, by our blessed Savior, as the other was: but yet it
was of his own institution, as we shall show anon, and if it were not, I do not
find any matter of false faith in it, that an Apostle by the commandment of
Christ, and possessed with his full authority, should have the power to institute
a Sacrament. But it is plain, that our Savior did institute it, and Saint
James only publish and declare it. And though it were at some time doubted,
whether that Epistle were written by any body else besides Saint James; yet it
is plainly now admitted to be Canonical, and never denied yet by your own
Church. And truly he that shall refuse to hear the Church (in this particular)
approving the Epistle of this Apostle, will presently throw all Scripture into
uncertainty, and by the same reason may deny the Epistles of St. Paul, or any
other Apostles.

Now because you seem to take for granted that our Sacraments are for the most
part humane constitutions, and it is of faith that they are of divine
institution, 1 Pet. 3.15
and we ought to be as St. Peter advises us, Always ready to give answer to
every one that asks us a reason of the says and hope that is in us. I shall
take some pains to prove it to you thus.
As for our Sacrament of Penance, as you conceive enough said on your part
against it, so I conceive I have said sufficiently for it in my reply to those
two parts of it, Confession and Satisfaction, to which I refer you: So I shall
make it my business now to prove the other four, to be Sacraments, and of
divine institution; and I shall begin with the Sacrament of Confirmation. Every
Sacrament is a sensible sign, having an infallible assistance of the grace of
the Holy Spirit; and such I prove Confirmation to be, by most express
Scriptures thus.

We find in the Acts, That when the Apostles which were at Jerusalem heard that
Samaria had received the Word of God, Act. 8.14.15, 16, 17.
they sent unto them Peter and John. Who when they were come down, prayed for
them, that they might receive the Holy Ghost. (F^r as yet he was fallen upon
none of them; only they were baptized in the Name of the Lord Jesus) Then laid
they their hands upon them, and they received the Holy Ghost. Here was
manifestly a confirmation after Baptism, and a sensible sign, to wit,
Imposition of hands, by which the grace of the holy spirit was conferred, and
that is enough to make a Sacrament.

Again we find in another Chapter of the same Acts, Act. 19.2.3, 4, 5, 6.
That Paul being at Ephesus, and finding some Disciples there, said unto them,
have ye received the Holy Ghost since ^e believed, and they said unto him, we
have not so much as heard whether there be any holy Ghost; and be said unto
them, unto what then were ye baptized? and they said unto him, John's Baptism,
then said Paul, John verily baptized with the Boptism of Repentance, saying
unto the people that they should believe on him which should come after him
that is on Christ Jesus: when they heard this they believed on Christ Jesus.
And when Paul bad laid his hands upon them, the Holy Ghost came on them; and
they spoke with Tongues and Prophesied. Here is I say again, after Belief and
Baptism, an Imposition of hands, by which, the grace of the Holy Spirit was
ferr'd.

Now that this Sacrament waa instituted by Christ himself, is plain by the
Gospells, John 16.
where he promises his Apostles the Comforter, his Holy Spirit, with which
they should be confirmed, by virtue from above, now the mission of the Holy
Ghost in the time of Penticost, either was the Sacrament of confirmation it
self, or instead of it: Mark. 11.13, 14. Matthew. 10.
again we find in the Gospels, That they brought young children to Christ, that
be should touch them and his Disciples rebuked them that brought them, but when
Jesus saw it be was displeased, and said suffer the little Children to come to
me, for of such is the Kingdom of God, etc. Now it is very probable that he
did either institute this Sacrament then, or at least infinuate it. So enough I
coceive said to that.

Now that the Sacramnot of Orders, was instituted likewise by Christ himself,
and with a sensible sign conferrs grace, I prove this by express Scriptures.
First we find that when Jesus had called unto him his twelve Disciples, Mat.
10.1.
he gave them power against unclean spirets, and to heal all manner of
sickness and all manner of diseases. Then again, Jesus going up into the
Mountain, and called unto him wh^m he would, and they came unto him, and he
made that Twelve should be with him, Mark. 6.7.
and he sent them to preach, etc. And after these things, the Lord appointed
other seventy also, and sent them tweand two before his face into every City
and place whither he himself would come. Then again we find, Luk 10.1.
that taking bread he brake it, giving thanks and saying; this is my Body, etc.
Do this in remembrance of me. Then last of all look into St. John's Gospel, and
you will find yet a more express Ordination and mission. As my Father h^th sens
me so send I you. L^k. 28.
And when he had said this, he breathed on them and says unto them, receive ye
the holy Ghost: John 10.^ 21, 22, 23,
Whosoever sins ye remit they are remitted unto them, and whosoever sins ye
retein, they are retained. Thus you have in the four Gospells the institution
of this Sacrament: Let us now look a little into the Apostolical practice.

We find in the Acts, Act. 13.^^
As they ministered to the Lord; and fasted, the holy Ghost said, separate me
Barnabas and Saul, for the work whereunto I have called them: and when they had
fasted and prayed and I did their hands on them, they sent them away. Here
again is plain Ordination and Mission.

St. Paul gives direction to young Timothy, how to behaave himself in his
Ministry, and then says, 1 Timothy 4.14.
Neglect not the gift that is in thee, which was given to thee by Pr^phecy,
with the laying on of the hands of the Presbytery. Then again he says, Lay not
thy hands on any man over haftily, and again, the Elders that govern well, are
worthy of double honor. Then the same Apostle tells Titus, 1 Timothy 6.
For this Cause I left thee in Creet, that thou should make Elders in
several Cities. 2 Timothy 1.
Then to Philemon he says of those Elders, those that are of this sort, have a
great regard to, thus you see what respect St. Paul had to holy orders, and yet
to admonish us further of our duties to them, he makes it his humble request to
the Thessalonians, thus, Phil. 1.
We beseech you brethren, to know them that labor amongst you, and over you on
the Lord, and admonish you in the Lord, and to esteem them very highly in love
for their works sake, and be at peace amongst your selves. See what charge St.
1 These. 5.12.13.
Peter gives the Elders: The Elders which are among you, I exhort, who am also
an Elder, etc. Feed the flock of God which is among you, taking the eversighe
thereof, etc. And when the chief Shepherd shall appear, ye shall receive a
Crown of glory that fades not away. So St. Paul, again, in the Acts of the
Apostles, Exhorts the Elders of Eph^sus thus, Take heed therefore unto your
selves, and to the Flock over which the Holy Ghost has made you Bishops, (or
Overseers as you would have it, for it is all one) to feed the Church of God,
which he has purchased with his own Blood. Act. 20.28. Ge^. 1.37
Observe that the Holy Ghost made them Bishops and Overseers, and yet you will
deny Orders to be a Sacrament, but it is plain it is, for Imposition of hands
is the visible sign, which carries with it the invisible grace of the Holy
Spirit, as you have seen at large proved by Scripture.

That Matrimony is a Sacrament, and instituted by Christ, I likewise prove by
express Scripture thus.
First it is very probable that the blessing which God Almighty gave to Adam
and Eve in Paradise, was not unaccompani'd with divine grace. But howsoever the
institution of our Savior I Am sure could not be without it: Matthew. 19.1.6.
and first he is pleased to repeat the words of the first Institution. For this
cause shall a man leav his Father and mother and shall cleave to his Wife, and
they twain shall be one flesh, wherefore they are no more twain, but one flesh:
What therefore God has joynd together let no man put asunder. Now if God has
joyndthemtogether, it must be a divine conjunction and that cannot possibly be
without divine grace.

But this is most fully expressed by St Paul to the Ephesians thus, Wives submit
your selves to your own Husbands, as unto the Lord, for the Husband is the head
of the Wife, even as Christ is the head of the Church; and he is the Savior of
the body, therefore as the Church is subject to Christ, Ephesians 5.22, 23, 225
so let the Wives be to their own Husbands in every thing. Husbands love your
Wives, even as Christ also loved the Church, and gave himself for it, etc. And
then concludes, for this eause shall a man leave his father and mother, and
shall be joined with his Wife, and they two shall be one flesh. This is a great
Mystery, or Sacrament, choose you which. Here the Apostle clearly proclaims it a
Sacrament, because the Conjunction of man and wife, is the visible sign of that
Sacred Conjunction between Christ and his Church.

Again to the Hebrews he says thus, Marriage is honorable in all, and the bed
undefiled, Heb. 13.4.
but Wheremingers and Adulterers God will judge. Now if there were not a divine
and Sacramental grace in marriage, how could the Bed be undefiled?

Again to the Corinthians, he advises every one to have his own Wise, 1 Cor.
7.2.
for the avoiding of Formeation; yet it is not to be supposed, that any man by
the help of a Wife only, be she what she can be of virtue and beauty, can be
capable to avoid Fornication without the said Sacramental Grace.

Again, to the Thessalonians thus. 1 These 1.
Let every one amongst you know how to possess his Vessels in sanctification
and honor, now sanctification, we know cannot be without divine grace.

Then he tells Timethy, that a woman shall be saved by Childbearing, if she
remain in says and love, now to beget children, without the grace of this
Sacrament, would be more probably occasion of damnation than salvation.

Then again to the Corinthians he says, 1 Cor. 7.12, 13, 14
If any brother has a wife that believes not, and she be pleased to dwell
with him, let him not put her away. And the woman which has a busband that
believes not, and if he be pleased to dwell with her, let her not leave him.
For the unbelieving husband is sanctified by the wife, and the unbelieving wife
is sanctified by the husband: else were your children unclean, but now are they
holy; which must needs be understood; as by the grace of this holy Sacrament.

I shall conclude all concerning this, Prove. 19.
with what the wise King Solomon tells us, that a house and riches we have from
our Parents, but a prudent wife is from the Lord. Thus we must acknowledge God
to be the immediate Author of Marriages, as we say matches are made in heaven,
and by the grace of this Sacrament, only to be made happy.

That extreme Unction is a Saeroment likewise, and a visible sign of an
invisible grace, I prove by ezpress Scripture thus.
We find in Saint Marks Gospel, how our Savior called unto him the twelve,
Mark. 6, 7, 8.9, 10, 11, 12, 13.
and began to send them out by two and two, and gave them power over unclean
Spirits, etc. And after he had given them their mission fully, with orders how
to behave themselves, in their business, we find, that they went out
accordingly, and Preached that men should repent, and they cast out many
Devils: And then anointed with Oil many that were sick, and healed them. This
it is not to be thought, that they did this upon their own heads, but by their
Masters command, by whose power they did those mighty works, and having his
command, sure then none can deny but it was his Institution.

Then this Sacrament is so loudly proclaimed by Saint James, that I admire how
any Christian can believe in Scripture, and doubt the other. It any sick among
you, says the Apostle, James 5.14, 15.
let him call for the Elders of the Church, and let them pray over him,
anointing him with Oil in the Name of the Lord, etc. and if he have committed
sins, they shall be forgiven him. Here is plainly a most visible sign, and as
plainly, a most extraordinary grace accompanying it, that is to say, remission
of sins.

Thus you may clearly see, how extreme Unction is a Sacrament of our Saviors
own Institution, or at least plainly impli'd to have been instituted by him,
and that by the action of the Twelve Apostles before his face, whilst he was
upon earth, and at large declared to be so by the express words of one of the
Twelve that is Saint James. Over and above this, we have the universal
tradition of the Church of Christ, that in these matters of faith, we know
cannot err: and that alone indeed might have been a sufficient proof of the
verity of it, if our Savior himself, his Apostles, and Evangelists had been
silent in it. The truth is, that the Evangelists being to write in short (for
if they had writ at large, the whole world had not been able to contain the
books that might have been written, as Saint John tells us) of the Acts, and
words of our Savior Jesus Christ, made it their principal care to deliver
punctually to us only those things that were most highly necessary to our
salvation; as we see how amply they have set down the Sacraments that were
absolutely necessary, as Baptism, Penance; and Eucharist, and as for
confirmition, and extreme Unction, they do not so much as insist upon, because
they are not of absolute necessity to salvation, though they are very great
expedients toward it; the one to confirm us in grace, after Baptism, the other
to remove the relics of sin, after a hearty repentance. And it is the opinion
of the learned in this point, that the benefit of this Sacrament, is such, that
a penitent with attrition only receiving this Sacrament, receives likewise
such a grace along with it, that by virtue of it, his sins though mortal, may
be forgiven him. Thus I conceive enough said as to this, and all the rest of
your last paper; and when you please I am ready for another, and to serve you
with any thing, that may lie within the power of

Your faithfully loving and true friend, M.

This paper my Lady had no sooner dispatched, but she sent it away by one of her
servants sealed up, and by him she roceived this Answer.
Madam,
I have received your Ladyships Letter and Paper enclosed, for which I teturn
my most humble thanks, and instead of another which you seem to require of me,
I have sent you two, herein enclosed, the one to show you the superstition,
Idolatry, and Will Worship of your Church; the other to convince you of the
Pride, Arrogance, Tyranny, and Usurped power of it, which when your Ladyship
has been pleased to peruse, and as well as you can, to answer, I shall sum
up all that you have said rogether, and make a short rejoinder to the whole of
your replies; for I am refolved to trouble your Ladyship with no more Papers,
so praying God for your Ladyships good health, both of Body and Soul, I take
leave to remain,

Madam, Your Ladyships most assured faithful servant, N.


My Lady upon the return of her servant, opening the Packet that Mistress. N.
had sent back to her, found the Papers enclosed, whereof the first was to this
effect as follows.
That which your Church teaches concerning the invocation of Saints, is a
Doctrine very injurious to God, and yet not more profane then superstitious,
and impertinent, and that I will prove thus.

1. Jesus Christ our blessed Savior, with God the Father, God the Holy Ghost,
Holy Trinity in Unity, three Persons and one God, alone is allsufficient, alone
is most liberal, and alone is most merciful, and who alone loves us more than
all the Saints. There is not a Christian living, that I think dares deny a word
of this, if there should be such a monster, a were easy to prove every word of
it, by express Scripture: who can think it rational then to invoke any other
thing; and besides that, this all-bountifull, all-mercifull, all-powerfull,
most good, most gracious, and most loving Lord God, has not only enjoined us,
but importuned us to pray to him, and him alone, promising to hear, and grant
our requests, and that I prove by most express Scriptures thus.

2. First by the Gospells it is most clear, our Savior in Saint John assures
it with a Verily, verily, I say unto you, whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in
my name, he will give it you, John 16.23, 24.
and then in the next verse, Ask, and ye shall receive, thus it is but asking of
God and having, and yet you must think fit to go about by the Saints.

3. Then in Saint Lukes Gospel we find, and I say unto you, ask and it shall be
given you, Luke 11.9.10, 11, 12, 13.
seek and ye shall find, knock, and it shall be opened unto you. For every one
that asks receives, and he that seeks finds, and to him that knocks it
shall be opened. Then by the parallel of God with a good Father granting his
child's requests he concludes how much more shall your heavenly Father give the
holy Spirit to them that ask him. Again, what you ask in prayet believing ye
shall receive, as Saint Matthews Gospel tells, Matthew. 2.
with an infinity of other places; too many to repeat to that purpose,
wherefore Saint Paul most pithily concludes, Heb. 4.16.
Let us therefore come boldly unto the throne of Grace, that we may obtain
mercy, and find grace to help, in time of need.

4 The Apostle tells us, 2 Cor. 1.3.
that God is the Father of mercies, and the Lord of all comforts, who
comfort us in all our tribulation, that we may be able to comfort them which
are in any trouble, by the comfort wherewith we our selves are comforted of God,
etc. If all our comfort then be from God, had we not better make our address to
him, that we know is the fountain of all Grace, than to the Saints, who can
have nothing but what they derive from him.

5. The same Apostle tells Tymothy plainly that there is but one Mediator
between God and men, and that is Christ Jesus; what an offense then must it
needs be to God, to make more Mediators, that is, the Saints? Then we find
frequently in Scripture that he alone makes intercesion for us, as in Isaiah
that he makes intercession for transgressors: 1 Timothy 2.5. Isai. 53.12. Romans
8.26.24. Heb. 7.25.
and Saint Paul tells us, that he ever lives to make intercession for us. And
again, who always makes intercession for us, why should we date to make more
intercessors, that is, the Saints.

6. In fine to sum up all in short, your Doctrine of invocacion of the
Saints, is highly injurious to God, who is a jealous God, and will only be
worshipped. It is injurious to Jesus Christ, who is the only Mediator between
God and man. Thirdly it is injurious to our selves, for it is an argument of a
diffidence and distrust in God, when we fly to the Saints for succor: and then
lastly it is an impertinent and unprofitable piece of devotion, because the
Saints in heaven neither do nor can hear our prayets, nor know our wants or
what is done here amongst us as Job tells us, Job. 24.21 Eccles. 9.5.
his sons came to honor, and he knows it not, Ecclesiastes assures us, that
the living know that they shall dye, but the dead know not any thing: and the
Prophet Isaiah yet more plainly, Isai. 63.16.
doubtlessthou art our Father, though Abraham be ignorant of us, and Israel do
not acknowledge us, etc. Thus it is plain that the Saintf in heaven are
incapable to know our wants, or hear our prayers, much less to help us.

That your Doctrine of Veneration of Images is an abominable, Idolatrcus
Dactrine, and prejudicial to divine Worship, I prove Thus.
First, out of the plain words of the Commandment. Thou shall not make unto
thee any graven Image, Exodus 20.4, 5. Deuteronomy. 4.5. and 2^.
or any likeness of any thing that is in heaven above, or that is in the earth
beneath; or that is in the waterunder the earth, thou shall notbow down thy
self to them, nor serve them, etc. The same thing is repeated at the latter end
of Ex^dus, and in several places of Deuteronomy; and in many other places of
the Old Testament.

2. Again we find how good Hezekiah, 2 King. 18.4.
removed the high places, and brake the Images, and brake in pieces the beazen
Serpent that Moses had made etc. Yet your Religion strives to restore to
Christians that kind of worship.

3 How well our Savior is pleased with that kind of Worship, Joh. 22, 23 24.
you may see in Saint John's Gospel, where our Savior says, ye worship, ye
know not what, etc. But the hour comes, and now is, when the true Worshippers
shall worship the Father in Spirit and in Truth, for the Father seeks such to
worship him. God is a Spirit, and they that worship him, must worship him in
Spirit and in Truth Now I would feign know what a Spirit has to do with
Images? or how can the worship of Images, be thought a spiritual worship.

4 Over and above the danger of Idolatry, and many unclean thoughts, that may
be occasioned by Images, I shall only add this one Argument, against so foul a
thing, and that is this, either Images are commanded, or commended for good
means of divine worship, or they are not, if they be, then show it by
Scripture, if they be not, then it must follow, that it is a piece of
will worship, and that all Images, are mere fond and vain things.

That your, Doctrines of Indulgences, Purgatory, and Prayer for the dead, are
derogatory to Gods glory, and abusive to the world, Iprove by Scripture thus.
And First, as to your business of Indulgencies, I shall give but one blow, and
that I presume will be a mortal one, out of Saint Paul to the Romans where he
says, for I reckon. that the sufferrings of this present time, Romans 8.18.
are not worthy to be compared with the Glory which shall be revealed in me. If
then the merits of the Saints upon earth, are more then enough rewarded, by the
glory which the Lord is pleased to confer upon them in heaven, how can there be a
superabundance of their merits, picked up by your Church, and laid up in a
storehouse, or treasury, for the Pope to take out at his pleasure and apply to
the use and advantage of other men? which is as I am informed the profane and
sottish opinion of your Church.

Then as to your Doctrine of Purgatory, I shall disprove it thus.
The Prophet Daniell mentions but two ways for souls to go: The one to
everlasting life, Dan. 11.2. Matthew. 25.46. John 5.29.
the other to everlasting contempt. Our Savior does mention no more, And these
shall go away into everlasting punishment, but the Righteous into life
eternal, so St. Matthew; And again in St. John's Gospel, They that have done
good unto the Resurrection of life, and they that have done evil, unto the
Resurrection of damnation. How dare any man invent a third place upon his own
head, when God himself has appointed but two.

Again, the Scriptures plainly tells us, that those which are to be saved, go
immediately to Heaven, without any stop or stay by the way, therefore your
Purgatory must needs be very much out of the way. Luke 23.43.
As first we find in Saint Lukes gospel, our Saviors own words to the Thief
upon the Cross. And Jesus said unto him Verily I say unto thee, to day shall
thou be with me in Paradise: that is understood, immediately after his death,
without any delay in Purgatory, Phil. 1.23.
or else where Then again St. Paul tells the Philipians, that he had a desire
to depart, and to be with Christ: therefore after departure, the saved soul
goes immediately to Christ, without any rubbs, stops or stays by the way: what
then is become of your pitiful purgatory? So I presume I need not trouble your
Ladyship with any more arguments, to convince so foul an error. I shall only
produce one or two more against your prayer for the dead, which is a consequent
of your Purgatory, and so conclude this Paper.

That your Doctrine of Prayer for the dead, is an impertinent piece of
devotion, and contrary to Scripture, I prove thus.
1. It were enough for the satisfaction of any reasonable person in this point,
to have disproved purgatory, as I have done already, for if there be no
Purgatory there can be no prayer for the dead useful at all, but I will
proceed more particularly to prove against prayer for the dead thus, The
Prophet Jeremy not only forbids to pray, but to weep for the dead, saying Weep
ye not for the dead, Jer. 22.10.
neither bemoan him, but weep for him that goes, astray, etc. If the dead be
not in a condition to be wept for, they are mch less in a condition to be
prayed for; and by consequence again, there can be no Purgatory.

2. Luke 7.13.
Our Savior again in like manner forbids the Widow to weep for her Son that
was dead; so still it follows, if there ought to be no weeping, then no
Purgatory, and if no Purgatory then no prayer for the dead.

3ly. and Lastly, for the Explication of all that has been said, 1 These.
14.13, 14, 15.16, 17, 18
and the conviction of all gainsayers, Observe what St. Paul says to the
Thessalonians. But I would not have you be ignorant brethren, concerning them
which are asleep, that ye s^rrow not even as others which have no hope, for if
we believ, etc. So to the end of the Chapter comforts them, with an assurance
of resurrection to life eternal, without any the least mention of Purgatory,
or prayers for the dead.

This Paper my Lady had at sooner peras'd, but she disposed her self
immediately to her pen, and writ as follows.
To what you are pleased to allege against our Doctrine, for the invocation of
the Saints in Heaven, I answer thus.
To your first, second, third, and fourth I shall answer together, and with
good reason, for there runs the same fallacy along with them all; and I do
wonder you should be so deluded by the Sophismes of your Doctors; for those
very Arguments that they have furnished you withal against us in this point,
do as well take away the Intercession of Christ himself, and the prayers of the
Saints living upon earth, as the intercession of the Saints in heaven. For if
this be a good consequence, God is only to be worshipped; therefore it is not
lawful to invoke the Saints in heaven, then this must be a good consequence
too, God is only to be worshipped; therefore it is not lawful to invoke or
desire the Saints on earth to pray for us: For this word only exclude; as well
one as the other; and must of necessity, as well condemn the invocation of the
Saints Militant, which all of you use, and the Apostle himself did too, as the
invocation of the Saints Triumphant. Besides we do acknowledge it to be our
duty to pray and ask of God, and to pray and ask in Jesus his name, and to pray
and to ask with confidence, as the Apostle would have us, but nothing of all
this can make an exclusion of the Saints. For by the Saints, as our fellow
Members, we pray in the name of Jesus our head; wherefore our Church always does
conclude its Collects of the Saints, with through Jesus Chirst our Lord; and
you are to understand, that though God be most good, most gracious, and
merciful, yet he is a God of order, and disposes of all things so sweetly,
that all Inferiors may lead us to Superiors, and so in this particular case,
our Church is likewise well pleased, that we should come boldly to the Throne
of Grace, to the fountain of Grace, Father of Mercy, and God of all comforts;
but this she tells us, that we may more commodiously do it by the Saints, then
only by our selves, who are most miserable sinners, and so must of necessity be
abhorred by him: And the Scripture tells us, that our God is a consuming fire;
and we may justly fear lest we perish before his face, as wax melts before
the face of the fire, Deuteronomy. 4. Heb. 13.19.
and for this we beg the mediation and intercession of the blessed Saints in
heaven.

To the fifth.
To what you urge out of the Apostle to Timothy, that there is but one Mediator
I do acknowledge, that there is but one Mediator of Redemption, that is Jesus
Christ, because he alone redeemed Mankind; nor is there any other name under
heaven, by which we can be saved, but that hinders not but that there may be
more Mediators of intercession; so then there is but one Mediator by
Redemption, as but one Savior; for he is the only good Shepherd, who gave his
life for his flock; but there are more Mediators by intercession, as the
Scripture names more Saviors, Mediators, and Redeemers too. Moses says of
himself, that he was set apart or chosen for a Mediator between God and the
children of Israel. Again, he raised up a Redeemer, Deliverer, or Savior to
them, one Othoniel; Deuteronomy. 3. Judge. 3.9. Nehem. 9: Genesis 4.1
and Nehemiah tells us how God did raise unto the children of Israel Saviors,
and Pharaoh calls Joseph a Savior.

To the sixth.
I say, that as to the injury which you pretend, done to God, by the invoking
of his Saints, I have sufficiently answered already, in my return to your first
Arguments; for the injury which you allege done to Christ, I answer in like
manner, if this be a good consequence, Christ is our only Mediator; therefore
we do an injury to him, to invoke the Saints in heaven, then this must be
likewise a good Argument, therefore it is injurious to Christ, to invoke the
Saints upon earth, and that you all are guilty of, praying one another to pray
for you, and doubtless you do not do amiss in it. Again, if we show our
diffidence, and distrust in Christ's Mediation, by invoking the Saints in
heaven, then it will follow likewise that you diffide in Christ's mediation, by
invoking one another, or any Saints upon earth.

As for your supposition (which indeed is the strength of your Argument) that
the Saints in heaven do not hear our prayers, nor know what is done amongst^ns,
and therefore must be much less able to help us, and as to the places of
Scripture, which you pretend to bring to that purpose, I answer, that they all
signify nothing; for here we speak not of those, who in the time of the Old
Testament, were either in Hell, or in the Limbus that was appointed for them;
but of the Saints, that since the time of the New Testament are in heaven; we
may safely grant that all those were ignorant of what was done here, bua that
proves nothing as to these last beattifi'd souls in heaven. And yet I know,
you will be importunate to know how the Saints should be capable to hear our
prayers, and understand our inward affections and desires. I would ask you
again, how the Saints in this life, can know the secrets of other men's
counsels, and contrivances. 1 Samuel 19.
Samuel knew all things which were in the heart of Saul, and told him all that
was in his heart. 2 Kings 5.26. 2 Kin. 6.33
Did not Elishah know all things that were done by his servant that was at a
great distance from him, and so the same Prophet knew all the secret Counsels
of the King of Syria. Dan. 2.26.
Did not Daniel know the dream of Nebuchadnezzar, and the interpretation of it,
before he sent to him, and did not the Apostle Saint Peter know the hidden
fraud, and close collusions of Ananias and Saphira: And to conclude, I would
fain know, what things were they which were hidden from the Prophets, though
never so close from the eyes of men? And can these things be done on earth, and
not possibly be done in heaven?

Now that this veneration, or invocation of Saints is expressly commanded in
Scripture I cannot say, nor see any reason that it should be; first it could
not be well in the old Testament, where the people were so prone to idolatry,
and the Patriarchs besides were but in a Limbus, Esaias 63.
reposed till our Saviors triumphant entry into heaven, so they could not be
beatified or made capable of hearing of prayers of men: and therefore it was
said, Abraham knows us not, and Israel does not acknowledge us. Again under the
Gospel it was not absolutely commanded, least the Gentiles that were newly
turned from Paganism, should believe that they were brought again to the
worship of earthly gods; for that was their use, to worship their deified
persons, not as Patrons but as very Gods indeed; as at Lyraania, they would
have sacrificed to Paul and Barnabas. Besides if the Apostles and Evangelist,
had taught expressly that the Saints are to be prayed to, it might have been
thought as a piece of arrogance in them, as if they had been after death,
ambitious of that honor to be done to them. The holy Spirit therefore would
not by express Scripture, teach this doctrine of veneration and invocation of
Saints, but the Church being once established, quickly found by the Miracles and
succors, that those Saints performed to men, that they were to be worshipped,
and invoked with prayers, that they would please to pray for us: and this is a
worship far different from that, which we pay to God, therefore no way
prejudicial to the divine Majesty, no; though express Scripture, as I said, we
have none for this, yet very much inclining to, and favoring of our purpose.

That the saints, the friends of God, are to be implored that they will please
to intercede for us, I prove by express Scripture thus.
Our Savior in S. John's Gospel says thus, if any man serve me, John 12.26.
him will my Father honor, if therefore God does honor his saints, why should
not we mortals give honor to them? Our Savior says again in S. Mat. 25.40.
Mathews Gospel verily I say unto you insomuch as ye have done it unto one of
the least of these my brethren ye have done it unto me; the honor therefore
that is given to the saints of God, he takes as done unto himself.

We find in Job how Eliphaz says to him, Call now if there be any that will
answer thee, Job 5.1.
and to which of the saints will thou turn? which words though Eliphaz spoke,
yet Job reprehends them not, but takes it as wholesome council from his friend.

Again in another place, Job 42.1, 9, 10.
the Lord himself says, go to my servant Job, and my servant Job shall pray
for you, for him will I accept, least I deal with you after your folly etc. so
they did as the Lord commanded them, the Lord also accepted Job, and the Lord
turned the captivity of Job, when he prayed for his friends etc.

Then we find how Absalon after he was reconciled to his father, 2 Samuel 14.28.
staid two years in Jerusalem, before he saw his fathers face, so a sinner
though reconsiled to God, will not dare presently to thrust himself before his
divine Majesty, that he has offended, but by mediators and intercessors.

The wisest of Kings Solomon, rose up to meet his mother, and bowed himself
unto her, 1 Kings 2.19.
and caused a throne to be set, for his mother, and she sat on his right hand,
and shall not Jesus Christ, a greater and a wiser than Solomon, honor his
mother in the like kind?

It is most manifest that the Angels are assisting to us, and pray for us,
Mat. 2.8. Mark 12 Psalm 33
then why should not we pray to them, and there is the same reason for the
saints, as for the Angels; who are their equals in heaven as we find in the
holy Gospells, Psalm 90.
how freequently in the Psalms does the Royal prophet speak of Gods sending
his Angels to snatch us out of dangers, to guard us, and to keep us in all our
ways etc. Then we find in the Prophet Zachcariah, Zach. 1.12.13.
how the Angel of the Lord interceded for the people in these words, O Lord of
Host, how long will thou not have mercy on Jerusalem, Heb. 1.7
and on the Cities of Judah, against which thon have bad indignation these
threescore and ten years, and the Lord answered the Angel with good words, and
comfortable words. Then S. Acts 12.12.7, 8.
Paul calls the Angels minnistring spirits, and we find how freequently they
have delivered Gods servants, as S. Peter out of prison etc. now I say if it be
in the power of the Angels in heaven to help us by their prayers, the same
reason will hold for the saints, who are as the Evangelists aforesaid tell us
their equals, both in their favor, and power with God. And that they do too,
is as manifest, for the Lord has sometimes sought for a saint, to stand in the
gap, as he says himself in Ezeckiel, Ezekiel. 22.30.31.
and I sought for a man amongst them, that should make up the hedge, and stand
in the gap before me for the land, that I should not destroy it, but I found
none, therefore have I powered out mine indignation upon them, I have consumed
them with the fire of my wrath etc. therefore did the Lord do it for want of an
acceptable intercesor.

But it is most clear in the Apocalypse, Revel. 4. and 5.
how the four beasts and four and twenty elders are continually falling down
before the Lamb and interceding for the faithful on earth, with their Violls
full of precious ointments, which are the prayers of the saints. And then again
it is expressly said, that another Angel came and stood at the Altar, having
a golden censer, Revel. 8.3.4.
and there was given unto him much incense that he should offer it with the
prayers of all saints, upon the golden Alter, which was before the Throne, and
the smoke of the incense, which came with the prayers of the faints ascended up
before God, out of the Angels hand etc.

If yet there be any doubt remaining, me thinks mere reason raised from a most
undoubted Scripture, should clear this point, as first we find, and I think
no body questions it, that Jesus Christ, as he is man does continually interde
for all mankind, especially his faithful ones, if any man does doubt, let him
look into S. Paul, to the Romans, Romans 8. Heb. 7.
and Hebrews, where it is positively said in diverse places, that Jesus Christ
does constantly interecde for us. And S. John tells us, if any man have sinned,
1 John 2.
we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous, and he is the
propitiation for our sins, nor for our sins only but for the sins of the whole
world. If therefore Christ our head according to his humanity pray for us, why
should not his members, the saints that rain with him, and are conformable to
him, intercede likewise in their proportion, for their fellow members upon
earth, for we are all members of the same mystical body.

Again the liveing pray for one another and frequently obtain? Exodus 17 and 31.
Mat. 15. Luke 7. Acts 17. Collos. 4.2. 2 These. 3.1.
as Moses prayed and obtained for the people, the woman of Canan for her
daughter, the Centurion for his servant, Paul for those that sailed with him.
Nay S. Paul desired the Colossians to be instant in prayer, and particularly
for himself and so to the Thessalonians, he says, finally hretheren pray for
us, that the word of the Lord may have free course etc. If therefore the living
may pray for one another why may not the glorified saints in heaven do the same
for us, who are more perfect in charity, more powerful with God, and more pure
in understanding? for if they may not pray for us, as the living do, it would
appear unworthy of Christ's grace and favor to them, which we cannot apprehend;
or it must be because it is a purpose of the excellency, that it is fiting
only for Christ himself to do it, and no person else, and then it will not be
lawful for us mortals to pray for one another. But that we know the contrary
by what has been before set down, and as S. Paul does earnestly beseech the
Romans, Romans 15.30.31. James 5.16.
for the Lord Jesus Christ sake, and for the love of the Spirit, that they pray
to God for him, So I do humbly beseech, the blessed mother of God, and all the
saints of heaven, to pray for me, and all the world besides. And so as S. James
advises us, let us pray one for another, that we may be saved. I pray you here
take notice, that I have made use of no Scripture out of Baruch the Machabees,
or any parts of Scripture, which you question for Apocrypha, though by all the
Canons of the Church they are received, so I proceed.

To what you allege against our use of images, which you call an abominable
and idolatorrious doctrine, I answer thus.
To the first.
I say that God Allmighty in that commandment, has sufficiently explained his
own mind, both in the precedent, and subsequent words, for as he did forbid
the worship of strange Gods, so he forbide the Images of them to be erected.
But we worship not the saint; for Gods, therefore we are not at all prohibited
by that commandment, to set up their Images. For in the first place he says,
thou shall have no strange Gods before me, then follows; thou shall not make to
thee any graven Image etc. then last of all, thou shall not bow down to them,
nor worship them. see then the whole drift of that commandment is evident, that
Images should not be made to that end, and purpose, and so we concur with you.
For if to make and erect Images were absolutely, and in it self unlawful, then
it would follow that Moses himself had sinnd, immediately after the giving of
that commandment nay that God Almighty had showed the first way to break his
own commandment, for God commanded Moses thus, Exodus 25.18.
And thou shall make two Cherubims of Gold, of beaten work shall thou make
them, in the two ends of the mercy seat, It would likewise follow, 1 King. 7
that Solomon had sinnd in his Architecture of the Temple, when he made twelve
little Lions and set them over the Throne. And when he made Oxen, Lions, and
Cherubims or brazen bases. Thus we see the end to which those Images are made,
and erected, does altogether alter the case.

To the Second.
I grant that Hezekiah broke the brazen serpents Image, therefore must the
Image of Christ and his saints be broken, I deny it. First because the Image of
the brazen serpent was made by Moses, 2 Kings 18.
that they which were bitten by the firey serpents should look upon it, and be
healed; so long as that end lasted, the Image lasted, but that ceasing, it was
fit for nothing else, but to be broken. Then the brazen serpent began to be an
occasion of idolatry, and they burnt incense to it, so then it ought to be
broken, but the Image of Christ and his saints cannot be occasions of that
amongst Christians, for we retain, the use of Images, only as they are the
representations of him from whom we have received so great benefits, and of
those his blessed servants, who are to be our examples

To the Third.
I grant to you that God is, and ought to be worshipped in Spirit and in truth,
which that we may do the better, we make use of images, for they put us in mind
of our duties, and call us to a remembrance of those benefits we have received,
which cannot but inspire a devotion into a heart of stone. And why I would fain
know, or wherein a spiritual worship should be at all hindered by the sight of
an image, more then the opperation of Sacraments, be taken off, by the sensible
signs whereunder they lie, and as under those visible signs, we receive an
invisible grace, so are we led by the visible images of Christ and his Saints,
to the true and spiritual worship of those things invisible, of which they are
but the representations.

To the fourth.
I say, there can be no danger at all of Idolatry amongst Christians, for there
is none so simple but knows, that the veneration that is used, referres not at
all to the image of wood, Stone or Brass, but to the prototype, or person
represented, and that is enough to rectify their intentions; then for the
danger of unclean thoughts, there is care sufficiently taken by the Church, to
inhibite Painters and Carvers, all manner of laciviousness, or probable
dispositions toward it. Then as to your argument that you think is so strange,
and in your opinion caries horns with it, you will find upon better
examination, that they are but a pair of ears. You say either images are
commanded, or they are not, if they be, then we are to show it in Scripture, if
they be not, then you say, it must follow, that it must be a will worship, or
Idolatry. I answer, some things are commanded in Scripture, and yet not to be
observed, as the observation of the Sabbath day holy, or sanctifying it, as the
Scripture speaks, as also the forbearing of things strangled, and of blood etc.
It is enough to satisfy any reasonable Christian, that the Church has
appointed images to be set up, for the use of Christians, as I say, for
profitable, and almost necessary expedients to their devotion. So I return your
horned argument upon your self, thus, either to sanctify, or celebrate the
Lords day, that is the first day of the week, is commanded, or it is not, if it
be, let Scripture be showed for it; if it be not, then it is will worship, a
fond, and a vain thing to do it, and that I am sure, none of your Church, will
ever yield to.

That the use of Images is lawful, and profitable in the Church of God, I
prove by Scripture thus.
I must confess we have nothing express in the the new Testament for it, and
the reason I conceive was the fierceness of the primitive persecution, which
would hardly permit the persons of Christians to meet, much less to adorn their
meeting places, with images or any thing else. And yet we have it by universal
Tradition, that the use of images is Apostolical, and that we have our
authority for the use of them, from the Apostles themselves. Then we have in
our Ecclesiastical histories, as how our Savior sent his picture to Abagarus
King of the Edessens, which is yet as (I am informed) preserved and to be seen
at Genoa. Then we have again in the same story, that our Savior himself
impressed the picture of his countenance upon a piece of linen cloth, which he
gave to Veronica, by the virtue of which picture, the Emperor Tiberius was
recovered from a dangerous disease, and for that reason Caesar would have
decreed to Christ divine honors. Then again we have in history, and clear
Tradition that S. Luke the Evangelist did draw the picture of the blessed
virgin, which was for many ages preserved in great veneration: and to say that
there were no Painters, Mark 22
Carvers or Engravers in that age, is most extremely false, for we find our
Savior asking in the Gospel, whose image and superscription is this? But all
this I must pass by, because we have resolved to insist only upon Scripture,
and in the old Testament we find enough.

First we find in Exodus, as a foresaid, Exodus 25.18.
and thou shall make two Cherubims of gold, of beaten work shall thou make
them, in the two ends of the mercy-seat. Numb. 21.8.
Then we find the Lord saying to Moses, make thee a fiery Serpent, and set it
upon a Pole, and it shall come to pass that every one that is bitten, when he
looks upon it, be shall live, and Moses did so, and it was a certain cure to
them. Now this Brazen Serpent, was the figure or Type of Christ, hanging upon
the Cross, for as they that were bitten by the fiery Serpents, were cured by
looking upon the Brazen Serpent, so all they that are bitten by the devil, are
cured by a faithful looking upon Jesus Christ Crucified, as we find in the
Gospel of S. John, from whence I think I may conclude. The figure must of
necessity be of less value than the thing that is figured. as Moses who was
likewise the figure of Christ, was of much less value then Christ himself, the
Paschal Lamb less to be esteemed then our Eucharist, and circumcision than
Baptism. If then the image of the Brazen Serpent was honored, as we know it
was, how much more ought the image of Christ be honored? nay it is plain that
the Serpent had not been honored at all, but as it was the figure or shadow of
the image of Christ upon the Cross, nor had it cured those that were bitten by
the fiery Serpents, but by the virtue of Christ, who cures still all that are
bitten by the devil. As to the breaking of it by Hezekiah, I have hinted
already, that the end for which it was made ceased, it was of no use longer
then the children of Israel were in the wilderness, for there was no more danger
of Serpents in the land of promise. But the image of Christ Crucified is made
to this end, to represent to us our bleeding Savior, and to call to mind
those benefits that we receive by that his bitter death and passion, now this
end, must last till the end of the world, therefore his image is still to be
retained, and kept with honor for ever. 2 King. 8
Besides the brazen Serpent, after the end of its making ceased, began to be as
a foresaid an occasion of Idolatry, which the image of Christ cannot be amongst
us Christians, for we know it is set up to no other intent of purpose, then to
represent our Savior, and his benefits to us.

Again, Levi. 26.1. Josh. 24.26.
we find in Leviticus forbidden to make idols, or graven images, nor to rear
up a standing image, nor to set up any graven stone in the land, and yet we
find that Joshua, took a great stone, and set it up there under an oak that
was by the Sanctuary of the Lord: and so the Altar that was built by the
children of Reuben, and Gad, and the half tribe of Manasseh, was permitted to
them, though contrary to their Law, so soon as they had satisfied their
brethren, Josh. 22.
that there was no intention of Idolatry, in their so doing, and in the like
manner did Samuel, which I have before insisted upon.

Again, if to set up Images in the house of God, had been absolutely Idolatry, 1
Kings 7
would Solomon have done it? Nay it was done by Gods own order; so many Lions,
Oxen, and Cherubims; and all carrying a divine moral, or signification with
them, had never sure been set up in that glorious Temple, the beloved house of
God, if they had not been as well useful, as lawful, and specious. And so let
the use remain in the name of God, and the abuse be taken away.

In the last place I beseech you tell me now, if that Scripture, and the whole
Church were filent in this case; by what reason you proceed when you endeavor
with so much charge and artifice, to paint, adorn, and preserve the statues
and Pictures of Princes, and great persons, the pictures of Parents, Children,
husbands, and wives, you will not deny but this you do, and you think well done
too. What madness therefore must it needs appear to be in you, to contemn the
picture of Christ, Spit upon his Images, or throw dirt in the faces of them,
beat them down, abolish, or exterminate them would not any indifferent person
say, that sees those actions, that you have a greater kindness for a parent,
kinsman, child, or friend, then you have for your Crucified God, I must tell
you, that a good honest Pagan would blush and be troubled at it, a good Jew
would no doubt be pleased at the action, yet angry with all those that did it;
and none but the Devil could rejoice, and make sport with it. I am sure, I
pity it, as the action of poor blind men, that are led by those that are
wilfully blind that is blinder than themselves.

To what you are pleased to allege against our doctrines of Indulgencies,
Purgatory and prayer for the dead, I answer thus.
To the first.
Now first as to the matter of Indulgencies you say you have but one blow to
give me, but that must be a mortal one, and that must be out of S. Paul to the
Romans; well I shall freely and humbly grant all that the holy Apostle says,
that nothing that we suffer, here can be compared to the glory that we are to
receive, by his favor he^reafter. But you must understand, that as the works
of Jesus Christ upon earth, so are those of his saints here, as well
satisfactory, as mertorious. For he merited both for himself. and us. For
himself he merited, because by the humility of his passion, he merited the
glory of his Resurrection, for so S. Paul tells us, Phil. 2.9, 10.
that being found in fashion as a man, he humbled himself and became obedient
unto death; even the death of the Cross, wherefore God has highly exalted him,
and given him a name, which is above every name etc. Then he merited for us,
Romans 5.17, 18, 19.
as S. Paul declares to the Romans, for if by one man's offense death reigned by
one, much more they which receive abundance of grace, and of the gift of
righteousness, shall reign in life by Jesus Christ therefore as by the offense
of one, judgment came upon all men to condemnation; even so by the
righteousness of one, the free gift came upon all men to justification of life
for as by one man's, disobedience many were made sinners so by the obedience of
one, shall many be made righteous etc. For all this his works were meritorious.
Now they were satisfactory, not for his own sins, because he had non as S.
Peter tells us, Who did no sin, 1 Pet. 2.22. Esaias 5.4.5, 6. Ephesians. 5.2. 1 Pet.
2.24.
neither was guil found in his mouth, but for our sins, as is apparent out of
scripture, he was wounded for our transgression and bruised for our iniquities,
the chastisment of our peace was upon him, and with his stripes we are healed,
All we like sheep have gone astray, we have turned every one to his own way.
and the Lord has laid on him the iniquity of us all etc. therefore S. Paul
tells us, that he has given himself for us an offering, and a sacrifice to God
for a sweet smelling savor. and S. Peter says that his own self bare our sins
in his own body on the Tree, that we being dead to sin, should live unto
righteousness, by whose stripes we are healed, 1 John 2 2.
and S. John assures us, that he is the propitiation for our sins, and not for
ours only, but also for the sins of the whole world. just so we are to
conceive of the works and sufferings of the saints, which as they are
meritorious, are more then enough, and infinitely beyond their merit
remunerated, as the Apostle whom you so urge, does diliver to us. But as they
are satisfactory for punishment, we do find that there are many saints, who
have satisfied and suffered more than they ought to have done for their own
sins; as is plain in holy Job, Job 6.2.3.
in whose book and diverse others of holy writ, it is said, that he suffered
much more than he deserved, and S. Paul speaks it most plainly of himself,
Colos. 1.24.
thus, who now rejoice in my sufferings for you, and fill up that which is
behind of the afflictions of Christ in my flesh, for his b^dies sake which is
the Church. Can any thing be more plain than this for the doctrine of
Indulgence, that the residue of his satisfaction and sufferings, should be
added to the sufferings of Christ, and applied to the body of Christ, that is
his Church, out of the treasury of Indulgencies? And sure this satisfaction of
the saints, does turn to their greatest glory. As for example, if the
satisfaction and suffering of La^erence, does pay the punishment due to John,
being a penitent, will not Laurence have a kind of additionall joy in heaven,
for that, his satisfaction has paid for his brother John, and so the works of
the saints, as they are sattisfactory and penal, are perfectly remunerated to
the Saints, in that others enjoy the benefit of them, being aplyed by the
Churches indulgencies. And this you may please to accept, not only for a
sufficient answer, but also a reply, as to this particular.

To what you are pleased to allege against our doctrine of Purgatory I answer
thus.
To the first.
I grant that which those texts you urge requir which is that after the day of
judgment there shall be but too places, for those which are grown in years,
and that is all which can be enforced out of those Texts. But as yet there are,
as also there were in the old Testament, more places, or receptacles for souls.
And truly granting that there were but too; I would fain have you, or any man
to tell me; where the fouls of those were who died, and were afterward raised
again to life? I would fain know I say, how the son of the widow of Sarepta,
was raised by Elias, how the Shunamites son was raised by Elisha, how the Son
of the widow in Naim, and the daughter of Jarus, the Ruler of the synagoge,
and Lazarus, in Beth^ny were raised by Jesus Christ; how Tabitha was raised by
S. Peter, and Eu^yous by S. Paul? I would fain know, I say where the souls of
these persons were between the time of their death, and there raising to life?
They could not be in Hell, for from thence there is no redemption. Nor in
heaven, for then it had been so far from being a benefit, as it would have
proved a loss, if from the joys beatitudes there, they should return to
miserable mortal life. It must then follow of necessity, that they were in some
third place, distinct from heaven, and from Hell, so call it what you will,
your argument is answered.

To the second.
I answer and grant, what you collect out of those Scriptures which you quote,
that the righteous after this life ended, are presently admitted into heavenly
glory, but I must tell you, not all the righteous neither, who leave nothing to
be purged out of them, after this life, they questionless are admitted
presently into heaven. But they that have any thing to be expiated, left in
them, shall be admitted in Gods good time, but so as by fire; as the Apostle
tells us. Nor are your testimonies out of Scripture any thing importing to the
contrary. F^r that, to day shall, thou be with (...) in Paradise, was a
singular thing, and particular privilege indulged to the good Theife, to whom
Christ did most liberally forgive all his sins without any further obligation
of temporal punishment after death, ^ut this is not granted to all no more
than the privilege of one, is to be drawn into a president for another. Then
out of that Text, I desire to be dissolved and to be with Christ, nothing else
can be collected, then that the Apostle had a great desire to live with Christ,
which desire, you and I may likewise have, especially, if we can truly say,
with the same Apostle, I do chastise my body, and bring it into subjection.
Such a mortification as that on earth, may give us indeed a present life in
heaven; which God of his mercy grant us both, and all the world besides, if so
be it may confist with his blessed will.

To what you say against our doctrine of praying for the dead which is a
consequence of Purgatory I answer thus.
To the first.
To what you allege out of the Prophet Jeremy, I answer that the Prophet
Jeremy does not speak it absolutely of all the dead, but of one only, that was
the King Joachas, who died in captivity in Egypt, so says the Prophet. Weep
not for the dead, neither bemoane him, but weep for your following Kings,
und^er whom you are to suffer greater Tribullation.

To the Second.
I grant that Christ did forbid the widow to weep for her Son, but it was,
because he was immediately to raise him from the dead, so she was not to weep
for him as dead, but to be comforted, for the miraculous life which he was to
receive. I must profess that I see not a word against Purgatory, or prayer for
the dead in all this.

To the Third and Last.
I say that which you bring so confidently out of S. Paul, as a most invinsible
and unanswerable argument, give me leave to tell you comes off but very lamely
for you, for the words of the Text, do sufficiently clear themselves, that ye
sorrow not, for those that sleep, as others which have no hope; so we agree,
that to weep for the dead out of any despair of a future resurrection, is so
far from being the practice of our Church that we hold it to be a sin, or to
weep for a dead friend out of diffidence that we shall never see him again, or
a fear that we have for ever lost him, is very injunious to God and
Christianity; but when we weep and ad^prayers to our tears in the behalf of our
dead friends, we are so far from weeping, as those without hope, that we
testify our Christian Confidence, and assurance in the Security of his
condition, for being in Purgatory he is sure of salvation, though he may stay
some time for it, to pay the temporal punishment there due for his sins here.

That there is a third place, which we call Purgatory, and that the prayers of
the faithful upon earth, are very helpful to them, I prove thus.
First we find it delivered at large by S. 1 Cor. 3.12, 13, 14, 15.
Paul in these words. Now if any man build upon this foundation, gold, silver,
precious stones, wood, hay, stubble, every man's work shall be made manifest,
for the day shall declare it, because it shall be revealed by fire, and the
fire shall try every man's work of which sort it is, if any man's work shall be
burnt, he shall suffer loss, but he himself shall be saved, yet so as by fire.
Here it is most plain, that though a man do works to be burnt, as shall appear
in the day of every man's particular judgment, that is his death, yet he shall
be saved by fire, that cannot be meant of infernal fire, for from thence there
is no redemption, it must be then understood of Purgatory.

Our Savior in the Gospels implys Purgatory plainly, though under a Parable,
in these words. Matthew. 5.25.26. Luke 12.38.
Agree with thine adversary quickly whilst thou art in the way with him, least
at any time the adversary deliver thee to the Judge, and the Judge deliver thee
to the officer, and thou be cast into Prison, verily I say unto thee, thou
shall by no means come out thence, till thou have paid the uttermost farthing
This prison our Savior speaks of has been always received by the Church for
Purgatory.

Again our Savior says in S. Mat. 12.32.
Matthews Gospel that whosoever speaks against the holy Ghost, it shall not
be forgiven him, neither in this world, nor in the world to come. By which it
is manifest that some sins are to be purged, and forgiven in the next world.

S. Paul, is likewise very plain in this, in his Epistle to the Philippians,
Phil. 2.10.
wherein he tells them that at the name of Jesus every knee shall bow of things
in heaven, and things in earth, and things under the earth. Here are clearly
three sorts of persons spoken of, as for those under the earth it is
impossible, should be meant of those in hell, no the damned souls are so far
from paying a reverence to the name of Jesus that they are always busy in
blaspheming of it, it must then of necessity be the faithful souls that are in
Purgatory.

In the like manner we find in the Revelation of S. Revel. 5.13.
John, how the Apostle saw every creature which is in heaven, and on the earth,
and under the earth, and sea and all that are in them, and heard them saying,
blessing, hnour, glory and power be unto him that sits upon the throne, and
to the Lamb for ever and ever. Now observe how the Apostle makes a threefold
order of the prayers of God, first of the blessed in heaven, then of the
righteous upon earth, than of those that remain to be purged under the earth,
and it must be so understood for the damned in hell, as I said before, are so
far from praising and glorifying of God, and blessing him that fits upon the
Throne, that their malice does wholely employ it self in cursing and
blaspheming of his divine Majesty, and all the blessed souls with him.

Again, 2 Match. 15. Mat. 17. Mark 9. Luke 9.24.
a great evidence of the truth of Purgatory, and a convincing one indeed, may
be taken from the frequent apparitions of many departed souls, to pass by those
in the Machabees of Onias and Hieremias that appeared to Judas, we find that
Moses and Elias did appear to Christ when he was transfigured, and the
disciples themselves, after the resurrection of our Savior, when he appeared
to them thought that they had seen a spirit, which they would never have
thought, unless they had known that the spirits of some departed, did make
usual apparitions, now granting such a thing, as the apparition of a spirit,
which I take to be already proved, it must follow that those souls must be
reposed in some place that is not in heaven, for then they would never wander
here to so great a loss, nor can they be in hell, from whence there is no
redemption.

Again, we find the Theif upon the Cross saying to our Savior, Lord remember
me, when thou come into thy kingdom, which he had never said, but that he
thought that Jesus Christ had a power to pardon sins after this Life. S. Paul
likewise was certainly of this opinion, where he tells the Corrinthians thus,
else what shall they do which are baptized for the dead, if the dead rise not
at all, why are they then baptized for the dead? which plainly shows that it
was a practiced course amongst the Christians then to undertake duties and
voluntary afflictions in the behalf of the dead; which sure was imagined to be
for their advantage, and yet you think much to pray for them.

Now the reason of all this is very clear, for we know that a man who sins
mortally, may have the mortality of that sin forgiven him, and consequently be
freed from the guilt of eternal punishment, and yet may be obnoxious to some
temporal penalties, which if he does not satisfy in this life, he must expect
to do it in the next. As for example, we see a King does often pardon an
offender his life, which he has forfeited to the Law, and deserved to loose,
and yet he may inflict banishment, or imprisonment, upon the same person, and
this very course we find taken by God in Scripture. Number. 20 12. Deuteronomy. 32.48. 2 Samuel 12.13, 14. 2 Samuel 24.10.
First we see the sin of unbelief forgiven by God, to Moses and Aaron, that is
as to the eternal punishment, and yet they were punished with a temporal death.
Again we find King David, after he had obtained a pardon for his fins of
Adultery and Murder, was punished yet with the death of his son, nay after the
prophet Nathan had declared, that the Lord had put away his sin, he should not
dye yet his son must, and again the same King David for his sin of pride in
numbering the people, was pardoned, as to the eternal guilt, and yet we see what
a temporal punishment followed upon it; and he was forced to choose one of the
three Plagues for it. I might be infinite in examples of the like kind, but I
have something else to say to this point, so must not insist too long in that
particular of it. We know again, that a righteous man may sometimes happen to
dye with a great many venial sins about him, especially if he be prevented with
any sudden death so cannot possibly have time enough to bethink himself, much
less to repent of them, so must still remain obnoxious to the temporal
punishment, that is due to those sins, certainly in such a case, that person
cannot be admitted into the joys and glory of heaven, till he be freed from
those venial sins, and the guilt of that temporal punishment that is due for
them. So we find in the Revelation, that there shall in no wise enter into it,
Rev. 21.27.
any thing that defiles neither whatsoever works abomination, or makes a
lie etc. now such a person is possible to be, and we may very well suppose it,
that he cannot be freed in this life, therefore after it, it must be: nor can
this be in Heaven, or in Hell, therefore it must be in Purgatory.

Over and above all this, the undeniable practice of the Church in praying for
the dead is a most invincible argument for Purgatory, and no man can deny, but
that custom is much ancienter than Christianity, and has continued ever since
That it was ancienter then Christianity, we find in the Machabees, which book
though you shut out of the Cannon of holy Scripture, (with as much reason as
you do other things) yet you allow it more credit than any ordinary Author, 2
Match. 12.43, 44, 45.
how then should it fail so grossy as to make a lie in matter of fact as well
as matter of faith. We are told there of a sacrifice offered for the dead, and
that he sent two thousand Drachmes of silver to Jerusalem, to offer a
sin-offering, doing therein very well and honestly, in that he was mindeful of
the resurrection: for if he had not hoped that they that were slain, should
have risen again, it had been superfluous and vain to pray for the dead, and
also in that he perceived that there was a great favor laid up for those that
dyed godly (it was a holy and good thought whereupon he made a reconciliation
for the dead, and that they might be delivered from sin. 2 Timothy 1.16, 18.
But if you will deny the authority of this book, you will not sure deny that
of S. Paul, who prays for the whole household of Onesiphorus, some whereof were
dead in all probability, and Onesiphous himself dead in history, before the
writing of that Epistle, wherefore he prays to the Lord to give mercy unto them
and that Onesiphorus himself may find mercy of the Lord, in that day; it is
plain from hence, that there is a capacity for mercy at the lastday by
consequence therefore there must be a third place, that is nesther Heaven nor
Hell, and so by consequence again, prayer for the dead must be a a very good
devotion, and available to the case, and release of those poor souls. And to
this truly, if all Scripture were perfectly silent, the practice of the Church
of Christ has been clear and universal, that no prudent Christian can deny his
assent, if he be not resolved to shake the very foundations of Christianity it
self. which the gates of bell, shall never prevail against.

Thus my Lady having dispatched her answer and replies to this paper, made have
to open the next, which she found to this purpose following.

Madam, this is the last paper that I shall be bold to offer to your Ladyship,
which indeed might have served for all the rest, for it striks at the very root
of all your Religion, and what a pitiful, weak, and sandy foundation you have
you shall see if you shall please impartially to confider what follows.

That your Pope or Bishop of Rome, is not, nor can be head of the Church of
Christ, nor S. Peter successor as you pretend, nor has any priminary, or
superiority over other Bishops. I prove out of Scripture thus.
1 S. Romans 12.5.
Paul tells the Romans plainly that we being many are one body in Christ and
every one members, one of another. Here the Apostle acknowledges no head but
Christ, and concludes Peter to be as much a member, as any one of the faithful
and that not only in respect of Christ we are members, but in respect of our
selves is clear by those words, every one members, one of another so that
Peter, Pope or Bishop be he what he will is not only a member of the body of
the Church, as he has relation to Christ the head, but as he does relate to the
other faithful members.

2 Again as the head and the other members, make up one entire natural body, 1
Cor. 12
so Christ and his Church make up; one entire mystical body, which is so made
up of head and members as the Apostle tells us, therefore all others besides
Christ who is the head, are but members of the body of the Church, and none but
Christ can be the head of the Church.

3 We find in the Gospells, Math. Mark Luke John
that Jesus Christ does equally commend the care of his Churh to all his
Apostles, for he said to all the rest as well as Peter, as the father sent me,
so send I you again, go ye and teach all Nations etc. then again we know that
he did teach, and instruct them all equally, and sent the holy Ghost to them
all equally, and indifferently at the time of Pentecost, therefore Peter had no
priveledge nor prehemminence over the rest.

4 S. Gal. 2.11
Paul tells us, that when Peter was come to Antioch, he withstood him to the
face, because he was to be blamed, therefore Peter was not then taken for the
head of the Church; For S. Paul had he believed that, would not have showed
such arrogance, and perverseness as to resist the head of the Church in such an
open manner.

5. Then it is manifest that the Church of Christ could not be built upon the
person of Peter, for then the gates of Hell had prevailed against it and him,
when he was terrified from his faith by the voice of a silly wench. And so by
consequence it cannot be built upon his successors, who are daily guilty of
such personal crimes.

6 Again we find that the Church of Christ is built upon a Rock, and that Rock
was Christ, 1 Cor. 3. 1 Cor. 10
therefore it could never be understood of Peter for another foundation can no
man lay, besides that which is already laid, as the Apostle tells us.

7 Then it is very disputable, whether Peter was ever at Rome, and sure we are
out of Scripture, that he was eighteen years at least after our Saviors
passion in and about Jerusalem, where was then the Roman Church.

8 Then again how could Peter be the Rock upon which he would build his Church
when our Savior himself said to him, Mat. 16.
get thee behind me satan, he never intended, sure satan should be the head of
his Church, as it is too much to be feared he makes himself now to be of yours.

9 We cannot find that S. Peter did ever exercise any power or jurisdiction
over the other Apostles, Acts 8.
but they did plainly over him, when they sent him and John into Samaria.

10 Again Peter knew fullwell that such a power or superiority was expressly
forbiden by our Savior himself, Mat. 20.25. Mark 10.46. Luke 22.24.25.
in all the Gospeles; you know, says he, that they which are accounted to rule
over the Gentiles, exercise Lordship over them and their great ones exercise
authority upon them, but so shall it not be amongst you but whosoever will be
great amongst you shall be your Minister and whosoever of you will be the
chiefest shall be servant of all. All which our Savior spok rebuke a strife
that was amongst them who should be the greatest? Nay it is plain by the Text
in all those Gospells, that it is only for the Kings and rulers of the Earth
to take upon them power and Authority, Bishops therefore of the Church have
nothing to do with it, therefore not the Pope.

11 Nay our Savior shows such a detestation of this affected superiority that
he rebukes the Diciples for it and warnes them against it in several other
places of the Gospells and set a little child before them and tellls them, Mot.
18.4. Mark 9.46.
that whoosever shall humble himself as that little child, the sames is
greatest in the Kingdom of heaven etc. How well your Pope is an immitator of
Jesus Christ, and follower of his commands I will leave your self to judge, who
takes upon him not only a power over all Bishops, but Princes.

That it is not in the power of the Pope, neither by himself, nor with all his
Cardinals, and counsels, to determine any matter of faith, I prove thus by
Scripture.
1 We find in Isay, that we are commanded to the law, and to the Testimony,
Isay 8.20
if they speak not according to this word, it is because there is no light in
them as the Jews were commanded to their law and to their Testemony, Luke 16.29.
so are we Christians to our Scripture for our judge of all things in
difference, so our Savior brings Abraham in the Gospel, saying, that they have
Moses, and the Prophets, let them hear them, woe are not therefore to have
recourse for any matter of faith to Pope, or any power else whatsoever.

2 Again our Savior commands us thus, Starch the Scriptures, for in them ye
think ye have eternal life, and they are they which testify of me. John 5.39.
Christ therefore remits us to Scripture only for a judge of controversy.

3 Again we find in the Acts of the Apostles how those of Berea were commended
and acknowledgeed to be more noble than those of Thessalonie, Acts 17.11.
in that they received the word with all redyness of mind, and Searthed the
Scriptures daily, whether those things were so. Here we find, I say, that
those of Berea did not overhastyly believe what the Apostles themselves
delivered to them, but did examine all things by the Rule of Scripture is it
not therefore fit, that we should follow their example, and acknowledge nothing
but Scripture for our Rule and judge?

4 It is manifest by reason, that the judge of all controversy in matter of
faith ought to be infallible, for if the judge should err, all that follow his
judgment must err likewise, now it is plain on tone side, that Scripture is
infallible, being the word of God which cannot err, and on the other side that
all men are liars, and subject to errors, as we find in the Romans, Romans 3.4
Psalm. 111
God is true, but every man is a liar. Now the pope is but a man; all the
Cardinals are but men, nay counsels themselves are but collections of men, no
man therefore that builds himself upon their judgment in point of faith can
have any security at all, but only by depending upon the infallible and true
P^^le of Scripture.

5 Counsels we know have, erred in matters of faith, and made decrees one
against another, at least altered one another constitutions, and if that any
such things as counsels, are to be, why should not lay men be made a part of
them, since they are a part of the Church, as well as any priests, or Bishops
and their salvation as much concerned in those decrees, as any Clergy men
whatsoever, it should be therefore as necessary for them to be present there.

That the Scripture it self, is, and ought to be the entire Rule of faith, and
that neither your whole Church, nor all the Traditions of it, have any power to
prescribe to to us in matter of Faith, I prove thus.
The authority of Scripture is greater then the Authority of the Church, for
the Church ought to be governed by Scripture; the Word of God we know is to
yield to no man, nor is it lawful for any man, or power of men whatsoever to
oppose or diminish it.

2. We find expressly in Deuteronomy, Ye shall not add unto the Word which I
command you neither shall you diminish out from it, Deuteronomy. 4.8.
that ye keep thn Comandements of the Lord your God which I command you, all
your tradition therefore are to cast away, for they add to the written Word of
God.

3. Again, We read in another place of the same Book thus, Deuteronomy. 1^.32.
Whatsoever thing I command you, observe to do it, thou shall not add thereto,
nor diminish from it. That therefore is to be done only, which God commands,
what men require or add of their own, is unlawful and not to be obeyed.

4. St. Paul declares his mind in this particular, very freely to the Galatians
thus, but though we or an Angel from Heaven, preach any other Gospel unto
you, then that which we have preached unto you, let him be accursed, and
presently repents As we said before, so say I now again, If any man preach any
other Gospel unto you, Gallat. 1.
tha^ that ye have received, let him be accursed. I say therefore that we are
to admit of no Traditions, nor any thing else besides the Gospel.

Again, We have most solemnly said in the Revelation of St. John, Revel.
22.18.19.
That if any man shall take away from the Words of the Book of that Prophecy,
God shall take away his part out of the Book of Life. And so if any man shall
add unto these things, God shall add unto him the plague; that are written in
that Book: Therefore it is not lawful to add your Traditions.

6. 2 Timothy 3.16, 17.
St. Paul assures Timothy, that all Scripture is given by inspiration of God,
and is profitable for Doctrine, for Reproof, for Correction, for Instruction in
Righteousness, that the man of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto
all good works. Therefore we have no need of Traditions.

Our Savior tells such Observers of Traditions as you are, Mat. 15.6.
Thus have you made the Commandments of God of none effect, by your
traditions; and the Apostle gives the like caution to the Colossians, Col. 2.8.
beware least any man spoil you through Phlosophy and vain deceit, 1 Pet. 1.18.
after the tradition of men, after the rudiaments of the World, and not after
Christ. And St. Peter puts the whole World in mind, how they were redeemed from
their vain conversation, received by Tradition from their Fathers. Thus you see
how much Jusus Christ and his Apostles were careful to forewarn and forbid us,
and yet you will restore to us the vanity of those very Traditions.

8. Again, Romans 1.17.
how can that be said to be determined by the whole Church, which the Pope,
with his Cardinals, Gal. 7.11.
and it may be his Bishops assembled in Council does determine, Heb. 10.38
when the Church is a Congregation of all the faithful and a connexon of them
in the true says by which the just man lives, as the Apostle tells us. It is
not therefore what all the Popes. Cardinals, Bishops, or Councills tell us,
though backed with all the strength of your Traditions, which is to be believed,
for they can be at most but a part of the Church, not the whole Church.

9. Then Lastly, when you speak of the whole Church, you speak of what you no
ways understand, for it is a spiritual thing and hidden from the eyes of men,
it cannot be visible, for if it were then it could not be an Article of faith,
as we know it is, so I would fain know, what obligation can possibly come from
such an unknown thing, Apostles Creed.
and that is impossible for the eyes of men to discover, or no find it out
where it is.

That not only your Church, which I take to be but a part, but the whole
Church of Christ, may and must err sometimes in faith, I prove thus.
The Jewish Synagouge, where was the true Church of God, and which was the true
Type of the Church of Christ made often saylings in ^^^ch as first in the time
of Moses, when Aaren with all the people worshipped a Calf. Exodus 32.4
Again in the time of Elias, when there remained none faithful but himself, as
he himself complains, I have been very jealous for the Lord God of Hosts,
because the Children of Israel have forsaken thy Covenant, thrown down thy
Altars, 1 Kings 19 14.
slain the Prophets with the sword, and I, even I only am left, and they seek
my life to take it away. Then in the time of the Prophets Isaiah and Jeremy,
Isai. 1.7.
when we see there was an universal revolt of the people from the Lord. And
Isay complains how the Ox knew his owner, and the Ass his Masters Crib, But
Israel has not known me, etc. And the Prophet Jeremy complains thus, for my
people have committed two evils, Jer. 3.13.
they have forsaken me the fountains of living waters, and heat'd them out
Cisterns broken Cisterns that can hold no water, etc. And yet more plainly we
may see in the Chronicles, 2 Chro. 15.3.
how Azariah the Prophet says, that for a long season Israel was without a
true God, and without a teaching Priest, and without Law. And then last of all
the Synagogue was seen to fail, when it felf and all it is devises, were
abolisht by Jesus Christ. And I hence conclude that if the Jewish Church did so
grossly fail, then the Christian Church may, for the reason is the same of one
and the other.

Again, that the Church shall fail in the time of Antichrist is rertain, 2
These. 2.
for so the Apostle foretells thus, Let no man deceive you by any means, for
that day shall not come except there come a falling away first, and that man of
sins be revealed, the Son of Pertution, etc. that is agreed on all sides to be
Antichrist, Dan. 9.27.
but now Antichrist is revealed long time to the Bishop of Rome, therefore your
which you pretend to be universal, has failed in faith long since.

We find it says again in Daniell, that he shall cause the sacrifice, and the
Oblation to sense, and for the overspreading of abominations, he shall make it
desolate, etc. Here is a plain Prophets of the failing of the Church.

4. The Church is frequently compared to the Moon in the Scripture, Cant. 10.
Revel. 12.1.
now the Moon we know is often failing, therefore the Church is not amiss
compared to it and it is failings we have manifestly seen by the oppositions,
that some one or two honest and godly men have ever made to it, as of Late,
John Wickliffe, John Huss, Luther Calvin, and others, to this very day.

3. Lastly that your Church may and must err, I shall add but this one
Argument to prove out of Scripture that your Pope is Antichrist therefore your
whole Church must be Antichristian: and by consequence the most failing Church
in the World.

The first not of Antichrist is that he must fall away from the faith, 2 These.
3.
and that he has done we in defending of Purgatory, invocation of Saul's
sacrifice of the Mass, etc. verse. 3.
The second Note is that he shall sit in the Temple of God, so the Pope sits in
Rome as the Head Church of Christ. verse. 4.
The third mark is that he shall show himself as God, and this the Pope plainly
does, when he makes himself the visible head of Christ's Church. The fourth mark
is to exalt and oppose himself to, and above all that is called God. This the
Pope does whilst he exalts himself above all Ecclesiastical and civil power.
All these marks we have of him in that Chapter of the Epistle of Paul to the
Thessalonians. 1 John 2.23.
Then a fifth mark we have of him out of St. John, that he must deny Jesus
Christ. This we know by the corruption of the Doctrine that concerns the
mediation of Christ, and introducing of new Mediators. The sixth mark we have
again that he is a Liar and a worker of false miracles, and that we see your
Pope to do still at Lorettoy and other places. The seventh and last is plainly
set down by the same St. John in his Revellation, that he causes all both
small and great, Rich and poor, free and bound to receive a mark in their
Right-hands or in their Fore heads; and the Pope plainly does when he imposes
his Character upon some, and marks upon all, when by the unction of his
Chrisme, he signs the Fore heads of Christians when they take your Sacrament
of Confirmation, Revel. 13.16.
etc. If this be not enough to prove your Pope to be the great Beast that leads
you all into perdition, I must profess I know not what is; so I shall forbear to
offer any further Arguments.

My Lady had no sooner read this Paper, but she fell to work upon it as
formerly, and she was the rather encouraged, being promised to be the last of
her troubles upon this occasion. So she proceeds.

To what you allege against our Pope or Bishop of Rome, that he neither is,
nor can be head of the Church of Christ, or St. Peter's Successor, or have any
power over other Bishops. I answer thus.
To the first.
I answer, that the Apostle there in that Chapter to the Romans speaks of
Christ only, as he is head of the Church, by the internal influencies of his
gifts of grace; and so it is true, that all the faithful are fellow members,
as well Saint Peter himself, and the Pope too, as any other Christians; nor in
this sense can the Pope be thought to be head at all, for all are to receive
grace from Christ the head, not from Saint Peter or the Pope. But if you speak
of Christ, as he is head of the Churrh, by his eternal Government of it, then
not only he himself, but Peter also is the head; for though to him Primarily
and in his proper power, the Government belongs, so secondarily it belongs to
the other, and by a power derived from him. And whereas I know here you will be
ready to reply, that the Church has two heads, which is monstrous, I answer,
that a Kingdom is not to be said to have two heads, when the King is absent,
and a Vice-king present with it; for one is subordinate to another: so the
Church may have two heads, one primary, and the other secondary as aforesaid.
I Will give you another example out of the Apostle, who tells us, that the man is
the head of the woman, yet the woman has another head, that is her natural one,
befides her husband; shall we therefore say, that every married woman is a
Monster with two heads.

To the second.
I answer as before, that a head is taken two ways in relation to the Members,
first according to the internal influence which proceeds from the head, into
the other members, and so there can be but one head of one body. Secondly, as
to the external Government, so there may be two heads of one body; so the body
of a woman as aforesaid, has but one head, from which it receives the influence
of sensitive spirits, but has two as to the Government of her external actions:
for in the one she is governed by her own natural head, and in the other by her
husband, who is her moral head. It is just so in the Church, which has but one
head as to the influx of grac, but two as to its Government, whereof one
supplies the place of the other the first was only Christ is head, and all
others are members; the last way not only Christ, but Peter is head, who the
former way is so far from being a head, that he is but a common member. When
therefore the Apostle tells the Corinthiaus that Christ and his Church make but
up one entire mystical body, which consist of head, and members, this must be
understood in the former sense; for the Apostle speaks plainly there of Christ,
as he is head of the Church by the internal division of his gifts, of grace, as
is plain by the context, and so in that case it cannot be denied, but all
besides Christ are Members of the Church, and none besides him can be head of
it. But if you speak as to the external Government, then Christ's Vicar may be
head, and all others Members, as in Kingdoms Governed by a Deputy or Vice-king,
as aforesaid.

To the third.
I freely grant what you urge out of the Gospels, that Jesus Christ did commend
the care of his Church to all his Apostles, but I deny that he commanded it
equally to all; for only to Pater he said, Feed my sheep, therefore the Supreme
Pastorship was only committed to Peter, and to none of the rest. Nor do I
understand any force in that argument of yours, which follows thus: All of them
were equally taught and instructed by Christ, and all of them received the holy
Ghost equally; therefore one had no more jurisdiction then another. For it is
one thing to speak of the Learning and Sanctity of the Apostles, and another to
speak of their power or jurisdiction. It is not necessary that all which have
equality of one, should have equility of the other. Otherwise a King in his
Kingdom, if he had not more learning and holiness than his Subjects, should not
have a greater power and authority, which you know, how absurd it is to say:
and the reason is plain, for power and jurisdiction do not necessarily, and of
themselves depend upon Learning and Sanctity; and suppose we grant that all the
Apostles were equal, before Christ said to Peter, Feed my sheep, it does not
follow that they were all equal afterward but that Peter had ever after that
his just pre-eminence.

To the fourth.
I grant that Paul did resist Peter, and justly, for Peter was in an error,
and yet not in any Article of faith neither, for in that he could not err; for
Christ assured him that he had asked his Father, that his Faith should not fail;
but his error was in matter of Fact only, because he did unadvisedly dissemble
Judaism to the scandal and offense of the Gentiles; but from hence it follows
not that Peter was not the head of the Church, no more then this is a
consequence, David was rebuked by Joah; therefore David was not the Head of his
Kingdom. Nay all good men will collect rather this from the reprehension that
Paul gave to Peter, that Superiors when they are in fault, may be reproved by
Inferiors, when they shall do it with due humility and charity. Now can this
be called perverseness or arrogance in St. Paul, because he pid it with a good
zeal, to take away a scandal that was like to rise, by the unwary dissimulation
of St. Peter. Beside this was no more then what belonged to the Apostleship of
St. Paul, to look to the edification of Faith; and as to the duty of
Apostleship, and the honor of it, they were all equal, though not in point of
power and Government; for therein Peter had the Primacy.

To the fifth.
Your Inference does not hold that Peter having offended in his person,
therefore the gares of Hell prevailed against his power; so the succession of
the just jurisdiction will hold as due to the successors of St. Peter, though
their persons be never so sinful. For Christ gave the power of the Keys to his
Church in the person of St. Peter; so St. Peter had the power of the keys, as
he bore the person of the Church only. Besides all this, it is plain, that
when Peter denied Christ, the Church was not then founded upon him, but to be
founded; for Christ said, upon this Rock I will build my Church, that was to be
understood, after his Resurrection.

To the Sixth.
It is most true that Christ himself is the principal Rock and primary
foundation of his Church yet he may have Vicars and Substitutes for secundary
Rocks, for though saint Paul's saying be true, that Christ is the only
Foundation, the saying of saint John must be as true, that the Wall of that
City had twelve Foundations, and in them thennees of the twelve Apostles.

To the Seventh.
It would be too long abusinesse, and out of the Road that we have proposed to
our selves, to prove out of antiquity, that St. Peter was at Rome which no
question is more sure then that you and I were once in London, and never was
denied till some upstart Doctors of yours were pleased to make a Question of
it. I am informed that all the Ancient Doctors of the Church, do understand the
Epistle of St. Paul to the Romans, as sent on purpose to confirm them in that
Faith which they had received by the Preaching of St. Peter there, and was so
famous as to be spoken of throughout the whole World, for so he himself
implies, when he said he writ to them some spiritual gift, to the end, that
that they might be established, etc. Paul would confirm what Peter had preached
that by the Testimony of two Apostles their faith might be strengthened. And as
for his so late coming to Rome, it is as great an error. It is true he was
five years in Pontus and Asia, and seven years in Antioch, before he went to
Rome; but then he did go, and in Eighteen years after Christ's Passion, he
returned again to Jerusalem to preside in a Council there, which is the groand
of your error, in saying, that he was eighteen years in and about Jerusalem,
before he went to Rome. But howsoever all that would make little to the matter;
for wheresoever he was he was still a supreme Bishop, and though by the
Revellations of the spirit, he chose out Rome for his Seat, yet he was chief
Bishop of the World, long before he was Bishop of Rome.

To the Third.
I answer thus, that it was no wonder, that our Savior rebuked Peter, for
resisting the sense that he proposed to him, concerning his being put to death,
because he had not yet received the Keys, he was not yet confirmed, nor was yet
the fullness of the spirit yet come upon him. Therefore he was not yet the
Rock, but Christ after his Resurrection, fullfill'd that promise to him and
founded his Church upon him. Then very learned men are of opinion are of
opinion that Jesus Christ said to those words to Peter, but to the Devil
himself, who was the Suggestor of that mistake to him. Again, the fall of a
person, in point of opinion, does not necessity take away his power. Then again
Peter not being yet fully confirmed, it is possible that he might have a
Revellation from God the Father, by which he might profess Christ to be the Son
of the living God, and yet that great mystery might be concealed from him, as
yet that Christ would be crucified for the salvation of mankind, and rise again
the third day: and because you are pleased to put the Devil upon us for our
Head, I would ask you, what was the Rock our Savior meant? if faith, as you
pretend, then I say Faith is so soon lost in a man as grace, and the faith of
one man must be as considerable to that foundation, as the faith of any other
man; and so upon the faith of all the faithful, the Church is to be built,
and if all the faithful are to be the foundation; what kind of Church, will
you leave to Christianity?

To the Ninth.
I answer, that your argument is not good at all, Peter was sent by the
Apostles into Samaria, therefore he was less then the other Apostles: Joh.
6.20. Gallat. 4.
just so the Arrians, as I have heard, formed their Argument, because the
Father sent the Son, as is plain in Scripture, therefore he is greater then the
Son, for the Sender, say they and you, is greater than he that is sent. Because
Herod did did not send the three Wise men to worship the Child, He was
therefore not greater then they. When it is frequent that the most principal
persons are likely sent, especially if it be from the body of an Assembly, and
that for their honor, out of love and good council, not out of any Right of
Authority in their Inferiors. So we find in Josuah, Jos. 22.12.13.14.
that when the Children of Israel heard what the two Tribes and the half had
done, the Children of Israel gathered themselves together, etc. and sent unto
the children of Reuben, and to the children of Gad, 91.
and to the half Tribe of Manasseth, into the Land of Gillead Phineas the Son
of Eleazer the Priest, and with him ten Princes, 1 Chronicles. 9.20.
of each chief house a Prince, etc. Here you see how the children of Israel,
the inferior sort of the people, sent Phineas that was their Captain and Ruler
over them, as we find in the Chronicles, and diverse other of their Princes, it
is plain therefore by your consequencies out of Scripture, that your Argument
has none. He is sent, therefore he is inferior to him, or them, that send him.

To the tenth.
It is plain that Christ did only prohibit ambition and Tyranny amongst his
Apostles, not power and order, because they are of God, as the Apostle Paul
tells us, Romans 15.
and he that resists the power, resists the Ordinance of God. Our Savior
therefore intended only to teach humility to him that was the chiefest, or
presided over the rest, not to take away his power. You would take it I
presume, for a very ill Argument, if any one should say, Jesus Christ himself
was a Minister, or did serve upon earth, and taught others to serve or minister
likewise; therefore Christ had no power when he was here. Besides when Christ
said, He that is greatest amongst you; Is it not plain, that he does imply,
that there should be one greater in power than another, though he does enjoin
that greater, to be as the lesser, by way of humility, and ministration, or
service?

To the eleventh and last.
I answer in like manner, that all which can be collected out of those
Scriptures, is to show, that he could have all those that were his, to rise to
greatness, not by power, and ambition, but by humility, and innocence; that
when they were in power, they should be as if they were not so, and as little
ones in humility and innocence; that when they were in power, they should be as
if they were not so, and as little ones in humility and innocence, not as so in
age, and understanding.

Now you must give me leave, according to my usual method to reply something
upon you, out of the clear and unforced Letter of Scripture; and that the Pope,
or Bishop if Rome, is and ought to be the he^^ of the Church of Christ, as St.
Peter's Successor, and has just power and superiority ever all other Bishops, I
prove thus.
First out of the Letter of St. Matthews Gospel, after Peter had made his
consession, Jesus answered and said unto him, Blessed art thou Simon Barjona,
Matthew. 16.16, 17, 18.19.
for flesh and blood has not revealed it unto thee; but my Father which is in
heaven, and I say, also unto thee, that thou art Peter, and upon this Rock I
will build my Church, and the gates of Hell shall not prevail against it. And I
will give unto thee the keys of the ^^osed in Heaven, etc. It is worth your
observation how signally our Savior insists upon St. Peter's person; for that
he might be sure that none but those that were wilfully disposed, should be
able to mistake, he calls him by his old name Simon, then by his Fathers name
Barjona, then by his new name Peter, which he gave him then, and signifies a
Rock, and presently says, that upon that Rock will he build his Church, etc.
And that must plainly be said and meant of himself in his own person, for
presently after follows, And I will give unto thee the Keys of Heaven, etc. And
whatsoever thou shall bind, etc. And whatsoever thou shall loose, etc.

Again we find how clearly the Primacy of St. Peter may be proved out of St.
Lukes Gospel; When our Savior twice repeats his name. Luke 22.31, 32.
And the Lord said, Simon, Simon, behold Satan has desired to have you, that
he may sift you as Wheat, but I have prayed for thee, that thy faith fail not;
and when thou art converted strengthen thy brethren. Observe I pray you how our
Savior prays for him most particularly and above the rest, and he asked two
things for him, First, an indefectibility of his faith, and then a power to
confirm the rest of the Apostles and all the faithfall.

Again, we find in St. Matthews Gospel, how Christ before all his Apostles
says to Peter, Go thou to the red Sea, Math. 17.27.
and cast an book and take up the Fish that first comes up, and when thou have
opened his mouth, thou shall find a piece of money that take, and give unto
them for me and thee. here it is plain that though the rest of his Disciples
were present, he paid only for him, and made him equal to himself in the
payment.

We find in all the Gospells, where there is any description of the
constitution of the Apostles or any mention made of them; Math. 10.
Peter is still nominated first, Mark. 3.
as the head of all the rest, which would not have been done but in regard of
his Primacy, Luke 6
and so it has been ever understood by the Church. Then we find that though all
the Apostles were present at our Saviors apparition by the Sea Coast, Joh.
21.7.
only Peter did come upon the water of the Sea to him, Luke 5.4.
which was no doubt a sign of his singular power and prerogative above the
rest. In like manner though all the Disciples were commanded to loose their
Nets, only Peter was commanded to Launch into the deep.

But above all, we find the performance of that long promised Primacy, made to
St. Peter most expressly in St. John's Gospel. Jesus says to Simon Peter, John
21
Simon son of Jonas love thou me more then these, he says unto him yea Lord
thou know that I love thee, he says unto him feed my Lambs He says unto
him again the second Simon, Simon, son of Jonas love thou me? He says
unto him, 15, 16, 17.
yea Lord thou know that I love th^e, He says unto him feed my sheep. He
says unto him again the third time, Simon, Simon, Son of Jonas love thou
me? and he said unto him, Lord thou know all things, thou know that I
love thee, Jesus says unto him, feed my sheep. Here it was that Peter received
his pastoral charge, which was but promised him before: and in the presence of
all the Apostles the care of Christ's sheep was committed to him as to the
Prince of the Apostles. Now to Feed, Ezekiel. 34. Isai. 44.56. Jerem 26.22. Psalm
32.
in Scripture is very frequently taken in Scripture, for to govern, and Rule,
and Pastors likewise for Kings, as may be seen throughout the Prophets. But
that I may contract my self in this Copious Theme: I shall endeavor to sum
up all the Prerogatives of St. Peter, that are given him in Scripture, and then
leav your self to judge whether he was not intended by our Savior to be
Primate and Superior.

First, it is manifest that he alone of all the Apostles had the honor to have
his Proper-name changed, and a new one given him by Christ. Secondly in the
Repetition of all their Names, Peter is always put first. Thirdly, the
Scripture always speaks of Peter as a Prince, and of the others as Subjects.
Fourthly, Peter speaks in the Name of all the rest, as the chief amongst them.
Fifthly, only to Peter was the first Revellation made of the Divinity of
Christ. Sixthly, only to Peter was made a promise of the infallability of his
faith, and stability of his chair. Seventhly, Christ paid Tribute only for
himself and Peter, and for none of the rest, and as much for Peter as himself.
Eighthly, Jesus Christ after his Resurrection, made his first Apparition to
Peter alone of all the Apostles; and all this you cannot deny to be perfect
Gospel Now you may please to take notice of these Eight Privileges or
Prerogatives spoken of in the Gospel, were before he was actually instated in
his Primacy, for that was not till after our Saviors Resurrection, so these
that I have already mentioned, were but as signs or previous dispositions to
his future Primacy and power, which how he afterward executed, you shall see
in these particular prerogatives more. First to Peter alone it was absolutely
said, Feed my sheep, there was his power conferred and confirmed upon him.
Secondly Peter by his own Authority called all the rest of the Apostles to the
election of a new Apostle in the place of the Traitor Judas, and directed the
Ordination of Matthias into that Apostleship; Act. 1.15, 16.
as we find in the Acts. And Peter stood up in the midst of the Disciples, and
said men and buethren, etc. Thirdly, Peter only in the day of Penticost,
defended all the rest of the Apostles when they were said to be full of Wine:
for the Text tells us, that Peter standing up with the Eleven did lift up his
voice and said unto them, etc.

(Which was the first miracle wrought in Christ's Name and conformable to the
gospel) 4ly. Peter, when Jobn was present, cured he lame man; so the Gospel
justified and defended that action and Christianity together, against the Jews
in a set Sermon. Act. 3.4. 13, etc. Act. 4.8.
5ly. St. Peter argues the case in the Counsel and defends himself and John.
Sixthly Peter does the first act of justice and first first instance of a
coercive power in the Church, Act. 5.3.4, 5. Act. 8, 20. Acts 2.
when he pronouncedsentence of death upon Ananias and Saphira. Seventhly, Peter
was the only person that proceeded to justice against Simon Magus for his
wicked marketting of the Holy Ghost. 8ly, he was the first that did publicly
did preach the Gospel to the Jews, after thedescent of the Holy ghost. 9ly, He
was the first that did likewise preach the Gospel to the Gentiles, and to whom
only the heavenly Visions offered for the calling of the Gentiles, Act. 10.12,
13.
and by which he was commanded to take a particular care of them as his own
cure, and as their proper Prelate: When he saw the great Sheet let down to the
Earth, wherein were allmanner of fore-footed beasts, and creeping things of the
Earth, etc. And there came down a Voice from Heaven to him, Acts 15.7.
Rise Peter, kill and eat, by which he as head was commanded to incorporate the
Gentiles into the Church of Christ etc. Tenthly and lastly he was the first that
gave his Vote, and spoke in that great Council at Jerusalem, and was chief
Author of that decree, against the Legal Rites and Ceremonies. Here are
plainly Ten parts or pieces of his pastoral prerogative that he exercised
after the Resurrection of our Savior, when he was established in his pastoral
charge by those Words, Feed my Sheep. And if all the ma^ks and promises of this
prerogative given in the Gospel, nor all these confirmations and matters of
fact since, will not prevail to satisfy you in St. Peter's Primacy, I shall
despair ever to be able to satisfy you in any thing.

And yet truly if that Scripture had not been so punctually plain in this
particular, as we see it is for St. Peter and his Successors, the very Analogy
of reason would induce, that Jesus Christ should appoint somebody for that
great charge to govern his whole Church. First let us look upon the Anology of
the Christian Church, and that of the Jews. The Mosaicall synagogue was but a
Type or shadow of the Church of Christ but the Synagogue was always governed by
one visible head, Namely the High Priest, to whom all others were subject, as
is apparent out of the Books of Exodus Levit. Deuteronomy.

Therefore the Church of Christ ought to be so governed. For it is not fit that
the more perfect government, which by all is acknowledged to be Monarchy,
should be over the shadow (that we know is more imperfect then the substance)
and and not over the substance it self which is the Church of Christ. And as
the Jewish Synagogue was the Type of our Church, so undoubtedly their High
Priests were the Types of our Popes: and as they presided over the whole Jewish
Nation as to the external government, so our Popes in like manner, do over all
Christian people.

Now I ask you how it can st^^ with reason That Moses, Peut. 17.8, 9.
who was a Type of Christ too should provide for the Synagogue, that if there
should arise a matter of difficulty, that they should come unto the Priests and
Levites, and to the Judge that shall be in those days, and enquire and they
shall show thee the sentence of Judgment, which are his own words, and that
Jesus Christ should neglect to provide in the same manner, for his own beloved
Spouse, his Church? Since then Monarchical Government, both in Church and
state, is the best of Governments and was the practiced government of the
Synaogue, and amongst the jews and is the only government in the triumphant
Church in heaven, why should not the same provision, be made by Jesus Christ
for his poor Militant Church upon Earth? Or why should you or any body else
oppose that happiness of ours, which Christ has appointed for us? unless it be
out of a design to bring your selves and the whole Church to confusion, and to
do as was done in those days, when there was no King in Israel, when every one
did what seemed good in his own eyes, which unhappy license, that you call
liberty shall be ever part of my Litany, Judge. 17.6 Judge. 21.25.
that God would please to deliver me and all his faithful servants from.

To what you allege against the power of the Pope, that he can neither by
himself nor with all his Cardinals, and councills about him, he able to
determine any matter of Fath. I answer thus.
To the First.
I say that you are clearly in a great error to think thi^ the Law and the
Testimony, or any written thing, was or could be judge of any controversy or
difficulty whatsoever, but the High Priest, as appears by the Text aforecited
out of Deuteronomy. Then those words, to the Law and to the Testimony, are to
be understood far otherwise, than you imagine, as is plain by the precedent
words. which are these, and when they shall say unto you, seek unto them that
have familiar spirits, and to wizards that peep, and that mutter: should not a
people seek unto their God? for the living to the dead? then immediately follows
to the Law, and to the Testimony; if they speak not according to this word, it
is because there is no light in them, etc. Now it is plain that the Prophet
speaks here only against those, who were wont to consult witches, wizards, and
Sorcerers about future events; and therefore they were remitted partly to the
Law, Deuteronomy. 18.9. 1 Kings 22 7.
which did expressly prohibit all that, and partly to the Testimony of the
Prophets, who were appointed by God to foretell futurities to them. The sense
therefore of those words, to the Law and to the Testimony, 1 Samuel 28.7.
is this: if you will be informed of future events, you ought not to consult
witches, wizards, or sorcerers, as Saul did, because God had forbidden that by
his Law, to which I therefore remitted you, but consult ye the Prophets of God,
whose office it is, to foretell all future things that ye ought to know. What
does this make to the derision of difficult controversies, or determination of
matters of Faith? Nothing at all sure, unless you can think this Argument to be
good. It is not Lawful to consult Witches, Wizards and Sorecters, therefore
only Scripture is to be the Judge of controversies. This sure is a very
pitiful Argument, and yet such as that, do your great Rabbis, and principal
Doctors make use of, to abuse you and themselves.

To the second.
I grant, that Jesus Christ disputing with the Jews, who denyd him to be the
Son of God does remit them to the Scriptures, but not to them only neither, for
he proves himself to be so by other Testimonies. First, he appeals to the
Testimony of John the Baptist, saying, you sent to John and he gave witness to
the truth, Joh. 1.34.
now his Testimony was this, Behold the Lamb of God which takes away the sins
of the World; and again, I have given witness to the truth, Joh. 5.36.
because this is the Son of God. Secondly, he refers them to the Testimony of
the miracles that he wrought amongst them But I says he, have greater witness
then that of John, for the Works which the Father has given me to finish, the
same works that I do, Mat. 3.27. Luke 9.35. Joh. 5.39.40.
bear witness of me, that the Father has sent me. Thirdly, he refers them to
the Testimony of God the Father, saying, And the Father that sent me he has
given Testimony of me, that was when he said from Heaven, This is my beloved
Son, in whom I am well pleased, hear him: Fourthly and Lastly he refers them,
as you urge, to the Testimony of the Scriptures, saying, Search the Scriptures,
for in them ye think ye have eternal life. So much as to say, if you will not
accept of the three first Testimonies of me (which sure are most efficatious
ones (otherwise I had never produced them) yet at least ye cannot reject the
Testimony of the Scriptures, in which you glory so much, they themselves, if
you search and examine them, as you should, do give Testimony of me, that Jame
the Messiah, promised by God, Why therefore, will ye not believe, etc. Thus in
my Opinion your Argument retorts it self upon you more then oppugneth us. For
you contend that only Scripture is necessary for the decision of controversies,
and difficulties in faith, and yet you see, that Christ himself does not so,
but remits us to those other Testimonies, as well as Scripture, now the
Catholic Church does in this, as in all things else, imitate our blessed Lord
and Savior, for in those controversies which she has with all Adversaries she
does not use the testimony of Scriptures only but likewise the testimony of the
most ancient and holy Fathers, the invincible evidence of the true
Mother Church, and the testimony of divine miracles, which are frequently one
for the confirmation of our faith. But you forsooth as if you were wiser than
Christ himself, will neither admit or hear of any thing but out of Scripture
alone, in which you show your selves like those Jews against whom our Savior
so disputes; for the Jews casting off all other testimony, would admit only of
Scripture, 2 Cor. 3.14.15.^
and yet they neither understood it then nor yet do or ever will, as the
Apostle tells us when he says, but their minds were blinded, for until this day
remains the same Vail untaken away, in the reading of the Old Testament, etc.
and again when Moses is read, the Vail is upon their hearts, etc.

To the third.
For what you urge so hard out of the Acts, you shall find to be to as little
purpose as the other, if if you but please to examine the Context, which tells
you, That there being a Synagogue of Jews at Thessalonica, St. Paul as his
manner was, went in unto them, and three Sabbath days reasoned with them out of
the Scriptures, opening and alleging that Christ must needs have suffered and
risen again from the dead, Act. 17.2, 3.
and that Jesus whom he preached unto them was Christ, etc. But the Word so
preached did but little profit those of Thessalonica, then follows that they of
Berea were more Neble then those of Thessalonica, in that they received the
Word with all readiness of mind and searched the Scriptures daily whether
those things were so? etc. Now I would fain know what you will conclude out of
this, as to your purpose, unless thus. Those of Berea searched the Testimonies
of Scripture concerning Christ, that were quoted by St. Paul, therefore
Scripture alone must determine faith, and be the only Rule and Judge between
us. That is just as if you would say, that one of your Doctors, searches all
the testimonies of St. Austin, that are quoted by Bellarmin, therefore St.
Austin is the only Judge of Controversies. Or thus, one of your Congregation
searches all the testimonies which are produced against a great Doctor of
yours, as they are quoted by a greater of your own, therefore that great Doctor
is the only judge of Controversies. Or thus, one of your Doctors, searches all
the Traditions that are alleged in the Council of Yrent thefefore only
Tradition is to be received for a Judge of Controversies. I pray you forbear
these pitiful consequences, and yet your great Doctors seldommake be tter and
are not ashamed of them, so I may well excuse you andothers seduced by them.

To the Fourth.
I say that your Argument, if it had any weight at all, would serve altogether
as well agianst your self as us, for if as you understand it every man be a
Liar add may err, it will follow necessarily, that Moses with the Prophets,
Apostles and Evangelists, nay that your Friends, Luther and Calvin, nay all
your Preachers to be Liars and may err, because they are men, therefore there
is no credit to be given to any of them, no confidence to be put in them, but
all things that are said by them must be taken for suspected and uncertain:
where then is faith? Nor matters it though they say, that the Word which they
tell us, is not their own but Gods Word, for if they be Liars, they may as well
lie in the delivery of Gods message, as in any thing else of their own, nothing
therefore can be certain. But God forbid that any Christian should think so,
for it is far otherwise.

First, we confess the Scripture to be certain and infallible, because it is
the Word of God, but we add that it is so obscure, that the true sense and
meaning cannot easily appear to every man: Therefore of necessity there must be
some other Judge that must infallibly determine what is the clear and genuine
sense of the Scripture it self. Now this infallible Judge cannot possibly be
every private man, for then there would be so many Judges as there be men, and
diversities of Opinions: and so there would be an utter impossibility to agree
to any thing, or compose any difference in Religion, every one being apt to
favor his own opinion. It is necessary therefore that there should be a
public Judge agreed upon who should have a power of decreeing, defining, and
determining all things between differet parties. Genesis 8.21. Psalm. 38.6.
Then again we says that we must consider men in two respects, Number. 11.17.
Deuteronomy. 17.9 Aug. 2.12. Malac. 2.3 Jerem. 1.7.
first as men and the sons of Adam, so obnoxions to many natural corruptious,
so without doubt they are all prone to lying, and falsehood. In the next place
we must consider them as they are directed and gove^n'd by the Holy Ghost for
the instruction of others: so they are infallible and without possibility of
lying, such as Moses in the Old Testament, with bis Congregation of Elders
about him. So were diverse other High Priests that succeeded him, such were the
Prophets, Isaiah, Jeremiah, Ezechiel, Daniel and all the rest. Such in the New
Testament, were the Apostles to whom it was said, I will from the Father send
you the spirit of truth and again when the of Spirit of truth shall come, he
shall teach you all truth. John 16.6.13.
now where there is all truth there can be no lie. Such ever was, now is, and
still must be the Church of Christ, which having the perpetual assistance and
government of the same Holy Spirit, has as it were the heart of it, so long
therefore as the faithful Christian shall continue in the unity of the Church
and keep close to the Doctrine of the supreme Bishop and Counsels, he shall
participate of the assistance and government of the holy Ghost, nor can err in
faith: but if through any pride or perversity of spirit, he shall disagree and
depart from that head and heart, then he shuts all those passages and Channels,
by which that divine assistency and direction is to be derived, and so must of
necessity be seduced from truth, and led into a Labyrinth of errors, as we
have sadly seen in all the ancient and modern Heretics. The next similitude
may be drawn from a flock of sheep which indeed is the best representation of
the Church, Ioh. 10.14 math. 28.20.
as our Savior himself is pleased to attest in the Gospel: for as the whole
flock being in one Fold or place collected together, has the perpetual
assistance and guard of the Shepherd, and so are defended from the malice and
fierceness of wolves so the Universal Church of the faithful, being collected
in one faith and spirit. has the perpetual care and assistance of that divine
Shepherd, who said, I an the good Shepherd, and know my Sheep, and again, and I
am always with you to the end of the World. And just as each single Sheep so
long as it remains in the society and Communion with the Flock, and under the
aare and custody of the Shepherd, is safe and secure from the mouths of wolves,
so is each single Christian, so long as he remains joined and tied up in the
unity of the Church, that is, submits to the sense and doctrine of the whole
Church, is never erred yet in matter of faith, nor ever can, now I presume you
may require to know of me whether all and every one of this Church has this
great assistance and direction of the Holy Spirit; that he cannot err in
matter of Faith?

I do readily answer, that every one of the faithful has it, but by way of
dependence upon the Church, and from it. So long therefore as any man remains
in conjunction with the Church he cannot err; if he separates or dissents from
it, he must needs of necessity fall into an error, which I Will thus explain to
you, by two Examples or similitudes.

The one may be taken from the proportion of a humane body, in which we see
that all the members do jointly and severally paticipate of the vital and
sensitive spirits, by which life is preserved in them all, but yet they have
these spirits derivatively from, and by way of dependency upon the head and
heart: for it is from them as from a double Fountain, those spirits are derived
into the other members: so that when the Channells and passages, by which that
derivation and distribution is made, are stopped or intercepted, it must follow
necessarily, that the other Members must be left destitute of spirits, and be
rendered incapable of performing their Office, but being open all will be well.
So likewise in the Church, all the faithful, which are as it were Members of
it, have a certain assistancy and direction from the holy Ghost, but by way of
dependency upon the Pope, who is as the head of the Church and from Councils,
which are safe and secure from all danger of error and infidelity. In the last
place, as sheep that go astray from the flock, are out of the protection of the
Shepherd, and by consequence must fall into the danger of Wolves: so Christians
which depart from the common sense and doctrine of the Church must of necessity
fall into millions of errors, for want of the assistance of the holy spirit,
which is the Judge and Guardian of that. I pray you good Mistress N. have a
care how you expose your self to this terrible danger.

To the Fifth.
I utterly deny that general Counsels have er'd in matters of faith, it is
possible that some particular Counsels might or some false Counsels, more
truly called conventicles. Then that some councills have determined variously,
as to discipline and Ecclesiastical government, I grant for variety of times
requires diversity of Laws, and God himself gives the president of that, who
changed many things in the new Testament, that were commanded in the Old. And
as for Laymen to be present in Councels, we do not at all deny, so they be as
witnesses, defenders, Counselors, Suggestors or Executioners of their decrees,
but never as to have a Voyc in any Council or Church business, and this is
plain by those Gouncils, that we find in the Acts celebrated by the Apostles,
and so clearly in every Age since, and why should Laymen have to do more now?
Now give me leave to reply something to you, and I Will be short in my proof,
having been so long in my answers.

That the Pope with a general Council, may detrmine what is of Fath and what
is not, I pove by express Scripture thus.
We find in Scripture some Councils celebrated by the Apostles that have
actually made such determinations. As first for the taking off the burden of
Circumcision and other Indaicall obligations, we find the result thus. For it
seemed good to the Holy Ghost and to us, Act. 15.28 29.
to lay upon you no greater burden than these necessary things that they
abstein from meats offered to Idols, and from blood, and from things strangled,
and from Fornication; from which if ye keep your selves ye shalde well. See
here the form of an Apostolical Council: First the Text tells us, that the
Apostles and Elders came together, and that St. Peter was President and
Prolocutor; then they issued out their decrees, with this authoritative
preface; It seemed good to the Holy Ghost, and to us: Now do you find that any
faithful Christians then did question their authority, ver. 6.7.
as you do now that of other Conncells assembled in like manner, and assisted
by the same spirit? Thus you see that Council did decree somethings to be
necessary for a time, which were not simply and of themselves matters of faith,
and to take off from the Jews many things that were to them before matters
Faith: as circumcision and other mosaicall Statutes. Why should not I say the
Church now have the same power when the same necessity shall require? we have
I Am sure, the same Christ the fame holy spirit, the same faith, the same Church
why not the fame power in Councills.

We read again of another Council celebrated by the Apostles when they were to
part one from another, Apostles Creed.
and to go preach the Gospel, as the Lord had commanded them over the whole
World: when they met together, and upon a large debate delivered to us the
Creed, which you your selves and I Am sure the whole Church of Christ submits to
as as points of faith, and is to this day called the Apostles Creed; and for
some of those Articles, we have no Scripture at all nor any other authority but
this, that they were so delivered by the Apostles: and I conceive it a duty
incumbent upon all good Christians, what the wise Man advises, Prove. 22.28.
not to remove the ancient Landmarks which our Fathers have set.

In what respect a Council or Convocation of Elders was with God, and ever
taken for the representative body of the Church, is plain in many places of
Exodus, Exodus: 19.3 7, 8.
especially, that where God commands Moses to say to the House of Jacob and
tell the Children of Israel etc. And yet afterward it is said of Moses, that
he came and called for the Flders only of the people, and laid before their
faces all these Words which the Lord commanded him, etc. And though it is
plain, that the Elders of the people only answered, with whom Moses was
talking, Deuteronomy. 32.7.
yet the Text tell us, That all the people answered together and said, etc.
Which could dot be, ^nless only so representatively by their convocation of
Elders. How well therefore does the same Moses express this in his fong, when
he says, Remember the days of old confider the years of many generations. Ask
thy Father and he will show thee, thy Elders and they will tell thee, etc. I
should be infinite to run through all the Old Scripture to show what a stamp of
Majesty and Authority God Almighty fixed upon such assemblies, and what respect
the people always rendered them. So it shall suffice to give you our Saviors
own words and so conclude this point.

We find in St. Matthew thus, Again, I say unto you, that if two of you shall
agree on earth as touching any thing that they shall ask, it shall be done for
them of my Father which is in Heaven, Matthew. 18. v. 18, 20.
for where two or three are gathered together in my name, there am I in the
midst of them. Now I would fain know, who can be convinced more evidently not
to hear the Church, then he that will not hear a Council there can be no where
a greater and more conspicuous consent than in a Council, nor can there be any
Congregations assembled more in the name of God then general Counsels are,
and yet you are pleased to cast contempt upon them. But give me leave to tell
you, let the Authority of Counsels be once taken away and all things in the
Church will be ambiguous and uncertain. First all the ancient Heresies that
have been condemned by the authority of Counsels, and cast out of the Church
may be revived and reinforced upon Christians with as much reason, as any
primitive and Catholic Doctrine. Then set up the Authority of Scripture alone
against that of the Church and Councills, and then Scripture it self will be
uncertain, for thrusting out that authority which has commended sacred
Scripture to us, and commanded us to recive it, what Scripture is it that
opinionated men will not reject, and condemn for Apocrypha which will not save
their own turns? as some of your Doctros have notoriously done, and so in fine
we can never agree upon the point what is Scripture and what is not. Thus must
the Church of Christ fall into a most miserable condition, for upon the arising
of any doubt in matter of faith, there can be no way found out to decide it,
but every particular person according to the proportion of wit in his own pate,
shall frame to himself faith of what form or fashion he pleases. How then
has Christ provided for his Church a sufficientrule to go by? and why should
his Evangelioall Law be called the most perfect, if he has not otherwise
ordered a determination of all emergent coutroversies? But thanks be to our
most gracious God and Savior, he has abundantly done it for us, as I shall more
amply show in my answers and replies to the following heads of this your Paper,
which God give you grace with prudence and impartiality to petuse.

To what you allege for Scripture to be the only Rule of our faith, and
against the Authority of the universal Church and it is Traditions, I answer
thus.
To the first.
I say that you are very much mistaken in matter of Scripture, so I shall be
bold to enlarge a little upon it, for your better understanding. And first it
is to be observed that our Savior himself writ no book at all, neither
commanded his disciples or Apostles to write any, inso much as being to send
them to plant his Church, Matthew. 28.
he said not to them go and write, but go and preach to the whole World.
Therefore we find the Old Law written in Tables of Stone: but the Gospel had
no other writing then, but in the hearts of Christians. So St. Paul plainly
expresses it, Ye are our Epistle etc. and again, 2 Cor. 3.2, 3.
Forasmuch as ye are manifestly declard to be the Epistle of Christ, ministered
by us, not with ink, but with the spirit of the living God, not in Tables of
stone, but in fleshly tables of the heart, etc. This was before prophesyed by
the Prophet Jerem. Behold the days come, Jer. 31.31.302 3,
says the Lord, that I will make a new Cavenant with the House Israel and
with the House of Judah, not according to the Covenant that I made with their
Fathers. But this shall be the Covenant that I will make with the House of
Israel, after those days, says the Lord, I will put my Law in their inward
parts, and write it in their hearts, and I will be their God and they shall be
my people, etc.

Again we find, that the Church is much ancienter then Scripture; for when the
Apostles began to preach, there was no Evangelical Scripture, no Epistle of St.
Paul extant, and yet the Church was then purchased and sprinkled with the blood
of Christ, Acts 1.
and governed by his unerring Spirit. So the Apostles without any authority of
the Scripture of the New Testament, proceeded to the election of Matthias, and
to the ordination or seven Deacons, Acts 5.6.
etc. So Peter proceeded to the sentence against Ananias and Saphira, which
struck the breath out of their bodies, etc. Now we know that the Apostles were
very diligent in preaching, and sowing the word of God; and yet we find but
very little that they left us in writing; so it must follow, that they taught a
great deal more then they wrote, which must have equal authority with their
writings. Yet further, it is plain that the Scripture it self cannot be
authentical, without the authority of the Church; for the Canonical Writers
themselves, were but members of the Church; and how shall any private man know
what Scripture is Canonical and what not, but by the Church? John 3.
Why should any man believe the Gospel of St. Mark to be Canonical, who never
saw Christ, and the Gospel of Nicodemus not to be so, who both saw and heard
Christ, as St. John testifies of him? and why should the Gospel of St. Luke the
Disciple be received, and the Gospel of St. Bartholomew the Apostle be
rejected, unless we humbly comply with the power and authority of the Church,
which has so ordered it, and clearly confess that the Church can judge of
Scriptures? Thus since it is plain, that the Church is ancienter then
Scripture, and that no Scripture can be thought authentical, without the
authority of the Church, Exodus 20.
can any Christian be blamed, for saying that he would never believe the
Scripture, but that the Authority of the Church commanded? it over over and
above all this the Authority of the Church over Scripture is hugely evident in
many particulars of Scripture: As first, Matthew. 28. Act. 15.
the Scripture commands thus, Remember that thou keep holy the Sabbath day, six
days shall thou labor, and do all that thou have to do, but the seventh day is
the Sabbath of the Lord thy God, etc. And yet the Church changed the Sabbath
into the Lords day by its own authority, Matthew. 28.19, 20.
and not only without, but against known Scripture. Again, Christ said to his
Disciples in the Mount, that he came not to dissolve the Law, but fulfill it;
and yet the Church in the Apostles Council, decreed and pronounced boldly for
the Cessation of those Legalities. We find again in the last of St. Matthew,
Christ saying to his Disciples, Go ye therefore, and teach all Nations,
baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy
Ghost, teaching them to observe all things, whatsoever I have commanded you.
Here Christ laid down an express form of Baptism in the name of the holy
Trinity, and yet the primitive Church did think fit to change that form into a
Baptism in the name of Jesus Christ only, for so St. Peter enjoined them,
Repent and be baptized every one of you, in the name of Jesus Christ, for the
remission of sins, etc. And again we find that the Samaritars were baptized by
St. Philip in the name of Jesus: Act. 2.38. Acts 8. Act. 19.5. Act. 15.28 29.
So again, upon St. Paul's preaching at Ephesus, when they heard this, they were
baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus. Above all this, we find the Scripture
telling us, that it was defined in the Apostles Council thus: It has seemed
good to the holy Ghost, and to us, etc. that ye abstam from meats offered unto
Idols, and from blood, and frous things strangled, etc. This we see is most
plainly and expressly defined by the Apostles, and as clearly attested by
Scripture, and yet the Church in after Ages has thought fit to change that
decree, and permit Christians to eat strangled things and blood; nay, you that
dispute against the Authority of the Church in matters of Faith, are contented
to submit to it in point of eating, you could not otherwise deny the eating of
a black pudding or strangled Hen, to be a most notorions transgression, nor
could any thing excuse us from sin in so doing, if the Church h^d not a power
over the Scriptures. And to conclude, if the authority of the Church were not
over the Scriptore, then all Jews that should be converted now to the Faith of
Christ and come to Baptism, should be tied still to the observation of Mases
his Law; for so we find in Scripture, that the Apostles themselves, and others
of the Nation, which became Converts, did always do. St. James, and all the
Elders said to St. Paul upon his return from the Gentiles; Thou see brother,
how many thousands of Jews there are which believe, and they are all zealous
for the Law, and they are informed of thee, that thou teach all the Jews
which are among the Gentiles, to forsake Moses, Saying, Act. 21.18 20, 21, 22,
23, 24, 25.
that they ought not to circumcise their children, neither to walk after the
custums: What is it therefore? the multitude must needs come together; for they
will hear that thou art come. Do therefore this that we say unto thee, we have
four men which have a vow on them. Them take and purify thy self with them,
and be at chrrges with them, that they may shave their heads, and all may know,
that those things whereof they were informed concerning thee are nothing, but
that thy self also walk orderly, and keep the Law. As touching the
Geutiles which believe, we have written, and concluded, that they observe no
such thing, save only that they keep themselves from things offered unto Idols,
and from blood, and from things strangled, and from fornica^on. Here it is
plain that St. Paul with many thousands more, did observe the Law of Moses, and
that by the immediate order of St. James, the Prelate of the place, and the
Council of all the Elders. This we know clearly altered since by the authority
of the Church, and what a fine confusion it would produce, if otherwise
practiced now, I will leave your self to judge.

To the second.
I say, that what you urge out of Deuteronomy, makes no more against us, then
it does against the Apostles themselves, from whence we received our
Traditions: but most especially St. Paul, who expressly bids us to hold fast the
Traditions which we have received: Nay, and all the holy Fathers of the
Primitive Church, who have always embraced, and held them. Nay yet further, you
do most manifestly oppose and oppugn your own selves, who receive the
Tradition of Scripture, the Lords day, and many holy days, with diverse other
things which you hold in great reverence, by no other Authority. If therefore
we Catholics offend in so doing, then the Apostles themselves, and all the
Primitive Fathers and Christians, and you your selves are as guilty of a fault;
if they be innocent, and you too, why should we be condemned? Again, give me
leave to tell you, that you have wholly mistaken the sense of that Text, and
that I will demonstrate to you out of the context; which runs thus. Deu 4.1.2.
Now therefore hearken, O Israel, un-the Statutes, and unto the Judgments,
which I teach you for to do them, that ye may live, and go in, and possess the
Land, which the Lord God of your Fathers gives you. Ye shall not add unto the
word which I command you; neither shall you diminish ought from it, that ye may
keep the Commandments of the Lord your God which I command you. As if he should
say, I give unto you precepts both Ceremonial and Judicial, which ye ought
perfectly and entirely to keep; for so much is signified in those words ye
shall not add nor diminish; and this precept to that people, is delivered
though in other words, yet to the very same sense in diverse other places, that
they should be punctual in the observation of what was commanded them, and not
to swerve or turn to the right hand or the left. So that these three things are
upon the matter all one, that is perfectly and entirely to keep Moses his
precepts, Deuteronomy. 17.20. Deuteronomy. 28.14. Deuteronomy. 31.29. Josu. 1.7.
not to turn from them neither to the right hand, nor to the lest, and last of
all, neither to add to, nor diminish from their observation. Which now is plain
cannot be so understood, as if it were unlawful to add any new precept; for
then it had been utterly unlawful to add those new Evangelical precepts, as
Faith in the blessed Trinity, the whole business of Holy Baptism, and the
Eucharist; which you receive as well as we: but the sense of those Texts must
be plainly this, that they ought to be very exact in the observation of Moses
his Laws, not to corrupt them with any addition or dimunition, but to keep them
entirely; as for example, this was a Mosaical precept. Levit. 12.2, 3.
If a woman have conceived seed, ann born a man child, then she shall be unclean
seven days, etc. And in the eighth day, the flesh of his soreskin shall be
circumcised, etc. To this precept now, it was not lawful to add or diminish
from that, it was not lawful, neither before nor after the eigth day to
circumcise the child, nor was the uncleanness of the mother to last more or
less than seven days. Now the same reason holds throughout all other precepts,
as I shall show you in my answer to your next Argument. But from what has been
said already, it is very evident, that this Text out of Deuteronomy, which you
press so hard, makes nothing at all to the purpose, unless you can think this a
good Argument. The Jews were bound perfectly and entirely to keep the commands
of Moses; therefore Christians must not admit of Apostolical Traditions, but be
content with only Scripture: which I think no reasonable man will take for other
than an absutd and ridiculous consequence. But that the business may be more
clear, give me leave to ask of you, whether those commands did belong to the
Jews only, or to us Christians, as well as they? If to the Jews only, why do
you allege that Text against us, or why should we be obliged to the
observation of those precepts? If they belong to us Christians likewise, why do
not you keep all the Mosaical Law? Why do not all the Mankind amongst you
Circumcise themselves? And why do you forbear the observation of all the lethe
legal Ceremonies? In the last place answer me, why do you urge the first
particle of the text against us, you shall not add, and do not in like manner,
urge against your selves, ye shall not diminish? but I fear I have been too
long in this.

To the third.
I wonder truly how you can infer from that Text, that nothing is to be done,
but what God commands, and all humane precepts to be cast away. If so, what
will you say of the Jews themselves, Jer. 35.6 Acts 15.29.
that did with all exactness observe the Feast of Dedication that was no more
then a humane precept? What will you say of the Rechabites, who did most
religiously observe the Command of their Father Jonadab, in a perpetual
abstinence from wine? What will you think of the Apostles, who in their Council
at Jerusalem commanded abstinence from blood and things strangled? 1 Cor. 7.12.
what will you think of St. Paul, who distinguishes between his own commands
and those of Jesus Christ, what will you think of all sorts of Magistrates, who
are forced to fasten humane Laws and precepts upon us, for the preservation of
peace and justice in a Commonwealth? What must ye think of your selves, who in
your Synods and Conventicles make Laws and Ecclesiastical decrees, to bind up
your own Congregations to obedience and will have observed by all? In the next
place give me leave to tell you, that the sense of this place is clean
otherwise then what you would impose upon it. For as in your last Argument, you
pressed a Text that was to be underst^od in general, of all the precepts that
were delivered by Moses, Deuteronomy. 12.30, 31, 32.
which were to be exactly and entirely observed, so here you urge another that
enjoins the entire Observation of one sort of sacrifice, and the Text runs
thus. When the Lord thy God shall out of the Nations from before thee, whither
thou go to possess them and then succeedest them and dwell in their land,
Simila.
take heed to thy self that thou be not snared by following them, and that thou
enquire not after their gods, saying, how did these Nations serve their gods,
even so will I do likewise. Thou shall not do so unto the Lord thy God: for
every abomination to the Lord which he hates, have they done unto their gods
for even their Sons and daughters have they burnt in the fire to their gods,
then follows, whatsoever thing I command you to do it, thou shall not add nor
diminish from it. All which as I humbly conceive amounts to this, When thou
shall come into Palestin, the Land of Promise, whither thou art going, and
shall offer to the Lord thy God a Sacrafice, thou shall not imitate the
Gentiles that offer their sons and daughters by fire to their falfe gods, but
this thou shall only offer what I command thee. To wit, of the Beasts Sheep,
Goats, Kids, Oxen, Calves, Pigeons, Sparrows, Turtles. Of the fruits of the
earth, fine flower, Bread, Salt, Fiankensence, handfulls of Ears of Corn and
Wheat; and of Liquors, Blood, Wine, Oil, Water. This only do, that is offer to
the Lord, thou shall not add any thing of the Sacrinces of the Gentiles, nor
diminish any thing of mine, that I have commanded thee. What you will conclude
from hence, I know not unless you infer thus; The Jews were obliged to offer
nothing in Sacrifice to God, but what the Lord had commanded, therefore
Christians-ought not to observe any humane precepts, whether civil or
Ecclesiastical: a most excellent consequence, so fare it well.

To the Fourth.
I answer, that your Argument would be much better employed upon your selves
then against us, and in this manner I retort it. If any man shall preach
another Gospel than that which the Apostle himself preached, let him be
Anathema, but you preach another Gospel besides, nay against that which the
Apostle taught and preached, because do manifestly oppose Traditions, which he
commanded us to keep, when he said hold fast traditions; therefore you are to
be Anathema. But to answer yet more closely to what you urge out of the
Apostle; I would desire you to gather out of the scope of the Apostle, whether
his intention was there to condem all traditions, or only this, G^l. 2.16. c.
1.6. c. 3.1. c. 4.9 etc. 5.1.
that the Galations being taught by St. Paul, that the ceremonies of the
Mosaicall Law were abrogated, and that not any man could be justified by those
Cnremonies, but by faith in Christ, and they were from this Doctrine seduced by
some false Apostles, who taught that they could not be saved by faith in
Christ, unless they were also circumcised and observed other moisaic^l
Ceremonies: St Paul here addresseth himself against those falfe Apostles, when
he says, and if any man preach any other Gospel then that ye have received,
let him be occursed: so much as to say, you have received from me that a man is
justified by faith in Christ and not at all for the observances of Moses his
Laws, if any man instruct you otherwise, let him be accursed. But how can it
follow frow hence that Apostalicall Traditions are to be rejected, but rather
received, conserved, and Religiously to be honored, because they are not
against that which St. Paul preached te the Galatians concerning Justification,
but rather they are that very thing which he preached to the Thessalonians, when
he bid them hold fast the traditions that they learnt, and that the Word
received in the Text, does sufficiently clear, for he speaks not only of the
Gospel that he had preached, but o^ the Gospel that they had received.

To the Fifth.
I say your Argument is very weak, which you draw out of Sr. John, which you
frame thus as I understand it. It is not lawful to add to the Words of that
Revellation, therefore it is not lawful to add our tradition; to Scripture,
let any one judge now whether that be a natural consequence? the truth on it
is, that that Text out of the Revelation may be most clearly brought against
most of you, who do not only diminish the Words of that Prophecy, but take the
whole to be suspected, thrust it out of your Canon, and account it for
Apocrypha. Then others of you again are pleased to add to it most notoriously,
as when some of your Doctors go about to intepret that part of the Revelation,
which tells us, that there shall come two witnesses, that shall prophecy a
1260. Rev. 11.3.6.
days clothed in Sackclooth, who shall have power to shut heaven in the days of
their prophecy, and have power over Waters to turn them inblood, etc. they
will persuade us that these two witnesses are your two great Prophets, Luther
and Calvin; now it is plain, that they were not clothed in Sackcloth, nor had
power to shut heaven, etc, Now it is evident that the Text you Quote, makes
nothing toward the condemnation of our traditions, but forbids that nothing be
added to that book, but that which is a true part of that Apocalyptical
Prophecy: Otherwise it must be unlawful to receive the Prophesies of Jeremy,
Isay and other Prophets of the Old Testament, as also the Gospels and Epistles
of the new, and our whole Symbol of faith. So that it is plain we are only by
the Text forbidden to deprave any part of that Apocalyptical Prophecy, which
the Apostle in in^^tes maybe done 2. ways, either by addition by putting any
thing into that Prophecy, which truly is no part of it: Or by dimination, as
if any man should detract from it, any part as not belonging to it, which
really was so. Now when you have showed that we Catholics do either of that, I
shall grant your Argument to conclude something.

To the Sixth.
I say you still strangly conclude out of the Apostle, and I pray you mark your
Argument. All Scripture is profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for
correction, for instruction, etc. Therefore all Traditions are unnecessary. I
will give you such another cousequence. All meat is profitable for nourishment,
therefore drink is unnecessary. Or thus, all Alms giving is profitable for
Salvation, Luke 11.43. Dan. 1.34.
as St. Luke and the Prophet Daniell assures us, therefore prayer is to no
purpose, and the Sacraments themselves are unnecessary. Or it may be you intend
your Argument thus, all Scripture is profitable, that is sufficient, therefore
Traditions are altogether useless. What strange interpretation of Scripture is
this? Is to be profitable and sufficient alone? then mark this consequence, St.
Paul tells Timothy, that godliness is profitable to all things, 1 Timothy 4.8. 2 Timothy 4.11.
therefore all other things are unnecessary. Again the same Apostle bids
Timothy, take Mark and bring him with him, adding, that he was profitable unto
him for the Ministry: therefore Timothy, Titus, Onesimus and Luke that was then
with him, were all unnecessary. Who sees not now, that if his License may be
admitted of interpreting Scripture after this manner, that the whole must of
necessity be corrupted quickly and adulterated. But now that you may more
clearly see your error, I will show you the whole scope of the Apostle in
these words. First in the precedent Words, he exhorts Timothr as a Bishop, to
instruct those that are committed to his charge in faith and good works, and to
reprove and convince adversaries who rejected the truth and were men of corrupt
minds, reprobate concerning the faith, and so he adds to show him how he was
to do it, 2 Timothy 3.8. ver. 14, 15, 16.
these words. But continue thou in the things that thou have learned, and have
been assured of, knowing of whom thou have learned them, and that from a Child
thou have known the holy Scriptures which are able to make thee wise unto
salvation, through faith which is in Christ Jesus, for all Scripture is given
by inspiration of God, and profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for
correction, etc. Now here by the Scripture, which he says, Timothy had known
from his Infancy, he must needs understand the Scripture of the Old Testament,
for at that time when Timothy was a child, there could be no Scripture of the
new Testament extant. The Apostle the refore in the Text so argues, all
Scripture divinely inspired, is profitable to teach friends to convince
adversaries, but the Scripture of the Old Testament, which thou have learnt
from thy Infancy, is divinely inspired, there it is so, and so profitable. In
the same manner we under the Gospel, may agree thus. All Scripture divinely
inspired, is profitable to teach, to reproves etc. But the Scripture of the New
Testament is divinely inspired, therefore it is profitable to teach, reprove,
etc. That is, whosoever is instructed in knowledge of that, shall find great
helps to perform all that now out of these Arguments, grounded upon that Text
which you urg, we may collect these 3 propositions to be true. First, that all
Scripture divniely inspired is profitable to teach, reprove, etc. 2ly. That the
Scripture of the Old Testament is profitable to teach Thirdly, that the
Scripture of the Old Testament is so; and so profitable likewise. So as
therefore this does not follow the Scripture of the Old Testament is altogether
useless and unnecessary, so neither does this follow. The Scripture of the New
Testament is profitable, Therefore the Scripture of the Old is altogether
useless and unnecessary. Nor can this with more reason follow, the Scripture
of both Testaments New and Old, is so and so profitable, therefore Tradition is
altogether useless and unnecessary. Then that which the same Apostle tells us
in another place, I am sure were altogether impertinent, if not impions; When
he says, hold fast Traditions.

To the Seventh.
I answer in short, that there can be none so blind but must see, that which
you urge out of the Gospel and Epistles, was only spoken, either of Traditions
of the Jews, which the Pharisees made ill use of, as I have showed you before:
or of the traditions of the Gentiles, which were quite and clean repugnant to
Christianity, but such as those we speak not of, much less defend, but only
those divine and Apostolical traditions, which we have received, and must for
ever continue in the Christian Church.

to the Eight.
I confess the Church to be a Congregation of all the faithful, which are of
the body of Christ; but yet we know what is done by our Princes, Peers and
Commons assembled in Parliament, is said to be done by the whole Nation: so
what the Prelates of the Church with those others, that are chosen to sit with
them in Councels shall determine, is said to be done by the whole Church. For
otherwise the Church could never be Congregated, and then to what purpose did
our Savior say that, in St. Matthew, But if he will not hear thee tell the
Church, but if he shall not hear the Church let him be to thee as a Heathen and
a Publican. Matthew. 18.
Now he that would tell the Church any thing in your sense, must ramble all the
World over to do it. But it is plain that our Savior by the Church there,
meant the Prelates and Presidents of it, for presently after he speaks to his
Apostles as to Prelates, and give them the power of binding, etc. That you may
the better understand this, take along with you the whole context of that place
of Denteronemy, which I have before quoted to you, and that you shell find to
be this. Deuteronomy. 17.
If there arise a matter too hard for thee in judgment, between blood and
blood, between Plea and Plea, and between stroke and stooak, being matters of
controversy within thy Gaces, then shall thou arise and get thee up into the
place which the Lord thy God shall choose and thou shall come unto the Priests
and Levite^, 8, 10, 11,
and unto the Judge that shall be in those days, and enquire: and they shall
show thee the sentence of judgment. And thou shall do according to the
sentence which they of that place (which the Lord shall choose) shall show thee,
12, 13, 14.
and thou shall observe to do according to all, that they inform thee. Accorto
the Sentence of the Law which they shall teach thee, and according to the
judgment which they shall tell thee, thou shall do, thou shall not decline from
the sentence which they shall show thee, to the right hand nor to the left. And
the man that will do presumptuosly, and will not hark in unto the Priest (that
stands to Minister there before the Lord thy God) or unto the Judge, even
that man shall dye, and thou shall put away the evil from Israel. I pray you
observe there the power and great authority of the old Legal Priests, and
consider then the just power that the Evangelicall ones ought to have, and do
not forget to observe the dismal punishment of presumption, and disobedience.
Then I pray you be pleased to observe how the Primitive Christians did follow
the orders that were given by Moses in Denteronemy, for we find in the Acts,
that when a great dissension arose about the business of circumcision, the
Apostles and Elders came together for to consider the matter, and upon the
issue of the dissension and disputation, they determined to send Paul and
Barnabas up to Jerusalem unto the Apostles and Elders there about this
question, and they did so, and it follows it so pleased the Apostles and Elders
with the whole Church, now what was the whole Church there, not the whole
Congregation of Christians, but they went up to the Apostles and Elders about
this question, here it is plain that the Apostles and Elders were the
representative body of the Church.

To the Ninth and last.
I utterly deny the whole Church to be such an invisible thing, as you world
have much less not to be understood; for first if it were so hidden from the
eyes and understanding of men, why or how should our Savior command* us to
tell, the Church; and if he hears not the Church, Math. 18. Romans 12. 1 Cor. 1.12
Ephesians. 1.5. Col. 1.
etc. Now if the Church were hidden, how could any man tell it any thing? and
if it were not to be understood how could any men hear it? Do we not find that
the Church is the body of Christ and all Christians the members? and this is
plain in several places of Scripture? Now how can you say that body and those
members are hidden and the Church to be only in clouds, when St. Paul tells us
plainly, you are the body of Christ, and members one of another, etc. Luke 11.
It has been of Heretics always to run into Dens and Caves and hiding holes,
the Church h^'s always put the Candle in the candlestick, as the Gospel
teaches us. The Church has been always visible to us in Councils in the
Apostolical Seat, in Bishops, Presidents and Pastor; of several Churches. 2
Cor. 8.18.
For if the Church were in the clouds, and a mere Mathematical Phancasme, as
you would have it, how could the Brother that St. Paul speaks of, have his
praise throughout all the Churches? And the Prophet David repeats so often,
with thee is my praise and glory in the Congregation of thy people, and in the
Chair of the Elders, Psal^ 21. Psalm. 106.
let thy name be praised, and desires that he may see the good of his chosen
that he may rejoice in the gladness of his people and that he may glory with
his inheritance etc. Now I have been informed indeed that it has ever been the
fashion of all old Heretics to strengthen the Church with a narrow compass,
and draw it within the compass of one of their convanticles, I hope you will
not be guilty of that fault; and whereas you urge it for a matter of faith,
therefore not to be seen; I ask you whether God the Creator be not to be seen
in every thing that moves and has a being, and yet the Creation is an Article
of faith. I ask whether Jesus Christ God the son was not seen in the flesh, and
to ascend visibly into heaven, and yet matters of faith. I ask again whether
God the holy Ghost was not seen visibly to descend upon the Apostles, and yet
an Article of faith propo^'d by the same Apostles: and so the same I say of the
Holy, Catholic and Apostolic Church.

Now because I have been so large in my answers, I shall not need to be
otherwise then short in my replies, but something I shall urge to you out of
Scripture; according to my former method, and that Scripture alone cannot be
the Rule of our faith, I prove thus.
I shall begin with the Articles of your faith, and ours, contained in the
Apostles Creed, and a^k you whether alll those are to be proved out of express
Scripture. As first: that Article of Christ's descent into Hell, the Church has
ever believed it, ^ecles. 24.
as it is proposed locally, but how shall we prone it I say out of Scripture?
if out of Ecclesiasticus where it is said, I will pierce into the lower mo^^
parts of the Earth; you will say it is Apocripha, If out of St. Paul to the
Ephesians, Ephesians. s. 4.9, 10.
where is it said now that he ascended, what is it but that he also descended
first into the lower parts of the earth he that descended is the same also that
ascended up far above all things, etc. Some of your Doctors have found a
shift for that too: First they will say that he descended by his power not by
his person. Then they will tell you of his descen into the wombs of the Virgin,
etc.

Now as you are pleased to distinguish upon it, what are we the better in that
point for the Scripture? Then in the Athanasian Creed, how will you prove the
one substance of the blessed Trinity? if from that text in the Gospel (I and
my Father are one) some of you will venture a distinction upon it too, as that
they are one in will, not in substance.

Then again, as to the perpetual Virginity of our blessed Lady, which some of
you will please to deny, but most prudent Christians believe: what Scripture
have we for it, or for your and our observation of the Lords Day; I know no
Scripture that (and so for a hundred things more) can be produced.

I say sure according to your judgment, that nothing is to be received but
clear and express Scripture. Out Savior himself not clearly proved the
Resurrection of our bodies against the Saduces, for he brought no certain
clear and express text, but only this because it is said in the Old
Testament, the God of Abraham, the God of Isass, and the God of Jacob; our
Savior therefore infers, that God is not the God of the dead, but of the
living, and then we know that those Patriarchs were only living in their souls,
not in their bodies: So I say upon your grounds, that was no conviction to the
Sadduces; By all this it is plain, that not only those things are to be
blessed, and observed, which are expressly to be found in holy writ, or clearly
proved out of it, as those of your Church will have it; but also we are to
believe and observe, what our holy Mother the Church believes and observes. For
we see all things of Faith are not clearly delivered in sacred Scripture, but
very many things are left to the determination of the Church, which because it
is enlightened and governed by the holy Ghost, cannot possibly wander or go
astray out of the track of truth. John 76.13, 13.
Our Savior, therefore in St. John's Gospel said to his Disciples, I^ have yet
many things to say unto you, but ye cannot bear them now; Howbeit, when he the
Spirit of truth is come, b^ will guide you into all truth, etc. The holy Church
therefore observes many things in its Rites, and Ceremonies, besides matters
of faith, from the familiar instinct of the holy Spirit, and by the tradition
of the Apostles and Primitive Fathers, which though they are not expressly to be
found in holy Scriptures, yet they are no ways against them, or differ from
them. Nay they are in all things most conformable to them, and therefore to be
embraced and observed by all good Christians; for so St. Paul most expressly
tells us: 2 These, ^.15.
Therefore Brethren stand fast, and hold the Traditions, which ye have been
tavght whereby word, or our Epistles.

Again, St. Paul speaking to the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 11.34.
concerning the blessed Eucharist a thing in Christianity, as I take it, of
greatest concernment, tells them that the rest he nill set in order, when he
comes; so all was not to be ordered by his Epistle, or written words, but
something it is plain he was afterward to dispose of concerning that important
affair, by word of mouth.

In like manner, St. 2 John 12
John tells the honorable Matron that he writ unto, That hebad many things to
write unto her, but be would not writer with paper and ^nk, but he trusted to
come unto her, and speak face to face, etc. And so he likewise tells his
friend, Gaius, sohn 3. verse. 13, 14
That he trusted shortly to see him, and that they should speak face to face,
and yet he said before, that he had many things to write unto him, but he would
not with ink and pen write unto him, etc. By all which it is plain, that
Christians are not in all things to be ruled and determined by the word
written. Nay do we not plainly find many things both of the words and deeds of
our blessed Savior, that none of the Evangelists make mention of, Act. 20.26 1
Cor. 15.6.
which the Apostles have supplied and expressed in word or deed. As first, St.
Paul in the Acts of the Apostles, cites some words of our Saviors, that are
not to be found in any of the Evangelists, and he bids them to remember the
words of the Lord Josus, how he said, that it is more blessed to give, than to
receive; and no such thing, or to that purpose, I could find yet, in any of the
Gospels. In like manner, some of his most confiderable deeds, were not fully
described, or at all signified to us, by any of the Evangelists, As that he was
seen by above five bundred brethren at once, which St. Paul most expressly
affirms to the Corinthians, which apparition of his I could never read any
thing of, Luke 10.35.
as I said before, in any of the Gospels.

Then there are some Ecclesiastical observancies, which you retain still in
your Church, that neither are to be found in Scripture, nor is the reason
apparent to every one, why they were ever invented or used; As first, that we
kneel at our prayers, is not from any command in Scripture, and yet you your
selves hold it highly necessary. Then that we choose out of all the corners of
heaven, that side where the Sun rises, toward which to turn our selves
praying, it is neither in Scripture, nor apparently in reason to ordinary
capacities, but only that it has been the practice of the universal Church.

Again we know, as I have showed formerly, in the Old Testament, Dent. 17.
Ezeth. 44.
the Law was not the judge of difficulties, but the Priest, so at large in
Deuteron^^y, and the Prophet Ezekiel tells us plainly, that the Priest; shall
stand in judgment, and they only shall judge.

Now it is clear, that we admit of Scripture as well as you, but we differ in
the understanding of it, because you will have your own single judgments upon
it to be your Rule, and we admit no other judge, but that authority which gives
it, that is the Church. And this is apparently the reason, why all you that are
out of the Church do so differ amongst your selves upon all points, and
principally in that great point, concerning the blessed Sacrament, whether it
be truly, and spiritually the very body and blood of Christ, by the figure and
signs, and the bare letter of Scripture will never be able to determine betwixt
you, and so there must be an impossibility of Accord in that, and a hundred
things more. Thus we see that the Devil himself could allege Scriptue against
our blessed Savior, which was, that God had given his Angels charge over him,
to keep him, etc. But he maliciously mistook, Metth. 4.
or through ignorance misunderstood, which is not altogether so likely the
sense of that place. Now whereas you do all pretend that the holy Scriptures
are clear, and easy to be understood of all ordinary Readers, and so that lay
people, and doting old women may be bold to venture their interpretations, and
comments upon it: that is clean contrary to what St. Peter tells you, speaking
of all the Epistles of St. Paul, in which are something hard to be understood,
which they that are unlearned and unstable wrest as they do also the other
Scriptures, unto their own destruction. Thus do you see what unhappy mistakes
there were upon St. Paul's writings while St. Paul himself was yet alive, how
much more then must there needs be now upon those grounds that you receive
them. Niy St. Paul himself tells you, that if his Gospel be hid, it is hid to
them, that are lost: Now it is plain it cannot be hidden to us, who take the
sense and interpretation of the whole Church, you had best therefore look to
your selves, that you be not lost by hiding of it from your selves. And if the
blessed Fathers of the Church, that were so conversant in Scripture, yet
understood it not in those times, so near to the time of Christ himself, as
some of you say that they did not, how can you presume upon your selves, and
some late Doctors, that have dared to give you a contrary Doctrine, to what
they have delivered to us? I have often meditared upon that place in St. Lukes
Cospel, where it is said of the good Samaritan, that when he departed, he took
out two pence, and gave them to the Host, and said unto him, take care of him,
and what ever thou spendest more, when I come again I will repay thee. Just so
me thinks our Savior have left us two Testaments, and whatsoever the Apostles,
Doctors, and Fathers of the Church have added more, and we shall humbly
observe, he when he comes again, of his great goodness will repay us. Now to
sum up all, it is plain, by this that has been said, that some Traditions of
the Church must have equal authority with Scripture, as the commands of a
Prince have equal force and power upon Subjects, whether by word of mouth
delivered, or by writing. So the word of God, written or delivered, is still
the word of God, and of equal power. And if you say that the Apostolical
Tradition cannot be the word of God, I ask you whether the other part of the
Apostles, that have left us nothing in writing, were not as well inspired of
the Holy Ghost as they that did: you cannot sure deny it, and they were too the
greater part of the Twelve. Now the Church of Christ still retains many things
of their Doctrine, thorgh we have none of their writing, and sure we are to
give as much credit to those that writ not, as those that did. I ask you again,
whether it be not a point of faith, that the whole Scripture taken together, of
the Old and New Testament is the word of God? and again whether all that
Scripture, especially in those things which concern Faith, and Salvation be not
most clear from corruption? and again, that we have the true genuine, and
legitimate sense of that Scripture, is a point of faith too. I believe you will
not deny any one of these to be a point of your Faith: I am sure they are all
of mine, so you must first acknowledge that I give as great an honor to
Scripture as your self; and then if we both admit those three positions, as
principles of Faith, we must necessarily admit of Traditions; for we have no
Authority but that to justify them, and if we do not admit those for
principles, our Faith it self is wholly vain.

Then besides these three principles of Faith, there are others also, which we
have only by Tradition, as that the Symbol of our Faith, is Canonical and
Apostolical. Then that Infants are to be baptized. Then that those who are
baptized by Heretics, are not to be rebaptized. Then as is aforesaid, that
the blessed Mother of God, always remained a Virgin. Then that in Baptism
those words ought to be pronounced, I baptize thee in the name of the Father,
and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, and that without them, there can be no
valid Baptism. Then that there is a certain, and determinate number of
Sacraments and what that number is. All these things, I say, are not clearly
to be found in Scripture but we must be beholding to the Authority of Tradition,

But last of all for Ecclesiastical Rites and Ceremonies, it is manifest that
we can have no other authority but Tradition, and not Apostolical; for all
those neither, but some of them only from the Primitive Fathers that succeeded
the Apostles in the Government of Christ's Church, and that sure it security
enough for the practice and persuasion of any Christian: for I have heard that
a very ancient and most learned Father said, that it was a piece of most
insolent madness, to dispute the doing of that, which the Church of Christ
throughout the whole world has always frequented, and practiced; so (...) you
to it.

There were other wicked and idolatrous Kings, as Abaz, Manasses, Amon, and
some others wicked, though not idolaters, but yet the use of the Divine
Sacrifice and worship according to the Mosaical Law, does appear still to have
remained in the Temple of Solomon, til the Babylonish captivity, as is evident
by several places of Scripture. Then for the failing of the Synagogue in the
time of Christ, which you allege, it is not to be supposed that they failed
from the true faith, which was before professed, but she with her ceremonies and
Sacrifices was turned out of doors, as was before typified in Abraham's
bondwoman, it does not therefore follow that the Church, the true wife should
be so too. Then the Synagogue was therefore turned away because it was neither
perfect, nor sufficient to salvation, Heb. 7.19.
for so St. Paul tells us that the Law brought nothing to perfection, and in
that sense the ceremonies and Sacraments of the Synagogue, are called by the
same Apostle, Gal. 4.9.
weak and beggarly elements, but now the Church of Christ is perfect and
sufficient to salvation, because it is Sacraments which are instituted by
Christ, carry with them a virtue of justification, and taking away of sins:
the Sacrrments of the old Law, only promised a Savior, but the Sacraments of
the new give salvation. Again, the Synagogue contained only the shadow of
future things as St. Paul speaks; Heb. 10.1. Ioh. 1.9.
but the Church contains the light it self, which is Christ, as St. John
assures us: now the shadow must necessarily fly before the light; the Synagogue
therefore, with the Mosaical Sacrifices, ought to cease when the Church comes
with Christ. Last of all, the Synagogue was instituted for servants, the Church
for sons, now servants take wages of their masters for a time, and so are
dismissed by their masters; but sons succeed in the perpetual inheritance,
which the Apostles thus insinstates to the Galatians, Gast out the bondwoman
and her son, Gal. 4.30.
for the son of the bondwoman shall not be heir with the son of the free
woman, and so enough of difference I conceive is showed, between the Synagogue,
and the Church, to show you that the reason is not the same.

To the second.
I deny that there shall be an universal falling away of the faithful in the
time of Antichrist, but of some only. And in that methinks you contradict your
self, for you say that Antichrist is already come, and yet you affirm that
there are some faithful lest. Then it is a great dispute, as I have understood
amongst the learned, whether the Apostle out of whom you take your proof,
speaks there of a falling away from the faith; for many of the most learned are
of opinion, that he only speaks of a falling away from the Roman Empire. But
that euriosity I shall not further meddle withal, it being out of our road,
and above our pitch.

To the Third.
In truth methinks it is a very sad course of arguing, that most of your Church
are pleased to use, that is, if you can find any one Text that is never so
obscure, if it can be fashioned at all for your turn, you will entirely insist
upon it, though there be hundreds of clear Texts to the contrary. As for
example, This Text you urge out of Daniel, is very dark, That he shall cause
the Sacrifice and oblation to cease. I am sure these Texts are very clear, That
the gates of hell shall not prevail against it; again, I am always with you to
the end of the world; and again, I have prayed for thee, that thy faith fail
not; and again, The Church is the pillar and foundation of truth: These Texts I
say are clear and need no Interpreter, the other that you quote is so obscure,
that the greatest learning in the world may be at a stand, to understand it.
For most understand that place of the failing of the Synagogue, and the
cessation of the Jewish Sacrifices, not at all of the Christian Church: And
those that do interpret it of the Christian Church, make it to be the cessation
of public worship only, not of the Christian faith.

To the Fourth.
I grant that the Church is frequently compared to the Moon, but never as to
her failings, but in these respects following. First, as the Moon in the
beginning of the month is very little, and so by little and little increases,
till she grow full andperfect; so the Christian Church in the beginning of its
rise, took up but very little room, afterward increased and spead it self by
degrees that at last it should diffuse it self over the face of the whole
world. Secondly, as the Moon receives corporeal light from the Sun, so the
Church receives its light of faith and holiness, from the Sun of righteousness,
that is Christ. Thirdly, as the Moon is subject to changes, so is the Church in
this life, for sometimes she flourishes in the splendour of peace, sometimes is
oppressed with persecutions, but never totally fayles, it may be clouded for a
while, but never quite extinguished. You see then in what the similitude
between the Moon, and the Church consists, and no similitude, as I am informed,
is obliged to run upon four feet. The Church cannot at all be like the Moon in
her failings, but more resembles the earth, as she is likewise called in
Scripture for her firmness, stability and unmoveableness. Then why should you
bring that similitude to the prejudices of the Church, when there are so many
to the favor and honor of her throughout the sacred Scripture, where you may
find that she is as frequently called the Sun as the Moon, an enclosed Garden,
a Fountain, a Paradise, a fair Dove, the City of God, the Land of the living,
the woman clothed with the Sun, the Queen in a vesture of gold, etc. and many
more such honorable titles as those, you cannot but your own reading find out
in Scripture, and those methinks, all dutiful children should be more ready to
give to their Mother, then to throw dirt in her face, or to asperse her with
calumnies: as for the honesty and goodness of Wicklif, Huss, Luther, and
Calvin, I will not meddle, but only ask you, who were the one or two honest and
godly men, that in the ages before them, did ever so contradict the Church? if
you know not any such, why do you so rashly affirm it? if you do, I should
desire you to name them, and let us know whereabouts they lived. Howsoever by
your argument you make the Church of Christ to be in a worse condition then the
Synagogue of the Jews, Gal. 4.11.
when we know the Church is our Mistress, and the Synagogue but a servant, but
the Synagogue was never so deserted, that but two only were to be found in it.
Nay in the time of Elias, Romans 9.4.
when it was thought to be most forsaken, yet there were found in it seven
thousand; how can you possibly think the Church of Christ, should be ever left
so desolate, as but two honest and godly men should be found in it, when we
find it so clear said in the Prophecy of Isay, Isay 54.1.
that the Church should be of a far larger extent, and more fruitful in its
children, than ever the Synagogue was, so I pass to your last and grand
concluding argument, which proves the Pope to be Antichrist, and then I hope I
shall make an end with you.

To your last argument, and that which you presume will conclude me, as you
have laid it, I look upon it to be the weakest, and least signifycant, that
you have alleged yet, for truly all those marks of Antichrist, that you
produce upon the Pope, are mere trifles, and tricks of some of your Doctors
invention and truly would agree better in the application to themselves, than
to his holiness, and how imposible it is, that they should be applicable to
him, I Will pass through every particular. The first note that you give of
Antichrist is, that he must fall away from the faith, now defending of
purgatory, invocation of saints, and sacrifice of the Mass, cannot be called
falling from the faith, because the most ancient fathers of the Church, have
allways been of that opinion: Your Doctors therefore are most manifestly fallen
from the faith, that so expressly oppose those received Doctrines. The second
mark you give of the Beast is that he shall sit in the Temple of God, and that
you say the Pope does, as the head of the Church at Rome. Truly I do humbly
conceive the case to be very different, between sitting in the Temple of God at
Jerusalem, and sitting in the Church of Christ at Rome. Antichrist shall sit
in the Temple of Jerusalem, and be adored of the Jews, the Pope sits in the
Church of Christ at Rome, which all you have most unhappyly forsaken. The third
mark you say is, that he shall show himself as God, and that the Pope plainly
does you say, whilst he makes himself, the visible head of Christ's Church; but
sure that is not all one, as to show himself as God. For Peter himself showed
himself, as visible head, as we have proved already, but only Antichrist shall
show himself as God. The fourth mark you make is, to exalt and oppose himself
to and above all that is called God, and that you say the Pope does, when he
exalts himself above all ecclesiastical and civil power: here give me leave to
tell you that Moses was above all ecclesiastical, and civil power, and yet in
that he was not exalted above God. Thus four marks of Antichrist you are
pleased to take out of the Epistle of S. Paul to the Thessalonians, your fifth
mark follows out of S. John, That he must deny Jesus Christ, which you say
the Pope does by the corruption of the doctrine, that concerns the mediation
of Christ, and introducing of new mediators, but that I have proved to be a
corruption of yours, as you will see in my last paper. The sixth mark again,
you make to be that he is a Liar and worker of falls miracles, so you say the
Pope does at Loretto and other places. I wonder your understanding is so weak,
as to think, that we think that the Pope does the Loretto miracles, but God. If
you would prove any thing as to this point you should prove indeed, that the
Pope does those very miracles, which the Scripture foretells that Antichrist
shall do, Revel. 13.13.15.
as that he should make fire come down from heaven on the earth in the sight of
men. Then that he should make the Image of a beast to speak etc. neither of
these miracles, as ever I heard of, has been attempted yet by any pope. The
seventh and last mark you give, is that he causes all both small and great,
rich and poor, free and bond, to receive a mark etc. and the pope you say
plainly does that, Revel. 16.13. and chapter 14.9.
when he imposes his Character upon some, and marks upon all, as by the
Sacrament of confirmation, wherein he uses the unction of his Chrisme to sign
the foreheads etc. Here are clearly three conditions required by the text to
the accomplishment of this mark: first that it should be common to all great
and little, rich and poor, bond and free: Secondly, that he should impose his
Character either in their foreheads or right hands: Thirdly, that none but he,
that has his mark or character, shall be privileged to buy or sell. Now let
any man show that those conditions do at all suite with the unction of Chrisme
and Isle rest fully satisfied, otherwise this argument which you so fondly
boast of, has no force at all. So according to my former method, I shall be
bold to reply, and to conclude your trouble and mina, upon this occasion.

That the whole Church of Christ cannot possibly err, and that the Roman
Catholic Church is that Church dispersed over all the world, I prove by most
express Scripture thus.
How that the Catholic Church is the body of Christ, the spouse of Christ, and
the kingdom of heaven, is clear by many Scriptures, what probability then, nay
what possibility is there that a thing so nearly related to him, and in so
high, dear, and honorable relations, should be forsaken by him?

First, That the Church is his body, is plain out of S. Paul, who tells us,
Ephesians. 4.
that God laid all things under his feet, and gave him to be head of the whole
Church, which is his body, and the fullness of him who fills all in all;
wherefore walk worthy of the vocation, wherewith you are called, with all
humility and meekness, with patience and long suffering, supporting one another
in charity, Cap. 5.
and careful to keep the unity of the spirit, in the bond of peace, there is
one body and one spirit, even as ye are called in one hope of your calling, one
Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, one God and Father of all, who is above all, and
through you all, and in you all. Then to the Corinthians again, 1 Cor. 11. Rom:
12.
and to the Romans, he says, ye are the body of Christ, and members one of
another.

Then that the Church is the Spouse of Christ, is plain out of other Texts, as
first out of the Canticles, My Dove, Cantic. 6.9.
my undefiled is but one, she is the only one of her mother, she is the choice
one of her that bare her, etc. And in another place, A garden enclosed is my
Sister, my Spouse, Cant. 4.11.
a spring shut up, a fountain sealed; and therefore S. John says of the new
Jerusalem, which is the Church of Christ, Rev. 21.2.
that he saw her coming down out of Heaven prepared as a Bride adorned for her
Husband. And S. Paul more largely and plainly yet tells the Ephesians thus,
Wives submit your selves unto your Husbands, as unto the Lord, for the Husband
is the head of the Wife, even as Christ is the head of the Church, Ephesians. 5.22,
23, 24, 25, 26, 27.
and he is the Savior of the body, therefore as the Church is subject unto
Christ, so let the Wives be to their own Husbands in every thing, Husbands love
your Wives, even as Christ also loved the Church, and gave himself for it, that
he might sanctify and cleanse it with the washing of water by the word, that he
might present it to himself a glorious Church, not having spot or wrinkle, or
any such thing, but that it should be holy without blemish. Now examine, I pray
you, what a pretty piece of Christianity it is, to impute impurity and error to
it?

Then that the Church is called the Kingdom of Heaven too, Mat. 20.
is as plain by Scripture, first out of S. Mat. 22.2, 3.
Matthews Gospel, For the Kingdom of Heaven is like unto a man that is an
householder, which went out early in the morning to hire laborers into his
vineyard. Then again, The Kingdom of Heaven is like unto a certain King, Mat.
25.1, 2, 3.
which made a marriage for his Son, and sent forth his servants to call them
that were bid to the medding, etc. Then again, The Kingdom of heaven shall be
likned to ten Virgins, which took their lamps and went forth to meet the
Bridgroome, and five of them were wise, and five were foolish, etc. Many more
such Parables we find in the Gospells, but these three will be enough for our
purpose, to draw from thence these three conclusions, first, if the Church be
called the Kingdom of Heaven, how should error, falsity, and uncleaness reign
in it so many hundred years, as you pretend it has? when the Kingdom of Heaven
we know is the Kingdom of truth and purity. Secondly, It is plain that God
goes out even until the evening to hire laborers whereas you do, and must
maintain, that none were hired in the Church for above a thousand years, but
your late upstart Doctors. Thirdly, It is plain that the Church here militant,
is a collection of good and bad, for our Savior says plainly, that of the
Virgins, five were wise, and five foolish, and so fishes good and bad come to
the net of the Church. I beseech you be pleased to make your own application.

Over and above all this, I shall prove that the Church is not only incapable
of error, because it is the Spouse of Christ, his body, and called the
Kingdom of Heaven, but because she is governed by the perpetual presence,
power and authority of the Holy Ghost, who is never to forsake her; Joh. 14.
and first our Savior promises that be will ask the Father, and he shall send
another comforter, and so accordingly he did not long after in the same
Gospel, Holy Father, Joh. 17.11.
keep through thine own name those that thou have given me, etc. and he
explains himself in the same cha^ter, that he prays not for them only,
meaning his Apostles, but for them who were afterward to believe in him
through their preaching, 1 Timothy 3.15.


Does not S Paul tell his Disciple Timothy, how he is to behave himself in the
house of God, which is the Church of God, the pillar and ground of truth; how
then can it possibly err?

Then S. John tells us, that our Savior said that he had many things to say
unto them, but that they could not bear them then, but when the spirit of truth
should come, he should teach them all truth. Again the same S. John in his
Epistle General tells us, 1 John 2.20.
that we have an unction from the holy one, and that we know all things, and
that we shall be always capable to distinguish a lie from truth, it must be
therefore the unction of the holy Ghost, that always teaches the Church.

In fine, Matthew. 28.20.
S. Matthew makes them the concluding words of his Gospel, Go yet herefore and
teach all Nations, etc. teaching them to observe all things, whatsoever I have
commanded you, and lo I am with you always, even to the end of the world.
Christ who is the way, the truth and the life, said this to his Disciples, it
is plain therefore that this Church, which is the pillar and ground of truth,
that has him for its leader, and the Holy Ghost for its teacher, can never
err; how probable is it then, that it should be in an error for above a
thousand years together, as you fondly imagine?

Then as the Church is but one, so it is necessary that unity should be in the
Church, I prove out of the express words of S. 1 Cor. 1.10.
Paul, Now I beseech you brethren, by the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that
ye all speak the same thing. and that there he no divisions amongst you, but
that ye be perfectly joined together in the same mind, and in the same
judgment: and then in another place in the same Epistle says, 1 Cor. 14.33.
that God is not the author of confusion, but of peace, as in all Churches of
the Saints. What then will you say for your selves, that have nothing but
confusions amongst you? nay is it not more probable that God will rather
inspire his own body, that is the concord and unity of his Church, than any
private Doctors whatsoever, that teach a dissent from it?

Nay, how much this unity of his Church is desired by God himself, is evident
by what the same S. Paul writes to the Romans, Romans 15.4, 5, 6.
for whatsoever things are written aforetime, were written for our learning,
that we through patience and comfort of the Scriptures, might have hope; Now
the God of patience and consolation, grant you to be like minded one toward
another; according to Christ Jesus, That ye may with one mind, and one mouth
glorify God; even the father of our Lord Jesus Christ, etc. Again the same
Apostle in the same Epistle lays an injunction upon the Romans, Romans 12.16.
whose faith he acknowledged before, was celebrated over the whole world, that
they should be of the same mind, one toward another, not to mind high things,
but condescend to men of low estate, and not to he wise in their own conceits,
which all they are, and must be, that are out of the Church.

Observe I pray you, the most pathetical exhortation of S. Paul to this
purpose; Phil. 2.1, 2.
If there be therefore any consolation in Christ, if any comfort of love, if
any fellowship of the spirit, if any bowels of mercy, fulfill ye my joy, that
ye be like minded, having the same love, being of one accord, of one wind. Nay,
the breach of this peace, unity, and unanimity in Gods Church, is most
passionately, if it be lawful to say so, Jerem. 2.12, 13.
bewailed by God himself, as the Prophet Jeremy expresses it, nay, proposes
it as a matter of amazement to Heaven it self; be astonished, O ye Heavens, at
this, and be horribly afraid, be ye very desolate, says the Lord; foy my
people have committed two evils, they have forsaken me, the fountain of living
waters, and hewed them out cisterns, broken cisterns, that can hold no water. I
pray you seriously examine with your self, whether you do less, by leaving off
the Church, the true and living fountain, and digging to your selves broken
cisterns, out of Wicklif, Huss, Luther, Calvin, etc. In vain sure has God sent
his Son, in vain the Holy Ghost, and yet more in vain has he sent Apostles,
Martyrs, Confessors, Doctors, in all ages, to perpetuate the truth of his
Church to us, when a few of such precious persons as those of yours would have
served the turn. Here are only two things now as I conceive, left to be
cleared, the one is, that the Prelates, and principal Persons of Christ's Church
assembled together, do make the representative body of the whole Church; the
other is, that the Roman Catholic Church, is that universal Church, dispersed
over the whole world. As to the first, it is sufficiently clear, by many such
Scriptures as thse, And he stood and blessed all the congregation of Israel,
with a loud voice, etc. And the King and all Israel with him, offered Sacrifice
before the Lord; now that this must be only meant of the body representative
of Israel, is plain to sense, and particularly expressed in the beginning of the
Chapter, Then Solomon assembled the Elders of Israel, and all the heads of the
Tribes, the chief of the Fathers of the Children of Israel unto King Solomon in
Jerusalem, 1 Kings 8.58.62.1.
Thus it is plain, that the heads of the Church assembled, represent the body
of the whole Church.

Then as to the clearing of the next point I must tell you a great mistake
amongst you, for you commonly speaking of the Church of Rome, take it only for
the particular Church, which formerly was, and still is there, and so it is no
more indeed than particular. But if you take it for the collection of all the
faithful, who being dispersed over all the world, did in old days always
adhere, and still do to the Bishop of Rome, so it is called Catholic or
Universal, because diffused over the whole world, and it is called Roman from
the most noble part, the head of it: and that she must be that Universal, and
for ever visible Church of Christ, is plain, because she ever has been so. Let
any man show, that any other Church has continued without error or
interruption, and I will grant you all that you have said, and can more require
of me. But if it be manifest, that no one Church of Christ in the world has
continued without error, or interruption but only she, it must follow, that
she is the only true Church of Christ. First the Jewish Church has been long
since more then interrupted, quite abrogated. The Turkish or Mahumetan has not
always been. The Liaheran, Calvinian, and reformed Church of England, are all
new; for they began with pretended reformation, which was made by them, and
other particular Doctors, so must of necessity imply novelty: The Roman only
has persevered in its own place, and ancient profession, so must be for ever
the Mother and Mistress of our faith, as taught by the Spirit of God. If any of
you will say, that your Church, or any other, their Church, has continued
visible, and without error, I beg the favor only to know by what name she
was called, and is, what parts of the world she has possessed, and does? what
pastors and Bishops she has had, and still has? what Kings and Emperors have
adhered to her, and still do? What Heretics have been condemned by her? What
Universities she has confirmed? What Churches and Monasteries built? If none
of this can be shown, you must give me leave to persist in my former
persuasion. Now though I conceive enough said in my answer before, as to the
business of the popes being Antichrist, and that no obligation at all lies
upon me, to prove a negative, yet because that is so great a gudgeon, and so
vulgarly swallowed, I shall undertake the task a little further.

That you may better understand this controversy concerning Antichrist, you
must know that the name of Antichrist signifies, as I am informed, an enemy,
or adversary to Christ, and that must be understood in a two fold manner: first
generally for any enemy of Christ, as all Heretics are, and in that sense, we
are to understand the Apostle who tells us, that even now there are many
Antichrists, that is many Heretics, that think evilly, and maliciously of
Christ, of whom it follows in the Text They went cut from us, but they are not
of us: and again in another chapter of the same Epistle, And every spirit that
confesses not, 1 John 4.3.
that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, is not of God, and this is that spirit
of Antichrist, whereof you have heard, that it should come, and even now
already it is in the world. Secondly, it is taken specially, for the principal
and grandest adversary of Christ, of whom all the rest before spoken of, are
but forerunners: and of this grand Antichrist it is that S. Paul speaks, when
he says, 2 Thessalonians. 2, 3, 4.
unless that man of sin be revealed, the son of perdition, who opposes and
exalts himself above all that is called God, etc. Now first I shall prove,
that this special Antichrist is not yet come at all: for it is agreed upon by
all the learned, that the Antichrist shall not come, till after the overthrow,
and desolation of the Roman Empire, and they ground themselves upon those
express places in Daniel and the Revelations, Dan 2.7. Rev. 17.
but now we know that the Roman Empire is not yet over thrown, therefore
Antichrist cannot be yet come. Then we find in the Revelation, Rev. 11.3.6.
I will give power unto my two witnesses, and they shall prophecy a thousand
two hundred and threescore days, clothed in sackcloath, who shall have power
to shut up heaven that it rain not in the days of their prophecy, and have
power over waters to turn them into blood, etc. but these two witnesses are not
yet come, fore Antichrist cannot yet be come himself. In the second place, I am
to prove that the Pope is not Antichrist, and first, as before, Antichrist is
not to come, but after the ruin of the Roman Empire, but the Pope came and
still is, in the flourishing condition of the Roman Empire. Then Antichrist is
to kill those two witnesses or Prophets, before spoken of, but this the Pope
has not done, therefore. Then again, Antichrist is not to reign above three
years and a half, Dan. 7.25. Re. 11.2. Rev. 5.3.
as first the Prophet Daniel informs us, for a time, and times, and half a
time, and in the Revelation it is said, for forty and two months in one place,
and a thousand two hundred and threescore days in another place: but now the
Pope has reigned for many ages. Again, the Antichrist is to be received by the
Jews for their Messiah, John 7.43. 2 Thessalonians. 10.
as both S. John and S. Paul do testify, but the Pope I am sure never yet was,
and very improbable it is, that he will ever be received by them for their
Mossiah. Lastly, Antichrist is to make fire come down from Heaven, Rev. 13.13.
as we see said in the Revelation, but none of this, has the Pope ever done,
therefore he can never be thought to be Antichrist.

Thus I have been bold to enlarge upon this particular, it being so vulgar an
error, and the grand pretext of all the schism and heresy in the whole
world, for to justify their defection from the Bishop of Rome: and indeed it
was a very artificial trick of the Devil, and some of your Doctors, to fasten
that dirt upon him, for who will be so mad to keep in communion with that man
of sin, or the Antichrist, as most of your common people do most ignorantly
presume him to be. And so I have done with all your Papers, but I hope I have
not yet done with you, and presume that you will do me the honor very speedily
to see me, that we may sit, and discourse something further upon these
particulars, so the Lord give you understanding in all things, and enable me to
prove more fully that I am

Mistress N. your most faithful friend to serve you, M.
Postscript.
I pray you dear Mistress N. do me the favor to come and dine with me to
morrow, and bring your Husband with you, so you shall more obbige your true
friend M.



So my Lady immediately closed up the Papers into one Packet, which she sealed,
and presently sent it away by her servant.

FINIS.
THE DIPPER DROWNED, By endeavoring to wade in the unfathomable depths of
SCRIPTVRE Whilst the FEMALE DUELLISTS Swim over him.

1 Cor. 27. God has chosen the foolish things of the world to confound the
wise.

London, Printed by Peter Lillicrap, 1661.

THE DIPPER DROWNED By endeavoring to wade in the unfathomed depths of
Scripture, etc.
Mris N. had no sooner received these papers, but she went immediately with
them to her husband the Doctor, imploring his advice, and assistance in the
management of her further discourses with my Lady. The Doctor was at this time
fallen into some indisposition of body, notwitnstanding he took the pains to
look hastily over them, and then called his wife to him, and told her after
this manner.

Indeed sweetheart you have done very ill, to engage your self in any business
of this nature, without my knowledge and approbation, for what you have said,
or done amiss in it, will be all imputed to me, though utterly ignorant, and
innocent in the matter. And I must tell you, that you have ventured very boldly
upon some main points, in which the most learned Doctors in the world, are yet
to seek for satisfaction: and again give me leave to tell you, that you charge
the Church of Rome with some things, that the Church of England does not; and
so instead of healing up those breaches that are betwixt us, which should be
all our endeavors to do, you have made the wounds wider, and differences
greater, then indeed they are: and that truly is no small fault amongst us all.
Then last of all, I fear you have hazarded much of that good opinion, that my
Lady had of us, by entering the list with her upon this occasion, and that
interest we had in her, was not a little considerable, being so excellent a
neighbor, and especial a friend, as she has always been to us, so for my part
I will have nothing to do in the business, but as you begun, you shall e'n make
an end without me; but if you must needs be scribbling of controversy, and
dabling in divinity, I Will let you a task, and you may offer it to my Lady, if
you please, and you are both, I perceive so good Scripturists, as that I may
entrust you with it, it is a Paper that I received from Mr. R. the grand
Patriarch of all the Anabaptist: in these parts, I will write a Letter to my
Lady, to beg her excuse of me, for not waiting on her Ladyship at dinner.

Mr is. N. not a little troubled to find no better acceptance of her zealous
and painful endeavors, for my Ladies conversion, yet being unwilling to move
her husband further at that time, took the Anabaptists paper from him so left
him to his other studies, and she betook her self to her household occasions.

The next morning early, she made her self ready to wait on my Lady, that she
might have some private discourse with her Ladyship before dinner, so calling
for her husbands letter, she took her walk, and coming to my Ladies house, she
found her in her Kitchen, giving orders about dinner, and directing her
servants, how to employ themselves, in the other affairs of her family. My
Lady, begging pardon for her being surprised in that place, and posture, took
Mrs. N. along with her to her chamber, where after she had delivered her
husbands letter, they fell to read the Anabaptists paper, which when they had
done, my Lady willingly undertook the task, to join with her in the answer, but
what shall we do with the Latin that is here said my Lady? O for that Madam,
replied Mrs. N. my husband will direct us, and has promised us all his
assistance in this, though he does not approve our other disputes at all. Nay
further he says, that when we have answered in our way, he will answer it too
in his. Well then, replied my Lady, we will not trouble him till we have done,
for I have a Kinsman in my house, that will be able to give us the English of
his Latin: and so they fell to work immediately, and in two or three meetings
more, they made an end of the business, in this manner as follows.

That to build or to use Steeple Houses (which you call Churches) in the
service of God, is altogether unlawful, much more to beautify or adorn them,
and to give privileges, lands or possessiens to them, or to the persons of
your Churchmen, but that we are all Priests equally, and that your Canonical
hours and prayers in those Churches, are utterly unlawful too; I prove by
Scripture thus.
1. FIrst, we find that Stephen in the latter end of his Sermon, and in the
words foregoing his death, expressly declares against the vanity of all Temples,
or Churches, call them what you please, Acts 7.48, 49, 50.
and quotes the Prophet for it. Howbeit the Most High dwells not in Temples
made with hands, as says the Prophet, Heaven is my Throne, and earth is my
footstool, what house will ye build me, says the Lord? or what is the place of
my rest? has not my hands made all these things, etc. From hence it is plain,
that God delights not in any of your Steeple Houses.

Again, we find Paul as plainly declaiming against the Idolatry of all
Steeple Houses, assuring the Athenians, Acts 17.24, 25.
that God that made the world and all things therein, seeing that he is Lord of
Heaven and earth, dwells not in Temples made with hands, neither is he
worshipped with men's hands, etc. Thus you see how in the beginning of
Christianity, there were not only no steeple houses, but by Scripture expressly
forbiden that there should be any.

3. The Apostle Paul bids us again, 1 Timothy 2.
to pray always in all places, holding up pure hands, what need have we more of
Churches and steeolehouses to pray in, than in any other rooms?

4 Nay find we not our Savior Jesus Christ himself prophesying the
destruction of that Idol of the Jews their Temple to say, Matt 24.2.
Verily Verily I say unto you there shall not be left here one stone upon
another that shall not be thrown down, You may see then what pleasure he took
in that place, which was the gloriousest of the whole world, what then will
become of your pitiful Temples and steeplehouses?

5 Our Savior yet more plainly shows his distaste of that kind of worship,
when he tells the woman of Samaria in S. John's Gospel. John. 4.21.23.
Women believe me, The hour comes, when ye shall neither in this mountain nor
yet at Jerusalem worship the Father etc. But the hour comes, and now is when
the true worshipers shall worship the Father in spirit and in truth, for the
Father seeks such to worship him. Here it is plain that he will not have his
worship confined to places, no not to his holy Temple.

6 Then does not the Prophet Jeremy heat down the fond confidence that the Jews
had in their Temple, when he bids them not to trust in lying words, saying,
Jer. 4.7.
The Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord; it is
plain he says, that to call that the Temple of the Lord, was to give lying
words.

7 Is not God in every place, and can there be any one place showed, where he
is properly present, but he is always ready to hear sinners every where, as is
frequently said in Scripture, what need have we then of your Churches, or
steple houses? Nay did not Jesus Christ live a poor life upon earth, and
counsel poverty to all the followers of him, what need have we then of all
those splendid sumptuous buildings, and statly ornaments and rich revenues of
your Churches; which are but golden snares, for to entrap Christian souls, and
our Savior himself declared as aforesaid how much he abhorred, and did
afterward destroy the riches of Solomon's Temple, and a heathen Poet himself
could say, at vos dicite Pontifices, in sacro quid facit aurum nempe quod and
veneri donatae a virginie puppe. Yet you will persist in that foolish idolatry.

8 Then that your Churches, nor your Churhmen are to be privileged, or
exempted from the jurisdiction of the secular power more than others, I prove
by the express precept and president of our Savior, who not only suffered
himself to be judged by Pontius Pilat a mere lay man, John 19.11.
and a heathen, but aproved his power, granting expressly to him, that his
power was given him from above, what reason then have any of your Churchmen to
refugiate themselves under any pretended privilege, or be exempted from the
secular power more than we?

9 Nay that all faithful Christians are Priests, and the Lords Anointed, and
that by Baptism it self, 1. Pet. 2.5 9.
is plain by many express Scriptures. And therefore Peter twice in one chapter
inculcates it thus. first, ye also as lively stones are built up a spiritual
house, an holy preisthood to offer up Spiritual Sacrifice, acceptable to God
by Jesus Christ, and again, but ye are a chosen generation, a Royal Preisthood
an holy nation, a peculiar people, that ye should show forth the praises of
him, who has called you out of darkness into his marvelous light? By which it
is plain that all good Christians are as much priests as any of your black
coats what soever, and this is likewise affirmed by John, who tells us that he
loved us and washed us from our sins in his blood, and made us a Kingdom, and
priests to God his Father. 1. Cor. 12.13.


10 Then the Apostle Paul tells us, that by one Spirit we are all baptized into
one body, whether we be Jews or Gentiles, whether we be bond or free, and have
been all made to drink into one spirit, it must follow therefore, Rem. 12
that we are equally Priests with any of you. Nay does not the same Apostle
tell us yet more plainly, that we may do the office of Priests? which is to
offer Sacrifice, when he charge us: to present our bodies a living Sacrifice,
holy acceptable unto God, which is our reasonable service, and cannot we do that
as well as you?

11. Last of all for your Canonical hours and formal prayers in your
Churches, and by your pretended priests, I can for my part find as little
aggreeable to Scripture, for first our Savior to discountenance that kind of
devotion, Matt. 7.
tells us plainly, that not every one that says unto him Lord, Lord, shall
enter into the Kingdom of heaven. Then if that kind of praying were of any
use or force with God at all, then the Lord would be in a manner necessitated
and constrained to his actions, by those prayers, but that we know he cannot
be? Over and above, if such praying were prevalent with God, what need will
there be of living in obedience to his Law, or of any good works at all?

12. Again our savior Christ tells us, that our Father in heaven knows what
is needful for us: Matt- 6.
before we ask him, to what purpose therefore should we pray at all to him?
only do his will and leave the rest to his own goodness. For so the Prophet
Malachy assures us likewise, Malac. 3.13.
that they are his own words, I am God and am not to be changed? You gain
nothing therefore upon his decrees, by your prayers?

13. Then that our Savior Christ was clearly against that kind of praying,
appears by those words, Matt. 6.
but when ye pray, use not vain repetitions, as the Heathens do, for they think
that they shall be heard for their much speaking.

Methinks you should therefore be ashamed of your many repetitions, and
prayers, at your Canonical hours forsooth, when you know that there is no such
thing as Canonical hours commanded, and besides that nothing should be read or
said in any congregation, but what is for the edification of Christians souls.

That it is not lawful to make war with Turks, Jews, Heathens or Heritcks, or
to persecute them for any cause of conscience; nay, that Christians cannot
justify to make war at all, or to bear any civil Magistracy whatsoever, or give
or take any oaths, I prove by express Scripture thus.
1. First it is plain that to wage war against Turks, Jews, Heathen, or
Heretics, is to resist the will of God, and his holy Sprit visiting our sins
upon us, and punishing us by their hands, and our duty is to fight with prayers
and tears, not with the the sword: As the Apostles did.

2. Then we find our Savior Expressly forbid, all kind of resistance, and
returns of injury for injury, when he says in Matthews gospel. Matt. 4.39.
But I say unto you that ye resist not evil, but whosoever shall smite thee on
the right cheek, turn to him the other also.

3. Nay more expressly yet, we have it in the same Gospel, Mat. 26.52.
Then said Jesus unto him put up again thy sword into his place, for all they
that take the sword shall perish by the sword and that this was so understood
by the Apostles and primitive Christians, is plainly held forth by John in his
Apockalyps where it is said, Rev. 13.10
he that leads into captivity, shall go into captivity, he that kills with
the sword, must be killed with the sword, here is the patience and the faith of
the saints so that all war must be simply and of it self unlawful?

4. Then we find that persecution for cause of conscience, is utterly
unlawful, for the Apostles and primitive Christians did never seek to princes,
to give them any force to defend them against any ^ersecutors whatsoever, nor
do we find the Gospel, or Apostles teach us any thing but submission to our
Sufferings, and that all the enemies of Christ are to be over come only with
the sword of the spirit, which is the word of God.

5. The Lord in Matthews Gospel commands again expressly, that the Tares which
the enemy sowed should not be pulled up, Matt. 13.30.
but that both be let to grow together till the Harvest, that is the end of the
world and then he will say to the Repers, gather ye together first the tares,
and bind them in bundells to burn them, but gather the wheat into my barn. 1.
Cor. 11.19.
So that Heretics as well as Turks, Jews and Infidels, must be let alone to
grow till the end of the world; and Paul plainly asserts the necessity of that
too, when he says, for there must be also Heresies amongst you that they which
are approved may be made manifest amongst you

6. Then that no civil magistracy is to be born amongst Christians, Luke. 22.25.
is plain out of Lukes Gospel, when the Lord said unto them, the Kings of the
earth exercise Lordship over them etc. but ye shall not be so. And this it
plainly again confirmed by Paul to the Ephesians, Ephesians. 4.5.
where he tells us that there is but one Lord, one Faith, and one Baptism, if
therefore there is to be but one Lord, who? who shall dare to make more? so
that Kings, Princes and Magistrates, are all unlawful things.

7. Last of all, that it is absolutely unlawful for Christians to give or take
Oaths, is most evident out of our Saviors own words, recited at large in
Matthews Gospel thus, Matt. 5.33, 34, 35, 36, 37.
Ye have heard that it has been said by them of old time, thou shall not
forswear thy self, but shall perform unto the Lord thy Oaths. But I say unto
you, swear not at all, neither by Heaven, for it Gods Throne, nor by the earth,
for it is his footstool, neither by Jerusalem, for it is the City of the great
King, neither shall thou swear by thy head, because thou can not make one
hair white or black, but let your communication be ye, ye, nay, nay, for
whatsoever is more than these, comes of evil. And is not all this as plainly
repeated, Jam. 5.12.
and confirmed by James in his Epistle General? where he says, But above all
things, my Brethren, swear not, neither by Heaven, neither by the earth,
neither by any other Oath, but let your yea be yea, and your nay, nay, least
you fall into condemnation: can any thing be made more plain by more express
Scripture, than that all manner of swearing is utterly unlawful? Let them look
to it therefore that make it their common practice to swear vainly, and they
too, that under pretense of Law, dare to administer, or receive any Oath, how
judicial soever: for it is a thing injurious to God, and Tyrannical over humane
souls.

That to Baptize Infants, is an injury to the Lord, and a most high abuse of
Christian Souls, and that the doctrine of a Character impressed in the Soul by
Baptism, is a mear Popish cheat and collusion, I prove by Scripture thus.
First, It is plain that our Savior in the Gospel bids his Disciples Go and
teach all Nations, Mat. 28.19, 20.
Baptising them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy
Ghost, teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you. So
Matthew renders his words, Mar. 16.15, 16.
and Mark not much different, Go ye into all the world, and preach the Gospel
to every creature, he that believes and is baptized shall be saved, but he
that believes not shall be damned: by both which Gospells it is evident that
they who would be baptized, ought first to be taught, and to believe, but
Infants for their want of age, are neither capable of learning, not of faith,
therefore they are not capable of Baptism.

2. We find it as plain likewise in the practice of the Apostles: first we see
that Philip preached the Gospel a long while to the Ethiopian Eunuch bofore he
was baptized, Acts 8.35, 36, 37.
and when he was sufficiently instructed he said, here is water what does
hinder me to be baptized, and Philip said, if thou believe with all thy
heart, thou may, and he answered and said, I believe that Jesns Christ is
the Son of God, and so he was baptized: thus you see how his express belief,
was to go before his baptism: and so you may see how the Gospoll was preached
to Cornelius by Peter, Acts 10.
before he would baptize him, all which sufficiently argues the madness of
your Pedo-baptisme, wherein their is an utter incapacity of hearing, learning,
or believing.

3. Over and above these express Scriptures, I Will give you one argument or two
out of reason. First, you will grant that Reprobates are not to be baptized,
but many Infants are Reprobates, therefore they are not to be baptized.

4. Then why did the Ancient Primitive Christians administer Baptism but at
certain times, and that but thrice a year, if that Children were to be baptized
so soon as they were born?

5. Lastly, The Scripture speaks not one word of baptising of Children, but one
pitiful Pope Nicholas, as we find in History, begun that childish Baptism,
and you have been all dotards, twice Children, and Pope-ridden ever since.

6. As for the Character that you pretend to in Baptism, it is altogether as
sottish and vain a thing. A Character is a mere Popish fiction likewise, of
which there is no mention at all made in Scripture, how can we then imagine it
to be any thing more than a mere figment? especially since, if it could be
true, it would would prove to be of such importance.

7. Then to conclude, I pray you consider a little impartially with your self,
what a horrid rediculous doctrine it is, that water should be capable to
impresse such a seal upon a soul, as to stamp an indeleble character, upon an
immaterial thing, Spectatum admissi risum tene atis Amici.

To what you object against our building, or using of of Churches, which you
call Steoplehouses, in the service of God; adorning or giving lands and
possessions to them, with privileges extraordinary, as also to our Churchmen,
and against their Priesthood, Canonical hours, and prayers, we answer thus.
To the first.
We grant what you urge from S. Stephen, out of the Acts to be great truth,
that the most high dweleth not in Temples made with hands etc. so as to be
circumscribed by his essence, that is a mere pagan opinion, which it may be
some foolish heathens, held of their Gods, for the wiser of them too, did not
think it, but we are sure no Christian can, or ever could imagine it; but that
he dwells not in his own houses dedicated to his service, by his more abundant
grace is as sottish again to deny, and such a presence of God in his Church, we
do only believe and maintain. This answer to your Argument we do assure you,
we have learnt from the wise King Solomon, 2 Chronicles. 6.18, 19, etc.
when he was dedicating his Temple, when he said. But will God in very deed
dwell with men on the earth? behold Heaven, and the Heaven of Heavens cannot
contain thee how much less the house that I have built? Then follows the end
and scope he had in the Building of that house, set out at large by him, but
that his divine Majesty should please to have respect Unto the prayers of his
Servants, etc.

To the second.
We answer in like manner, for both those texts are to the same tune perfectly,
only you are pleased to name this last pitifully, for had you produced the
whole out, the latter end of the Text would have answered the beginning: for we
grant as aforesaid, that the Lord of heaven and earth dwells not in Temples
made with hands, neither is worshipped with men's hands, as though he needed any
thing; that you are, pleased I say, to leave out and we deny as well as you
that God is so to be worshipped in our Churches, as if he stood in need of any
help of ours.

To the Third.
What you urge again out of S. Paul, we grant, that we are to pray in all
places, that is to be understood sure of all places of convenience, and what
place can be more convenient than that which is dedicated, consecrated, and
devoted to that, only use. Besides, S. Paul said that only to refute a vulgar
error, which was, that it was not lawful to pray any where but in the Church.

To the Fourth.
We do not deny but the Temple of the Jews was so destroyed as our Savior
prophesied, and that so it ought to be, but that signifies nothing to our
Churches; for as the Evangelical Law, succeeded the Jewish Law, so the
Evangelical Priesthood succeeded the Jewish Priesthood, and our Churches, their
Temple, and our unbloody Sacrifice, their bloody ones.

To the fifth.
We freely grant all that our Savior says, as you urge, and that the true
worshippers of him, shall do it in spirit and in truth, and we pray you, what
hinders, but that we may do that in our Churches, and what is in the text more
reougnant to our Churches, than to your woods, caves, and nasty conventicles?

To the Sixth.
The Prophet Jeremy whom you urge, does, most, expressly testify there that,
the Temple was his most choice and beloved place, and adds those words, and I
will dwell with you in that place. Notwithstanding he tells them in the Text
you quote, that they are not to trust in that, for the sanctity of the Temple
should not be a privilege to them, if they took wicked courses: This is all
the scope of the Text and the context.

To the Seventh.
We grant it to be true, that God is in every place and hears sinners every
where, does it therefore follow that we must have no Churches? This was
Jaroboaws argument sure to the Israelites to keep them from their going up to
the Temple at Jerusalem, when he told them how impertinent a piece of worship
it was to take so long a journey, to so little purpose. You Anahaptists
therefore may be very properly in this point called Jerohoites, going about to
dissuade Christians from the use of Churches, as he did there the Israelites
from their Temple; but because we perceive you are a Latinist we shall refet
you to a learned Jew, to teach you a more Christian religion, Joseph. lib. 8.
c. 12.
and that is Josephus, who will tell you, Deus est ubique sed in uno loco vult
orari, and honorari plusquam in alio. God is every where, but in one place he
will be prayed to and honored more than another, and what you seem to fling
against tho riches and ornaments of our Churches is nothing to the purpose,
supposing that we must have Churches at all, consecrated to divine use, sure
common reason tells us, that they are not then to be like Burns, nor our
Priests to go like Beggars who serve in them: what you produce out of Persius,
is little to the purpose, and you show your self to be a true imitater of your
grand Patriarch Martin Luther, who when he went about to prove that all things
in this world came by a fatal, absolute, and inevitable necessity, produces a
Heathen Poet for his Authority, certa stant emnia lege, so when we bring clear
Scriptures, and you are pleased to produce Ethnic Poets, we conceive our
selves not bound to answer to their authority, how valid soever you take it to
be, for we know they knew not God, therefore they are not to be received by us,
as any authority. But of this we shall tell you more hereafter.

To the Eight.
I say you have done very bravely, to make all Christian Princes and
Magistrates, to be Pilates and Herodes, and whereas you say that Christ
asserted Pilates power, the contrary is plain out of the Text, for our Savior
there clearly taxes him of sin, when he says, that he that betrayed him into
his hands, had the greater sin: Now that Pilate had a power given him from
above, our Savior says it, but in reference to God, that is permissively
only, that God did permit to him only that power; for we know, it was his own
will to offer himself, if the Text be understood, as in reference to Caesar, and
the supreme civil power, you then gain nothing by your argument.

To the Ninth.
We will grant you that all saithfull Christians are Priests, as they are also
Kings, that is to be understood spiritually, because God reigns in them by
his free grace, and they by the unction of his holy spirit, do play the Kings
over, and govern the powers and faculties of their souls and senses, hut yet
besides those Kings, which may be beggars, there are, and were always Kings
and external external Governors. In like manner all the faithful, who offer
to God their faith and faithful prayers, etc. may be said to be spiritual
Priests, and that Priesthood needs no ceremonies: but it is plain, that besides
this internal Priesthood, there is and must be an external one in the Church;
Take for example, every faithful Christian is the Temple of God, for so S.
Paul says to the Corinthians; ye are the holy Temple of God, but yet besides
those Temples there must be external Temples, affixt to certain places, in
which do meet the Congregations of the faithful. Then as to the words of the
Text you quote, you may as well infer out of another, that all the Jews were
Priests too; Enod. 19.5, 6.
for we find in Exodus, how God tells them, Now therefore, if ye will obey my
vain indeed, and keep my Covenant; then ye shall be a peculiar treasure unto
me above all peoples, and ye shall be unto me a Kingdom of Priests, and a holy
Nation, etc. This was said to all Israel, and yet you will not deny but there
were particular Kings, and Priests besides In fine you know well enough the
difference between a Priest of your making, and a Priest of Gods making, a
Lay-Priest, and a Hierarchical one, but you are willing to let your selves be
cheated by that sophisme of equivocation, that you may do again as Jeroboam
did, set up your Lay-Priests to hinder people from going to Rome, as he did to
hinder the Israelites from going to Jerusalem. So here again you are Jeroboites.

To the Tenth.
We say that you torment and turn that Text of the Apostle to the Corinthians
to a most heretical sense, for though we are all one body in Christ, yet sure
it is a most sottish inference to say that therefore we are all the hand, or
that we are all the foot, when we know that there is and must be a difference,
between the members themselves, wherefore the unity of the body, may consist
with the difference of members. Then as to that other Text out of the Romans,
we do acknowledge that all Christians, though merely Lay-mem may offer
spiritual oblations, and so may be mistical Priests, erecting in their hearts
an Altar of their affections to God, but it does not at follow from thence,
that therefore there are not, nor ought to be external, and Hierarchical
Priests.

To the Eleventh.
We say that our Savior in that Gospel you urge, sinds not fault with praying,
but praying as the Hepocrites do, who with his words prays to God, not with
his deeds, which kind of praying shuts the gates of the Kingdom of Heaven
against them. Then as to a necessity which you say our prayers must impose upon
God, we do absolutely deny any such thing, but yet we know that God is pleased
to express himself, as if he were necessitated by the importunity of faithful
prayers, as he said to Moses, let me alone that my fury may wax hot, as if he
were hindered from his purpose, by Moses his prayers he requests him to let him
aloue.

And as to your inference, that if prayrs be prevalent with God, than good
works an necessary we do absolutely deny it, for we are to do the one, and not
toleave the other undone, for by fasting, and alms giving, etc. Prayers are
carried up to Heaven, as with Angels wings.

To the twelfth,
To what you urge out of S. Matthew, and the Prophet Malachy, we acknowled that
God foreknowes our wants before we ask him, but yet we confess his power, in
praying to him and beseech him as he is all powerful to help us, we ask
therefore only that which God has ordered us to ask for, and has promised to
give to our prayers, and God will be asked, before he gives, least we should do
that, which most in the world do, vilify his proffered graces. Neither is God to
be thought to be changed by our prayers, that is in his essence, but the
effects of things are many times changed by holy prayers, as that before by
Moses. You mistake therefore if you think, that our prayers are ordained to
change the divine disposition, but that we may obtein by our prayers, what his
divine goodness had disposed for us, before the world was.

To the thirteenth and last.
We say that our Savior forbids not much speaking in prayers simply, but as
the heathen do, vain repetitions, and babbling in prayers is forbiden, not
prolixity and to continue long in prayer, it is the superfluity of words that
is offensive to God, therefore the old Fathers prayers were very short, Luke.
22.1. Sam. 1.
but frequent. Christ himself prayed long, and Amn prayed long, and multiplied
prayers, Luke. 2.6
Nay our Savior was a whole night in prayer, as the Scriptures testify. Then
that Canonical hours are not commanded in holy writ I grant, but they are
sufficiently insinuated, and the Church has allways learnt them from its holy
Masters, the Apostles, and we ought to obey those that are set over us in the
Lord, Then last of all, Heb. 11.
what can be more edifying to Christians, than those collects of holy prayers
and homilies made by the holy Fathers of the Church: the legands of the Saints,
and agonies of those invincible martyrs who have sealed our Chrsstion faith with
their blood, if they be well and faithfully written? So now give us leave to
reply a little upon you.

That it is lawful to build, use, and adorn Churches, and to give lands and
possessions to them, and to the persons that Officiate in them, and that we are
not all equally Priests, and that our Canonical hours and prayersure lawful,
we prove by Scripture thus.
First we find in Exodus that Jacob said surely the Lord was in this place,
Exodus 28 16, 17.
and I knew it not and again how dreadful is this place, this is no other but
the houset of God, and the gate of heaven. Again in Deuteronomy we find thus,
Deuteronomy. 46.2.
Thou shall therefore Sacrifice the passover, unto the Lord thy God, of thy
flock and of thy herds in the place which the Lord thy God shall choose to
place his name there. Therefore God appoints some places for his worship, and
delights in them, more then in others.

We find in the Chronicles that it was not permitted to David because he was a
man of blood, 1 Chronicles. 17.
and had made many wars, to build a house to the name of God. Here it is to be
observed that the Lord had a great care of the Reverence due to his house, when
he would not suffer it to be built by a warrior or a man of blood, ibid
but by a king of peace, as Solomon was. Then in the same chapter; and else
where God expresses himself to have walked about in Tents, 2 Kin. 7.
and Tabernacle, from place to place, observe, he that was every where, says,
he was in the Tabernacle. 1 Kings. 6, 7, 8. etc.


How often does the Almighty call Solomon's Temple his house to dwell in? what
infinite care and vast expense was in the building, and not so much as the
noise of a hammer to be heard about it all the while it was building, and you
will pull down Temples, with noise of Drumes and Trumpets. 1. Chron. 17.


Then, that God is more propitiated, and hears our prayers sooner in a place
hollowed to his name than in an other place, is as plain for it is said: That
King David came and stood before the Lord, that is the Arc: by which it is
plain, that God is more present in one place than in another. Daniel when he
could not pray in the Temple, Dan. 6.
being a captive in Babylon yet prayed thrice a day with his face toward the
Temple in Jerusalem; Then the Prophet Isay tells us, that God says, Isay 36.
my house shall be called by all people, the house of prayer, which our Savior
himself repeats and confirms, and adds upon the Jews, but ye have made it a
den of Thieves, Mat. 21.
so many of your faction have made our Churches lately, worse than dens of
Thieves.

It is said in the Acts, Acts 3.
how Peter and John went up into the Temple to pray, at the ninth hour of
prayer, observe how the Apostles would pray in the old Temple, when there was
no Christian Church built. 1 Cor. 11.
St. Paul rebukes the Corinthians for profaning of their Churches with eating
and drinking, and may not we say to you, as the Apostles does to them, despise
you not the Church of God, ibid.
does not the same St. Paul require that women should hold their peaces in the
Church out of reverence, 1 Cor. 14.25.
and that an unlearned man coming into the Church should falldown upon his
face, should worship God, etc. Now that the building of Churches is acceptable
to God, is evident because it was practiced in the Apostles time, Luke 7.
and the Jews knew that it was acceptable to our Savior, when they told him of
the Centurion, that he loved their Nation and built them a Synagogue. Exodus
23.26.29.30.31.35. etc.
Then how acceptable to God the adorning of Churches must be, I pray you look
upon the sumptuous offerings that were made by the people in the old law
toward the building of their Tabernacle, and the making of costly ornaments
for their Priests, and so for their Temple afterward, and I presume you will
be satisfied. Nay not withstanding the Temple was so richly provided for by
Solomon, Number 27.28, 29. Nehe 10.32.
and in every thing most abounding yet Nehemiah tells us, that the Jews made
ordinances to oblige, and charge themselves yearly, with the third part of a
sheckel for the service of the house of their God, besides their freewill
offerings which were unvalvable. And our Savior discommends not the rich
Temple then in his days, Luke 21.
for taking the poor widows mite, Jos. 21.
toward its encreas and ornament. As for the possessions of the Priests there
was as great a care taken by God, Number. 25
as first we find that Joshuah divided citys amongst the Priests and levites
as the Lord commanded by Moses. And again we find that the Prists and Levits,
had the tithes The first borne the first fruits, Lev. 27.
and great parts of the offerings and sacrifices, for their attendance on the
Tabernacle, Number. 18.
where they served day ly; and all this was by the express precept and
ordinance of God, 2 Kings 12.4, 5.
Then in the Kings we find, that Joash said to the Priests, all the money of
the didicated things that is brought into the house of the Lord, even the money
of every one that passes the account is the money that every one set at: and
all the money that comes into any man's heart to bring into the house of the
Lord, let the Priests take to them etc: 2 Chronicles. 31.4, 5.6, 7, 8, 9, etc.
So Hezekiah commanded the people that dwelt in Jerusalem to give
proportionably to the Priests and Levites, that they might be encouraged in the
law of the Lord, and we find in the Text, that they of Judah and Jerusalem did
bring in so abundantly, that new chambers and granaries were erected to receive
their offerings. Luke 8.2.3.
Jesus Christ himself we know carried always a treasurer or purse-bearer with
him, that was Judas who was to receive and dispose of what was sent to him. And
we find that diverse did minister unto him of their substance, as Joan the wife
of Chusa Herod's Steward, and diverse others. S. Paul is so express in this
point, that I wonder you, or any man can doubt not only that it is a good
devotion, but a necessary duty, to contribute toward their Priests. For he
says, Who goes to warfare any time at his own charges. 1 Cor 9.7, 8, 9, 10,
11, 12, 13, 14.
Who planteth a vineyard and eats not of the fruit thereof. Or who feeds a
flock, and eats not of the milk, of the flock? say I these things as a man,
or says not the Law the same also. For it is written in the law of Moses, thou
shall not muzlle the mouth of the Ox that treads our the corn, does God take
care for Oxen? Or says be altogether for our sakes, for our sakes no doubt
this is written, that he that ploweth should plough in hope, and he that
thresheth in hope should be partaker of his hope. If we have sown unto you
spiritual things, is it a great thing if we shall reap your carnal things.
Do you not know that they which minister about holy things, live of the things
of the Temple, and they which wait at the alter, are partakers with the alter?
Even so has the Lord ordained, that they which preach the Gospel, 1 Timothy 2.
should live of the Gospel etc. Then the same Apostletells, Timothy that a
Bishop must be blamless, the husband of one wife, vigialent, sober of good
behavior, given to hospitallity, apt to teach etc. Now I would fain know how a
Bishop can be hospitable, Acts. 4: 24.25.
if he have not wherewithal. Then in the Acts, we find, how so many as were
possessors of lands or houses sold them, and brought the prices of the things
that were sold, and laid them down at the Apostles feet etc. By what is it
most plain, that in the primitive Church, there were collections for the
sustertation of the clergy in a plentyfull manner, which failing, then
benefices succeeded in their rooms. And to conclude all that we mean to say in
this point, Luke. 10.
our Savior tells you, that the labourer is worthy of his hyre. Mat. 27.25; 26.


As to immunities due to their persons, we shall add only one word or two;
our Savior asks Peter, of whom do the Kings of the earth take tribute, of
their own Children or of strangers, Peter says unto him of straingers, Psalm.
104
Jesus says unto him, then are the Children free. The Psalmist in the person
of God comands thus, not to touch his anointed nor do his Prophets any harm.
And again the same King David says in another place, Who can stretch forth his
hand against the Lords anointed and be guiltless? 1 Samuel 26.1.
This was spoken truly of the unction of a King, but the same must follow upon
the unction of a Priest. Mat. 19. Mar. 9. Mat. 21.
Now that we are not all Priests equally is sufficiently proved in our paper
concerning the Sacrament of holy orders, so shall not he make repetition. Then
for our Canonical hours and prayers we are justified by Scriptures, Luke. 11.
Matt. 6. Mat. 14. Mark. 6. Luk 5.16 Luke 9. Luke 22. Mat. 26. Mar. 14. Mat. 24.
Mar. 13. Matt. 5. Luke. 18. Mat. 26.
innumerable. First the Disciples said to Christ, Lord teach us to pray, and he
said, when ye pray say our Father etc. and then sending away the multitude he
went into a mountain alone for to pray; again, he withdrew himself into the
wilderness and prayed; again, he went into a mountain to pray and he was all
night in prayer to God, again he went up into a mountain to pray, and whilst he
prayed his countenance was changed. Then again kneeling down he prayed saying,
Father if it be thy will let this cup pass from me, and being in his agony he
prayed long, So much for our Saviors practice, as for his precept, observe
first, Pray that your flight be not in the winter, nor on the sabbath day;
again, watch and pray, for ye know not when the time will come, again, pray for
those that persecute you etc. again pray always, and faint not; again, pray
that ye enter not into temptation, then this sort of devils, is not to be cast
out but with prayer and fasting and whatsoever thou shall ask in prayer
beleiving ye shall receive. As for the Apostolical practice of this holy duty
of prayer, every leaf is full of it, as first in the Acts, Acts 1.14.
These all continued with one accord in prayer and supplication with the women
and Mary the Mother of Jesus and with his brethren, Cap. 24.
and again in the same chapter as they prayed, and said, thou Lord which
know the hearts of al! men etc. Acts 4.31.


Again, and when they had prayed the place was shaken where they assembled were
together and they were all filled with the holy Ghost and they spoke the word
of God with boldness; and again, Acts 10.31.
Thy prayer is heard, and thine alms are had in rememberance in the sight of
God. Acts 12.5. Cap. 12.


Peter was kept in prison but prayer was wade without ceasing of the Church
unto God for him and then when he was delivered he came to the house of Mary
the mother of John whose Sir name was Mark where many were gathered together
praying. Acts. 13.3. Acts 14.23.
So again in the next chapter, and when they had fasted and prayed and laid
their hands on them, they they sent them away, and again in the next chapter,
and when they had ordained them elders in every Church and had prayed with
fasting, they commended them to the Lord; on whom they believed. What therefore
the Apostles so earnestly desired to know how to do, Christ himself so expressly
taught and commanded, and perfectly practiced in his own person to give us an
example, his Disciples and all the primitive Christians so faithfully followed,
shall we leave undone now, to satisfy your fanaticall humors, will you see yet
how the Apostles enjoin that duty, Now I beseech you brethren for the Lord
Jesus Christ's sake, Romans 15 30.
and for the love of the Spirit, that ye strive together with me, in your
prayers to God for me. 2 Cor. 1.10.11.
And again to the Corinthians, in whom we trust that he will yet deliver us,
you also helping together by praying for us etc. again to the Philipians be
careful for nothing, Phil. 4.6.
but in every thing by prayer and supplication with thanksgiving, let your
request be made known unto God. 1 These. 1.2.
So to the Thessalonians, we give thanks to God always for you all, making
mention always of you in our prayers remembering without ceasing etc. Clos. 4.2.
So again to the Colossians, continue in prayer, and watch in the same with
thanksgiving withal praying also for us that God would open to us a door of
utterance, to speak the mystery of Christ etc. So again to the Thessalonians
pray for us that the word of the Lord may have free course, and be glorified
etc. 1 These. ^.1. 2 Cor. 1^ 1 Timothy 2.12.
So again to the, Corinthians, we pray God that ye do no ill; but most expressly
to Timothy, he says, I exhort therefore that first of all supplications,
prayers, intercessions, and giving of thanks, be made for all men, for king and
all that are in Authority, that we may lead a quiet and a peaceable life in all
godliness and honesty then adds a little after, I will therefore that men pray
every where, lifting up holy hands without wrath and doubting. Acts 6.4^
Nay that this duty of prayer is the first and grand concernment of a
Christian, see what is said in the persons of all the Apostles, but we will
give our selves continually unto prayer, and to the ministry of the word, it is
very observable how all the Apostles preferred the duty of prayer before
preaching it self. I have picked out these few texts, out of a thousand that
might be produced, for as we said before, every leaf both in old and new
Testament, is full heither of the precept or practice of this holy duty. And as
for the set hours of praying, they are altogether as plainly prescribed to us
in Scripture. Psalm. 118. Dan. 6.10.


The Prophet David tells us, that he did it seven times a day, and Daniel we
find did it three times a day, he went into his house, and his windows being
open in his chamber, toward Jerusalem, he kneeled upon his knees three times a
day and prayed and gave thanks before his God, as he did before time. Acts 3.1^
It is as clear likewise that it was the Apostles practice, Now Peter and John
we ^t up together into the Temple at the hour of prayer being the ninth hour;
Act. 10.9
and again, Peter went up upon the house to pray about the sixth hour. So of
this we conceive enough said, and from your godly Church-work, we will pass to
your goodly State work.

To what you allege against the lawfulness of making war against Turks, Jews,
or Heriticks, or persecution of any for conscience, and against making of war
at all, or bearing of Civil Magistracy as Government, or giving or taking of
Oaths; we answer thus.
To the First.
We say, that though God does visit our sins upon us by the Turks, Jews,
Heriticks, etc. yet we are not forbidden to make our own defenses. Otherwise
when he does visit us by famine, pestilence, fire, or any other way, it would
be unlawful to make any provision for our selves, as to lay in any store
against famine, any medicine against diseases, or to fly from the plague. But
we know that God so visits us, as not to forsake us, Psalm. 88.
for so the Psalmist tells us, I will visit their iniquity with rods, and
their sins with scourges, but I will not take my mercy quite away, etc. And as
to our fighting with prayers, we do confess it the duty of every good soldier
to pray frequently, yet to take his Arms in hand likewise, with Joshua, Gedion,
David, and the Maccabees, for we find that Moses prayed, but Joshuah fought
against Amalech; Exo. 17.
so let those that cannot sight pray, and those that fight pray too, so they
may obtain doubtless the easier victory.

To the Second.
We grant that our Savior commands us not to resist evil, but that command
sure is not absolute, that we should never resist evil, but so often as we are
struck on one side to offer the other also, for then neither Christ nor his
Apostles had been so perfect: for Christ, when he was struck on one side before
the Chief Priest, did not turn the other, but rather resisted by a rebuke, If I
have spoken well, Joh. 18.23. Acts 23.3.
why strikest thou me? if evil bear witness of the evil? So S. Paul likewise,
when by the command of the Chief Priest he was struck, replied, the Lord will
smite thee, thou whited wall. So then those words of our Savior must be
understood, that we resist not evil, that is, that we seek not our own private
revenge, but should be rather ready to offer up the other cheek, that is; to
receive another injury, rather than to revenge any. Nor can it any way follow
from hence, that war is unlawful, for the invader, as well as the defender,
ought not to make war out of any private affection, to revenge, but out of a
right intention for the public good, otherwise war must be unlawful indeed.

To the Third.
We find two parts of your argument to be answered to, the first is, Christ's
command to Peter, Put up thy Sword again into his place, then give us leave to
tell you, that Christ speaks not of war at all, but meekly reprehends Peter for
these reasons: first, because all the Apostles had asked leave to strike and
healone without staying for Christ's answer, drew his Sward, and wounded a
servant of the High Priests. Secondly, because it was a rash and indiscrect
thing, that one man should assault such a multitude of armed men. Thirdly
because if it had been necessary, our Savior could have commanded Angels to
have so defended him, as he tells him, I can ask the Father, and he will send
me more then twelve legions of Angels, etc. Fourthly, because he would not have
his death hindered, as he said, The Cup which the Father has given me will thou
not that I drink? All this hinders not, but that war may notwithstanding be
lawful, if the just conditions of war be observed. The second part of your
argument consists in those words, both out of the Gospel and Apostle, he that
kills with the Sword, must perish or be killed with the Sword, which cannot
be understood simply to be true, for we know the contrary, and that many bloody
men die in their beds; but both our Savior and the Apostle, allege an old Law
out of the Text, whosoever shall shed man's blood, his blood shall be also shed,
Genesis 9.6. Leviticus 24.17.
and whosoever shall strike a man so as he dies, let him die the death: Now
that murderers are to die by the law, hinders nothing but war may be lawful:
for otherwise it must have been unlawful under the old Testament, for then the
Law was made against Homicides. Now the difference between homecide, and a
lawful war, if you know not, we will tell you, the one is committed against the
public laws of God and man, as well against common justice, as the Decalogue,
it must be therefore unlawful. The other is undertaken for the defense of
public justice, and to keep off, or repay a public injury, and that sure by
all laws of God and nature, must be lawful.

To the Fourth.
I would fain know of you, what Prince or Emperor did then believe in Christ,
whose aid the Apostles might have implored against Heretics, it was not that
the Heretics then did not deserve it, but because the swords of the Princes
and Emperors then were shut up in Pagan sheathes, but when they came to serve
the Gospel under Constantine, then the Christians besought them upon all such
occasions; and to what you say, that Heretics are to be conquered with the
sword of the spirit, that is, 1 Pet. 3.
the word of God, it is true that S. Peter teaches us to be ready to give an
account to every one that asks it, of the faith that is in us, and yet S. Paul
advises us, Tit. 3.10, 11.
to reject a Heritick after the first and second admonition, and gives the
reason, knowing that he is subverted, and sins, being condemned of himself.
We beseech you therefore look to your self, and all your party, that you do not
dispute out of Scriptures, against known faith.

To the Fifth.
It is plain, that our Savior only would not that one Tares should be pulled
up, to endanger the Wheat, for so he explaines himself after, Mat. 18.
least whilst ye pull up the Tares, ye pull up the Wheat also. We grant also,
that heresies must be, but yet there is a woe pronounced to him, by whom they
are, and that must too, implies no absolute necessity, but a conditional one,
as they are foreknown to God, so must be: or else a necessity of the end, which
the Apostle implies, that they who are approved may be made manifest: this
proves nothing against the punishing of a notorious Heritick.

To the Sixth.
We answer, that when our Savior said, but ye shall not be so, he did not
forbid civil Magistracy, but only instructed his Apostles, that they being to
be the future Pastors of souls should not meddle with secular businesses, nor
dominear after the manner of secular Lords, but rather that they should attend
their own charges, and become patterns of humility to all; and so in like
manner when the Apostle tells us, that there is but one Lord, one Faith, one
Baptism, he excludes not Kings and Princes, or other secular Lords, Romans 13.6.
but only a plurality of Gods, for there is but one God, who is King of Kings,
and Lord of Lords, whose Ministers all other Kings and Lords are.

To the Seventh.
We say that in those Texts you urge, the use of swearing is not forbidden, but
the abuse of it: and that consists plainly in swearing vainly, and in business
of no moment, and in calling God to witness, a thing without evident necessity,
which is against the reverence that is due to God, this abuse only Christ
forbids in these words, but I say unto you, swear not at all, that is, Exodus
20.7. Deuteronomy. 10.
without necessity ye shall not swear at all, and this is explained in other
Texts. Thou shall not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain; and again,
thou shall not mention the name of God lightly, or to no purpose, now by these
two words in vain, and lightly, or to no purpose, it is plain, that it is only
forbid so to do rashly, vainly, or without necessity. Now give us leave to
reply.

That it is lawful to make war against Turks, Jews, or Heriticks, upon a
reasonable and lawful occasion, or to punish them, and that Christians may
make war, and bear Civil Magistracy, yea, give and take Oaths, We prove by
Scripture thus.
First, As to the matter of war, it is plain, that when the Soldiers came to
St. John Baptist, and asked him what they should do, Luke 3.14.
he answered them, do violence to no man, neither accuse any falsely, and be
content with your wages; here it is plain, he forbid them not their trade,
which was to go to war, but taught them how to do it honestly.

S. Paul tells the Romans, Romans 13.
that Kings and Supreme powers carry not the sword in vain.

The Children of Israel we know got the possession of the Land of Promise by an
open war, of Gods own appointment, as is abundantly to be seen in the Books of
Joshuah, Judges, and Kings. Nay the Lord commanded them to have a continual war
against Infidells, for so we find in the Book of Judges. Now these Nations the
Lord left, to prove Israel by them, even as many of Israel as had not known all
the wars of Canaan, Judge. 3.1, 2.
only that the generation of the Children of Israel might know, to teach them
war, at the least such as before knew nothing thereof. Observe, I pray you the
great care the Almighty took, to teach the Children of Israel the art of war.

Observe again, the strict command that Samuel, by Gods command, gives to
Saul: Now go and smite Amaleek, 1 Samuel 15.3.
and utterly destroy all they have, and spare them not, but slay both man and
woman, infant and suckling, ox and sheep, camel and ass. This was you will say a
severe command and commission for war. Indeed the whole Old Testament is so
full of instances, how the Jews by the command and assistance of God, did not
only resist Infidells, but invade them, as in Abraham, Mases, Joshuah, etc.
that it would be us endless as needless to make a recital of them: Jer. 48.
Nay, we find high words in Prophet Jeremy, cursed be he that refrains his
sword from blood; and to sum up all this, that the trade of war is and must be
lawful, is plain, that God himself does own it, as to be the Patron and
defender of it, and calls himself therefore the Lord of Hosts, and when the
Pharisees asked our Savior whether it was lawful to pay tribute to Caesar,
which was for to pay soldiers wages, he answered them, give to Caesar the
things which are Cesars.

In the next place, we prove that it is lawful to punish Heretics, now the
first punishment that is spoken of in Scripture, is excommunication, and that
is plain out of St. Matthew, Mat. 18.
If he bear not the Church, let him be unto thee as a Heathen. and a Publican,
that is, let him be separated from the Church by excommunication; so in the
place before quoted out of S. Paul to Titus, Tit. 3. 2 Thessalonians. 3 2 John 2.
so to the Thessalonians, so S. John, which for brevity sake I forbear to
recite.

The next punishment to be inflicted upon Heretics as enemies to God is death,
and first it is plain out of the Old Testament, Deuteronomy. 13.5.
And that Prophet, or that dreamer of dreams, shall be put to death, because he
has spoken to turn you away from the Lord your God, etc. Then again in the
next chapter it is said, That he that shall grow proud, Deuteronomy. 14.
and refuse to obey the commands of the Priest, who at that time ministers to
the Lord, he was to die the death by sentence of the Judge, that the evil might
be taken from Isaael. The reason of this Law holds still, that the evil may be
taken out of the Church. And again, in the same Book it is expressly said, that
the Prophet who shall arrogantly dare to deliver in Gods name, Deuteronomy. 18.
what he had not commanded him to say, or anything else in the name of any
other Gods, Levit. 24.
should be put to death.

Then Blasphemers were to be led out of the Tents, 1 Kings 18.
and stoned to death, and why not Heritics? so we find Elias the Prophet of the
Lord, killed the Prophets of Baal.

Then as to the New Testament, we find our Savior calls false Prophets or
Heriticks Wolves in Sheeps clothing, Matt. 7.
but within were ravenous Wolves now such ought to be killed if the safety of
the flock cannot otherwise consist. Acts 20.
So S. Paul says, that he knew that ravenous Wolves would enter, not sparing
the flock, such therefore ought to be put to death.

If Jesus Christ whipped the mony-changers out of the Temple, John 2.
what should he do if he were in the earth, to the Heriticks that are in his
Church?

Ananias and Saphira, in the beginning of Christianity, Acts 5.
for a little diffembling in matter of money, were put to death, how ought they
to be used then that make it their business to cozen and cheat Christians of
their souls, nay to defraud God of them.

Last of all St. Paul charge the Galatians, Galat. 4. 2 Cor. 10.
and Corinthians too, to be in readiness to prosecute and punish all
disobedience, and in another place speaks it out plainly, Galat. 5.
I would they were even cut off that trouble you; so enough we conceive said as
to this.

Then that it is lawful to bear civil magistracy, is first plain out of our
Saviors words, Matt 22.21.
render to Caesar the things which are Cesars, and to God the things which are
Gods, by those words he does suficiently justify all civil Authority. But S.
Romans 13.1.2.3.4. etc.
Paul in that whole chapter to the Romans most expressly asserts it, Let every
soul be subject unto the higher powers, for there is no power but of God, the
powers that be are ordained by God, whosoever therefore resists the power,
resists the ordinance of God, and after that again he says, the Magistrate
bears not the sword in vain, for he is the minnister of God, a revenger unto
wrath unto him that does evil etc. Again to Timothy he says, 1 Timothy 2.1.
I exhort therefore, that first of all supplications; prayers, intercessions,
and giving of thanks be made for all men: For Kings and all in Authority etc.
Tit. 3.1. 1 Pet. 2 27.
Yet again to Titus he says, put them in mind; to be subject to
principalities and powers to obey rulers etc. and St. Peter commands us
expressly to fear God and honer the Kings.

Now last of all that a lawful oath may be lawfully taken and given, is plain
by Apostolical practice, for we find that S. Paul did very frequently swear,
which he should never have done, Romans 1.19. 2 Cor. 1.23. Phil. 1.8. 1 Timothy 5.21.
if swering had been absolutely forbiden (...) our Savior, as you pretend it
was.

First to the Romans he says, God is my witness Then to the Corinthians he says
I call God for a record upon my soul, Then to the Philipians again God is my
witness, or God is my Record, how greatly I long after you all, in the bowels
of Jesus Christ; and then again to Timothy, I charge thee before God and the
Lord Jesus Christ and all the elect Angels, etc. and to close up all this
pitiful controversy, Heb. 6.26.
the same St. Paul affirms in his Epistle to the Hebrews, that every
controversy ought to be ended by an Oath: and accordingly this practice has
obtained all over Christendom, and ever since the beginning of Christianity,
that in all judgments and Tribunals, when a man cannot clear his innocence by
witness, he ought to attest it by his Oath, and then the controversy cease.
By all these Texts that we have produced out of Scripture, it is most plain to
any reasonable man, that it is only, as we said before in our answers to your
arguments, that the abuse of Oaths is forbidden, not the use of them.

To what you aledge against the Baptism of infants, and the character impressed
upon the souls of Christians by Baptism, we answer thus.
To the first.
It is plain that in both those gospels, both of St. Mathewe and St. Marked, our
Saviuor only speaks of those that are grown, and for that you urge, that to
believe and be baptized is (...) enough for our Savior requires that the
person before baptism should be taught, and made to keep the commandments of
God; we answer again that Children are taught and believe, and keep the
commandments of God, by others, that is their God Fathers and God Mothers, as
they did contract the sin by others, which in baptism is forgiven in the same
manner; the Church lends her motherly mouth, to promise for the teaching and
nursing of these little ones, which cannot confess with their own mouths the
Lord Jesus, nor can believe in their own hearts to Salvation, as the Apostle
expresses it. And if they may be called faithful, because they profess the
faith, by the mouths of those that hold them and answer for them, why may they
not also be reputed penitents, when by their mouths likewise that hold them,
they do renounce the world, and the Devil. Now the reason of all this is plain
to sense, for the Spiritual regeneration, holds great proportion, with the
carnal generation, especially in this, for as children in their mothers wombs,
Romans 10.9.
do not take nourishment themselves, by themselves, but are sustained by the
nourishment of their mothers. So children not having yet the use of reason,
being as it where in the womb of the Church, do not by themselves, but by the
Churches action, receive Salvation, and so the faith of others, that is of the
Church, their Parents, and God Fathers offering them up to Baptism, is
sufficient for their Salvation, as the faith of those which offered the man
sick of the palsy to our Saviors cure, was the means of his recovery, Matt. 8.
Matt. 9. Mat. 15.
and the forgiveness of his sins for our Savior seeing their faith, said, Son
thy sins are forgiven thee. So the faith of the Centurion obtained health for
his son, and the faith of the Caananitish woman obtained for her daughter the
dispossession of the Devil.

To the second.
We say that what you urge of Philip and Cornelius makes nothing to our purpose
for they were grown men, so ought to be taught and have the Gospel preached to
them.

To the Third.
To your grand argument out of reason, we answer and return it thus upon you.
Reprobates are not to be baptized, but many grown men are reprobates, therefore
all grown men are not to be baptized. It is altogether So as strong against,
you as against us.

To the fourth.
To what you so learnedly urge out of antiquity that the ancient primitive
Christians did administer baptism but thrice a year, therefore children so
soon as they were born were not to be baptized. We will grant you more than
that, for it was administered but twice a year, and that was in the time of
Easter and Whit-suntide, but that was the solemn baptism for those that were
grown, and taught by a long course of Catechizing. and in that the primitive
Church, did rightly observe the order that was prescribed by our Savior Jesus
Christ, which was this, first to instruct them that were to be baptized, in the
faith, Secondly to teach them to keep the commandment of God. 3ly. To baptize
them, but this order we say was only to be observed with those that were grown
and capable of such instruction, and in this we conceive by all your main
mistakes.

To the Fifth.
That there is not a word in Scripture concerning the baptism of infants, we
utterly do deny, and shall anon prove to the contrary, as also that it was the
invention of Pope Nicholas is altogether as false, but as bad antiquaries as we
are, we will prove it to have been a constant practice in the Church in S.
Ieroms, S. Augustins and S. Cyprians time, that were before Pope Nicholas, four
hundred, and Six hundred years,

To the Sixth
We answer as for the character imprinted on the soul by baptism that gives
you so much offense, it is no feigned thing by the Fathers as you pretend, but
those men of God have always so understood it, by the instruction of the Holy
Ghost, and out of the letter of Scripture, as we shall show you anon more
largely.

To the Seventh.
We say that by your favor, it is no such ridiculous thing, that water by the
assistance of divine grace should make such a character or impression on the
soul. It is not we say water, but God that makes such an impression by the
means of baptismall water, his divine omnipotency assisting that Sacrament: and
in this point Christians have a privilege over the Jews, for we have the mark
and impression of the spirit on our souls, but they had it only in the flesh of
their bodies, so give us leave to reply again, and we shall conclude.

That the Baptism of Infants is lawful, and by it there is a character
impressed upon Christian souls; we prove by Scripture thus.
First, we find expressly in Genesis that Children are capable of the Covenant
of Grace, for the Lord says there, This is my Covenant, which ye shall keep
between me and you, and thy seed after thee, every man-child amongst you shall
he circumcised, Genesis 17.10.14.
etc. And then afterward it is said, and the uncircumcised manchild, whose
flesh of his foreskin is not circumcised, that soul shall be cut off from his
people, he has broken my Covenant, etc. If Children are capable of breaking the
Covenant, then they are also of keeping it, and Baptism is the same in the
Church, that Circumcision was in the Synagogue, for as by Circumcision the
Jewish Infants were included in the divine Covenant, so Christian Infants sure
are not to be excluded from the Covenant of Grace, wherefore Infants are to be
baptized, and those that are not so, are in danger of damnation.

All this is plainly made good by our blessed Savior in the Gospells, where we
find, that they brought young Children to him, that he should touch them, but
his Disciples rebuked them that brought them, but when Jesus saw it he was much
displeased, and said to them, Mar. 10.13, 14.16.
Suffer little Children to come unto me, and forbid them not, for of such is
the Kingdom of God, and he took them in his arms, put his hands upon them and
blessed them, etc. How can your Sect therefore justify to hinder little
Children to come unto Christ?

Our Savior again in St. Matthews Gospel, commands his Apostles to baptize
all Nations, Mat. 28.19.
you must therefore grant Children to be included as a part of those Nations.

St. 1 Cor. 11.1, 2.
Paul plainly requires the Corinthians not to be ignorant of this, and tells
them, how that all our Fathers were under the Cloud, and all passed thorough
the Sea, and were all baptized unto Moses in the Cloud, and in the Sea. Now it
is certain that the Infants were as well in the cloud, and in the Sea, as their
Fathers were, and were so also figuratively baptized

Again S. Heb. 6.4.6.
Paul has a remarkable passage in his Epistle to the Hebrews, which is this,
For it is impossible for those who were once enlightened, and have tasted of
the heavenly gift, and were made partakers of the holy Ghost etc. If they shall
fall away to renew them unto repentance. This must be understood of the
renewing by baptism, which cannot be reiterated; not of repentance, which we
know may be, though you, and some other Heretics deny it, and from thence
infer a renovation of Baptism.

Again to the Romans, for if through the offense of one many be dead, Romans
5.15, 16, 17, 18, 19.
much more by the grace of God and the gift by grace, which is by on man Jesus
Christ has abounded unto many, and a little after says, as by one man's
offense death reigned, by one, much more shall life by one Jesus Christ, and
again as by one man's disobedience many were made sinners, So by the obedience
of one, shall many be made righteous, from hence we infer, that as both men and
childeren were capable of death by Adams fall, so both men and children are
capable of a regeneration by Christ. 1 Cor. 15.20. Romans 6.
This the Apostle confirms again to the Corinthians, when he tells them, for
as in Adam all dye (that is children as well as men) even so in Christ shall
all be made alive (that is children too as well as men) and that is by
baptism, by which we are all incorporated into Christ as the same Apostle
says in another place.

Then we find that the Apostles did usually baptize whole families and
households, Ags 16.14.
as in the Acts Lydia was baptized and her household, and St. Paul says, he
baptized the household of Stephanus etc. 1 Cor. 1.16.
now in those households there were undoubtedly children too, and this has been
always so universally practiced in the Church, that no sober Christians can
doubt the truth of it.

And if there be yet any room for a doubt, be pleased to take this argument
along with you. Whoever are capable of justifying grace may by Sanctifying
grace be freed from original Sin, and so by consequence must be capable of the
remedy of original sin, and that is biptisme: b^t infants are capable of
justifying grace, as is plain in the example of S. John Baptist, of whom it is
said that he was sanctified and filled with the holy Ghost from his mothers
womb. Therefore sure children must be thought capable of the remedy against
original sin, and that is baptism. So now I shall proceed to prove some thing
of the character imprinted on our souls by Baptism, which it seems gives your
party so much scandal.

Now that this character of ours is plainly prefigured and spoken of in the old
Testament, as first in Exodus, Exodus 12 7.
where we find that the blood of the Lamb, was to be sprinkled on the two
sideposts, and on the uper dore-posts of the houses, where the passover was to
be eaten that so the destroying Angel might pass them by. So Christ in
Baptism, by the merit of his blood, does sign the side posts, and uper door
posts of our souls, that they may be preserved from the malice of the devil.

Again, we find that this Christian character of ours, was perfectly prefigured
in the mark which Ezekiel speaks of, Ez. 9.4. by Gods command, v. 6. And the
Lord said unto him, go through the midst of Jerusalem, and set T. a mark upon
the foreheads of the men that sigh, and that cry for all the abomination, that
be done in the midst thereof, and a little after, when the Lord commanded to
slay utterly both old and young, both maids and little children, but charged
them not to come near any one upon whom was the mark, you may observe by the
way, that the mark was to be set upon young as well as old and little children
too, to be preserved from the hands of the destroyer, and that mark T then
spoken of, is presumed by all the learned, to be the Tipe of our character in
Baptism. Then this mark is most clearly prophesied of, and expressed by the
Prophet Isay 66.18, 19. where speaking of the conversion of the Gentiles, and
the future glory and sanctity of the Christian Church, he says, It shall come
that I will gather all nations and tongues, and they shall come and see my
glory, and I will set a sign among them, and I will send those that escape of
them unto the Nations to Tarshith, Pull, and Lud, that draw the bow, to Tubal,
and Javan, and the Isles afar off, that have not heard my fame, neither have
seen my glory, and they shall declare my glory among the Gentels. Hear the
Prophet plainly forsees and prophesies the sending of the Apostles and
Disciples into Africa and Jndia, as well as Europe and that this sign or
character which we treat of, shall be established amongst all Christians:

But now the new Testament is so plain and express in this point that we admire
how any knowing Christian can dispute it. First St. Paul says to the
Ephesians. 1.13 14. in whom also after that ye believed, ye were sealed with
the holy Spirit of promise, which is the earnest of our inheritance etc. by
which text it is evident that the faithful in the regeneration of Baptism are
signed, sealed, and marked by the holy Ghost, that the sheep of Jesus Christ
may be known and distinguished from others.

Again the same Apostle repeats in the same Epistle Ephesians. 4.30 Grieve not the
holy Spirit of God whereby ye are sealed unto the day of redemption, that
sealing of the holy Ghost is the only character that we speak of, and which is
seems, gives you so much scandal

St. John. in like manner is very large in his discourse upon this sealing of a
Christian, in his whose book of his Revelation 7.2 3. but particularly in one
place produces, an Angel ascending out of the East and having the seal of the
living God, crying with a loud voice to the four Angels, to whom it was given
to hurt the earth and the Sea, and saying hurt not the earth neither Sea, nor
the treas, till we have sealed the servants of our God in their foreheads, what
is that seal I pray but our most sacred Christian Character, which we receive
in Baptism?

Thus we weak women have been bold, M. R. to show you some of our little skill
in Scripture, by offering to your serious consideration these sew Texts. not
doubting but your better Bible abilities, will soon furnish you with more. If
your own obstanency of Spirit, which you call Text-fastness, will permi^ to you
a right understanding For it is impossible, that any one who keeps so contant a
reading and conversation in Scripture, as most of you do, should not be
satisfied in what is there declared against all sorts of such Phanatick
Spirits, unless they be resolved, as (it is to be feared) most of you are, to
prejudicate, nay to violate the sense of the holy Spirit it self. You know none
are so blind, as they that are so wilfully, nor so ignorant as they that will
not understand, from which perversity, if not reprobation of sense we do humbly
pray Allmighty God to deliver you, and all other missed Souls of mistaking
Christians, and give you all that humility and resignation of Spirit, as is
requifit for all those that will grow in grace, and in the knowledge of Jesus
Christ and his holy word. So fa^e you well, and believe that we are.

M. R. Your friends in Christ. M. N.

FINIS.

