AN ELEGY Upon the Honorable Colonel Thomas Rainsbrough, butchered at
Doncaster Sunday the 29. October. 1648.
T'VVas like your selves brave Royallists, such a blow,
As n'ere a subject of that Prince below
Great Pluto's sacred Majesty durst own.
But you are bolder Devils; and have shown
By this one barbarous act worse Furies dwell
Within your breast then in the talked of Hell,
The powers of darkness, in your heads, strange fires
Of Lust within your veins; thirsting desires
For blood of Innocents; rapines, butcheries,
Wrath, malice, thousand oaths, ten thousand lies:
These are flesh of your flesh, bone of your bone*
And if these be not Devils there are none.
When the bold Cymbrian was sent to kill
Great Caius Marius; he went less in ill:
Durst not his hands in innocence imbrew:
Cymbrians are Saints (dear Cabs) compared with you.
But can the Dragons tail prevail so far
As to sweep down to th'dust of death a star
Of such a magnitude? such rays? whose sphaeare
was in the heart of God, and only there?
Will not bold Atheists question providence
And conclude against a Deity from hence?
Is there a righteous God? and could he see,
A naked, single valor, charged by three
Armed furies, and not draw his own, nor lend
A sword into the hand of such a friend?
Forsaken valor! whether will thou fly
For succor, when both heaven and earth deny
To be thy second? But stop stop my soul:
Heavens ways are just: earth may not heaven control
What if Heaven purposed Rainsbroughs fall to be
A prop for Englands dying Liberty?
And did in Love thus suffer one to fall
That Charles by Treaty might not ruin all?
For who will expect that Treaty should do good
Whose longer date commenc't in Rainsbroughs blood?
See noble Fairfax, and bold Cromwell see
What honors are prepared for thee, and thee.
Conclude a peace with Charles; thus you shall ride
Triumphant, with your robes of Scarlet di'de
In your own dearest blood: thus your Arrears
You noble souls are paid; the Tyrants fears
Thus cured: thus (if you be not wise) you will feel
In stead of Gold he will pay you all with steel.
Then let us adore that providence whose ways,
And works, do all proclaim aloud his praise.
And thou great Victim who wa'st set apart
For us, shall find a Tomb in every heart
That is not prostituted to the Lust
Of a right Reverend or Royal dust:
And on that Tomb which does such valor hold
This Epitaph shall stand in lines of Gold.
EPITAPHIVM.
Here lies as much true valor, as could dye:
A sacrifice for Englands Liberty.
Great, and Good Rainsborough, (enough is said)
Through Chomleys pride and Cowardice betrayed.
J. T.


