TEN necessary QUAERIES Touching the Personal Treaty Very useful and
necessary to be considered. ALSO A Right Description of a Cavalier: WITH Some
drops to quench the fiery Bull of COLCHESTER.

BY JAMES TASVVELL, a true lover of King, Parliament, Truth and Peace.

LONDON, Printed by R. I. for A. H. 1648.

Ten QVERIES Touching the Personal Treaty.
PRay take into consideration whether all those specious pretenses coined by
the Malignant party, in order to make a peace, are not only cloakes to cover
their design; and whether all tenders made by the Parliament, though only
tending to peace, and the safety of the people, have not ever been slieghted,
and no agreement liked, but that of their own proposing, though they never yet
gave any good account for their decenting, save only because it was, and have
been proposed by the Parliament; and whether they only fear the tying of
their mutinous hands thereby? or what else is it that keeps them from complying
and joining with the Parliament, they being all men that are sworn to do the
whole Kingdom right, and which were once thought the fittest to be confided
in, also they are men of their familiar acquaintance, and near to many of them
in blood, and all of one and the same reformed Protestant Religion, by outward
profession; nay and many of the opposers have by Covenant also promised to be
the same in all circumstances? or whether do they believe the Parliament will
contrary to their oath, and solemn Covenant impose, and the Synod coin a
Religion false and damnable to themselves, of purpose to cross other men
thereby; yet the Parliament and Synod are not so well conceited of the
accutenesse of their own judgments, as to think they can reform immediately
and perfectly according to the word and will of God, and therefore (for which
they are much to be commended) have made some provision for tender consciences.
But their enemies indeed having no just cause to complain, do for want of a
better accusation, charge them with robbing the subject by imposition of taxes,
etc. Is this charge true, or do they occasion the Parliament to impose those
taxes, to maintain a power in the Kingdom, to suppress their rebellions, and
their enemies which are the Plaintiffes? do not they occasion them still to
continue the same force in the field, and otherwise to preserve the peace of
the Kingdom, to the expense of many hundred thousand pounds; and whereas they
say the Parliament robs the Kingdom by taxes, it was but lately they
themselves were guilty of imposing the like, and as many taxes for their uses,
and had they the like power as they again earnestly strive for, whether they
will not impose the like again, and the same, and more then the Parliament
does.

Object. But they ask how the Parliament is enforced by them to continue such
force in the field, they desire rather that the subject may be eased, to
purchase which, is the chief cause of their stirring.

Answ. Indeed you so pretend, to delude the people, but your actions discover
the contrary, witness your often provoking the Parliament, by coming to the
door of the House, threatening them that if they durst deny what they required
of them, they would cudgel them into a better disposition, and not only so,
but you have also offered violence to their persons, in so much that their
lives have been endangered, witness the action of the City, 1647. causing the
Parliament to fetch an Army for their guard, (before which time you saw the
Parliaments readiness to disband, so that if they deserved blame at all, it
was rather for disbanding too fast) and now again the Essex men, under
pretense of a Petition, all which you have done only to pick a quarrel with
the Parliament to find an occasion to raise Arms, and having no just cavell,
nor fair pretense, they begin it in plain terms without either; witness
the Kentish men, raising thirty or forty thousand men in Arms to present a
Petition to the House, belike they intended to present it after some new and
strange manner, all which men took the field, before any Petition was drawn,
and therefore it was before they knew whether it would be refused or not; and
when the General demanded what they intended by their so drawing together,
they answered scornfully, and engage to fight with him, doubtless the General
would not have stopped their proceedings, had it been only to deliver a
Petition, nor had they need to have fled into Colchester to have garrisoned it
for their defense, had all their business been only to deliver a Petition: I
might instance several insurrections in diverse parts of the Kingdom, and
seizing on several Garrisons, all plainly manifests their intentions; and
whether it be the Parliament that injureth the subject by taxes, or whether it
be themselves, by enforcing the Parliament to maintain an Army to enforce
their obedience to the Law and government.

But they have gotten a new pretense, saying, If we might have the King come to
a personal Treaty, we would be all quiet. To which I answer.

Query I. Whether they may not accuse themselves most justly for the
nonrestauration of the King ere this time? and whether if they had not busled
so, and been so eager for it? whether the King had not signed the Propositions
long since, and so have been in Statu quo prius?

Query II. Whether the Parliament have not descended as low as possibly safety
will permit, in composing the Propositions, and drawing them into only three,
and they so easy, as tends only to the safety of the people, and peace of
the Kingdom, neither incroaching on the Kings Prerogative, nor advancing their
own private ends?

Query III. Touching the Militia: Whether it can be prejudicial to the honor
of the King to assure his Subjects by all ways and means he can, that they
shall live in safety? And whether in reason such assurance ought not to be
given, since the Arms, Ammunition, Castles, Ships, etc. are bought and provided
by the Subject wholly for their safety and defense.

Query IV. Touching Church government; since the Parliament does not intend to
make the signing this Proposition a lasting binding, but rather apply it as a
present settlement, in a case of necessity: whether the King may not
notwithstanding all former pretenses to the contrary, join with them without
prejudice? and whether in such time, these jarring and discenting spirits might
not apparently discover their errors, and become calmer and more pliable to
be reduced, or else more clearly manifest the truth of their tenets, whereby a
continued government might also the better be considered and agreed on, and
more easily settled to, and by the consent of all parties, then at present it
can be? and whether much strife and controversy might not thereby be quenched?
and whether in that time his Majesty's Divines might not by conference with
other, be made sensible of their failings, and so be reduced? or whether they
might not (as happily they conceive) discover the errors of our Divines, or at
least that all men might thereby have opportunity thereby to hear and know
what each party can say in defense of their cause? and whether that might not
prove the nearest way to satisfy all those which have an over-weaning conceit
of the adverse party, and also of all descenting persons? also whether the King
and Parliament might not thereby have opportunity to hear all controversies
discoursed, and so might establish that which brought best evidence with it?
and whether would it be requisite that such settlement or government as should
at present be agreed on, should stand irrevocable, until another government
should at present be agreed on by King and Parliament, so we should have a
government at present, and also be in a condition to embrace another, when it
should be presented by the authority aforesaid?

Query V. Touching the Kings recalling his Votes and Declarations against the
Parliament, and the disclayming all such wherein he has proclaimed the
Parliament Rebels and Traitors.

Whether the King ought not to vouchsafe the Parliament equal or as much
favor as the Irish Rebels, in that he formerly likewise proclaimed the Irish,
Rebels and Traitors, and doubtless not without just cause, and that not Rebels
of the meanest sort neither, in that they made the King himself, the author
of their Rebellion, by saying, they had his Broad-seale for it, which if the
King to lessen their guilt should acknowledge, whether he would not then
confirm these jealousies formerly taken up against himself? and whether it
would have been more honorable for the King, though some way it might have
been prejudicial to have joined with his Parliament here, being in part near
allied to him in blood, and of one and the same Religion, or at least so
pretended to be, then to join with a so much despised Nation, as the Irish
against his Parliament, to whom he was so nearly engaged and conserved; but
this by the by: I say again, that notwithstanding his so proclayming them, he
after owneth them again, and calls them his good subjects? whether may not
the King do the like as well by the Parliament? and whether the Parliament
under the notion of Rebels and Traitors, are in a capacity to treat with the
King or not? and whether the King must not of necessity repute them free
subjects before s^a Treaty; and if of necessity that must be done before the
Treaty, whether the King may not, if he intend to do it at all, do it as well
in the Isle of Wight, as when he comes to London? and also why in these times
of danger, the King should urge the Parliament to let him come first to treat
before he sign (if he intended to be real) and so desire the Parliament to
run so great a hazard and task, for a thing no more available to him, and of
such dangerous consequence to them?

Query VI. Whether if the Parliament should adventure all the blood and
treasure which has been hitherto expended, at this one cast, on the Kings bare
word (nay and he scarce passing that?) whether the Kingdom might not justly
charge the Parliament with the breach of trust?

Query VII. Whether the King may not at his coming to his pretended Treaty
give commission, or only intimate, which would be warrant enough for some of
his violent, headlong accomplices, whom we see are so inconsiderately eager to
act for him, as that they would desire no better warrant then for his Majesty
to hold up his finger to them? and so whether this pretended Treaty may not be
made an opportunity to make a further breach with the Parliament? and whether
there be not some just cause given for this doubt, by his Majesty's
unwillingnesse to afford the Parliament any kind of security which lies in
him to withhold from them?

Query VIII. Whether it be not to be doubted, that the King has some unseen
design against the Parliament, in that he and his accomplices endeavors to
remove themselves from under the protection of the Parliament? and whether it
be to stand on their own guards in this Kingdom, or to convey the person of
his Majesty out of this Kingdom? whether either of these two things (one of
which must be their intent) are not like to be prejudicial to the Kingdom in
a very high nature? and whether this action of his Majesty be not sufficient to
cause the Parliament and their adherents to doubt, whether the King has such a
desire to compose these differences by a personal Treaty, as many would make
us believe he has? and whether the coming of his Majesty into, or near the
City, may not be the nearest way to finish what he desires?

Query IX. Whether the Parliament, what dangers soever presents themselves, are
not bound in conscience, by reason of the trust imposed on them by the
Kingdom, as also by their Oath and solemn Covenant which they have taken, to
stand with the hazard of their lives and fortunes, for the maintenance, and
defense of that which appears unto their judgments and consciences, to be
most just and safe, from which if they should be deterred by threatening
dangers, and so should imbezzle the Subjects privileges, and bereave them of
their right? whether it may not be a burden to their souls in the day of their
accounts defore Almighty God?

Query X. Whether if the Parliament should by unexpected violence be surprised,
whilst they lie under the brand of Rebellion and Treason, and the King set up
by the sword? whether I say, they and all their adherents, should not be
forthwith proceeded against as Rebels and Traitors, they being already
condemned by such as doubtless would as willingly proceed to execution, had
they but power? and whether when the verduit was past, it were not by the
approbation of those Lawyers which would be in highest seats, and courts of
judicature in the Kingdom, were the King brought in as is endeavored (I mean
if any Courts at all were kept?) and then whether these men which so adjudged
and condemned the Parliament, and all that did adhere to them, when they had no
power over them, and when it was but disputable whom should prevail, either
the King or Parliament? whether I say these men should now contradict
themselves of their own accord, and confess themselves in an error for so
censuring the Parliament? or whether they would when they had power so to do,
be more violent then ever, and desirous to proceed to execution? and whether it
may be done lawfully or not lawfully, that is all one, the King has declared
them Rebels; and what Law shall contradict that now, which could not
contradict it then, when the King had not the like power which now he may have;
also all that shall sit in Judicature then, shall be men of the Kings own
judgment, and then which of them will say to his Majesty, this proceeding is
contrary to Law, though they know it to be so, but rather urge the contrary
with bitterness.

But they will object: What need all these doubts, have not the City proferred
to engage their lives and estates, to preserve the Parliament in safety during
the treaty, and that in case the King and they do not accord at last, that
they will deliver the person of the King into the Parliaments custody again,
as now he is.

To which I answer, That in case a private design be carried on, to take this
opportunity to give the King his desired liberty, and to prevent and stop the
Parliaments proceedings, as have been already said, by the gathering together
the many thousands in and about the City which would be ready for such a work
on short warning, whither it may be then in the Cities power, or at least in
the power of that small party in the City which have so engaged, to make good
that engagement, or whither the City may desert or wilfully fail the
Parliament herein, or do just the contrary, I mean oppose the Parliament, at
that time; and so the Parliament be forceably, dispersed, and made incapable to
act, and at the same time the King attain to his purpose, how shall the
Parliament after all this is done, repair themselves upon the City for not
making good their engagement, so that it plainly appears that this specious
pretended Engagement of the City is of no value, nor security to be confided
in at all, And now whither the Parliament will adventure these seven years
toil, with the larger happiness and welfare of themselves and posterity, and
also the happiness and wellbeing of the whole Commonwealth, on the Kings bare
word, without any security at all, I shall leave to their juditious
consideration.

Whither now in this condition, and cause, as the case now stands with the
Parliament, all good Subjects in this Kingdom are not bound in conscience to
assist the Parliament to the utmost of their power, I shall leave to all the
world to judge, and so shall conclude, only by putting them in mind of some
few things more worth the noting, And first.

Whither if the Parliament through want of sufficient assistance, shall be
dispersed and made incapable of acting, or defending themselves and others?
Whither tyranny would not be abundantly exercised on the Members of
Parliament, and on all their adherents, and indeed an inlet made, for tyranny
to spread over the whole Kingdom, and the King being so brought in by the
sword, whither he would rule alone? and whither he might not coulourably do it,
and if he should, whither those of his own party which have so much labored to
procure that liberty for him, will either for shame, or for fear to displease
him, find fault therewith? and whither the other party, reputed as enemies,
shall dare to find fault? And whither a few capital men of the Kings party may
not have content given them on their own parties for a while, thereby to have
their assistance to carry on their grand Design on the whole Kingdom beside,
according to the example of France, where the Subject is much inslaved, yet
many of the Gentry, as free as in any commonwealth in the world, made so by
the King, to engage them thereby to cleave to his assistance, to tirannize over
the commonalty, and being once so, whither it may possible ever be shook off
again?

Further also, the King being so set up, whither the diversity of opinions
amongst his party, and the strict and cruel dealing with the other party, may
disquiet the Kingdom then, as much as now it is, and that for many years? and
likewise whither all things the Parliament has reformed, shall not be brought
back again to their former estate? and whither all Gospel preachers, beneficed
by the Parliament shall not immediately be thrust out, how able or well
deserving soever they be, only because the Parliament placed them in, and
those of the contrary judgment how scandalons soever shall be re-invested, in
opposition to the Parliament? and whither all Ceremonies and fopperies, cast
out of the Church, and whatsoever have been done by the Parliament, shall not
be turned into its former condition again, nay, and those things which they
shall think to be most grievous to tender consciences, pressed with much more
violence then formerly. To prevent all which, let us earnestly seek unto God by
earnest prayers, that he would be pleased to fend the spirit of peace and
concord into the hearts of both King and Parliament, that they and us, may all
resolve with one heart, to lay all particular and private interestes aside, and
unfainedly secke and ensue peace, doing what we do without deceit, and for
Gods sake, and as it were in his presence, and that in reallity, without
seeking the prejudice or detriment of others, but that on all sides the glory
of God, the welfare of each other, and the happiness and prosperity of the
Church and Commonwealth, may be the prime things aimed at, and desired, that
so we might walk comfortably together as becomes professors of the Gospel,
using the world as if we used it not, also let us seek unto God for humility
and charity, both which are in these times much wanting, for that we see many
which by having overgood conceits of themselves, have not so good opinions as
they should have of others, in a word let us wholly turn our selves unto the
Lord, and he will turn himself unto us, and who knows whither God may be
yet merciful, and heal our land.

A Right Description of a CAVALIER: With Some drops to quench the fiery BULL of
COLCHESTER.
GEntlemen what various stories our distractions have already produced, most
men do to their sorrows know, which were first occasioned, and to this day
continued by a sort of creatures like men, which have left no means unatempted
to extirpate Religion, Law and Government in this Kingdom, and these are they
which are commonly called Cavaliers, a fine name, and they are as fine men, and
do in nature well agree with their name, for though they are not always
riding, yet they seem to be very active, for they are ever kicking and
spurning of the Commonwealth where they live, in so much that no Government
durst show its nose for them, witness their actions ever since their first
appearance in England; first they began with the Scots, endeavoring to engage
that Kingdom and this Kingdom in a War; next they dispatched the Queen to
France, on what employment is more safe to believe then express, and since all
their actions tend wholly to destruction, or at least to the thraldom of the
Kingdom; how can we think there was likewise any other intent in that action
also, then they suggested an evil conceit into his Majesty, of his Parliament
thereby to coin a distraction by his absence in the House, and how far they
have prevailed thence, and what effect that has taken, we all too well know;
but when they saw they could not bring a final destruction hereby, then they
go and send the Prince of Wales into France, thereby to give a further
occasion and opportunity to that Kingdom to engage against us, which ere this
doubtless we should have had experience of, had not their employments
elsewhere prevented it; and to be sure to make us work enough, and
sufficiently to manifest that their aim and desire is destruction, they sent
the Duke of York into Holland to engage that Nation against us likewise, for
they it seems cares not by whom it be, so the design be going on toward
destruction and desolation.

But that which is most worthy note, is, how they have cheated the Scottish
Jockies at last, only on pretense of a Covenant, which all their actions ever
have and do manifest to be altogether against, as the Boares might well
perceive by their eager fighting against it, whilst they could procure any
Episcopal party to stand up, and does also very plainly appear yet, by their
endeavoring to bring in the King by the sword, and so put them in a posture of
government, who is a professed enemy to Presbytery and the Covenant; and the
Cavalliers says that they desire to buy the King, and as he will; how can
they then conform to the Scots Covenant? does it not then appear that the
Scots do now fight against themselves, in that they join with the Cavalliers
to set up the King by the sword who is clearly against their Covenant, as
appears by his refusing to take it, and also to hear any Covenant Minister:
Now how the Cavalliers can thus bring in the King to rule against the Covenant,
and yet stand for the Covenant, I would have the Scots to judge, and that they
endeavor to set up the King, is plain, as appears by their endeavor so to
steal or take him away from out of the Parliaments hands, all which the
wind-mil-headed Scots might see, if they would be pleased but to move their
bonnets of their eyes, and also how the Cavalliers did the lost year endeavor
as much as in them lay, to scrue themselves into the affections of the
Independent party, calling them their friend, and telling them, that the King
accounted them his friends, and they be the happy men to put a period to the
differences, and presently they would join with Sir Tho. Insomuch that they
called him their General, and declared him to be for the King, and presumed to
set forth Declarations in his name, and that point blanke against the
Covenanters, witness the Proclamation to remove all the Clergy placed by the
Parliament in Delinquents livings, and the re-investing of thousands put out,
notwithstanding all which the Independents soon discovered their lime-twigs
(being indeed a little better able to discern these and such like things
pertaining to the Church, then the Presbyterians are, though they exceed them
in temporalls) and so esteemed of them accordingly, since which time they have
fully testified by their actions how real their love was toward them, witness
the many hundred callumnies, scandalls, and all manner of false and base
reports, which the Devil can coin for them, they have ever since, and to this
day do cast on the Army.

But this I must say for the Cavalliers, they are vigilant men to pursue their
designs, and neglect no opportunity wherein they might do the Devil service,
witness their late Rebellion breaking out in Wales, Cornwall, the North, Kent,
and diverse other places of the Kingdom at one at the same time, in which,
surely there was a mystery more then is yet seen, as appears by the
distinctnesse and remoteness, of the insurrection, but indeed all their
actions are so mystical, that no man can discern what they drive at in any of
their designs, which makes me think that their grand Design is a final
destruction, and that they act it so many several ways to find the nearest
way for that purpose, as not caring, so they bring it to pass, which way it be
done, they would engage the French, they would engage the Irish, they would
engage the Hollanders, they would engage the Scot, with whom they have
prevailed, they would be glad of any Nation or people that would come in to
their assistance to help to destroy this poor Kingdom, just viper like, who is
the greatest enemy to her own dam, with desire of drawing in so many several
Nations, plainly shows it is not Religion they contend for, or care at all of
what Religion they are, also their joining with Episcopacy, and after with
Independency, and now with Presbytery, does plainly declare that they are of no
government, neither do they care likewise with what government they join, and
so are at present men of no Religion, and of no government, are like a Nowne
Adjective which cannot stand alone, and therefore are never like to make a
Commonwealth of themselves, nor indeed are they fit to live in any Commonwealth
amongst others: They cannot endure any thing in that form and shape which God
has put it in, witness the honor and dignity of the King, which is wholly by
them deminished, also the freedom and power of Parliaments, wholly by them
opposed and infringed; likewise the liberty and peace of the subject, by them
altogether violated, and for the Church, which are the people of God, and his
Elect and Chosen, and immediately and especially governed by him, and whom are
as himself says, as tender unto him as the apple of his eye, and yet these
are most of all perplexed by them, they would if they might new mould all
things, yea even the beasts of the field, not mend any thing that they least
think on, but to change it into some other form then it should have, or then
it has in being, as appears by that late pretended Bull, which they
metamorphized at Colchester, they would make all Monsters like themselves, both
King, Parliament, Laws, Church, and Commonwealth.

Now what think you of these men, surely I Will tell you what I think of them,
that is, that if they had so much divinity, or the devil could teach them so
much, as to know what were most displeasing to God, that would they first act
in despite of the Deity.

They had made this Bull of Colchester they say a very good emblem of the
devil, by which diabolical Idolatry they manifest their love and service to
be to the Devil. By the example of the Papists who draws the Image of God in
honor of him, to worship him thereby, as also most desiring to see him whom
they most love and serve, or whither is it for that they are impatient of being
without his visible company whiles they live here on earth, and therefore
draws his picture, and that it may be said that they are servants to whom
they obey, then we may guess whom they serve, by raising a picture in honor
of him, and so much delighting themselves at the sight thereof, as they did
also at the sight of 400 houses which they set on fire in and near Colchester,
surely they would make it but their sport to see the whole Kingdom in a flame,
as they do to see it died in blood, you see what grief they express for the
abundance of blood and treasure which have been expended by reason of this
wicked action of theirs; and how they having drawn up their accounts, have
given the country a Bull for it, the making of which have been their study, it is
true, but the Countries cost to the value of 500000 li. The calves of which
said Bull does yield scarce pence a piece, at which rate the sum above said
will be long arising, in which I have observed this, that all the calves which
comes out of Essex are Bull calves, which makes me think there will be
none but Cow calves left in Essex shortly.

But to continue this sport and pastime the Gentlemen has fetched two or three
brace of Bears, roaring meg and her Squadron from Paris Garden, or
Tower-wharfe, which will soon be there, to the Cavaliers neverlasting content,
this business of Colchester shall be called on record, Colchester-watch, where
Goring shall be recorded Host, and Capel Fiddler, and Lucas Bull-keepers, and
their accomplices shall no longer be called Cavaliers, but Calves-yeares or
Bull-babies, so I shall leave them at present to their sport, with an intent to
take view of their actions again shortly, In which time I desire they would
not give me just cause to conclude they are all Rebels, blood-thirsty,
professed enemies to peace, and Government of all sorts, and when they shall
give me cause to think better of them, I shall communicate the same to many
more, which would be glad to hear good of them.

FINIS.

