To the Supreme Authority, THE COMMONS of ENGLAND Assembled in PARLIAMENT: The
humble Petition of diverse well-affected of the County of Leicester, in behalf
of themselves and the Nation,
SHOWS,
THat with much thankfulness we acknowledge your continued faithful pains and
endeavors for the Nations Peace and Freedom, especially in your late Votes and
Acts so much conducing to a good Settlement and Reformation (the end and price
of all our blood and treasure) To the forwarding and promoting whereof, that so
great a work may still prosper in your hands, We humbly take leave to offer
these following particulars to your serious consideration.

First, That we may not again be surprised by any sudden Invasion; and to
prevent the breaking forth of new flames amongst our selves, We humbly beg,
That the Militia of the Nation may speedily be settled and put into good hands,
that a sufficient strength may be in readiness in every County to preserve it
self, and how to be in conjunction with others to defend the whole.

2. That during the necessity of continuing the Army on foot, they may be so
provided for, for future, that they may be least burdensome to the
Commonwealth; and that present and speedy care may be taken to ease the people
of that intolerable burden of Free Quarter, especially from those that pay
all due taxes; to which purpose we earnestly entreat, That all Lands and
public advantages now in your hands, may be improved and employed toward the
pay of the Army, and what they may fall short, that they may be supplied by an
equal tax, each County knowing their Soldiers they are to pay (which will save
the trouble and charge of many Collectors, Treasurers, and Receivers, and that
then they only may be liable to Free Quarter, who resist or delay payment
thereof.

3. And further, to this purpose we humbly offer, That whereas there are many
public offices of advantage worth to diverse particular men thousands by the
year, that till the debts of the Nation be duly satisfied, and during this
great necessity of the Commonwealth, there may be competent salleries appointed
for the discharge of each of them, and that the residue of the Revenue
belonging to the said great Offices, may come into the public Treasury.

4. That this Honorable House would please to ratify and establish such good
and wholesome Laws, as may best preserve our just Liberties and Interests (and
that according to those Laws God gave his people) they may be short, plain and
positive, and as well themselves, as all their practice and proceeds, may be in
our known English Tongue and Hand, and the dispensation thereof may be with the
most ease to the people; that our Law may become by its Reformation, an
advantage and remedy, which for so long time by corruption has been so heavy a
burden and oppression to this Nation.

5. That that unequal, burthensom, and contentious way of Tithes may be taken
away, and a more equal course provided for the maintenance of the Ministry.

6. That all that have had to do with public Treasuries, may speedily, by
Commissioners to that purpose, give up their Accounts in Print, and for the
future, that every Twelve months Accounts may be publicly extant for the due
satisfaction of the Commonwealth.

7. That every one may enjoy the just Freedoms to worship God according to his
Word, without any Coersive or Restrictive courses to the contrary.

8. That (before it be too late) there may be some speedy supply and relief
sent to our Brethren of Ireland, wherein we are so nearly concerned.

9. That there may be some effectual provision made for the poor, by the
improvement of our Inland Trades, and setting up Manufactures and Workhouses
in every County, according to that excellent custom of our Neighbors of
Holland, and that Fen and Forrest-Lands may be improved to the same purpose.

These being (as we humbly conceive) so essential to our just Rights and
effectual settlement, will, we hope, admit of your most serious Consideration
and Redress.

Die Lunae, 19 Martii, 1648.
THe House being informed, That there were some Gentlemen at the Door, they
were called in, and presented a Petition, which after the Petitioners were
withdrawn, was read; and was entitled, The humble Petition of many of the
well-affected in the County of Leicester, in the behalf of themselves and the
Nation: And thereupon the Petitioners were again called in, and Mr. Speaker
returned them this Answer.

Gentlemen, You of the County of Leicester, the House has read your Petition,
and I shall as near as I can declare their sense; The House does take notice of
the modesty and discretion of the Petition and Petitioners in the way of
delivering of it, and the expressions in it; The House does likewise take
notice of something out of the Petition that is concerning your County, whose
readiness to the Service of the Public the last Summer, wherein you did real
and acceptable Service to the Commonwealth, and for these, and your good
affections always to the Public, The House has commanded me to return you
hearty thanks, and I do in their name return you hearty thanks for the
particulars in the Petition, some of them are of great weight and consequence,
fit for you to present, and for them to take consideration of; some of which as
taking off Free Quarter, and others are already in a way of settlement; And the
whole House is Zealous to give you and the Kingdom satisfaction therein: For
the rest of the particulars, they doubt not but you will leave it to them, as
the urgent and important Affairs of the Kingdom will admit to take the same
into consideration, and doubt not but to do it so, as the Kingdom may receive
satisfaction and safety.

Hen: Scobell, Cleric' Parliament'.

London, Printed for GILES CALVERT, at the Black-Spread Eagle at the West End
of PAUL'S, 1648.


