A CASE OF CONSCIENCE, CONCERNING Flying in Times of Trouble.

Resolved According to the Scriptures, and the Examples of Holy men.

Applied to the present times and occasions.

Jmprimatur. Edm. Calamy.

LONDON, Printed for John Bellamie and Ralph Smith, and are to be sold at their
shop, at the three golden Lions in Cornhill near the royal Exchange. 1643.

To the Reader.
ABout four months since, upon an occasion that offered it self, I then drew
up this Case, so as it is. It was communicated to diverse private hands and had
the Testimony of some Divines both Learned and Conscientious, yet I laid it by
me, being not desirous to expose it (among the many Impertinencies and
unnecessary and raw Scriblings now adays) to the public view. But now the
opinion and request of some who judge it useful has obtained it to the
press: for they say the condition of the times does challenge it, wherein many
seem to be ashamed of their former acquaintance with the great cause in hand;
The truth is, many that came up to the Parliaments sense in the head of the
Tide, are willing to shrink away in the Ebb of things. There is a poor and
low and narrow Spirit in very many who thought well of the Parliament only so
long as no body spoke ill of it, or durst speak out, if they thought
otherwise, and loved it while they might be safe, and enjoy the worlds
friendship, God will not honor himself by such self-seekers; we must bid a
better price, before God will part with the rich commodity of Reformation; If
we love the public cause, we must not only keep it company in its health,
but stand by it and comfort it in its faintings. Amd this is the purpose of the
following discourse, which I commend unto the blessing of the Almighty.

S. T.

A Case of Conscience, concerning Flying in times of Trouble.
THE Scriptures are so clear, and the consent of Divines so full, that it had
not needed to have been put to the Question, Whether flight be lawful in
times of trouble and persecution; but that some have been too rigid, and
others contrarily have challenged this liberty without all caution, or respect
to any circumstances. I shall therefore so examine the case, that conscience
may be settled, when to take the liberty which God has allowed, and how to know
when God has shut up the way against us.

There is a flight which arises; First, from the shame of sin, and from
fear of public justice. Secondly, from an inward terror and trembling,
caused also by guilt, and laid upon men as a punishment, as it was in the case
of Cain. Thirdly, from weakness, irresolution, and unbelief, which prevailed
upon the Disciples who for sooke Pesus and fied. Fourthly, from mere humane
prudence and forecast, in which the Prophet Jonah offended. But none of these
are spoken unto, in the present question, bu that which Aretius defines,
Mutatio loci, mali praesentis vitand, alibique melius deeendi gratia, suscepta
cumtimore Domint. Bened. Aret. problem.
to be, A changing of place, to shun some present evil, and more comfortably
to live elsewhere, undertaken in the fear of the Lord: Which distinguishes it
from all those former kinds of either rash or sinful flight.

It Is a question that exercised the primitive Divines, for those times being
very terrible till Constantine settled peace in the Church, made the search very
necessary; as the sad and violent and unsettled time that wear fallen upon,
make it now.

I find the Ancients divided, according to the different sense they
entertained of the Scriptures, whether lawful to fly and leave or change ones
station, and if lawful, whether permitted only, and so lawful only and no
more, or a duty commanded, and so nenessary also as a binding law.

First, Tertullian, in a tract that he wrote professedly of this argument,
altogether denies it to be lawful to fly, or seems to deny it.

He contends, Matthew. 10.23.
that when our Lord bid his Disciples when they were persecuted in one City to
fiye into another; He only gave them a special allowance (or dispensation
rather) then for a particular reason, that the progress of the Gospel might
not be hindered, but preached and spread abroad in all Cities. But that now the
Gospel is already propagated, we are to stand unto the profession of the
faith received, and to keep our station. And that because nothing comes to
pass without Gods order, and we are all in Gods hand; it were unbeleefe,
treachery, cowardice, rebellion against God to go out of our place; and that
we must dye in our standing, and (if God will have it so) perish in the ruins
of our Country.

To this purpose he wrote; yet I express my self thus favorably of him, that
he altogether denies flight to be lawful, o^ seems to deny it; because though
most conceive that to be his very opinion, and the Ancients condemned him for
it, and Jerome in particular censures him, Hieron. lib. de Script. Illustr.
that when he wrote that book he had forsaken the sound faith, and was gone
over to the part of Montanus the Heretic, and therefore wrote that book in
hatred, and disgrace of the Christians whose usual practice many of them was
to decline the fury of the times where they might conveniently, though
otherwise ambitious enough of martyrdom: yet I am not wholly convinced to the
contrary, but that perhaps writing to Fabius who was a presbyter and a pastor
of a Church, he might use that severe and rigid language to keep and hold him
upon his charge, in that dangerous and uncomfortable condition of things. But
if it were truly his opinion, I consent to the judgment of Jerome and
Augustine against him, and to the answers they directed to his arguments: That
it is true, all things are ordered by God, and all are in his hand; yet David
knew all this, but he fled notwithstanding from the violence of Saul. And that
God calls some to give testimony to the truth by death, others he reserves, and
whom he saves from the rage of cruel ones he saves by means. If he shut up
any man, it is his will and order he should stand the trial courageously; but
if he offer an opportunity and open the door of escape, it is his will and
ordering to escape. And to this very effect, Origin had formerly resolved;
Origin in John.
That a man must maintain Christ's cause by death when he is taken, but before
he be taken, he may escape if honorably he can do it. Naz. in Orat. 10
And this was it for which Nazienzen commended Caesarius that excellent
Christian; That he honorably yielded to the times, and neither betrayed the
truth nor provoked danger.

I shall not need to insist upon this, the lawfulness of declining danger; It
is a dictate of nature, which grace also cherishes, and God has planted a
natural love of life in every man, which teaches him to shun what may be
harmefull. Tertullian (for ought I know) stands alone, against the lawfulness;
all the doubt among others is, whether it be a permission only or a precept.

Secondly, Augustine and some others that go in the middle and moderate way;
do say, 1 Cor. 10.12.
that God would have no man presume of his strength, for let him that stands
take heed lest he fall; and therefore as well knowing our infirmity, he gives
us the same and as large allowance and liberty as he granted to his Disciples,
whom he permitted to flee from one City to another. There are some also of
late that have held it but a permission, and therefore say, that when our
Savior had given the immediate sign of the ruin of Jerusalem, and thereupon
warned them to fly, when ye see the Abomination of desolation, then let them
that are in Judea flee unto the mountains: He meant not to injoyne it as
duty, but only would thereby manifest the greatness of the calamity upon
their City, and show what they might do in that case, and what they would be
constrained to do.

Thirdly, but Athanasius and others are express for it as a duty; and that
men must fly, when God calls them to fly. Athanasius wrote two books of
Apology upon this argument, in both which he goes that way. And agreeable to
this was the resolution of Clement of Alexandria, Clem. Strom. 4. and 7.
that they are guilty of their own death that do not avoid danger where they
may. And accordingly Cyprian (who yet was afterward himself a Martry)
persuades flight, and tells them of Carthage, that it shall be reckoned as a
martyrdom, if any lawfully and worthily flying, do miscarry by wild beasis,
famine, or thieves. I confess I incline to this, that it is a duty to provide
for safety by flight where it may be; but I will not interpose, because the
difference is not much material, for if it be lawful, it is not much to me,
whether only permitted, or commanded.

Having said thus much, more generally, I shall consider the difficulty in
particular, as it concerns; first, other people; secondly, Ministers and
Pastors.

First, concerning people that are of a private condition, it is out of all
doubt that they may lawfully fly. We have many warranted examples of it in
holy Scripture, among such as were godly and conscientious. David often times
laid hold upon this remedy, as appears all along in his story, 1 Samuel
21.1.22.1.27.1.
while he was in or belonging to the Court of Saul. So the faithful were
scattered upon the persecution of Steven, Act. 8.1. and the Apostle in that
Catalogue of eminent men in the faith, Heb. 11. reckons up many that in hard
times forsook their habitations, and exposed themselves to wants and extreme
poverty, They wandered about in Sheepes-skins and Goat Skins, being destitute,
afflicted, tormented, ver. 37. and unto solitary wanderings in voluntary exile;
They wandered in deserts, and in mountains, and in dens and caves of the earth,
verse. 38. and all this to avoid the fury of the times, as appears, verse.
36.37. Others had trial of cruel mockings and scourgings, of bonds and
imprisonments, they were stoned, they were sawen asunder, they were slain with
the Sword. These evils overtaking others, the men whom the Apostle commends,
provided to escape them by their wandering away into Deserts. It were easy to
be large in instances in the ten primitive persecutions. And of later times,
we have fresher examples of our own in Queen Mary's time, that fled into
other parts, and since of such as from those parts of France, the Netherlands,
the Palatinate, have fled to us. It were to trifle, to spend more words for the
proof of this; but there are two things more necessary here to be done. First
to put in caution lest some may happily presume too far upon this liberty, so
lawful. Secondly, to make application of the question to this present time and
condition of things, whether now be the time to fly, whether now it be
lawful.

First the caution I would put in is this, that all Lay People (for so I must
all them for distinction, that I may be understood, not that I will justify
the word of difference) are not at liberty, if they be bound up by office,
relation, public engagement, etc.

First, No man may fly till the door be set open unto bim, that is, not till
all others doors of remedy be shut up: not till all has been done for
maintenance of public safety and liberty, and for the opposing of evil and
corruption: But when as water that has broken down the damme, there is no
resistance, then the duty is to do what may be to escape drowning. It lies
upon all in some measure or other, to see to the state of others safety,
especially the public. So that that which at all times else is lawful, to
remove ones station for better accommodating his trade and merchandising, yet
is not so, if any notable discouragement arise thence to the public. This is
grounded upon that common bond of duty which lies mutually upon one and other
in regard of vicinitie or neighborhood of place. As from hence also it is,
that rich men may not remove to their Country houses in time of a public
pestilence, till provision be made and due care had of the poor, lest they
perish for want of relief by their withdrawing.

A man therefore may not slip away at a posterne, he must go out that way
which God sets open, and he must have his pass. The Jews had a direct open
warrant, when they got away from Pharaoh, Exodus 13.21. And so had Joseph when
with Jesus and Mary he escaped into Egypt, Matthew. 2.13. they were warned from
heaven. But how shall we know we have a warrant? I can only satisfy this, by
considering some particular cases recorded in Scripture, wherein flight was
warranted, that so we may make the better judgment upon our own exigences.

First, I conceive it may be gathered from the story in 2 Samuel 4.3.4. That
Adhaerents may fly when the side it self is lost. The Beerothites had
assisted the side and cause of Saul's house, to which they were joined in some
relations, during all the war, till it was utterly weakened and lost, by the
death of Abner, and then they fled to Gittaim. I know the instance does not
suite in all things, for they adhered to the worser party; yet howsoever it
serves to my purpose, that they would have continued firm to the part if there
had continued a head and considerable strength to it; and left not the side,
till they were left alone, and then they warrantably escaped, and not till
then. The application is easy and ready to the present occasions.

Secondly, when a man's Relations and his calling are not prejudiced by going
out of the way, he may lawfully do it; when his relations and present service
are not higher and more tender then his safety. What was there in Jacobs
family-relation, when as yet affairs did not depend upon him, that might be a
block in his way of escape, when his mother sent him far off to Laban out of
the reach of Esau's bloody attempts? Genesis 27.43.44.

Thirdly, when the cause in which a man is inbarked is no way bettered by his
stay, he may do the same right to himself, which he endeavored to do to it.
Hence, when Jotham the youngest son of Gideon, who had hardly escaped the
conspiracy of Abimelech, and understood the outrages of the new court and
government, thought it his duty to make protestation against those courses and
to undeceive the people so far as he might, when he had published his
thoughts, he ran away, and fled to Beer, Judge. 9.21. for what advantage would
it have been to the cause, if he had unadvisedly verified his own parable,
and had been catched and torn by that Bramble?

Fourthly, so that a man be ready to appear when the hour of standing
requires, he may reserve himself till that hour of action come. Thus Moses
went aside, Exodus 2.15. till businesses were ripened. And Rutilius, in the
ecclesiastical story, often fled, but afterward became a Martyr; which was
also the famous case of Saint Cyprian.

5. Lastly, if a man be singly hunted after for his estate and liberty, and no
way be left him to keep himself from injurious dealing, he may accommodate
himself elsewhere. For this reason Jacob conveyed himself, and family, and
estate, from under the hard and evil eye of Laban, Genesis 31.21. And it seems
by the story, Judge. 11.2.3. that Jephthah was thus necessitated to seek an
habitation in the Land Tob. But when (for instance) a Parliamentary State is
engaged for the repressing of injuries, and maintenance of public liberties
and men's estates, this alters the case and calls in all private thoughts of
escape, to contribute them to the public defense.

More particulars might happily be observed of the Scripture, but because they
do not occur to my present meditations, this shall suffice for the first
Caution.

First, As every one must have regard to some circumstances, so if any one have
been more appearing, more forward, more encouraging in his speeches and
advices, and be a man looked at, he is to be more cautious. This I suppose was
that which was meant by that speech of Nehemiah, Neh. 6.11. Should such a man
as I fly? Yet I doubt not but if the flood had broken in upon him violently,
so that the fury of the Waters could not have been kept back, he would have
run to avoid drowning; but it would have been in the Reere of the people. The
Captains place in a retreat is hindmost. Such as have gone before the people
in a public undertaking, and have been leading men, must see the people safe
before him, before he give his ground.

Secondly, But now for application to the present condition of things: What may
we say of this present time? Is the door now open or not? I answer. We may
not presume to judge precisely of the issue of things. But there are two things
I have here to say.

First, That it is true, we have many sad omens of the ruin of our nation. As
our Lord Jesus after all other warnings, and various Calamities, foretold the
destruction of Jerusalem, Matthew. 24.15. Luke 21.21.
that they might know that desolation was near at hand, when they should see
the Abominatirn of Desolation set up, or as S. Luke expresses it, Jerusalem
compassed with Armies: So has God taken all the courses, and given all the
warnings to us, which have been usual before a Nation comes to destruction.
All the sins which are noted by Divines or Political writers to be the
general, Internal causes of ruin, do notoriously show themselves among us;
Variety of enormous sins, of the deepest stain and the highest provocation;
The multitude of Sinners; and the impunity of sinning. And then, what warnings
have we had, nay what have we not had? And after all, besides the dangerous
distemper spread over all our body, the discord in our own bowels, an
abominable Army, Idolatrous Ensigns, the Romish Banner, does also portend the
worst of evils. If I should also touch at those Periods, which wise and great
Authors do so much discourse of, and which they will have to be finished in
this age; I should reckon up enough, to make us cast about at least in case
things should come to extremity. I am mistaken in the story, if the believers
had not an eye to Pella, even before Titus came, and conveyed some things away.
I observe this from that passage in Eccles: History, of S. James his chair.

Secondly, But in the next place, I am not willing to leave these sad thoughts
upon any, and do therefore observe that there are two maine considerations,
wherein the condition of our nation differs from that of Jerusalem at that
time. First, one is, that they had an immediate warning of ruin by a direct
sign which they might clearly take notice of. But so have not we. Secondly,
the other is, That there was an inevitable and irrevocable sentence upon
Jerusalem; but for our nation we are to think, according to what the Scripture
speaks, Jer. 18.7.8.
That at what instant God speaks of a Kingdom to pluck up and destroy, if
that nation against whom God has pronounced, turn from their evil, he will
repent of the evil that he thought to do unto them. These are the things that
maintain in us some hope, besides the spirit of courage and the fear of the
Lord, which has been given and continued of late to many, who have ventured
themselves upon the great cause now in hand, and are constant to it.

But what then may be the Resolution? I answer, P. Martyr when he had escaped
from Luca in Italy, wrote back again to his Auditors there, and in particular
to a friend, about the Case of flying; wherein he seems not to me to be
determining, (for the circumstances of every man's condition do so differ that
it is very difficult to make a settled rule) but advises to pray unto God for
direction, and after prayer, as they find their hearts inclined, so to fly or
stay. This Counsel I do approve, to seek Counsel from God; but to take the
next inclination of heart, to be the present answer, I believe may be unsafe.
The direction is too large, too uncertain. Besides that many cannot, happily,
discern clearly, many may deceive themselves about the inclination of heart,
which we find ordinarily to be strongly biassed by private respects and
interesses. We must look further then our proper inclinations, yea further
then our proper convenience and advantages, to observe how things are round
about us, and whether there be any thing in the public, wherein we are
concerned, and that will countermand our proper inclination, and prevail above
our proper convenience. And if I may express my conceit, Things stand now in
such posture, that God requires our deep engagement, and that we should banish
all thoughts of declining. In this great hazard that liberty, laws, and
religion run, to leave our ground, were to leave Popery Master of the Field.
We may not now suffer the thoughts of safety elsewhere, to womanize our
spirits: but together with our earnest and humble prayers for our King, that he
may at length embrace the Counsels of our great Estate; we are in case of so
sad a necessity, to resolve to lay out all our strength toward the great
business, and rather burn our ships, as some stories mention of some resolute
Soldiers, to keep off all thoughts of return in the cowardly and
faint-hearted; that is, forget all conveniences and opportunities of being
elsewhere in a whole skin.

Secondly, Having thus far spoken of the liberty of other people, It remains
to be examined whether Ministers the Pastors of Congregations be at the same
liberty. I find the Ancients and others more difficult concerning them, urging
that place of Christ, Job. 10.12, 13. He that is an hireling, sees the Woolfe
coming, and leaves the sheep and flees. The hireling flees because he is
an hireling, and cares not for the sheep. And it is not without reason that
they are straight toward them; for Ministers are to have care not so much of
their own Bodies as of the Souls of others. Their mouth is the dug on which
they hang and feed; and many build on their example. Who shall look to the
flock, if the Shepherd be gone? Who shall govern the Ship in a storm, if
the Pilot be not at the Stern? Who shall prevent the theife, if there be no
watchman? The people do at all times need their Pastors, but most of all when
the dangers are greatest. There is use of a Pylot in the calm, much more when
the weather is stormy. What will the Shepherd of the peoples souls answer to
the great Shepherd? These considerations wrought effectually and strongly upon
many of the old Pastors of the Church, many of whom sealed up their profession
with their blood; and preached their doctrines over again in Martyrdom. Peter
was willingly crucified with his feet upward. James and Paul dyed by the
sword. Ignatius derided all torments. Polycarpus, Justin, Cyprian, of old;
Cranmer, Latimer, Ridley, Hooper, Farrar, Bradford, Saunders, Tailor, Rogers,
of late, and many others, laid down their lives for the brethren in the
Testimony of Jesus. 1 John 3.16. Eusebius. hist. l. 6. c 35.
And contrarily it remains as a blot upon the name of Novatus in the
Ecclesiastical history, who being a Presbyter, in a time of persecution left
his flock, and disclaimed his office.

All this is true, and true it is that such cannot be too abundantly cautelous;
yet some there are that have stretched these arguments too far, as if it were
unlawful in any case, for a Minister who is fastened to any particular
congregation to fly. And they have made an observation, how true I know not,
neither have I opportunity to examine or disprove it; That in Queen Mary's
days among all those Scholars and Divines that fled, there were none but
fellows of Colleges, and Students in Divinity, such as had undertaken no
pastoral charge; but that all the Bps. and settled pastors that were good,
continued upon their charge, with resolution to welcome the assault when it
should come. Which whether it may be good I doubt; or if it may be, yet it will
but only discothat that was the received resolution then, which might happily be
too rigid in some cases: for though a Minister be specially bound up, if by his
flight, the glory of God, the Church, the cause of Religion, the souls of the
people, shall receive any prejudice: yet in some cases they may fly, according
to the warrantable examples of Elias the Prophet, of our Lord Jesus Christ who
often withdrew himself during the years of his public ministry; and left a
word of direction, at least of allowance, for those whom he sent to preach,
Matthew. 10.23. The Disciples, Act. 8.1. and Saint Paul, Act. 9. made use of this
lawful liberty.

There are five doors, (if not more) through which even the Minister of a
Congregation may pass in his flight, without being stayed by any such question
from God, Genesis 16.8.
as was once put to Hagar by an Angel, Whence came thou? and whither will thou go?

First, when there is a Dispersion of the whole flock, there is no doubt but
the shepherd may also escape. There seems to have been such a general
dispersion of the whole Church at Jerusalem upon that great persecution that
was raised after Steven was stoned. Act. 8.1. This is clearly the case of many
Ministers of Ireland, whose congregations have been wholly scattered, if not
massacred. And some places in this Kingdom, have felt well near a like
violence.

Secondly, when the persecution is particular, and the Congregation not aimed
at, or not so directly concerned. 1 King 19.3.
It was the case of Elias, and clearly of Saint Paul, newly upon his
conversion which much enraged his old companions, friends, and masters, Act.
9.23.
so that him they sought, the Church at Damascus being safe, Athan. Apol. 2.
how else could Ananias and the brethren stay there? Athanasius in his second,
which is his large Apology, makes it appear by a full relation, that he lay
under a private particular and extreme hatred, and therefore might safely and
with a good conscience leave his charge to escape the traps and snares of the
Arrian Bishops, his enemies, Vide etiam Buxtorf. in Abrev. Hebr. p. 165, 166.
De R. Simeone.
because he was so thoroughly the truths friend.

This particular danger will warrant an escape, when there is but a strong
presumption of it, though no actual attempt. When Christ knew that there was a
consultation among the Pharisees how to destroy him, he withdrew himself.
Matthew. 12.15.
At another time when he perceived that the envy was increased against him,
because many came in to his Baptism, and so his name being grown up would and
did endanger him, he left Judaea and departed into Galile. Joh. 4.3.
Nay when he saw by their dealing with others what himself must look for,
when he heard that John was beheaded, Matthew. 14.12.13.
he departed by ship into a desert place. The reverend Musculus wrote after
these copies. He was the Preacher at Anspurg in Germany, where his zeal
against Popery caused him to be so maliced, that he was feign to be guarded to
his pulpit ordinarily. When the book of the Interim a mixture of Religions was
sent by the Emperor Charles the fifth and received by the City, Musculus who
could not preach in better times without danger, knew well enough there would
then be no biding for him, and therefore before further prosecution got away.

I the rather instance in this case so warranted by examples, because it will
come home and close to the case of many able and laborious ministers, who from
several parts of the Kingdom, have been carried by their just and grounded
fears from their houses and Congregations, whom many profane scoffers who
know how to deride but not compassionate their misery, brand for cowards and
runawayes, and having forced them to fly, after rail at them for flying. I
thought fit to insert this by the way, for the comfort and the clearing of
those upon whom their sufferings by the Cavalierie in one kind or other, has
put the name of plundered Ministers.

Under this head I add, that a minister may fly from a sudden popular attempt
and fury. Thus Christ did when those of the Synagogue of Nazareth would have
thrown him down headlong from the brow of an hill. Luke 4.30.
In such a danger one may run even out of the pulpit; Joh. 8.59
so Christ at another time, when the people in stead of giving attention fell
to throw stones at him, he slipped out of the pulpit. Act. 14.6.
And it appears by the story, that Paul and Barnabas were in the actual
exercise of their ministry, when they fled from Iconium to Lystra. It was even
out of the Synagogue.

And lastly let me note this also that such a particular persecution and
danger, will authorize and warrant even an uncomely escape, and plead for such
actions as otherwise and at other times would be unhandsome and unworthy of the
dignity of so weighty a calling. Act. 9.23.
Saint Paul's getting over the town wall, yea his Basket will be justified by
this. Musculus (of whom I spoke before) when he slipped from Auspurg, left his
wife and eight children for a while without any notice whither he was gone. But
most notable is that passage of the learned Divine, John Brentius. He was in
great danger because of the Interim. The Emperor was so exasperated that he
commanded he should be brought to him alive or dead. The Commissary comes to
Hale in Saxony, where Brentius preached, calls the Senate and took an oath of
them not to discover his design. But it happened by the good providence of
God, that one Alderman came in, after the oath was taken, undiscerned; and
hearing the plot, had only time to convey away a short note with these words;
Fuge, fuge Brenti, cito, citius, citissime. Flee, flee Brentius, in have, have,
post-hast. Brentius took the warning, disguised himself like a Captain, with
Buffe, and a patch upon one eye: and in that habit secured himself. And is
excused by the grave writer of his story; which I also allege in defense of
those Scarlet cloaks, Buffe-coates, gray rockets, perukes of hair, and
colored montero's, which have of late hid many grave and sober Ministers from
the eyes of their adversaries.

I proceed to the third particular, no Minister is bound up, when it is not for
the good of the Church that he should stay, but happily much better for it that
he escape. Suppose that all the darts are aimed at one breast, and an offer be
made, give up such an head and all the rest shall be quiet; or it be known
that if one be removed, all the rest shall be secured; In this case, Divines
have held, that greater service may be done by absence and flight, then by
stay. Cyprian professes he went aside, Cypr. Epist. 15.
for the benefit of the Church at Carthage. And Peter Martyr satisfies his
friends in Italy by this, after he had left Lu^en and his dignity there. He
writes back to them; That he could not have stayed with them, but he had been
silenced and ill used, and that no way to their good, but he should have made
them more obnoxious, and looked upon with a narrower and more curious eye by
their adversaries. And lest they should object; But why did you not stay till
it came to extremity? He tells them, That he found it was the opportunity that
God directed them unto. That he was useful where he now was, but with them he
could not be so. He could not have enjoyed liberty to do there what he would,
about their reformation, but in striving to show them truth, he should have
wronged them of their peace. But now they might have peace, and his help too,
that is, by his letters and secret directions to them. And finally he promised
to return to them again, if ever the door should be opened, and it were
likely he might stay among them without hazarding of them. Thus that reverend
and godly man, satisfied himself and them. And by this another eminent person
satisfied the world. The person that I mean, was that rare man, John Camera,
the learned, powerful and famous Preacher of the Protestant Church at Bordeaux
in France. There was an ill spirited rotten man, one Santangelus a Lawyer that
dwelt there, who would be taken for a Protestant, but was closely a Papist, or
worse, an Atheist, he cunningly brought it about, that the good man was forced
to leave his charge, and then Santangelus boasted that he was a Mercinary and
fled when he saw the Woolfe come. Cameron. Stelliteut. in Santang.
Camero was feign to publish an Apology to the world, to clear himself of
that stain, and to show how much the whole City was concerned in his removing.
And did sit so satisfyingly and so to purpose, that all men took notice of the
base frauds of that dissembling Lawyer, and were convinced that out of
conscience he did that good service to his City, by getting away to draw aside
after him the hatred conceived and intended against it.

4. The fourth door for a Ministers passage out is, when he is endangered, and
others are sufficiently lest to supply the care of the peoples souls. The
Church received not detriment by Paul's flight, for it seems An^n^^s was a
teacher there, and was safe to instruct them, and happily others besides him, and
the Church flourished. We have a pregnant instance to this purpose, concerning
V^ia^; Jer. 26.20.21.
who prophesied in the name of the Lord, against the City and against the
land, according to all the words of Jeremiah; and when Jehojakim the King with
his mighty men and the Princes heard his words, the King sought to put him to
death, but when Vria^ heard it, he searing fled, and went into Egypt. He
preached the same things that Jeremiah did; but it seems at that time, the
Court could better bear Jeremy then him, and Jeremy being then for that season
safe, and in the exercise of his office, Vriab provided for his present
safety, Verse. 22.23.
(though afterward he was taken and made a Martyr.)

5. Lastly, I will mention but one other head, that it is lawful for a
Minister to fly when he has the consent of his Church. Paul besides other
warrants had this; Act. 9.2^. Act. 17.13.14.
The Disciples let him down by the wall in a Basket. And when the Jews of
Thessalonica came to entrap Paul at Berca, immediately the Brethren sent him
away, to go as it were by Sea. Cyp^ Epist. 6.
Thus Cyprian went aside, by the consent, yea the entreatie of the people of
Carthage, and by the advice of Tertullus who was a presbyter of prime and great
authority. Musculus though he departed from Auspurg in great distraction, yet
came and told the Consul or Major before he went, and had (as I gather) a
dismission. But Philip Par^us makes it most evident concerning his reverend
father, D. David Par^us of Heidleberg in the Palatinate, that in the late
popish wars against that Country which is now made desolate, when they knew a
siege would be laid to Heidleberg, the Citizens were so tender of him, that
they advised, yea entreated him to be gone.

This is that I have to say concerning the lawful freedoms of the ministers
of the word, and concerning the whole case, when it may be lawful for any to
fly, and when not. Let me shut up this discourse with a word of Application. I
hope we have not need of this case, and that God will so far magnify his
grace toward us of this poor sinful nation that we shall have no need of it,
and this is in all my prayers; yet because we know not unto what condition we
may be reserved, let us get our consciences rightly settled in so necessary, so
considerable a point. We walk most safely, when we walk after counsel. And
if we thus walk, and are obedient unto the Counsels of the Lord, we may have
comfort, though we be forced to fly; and may refresh our selves with that
sweet place of the psalm, Thou tellest (or numbrest) my wanderings, Psalm. 56.8.
put thou my tears into thy bottle; are they not in thy book? But what
comfort can there be, if we run away from a good cause, as if we were
ashamed to own, or afraid to assist it, and unwilling to suffer and be lost
with it. Christ tells us that his Disciples must (if the cause so require it)
even hate their own lives. And that he that saves his life shall lose it. And
truly that man is not safe, though he saves his skin, that is not mindful
and regardfull to save his inward peace. Let us stay or fly, as the counsel
of God shall direct us; else if we be found running from God, we may be
overtaken with Jonah in a tempest, and fall into the Sea, and be swallowed of
the Whale. Oh how would it sink a man when his conscience should answer him
some sad questions in a strange land, I have left my house and habitation, have
I not left God too? Yes, thou have also left God by an unbeleeving have. I am
deprived of my land, and my goods, and my state: Have I not lost my peace too?
Yes, Thou have lost thy peace, through thy wary providence to shift for thy
self, in the neglect of the public which ought to be dearer to thee then
thy self. Oh let us banish all thoughts of flying, when God calls us to
another service. And if we assist him when he pleases to honor us in
accepting our service, he will either open a door in the greatest need, or hide
us in the evil day, or turn the worst of evils to our good.

FINIS.

