Declaration of the Comte de Tourville Commandant his most Christian Mties
fleet.
Translated from the French Original.
THe English possibly may be sensible, now the French Fleet is upon their
Coasts, how much they have been deluded these two years by false notions,
industriously imposed upon them of the weakness of France, and strength of the
Allies. They may perceive that those, who by subverting the Laws of the
Government, and dispossessing the rightful King, have drawn so powerful an
Enemy upon them, have also brought them so lovv, that they are not able, even
with the help of the Dutch, to maintain the Dominion of their own Sea, nor
preserve their trade, and themselves from utter ruin. The People, instead of
that full enjoyment of their Liberties and Properties. which they promised to
thmselves from their new Master, have never been more oppressed with Taxes,
and the vexations of Arbitrary procedings, and with all those mischief, the
bare apprehension vvher of has hurried them into their present extremities.

The Usurper at first extorted great sums from a Parliament abonding in
Presbyterians, by giving up to them the Religion Established by Law. He has
squeezed more out of this last Church-of-England Parliament, by sacrificing the
Presbyterians to them: all the while equally fleecing both. These aids were
more than needed tho secure the Quiet an Trade of the Kingdom, both at home
and abroad, if they had been applied that way, and not diverted to secret and
infinitely expenceful courses to str^ngthen himself by foreign Forces, always
suspicious, and always fatal to the Nation. Parliaments have been already
twice hindered from taking an account of this Money, least their Eyes should be
opened, and the design of their total oppression exposed to their clear view.
That oppression would have been easy enough, if the Usurper had not met with
such an Enemy as the King of France. But it would be more easy, if the Nation
deprived of trade; drained of Money an divided by the animosity of two
Parties, both fomented by the Usurper, with his countenancing now the one,
and now the other, become a defenseless looker on, while the Authority of the
Laws is subjected to the foreign force, with which he seeks to fill the
Kingdom.

His weakness will oblige him to go on yet a while in overreaching the
English, and persuading them his Most Christian Majesty arms so strongly, only
to pursue the pretenses with which he amused them at first, to drive them
into utter ruin, by engaging them to maintain to the utmost a quarrel which
is his ouvn, not theirs. In the mean time the French come not against the
English but against an Usurper, who has engaged them into a Revolt equally
contrary to the Doctrine of the Church of England, an the Laws of the Kingdom;
and on which he could put no better color than the votes of men convened
without Legal Authority: in a word, who actually has brought more mischief
upon them in eighteen months, than an Enemy could have don in a long war.

There are many who preserve a sense of their fidelity: imports to unite, and
assure themselves His most Christian Majesty h^s no design to Invade the
English Nation, nor take advantage of their disorders for his particular ends.
He has preserved their Lavvful Souereign for them, and the Heir apparent of the
Crown, from whom they may hope for quiet and security, which they can never
expect while foreign and usurping hands are, and always vvil be snatching the
Crown. He has furnished His Majesty of great Britain with means to keep
himself up in Ireland, and to prevent the Usurper from ruining them utterly by
the easiness with which they put into his hands the opportunity to enslaue
them. He is in a condition to cross all his designs by sending new succors to
His Majesty of Great Britain, and cutting off the means of subsisting from the
Enemies His conduct is demonstration that he aims at nothing but the Restoration
of a Prince his Ally, and never dream of destroying a Kingdom, which he ma^es
it his business to preserve to him. All then who love their King, their
Country, their Religion, their Laws, and the good of the Kingdom, ought to be
sensible that they cannot run themselves into any danger so great, as being at
the mercy of the Prince of Orange, if orce he be out of fear of His most
Christian Mties Arms, and get the Irish thorn out of his foot; and that the
French far from Enemies, are truly the Defenders of their Liberty.

It is therefore declared that as on the one side His M.ties Fleet has orders
to fall upon the enemies and rebels of his M.ty of England vvherever they shall
be found: so on the other that all who will return to their duty, and
recognize their own King, shall not be looked upon as enemies: that on the
contrary they shall meet with all possible Kindness and succor for themselves
as well as all other his good subjets: that no hostility shall be exercised
against the Persons, or Places which will return to his obedience. That we
shall confide in all who shall come authorized by him, and join with them in
all expedient^ proper to avoid shedding the blood of his People, and the other
miseries of war. And that we shall make it effectually appear, that as we
act according to the intentions of a Prince whose goodness toward them had
no bounds, and the want of whose mild Government has been so often lamented,
we have no design but against R^^^lli^^ we shall manage with consideration
and tenderness even to the Rebels themselves, if by a speedy subm^ssion they
will prevent the punishment which they have deserved. They may farther be
assured, that regard shall be had to their service who shall become examples
to others, and rewards procured for them, such as their fidelity can ex^ect.
And we hope, that those who mas have been surprised by passion and the
artifices of enemies to their quiet, will open their eyes, ac^novvledge the
sin erity of our intentions, thank France for preserving so good a Master for
them, and become sensible, that as they cannot hope for any end of their
misfortunes and divisions but by his return, they can as little expect their
Trade again, as long as it depends on Allies so much interested as the
Hollanders, who in less than a year of their close union, have don them more
harm, than in many years of open war.


