To the Supreme Authority THE PARLIAMENT OF THE Commonwealth of England,
Assembled at WESTMINSTER.
The hearty Congratulations and humble Petition of thousands of well-affected
Gentlemen, Freeholders, and Inhabitants of the County of Kent, and City of
Canterbury,
HUMBLY SHOWS,
THat upon the first report of your being invited to that Supreme trust, from
which you were illegally interrupted, we were surprised with joy in the hopes
of our approaching deliverance: and beholding your Declaration manifesting your
resolution (in the strength of God) to endeavor the settlement of this
Commonwealth upon such a foundation, as may assert, establish, and secure the
Liberties of the people, both as men and Christians; Your Petitioners are
filled with hope, that a price being once more put into your hands, you will
endeavor to complete and perfect what you have declared; that the sincerity of
your engagements may be made conspicuous in the eye of the world, by the
reality of your righteous Actions. And although we cannot omit to express the
fears in some, of a relapse, by the continuance of many in places of trust, who
in April 1659. labored not only to make the Name of a Commonwealth odious,
but to plunge us into a more dangerous gulf of Tyranny and slavery then we were
in in 1640. yet we are rather persuaded, that the God of Heaven, after his long
chastisement both of you and us (who has made the Mountain of Monarchy become
a Plain, by restoring you to your entrusted Rights) will carry you on to
accomplish greater things then hitherto our eyes have seen: That the present
Age may joyfully conclude your last Works to be more glorious then the former,
and future Generations triumphantly sing, Many Parliaments have done worthily,
but you have excelled them all.

Wherefore we take boldness humbly to offer at present to your Grave and
serious Considerations, These few particulars following.
1. That for the future settling of this Nation, upon the firm Basis of a free
Commonwealth, you would be pleased to make such provision for securing of the
Government, as that no usurping spirit might be able to bring us back to
Monarchy, nor introduce Oligarchy upon us; and that the future Elections may be
so settled, that the good people may be freed from fears of the Old Enemies and
Neuters getting up to Lord it over us, by putting such qualifications on the
Electors and Elected, as may not give up our dear-bought Freedom, and as may
appear just in the sight of all.

2. That for the prevention of foreign Invasions, and domestic broyls, the
Militia of this County, and other parts of the Commonwealth, may be timely
settled in the hands of faithful men, that have in these trying times been
steadfast to the Interest thereof.

3. That all which profess faith in Jesus Christ, and live peaceably in
godliness and honesty, though different in apprehension in matters of Faith and
Worship, may be equally protected and encouraged; and that the vexatious and
intolerable burden of Tithes may be taken away, and no other forced
maintenance imposed on the tender Consciences of such as maintain their own
Ministers.

4. That all such faithful persons that have been illegally removed from places
of trust Military or Civil, or have quitted their employments for
Conscience Sake, and faithfulness to this Commonwealth, may be invited and
restored to their former capacities.

5. That the mischievous Inconveniences, Irregularities, Delays, and
Chargeableness of the Law may be rectified, by distribution of Justice to the
People in their several Counties; and that the great cheats in Sales and
Mortgages may be prevented, by settling of Registers in each County.

6. That you would be mindful for the quickening of Trade so much decayed,
principally that of Clothing, which greatly concerns this County; the fail
whereof has greatly impoverished and ruinated many families.

In the Prosecution of which, we shall, with the utmost hazard of our lives and
estates, stand by you against all opposers, and with hearts bowed down to the
Father of spirits implore strength for you.

This Petition was presented the 4th of June; and the Petitioners being called
in, they received the thanks of the House for their good affection to the
Commonwealth.

Printed at London for Livewell Chapman, 1659.


