TRADE'S RELEASE: OR, Courage to the SCOTCH-INDIAN-COMPANY.
Being an Excellent New BALLAD; To the Tune of, The Turks are all Confounded.
1.
COme, rouse up your Heads, Come rouse up anon!
Think of the Wisdom of old Solomon,
And heartily Join with our own Paterson,
To fetch Home INDIAN Treasures:
Solomon sent a far for Gold,
Let us do now as he did of old,
Wait but three Years for a Hundredfold
Of Riches and all Pleasures.
2.
His Throne with Gold was overlaid,
He hundreds of Shields and Targets had
Of beaten Gold, and (as is said)
Gold Vessels all for Drinking:
Cedars he made as the Sycamore-Tree,
Silver as Stones abounding to be,
And TRADE from all Encumbrance free;
For Reason ruled his thinking.
3.
So the wisdom of our Parliament
Have jointly agreed, with a very good Intent,
By their ACT together with the Royal Assent,
To free TRADE from Taxation:
Now since our Freedom they did restore,
We'll quickly visit the Indian-Shoar,
And thence return with such Cargoes of Ore
As must enrich this Nation.
4.
Saint-Andrew's Flag then without delay
We'll over all the World display;
We'll many a River, Crick and Bay
Find out by Navigation;
In which our selves we'll soon Invest,
As having never been Possessed
By any that can in the least
Pretend Preoccupation.
5.
And as choice of Plantations abroad we can find;
To our Undertaking even Nature seems kind,
In having our Nation disposed and designed
For TRADE, by its situation:
For to Portus-Salutis from our Harbor at Leith,
And round by the Lewis till you come to Roseneath
There are store of good Bays, where free from all skaith
Our Shipping may never miss a station.
6.
And now while that matter runs fresh in my Head,
Let us think of our own Home-Subjects of Trade;
Rare Fishings of all sorts, all-North from the Tweed,
And plenty of Corns and Provision,
Our fine Manufactures of Woolen and Thread,
Our Salt, Coals, Marble; our Iron and Lead;
Pray then what should ail us, but to Thrive with all speed,
If we banish all Seeds of Division.
7.
No River by Nature was ever brought forth,
From the East to the West, or the South to the North,
More adapted to Trade than our Clyde and our Forth,
When both shall in one be united:
We'll make both the INDIES pay Tribute to Clyde,
From whence we'll diffuse it upon our Forth's side,
And many more Things which never were tried,
May at Home to our Trading be fitted.
8.
Then come along Lads then, Come, come, come,
Why should we longer thus linger at home?
While extending the bounds of Christendom
Must be Crowned with Riches and Glory:
But to carry our noble Achievement on,
Our Purses and Strength we must all Join in One,
We must never remember the Distinction
Of Papist, Whig, or Tory.
9.
Since by Nature and Law we are equally free,
Wherever true Merit is found, let it be
Rewarded most nobly in every Degree,
Without regard to Compactions:
Let Vice and Oppression be clothed with shame,
Let brave Undertakings our Breasts all inflame,
Let Liberty, Property, Religion and Fame
Be mainly the Scope of our Actions.
10.
For if ever great things to do we propose,
We must cherish our Friends, and vanquish our Foes
By Rules of Justice; but scorn to impose
Such Tricks as now are in Fashion:
By regular steps we'll bravely advance
Till the Trade of all EUROPE to us we enhaunce;
Then adieu to the blustering Grandeur of FRANCE
Or any imperious Nation.
11.
To SCOTLAND'S just and never-dying Fame,
We'll in ASIA, AFRICA and AMERICA proclaim
Liberty! Liberty! nay, to the shame
Of all that went before us;
Wherever we Plant, TRADE shall be free,
In three Years time, I plainly foresee,
GOD BLESS THE SCOTTISH-COMPANY
Shall be the Indian-Chorus.
12.
No Brawle, no Murmr, no Complaint,
No Cause of any Discontent,
Where Patersonian-Government
Shall once commence a Footing;
His wholesome Laws being published there,
Shall harmeless keep their Goods and Gear,
And free their Persons from all Fear
Of Thummikin or Booting.
13.
The Muscovite, Tartar, Turk, and the Pope,
The Sophi, Mogul, and Morocco, I hope,
To the Charm of our Laws must yield and give up,
Their absolute Sway and Dominions:
Then the Spainiards, and French, and Portugueze,
Venetians and Dutch, and Genoese,
And the English themselves perhaps may please
To alter their narrow Opinions.
14.
The Gospel in the ^S we'll propagate,
But not by such Ways as attempted of Late,
By Jesuits-Guile, nor vain pompous State,
Nor bloody Inquisition:
There Is one way more yet left fol Us,
A way Divine and Glorious,
Which can not fail; and that is thus:
By Peace, Love, and Contrition.
15.
Then Sawny, and Johnny, and Jemmy, and all,
Whose Names are Enrol'd in the INDIAN-HALL,
Prepare and be ready to answer the Call
Of our brave Sea-Commanders:
Come follow me quickly, our Admiral is gone
On board of SAINT-ANDREW, I Have heard a Gun,
You belong to the NEPTVN, and I to the SUN,
We Will try who dare withstand us.
16.
We'll truckle no longer to Friend or to Foe,
But be every one's Friend that to Us will be so;
We'll build our Success wherever we go;
On the Justice of our Undertaking:
May evil betide them that evil do think;
Mean while ( pray-thee Sawny) forget not to Drink,
Bon-voyage to Our FLEET, I Am resolved to skink,
One Brimmer or Two at our parting.
17.
Now Malice and Envy are rampant with Rage,
To see Us so frankly our Purses engage,
Beyond Expectation; from which they presage,
In TRADE some strange Revolution:
Since by LAW to suppress Us, none well dare move,
Gross Lies and new Stories they daily improve,
As hoping by such to make our Minds rove,
But we'll show them a firm Resolution.
18.
Should our Neighbors still offer, in stead of their Aid
To crush our Adventurers, (as it is said)
Or send Us more Cox-combs in grave Masquerade
To sow and nourish Sedition:
May they never thereafter taste Pudding or Beef,
May Poverty seize their Traders in chief,
May they labor in Streights, and beg our Relief,
Till we pity at last their Condition.
19.
And if any unnatural Son of a Scot,
Has basely against Us engaged to Plot,
May he live in Disgrace, and at last may his Lot
Be to dance aloft in a Halter;
Let his Offspring beg both Abroad and at Home,
May the Curse of their Parent pronunce their Doom,
May they never be cherished wherever they come,
With either Food or Shelter.
20.
May the Plague, and the Pox, and the Gravel, and Gout,
Seize them all over within and without,
May they never find Ease till their Candle go out,
Who labor to destroy Us.
Let nothing disturb Us, come let Us go on,
And mind the Business which now we are upon;
If JEHOVAH be for Us, though but he alone,
Who is it that can annoy Us?
21.
Though Calumny, Malice, and Envy combine,
To strike at the Root of this noble Design,
Yet bravely to push it, we'll never decline,
in spite of all Banter or Bully:
Come the Work is near ended that well is begun,
Here Is a Cup of Success to the RISING-SVN,
If any refuse it all over the Town,
May he soundly be kicked for a Cully.
22.
We'll Statues of Brass and Pyramides raise,
We'll drink to the Health, and sing to the Praise,
Of our Nobles and Worthies, who made no delays
Our TRADE to free from Disaster:
Now that those who support it may scorn to relent,
That such as would crush it may've Cause to repent,
That Lies may not fully what is honestly meant,
Is the Prayer of your Poetaster.
FINIS.

