To the Supreme Authority, the Parliament of the Commonwealth of ENGLAND. The
humble Petition of diverse constant Adherers to this Parliament, and faithful
Assertors of the Fundamental Laws and Liberties of the Commonwealth.
Humbly showing,
THat forasmuch as the original ground of our many years contentions, wars,
and miseries, was because encroachments, breaches, and innovations had been
frequently made and enforced upon the people, in prejudice of, and tending
utterly to subvert their fundamental Laws (their Birthright and chief
Inheritance) as plentifully appears throughout the Declarations and
Remonstrances of Parliament, in justification of the war against the King and
his Adherents: and of the Army, in justification of their Proceedings against
the corrupted Members; being all in behalf, and for preservation of those
Fundamental Rights, without which there was no hope of enjoying any comforts
of life, or so much as life it self, but at the pleasure of some men, ruling
merely according to Will and Power; as the Army solemnly and truly urged.

And forasmuch as those many Victories, mercifully vouchsafed by Almighty God
in approbation of this Cause, have not been obtained at a low and easy rate,
but as through a Sea of blood, and all kinds of miseries (whereof we have had a
large proportion) thereby rendering the cause more prcious to our thoughts, and
working our Consciences into sad fears of wrath, for the long deferment of the
Restoration of those fundamental Laws to their primitive power in this Nation
(as of right is due) clearly from all encroachments and innovations any ways
introduced; whether by Kings solely, or jointly with their Instruments, as
Clergy, Lawyers, Statesmen, or other corrupt interests in Parliaments; most of
the Statute Laws being more or less tainted therewith; fearing also a return
of the like woeful wars and miseries upon us, and that this unsettled,
distracted, and divided Nation will never be free from discontents and deadly
quarrels, until our ancient Native Rights and Fundamental Laws are so
cleared and secured, as has been faithfully promised both by Parliament and
Army; and upon which we (with thousands others) were invited and drawn forth to
assist both, with all our abilities.

These considerations lying sadly upon our spirits, and observing as yet a very
small propension to this work; though we judge it the proper end of all just
endeavors in these late Troubles, the only right Improvement of all Victories
and Successes: Lest the same should be utterly omitted, and either New things
taken up of a contrary nature, or this great opportunity pass away as a Dream;
we deem our selves bound in Conscience, in pursuance of our faithfulness to
Parliament, Army, and Commonwealth, in most earnest manner

To pray, as our Birthright, and the common right of the Nation;

1. That henceforward no man be Attached, Fined, Imprisoned, Outlawed, or
adjudged of Life, Limb, Liberty, or Estate, but by Juries; according to the old
Law of the Land: And that whatsoever practice or proceedings have been, or are
contrary thereunto, whether by way of standing Committees, Courts Martial,
high Courts of Justice, or the like; may be abolished for ever.

2. That no man be put to his defense at Law, upon the bare saying or
accusation of any; but by presentment of faithful men, and lawful witnesses,
brought openly face to face.

3. That no man be compelled by Oath, or otherwise, to answer to questions
against himself.

4. That all controversies between party and party, may be finally decided,
past all Appeal, within a prefixed time, by Juries in the Hundreds, or County
Courts; that so there may be no more tedious traveling from all parts of the
Land to Westminster, nor any further vexation, and consumption of men's estates
by the Court of Chancery, or the rest of the Courts there; nor any further
attendance or dependence upon the uncertain Appearance and Votes of Committees
there, or elsewhere: Also that all Malefactors may have the like speedy Trials,
and no longer be destroyed or vitiated by long Imprisonments; That Bail be not
denied where it ought to be taken; That food and other necessaries be provided
for prisoners (whilst such) at the common charge; and no fees taken by Goalers
of their prisoners; and that all Proceedings in Law may be free, without charge
or fees from the parties to the Officers.

5. That punishments be proportioned to offenses, according to the true intent
of the fundamental Laws; that no man be punished in a mean manner for a
great fault, nor highly for a small, and that nothing be deemed Treason, but
what manifestly appears to tend to the subversion of the Fundamental Liberty
of England: and that upon judgments in criminal cases the parties damnified
may be satisfied out of the estates of the offenders, and not confiscate to the
Commonwealth: And that Witnesses may be sworn in behalf of the accused, as well
as for the Prosecutor.

6. That none be questioned or molested for Matters of Conscience and Religion;
the grounds of implacable trouble, and the very spawn of Tyranny and
Superstition; and that Tithes (sprung from the same root, and tending to the
same end, and to the obstruction of Tillage and Industry) may also cease, and
no enforced maintenance imposed in the place thereof.

7. That all servile Tenures of Copy-holds, and the like (as well as the Court
of Wards) together with the unjust descent of Inheritances to the eldest son
only, (the prinpall remaining badges of the Norman Conquest, and main support
of Regal Tyranny, creating Royalties in every Manor, and in all such
Families) may also in some convenient way, and in some reasonable time, be both
reduced to the old equal ways, as was before the times of bondage.

8. That there be no more imprisonment of men's persons for debt, but that all
estates may be liable to make satisfaction; that so the poor and unable may not
be destroyed for want of ability, nor the rich and able (as they have done)
turn prisons into places of protection.

9. That none be pressed or compelled to serve in wars; the power of Counties
(always at the direction of Parliament) being sufficient (joint or separate,
as occasion may be) for suppressing of all Insurrections and foreign
Invasions, as they may be ordered, with help of Salary Forces, and such
Volunteers as out of conscience would be aiding therein; as (blessed be God)
has been seen of late.

10. That Trade to all p^rts beyond the Seas be equally free to all Englishmen,
and here at home exempt from ingrossings, Monopolies and Forestallings, and
disburthened of Custom, Excize, and all other peculiar charges and per
plexities, occasioned by Offices and Officers; the freedom of Trade conducing
very much to the enriching and strengthening of the whole Land: and that all
public moneys may be raised by an equal rate, upon all real and personal
estates, free from charge to the Commonwealth, or trouble to Traders in
Collection.

11. That all public Officers, as Sheriffs, Justices, Coroners, Constables,
and the like, be all annually chosen by those of the place where their
Jurisdiction is to be exercised, and none imposed.

11. That all Statute Laws, and all corrupt Customs, Ordinances of
Parliaments, or Practices, of what time or continuance soever, contrary to any
of these Fundamentalls, may be repealed and abolished, that all things tending
to their establishment be revived.

13. That Parliaments or rather (according to the more ancient and rightful
denomination) Common Counsels of England, may with all convenient speed (and
due care had, against the admission of such as have forfeited their rights) be
returned to their due course of being Annually elected, for the more sure
conservation of these Fundamentalls, and of the public peace and welfare of
this Nation: and to provide such necessary Laws (not contrary unto these) as
in their wisdoms shall appear most profitable for the Commonwealth; a frequent
change of such as are trusted with power and authority, whereby all men come to
taste of subjection as well as rule, being essential to the freedom and safety
of the Nation.

And we also humbly entreat that satisfaction may be speedily given to the
Nation in point of accounts, of all estates and moneys received: that the
public Faith may yet be recovered and made good, by satisfying those that
freely lent in times of greatest hazard and necessity. That all just Arrears to
Soldiers or others may be duly paid. That all Juries may be impartially
returned, and freed from those overawings of Judges, and intanglements of
Lawyers accustomed, whereby the most juditious sort of men are discouraged from
attending that public service. That Registers may be appointed through out
the Commonwealth, to ascertain all sales and mortgages of lands, for
prevention of such gross deceipts as have been usual by double and treble
sales and morgages of one and the same parcells. That a just care may be had of
the poor of the land; that the wast places may be their portion; labor
provided for such of them as are able, and necessaries for such as are
impotent. And for the advancement and defense of truth and right; that the
Printing Press may be set at liberty; that so all things being thus rightly
and conscionably disposed, those who have been our adversaries, and all the
world may see, that we have not strove for particular advantages, but general
good, and common right; and be at length convinced, the happiness of this
Nation does not in the least depend upon a King, or House of Lords, nor upon
the wills or arbitrary discretions of men, but upon unalterable Native Laws,
unto which all are bound and ought to submit.

And though in doing hereof you should meet with great oppositions, yet greater
will be your strength then ever, in that the whole Army, and all the people
(disingaged from corrupt and self-interest) will be wholly at your command;
these being the just ends of our just war, the proper and long hoped for fruits
of all their labors, and many dangers; bringing great glory to God in the
faithful performance of all promises and engagements, true freedom and
security to every well minded person in particular, and universal good to the
Commonwealth; in restoring of our long detained and almost obliterated Native
Rights, with an immediate redress of a multitude of old and new contracted
grievances; wherein also you will fulfill the Fast which God has chosen: In
loosing the bands of wickedness, unbinding the heavy burdens, setting the
oppressed free, and breaking every yoke, and then will your light break forth
as the morning, and your health spring forth speedily, your righteousness
shall go before you, and the glory of the Lord shall be your exceeding great
reward. And therefore we beseech you neither to be discouraged nor to defer the
work, but go on without ceasing, until you have perfected the same. And that
the Lord our God may bless, honor, and preserve you therein, shall ever be
the prayers of

Your humble Petitioners.

This Petition (for restoring to the People of this Nation all their ancient
and just Rights) was subscribed by thousands of cordial Friends to this
Parliament, Inhabitants of London, Westminster, Southwark, and places adjacent;
and was by a competent number of them presented to the Parliament upon the 23.
of June 1652. And they were called in, and the Petition read, but no answer at
all given thereunto.


