A Clavis to the Bible. OR A NEW COMMENT UPON THE Pentateuch: OR Five Books of
MOSES.

Wherein are 1. Difficult Texts explained. 2. Controversies discussed. 3.
Common-places handled. 4. Cases of Conscience cleared. 5. Many Remarkable
matters hinted, that had by other Interpreters been omitted. 6. Besides, diverse
Texts of Scripture which occasionally occur, are fully opened. 7. And the whole
so intermixed with pertinent Histories, as will yield both pleasure and profit
to the Judicious, pious Reader.


By JOHN TRAPP, Pastor of Weston upon Avon in Glocestershire.

LONDON, Printed for Timothy Garthwait, at the George in Little-Brittain, 1650.

TO THE WORSHIPFUL, his highly honored friend, William Comb, Esquire of
Stratford upon Avon; Justice of the Peace for the County (...) Warwickt
Worthy Sir,
YOu may well wonder, not so much that I now dedicate this piece of my pains
unto you, as that I did it not till now; considering how long I have known you,
and how very much I am obliged to You. The truth is this; These Notes (upon
Genesis) were the first, in this kind, that ever I finished; and You were
deservedly among the first that came into my thoughts, for a Patron to them.
But as Pharez once made a breach upon his brother Zarah, Genesis 38.29.
and gat into the world before him, so did those other Works of mine (if at
least, that name be not too good for them) deal by This, which now, with its
red thread, (a sign of its intended seniority,) humbly implores Your patronage,
and (if worth while) your perusal: I know you have somewhat else to do, then to
read Commentaries; and yet I must needs know too, that You (that are so
sedulous a searcher of the Scriptures, and so seriously inquisitive after the
genuine sense of such and such dark Texts therein, as, in conference
occasionally, You have often proposed unto me,) cannot but delight to be duly
exercised in books of this nature. Dr. Cumber.
That Reverend Doctor of Cambridge, that (in the behalf of himself, and his
whole College, for a very good turn you did them,) presented You with the
fairest great Bible that ever I beheld, saw something, surely, of your pious
inclination to the study of that blessed Book: And, if to the better
understanding thereof, this, or any thing else that I have yet written, may be
any way serviceable, I have that I sought for. Alphonsus, King of Arragon, is
said to have read over the Bible fourteen times, Panormitan.
with Lyra's Notes upon it. And those English Exiles for Christ at Geneva, knew
they could not present any thing more pleasing, to that Incomparable Queen
Elizabeth, then their new Translation of, and marginal Notes upon the holy
Bible; which Book of books she had received, with both her hands, Speed.
from the Londoners, soon after her Coronation; and kissing it, laid it to her
breast, saying, That the same had been her chiefest delight, and should be the
rule whereby she meant to frame her whole deportment. Let it be still Yours,
Good Sir, as hitherto it has been; and let this poor piece of mine (if at any
time you think good to consult with it) tell you, in my absence, what my sense
is of such places, as wherein, with that noble Eunuch, ( Act. 8.31.) You may
need an Interpreter. No more, Jam. 1.17. 2 Cor. 4.6.
Sir, at present, then to pray the Father of lights (who commanded the light to
shine out of darkness,) to give You the light of the knowledge of the glory of
God, Verse. 7.
in the face of Jesus Christ; That though You have this treasure presented to
you in an earthen vessel, (...).
in a vile oyster-shell; as the Greek has it,) yet You may partake of the
excellency of the power that is of God, and not of Me, Verse. 5.
who preach not, present not, my self, but Christ Jesus the Lord; and my self

Your Servant for Jesus sake, JOHN TRAPP.

(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)

(...):
(...):
(...)
(...):
(...):
(...):
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...):
(...):
(...):
Thomas Richardson, Oxen: Pastor Ecclesiae de Newbold pace.

(...).
(...).

(...).
(...)
(...),
(...),
(...),
(...),
(...),
(...).
(...),
(...),
(...),
(...),
(...).
(...)
(...)
(...).
(...).
(...).
Tho: Dugard. Art. Mag. Rector Barsordiae.

LECTORI.
HAbes hic Lector pretii quantivis Librum;
Prioribus Limatissimis et lectissimis illis Annotationibus in Novum
Testamentum; unam cum locorum communium decade: nec non duobus aliis, idiomate
etiam vernaculo conscriptis, quorum alteri nomen, God's Love Tokens, etc.
alteri, The true Treasure, etc.
quos trivistilatus parem;
Notas in Mosis Pentadem; unde denuo
Sic splendet ille, ^t M^nte quum descenderet,
Magni Tonantis inclytus Tabellio.
At non at olim Claritate territans
Abegit accedentes, nunc parili modo
(Ne contremas) tibi prodit formidabilis.
Accede sis, et intuere; senties
Lucem stupendam, sed quae oculos beet tuos.
Tenebras fugari gestis? ecce Phosphorus.
Aenigmata solvi? te penes est nunc Oedipus.
Gazas recludi? clavem cernis auream.
Tenebricosior est subinde Legifen;
Et Sphingis instar, et gazas premit suas.
Ast Trappus clarat, solvit, pandit omnia.
Trappi nil quicquam est invium solertiae.
Nec Luce solum donat: ut scientior,
Et auctior Capite, ita cord purior
(Modo tibi ne desis) hinc discedas. Vale.
Dugardus.

TO THE BOOK.
WElcome sweet Babe into the Light:
A Light thy self to Him, whose sight
Was at twice sixty undecay'd; Deuteronomy. 34.7.

Whose Infancy ravished a maid.
His wind-and-wave-rockt Cradle she,
That gracious Princess, needs would see;
And seeing, fell in love with him
Whose first three months were taught to swim.
As he to her, so thou to me
Art full of Amabilitie.
Exceeding fair and proper too,
He was, thou art: who can but woo? (...), Act. 7.20. (...), Heb. 11.23.

Who can but fix on thee his eye?
And much affect thy company?
So sweet is thy discourse; where meet
Piety, Learning, Eloquence, wit;
Profit and Pleasure; Muse and Grace;
Maschil and Michtam; here is the place
Where golden apples we may find
With silver pictures fitly joined.
Were it not so, I durst profess,
That thou, sweet child, were nothing less
Than Son of Trappe; whose pregnant Head
So often has us Treasured
With gallant Births: in which we see
Whatsoever can be said of thee.
^o now, sweet Babe, and certifi^
Thy Sire, his Readers Thoughts are high,
Of his enlightened Pentateuch;
And that they cannot choose but look,
That Joshua Moses should succeed,
And then the rest; for Light all need.
And Moses only Earnest is;
One draught, from whence their Thirst does rise (...)
Which will not quenched be, until
Each Sacred Penman tastes his Quill.
Tell him, his Readers do believe,
While time shall be, his Sons will live.
They only pray, his Sons may grow,
In Number, and in Greatness too:
For this defect is in them All;
Being so Fine, they are too Small.
Idem.

A COMMENTARY or EXPOSITION UPON GENESIS. WHEREIN The TEXT is explained, some
Controversies are discussed, diverse common places* are handled, and many
remarkable Matters hinted, that had by former INTERPRETERS been pretermitted.
CHAP. I. Verse 1. In the beginning]
A Beginning there was then; Ar. Physic. l 8. Vide Sharpei symphon. p. 11.
Plin. lib. 1. c. 1. Veritatem qua rit Philosophia invenit Theol^gia, etc. Jo.
Picus Mirand. D. Pride. e. Cathedra.
Whatever Aristotle fancied of the Worlds eternity. So true is that of a
learned Italian, Philosophy seeks after Truth, Divinity only finds it,
Religion improves it. But the Philosopher would be yet better satisfied. He had
read (say some) this first of Genesis, and was heard to say thereupon, ^rege
diei^ domine Moses, sed quomodo probas? Well said, Sir Moses; how prove you,
what you have so said? An Ancient answers, Credo, non pro bo, Augustine.
Piscatoribus credimus, non Dialecticis. Amb. Multo melius credendo
intelliguntur, quam in^ellig^ndo creduntur fidei Christianae my^^^ria, Rupert.
Abbas Tu^rie^sis. Theologia non est argumentativa, Alsted. Aristotelis oc^^a,
seu Theologia, sophistica est ^mnium, quae literis unquam mandatae sum, maxim
^lulta, maximeque im^ia: Ramus in Theolog. Job 35.10. Psalm 1.9.1. Eccles. 12.1.
Moses was read every Sabbath, Acts 15.21. with a Lecture cut of the Prophets.
Acts 13.15. Psalm. 53.6. (...). Suidas. (...). In P^^mandro. N^m b^^ propria est
H^brai verbi significatio. Jun. Irride^ Galenus Mosen, eo quod dicat, Deum ex
nulla praexistente materia ^ondidisse mundum. Buchol. 1 Cor. 2.14. (...).
I believe it, I need not prove it. Another, We believe the holy Penmen, before
Heathen wisemen. A third, The mysteries of Christian. Religion are better
understood by believing, then believed by understanding. But best of all, the
Apostle, Through Fa^^^ (...) understand, that the Worlds were framed by the
Word of God; so that things which are seen, were not made of things which do
appear, Heb. 11.3. Divinity does not use to prove her principles (whereof this
is one.) No, not Aristotle's own Divinity (his Metaphysics, I mean,) wherein he
requires, to be believed upon his bare words Albeit, (if Ramus may be judge)
those, fourteen Books of his, are the most idle and impious piece of Sophistry,
that ever was set forth by any man. Thus, Professing themselves to be wise,
they became fools, Romans 1.22. Behold, they have rejected the word of the Lord,
and what wisdom is in them? Jerem. 8.9. God created.] Heb. Dii creavit. The
Mystery of the blessed Trinity, called by Elihu, Eloah Gnoscai, God my Makers;
and by David, The Makers of Israel; And remember thy Creators, says Solomon.
To the same sense, sweetly sounds the Haphtara or portion of Scripture, which
is read by the Jews, together with this of Moses, viz. Isai. 42.5. And that of
the Psalmist, By the word of the Lord were the heavens made, and all the host
of them, by the breath (or Spirit) of his mouth: That is, God the Father, by
the Son, through the Holy Ghost, created all. This, Trismegist an ancient
Egyptian (for he flourished before Pharaoh) acknowledged, and thence had his
name. The Hebrews also of old, were no strangers to this Mystery, though their
posterity understood it not. R. Solomon Jarchi writing on that, Cant. 1.11. We
will make, etc. Interprets it, I and my Judgment-hall. Now a Judgment-hall in
Israel consisted of three at least, which in their close manner of speech, they
applied to God, who is Three in one, and One in three. Created] Made all things
of nothing, in a most mavelous and magnificent manner, as the word
signifies. This Plato doubts of, Aristotle denies; Galen derides, as a thing
impossible, because, with Nicodemus, he cannot conceive how these things can
be. The natural man (the mere animal, whose Reason is not elevated by Religion)
perceives not these things of the Spirit of God: They are foolishness unto
him. The Cock on the dunghill meddles not with these matters. Well might Saint
Paul tell the men of Athens, (and yet Athens was the Greece of Greece, (...)
Athenaeus. Acts 17.23, 24. Somniaverat Deum non cognoverat. Instit. l. 5. c. 14.
and had in it the most Mercurial wits in the world,) That God, that made all
things of nothing, was to them the unknown God: And Lactantius fitly says of
Plato (who yet merited the style of Divine amongst them,) that he dreamt of
God, rather then had any true knowledge of him. He no where called God the
Creator, but (...), the Workman; as one that had made the World of a
praeexistent Matter, coeternal to himself. There were four Errors (says a late
learned man) about the Creation: Some affirmed, Zanch.
that the world was eternal; some, that it had a material beginning, and was
made of something; some held two beginners of things: That one beginner made
things incorruptible, and another made things corruptible. Lastly, Some said,
God made the superior creatures himself, and the inferior by Angels. This very
first verse of the Bible confutes all four. In the beginning, shows the world
not to be eternal. Created, notes that it was made of nothing. The heaven and
the earth, shows, That God was the only beginner of all creatures. God created
all: This excludes the Angels. In the government of the World, we grant they
have a great stroke, Ezekiel. 1.5, 6, etc. Dan. 10. and 11. Not so in the making
of the World, wherein God was alone, and by himself, Isai. 44.24. And lest any
should imagine otherwise; the creation of Angels is not so much as mentioned by
Moses, unless it be tacitly intimated in these words, The heaven and the
earth. (...). Aristot. de Mundo. c. 2. Matthew. 24.36. Gal. 1.8. Yates his Model
of Divinity.
The world and all things that are therein, Acts 17.24. Things visible and
invisible, (Colos. 1.16.) Whether they be thrones or dominions, etc. called
elsewhere, Angels of heaven; because (probably) created with, and in the
highest Heaven; as Christ's soul was created with, and in his body, in the
Virgins womb, the self-same moment. The highest Heaven, and the Angels were of
necessity (say some) to be created the first instant, that they might have
their perfection of matter and form together; otherwise, they should be
corruptible. For whatsoever is of a praeexistent matter, is resolvable, and
subject to corruption. But that which is immediately of nothing, is perfectly
composed, has no other change, but by the same hand to return to nothing again.

But if this were the Heaven, Quest.
what was the Earth here mentioned?

Not that we now tread upon (for that was not made till the third day.) But the
Matter of all, Answ.
that was afterward to be created; being all things in power, nothing in act.

Verse. 2. And the earth was without form, and void.] That is, as yet it had
neither essential nor accidental perfection. The Lord afterward did form it
into Light, the Firmament, the Water, and the Earth: So beginning above, and
building downwards (in the new Creature he does otherwise;) and in three days
laying the parts of the World; and in other three days adorning them. The
Rabbis tell us, Alsted. Lexic. Theol. p. 111.
that Tohu and Bohu, do properly import Materia prima and privatio: and others
of Tohu, derive Chaos; whence the ancient Latins called the World Chohus, and
borrowed their word Incho^, etc. And darkness was upon the face of the deep.]
That is, (...).
not of Hell, as Origin expounds it, but of the deep waters (see the like, Luke
8.31.) Which, as a garment covered the earth, and stood above the mountains,
Psalm. 104.6. This darkness God created not, for it was but the want of Light.
And to say, That God dwelt in darkness, till he had created Light, was a
devilish sarcasm of the Manichees; as if God were not Light it self, and the
Father of lights: 1 John 1.5. James 1.
Or, as if God had not ever been a Heaven to himself, Ere ever he had formed
the earth and the heavens, Psalm 92.2. What he did, or how he employed himself
before the Creation, is a Sea, over which no ship has sailed; a Mine, into
which no spade has delved; an Abyss, into which no bucket has dived. D.
Preston of Gods Attributes, p. 34.
Our sight is too tender to behold this Sun. A thousand years (says a great
Divine) are to God but as one day, etc. And who knows what the Lord has
done? Indeed, he made but one World to our knowledge; but who knows what he
did before, and what he will do after: Thus he. As for Saint Augustine, Prasul
ad haec Lybicus, Sabin. Po^^.
fabricabat Tartara, dixit
His, quos scrutari ^^lia, mente juvat.
Excellently another, Cuff his Differ. of Ages, p. 22.
who wanted no wit: As in the eliament of fire (says he) there is a faculty of
heating and inlightning; whence proceeds heat and light, unto the external
near bodies: And besides this faculty, there is also in it a natural power to
go upward; which when it comes into act, is received into no other subject,
but the fire it self: So that if fire could, by abstractive imagination, be
conceived of, as wanting those two transient operations, yet could we not
justly say it had no action; forasmuch as it might move upward, which is an
immanent and inward action: So, and much more so, though we grant that there
was no external work of the Godhead, until the making of the World, yet can
there be no necessary illation of idleness: Seeing it might have (as indeed it
had) actions immanent, included in the circle of the Trinity: This is an answer
to such as ask, what God did, before he made the World? Plotin. Eun^^d. 3. lib.
2. c. 2.
God (says Plotinus the Platonist) not working at all, but resting in himself,
does, and performs very great things. And the Spirit of God moved, etc.] Or,
hovered over, and hatched out the creature, Ferebatur super aquas non
pervagatione, sed potestate, non per spatium locorum, ut Sol super terram, sed
per potentiam sublimitatis suae. Eucberius. Psalm. 145 9.
as the Hen does her chickens; or, as the Eagle fluttereth over her young, to
provoke them to flight, Deuteronomy. 32.11. Or, as by a like operation, this same holy
Spirit formed the child Jesus in the Virgins womb, in that wonderful over
shadowing, Luke 1.35. The Chaldee here has it, The Spirit breathed: and David
says the same, Psalm. 33.6. He became to that rude dead mass, a quickening,
comforting Spirit. He kept it together, which else would have shattered. And so
he does still, or else all would soon fall asunder, Heb. 1.3. Psalm. 104.29.
were not his conserving Mercy, still over (or upon) all his Works.

Verse 3. And God said, Let there, etc.] He commanded the light to shine out of
darkness: He spoke the word, and it was done. 2 Cor. 4.6. Psalm. 33.9. and 148.5.
Creation is no motion, but a simple and bare emanation; which is, when without
any repugnancy of the Patient, or labor of the Agent, the work or effect, Dei
Dicere eft Efficere.
does voluntarily and freely arise from the action of the working cause, as the
shadow from the body. So Gods irresistible power made this admirable Work of
the world, by his bare word, as the shadow and obscure representation of his
unsearchable wisdom, and omnipotency. And there was light.] This first light
was not the Angels, as Augustine would have it; nor the Element of fire, as
Damascen; nor the Sun, which was not yet created; nor a lightsome cloud, or any
such thing; but the first day, which God could make without means, as Galvin
well observes. This light was the first ornament of the visible World, and so
is still of the hidden man of the heart, the new Creature, Acts 26.18. The
first thing, in Saint Paul's commission there, was to open men's eyes, to turn
them from darkness to light, etc. To dart such a saving light into the soul; as
might illighten both Organ and Object. In which great work also, Christ's words
are operative together with his commands in the mouths of his Ministers. (Know
the Lord, understand O ye brutish among the people, etc.) There goes forth a
Power to heal, as it did, Luke 5.1^. Or, as when he bade Lazarus ari^e, he made
him to arise: So here, the Word and the Spirit go together; and then what
wonder, that the spirit of darkness falls from the heaven of men's hearts, Ephesians
5 8. (...) 1 Pet 2 9.
as lightning, Luke 10.18. So as that, they that e^st were darkness, are now
light in the Lord, and do preach forth the praises of him, who has called them
out of darkness, into his mavelous light?

Verse 4. And God saw the light that it was good.] Praeviderat autem;
^^sberellus.
so one rendereth it: he saw this long before, but he would have us to see it;
he commends the goodness of this work of his to us. Good it is surely, and a
goodly creature: Sweet, says Solomon, Eccles. 11.7. Comfortable, says David,
Psalm 97.11. Which when one made question of; (...). Aristot. Beatum^ss^ hominem
Deo fruentem, sicut oculus luce. August. de Civitat. Dei. l. 8. 2 Cor. 6.14. 1
These. 5.^, 6, 7. (...). 2 Pet. 1.13. Lactant.
That Is a blind man's question, said the Philosopher. What is it then to enjoy
him, that is Light Essential? The Platonists (who were blind in divinis, and
could not see far off, yet they) could say, that he was a blessed man, who
enjoyed God, as the eye does enjoy the light. And God divided the light, etc.]
Let not us confound them, and so alter Gods order by doing deeds of darkness,
in a day of Grace, in a Land of Light. What make Owls at Athens? or such spots
among Saints, as count it pleasure to riot in the day time? It was a shame that
it should be said, There was never less wisdom in Greece, then in the time of
the seven wisemen of Greece. It was a worse shame, that it should be said to
the Corinthians, That some of them had not the knowledge of God; 1 Cor. 15. 1
Cor. 5.1. 2 Cor. 6.
and that such Fornication was found among them, as was not heard of among the
Heathen. For what fellowship has light with darkness? Surely none. Our morning
shadows fall as far as they can toward the West, Evening toward the East,
Plutarch.
Noon day toward the North, etc. Alexander having a soldier of his name that
was a coward, he bade him either leave off the name of Alexander, or be a
soldier.

Verse 5. And God called the light Day, etc.] He taught men to call them so,
Day, from the noise and hurry; Night, from the yelling of wild beasts. (...)
Darkness he created not, but only by accident; and yet not that, without
some notable use. Much less that darkness of affliction which he is said to
create, Esa. 45.7. Unto the upright there arises light in darkness, yea light
by darkness, Psalm. 112.4.
as to Paul, whose bodily blindness opened the eyes of his mind. Opera Dei
sunt in mediis co^trariis, says Luther, Gods works are effected usually by
contraries, (...). Nazi^nz. Laer^ius.
And the evening and the morning etc.] Thales (one of the seven Sages) had
learned this truth, by going to School in Egypt. For being asked whether was
first the Day or the Night? he answered, that the Night was sooner by one Day.
As who should say, before God had created the light, it must needs be confessed
that out of him, there was nothing but darkness. Evening seperates by
darkness, morning by light: so the one dis-joynes day from night, the other
night from day. Only this first evening separated not, because light was then
uncreated. Yet was it of God appointed (even then) to stand betwixt light and
darkness. In the first Evening was Heaven and Earth created, and in the first
Morning the light, 2 Cor. 11.25.
both which make the civil day, called (...) by the Apostle. And this (which
doubtless is the natural order of reckoning the day, Pli^. lib. 2. c. 7
from evening to evening) was in use among the Athenians, and is to this day
retained by the Jews, Italians, Bohemians, Si esians, and other Nations. Our
life likewise is such a day, and begins with the dark evening of misery here;
but death is to Saints the day-breake of eternal brightness. Morning lasts
but till morning: Nay, Psalm. 30.5.
not so long; for, Behold at even-tide trouble, and before the morning he is
not, Esaias 17.14. It is but a moment, yea a very little moment, and the
indignation will pertransire be overpast, says the Prophet; Esa. 16.10. (...).
Heb 6.10.37.
so little a while as you can scarce imagine, says the Apostle. If it seem
otherwise to any of us, consider; 1 That we have some lucida intervalla, some
respites, interspiriates, breathing whiles. And it is a mercy that the man is
not always sweating out a poor living, Genesis 3. Romans 6.23.
the woman ever in pangs of childbirth, etc. 2 That this is nothing to
eternity, of extremity which is the just hire of the least sin. 3 That much
good accrues unto us hereby, Heb. 12.10. Yea this light affliction which is but
for a moment, 2 Cor. 4.17.
works out unto us that far most excellent and eternal weight of glory. Oh
pray, pray, that the eyes of our understanding being enlightened by that Spirit
of wisdom, and r^vellation, we may know what is the riches of the glory of his
inheritance in the Saints, etc. Ephesians. 1.17, 18.

Verse 6. Let there be a firmament.] Yet not so firm, but it shall be
dissolved, 2 Pet. 3.11. That it is not presently so; that those windows of
heaven are not opened, as once in the deluge, (having no better a bar then the
liquid air) and we suddenly buried in one universal grave of waters, see a
miracle of Gods mercy, and thank him for this powerful word of his, Let there
be a firmament.] Bartholinus tells us, that in the year of Christ, 1551. a
very great multitude of men and cattle were drowned by a terrible tempest, the
clouds suddenly dissolving, and the waters pouring down again, Barthol lib. 2
de meteoris.
with such a strange stupendous violence, that the massy walls of many
Cities, diverse Vineyards, and fair houses were utterly destroyed and ruined.
Clouds, those bottles of rain, are vessels as thin as the liquor which is
contained in them. D. H. Conte^p.
There they hang and move, though weighty with their burdens. How they are
upheld (says a Reverend Divine) and why they fall here and now, we know not,
and wonder, Job 26.8. They water our lands, as we do our gardens, and are
therefore called our heavens, Deuteronomy. 33.28.

Verse 7. Waters which were above the firmament.] That is, the clouds, and
watery meteors above the lower region of the air, where Gods pavillion round
about him is dark waters, Psalm. 18.11. Jer. 10.13.
and thick clouds of the skies. These he weighes by measure, not a drop falls
in vain, or in a wrong place, Job 28.15. And this is the first heaven: As the
second is the starry sky, which is firm and fast, as a molten looking-glass,
Job 37.18. To this heaven, some that have calculated curiously, have found it
500 years journey. Others say, that if a stone should fall from from the eight
sphere, and should pass every hour an hundredth miles, Burton of Melancholy.
(...). De C^lo, tex^ 99. Deuteronomy. 10.14. Luke 22.42. Luke 16.22. Job. 14.2. Heb.
12.22. Heb. 11.14.
it would be 65 years or more, before it would come to ground. Beyond this
second heaven, Aristotle acknowledges none other. Beyond the moveable heavens
(says he) there is neither body, nor time, nor place, nor Vacuum. But we have
a more sure word of prophecy. Gods blessed book assures us of a third heaven,
2 Cor. 12.2. called elsewhere the heaven of heavens, the Paradise of God, the
bosom of Abraham, the Fathers house, the City of the living God, the Country
of his pilgrims. A body it is (for bodies are in it) but a subtle, fine,
spiritual body: next in purity to the substance of Angels and men's souls. It
is also, say some, solid as stone, but clear as crystal, Rev. 21.11. Job
37.18. A true firmament indeed; not penetrable by any (no not by Angels, Yates
his Model.
spirits, and bodies of just men made perfect) but by a miracle, God making way
by his power, where there is no natural passage. It opens to the very Angels,
Job. 1.51. Genesis 28.12. who yet are able to penetrate all under it. The other
two heavens are to be passed through by the grossest bodies.

Verse 8. And the evening, etc.] Here Is no mention of Gods approbation of this
second days work. Not for that hell was then ceated, or the reprobate Angels
then ejected (as the Jews give in the reason of it;) but because this days
work was left unperfected, till the next; to the which therefore the blessing
was reserved, and is then redoubled. God delights to do his works, not all at
once, but by degrees, that we may take time to contemplate them peece-meal, and
see him in every of them, as in an opticke glass. Consider the lillies of the
field, says our Savior. (...) Matthew. 6.18. Prove. 6.6.
Go to the Pismire, thou sluggard, says Solomon. Luther wished Pontanus, the
Chancellor of Saxony, to contemplate the Starchamber of Heaven (that
stupendous arch-worke) born up by no props or pillars, Proponit contemplandam
pulcherrimam coeli concamerationem Nullis pilis and columnis impositam, etc.
Scultet. Annal. 276.
and yet not falling on our heads: the thick clouds also hanging often over us
with great weight, and yet vanishing again, (when they have saluted us but)
with their threatening looks. And cannot God as easily uphold his sinking
Saints, and blow over any storm, that hangs over their heads? An Artificer
takes it ill, if when he has finished some curious piece of work, and sets it
forth to be seen (as Apelles was wont to do) men slight it, and take no notice
of his handiwork. And is there not a woe to such stupid persons, as regard not
the work of the Lord, neither consider the operation of his hands? A sino
quispiam narrabat fabulam, Esaias 5.12.
at ille movebat aures, is a proverb among the Greeks. Christ was by at the
Creation, and rejoiced, Prove. 8.30. Angels also were by at the doing of a great
deal, and were rapt with admiration, Job 38.4, 5, 6. Shall they shout for joy,
and we be silent? Oh how should we vex at the vile dullness of our hearts, are
no more affected with these indelible ravishments!

Verse 9, 10. Let the waters under the heaven be gathered, etc.] The water,
they say, is ten times greater then the earth, as is the air ten times greater
then the water, and the fire then the air. Sure it it is, that the proper
place of the water is to be above the earth, Psalm. 104.6. Sailors tell us, that
as they draw nigh to shore, when they enter into the haven, they run as it were
downe-hill. The waters stood above the mountains, till (at Gods rebuke here)
they fled, and hasted away at the voice of his thunder, Psalm. 104.6, 7. to the
place which he had founded for them. This drew from Aristotle, Lib. de mirabil.
in one place, a testimony of Gods providence, which elsewhere he denies. And
David in that Psalm. 104. (which one calls his Physics) tells us, that till
this word of command, Let the waters, etc.] God had covered the earth with the
deep, as with a garment; For as the garment in the proper use of it is above
the body, so is the sea above the land. And such a garment, (says the divine
Cosmographer) would it have been to the earth, but for Gods providence toward
us, as the shirt made for the murth^ring of Agamemnon, Psalm. 104.6, 9.
where he had no issue out. But thou have set a bound, says the Psalmist, that
they may not pass over, that they turn not again to cover the earth. God has
set the solid earth upon and above the liquid waters, for our conveni^n^y: so
that men are said to go down (not up) to the sea in ships, Psalm. 107.23. See
his mercy herein, as in a mirror, and believe, that God (whose work it is
still to appoint us the bounds of our habitations) will not fail to provide us
an hospitium, Act. 17.26.
a place to reside in, when cast out of all, as he did David, Psalm. 27.10. and
David's parents, 1 Samuel 22.4 and the Apostles, 2 Cor 6.10. and the English exiles
in Queen Mary's days, Scul^et A^^al.
and before them, Luther, (who being asked where he thought to be safe?
answered Sub Coelo) and yet before him, those persecuted Waldenses; Rev. 12.15.
after whom the Romish Dragon cast out so much water as a flood, but the earth
swallowed it; and God so provided, that they could travel from Cullen in
Germany to Millain in Italy, Cade of the Church, p. 180.
and every night lodge with hosts of their own profession. The waters of
affliction are often gathered together against the godly, but, by Gods gracious
appointment, ever under the heaven (where our conversation is, Tareus in loc.
Philip. 3.20.
though our commoration be a while upon earth) and unto one place, as the Text
here has it. The dry-land will appear, and we shall come safe to shore, be
sure of it. Esaias 26.4.
The Rock of eternity (whereupon we are set) is above all billows; washed we may
be, as Paul was in the shipwreck, drowned we cannot be, 1 Pet. 1.5.
because in the same bottom with Christ, and kept by the power of God, through
faith, to salvation.

Verse 11.12. Psalm. 104.
Let the earth bring forth, etc. Grass for the cattle, and herb for the use of
man,] and both these, before either man or or beast were created. He made meat
before mouths. He fills for us two bottles of milk before we come into the
world. Herbs and other creatures we have still ad esum and ad usum. Our land
flows not with milk only for necessity, but with hone too, for delight.
Nature amidst all is content with a little, Grace with less. Sing we merrily
with him, Hoc mihi pro certo, Georg. Fabricius Chemnicensis.
quod vitam qui dedit, idem
Et velit and possit suppeditare cibum.
(...),
(...).


Verse 12. and the earth brought forth etc.] St. Austine thinks that thorns and
thistles, brambles and briars were before the Fall, Aug de Genesis (...) cap. ^.8.
though not in that abundance that now. Basil thinks otherwise, and that till
sin came in, the rose was without prickles. Its likely, there were such shrubs
at first created, non ut laederent hominem non pec^antem, sed peccaturum, says
Pareus. Now since the Fall, all creatures are armed against man: as that sword
which Hector gave Ajax; which, so long as he used against men (his enemies)
served for help and defense: But after he began to abuse it to the hurt of
hurtless bea^^s, it turned into his own bowels. yielding fruit after his kind.]
So that men do not gather grapes of thorns, or figs of thistles. Luke 6.44.
Jam. 3.12.
Can a fig tree, says St. James, bear olive-berries; or a vine, figs? that
were monstrous. And should not every man, in like manner, bear his own fruit
(proper to his kind, to his calling?) do his own work? weed his own garden,
Psalm. 101.2.
walk within his own house with a perfect heart, till God come unto him? Come
he will, and look for fruit in its season. When he comes, he will turn up our
leaves, and look that, like the tree of life, Rev. 22.21. we bear fruit every
month: or that we be like the lemmon-tree, which ever and anon sends forth
new lemmons, as soon as the former are fallen down with ripeness. Or the
Egyptian fig tree; Vnde pomum decirpscris, alterum sine mora protuberat Sol.
in. Polyhist. cap. 45. Plin. lib. 10.
which, says Solinus, bears fruit seven times in a year: pull off a fig, and
another breaks forth in the place, shortly after. Now if we be found, like the
barren fig tree Luke 13. that had leaves onl^: or the Cypress-tree which is
said to be fair and tall, but altogether fruitless: Or the Cypar it-tree, of
which Pliny affirms, that it is natu morosa, fructu supervacanea, baccis
parva, foliis amara, odore violenta, ac ne umbra quidem gratiosa; what can we
expect, but that he should set down his basket, and, taking up his axe, hew us
down, as fuel for the fire of hell? In Hispania nihil Ig^avum, ^ihil sterile
Solin.
Spain is said to have nothing barren in it, or not some way useful; and why
should Christ's orchard, the Church? John 15.2. (...), he pares and prunes our
leaves and luxuriancies: Yea cuts and slashes where need requires; and all,
that we may bear more fruit. Sincerity alone will not comfort a man, unless it
grow up to fruitfulness; which, springing from the exercise of grace, Isa.
38.3. 2 Pet. 1.3.
has a sweet reflection on the soul, as in sick Hezekiah; and sweetly seals up
our calling to glory and virtue, as the budding of Aarons rod, did his calling
to the pr^esthood: whereupon One well observes, that not only all the plants
of Gods setting, but the very boughs cut off from the body of them will
flourish. Quest.


Here some demand, were the trees so created at first, that if sin had never
entered, they had ever flourished, laden with fruit? Answer is made by a worthy
Divine, Answ. Brightm. on Rev.
that the allusion* Rev. 22.2. seems to intimate some such matter. And perhaps
Christ would else never have cursed the fruitless fig tree, since the time of
figs was not yet come, Mark. 11.13.

Verse 14.15. Let there be light] The Sun, Moon, and Stars, are, as it were,
certain vessels, whereinto the Lord did gather the light, (...) of (...) Chald.
Ministravit. Psa. 19.5.
which before was scattered in the Heavens. The Sun, that prince of planets,
but servant to the Saints of the most High (as his name imports,) comes out of
his chamber, as a bridegroom; and rejoices, as a strong man, to run a race.
This he does with such a wonderful swiftness, as exceeds the Eagles flight,
more then it goes beyond the slow motion of a snail: and with such
incomparable sweetness, Eccles. 11.7. that Eudoxus the Philosopher professed,
Plutarch.
that he would be willing to be burnt up by the Sun presently, Herodot.
Chrysostom. Hom. 8 ad pop. Antioch.
so he might be admitted to come so near it, as to learn the nature of it.
Aeternum atri et tetri sunto and habentor, qui non tam cute, quam cord
Aethiopici, Solemn, quo magis luceat, eo magis execrentur. Chrysostom cannot
but wonder; that whereas all fire tends upwards, the Sun should shoot down his
rays to the earth, and send his light abroad all beneath him. This is the
Lords own work, and it ought to be mavelous in our eyes. Deuteronomy. 4.19. It
illuminates and beautifies all the orbs and heavenly bodies about it, yea it
strikes through the firmament, in the transparent parts, and seeks to bestow
its beauty and brightness, even beyond the Heavens. Bolt. walk. with God.
It illightens even the Opposite part of Heaven, (gliding by the sides of the
earth,) with all those glorious stars we see shining in the night. Yea, it
insinuates into every chink and cranny of the earth, and concurres to the
making of those precious metals which lie in her bowels, besides those
precious fruits brought forth by the Sun, and the precious things thrust forth
by the Moon; Deuteronomy. 33.14. For as the Sun by warmth, so the Moon by moisture,
makes the earth fruitful: whence also she has her name in the Hebrew, (...)
Jareach, from refreshing the earth with her cool influences. She is here
called a light, and a great light: therefore She has some light of her own,
(as the stars also have) besides what she borrows of the Sun, though not
strong enough to rule the night without light from the Sun. Galileus used
perspectives to descry mountains in the Moon; and some will needs place hell
in the hollow of it. It is easy to discern that her body is not all alike
lightsome (some parts being thicker, and some thinner then others) and that the
light of the Sun falling on her, is not alike diffused through her. It is
sufficient that the Church looks forth (at first) as the morning or
day-dawning, she shall be fair as the Moon at least (in regard of
sanctification) and (for justification) clear as the Sun, Cant. 6.10.
and therefore to the devil and his angels terrible as an Army with banners.
Clouded she may be or eclipsed, but not utterly darkened, or denied of light.
Astronomers tell us, that she has at all times as much light as in the full;
but oftentimes a great part of the bright side is turned to heaven, and a
lesser part to the earth. God seems therefore to have set it lowest in the
heavens, and nearest the earth, D. Hackwels Apolog. Preface
that it might daily put us in mind of the constancy of the one, and
inconstancy of the other; her self in some sort partaking of both, though in a
different manner; of the one in her substance, of the other in her visage.

Verse 16.17. He made also the stars,] To be receptacles of that first light,
(whence they are called, Stars of light, Psalm. 148.3.) and to work upon
inferior bodies, which they do by their motion, light and influence,
efficiendo imbres, ventos, grandines, procellas sudum, etc. by causing foul or
fair weather, as God appoints it. Stars are the storehouses of Gods good
treasure, which he opens to our profit, Deuteronomy. 38.12. By their influence they
make a scatter of riches upon the earth, which good men gather, and muck-wormes
scramble for. Every star is like a purse of gold, out of which God throws
down riches and plentiounesse into the earth. The heavens also are garnished
by them, Job 26.13. they are, as it were, the spangled curtain of the
Bride-groomes chamber, the glorious and glittering rough-cast of his heavenly
palace, the utmost court of it at least: from the which they twinckle to us,
and teach us to remember our and their Creator, who in them makes himself
visible, nay palpable, Psalm. 19 1. Haba^. 3.3. (...)
Act. 17.27. his wisdom, power, justice, and goodness, are lined out unto us
in the brows of the firmament; the countenance whereof we are bound to mark,
and to discern the face of the heavens, which therefore are somewhere compared
to a scroll that is written. The heavens, those Catholic Preachers, declare
the glory of God, etc. Their line, says David, their voice (says Paul, citing
the same text) is gone out throughout all the earth; (...) Romans 10.8. (...) 2
Pet. 2.16
they are real postills of his Divinity. These (nay far meaner creatures)
teach us, as Balaams Ass did that mad Prophet: to this School are we now put
back, as idle truants, to their ABC. Only let us not, as children, look most
on the babies on the backside of our books; gaze not, as they do, on the
gilded leaves and covers, never looking to our lessons; but as travelers in a
foreign Country, observe and make use of every thing; not content with the
natural use of the creature, as brute beasts; but mark how every creature
reads us a Divinity Lecture, from the highest Angel, to the lowest worm.

Verse 21. And God created great Whales,] In creating whereof, Plin. l. 9. c.
3. Ad quas nautae appellentes non* nunquam magnum incurrunt discrimen Heid.
Plin. 32. c. 1. Cur piscos vocat reptile? Repere communiter dicuntur omnia
(...), vel quae habent pedes brevieres, ut n^ures, etc.
creavit Deus vastitatus and stupores. For, as Pliny writes of them, when they
swim and show themselves above water, annare insulas putes, they seem to be so
many Islands, and have been so esteemed by seafaring men, to their great
danger and disadvantage. Into the Rivers of Arabia, says Pliny, there have
come Whales 600 foot long, and 360 foot broad. This is that Leviathan that
plays in the sea, besides other creeping, or mooving, things innumerble, Psalm.
104.25. This one word of Gods mouth, Fiat, has made such infinite numbers of
fishes, that their names may fill a Dictionary. Philosophers tell us, that
whatsoever creature is upon the earth, there is the like thereof in the sea,
yea many that are no where else to be found; but with this difference, that
those things that on the earth are hurtful, the like thereunto in the waters
are hurtlesse; as Eeles, those water-snakes, are without poison, etc. yea they
are wholesome and delicious food. Pis^is comes of Pasco: And in Hebrew the same
word signifies a pond or fish-pool, (...)
and blessing. Many Islands are maintained, and people fed by fish; besides the
wealth of the Sea. The ill-favored Oyster has sometimes a bright pearl in
it. In allusion whereunto, we have our treasure (that pearl of price, the
Gospel) says S. Paul, (...), 2 Cor. 4.7.
in Oyster-shells. And albeit now every creature of God is good, 1 Timothy 4.3.
and to be received with thanksgiving of them which believe, yet under the Law,
those fish only were reputed clean, Lev. 11.9. Deuteronomy. 14.9. Bern. Sermon. 1. in
die Sancti Andr^ae.
that had fins and scales. So, says St. Bernard, are those only clean in the
sight of God, qui squammas and loricam habent patientiae, and pinnulas
hilaritatis, that have the scales of patience, and sins of cheerfulness. And
every winged foul.] Birds were made of all four clements, yet have more of
the earth, Genesis 2.19. And therefore that they are so light, and do so delight
in the air, it is so much the more mavelous. They sing not at all till they
have taken up a stand to their mind, nor shall we praise God till content with
our estate. They use not to sing when they are on the ground, but when got into
the air, or on the tops of trees. Nor can we praise God aright, unless
weanedly affected to the world. It was a good speech of Heathen Epictetus, Si
luscinia essem, facerem quod luscinia. Cum autem, Epist. Enchirid.
homo rationalis sim, quid faciam? Laudabo Deum, nec cessabo unquam, vos vero*
ut idem faciatis, hortor. But concerning the creation of birds, Macrob. l. 7 c.
16
there is in Macrobius a large dispute and disquisition, whether were first,
the egg or the bird? And here Reason cannot resolve it, since neither can the
egg be produced without the bird, nor yet the bird without the egg. But now
both Scripture and Nature determine it, that all things were at first produced
in their essential perfection.

Verse 22. Be fruitful and multiply.] By bidding them do so, he made them do
so, for his words are operative. Trismegist says the self same things in
effect that Moses here does. God, says he, Morneu^ de verit. relig. cap. 9.
cries out to his works by his holy word, saying, Bring ye forth fruit, grow
and increase, etc. Note the harmony here (and in twenty more passages) between
Mercury and Moses. God has not left his truth without witness from the mouths
of heathen writers. We may profitably read them, but not for ostentation. That
were to make a calfe of the treasure gotten out of Egypt.

Verse 24.25. Let the earth, etc.] Lo here the earth, Act. 16.8.
in it self a dead element, brings forth, at Gods command, living creatures,
tame, wild and creeping: Why then should it be thought a thing incredible, that
the same earth, at Gods command, should bring forth again our dead bodies
restored to life, at the last day? Surely if that speech of Christ, Joh. 11.43.
Lazarus come forth, had been directed to all the dead, they had all presently
risen. If he speak to the rocks, they rent; if to the mountains, they melt;
if to the earth, it opens; if to the sea, it yields up her dead; if to the
whole host of heaven, they tremble, and stand amazed, waiting his pleasure. And
shall he not prevail by his mighty power, the same that he put forth in the
raising of his Son Christ, Ephesians. 1.19. to raise us from the death of sin; and of
carnal, Esa. 51.16.
to make us a people created again, Psalm. 102.18? Does he not plant the
heavens, and lay the foundation of the earth, that he may say to Zion thou art
my people? Empty man would be wise (says Zophar, Job 11.12.) though man be
born like a wild ass colt. Man's heart is a mere emptiness, a very Tohu vabohu,
as void of matter to ma^e him a new creature of, as the hollow of a tree is of
heart of oak. God therefore creates in his people clean hearts; Psalm. 50.10.
and, as in the first creation, so in the new creature, the first day, as it
were, God works light of knowledge; the second day, the firmament of faith; the
third day seas and trees, that is, repentant tears, and worthy fruits; the
fourth day, Lightf. Miscel.
the Sun, joining light and heat together, heat of zeal, with light of
knowledge; the fifth day, fishes to play, and fowls to fly; so, to live and
rejoice in a sea of troubles, and fly heavenward by prayer and contemplation.
The sixth day, God makes beasts and man, yea, of a wild asse-colt, a man in
Christ, with whom old things are past, all things are become new, 2 Cor. 5.17.
(...). 1 Thessalonians 4.
And to whom (besides that they are all taught of God) the very beasts, Esa.
1.2. and birds, Jer. 8.7. do read a Divinity Lecture. Ask now the beasts, and
they shall teach thee, and the fowls of the air they shall tell thee, Anton.
Eremita ap. Aug. lib. 1. de doctr. Christ. Niceph. l. 8. c. 40 Clem. Alex.
Job 12.8. The whole world is nothing else, says One, but God expressed, so
that we cannot plead ignorance; for all are, or may be book learned in the
creature. This is the Shepherds Callender, the Plowmans Alphabet; we may run
and read in this great book, which has three leaves, Heaven, Earth, Sea. A
brutish man knows not, neither does a fool understand this. Psalm. 9 29.
They stand gazing and gaping on the outside of things only, but asknot, Who
is their Father, their Creator? Like little children, which when they find a
Picture in their book, they gaze, and make sport with it, but never consider
it. Either their minds are like a clock that is over wound above the ordinary
pitch, and so stands still; their thoughts are amazed for a time; they are like
a block, thinking nothing at all; Esa. 40.28.
or else they think Atheistically, that all comes by nature; (but have thou not
known, says the Prophet? have thou not heard, that the everlasting God, the
Lord, the Creator? etc.) or at best, as the common passenger looks only at the
hand of the Dial to see what of the clock it is, but takes no notice of the
clock-work within the wheels, and poises, and various turnings and windings in
the work: so it is here with the man that is no more then a mere natural. 1
Cor. 2.15.
But he that is spiritual discerns all things; he enters into the
clock-house, as it were, and views every motion, beginning at the great wheel,
and ending in the least and last that is moved. He studies the glory of God
revealed in this great book of Nature, and prayseth his power, wisdom*
goodness. etc. And for that in these things He cannot order his speech, because
of darkness* Job 37.38, 39. he begs of God a larger heart and better language,
and cries out continually with David, Blessed be the Lord God, the God of
Israel, who only does wondrous things. And blessed be his glorious name for
ever and ever, and let the whole earth be filled with his glory. Amen and Amen.
Plal. 72.18, 19.


Verse 26. And God said, Let us make man.] Man is the masterpeece of Gods
handiwork. Sun, Moon, and Stars, are but the work^ of his fingers, Psalm. 8.3.
but man the work of his hands, Psalm. 1^ 9.14. He is cura divini ingenii, made
by counsel at first, Let us make, etc. and his body, which is but the souls
sheath, Dan. 7.15. Animae vagina.
is still curiously wrought in the lowest parts of the earth, that is, in the
womb, Psalm. 139.15. with Ephesians. 4.9. as curious workmen, when they have some
choice piece in hand, they perfect it in private, and then bring it forth to
light for men to gaze at. Thine bands have mude me (or took special pains
about me) and fashioned me, says Job. Thou have formed me by the book, says
David, Psalm, 139.16. Job 10.8.
yea em^roidered me with nerves, veyns, and variety of limbs, miracles enough,
says One, betwixt head and foot to fill a Volume. Man, says a Heathen, is the
bold attempt of daring nature the fair workmanship of a wise Artificer, says
another; (...). Trismegist. (...) Eurip. (...). X^noph. Miraculorum omnium
maximum Stoici. Gal. lib. 3. de usu partium. Lib. 11. and 1^.
The greatest of all miracles, says a third. And surely should a man be born
into the world but once in a hundred years, all the world would run to see the
wonder. Sed miracula assiduitate vilescunt. Galen (that profane man) was
forced upon the description of man, and the parts of his body only, to sing a
hymn to the Creator, whom yet he knew not. I make here, says he, a true hymn
in the honor of our Maker; whose service* I believe verily, consists not in
the sacrificing of Hecatombs, or in burning great heaps of Frankincense before
him, but in acknowledging the greatness of his wisdom, power and goodness; and
in making the same known to others etc. And in another place, Now is he, says
Gallen, which looking but only upon the skin of a thing, wondreth not of the
cunning at the Creator? Yet notwithstanding, he dissembleth not that he had
tried by all means to find some reason of the composing of living creatures;
and that he would rather have fathered the doing thereof upon Nature, then upon
the very Author of Nature. Lib. 15.
And in the end concludes thus; I confess that I know not what the soul is,
though I have sought very narrowly for it. Favorinus the Philosopher, Nibil in
terra magnum prater bomin^m, nibil in homine praeter mentem, Fav. ap. Gel.
was wont to say, The greatest thing in this world is Man, and the greatest
thing in man is his soul. It is an abridgement of the invisible world, as the
Body is of the visible. Hence man is called by the Hebrews Gnolam haktaton,
and by the Greeks Microcosmus, A little world. And it was a witty essay of him,
who styled woman, the second Edition of the Epitome of the whole world. The
soul is set in the body of them both, as a little god in this little world, as
Jehovah is a great God in the great world. Whence Proclus the Philosopher could
say, that the mind that is in us, is an image of the first mind, that is, of
God. [In our image, after our likeness.] That is, as like us as may be, to
come as near us as is possible; for these two expressions signify but one and
the same thing, and therefore verse. 27. and chap. 5.1. and 9.6. one of them
only is used: Howbeit Basil refers image to the reasonable soul in man,
similitude to a conformity to God in holy actions. Some of the Fathers, had a
conceit that Christ made man's body with his own hands according to the form
and likeness of that body which himself would afterward assume and suffer
in. We deny not, but that man's body also is Gods image, as it is a little
world, and so the idea or example of the world, that was in God from all
eternity, is, as it were, briefly and summarily expressed by God in man's body.
But far be it from us to conceive of God as a bodily substance, to think him
like unto us, as we are very apt to do. God made man in his own image,
Molinaeus de ^^gu. Dei.
and men of the other side, quasi ad hostimentum, would make God after their
image. It was seriously disputed by the Monks of Egypt, Anno Dom. 493. (and
much ado there was about it) whether God were not a bodily substance, Funcius
Chron. in Commentar.
having hands, eyes, ears, and other parts, as we have? For so the simpler
sort among them were clearly of opinion. Acute obtusi.
And in the second Council of Nice under Irene, John one of the Legates of the
Eastern Churches proved the making of Images lawful, because God had said in
this text, Let us make man after our own Image. And it was there decreed that
they should be reverenced and adored in as ample and pious manner as the
glorious Trinity. D. Heylins Geog. p. 53 3.
But God is a Spirit, Job. 4.4.
says our Savior, who best knew, for he came out of his Fathers bosom. And
man's soul is a spirit likewise, indivisible, immateriall immortal,
distinguished into three powe^s, which all make up one spirit. Spirit signifies
breath, which indeed is a body. Om^^s (...) Jebova ^^era sunt spiritual^^, ut
den^t^tur Deum esse spiritum, Alssed.
But because it is the finest body, the most subtle and most invisible,
therefore immateriall substances, which we are not able to conceive, are
represented unto us under this name. Such is the soul of man, which (for the
worth of it) the Stoics called the whole of Man. The body is but the sheath of
the soul says Daniel; the shell of it, Solam mentem dig^am esse quae home
appelletur Stoici statuunt, Sic Plato scripsit (...) Corpus five corpor quasi
cordis por. i.e. puer five farmus. Camerar. (...) quasi (...). i.e. vinculum
s^, anima Macrob. Some. Scip. l. 1. c. 11.
said Zoroaster; the servant, yea the sepulcher of it, say others. Compared to
the soul, it is but as a clay-wall that encompasseth a treasure, as a wodden
box of a Jeweller; as a course case to a rich instrument; or as a mask to a
beautiful face. He that alone knew, and went to the worth of souls has told
us that a soul is more worth then all the world besides, because infused by
God and stamped with his image and superscription. Now if we must give to Caesar
the things that are Cesars, (...), (three articles, for one in the former
clause Matthew. 22.21.) Cur non and nos animam nostram, Dei imaginem, soli Deo
consignemus, says Gaspar Ens? Why give we not our souls to God, since they are
made in his image?

Verse 27. So God created man in his own image.] There is a double image of
God in the soul. One in the substance of it, whereof I have spoken in the
former verse. The other in the qualities and supernatural graces, of knowledge
in the Understanding, rightness or straightness in the Will, and holiness in
the affections: In all these, Man, when he came first out of Gods mint, shone
most gloriously. But now O! quvntum haec Niobe, etc. Ezra 3.12.
Oh think of this burnt Temple, and mourn, as they in Ezra, Eber,
candidissimum, adhibito igne, nigrescit.

Verse 28. Subdue the earth, and have dominion.] Make it habitable by driving
out the wild beasts, that infest and annoy it. Make it arable also, and useful
to your selves and yours. Psalm. 8. Qui dominari in catera p^ssit. Natus homo
est.
The creatures are man's servants and houshold-sluffe. God has put all things
under his feet, that he may raise himself thereby to God his Maker. A wise
Philosopher could say, That man is the end of all things in a semicircle; that
is, All things in the world are made for him, and he is made for God; to know
and acknowledge him, to serve and express him, to say to him as David, and
that Son of David. Lord, a body (a soul) have thou given me; Heb. 10.5.
behold I come to do thy will O God. The very Manichees, that denied God to
be the Author of the body, fasted on Sundays, and in fasting exercised an
humiliation of the body. The Paternians are not worth speaking of, A^sted.
Chron. p. 387.
who held this heresy (in the year of Christ, 387) that the lower parts of
man's body were not made by God, but by the devil; and therefore allowing
liberty of all wickedness to those parts, they lived most impurely. But if
superstitious persons must reckon for it, Coloss. 2. ult.
that punish their bodies without commandment from God, where shall those
beasts app^ar that defile their bodies, and damn their soul? How shall all the
creatures instead of serving them, take up arms for God, and serve against
them? yea rise up in judgment and condemn them, for that when all other
things keep their fit and proper places in the frame, and observe their
peculiar ends and uses whereunto they were created, men only (as so many
Heteroclites and Irregulars) should prove unprofitable, unusefull, nay hurtful
to the whole frame, causing vanity and misery to the poor creature which groans
under it, and so defiling the very visible heavens that they must be purged by
the last fire, as those vessels were in the Law that held the sin-offering?
Rom 8.
As for those that are in Christ, these are restored to the privileges of
their first creation, as fellowship with God, dominion over the creatures* etc.
as appears by comparing Psalm. 8.45. with Heb. 2.6, 7. etc. where whatever is
spoken of man is applied to Christ, and so is proper to the Church, which is
Christ mystical, union being the ground of communion. Christ is married to his
people in faithfulness; and as part of a jointure, he has taken and bound over
the best of the creatures to serve them, and bring them in provision, Hos.
2.20, 21, 22.

Verse 29. Behold, I have given you] By this, Behold, God stirs up them and us
to confidence, thankfulness and obedience to so liberal a Lord, so bountiful
a Benefactor. And surely as iron put into the fire, seems to be nothing but
fire, so Adam, thus beloved of God, Psalm. 16.12.
was turned into a lump of love, and bethinks himself what to do by way of
retribution. All other creatures also willingly submitted to Gods ordinance and
man's service, well apaid of Gods provision, that great housekeeper of the
world, that has continually so many millions at bed and board. This is
intimated in that last clause, And it was so. An undoubted argument surely of
Gods infinite goodness, thus to have provided for so diverse natures and
appetites diverse food, remedies, and armor, Psalm. 104. for men especially,
filling their hearts with food and gladness, Act. 14.17.

Verse 31. Behold, it was very good] Or, extreme good, pleasant and profitable,
a curious and glorious frame, full of admirable variety and skill, such as
caused delight and complacency in God, and commands contemplation and
admiration from us; like as a great garden stored with fruits and flowers,
calls our eyes on every side: Wherefore else has God given us a reasonable
soul, and a Sabbath day, a countenance bent upward, and, as they say, peculiar
nerves in the eyes to pull them up toward the seat of their rest? besides a
nature carried with delight after plays, pageants, masks, Bodin. Theas. Nature.
strange shows and rare sights; which often are sinful or vain, or at best,
imperfect, and unsatisfactory? Surely those that regard not the works of the
Lord, nor the operation of his hands, God shall destroy, and not build them up,
Psalm. 28.4. which to prevent, good is the counsel of the Prophet Amos, and that
upon this very ground, Prepare to meet thy God, O Israel: For lo, he that
forms the mountains and creates the wind, etc. Amos 4.12, 13. when he had
made man, he made an end of making any thing more, because he meant to rest in
man, to delight in him, to communicate himself unto him, and to be enjoyed by
him throughout all eternity. And notwithstanding the fall, he has found a
ransom, Job 33.24. and creating us in Christ Jesus unto good works, Ephesians. 2.10.
he rejoices over his new workmanship with joy, yea he rests in his love,
Roderit. sanctii Hist Hisp. p. 4. c. 5. ^xantiq. Annalib.
and will seek no further, Zeph. 3.17. But what a mouth of madness did Alfonso
the Wise open, when he said openly, that if he had been of Gods counsel at the
Creation, some things should have been better made and marshalled. Prodigious
blasphemy!

CHAP. II. Verse 1. All the host of them.]
HIs upper and nether forces, his horse and foot, as it were, all creatures in
heaven, earth or under earth, called Gods Host, for their, 1. number, 2. order,
3. obedience. Kimchi.
These the Rabbines call magnleh cheloth and matteh cheloth, the upper and
lower troops ready pressed.

Verse 2. He rested] That is, He ceased to create, which work he had done,
without either labor or lassitude, Esa. 4.28. He made all nutu non motu.

Verse 3. God blessed the seventh day] i. e. made it an effectual means of
blessing to him that sanctifies it, as a rest from bodily labor and
spiritual idleness, (...). Ignat. Epist. 3. ad Magnesi^s. Spec Europ^.
as Ignatius exhorts. And sanctified it] i e. Consecrated and set it apart
for holy use, as they sanctified (that is, appointed) Kedesh for a City of
refuge, Josh. 20.7.

Verse 4. Jehovah God] Moses first calls God Jehovah here, when the universal
creation had its absolute being. This is the proper name of God. The Jews
pronounce it not, we profane it, which is to them a great stumbling block. The
first among the Christians that pronounced Jehovah, was Petrus Galatinus. But
if ye would pronounce it according to the own letters, it should be Jahuo, of
Jarmuth, Jagnak^b.

Verse 5. The Lord God had not caused it to rain] And none but he can give
rain, Jer. 14.22. the means of fruitfulness, which yet he is not tied to, as
here. The Egyptians used in mockery to tell the Grecians, that if God should
forget to rain, they might chance to starve for it.

Verse 6. But there went up a mist] The matter of rain: And hereby God tempered
the mortar whereof he would make man, as he did the clay with spittle,
wherewith he cured the blind, Ioh. 9.

Verse 7. Zuinglius.
Formed man of the dust] not of the rocks of the earth, but dust, that is soon
dispersed; to note our frailty, vility, and impurity. Lutum enim conspurcat
omnia, sic and caro. But why should so glorious a soul (called here Neshamah,
of affinity to Shamajim, Heaven, whence it came) dwell in this corruptible and
contemptible body? Lomb lib. 2. did. 1.
For answer; besides Gods will, and for order of the universe. Lombard says,
that by the conjunction of the soul with the body (so far its inferior) man
might learn and believe a possibility of the union of man with God in glory,
notwithstanding the vast distance of nature, and excellence; the infinitness of
both in God, the finiteness of both in man. And breathed into his nostrils]
Quidam volunt metaphoram sumptam a vitrorum formatione. The greatest man is but
a little air and dust tempered together. Nazian.
What is man, says One, but (...), soul and soil, Breath and Body, a pile of
dust the one, a puff of wind the other, no solidity in either? And man became
a living soul] Dicaearchus doubted of the soul, ^usc. quaest.
whether there were such a thing in rerum natura. He could not have doubted of
it, without it, as man cannot prove logic to be unnecessary, but by logic.

Verse 8. And the Lord God planted] Had planted (to wit, on the third day, when
he made trees) for man's pleasure, a garden or paradise in Eden (whence (...))
in the upper part of Chaldea, whereabout Babel was founded. It was destroyed by
the Deluge; the place indeed remained, but not the pleasantness of the place,
cecidi^ rosa, mansit spina. (...) Herod l. 1. Plin. l. 6. c, 16 Donec a sp^ ad
speciem transtret
And yet that Country is still very fruitful, returning (if Herodotus and
Pliny may be believed) the seed beyond credulity. He put the man whom he had
formed] And formed him not far from the garden, say the Hebrews; to mind him,
that he was not here to set up his rest, but to wait till his change should
come.

Verse 9. Every tree, etc.] The Hebrews think, that the world was created in
September, because the fruits were then ripe and ready, (...). The tree of life
also] A symbolicall tree; by the eating of the fruit whereof Adam should have
had Gaius his prosperity, his body should have been in health, 3 Jo^. 2.
as his soul. prospered. The tree of knowledge of good and evill] So called
not because it self either knew, or could cause man to know; but from the
event, God Forewarning our first parents, that they should know by woeful
experience, unless they abstained, what was the worth of good, by the want of
it; and what the presence of evil, by the sense of it. In like sort the waters
of Meribah, and Kibroth Hattaavah, or the graves of lust, received their names
from that which fell out in those places.

Verse 10. And a river went out] Pliny writes, Plin. l. 2. c. 106.
that in the Province of Babylon, there is burning and smothering a certain
lake or bog, about the bigness of an acre. And who knows, whether that be not
a piece of Paradise, now drowned and destroyed?

V. 11. Where there is gold] Which (though never so much admired and studiously
acquired) is but the guts and garbage of the earth. Gold is that which the
basest element yields, the most savage Indians get, servile Apprentices work,
Midianitish Camels carry, miserable muck-worms adore, unthrifty Ruffians spend.
It is to be wondered, thatt reading upon the Minerals, we cannot contemn them.
They lie furthest from heaven, and the best of them in Havilah, furthest of all
from the Church. Adam had them in the first paradise: In the second, we shall
not need them. Money is the Monarch of this world, and answers all things: but
in the matters of God, money bears no mastery, will fetch in no commodity, Job
28.15. Wisemen esteemed it as the stones of the street, 2 Chronicles. 1.15. children
of wisdom might not possess it in their girdles, Matthew. 10.9. Medes cared not
for it, Esa. 13.17. and devils were set to keep rich and pleasant Palaces,
verse 22. So subject these metals are to ensnare and defile us, that God made
a law to have them purified, ere he would have them used, Number. 31.22, 23. and
appointed the snuffers and snuffe-dishes of the Sanctuary to be made of pure
gold, Exodus 25.28.
to teach us to make no account of that, that he put to so base offices, and is
frequently given to so bad men. The Spaniard found in the mines of America more
gold then earth. D. Heyl. Geogr. p 774.
Hasten we to that Country where God shall be our gold, and we shall have
plenty of silver, Job 22.25.

Verse 15. To dress it, and to keep it] This he did as without necessity, so
without pains, without weariness. It was rather his recreation then his
occupation. He labored now by an Ordinance, it was after his fall laid upon
him as a punishment, Genesis 3.19. to eat his bread in the sweat of his nose. God
never made any, as he made Leviathan, to sport himself only; or to do as it is
said of the people of Tombutum in Afric, that they spend their whole time in
piping and dancing; ^ph. 4.28.
but to work either with his hands or his head (in the sweat of his brow, or of
his brain) the thing that is good; and with how much the more cheerfulness
any one goes about his business, by so much the nearer he comes to his
Paradise.

Verse 16. Commanded the man, saying] God has given man dominion over all the
sublunary creatures; and lest he should forget that he had a Lord whom to serve
and obey, he gave him this command to keep. [Of every tree of the Garden thou
may freely eat] The less need he had, to have been so licorish after
forbidden fruit. (...) hic adhibet; quod miserecordiae est. But stolen waters
are sweet, Nitimur in vetitum, etc.

Verse 17. But of the tree, etc.] An exploratory prohibition. God knew well
where we are weakest, and worst able to withstand; viz. about moderating the
pleasures of our touch and taste, because these befall us not as men, Arist.
Ethic. l. 1. c. 3.
but as living creatures. Here therefore he lays a law upon Adam, for the
trial of his love; which, left to his own free will, he soon transgressed.
Thou shall surely dye] Certissime citissimeque morieris, says Zuinglius, thou
shall surely and shortly or suddenly dye. And without doubt every man should
dye the same day he is born: the wages of death should be paid him presently.
But Christ begs their lives for a season. For which cause he is said to be the
Savior of all men, not of eternal preservation, but of temporal reservation.
1 Timothy 4.10.
In which respect also, God is said so to have loved the world that he gave his
only begotten Son, etc. It was a mercy to all mankind, Job. 3.16.
that the Messiah was promised and provided, sealed and sent into the world,
that some might be saved, and the rest sustained in life, for their sakes.
Symmachus renders it, Thou shall be mortal.

Verse 18. And the Lord God said] Had said, to wit, on the sixth day when he
made Man, and there was not a meet help found for him. Then God said, It is not
good, etc. and so created the woman by deliberate council, as before he had
done the man. Only there it was in the plural, Let us make, here, I will make;
to show the unity of the Essence in the Trinity of persons. (...). Athenis in
nuptiis dici solitum. Zenod. Proverb.
It is not good for man to be alone] It is neither for his profit, nor his
comfort. Optimum solatium sodalatium. I will make him a help meet for him] or,
such another as himself, of the same form for perfection of nature, and for
gifts inward and outward; one in whom he may see himself, and that may be to
him as an Alter-ego, a second-self, Ephesians. 5.28. Such an one as may be a help to
him both so this life, 1. By continual society and cohabitation. 2. For
procreation and education of children. And for the life to come, 1. As a remedy
against sin, 1 Cor. 7.2. Secondly, As a companion in Gods service, 1 Pet. 3.7.
Nazianzen says, (...) Naz. in pat. ^pitaph.
that his mother was not only a meet help to his father in matters of piety,
but also a doctresse and a governesse; and yet he was no baby, but an able
Minister of the Gospel. Budaeus (that learned Frenchman) had a great help of
his wife in points of learning; she would be as busy in his study, Non tractat
negligentius libros ^eos quam liberos. Daniels Chron. fol. 262.
as about her huswifery. Placilla the Empress was a singular help to her
husband Theodosius in things both temporal and spiritual: And so was our King
Edward the thirds Queen, a Lady of excellent virtue, the same that built Queens
College in Oxford. She drew evenly (says the Historian) with the King her
husband in all the courses of honor, that appertained to her side, and seems a
piece so just cut for him, as answered him rightly in every joint.

Verse 19. To see what he would call them] If he had been permitted to name
himself, it should have been probably, Luke 3. ult.
the Son of God, as he is called by St. Luke in regard of his creation. But
God, to humble him, calls him first Adam, (and after the fall) Enosh, that is,
frail, sorry man, a map of mortality, a mass of misery.

Verse 20. Adam gave names] A sign of his Sovereignty, Number. 32.38, 41. an
argument also of his wisdom, in giving them names according to their natures,
as Hebricians well know. But for Adam there was not found, etc.] God set all
the creatures before him, ere he gave him a wife: 1. That seeing the sexes, he
might desire to have a help in his kind, and nature also. Men should not
marry, till they find in themselves the need of a wife. Vt ei commendatius
esset Dei donum. Pet. Martyr.
2. That seeing no other fit help, he might the more prize her.

Verse 21. And the Lord God caused a deep sleep] It may be thought that Adam,
observing that among all the creatures there was no meet match found for him,
prayed in this deep sleep, or ecstasy, Genesis 24.63.
that such a help might be given unto him. This is Peter Martyrs note upon the
text. Isaac went forth to pray, when he had sent forth for a wife; Prove. 19.14.
A bad wise is but the image of a wife, or (as Lam^chs wives name was) a shadow
of a wife, tsilla, umbra ipsius. Mr. Gatak.
and it was but reason, For a prudent wife is from the Lord. And he that
finds a wife, finds a good thing, says the Wiseman. A wife, that is, a
good wife; for every married woman is not a wife, unless she be a help to her
husband, in the best things especially. The Heathen well says, that every man
when he marries, brings either a good or an evil spirit into his house, and
so makes it either a heaven, or a hell. And it is a device of the Rabbines (but
the moral is good) that in the names of Ish and Ishah is included Jah, the
name of God; and that, if you take out Jod and He, whereof that name consists,
there remains nothing Esch, Esch, fire, fire; the fire of dissension and brawl,
which burns, and consumes to the fire of hell. It is not evil therefore to
marry, but it is good to be wary, to marry in the Lord, as the Apostle has it.
He that marries in the Lord, marries also with the Lord; and he cannot be
absent from his own marriage. A good wife was one of the first real and royal
gifts bestowed upon Adam; and God consults not with him, to make him happy. As
he was ignorant while himself was made, so shall he not know, while a
second-selfe is made out of him; both that the comfort might be greater then
was expected, as also, that he might nor upbraid his wife with any great
dependence or obligation; See Yates his Model.
he neither willing the work, nor suffering any pain, to have it done. The rib
can challenge no more of her, then the earth can of him. And he took one of
his ribs] The woman was made of a bone (says a Reverend Writer) and but one
bone, Ne esset ossea, B. Kings Vitis Palatina.
lest she should be stiff and stubborn. The species of the bone is expressed to
be a rib (a bone that might be best spared because there are many of them) a
bone of the side, not of the head; (the wife must not usurp authority over her
husband) nor yet of the foot; she is not a slave, but a fellow-helper. A bone,
not of any anterior part, she is not praelata, preferred before the man:
neither yet of any hinder part, she is not post-posita, set behind the man; A
yokefellow standing on even ground with thee, though drawing on the lest side.
Gatak.
but a bone of the side, of the middle and indifferent part; to show, that she
is a companion, and the wife of thy covenant, Mal. 2.14. A bone she is from
under the arm, to put man in mind of protection and defense to the woman. A
bone not far from his heart, to put him in mind of dilection and love to the
woman. A bone from the left side (as many think likely) where the heart is, to
teach, that hearty love ought to be betwixt married couples: Vxorem vir amato,
marito pareat uxor;
Conjugis illa suae cor, caput ille sua.


Verse. 22. And the rib which the Lord God had taken,] Matter, in the beginning
of time, was taken from man, to make a woman: And matter, in the fullness of
time, was taken from a woman to make a man, even the man Christ Jesus. 1 Timothy
2.5.
And as out of the side of sleeping Adam, Eve was formed; so from the blood
issuing out of the side and flesh of dying Christ, came his Spouse the Church.
Ephesians. 5.26. Diabolus per costam tanquam per scalam, ad cor Adami ascendit.
Mor. l. 3. c 5. Sic Phoroneus apud Bruson. l. 7. c. 22. Requirit vir costam
suam, requirit soemina sedem suam. Hinc Ruth 3.1.9. Annon^ quaererem tibi
requiem? Aben-^zra.
His chief care therein was to sanctify and cleanse his Church, and therefore
he came by water and blood. So should it be every husbands; then would not the
devil so often break his head with his own rib; or as Saint Gregory has it,
Climb so often by h^s rib to his heart, as by a ladder. A good wife does him
good, and not evil, all her days. But this is not every man's happiness. Sylla
faelix, si non habuisset uxorem. So Job and Moses, quorum conjugium,
conjurgium. There is in most, a propension to the nuptial conjunction. The man
misseth his rib (say the Rabbines;) the woman would be in her old place again,
under the man's arm or wing. Then Naomi her mother in law, said unto her, My
daughter, shall I not seek rest for thee, that it may be well with thee? Ruth
3.1. [Made he a woman,] Heb. builded, That is, created with special care, art,
and fit proportion, in the manner of a house. A body has God given the woman
more capacious and roomthy, both for the conceiving and containing of her young
babe, which dwells in her womb, as in its house; and has all its
household stuff, as it were about it, till time produce it into the light of
life. Adam was formed, Eve builded; her frame consists of rarer rooms, of a
more exact composition then his does. And if place be any privilege, we find,
says one, hers built in Paradise, when his was made out of it. [And brought
her unto the man] Marriage then is of divine institution. The Saturnilian
heretics sinfully said, that it was of the devil. And the blemish will never
be wiped off from some of the Ancients, who to establish their own doll of I
know not what Virginity, have written most wickedly and basely against
marriage. Three things we have here out of Moses to say for it against
whatsoever opposite, viz. Gods 1. Dixit. 2. Duxit. 3. Benedixit, Genesis 1.28. God
the Father ordained it. God the Son honored it with his first miracle. God the
Holy Ghost did the like, by overshadowing the betrothed Virgin, Papists and
others that disgrace it, appear herein more like Devils then Divines, if S.
Paul may be judge, 1 Timothy 4.2 or Ignatius, who says, Habet inbabitatorem
Draconem Aposta^a^. Ignat. Epist. ad Philad.
If any call marriage a defilement, he has the Devil dwelling in him, and
speaking by him.

Verse 23. This is now bone of my bone, etc.] This sentence (says Tertullian,
and after him, Beda) is the first Prophecy that was ever uttered in the world.
And it is uttered in a way of admiration, which they that are taken with, do
commonly use a concise kind of speech; especially, if overjoyed as Adam here
was upon the first sight of the woman; whom he no sooner saw but knew, and
thereupon cried out, as wondering at Gods goodness to himself, [This now is bone
of my bone, and flesh of my flesh.] Luther, the night before he dyed, was
reasonably well, and sat with his friends at table. The matter of their
discourse was, whether they should know one another in heaven or no? Luther
held it affirmatively, and this was one reason he gave. Melch. Adam.
Adam as soon as he saw Eve, knew what she was, not by discourse, but by divine
revelation; so shall we in the life to come. All the Saints shall sit down with
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, having communion with them, not only as godly men,
but as Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. And if with them, why not with others? S.
Chrysostom says we shall point them out, and say, Lo yonder is Peter, (...).
and that is Paul, and there are the Prophets, Apostles, etc. [She shall be
called Woman] Or Manness, of Man, as Ishah of Ish. He gave her her name, from
his own, by taking away one numerall letter that stands for ten, and adding
another that stands for five; to note her infirmity, and duty of submitting to
her husband, whose very naming of her notes her subjection.

Verse. 24. Therefore shall a man leave, etc.] Whether these are the words of
God, Adam or Moses, it is uncertain, and not much material. The husband is
bound more to love his wife then his parents, in regard of domestical
communion, Paraus ad locum.
adh^^sion and cohabitation, not in regard of honor, obedience and recompense.
[And they two shall be one flesh.] Two in one flesh, not three or four, as the
Patriarks of old through ignorance, or inobservance of that plain prohibition,
Levit. 18.18. It is possible they might mistake the word (sister) for one so by
blood, which was spoken of a sister by nation, as those clauses (to vex her)
and (during her life) do evince.

Verse. 25. They were both naked, and not ashamed,] Neither needed they. Sin and
shame, as Papists say, hops and heresy, came in together. Clothes are the
ensigns of our sin, and covers of our shame: To be proud of them is as great
folly, as for a begar to be proud of his rags, or a thief of his halter. As the
prisoner looking on his irons, thinks on his theft; so we, looking on our
garments, should think on our sins.

CHAP. III. Verse 1. Now the Serpent was more subtle, etc.]
ANd so a more fit instrument of that old Serpent the Devil, (...) Theodotion.
Cui Paulus ^ Cor. 11.3. (...) oppo^it, quam mundus vocat Sillmess,
sheepishness. Revel. 12.9. Authoramentu^ majoris infidelitatis. Ter^ul. Isai.
55.3. Plin. l. 8. c. 25.
that deceives all the world. Good natural parts abused, prove rather as
press-money to impiety (as he phraseth it,) and their wisdom Culpae suasoria,
as Ambrose speaks. Wit unsanctified, is a fit tool for the devil to work
withal: Neither is there a likelier Anvil in all the shop of Hell, whereon to
forge mischief, then one that is learned and lewd, ingeniose nequam, Wittily
wicked. [And he said,] That is, the Devil in the Serpent, as the Angel in
Balaams Ass. Satan istius primae fabulae Poetafuit, serpens histrio. By the ear
he brought death into the world: And God, to cross him, brings life in by the
same door: For it is, Hear and your souls shall live. The Dragon bites the
Elephants ear, and thence sucks his blood: Because he knows that to be the
only place, which he cannot reach with his trunk to defend. So here, that
great red Dragon dealt with miserable mankind, setting first upon the woman as
the weaker vessel (where the hedge is lowest, there the beast leaps over) and so
climbing by Adams rib to his heart, as by a ladder; as I said before, out of
Saint Gregory. [Yea, has God said,] In the Chaldee, Is it true that God has
said? Vide simile Ruth 2.21. in Hebraeo, and 1 Samuel 14.30.
A concise expression, implying, That this was not the first of their
discourse: Something had been said before. It is not safe parling with the
Devil. Satan etsi semel videatur verax, millies est mendax, and semper fallax.
Halter him up therefore, (...)
and stop his mouth soon, as our Savior did. Or do, as the French say in their
Proverb, When the Spaniard comes to parley of peace, then double bolt the door.
The Hollanders are said to make no conditions with the Spaniard, but such as
are made at Sea, and sealed with great Ordnance, Spec. bell. sacr. Greenbam.
etc. He shoots with Satan in his own bow, that thinks by parling with him to
put him off. [Hath God said, Ye shall not eat.] Here, he began his assault upon
our first-parents; here, upon Christ, Matthew. 4.3. with 3.17. and here, he does
still upon us: Endeavoring to elevate the truth and certainty of Gods Word, and
to weaken our Faith in his precepts, promises, and menaces. And here, if he
take us out of our trenches, if he can but wring this sword of the Spirit out
of our hands, he may do what he will with us. Get but the Heretics (said that
subtle Sophi^ter) out of the paper-walls of the Scriptures, Bristow his Motives.
into the open field of Fathers and Councils, and ye shall soon do well enough
with them.

Verse. 3. Neither shall ye touch it] This is of the woman's own addition, and of
a good intention doubtless. For afterward, when she had drunk in more of the
Serpents deadly poison, Hausis virus peritura, and peritur^s paritura. Bern.
from gazing upon the fruit, she fell to gaping after it, from touching to
tasting. He that would not feed on sins meat, must beware of the broth; keep
thee far from an evil matter, says Moses, Exodus 23.7. A good man dare not
come near the train, though he be far off the blow: He dare not venture on the
occasion, lest his tinder should take fire. Circa serpent is antrum po^itu^ non
eris di^ illasus. Isidor.
It is ill playing upon the hole of the Aspe, or coming too near Hell-mouth:
For by so doing, you may beseem to drop in. Watch therefore, and pray too, that
ye enter not into temptation, says our blessed Savior; and mark his reason,
The spirit is willing, but the flesh is weak. q. d. Though the Spirit purpose
otherwise, the flesh will faulter, and be foiled: Witness the woman here with
her left ye die. She held the precept in the utmost extent of it: But that
which she failed in, was, That she minced the matter, and opposed not the
commination to the temptation; And see how the Devil works upon her weakness,
as he watches for our haltings, and where to have us on the lip.

Verse. 4. Ye shall not surely die,] He says not, Dying ye shall not dye; or,
Surely ye shall not die: This had been too plain a contradiction to that word
of God, that had threatened assured death. But, Ye shall not die in dying; That
is, It is not certain ye shall die. And this latter is more nice and ambiguous.
She seems to doubt of the certainty of what God had said. He plainly, and yet
clearly impugnes it: Whereas had Gods Word abidden in her, she had overcome
that wicked one, 1 John 2.14. The word is compared to mustard seed, which being
mixed with vinegar, is (they say) a sovereign medicine against Serpents.

Verse. 5. For God does know, etc.] Picherellus in Cosmopaea.
Id quod cuns Deum non lateat, sibi cavet. It is remarkable, that the devil
here charge God with envy, which is his own proper disease: For ever since,
he himself fell from Heaven, he cannot abide that any should come there; but of
pure spite hinders them, all that may be. Here he envyed that God should be
served by man, and that man should be gifted and graced by God. So that he
paints out and points out himself, in saying, That God envyed man the gift of
Wisdom. There is nothing more usual with the wicked, then to muse as they use,
and to suppose that evil to be in others, that they ^inde to be in themselves.
Die in Calig. Act. and Mon. fol. 1441.
Caligula (that impure beast) would not believe there was any chaste person upon
earth. And, I dare say (said Bonner to Hawks the Martyr) that Cranmer would
recant, if he might have his living. So judging others by himself: For Papists
apply themselves (said our Protomartyr Mr. Rogers) to the present state; yea,
if the state should change ten times in the year, they would ever be ready at
hand to change with it, and so follow the cry, and rather utterly forsake God,
and be of no Religion, then that they would forgo lust, or Living for God or
Religion. [Then your eyes shall be opened.] There is an opening of the eyes of
the mind to contemplation and joy: There is also an opening of the eyes of the
body to confusion and shame. (...). 2 Cor. 1 King. 22.15. Cioesus Halyn p^^^^^s
ma^nam di^p^^d^s ^pum vim. Herod.
He promises them the former, but intends the latter, and so cheats them, as
he does thousands now adays, by the cogging of a Dye, (as Saint Paul has it)
giving them an apple in exchange for paradise. Thus of old he couzened A^ab and
Croesus with promises of victory; which when it fell out otherwise, he had a
hole to creep out, and save his credit by an equivocation. Thus of latter time
be gulled Pope Silvester the second, assuring him that he should never dye till
he came to say Mass in Jerusalem; He, resolving never to come there, made no
reckonin^ but to live a long time. But it f^ll out somewhat otherwise: For as
he was saying Mass in a certain Church in Rome called Jerusalem, fearing
nothing, ^unc^ius in C^ronol Intelligit ^e a diabolo, amphibol^ vocis,
circumventum, auimadvertit sibi moriendum esse pensumque Sata^ae reddendum, etc.
the Devil claymed his due, and had it. For he was there, and then taken with
a strong fever, and lying on his death bed, he sent for all his Cardinais, and
declaring before them what a wretched bargain he had made with the devil
(selling his soul for the Popedom, and deceived^by him with promise of long
^^lfe) he bitterly bewailed his own folly, and advised them to beware by his
example. And was not Leoline the second, Prince of North Wales, as finely
cheated? For consulting with a Witch he was told, that it was his destiny to
ride through London with a crown on his head. Hereupon he growing burdensome to
the English borders was in a battle overthrown. His head fixed upon a stake, and
adorned with a paper-crown was by a horseman triumphantly carried through
London: Heylins Geog. p. 493.
and so the prophecy was fulfilled, Anno Dom. 1282. [And ye shall be as Gods]
The Serpents Grammar first taught (says Damianus) Deum pluraliter declinare,
eritis sicut Dii This the woman understood of the Trinity, as appears, verse.
22. but the Devil might mean it of the Angels, (so our Chaldee Paraphrast
translates it) which had sinned, and now had woeful experience of the good
which they had lost, and the evil wherein they lay.

Verse 6. And when the woman saw] At this Cinque-port the devil entered. How
many thousand souls have dyed of the wound of the eye, Ovid.
and cried out, as Eve might here, ut vidi, ut perii! If we do not let in sin
at the window of the eye, or the door of the ear, it cannot enter into our
hearts. Vitiis nobis in animum per oculos est via, says Quintilian. Wherefore
if thine eye offend thee, pull it out. In Barbary, it is death for any man to
see one of the Xoriffes concubines; and for them too, if when they see a man
(though but through a casement) they do not suddenly screek out. Quintil.
declam.
[She took of the fruit thereof] Whatever it were, whether an apple (as
Bernard, Heyl. Geog. p. 196. P^rrexit Pomum and surripuit paradisum. Bern.
and others; gather out of Cant. 2.3.) or a fig, as Theodorot; or a
pomegranate, as Mahomet in his Alchoran; or a peach) (malum persicum) or Pomum
Paradisi, as the Syrians call a kind of fruit common amongst them: God created
us of nothing, and we offended him for a matter of nothing. All the legions of
the reprobate devils, says one, entered into one beast, and, Yates his Medell.
by the Pitho and Suada of that viperous tongue, crept into the bosom of ^^ve,
as it were by all the Topic places in Logic, figures in Rhetoric, and other
engines of guile and deceit, till they had brought her into a fools paradise,
with the loss of the earthly, and hazard of the heavenly. [And gave it also to
her husband] It is probable (says the same Author) that Adam stood by all the
time of the disputation, therefore his sin was the greater, that he rebuked not
the Serpent, etc. And again, I cannot believe, says he, but that the devils
in the Serpent did as well tempt Adam as Eve, though first they began with her,
as a further means of enticing him. Others are of another mind, as that the
tempter set upon the woman alone and apart from her husband, as she was
curiously prying into the pleasures of the garden. Paraeus.
That the Serpent crept into Paradise unseen of Adam, who was to keep beasts
out of it; Cartw. Catach.
that he remained there without being espied of him, and crept out again when
he had done his feat: That when she gave him the fruit, she gave him also a
relation of the Serpents promise, concerning the force of that fruit, that it
would make them wise as God, knowing good and evil, etc. whence he is said to
have harkned to her voice, verse. 17. And surely, every Adam has still his Eve,
every David his Bathsheba, a tempter in his own bosom (his own flesh) whereby
he is eftsoons drawn away, and enticed as a fish by the bait, (beauty is a hook
without a bait, (...) Jam. 1.14.15. (...).
as one says) till when lust has conceived (as here it did in Eve) it
brings forth sin, and sin, when it is finished, brings forth death. Satan
has only a persuading slight, not an enforcing might. It is our own
concupiscence that carries the greatest stroke.

Verse. 7. They knew that they were naked] Bereft of Gods blessed Image; no more
of it left, then, as of one of Jobs messengers, to bear witness of our great
loss. I call it ours, because we were all in Adam, as Levi was in Abraham, or
as the whole Country is in a Parliament man. He was our head; and if the head
plot treason, Hos. 13.9.
all the body is guilty. Hence the Prophet Hosea; O Israel, One has destroyed
thee, but in me is thy help. So some read it. Had we been by when this wretched
One destroyed us all: had we seen him stand staggering betwixt Gods
Commandment, and Eves allurement, not yet resolved which way to incline, and
could have foreseen the danger hanging over him and our selves, we would surely
have cried out to him Cave miser, Augustine.
Take heed thou wretch. And why do we not the same to our selves, when
solicited to sin? Alterius perditio tua sit cautio, says Ifidore: and cavebis
si pavebis, says Another. There is a practical judgment still practiced in our
hearts. On the one side, is propounded the commodity of sin; on the other, the
offense, whereby we provoke God. So that in the one end of the balance, is
laid God, in the other sin, and man stands in the midst, rejecting the command
of God, and accepting the pleasure of sin. What is this, but to prefer Paris
before Paradise with Cardinal Burbon, Barabbas, before Christ, a thing of
naught before Heavens happiness? Our first parents were born with the royal
Robe of Righteousness (as those Porphyrog^niti in Constantinople,) Purchase
Pilgrim.
but the devil soon stripped them of it (the same day, as some think) and so
they became fore ashamed of their bodily nakedness, which therefore they fought
to cover, by making themselves Aprons, to cover their Privities.

But why did they (and do we still) so studiously hide those parts, Quest.
rather then their eyes and ears, which they had abused to sin with?

Because sin is become natural, Answ. Psalm. 51.7. Genesis 5 3.
and derived by generation. Therefore circumcision was also on that part of
man's body; to show, That that which was begotten thereby, deserved in like
manner, as execrable and accursed to be cut off, and thrown away by God. Here
some ground their opinion, That it is a sin against nature, to look on the
nakedness of another. A foul shame it was for old Noah to lie so uncovered in
the midst of his Tent: but far fouler for those worshipers of Priapus, (which
Jerome and Isidore make to be that Baal-Peor, Number. 25.5.) that shamed not to
say, Empedoclis vocab. apud Arist.
Nos, puabre pulso, stamus sub Jove, coleis apertis, etc. But in man's soul is
now a (...) the seed of all sin, though never so heinous or hideous: Neither by
nature is there ever a better of us; but as in Water face answers to face, so
does the heart of a man to a man, Prove. 27.19. And as there were many Marii in
one Caesar, so are there many Cains and Caiaphasses in the best of us all.
Totus homo est inversus decalogus. The whole man is in evil, and whole evil is
in man. As the Chaos had the seeds of all Creatures, and wanted only the
Spirits motion to produce them: So our corrupt nature has all sins in it, and
wants but the warmth of Satan's temptation to bring them into act, if God
restrain not. Sure it is, we can stay no more from sinning, then the heart can
from panting, and the pulse from beating. The first man defiled the nature, and
ever since the nature defiles the man. As poison put into a cup of wine
disperseth it self, and makes it deadly: so Original sin polluteth and
p^^soneth our whole man. And as the whitest ivory turns with the fire, into the
deep^st black, the sweetest wine becomes the sowrest vinegar: So here. The more
unnatural any quality is, the more extreme will it be, as a cold wind from the
south is intolerable, etc. So Adam, being in honor, was without understanding,
Psalm. 49. ult.
and is now in worse case then the very beasts that perish: Pecoribus
morticiuis, says Tremel: The beasts that die of the murrain, and so become
carrion, and are good for nothing.

Verse. 8. And they heard the voice of the Lord.] Either speaking something by
himself of that which Adam had done against his command; as who should say,
Has he served me so indeed? or else, calling to Adam in a mighty thunder, as
to Pharaoh, Exodus 9.28. or in a terrible whirlwind, as to Job, Chap. 38.1. the
better to humble him, and prepare him for a Sermon of mercy and forgiveness.
God pours not the oil of his grace, save only into broken vessels. Christ
came to cure not the sound, but the sick with sin: Isai. 35.7. and 44.3.
The Holy Ghost is poured out upon thirsty souls only, that are scorched and
parched with the sense of sin, and fear of wrath. As the way to Sion was by
Sinai, so, unless we desire rather to be carnally secured, then soundly
comforted, we must pass by Baca to Berachah, by a sight of our sin and misery,
to a sense of Gods grace and mercy. [Walking in the Garden in the cool of the
day.] God did not meet the man angerly, Exodus 4.
as he did Moses in the Inn, when he had much ado to forbear killing him; nor
as the Angel did Balaam, with a drawn sword in his hand to destroy him: Neither
did he rush upon him, as David ran upon Goliath, and cut off his head. But with
a soft and slow pace, (...) Gressu grallatorio. Isai. 28.21. (...). Ad vesperam
dici.
(as if he had no mind to it) he comes walking toward them, to do this his
work, his strange work, of sentencing sinners; and that in the cool of the day
too, or toward the evening, as Saint Ambrose has it after the Septuagint.
Whereas to show mercy, behold, he comes leaping upon the Mountains, skipping
upon the Hills. Lo, this is the voice, and the pace of my beloved. Cant. 2.8.
God was but six days in making the whole world, yet seven days in destroying
one city Jericho, as Chrysostom long since observed. He scourges not his
people, Isai. 42.14.
till there be no remedy, 2 Chronicles. 36.16. He forbears us, though he cry like a
traveling woman, to be delivered of his judgments. [And Adam and his wife, hid
themselves.] Their covering of figleaves then, was too short; for, here they
run with their aprons, into the thicket, to hide from God. A poor shift, God
wot, but such as is still too much in use. If I have covered my transgressions
as Adam, Job 31.33.
or after the manner of men, says Job, then let this and this evil befall me.
The bad heart runs from God, and would run from its own terrors, as the wounded
Deer from the deadly Arrow that sticks in his side; Facti sunt a cord suo
fugitivi. Tertul.
but refusing ordinary trial, it is in danger to be pressed to death inevitably.
We have no better refuge, then to run from God to God. Blood-letting is a cure
of bleeding, a Burn of a burn: To close and get in, avoyds the blow, etc.

Verse. 9. Where art thou,] Not, as if God knew not; for he searches Jerusalem
with lights; Jam. 1.17.
yea, himself is the father of lights, the great eye of the world, to whom the
Sun it self, is but a snuff. Zach. 3.9. 2 Chronicles. 16 9. Heb. 4.13. exp.
He has seven eyes upon one stone; yea, his eyes run to and fro through the
earth, and all things are naked and open: Naked (for the outside,) and open
(for the inside) before the eyes of him, with whom we have to deal. Simple men
hide God from themselves, and then think they have hid themselves from God;
like the Struthiocamelus they thrust their heads into a hole, Plin.
when hunted, and then think none sees them. But he searches (so one may do,
yet not find) and knows, Psalm. 139.1. He sees (so one may do, yet not
observe) and pondereth, Prove. 5.21. Though men hide their sins, as close as
Rachel did her idols, or Rahab the spies: Though they dig deep to hide their
counsels, God can and will detect them, Prove. 15.11.
with a woe to boot, Isai. 29.15. For hell and destruction are before him; how
then can Saul think to be hid behind the stuff, or Adam behind the bush? At
the voice of the Lord he must appear, will he nill he, to give account of his
fear, of his flight. This he does, (but untowardly) in the words following.

Verse. 10. I heard thy voice,] So he had done before his fall, and feared not.
Are not my words good to the upright? Micah 2.7. Excellently Saint Austin,
Adversarius est nobis, quamdiu sumus and ipsi nobis: Quamdiu tu tibi inimicus
es, inimitum habebis Sermonem Dei. Yea, but I was naked, and therefore hid my
self. This also was non-causa pro causa. There was another pad in the straw,
which he studiously conceals; viz. The conscience of his sin. Hic vero non
factum suum, Excusando seipsum accusat. Gregor. Prove. 19.3.
sed Dei factum in semetipso reprehendit, says Rupertus. He blames not himself
but God, for making him naked; and so verifies that of Solomon, The foolishness
of man perverteth his way; and then (to mend the matter) his heart fretteth
against the Lord. O silly simple!

Verse. 11. Who told thee.] His own conscience awakened and cited by Gods voice,
Joh. 4.
told him (as the woman of Samaria said of our Savior) all that ever he did.
Before and in the acting of sin, we will hear nothing; but afterward,
Conscience will send forth a shrill and sharp voice, that shall be heard all
the soul over; such as was that of Reuben to his brethren. Did not I warn you,
saying, Sin not against the child, etc. The Books of our Consciences are now
sealed up, and the woeful contents are not read by the Law: They remain as
Letters written with the juice of Oringes or Onions, which are only to be made
legible by the fire of Gods wrath. Then shall the wicked run away (but all in
vain) with those words in their mouths, Isai. 33.14.
Who amongst us shall dwell with this devouring fire? Who shall abide by these
everlasting burnings? Then shall they tire the Mountains with their hideous
outcries, Fall upon us, hide us, crush us in pieces, grind us to powder. But
how can that be, when the Mountains melt, and the Rocks rent asunder at the
presence of the Lord, at the presence of the God of Jacob?

Verse. 12. The woman whom thou gave.] Here he rejects the fault upon the
woman, and through her, upon God, who gave her to be with him, or before him; or
such another as himself, (with reference to that Lenegdo, Chap. 2.20.) or a
help meet for him. This she might have been to him, had he been (that he ought
to her) a manly guide in the way to Heaven. He should have rebuked her, as Job
did his wicked wife, for transgressing Gods Law, and tempting him to the like.
Then had her sin been personal, rested upon her self, and gone no further, had
not he hearkened to her voice. But he not only not did thus, but instead of
agnizing his fault, seeks to transfer it upon God: That since he could not be
like unto God in the divinity, which he aimed at, he might make God like unto
himself in iniquity, which was to fill up the measure of his sin, that wrath
might have come upon him to the utmost; but that Gods mercy was then, and is
still over all his own good, and our bad works.

Verse. 13. And the woman said, The Serpent.] Thus the Flesh never wants
excuses: Nature need not be taught to tell her own tale. Sin and shifting came
into the world together; never yet any came to Hell, but had some pretense for
coming thither. It is a very course Wool that will take no Dye: Sin and Satan
are alike in this; they cannot abide to appear in their own color. Men wrap
themselves in excuses, as they do their hands, to defend them from pricks. This
is still the vile poison of our hearts; that they will needs be naught, and yet
will not yield, but that there is reason to be mad, and great sense in sining.

Verse. 14. And the Lord God said to the Serpent.] The Serpent was not examined,
because God would show no mercy to him: But presently doemed, Hestod.
because of mere malice, he had offended. The Heathens called certain Devils
(...) quasi (...) (...). Evil befell him, that evil bethought him: As Balaam
that advised evil against Israel, was slain by the sword of Israel. The Serpent
also has his part in the punishment, because instrumental to the Devil. Both
Authors, Actors, and Abettors of evil, shall rue it together. The Serpent here,
is, first cut shorter by the feet, and made to wriggle upon his belly;
secondly, confined to the dust for his dict; which is also, says an Ancient
(...) the Devils diet: For your Adversary the Devil (that Ruler of the darkness
of this world) as he dwells in dark hearts, Ephesians. 6.12.
as so many holes and caverns. Job 40.10.
So, Behemoth-like, he cats grass as an Ox; yea, dust as a Serpent, continually
seeking whom he may devour, 1 Pat. 5.7. And is therefore cursed above all
Creatures. He has swallowed down souls, and he shall vomit them up again: God
shall cast them out of his belly, Job 20.15. He sins every day the sin
against the Holy Ghost, and shall lie lowest in Hell. Every foul that he drew
thither by his temptation, shall be as a millstone hanged about his neck, to
hold him down in the bottomless lake.

Verse. 15. And I will put enmity,] Instead of that amity and familiarity, thou
have lately had with the woman. And here begins the Book of the Lords wars: His
hand is here upon his Throne, he has solemnly sworn, That he will have war
(not with Amalek only, Exodus 17.16.
but) with the whole Serpentine seed, from generation to generation. There is
also a capital antipathy (says Bodinus) between the woman and the Serpent:
Bodin. Theat. lib. 3.
So that in a great multitude of men, if there be but one woman amongst them,
he makes at her, and stings her about the heel. Plin. lib. 2. cap. 63. and lib.
7. c. 2.
Pliny also tells us, That the fasting-spittle of a man, is deadly to Serpents;
and that if a Serpent wound a man, he is no more entertained by the earth, or
admitted thereinto. Others tell us, Sphinx Philos.
That a Snake fears and flies from a naked man, but pursues him when clothed or
covered. Put on Christ, and thou art safe. His blood, as Polium, is a
preservative against Serpents, Revel. 12.9. Plin. lib. 2. c. 2^.
[It shall bruise thy head.] And so kill thee quite; as a Serpent is not killed
dead, till knocked on the head; which he therefore carefully saves with the
hazard of his whole body. To elude, or elevate at least, this sweet promise
(this grand Charter of our Salvation) the Devil, no doubt, devised, and by his
Factors, the Poets divulged that frivolous fable of Hercules his clubbing down
the Lernaan Serpent, and cutting off his many heads. But Christ alone is that
stronger man, that, drawing the Dragon out of his Den, has cracked his crown,
destroyed his works, made him to fall as lightning from the heaven of men's
hearts, and will tread him also under our feet shortly, as he has already done
under his own, when spoiling these principalities and powers, Romans 16.
he made a show of them, openly triumphing over them on his cross, Colos. 2.15.
As in the mean while, till this be fully done, nibble he may at our heel, but
cannot come at our head. Achilles is said to have taken his death, by a wound
in his heel. But he that is begotten of God keeps himself, and that wicked
one (the Devil) touches him not, 1 John 5.18. That is, Tactu qualitative,
says Cajeta^, with a deadly touch; he thrusts not his sting so far into him,
as to do him to death. For Christ (who is our life, Colos. 3.4) can as soon die
at the right hand of his heavenly Father, as in the heart of a faithful
Christian; fith our life is hid with Christ in God; his life is bound up in his
Childs life. He shall make the broken horns of Satan to be the Trumpets of his
glory, and the Cornets of our joy. [Thou shall bruise his heel.] Not both his
heels, but one only: So that he shall stand upon one, though hurt in the
other; or if overthrown, yet he shall rise again, and be more then a conqueror,
(...). Romans 8.
or over overcome him that overturned him. He is the Victor, that breaks the
head: When as he that bruiseth the heel (though he be an enemy) yet he lies
along, and can do no great mischief there. And hereto the Prophet seems to
refer, when he says, Why should I fear in the days of evil, when the iniquity
of my heels (that is, when the punishment of mine iniquity that reaches but to
the heels) shall compass me about? God will redeem my soul from the hand of
hell, Psalm. 49.6, 16. I conclude with that memorable saying of a holy Martyr:
Bradford.
If we had a lively feeling of the Serpents poison, we could not but rejoice in
our Captain, who has bruised his head. What though the Serpent shoot his sting
into our heel, and make us halt, Heb. 12.2, 3.
yet let us go on, though halting to Heaven; Yea, run with patience the race
that is set before us; looking at Jesus, the Author and finisher of our Faith,
etc.

Verse. 16. I will greatly multiply thy sorrow,] The greatest of sorrows this
is, as we are given to understand, both out of divine, Decie^ in bello mori
mallem quam parere vel semel adhuc. Euripid.
and humane Writings. I had rather dye in battle ten times over, then bring
forth but once only, said Medea in the Tragedy. But we have a better example
in the Ecclesiastical History, of a Roman Lady, called Sabina; Who being great
with child, was cast in prison for the Profession of Christ's Truth. Now when
the time came, that she should be delivered, and she cried out for extremity of
pain; the Keeper of the prison asked her, Job. Manlii, loc. com p. 124.
Why she made such a stir now? And how she would, two or three days hence
endure to dye at a stake, or by the sword? She answered, Now I suffer as a
woman, the punishment of my sin; but then, I shall not suffer, but Christ shall
suffer in me. In peace offerings there might be oil mixed, not so in
sin offerings. In our sufferings for Christ, there is joy, not so, when we
suffer for our sins. [In sorrow thou shall bring forth.] And in sorrow shall
thou bring up, Liberi sunt dulci^ acerbitas, seu us Tertul. loquitur, amariss.
voluptas.
after the birth, as Genesis 50.23. Children are certain cares, but uncertain
comforts. Eve had a great catch of it, when she had got a manchilde of the
Lord, she called him Cain, a possession, as David did Absalom, his Fathers
peace. But Fallitur augurio spes bona sape suo. Excellently Saint Gregory, Ante
partum liberi sunt onerosi, in partu dolorosi, (...)
post partum laboriosi. [And he shall rule over thee.] Yet not with rigor. She
must (though to her grief and regret) be subject to all her husbands lawful,
both commands and restraints. But he must carry himself as a man of knowledge
toward her; and make her yoke as easy as may be. It is remarkable, Colos.
3.19.
That when the Apostle had bid Wives submit to your own husbands, etc. He does
not say, Husbands, rule over your wives, (for that they will do fast enough
without biding,) but husbands love your wives, and be not bitter unto them.

Verse. 17. Because thou have hearkened to the voice of thy wife.] Our English
Historian, relating the deadly difference that fell out betwixt those two noble
Seymours (the Lord Protector, Sir Johu Heywood in the life of K. Edw. 6. p. 84.
and the Admiral his Brother, in Edward the sixth time) thorough the instigation
of their ambitious wives, passionately cries out, O wives! The most sweet
poison, the most desired evil in the world, etc. Woman was first given to man
for a Comforter, says he, not for a Counselor, much less a controller and
director. And therefore in the first sentence against man, this cause is
expressed, Because thou have obeyed the voice of thy wife, etc. [Cursed is the
ground for thy sake.] (...) and Arvuum ab Heb. (...)
Hence the Greeks and Latins borrow their words for ground of the Hebrew word
that signifies cursed. The curse of emptiness and unsatisfyingness lies upon
it, that no man has enough, though never so much of it. The curse also of
barrenness, or unprofitable fruits, whose end is to be burned, Heb. 6.8. The
whole earth and the works therein, 2 Pet. 3.10.
shall be burnt up. It was never beautiful, nor cheerful, since Adams fall. At
this day it lies bedridden, waiting for the coming of the Son of God, that it may
be delivered from the bondage of corruption, Romans 8.20.

Verse. 18. Thorns also and thisties,] Vbi veritas dixit, quod terra homini
spinas and tribulos germinaret subintelligendum fuit, ait Petrareha, and
rusticos tribulis omnibus asperiores. Petrarch. de remed ver. fort. Dial. 59.
Judge. 8.7-16.
The Clowns of Midian drove Jethroes daughters from the water they had drawn.
Rudeness has no respect, either to sex or condition. Those Churls of Succoth,
were worthily threshed with thorns of the Wilderness, and with briars, and
thereby taught better manners. [Thou shall eat the herb of the field.] And no
longer feed on these pleasant fruits of Paradise, which by thy sin thou have
forfeited. Thus man is driven from his dainty and delicate diet, to eat husks
with hogs, as the Prodigal, or at least, grass with the Ox, as Nebuchadnezzar,
and be glad of it too; as our Ancestors, who though they fed not at first on
acorns, as the Poets fable, Hi^c holus quisi. (...).
yet if they could get a dish of good green herbs, they held themselves as well
provided for, as if they had all.

Verse 19. Picherellus in Cosm^p.
In the sweat of thy face] Or, of thy nose, as One renders it, that sweat that
beginning in thy brow runs down by thy nose, through thy hard labor. This is a
law laid upon all sorts to sweat out a poor living, to humble themselves by
just labor, to sweat either their brows or their brains (for this latter also
is a sore occupation, Eccles. 1.13. and the Ministers toil is compared to that
of those that cleave wood, or work hard in harvest, 1 Thessalonians. 3.5. Math. 10.1 ^
1 Cor. 9.14. See my true ^^ealure. (...)
etc.) [Shalt thou eat bread] Not herbs only as verse. 18. And here take notice
of an elegant gradation, together with a merciful mitigation of man's misery.
Thou shall* eat earth, ver. 17. herbs, verse. 18. and now here, Thou shall eat
bread, that stay and staff of man's life under his hard labor. Panem dictum
volunt a (...) Isidor. 1.20.
[Vntill thou return unto the ground] O earth, earth, earth, bear^ the word of
the Lord, i.e. Earth by creation, Earth by corruption, Earth by resolution.
This is the end of all men, and the living should lay it to heart. J^^. 22.29.
In this third of Genesis we find Man's Exodus. This is the first text of
mortality, and all comments, yea all dead corpses concur to the exposition of
it. Etiam mut^ cl^mant cadav^^a. Basil.
[For dust thou art] Think on this, and be proud, if thou can. We were
created (...), but now we live (...) says Agapetus. Had we so sweet a
generation as that little creature Scaliger speaks of, Exercit ad ad Cardan.
that is bred in sugar, we might have had some ground of boasting; but now we
may sprinkle the dust of humility on our heads, as the Ancients used to do, in
token that they had deserved to be as far under, as now they were above ground.
[And to dust thou shall return] By this limitation God restrains man's death
here threatened, to that earthy part of him, his body. The forest death is when
a man dies in his sins, as those Jews did, Joh. 8.21. (better dye in a ditch a
fair deal) when he is killed with death, as Jesabels children, Rev. 2.23. this
is the second death. The condemned person comes out of a dark prison, and goes
to the place of execution; so do many from the womb to the tomb, nay to that
tormenting Tophet, to the which death is but a trap-door, to give them entrance.

Verse 20. And Adam ca^^ed his wives name Eve] That is, Life, or Living. Not,
per antiphraesim, as some would have it, much less out of pride and stomach, in
contempt of the divine sentence denounced against them both, that they should
surely dye, as Rupertus would have it; but because she was to be mother of all
living, whether a natural or a spiritual life; and likewise for a testimony
of his faith in, and thankfulness for that lively and lifegiving oracle, verse.
15. (...) i. e. (...)
[The mother of all living] Have we not all, as one father, Mal. 3.10. so, one
mother? did we not all tumble in a belly? why, do we then deal treacherously
every man against his brother? ib. This one consideration should charm down our
rising and boiling spirits one against another, as it did Abraham's, Genesis 13 8.

Verse 21. Coats of skins and clothed them] God put them in leather, when yet
there was better means of clothing, to humble them doubtless, and draw them to
repentance. Whether God created these skins anew, or took them off the backs of
sheep and goats killed for sacrifice, to mind man of his mortality and
mortification, it much matters not. Our first parents, who even after the fall
were the goodliest creatures that ever lived, went no better clothed: no more
did those Worthies of whom the world was not worthy, Heb. 11.37. And surely,
The dogs that kept Vulcan^ temple would tear those that came in tattered
clo^thes. Hospinian.
howsoever our condition and calling afford us better array, and the vulgar
like a Bohemian cur fawn upon every good suit. (purpuram magis quam Deum
colunt,) yet we must take heed that pride creep not into our clothes, those
ensigns of our sin and shame, since our fineness is our filthiness, our
neatness our nastiness. It is a sure sign of a base mind, though in high
place, to think he can make himself great with any thing that is less then
himself, and win more credit by his garments, then his graces. St. Peter
teaches women, (who many of them are too much addicted to over much fineness)
to garnish themselves not with gay clothes, but with a meek and quiet spirit
as Sarah did, and not as those mincing dames, 1 Vestium curiositas,
deformitatis mentium and morum indicium est. Bernard.
Pet. 3.3, 4.
whose pride the Prophet inveighs against, as punctually as if he had viewed
the Ladies wardrobes in Jerusalem. Esa. 3.
Rich apparel are but fine covers of the foulest shame. The worst is Natures
garment, the best but follies garnish. How blessed a Nation were we, if every
silken suit did cover a sanctified soul: or if we would look upon out clothes,
as our first parents did, as love tokens from God;

Nam, cum charissinia semper
Munera, sunt Author quae pretiosa facit,
How could they but see it to be a singular favor that God with own hands
should cloth them, (though he had cast them out of Paradise for their nurture)
a visible Sacrament of his invisible love and grace concerning their souls, in
covering their sins, and so interresting them into true blessedness, Psalm. 32
1, 2.

Verse 22. The man is b^come as one of us] A holy irrisionof man's vain
affectation of the Deity. Quod Deus loquitur cum risu, tu l^gas cum fle^u. Aug.
de Genesis ad ^^eram. 1.11. c. 3^.
Howbeit St. Aug. is of opinion that God speaks thus, not by way of insulting
over Adam, but deterring others from such proud attempts. Discite justitiam
moniti, etc. [And take also of the tree of life] And so think to elude the
sentence of death pronounced upon him by God; which yet he could not have done,
had he eaten up tree and all. He should but have added to his sin and judgment
by abuse of this Sacrament; which would have sealed up life unto him, had he
held his integrity. Multi etiam hodie propter arborem scientiae amittunt
arborem vitae: Aug.
In terris manducant quod apudinferos digerunt.

Verse 23. Therefore the Lord God sent him forth] He gently dismissed him, as
the word signifies, placed him over against Paradise in the sight thereof (as
Stella observes out of the Septuagint) that, Stella in Luc. 7
by often beholding, the sorrow of his sin might be increased, Iisdem, quibu^
videmus, ^culis flemus. Lam. 3. 2 Cor. 2.7.11.
that his eye might affect his heart. Yet lest he should be swallowed up of
over much sorrow, and so Satan get an advantage of him (for God is not ignorant
of his devices) Christ the promised seed, was by his voluntary banishment, to
bring back all believers to their heavenly home; to bear them by his Angels
into Abraham's bosom, and to give them to eat of the tree of life, which is in
the midst of the Paradise of God, Rev. 2.7. Our whole life here is nothing else
but a banishment. That we like it no worse is, because we never knew better.
They that were born in hell, says the Proverb, think there is no other heaven.
The poor posterity of a banished Prince take their mean condition well-aworth;
Moses counts Egypt (where yet he was but a sojourner) his home; and in
reference to it calls his son, (born in Midian) Gershom, that is, a stranger
there. Oh how should we breath after our heavenly home, A^^ Paradisi Gesner.
groaning within our selves like those birds of Paradise, Naturalists speak of!
stretching forth the neck, as the Apostles word imports, waiting for the
adoption, even the redemption of our bodies, (...) Romans 8.
Romans 8.23. glorifying God. (meanwhile) with our spirits and bodies, devouring
all difficulties, donec a spe ad speciem transeamus, till Christ, who is gone
to prepare a place for us, return and say, This day thou shall be with me in
Paradise.

Verse 24. So he drove out the man] The Hebrews say, God led Adam gently by the
hand, till he came to the porch of Paradise, and then thrust him out violently,
who hungback, and played loath to depart. That he went out unwillingly, as I
wonder not, so that he should strive with God about his going out, I believe
not. This garden planted merely for his pleasure, and all the benefits created
for his use and service in six days, he lost in six hours say some; in nine,
say others; the same day he was made, say All, almost: What cause then have all
his sinful posterity to distrust themselves? And how little cause had that
blasphemous Pope to set his mouth against heaven, Ju^ius 3.
when being in a great rage at his Steward for a cold Peacock not brought to
table according to his appointment; and desired by one of his Cardinals, not to
be so much moved at a matter of so small moment, he answered: If God were so
angry for an apple, that he cast our first parents out of Paradise for the
same; why may not I, being his Vicar, be angry then for a Peacock, since it is a
greater matter then an apple? Act. and Mon. fol. 1417.
Is not this that mouth of the Beast that speaks great things and
blasphemies? Rev. 13.5.

CHAP. IV. Verse 1. I have gotten a man from the Lord]
OR, that famous Man the Lord, as if she had brought forth the Man Christ
Jesus. These were verba spei, non rei; for Cain was of that wicked one, the
Devil, 1 John 3.12. as all reprobates are, 1 John 3.10. Cain the Author of
the City of the World, says Augustine, is born first, and called Cain, that
is, a possession, because he builds a City, is given to the cares and pomp of
the world, and persecutes his brother that was chosen out of the world. But
Abel, the Author of the City of God, Aug. de civit. D^i. l. 15. c. 1.
is born second; called Vanity, because he saw the worlds vanity, and is
therefore driven out of the world by an untimely death; so early came
martyrdom into the world: the first man that dyed, dyed for Religion. H.
Broughton of the 10 patr. ex^ Rab. Bochai.
In a witty sense (says Hugh Broughton) Cain and Abel contain in their names
advertisements for matter of true continuance and corruption. Cain betokens
possession in this world: And Abel betokens one humbled in mind, and holding
such possession vain. Such was his offering, sheep-kinde, the gentlest of all
living beasts, and therefore the favor of God followed him. And the offering
of Cain was of the fruit of the earth; as he loved the possession of this
world, and the service of the body (which yet can have no continuance) and
followed after bodily lusts; therefore the blessed God favored him not. Thus
far he out of the Rabbines. Another English Divine has this note upon these
words, Ya^es his Model of Divin.
I have gotten a man from the Lord; Jehovah. Adam and Eve were all about the
composition of Cain. His soul was inspired pure and holy; yet as soon as the
vital spirits laid hold of it, it was in the compound, a son of Adam. A skilful
Artificer makes a clock of all his essential parts most accurately; only he
leaves the putting of all parts together to his unskilful apprentise; who so
jumbles together the several joints, that all falls to jaring, and can keep no
time at all, every wheel running backwardway. So God most artificially still
perfects both body and soul: but our accursed parents put all out of frame, and
set every part in a contrary course to Gods will. Sin is propagated and
proceeds from the union of body and soul into one man. That phrase, Warmed in
sin, Psalm. 51.5. is meant of the preparation of the body, as an instrument of
evil, which is not so actually, till the soul come.

Verse. 3. In process of time] That distance of time between the Creation, and
the general Flood, Varro the most learned of the Romans calls (...) obscure
or unknown, because the Heathen had no Records of that, which we now clearly
understand, to have been then done, out of the holy Scriptures. [Cain brought
of the fruit.] Godw. Hebr. Antiq. p. 27.
They brought their sacrifices to Adam, the high Priest of the family, who
offered them to God in their name. So in the Levitical Law, though a man's
offering were never so good, he might not offer it himself, upon pain of death:
But the Priest must offer it. And the Priest was to offer as well the poor man's
Turtle, as the rich man's Ox: To teach, that none may present his service to
God, how good soever he may conceit it, but in the hand of the high Priest of
the New Testament Jesus Christ, Revel. 5.
the just one, who will not only present, but perfume the poorest performances
of an upright heart, with his odors.

Verse. 4. See Number. 18.12. Fat taken for the best of all things. (...), Mark
12.41. Mal. 1.
Of the firstlings of his flock.] He brought the best of the best, not any
thing that came next to hand, as Cain seems to have done holding any thing good
enough, as did those rich wretches that cast brass-money into the treasury. But
cursed be that couzener, that has a male in his flock, and offers to God a
corrupt thing. Offer it now to thy Prince, will he be content with thy refuse
stuff? Behold, I am a great King, says God; he stands upon his seniority, and
looks to be honored with the best of our sub^tance. Mary that loved much,
thought nothing too much for her sweet Savior. John 12.9.
She brought an Alabaster box of ointment of great price, and poured it upon
him, and he defends her in it against those that held it waste. Among the
Papists, their Lady of Loretto has her Churches so stuffed with vowed presents
of the best, Sir Edw. Sands Relation of West. Relig. sect (...) Turk hist. fol.
342. 1 Pet. 3.11. Isai. 66.2.
as they are fain to hang their Cloisters and Churchyards with them. Shall not
their supe^stition rise up and condemn our irreligion, our slubbering services,
and dough-baked duties? The Turks build their private houses, low and homely,
but their Moschces or Temples stately and magnificent. [Had respect to Abel and
his offering.] The eye of the Lord is still upon the righteous, and his ears
are in their prayers: He looks upon such with singular delight, with special
intimation of his love; he is ravished with one of their eyes lifted up in
prayer, Cant. 4.9.
with one chain of their graces; when as he was no whit affected with the offer
of all the worlds glory, Matthew. 4. He says of such to the wicked, as the
Prophet said of Jehosaphat to the King of Israel. Surely, 2 King. 3.14.
were it not that I regard the presence of Jehosaphat King of Judah, I would
not look toward th^e, nor see thee: Cain here for instance.

Verse. 5. But to Cain and his offering, etc.] Because he brought non personam
sed opus personae, as Luther has it; Luth. in Decal.
who also calls those Cainists, that offer to God the work done, but do not
offer themselves to God. Works materially good, may never prove so, formally
and eventually. Luke 16. Levit. 11.18.
That which is fair to men, is abomination to God. He rejected the Swan for
sacrifice, because under a white feather, it has black skin. Sordet in
conspectu Judicis quod fulget in conspectu operantis, says Gregory. A thing
may shine in the night from its rottenness.

Verse. 6. Why is thy countenance f^^n?] Why do lowre and look so like a dog
under a door? Vultu saepe laeditur pietas: Cicer. orat. pro Amerin. Ovid. Meta^.
Difficile est animum non prodere vult^. He was discontented at God, and
displeased at his brother. He looks but sour and suffen upon him, and ^od
takes him up for it. He so loves his little ones, that he cannot abide the cold
wind should blow upon them. The Sun must not sm^te them by day, nor the Moon by
night. Psalm. 121. Cant^^ (...).
The North and South must both blow good to them. Better, a millstone, etc. then
offend one of these little ones, be it but by a frown or a frump. Better anger
all the witches in the world, then one of Gods zealous witnesses: Revel. 11.5.
For there goes a fire out of their mouths to devour their enemies.

Verse. 7. Resipiscenti remissio, pertinaci supplicium imminet, idque proximum
and prae entiss. Jun. Neme^s dicitur (...), quod (...). nemo eam effugere
possit.
Sin lies at the door.] Like a great ban-dog ready to pull out the throat of
thy soul, if thou but look over the hatch. Say this dog lie asleep for a while,
yet the door is for continual pass and repass, and so no fit place for any long
sleep. Your sin will surely find you out (says Moses) as a blood-hound, and
haunt you like a hell-hag, as the Heathen could say, Nemo crimen gerit in
pectore, qui non idem Nemesin in tergo.

Verse. 8. And Cain talked with Abel.] What talk they had, is not set down. The
Septuagint and vulgar Versions tell us Cain said, Let us go out into the field.
The Chaldee adds that he should say, There was no judgment, nor judge, nor
world to come, nor reward for justice, nor vengeance for wickedness, etc.
Certain it is, That those that are set to go on in sin, do lay hold upon all
the principles in their heads, Romans 1.18.
and imprison them in unrighteousness, that they may sin more freely; they
muzzle the mouths of their consciences, that they may satisfy their lusts
without control. But had Zimri peace that slew his master? or Cain that slew
his brother? has any ever waxed fierce against God and prospered? Job 9.4.
[Cain rose up against Abel his brother and slew.] So, Cain was the devils
Patriark, and Abel the Churches Protomartyr. Act. and Mon. fol. 814.
It is not long since Alphonsus Diazius a Spaniard, an Advocate in the Court of
Rome, came from Rome to Neoberg in Germany, to kill his own brother John
Diazius, a faithful Professor of the Reformed Religion, and a familiar friend
to Bu^er, who gives him an excellent commendation. But it is worth the
observing, Bucbolc.
says One, That the first quarrel about Religion arose propemodum inter media
sacrificia, in the midst of the sacrifices almost. These Theological hatreds
(as I may call them) are most bitter hatreds, and are carried on for most part,
with Cain-like rage, and bloody opposition. No fire sooner breaks forth, none
goes out more slowly, then that which is kindled about matters of Religion: and
the nearer any come to other, the more deadly are their differences, and the
more desperate their designs one against another. The Persians and Turks are
both Mahometans, and yet disagreeing about some small points in the
Interpretation of their Alchoran; Turk, hist.
the Persians burn whatsoever Books they find of the Turkish Sect. And the
Turks hold it more meritorious to kill one Persian, then seventy Christians.
The Jew can better brook a Heathen then a Christian; they curse us in their
daily devotions, concluding them with a Maledic Domine Nazaraeis. The Pope will
dispense with Jews, but not with Protestants. See D. Day on 1 Cor. 16.9.
Lutherans will sooner join hands with a Papist then a Calvinist. And what a
spirit had he, that in a Sermon at Norwich, not long since, inveighing against
Puritans, said, If a cup of cold water had a reward, much more a cup of such
men's blood? Bucholcer.
Mort^^^ est Cain, sed utinam ille non viveret in suis filiis, qui clavam ejus.
sanguine Abelis rubent^m, ut rem sacram, circumferunt, adorant and venerantur.
The place where Cain slew Abel, is by some thought to be Damascus in Syria,
called therefore Damesec, that is, a bag of blood.

Verse. 9. I know not: Am I my brothers keeper?] As if he had bid God, go look.
Let not us think much to receive dogged answers and disdainful speeches, from
profane persons. When they have learned to think better, they will speak
better. As till then, pity and pray for them. These churlish dogs will be
barking.

Verse. 10. What have thou done?] Here God appeals to the murderers conscience,
which is instead of a thousand witnesses. As often as we feel the secret smitings
of our own hearts for sin, think we hear him that is greater then our hearts,
saying to us as here, What have thou done? And that there is no good to be done
by denying or dawbing, for he knows all things, 1 John 3.20. and requires
that we should see our sins to confession, or we shall see them to our
confusion. [The voice of thy brothers bloods] The blood of one Abel had so many
tongues as drops; and every drop, a voice to cry for vengeance. Give them blood
to drink, Revel. 16.6.
for they are worthy. Charles the ninth of France, Author of that bloody
massacre of Paris, died of exceeding bleeding. Mr. Camdens Elisab. 165.
Richard the third of this Kingdom, and Q. Mary, had the shortest reigns of
any since the Conquest; according to that, Psalm. 55.23.
Bloody and deceitful men shall not live out half their days. Anno 1586. Walsh
Bishop of Ossery in Ireland, a man of honest life, with his two servants, were
stabbed to death by one Dulland, Ibidem 241.
an Irish old Soldier, whilst he gravely admonished him of his foul
adulteries; and the wicked murderer escaped away, who had now committed forty
five murders with his own hand. At length, revenge pursuing him, he was by
another bloody fellow Donald Spaniah shortly after slain himself, and his head
presented to the Lord Deputy of Ireland.

Verse. 11. And now thou art c^rsed.] The Pope contrarily blesses and sainteth
Traitors to their Country, and murderers of their natural Sovereigns; as
Ravilliac, and other his Assasines, those sworn sword men of the Devil. Bucer
in Prasat ad Senarclaei hister. de morte Diar. Lonicer.
Alphonsus Diarius, who killed his own brother for the cause of Religion, as
above said, fled to Rome, and was there highly commended for his zeal, and
largely rewarded, as Bucer reports. But, driven thereto by the terrors of his
own guilty conscience, like another Judas, he afterward hanged himself upon
the neck of his own Mule, for want of a better Gallows.

Verse. 12. A fugitive and a vagabond, etc.] The Patriarks were Pilgrims, and
staid not long in a place. The Apostles also were hurried about, 2 Cor. 4.11.
Romans 15.19. and had no certain dwelling place. But first, God numbered their
flittings, Psalm. 56.8. He kept just reckoning of them in his Count-book.
Secondly, Their hearts were fixed, trusting in the Lord, Psalm. 112.7. They
could call their souls to rest, when they had no rest in their bones: And fly
up to Heaven with the wings of a Dove, when hunted on Earth as so many
Patridges. Facti sun^ a cord suo fugitivi, Tertul.
So could not Cain the caytiff. He was not more a fugitive in the Earth, then
in his own conscience: Fain he would have fled from the terrors of it, but
could not, he was langold to it, and must abide by it. Hence the Greek
translates this Text, Sighing and trembling shall thou be on the earth; and so
the word here used is applied elsewhere, to the trembling of the heart, Isa.
7.2. to the walking of the lips, 1 Samuel 1.13. to the shaking of the Forest by a
violent wind, Isa. 7.2. to the leaping of the Lintel at the presence of the
Lord, Isai. 6.4, etc. And this (in all probability) was that mark, that God set
upon him, v. 15. Not a horn in his forehead, as the Jews fain, but a hornet in
his conscience, such as God vexed the Hivites with, Exodus 23.28. stinging them
with unquestionable conviction and horror. Cicer. orst. pro Ros. Amer.
For assuredly a body is not so tormented with stings, or torn with stripes,
as a mind with remembrance of wicked actions.

Verse. 13. My punishment is greater then I can bear.] Or, Mine iniquity is
greater then can be forgiven. In either sense he sins exceedingly, and worse
perhaps then in slaying his brother, whether he murmur against Gods justice, or
despair of his mercy. Mine iniquity is greater, etc. Mentiris Cain, says a
Father, Cain did not say so, because it was so: But it was so, because he said
so. Despair is Satan's masterpiece; it carries men headlong to hell, as the
Devils did the herd of Swine into the deep; Act. and Mon fol. 1908. Gellus in
dialog. secundo Chimaeric^.
witness Guarlacus, Bomelius, Latomus of Lovain, Johannes de Canis, our English
Hubertus, a covetous Oppressor, who made this will, I yield my goods to the
King, my body to the grave, my soul to the devil.

Verse. 14. From the face of the earth] That is, of this earth, this country,
my Fathers family; which in the next words, he calls Gods face, the place of
his public worship, from the which Cain was here justly excommunicated. And
surely, Saint Judes woe will light heavy upon all such, as going in the way of
Cain, and not willing to hear of their wicked ways, do wilfully absent
themselves from the powerful preaching of the Word. They that will not hear the
Word, shall hear the Rod, Mic. 6.9. Yea, a sword shall pierce through their
souls, as it did Cains here; in whom was fulfiled that of Eliphaz, Job 15.21,
22. A dreadful sound was in his ears, lest in his prosperity the destroyer
should come upon him. He believed not that he should return out of darkness,
and he is waited for of the sword. [Every one that finds me, Petron.
shall slay me] Quam male est extra legem viventibus: quicquid meruerunt semper
expectant: Fat Swine cry hideously, if but touched or meddled with, as knowing
they ow their life, to them that will take it. Tiberius felt the remorse of
conscience so violent, that he protested to the Senate, that he suffered death
daily: Tacitus.
Whereupon Tacitus makes this good note, Tandem facinora and flagitia in
supplicium vertuntur. As every body has its shadow appertaining to it, so has
every sin its punishment. And although they escape the lash of the Law, yet
vengeance will not suffer them to live, Acts 28.4.
(as the Barbari^^^ rashly censured Saint Paul) to live quietly at least.
Richard the third, after the murder of his two innocent Nephews, had fearful
dreams and visions; insomuch, that he did often leap out of his bed in the
dark, and catching his sword (which always naked, Daniels Chron. continued by
Trussel. 249.
stuck by his side) he would go distractedly about the chamber, every where
seeking to find out the cause of his own occasioned disquiet. Polydor Virgil
thus writes of his dream that night before Bosworth-field, where he was slain,
that he thought that all the devils in hell, pulled and haled him in most
hideous and ugly shapes; and concludes of it at last; I do not think it was so
much his dream, as his evil conscience, that bred those terrors. It is as
proper for sin to raise fears in the soul, as for rotten flesh and wood to
breed worms. That worm that never dies is bred here in the froth of filthy
lusts and slagitious courses, and lies gnawing and grubbing upon men's inwards,
many times in the ruff of all their jollity. This makes Saul call for
aminstrell, Belshazzar for his carrousing cups, Cain for his workmen to build
him a City, others for other of the Devils anodynes, to put by the pangs of
their wounded spirits, and throbbing consciences. Thuan. lib. 57.
Charles the ninth, after the massacre of France, could never endure to be
awakened in the night without music, or some like diversion; he became as
terrible to himself, as formerly he had been to others. But above all, I pity
the loss of their souls, who serve themselves as the Jesuit in Lancashire,
followed by one that found his glove, with a desire to restore it him. M. Wards
Sermons.
But pursued inwardly with a guilty conscience, he leaps over a hedge, plunges
into a Marle-pit behind it, unseen and unthought of, wherein he was drowned.

Verse. 15. The Lord set a mark, etc.] Some say it was the letter Tau; others,
some letter of Jehovah: probably, it was the perpetual trembling of his hands,
Totum Cedreni opus est stabulum quisquiliarum etc. Scalig.
and whole body; the very sight whereof, made people pity him, till at length
he was slain, say some, by his nephew Lamech. Cedrenus tells us (if we may
believe him) that Cain took his death by the fall of a house in the year of the
world, 931. the next year after the death of his father Adam. But however he
dyed, sure it is, he had but an ill life of it. He was marked, 'Ne semel morte
defungerctur, sed ut atatem totam moriendo exigeret. Philo.
says Philo, but to his misery; he might not be killed by any, that he might
every day be dying; having a hell in his conscience, and standing in fear of
every man he met with. He that would not harken to God, so sweetly inciting and
enticing him to do well, Lactan. Instit.
verse. 7. has now Pavor and Pallor for his gods, as Lactantius reports of
Tullius Hostilius, who had profanely derided the devotions of his predecessor
Numa, as here Cain had done his brother Abels.

Verse. 16. And Cain went out from the presence, etc.] But whiter could he go
from Gods Spirit? or whither could he fly from his presence? Psalm. 139.7. ^bi
est Deus? quid dixi miser? sed ubi non est? Bern. Act. 17. Coloss* 1.17.
From the presence of his power he could not: for, Enter, praesenter, Deus hic
and ubique potente. God is not very far from any one of us, says St. Paul. Not
so far surely as the bark is from the tree, for all things consist in him: so
that a wicked man cannot wag hand or foot, without his privity. But it was the
presence of his grace, and use of his Ordinances that this wretch fled from; as
did likewise Jonas (in that, as wise as he) so going out of the grace of God
into the warm sun, as we say. Jon. 1.3.
God fetched Jonas home again by weeping cross, Jon. 2.8.
and made him feelingly acknowledge (for it had like to have cost him a
choking) that they that observe lying vanities, as he had done, forsake their
own mercies. But Cain seated himself in the land of Nod, and there fell to
building and planting in contempt, as it is thought, of the divine doom
denounced against him; Sigon.
or rather to drown the noise of his conscience, as the old Italians were wont
to do the noise of the heavens in time of thunder, by ringing their greatest
Bells, and letting off their greatest Ordnance.

Verse. 17. And he builded a City] So, many drown themselves either in secular
businesses, or sensull pleasures, and all to put by their melancholy dumps,
and heart-qualms, as they call them; indeed, to muffle up the mouths of their
horribly guilty consciences: So Nicephorus Phocas, when Zimri like, he had
killed his master, he labored like Cain, to secure himself with building high
walls: After which, he heard a voice telling him, (...). Cedren.
that though he built his walls never so high, yet sin within the walls would
undermine all. Besides that, one small drop of an evil conscience troubles a
whole sea of outward comforts and contentments: a confluence whereof would no
more ease conscience, then a silken stocking would do a broken leg. Silly are
they that think to glide away their groans with games, and their cares with
cards, etc. [Called the City after the name of his son Enoch] That he might be
styled, Lord Enoch of Enoch. This is the ambition of worldly men; their names
are not written in heaven; they will propagate them therefore upon earth, as
Nimrod by his tower, Absalom by his pillar, Cain by his city, Enoch (which St.
Augustine fitly makes a figure of Rome, because both of them were built by a
parricide.) Psalm. 49.11.
Their inward thought is, says the Psalmist, that their houses shall continue
for ever, and their dwelling places to all generations; and therefore, they
call their lands after their own names. De mali quaes^^^ vix gaudet tertius
baeres. Lucian^.
They seek to immortalize themselves upon their possessions; but the third
heir seldom ever owns them. Hence houses and lands, shift masters so often; (
Olim eram Menipi, nunc Speusippi, etc. said that house in the Apology.) God
justly crosses these inhabitants of the earth, Rev. 12. Philip. 3.
as they are called, in opposition to the Saints, whose conversation is in
heaven, whereof they are Fellow-citizens. These know that they have here no
abiding City, they look for one therefore above, not Henochta, but Heaven,
Whose builder and maker is God, Heb. 11.10.

Verse. 19. And unto Enoch was born Irad. etc.] Cain had a numerous offspring.
Seven generations of his are here reckoned: Se^h is not yet born, that we hear
of. The wicked are full of children, and leave the rest of their substance to
their babes, Psalm. 17.14. They send forth their little ones like a flock, and
their children dance. Job. 21.11, 12, 13.
They dance to the timbrell and harp (as here Jabal and Jubul did) but they
suddenly turn into hell, and so their merry dance ends in a miserable downfall.

Verse. 19. Lamech took unto himself] As his own lust led him, not caring for
consent of parents: Lamech polygamus unam costam in du^s divisit. Hier.
And two wives; as little caring for the com^and of God* that two, and no more,
should be one flesh, Genesis 2.24. yea though he had the residue of the spirit,
and so could have made many wives for Adam, yet made he but one, says the
Prophet. And wherefore one? but that he might seek a godly seed. Solomon's
polygamy was punished with barreness. Mal. 12.5.
We read not of any son he had but one, Heroum filii noxae.
(and, he none of the wisest neither) Rehoboam. This great King has but one
son by many house-fulls of wives, when many a poor man has an house Full of
children by one wife. Erasmus tells astory of a certain poor English creeple,
lame on both legs, that married a blind woman, Procreatis ex ist^ conjugio 12.
fratrib^^, nuloque naevo deformatis. De instit. Matr. Deni duodenique unam
uxorem ducebant. De morib. gent. ^.1^ cap. 1. Vt cuique libitum fuerit, pecudum
more lasciviunt. Twini Comment. de reb. Britan. ex H^^ron. Act and Mon. fol.
791.
and gave this reason, We shall the better agree, when neither can hit other in
the teeth with our several defects and deformities. Nec f^fellit hominem
judicium, says he, It prooved a happy match. They lived lovingly and
cheerfully together, and God Almighty blessed them with a dozen lusty boys,
that had not the least deformity about them. Sardus tells us, that the old
Britains would, ten or twelve of them take one woman to wife: Belike women were
scarce amongst them. But yet that was better then the old Scots, of whom St.
Hierome reports, that they took no wives; but satisfied their lusts up and down
as they listed, and wheresoever they liked, after the manner of bruit
creatures. I have somewhere read, that not many hundreds of years since, they
had a custom kept up amongst them, that the Landlord might demand the first
night of his Tenants wife, as a chie^e rent. And Mr. Fox relates, that the
Friars in Germany were grown to that height of impudency, as to require the
tenth night of every man's wife, as a tithe due to them. Which to prevent, the
Helvetians, when they received any new Priest into their Churches, they
bargained with him before, to take his Concubine, lest he should attempt any
misuse of their wives and daughters. How much better were it, for the avoiding
of fornication, if every man of them had his own wife, 1 Cor. 7.
says Paul. Not so, says Cardinal Campeius: for if comparison should be
made, much greater offense it is, a Priest to have a wife, Ibid. 790.
then to have and keep at home many harlots. For they that keep harlots, (says
he) as it is naught that they do, so do they acknowledge their sin. The other
persuade themselves they do well, and so continue without repentance, or
conscience of their fact. A fit reason for a carnal Cardinal. Such another
was his brother, Cardinalis Cremonensis, who after his stout replying in the
Council of London, against the married estate of Priests; Ibid. 1065.
exclaiming what a shameful thing it was, to rise from the sides of a whore,
to make Christ's body, the night following was shamefully taken with a notable
Whore. This was bad enough: but that was worse in Johannes a Cassa, Dean of the
Popes chamber, Ibid. 14 17.
who so far forgot humanity and honesty, that he set forth a book in Italian
meeter, in commendation of Sodomitry, saying, that he never used any other.
This might better have become a Turk, then a Bishop. Blunts Voyage, p. 79.
Ibid. 14.
Sodomy in the Levant is not held a vice, so debauched they are grown. The
Turkish Bashaws, besides their wives, whereof they have ton at least, each
Bashaw has as many, or likely more Catamites, which are their serious loves.
For their wives are used but to dress their meat, to Laundress, and for
reputation. Only when the great Turk gives his daughter or sister to any
Bashaw to wife, it is somewhat otherwise: For he gives her at the same time a
dagger, saying, I give thee this man to be thy slave and bedfellow. If he be
not loving, obedient, and dutiful to thee, Heyl. Geog. p. 583.
I give thee here this cun^hare or dagger to out off his head. Yet can she not
forbid him to marry more wives to vex her, ( Levit. 18.18.) and to fret her, as
Peninnah did Hannah, yea to make her to thunder, as the word there signifies:
For Turks may take as many wives, 1 Samuel 1.6.
as they are able to maintain. Hence it is that in jealousy they ^^cend
Italians; making their women go mo^^ed all but the eyes; (...) 106.
and not suffe^ing them to go to Church, or so much as look out at their own
windows.

Verse. 20. Adah b^^ a Jaba^] Jabal a good husband, I^^al a merry Greek, whence
the word Iubilo in Latin, and our English Jo^iall. Jaball that dwelt in tents
and tended the herds, had Juball to his brother, the father of ha^d^nd wind
music. Jaball and Juball, frugality and mirth, good h^sbandry and sweet
content dwell together. Virgil makes mention of a happy husbandman in his time,
who Regum aequabat opes animis seraque reversus Virg. Georg.

Nocte domum, d^pibus mensas onerabat inemptis.


Verse. 22. And Zillah bare Tubalcam] Perhaps the same that the Poets call
Vulcan. He was a cunning Artificer in brass and iron. To oles they had before,
and instruments of iron: how else could they have plowed the accursed earth?
Vide Natal. Com. Mythol. l. 2. c. 5.
But this man, artem jam inventam excoluit ornavitque, says Iunius; and is
therefore called, A whetter or polisher of every Artificer in brass and iron.
They had the art of it before: but he added to their skill by his invention, he
sharply and wittily taught Smiths-craft; and is therefore by the heathens
fained to be the god of Smiths, says another Interpreter.

Verse. 23. And Lamech said unto his wives] Who it seems were troublesome to him
with their domestical discords, and led him a discontented life. He therefore
gives them to understand in this set speech, what a man he is, if molested by
them or any other; and what slaughters he can make, if provoked by an
adversary. I would slay a man, if but wounded, etc. This revenge he counts
manhood, Plutar. in Pelopid^.
which indeed is dog-hood rather. So Alexander Phereus consecrated his javelin,
wherewith he slew his uncle Polyphron (as a monument of his manhood) and
called it his god Tychon. Ne memoria tam pr^^larae rei dilueresur.
So Sylla caused it to be registered in the public Records, that he had
prescribed, and put to death four thousand and seven hundred Romans. So
Stokesly Bishop of London, comforted himself upon his death bed with this, Act.
and Mon.
that in his time he had burned fifty Heretics as he called them. Phil. 3.
Is not this to glory in their shame, and to have damnation for their end? Is
it not the Devil that sets men a work to do thus, as he did Saul to seek
David's life, and Lamech to domineer in this sort over his wives, New-Engl.
first fruits. p. 4.
seeking so to repress their strife? A certain Indian coming into a house of
the New-English, where a man and his wife were brawling, and they bidding him
sit down, he was welcome: he answered, he would not stay there; Hobomack, that
is the Devil, was there; and so departed.

Verse. 24. If Cain shall ^e avenged sevenfold, etc.] Thrasonicall Lamech brags,
and goes on to out-dare God himself. For it is as if he should say, If God will
take vengeance on them that contemn him, why may not I on those that contemn
me, wives or other? Nay, though God will forgive evils against him, yet will
not I evils against me. I Will have the odds of him, seventy to seven; so Iunius
interprets it. A desperate expression, and somewhat like that of Pope Julius
the third, abovementioned in the last note upon the former Chapter; whereunto
may here be added, that the same Pope being forbidden by his Ph^sitian to eat
Swine flesh, as being noisome and naught for his gout, he called to h^s Steward
in a great rage, and said, Act. and Mon. fol. 1417.
Bring me my pork-flesh, al despito di dio, In despite of God. O wretch!

Verse. 25. She bare a son, and called, etc.] Virgil. The Duke of Florence gave
for his Ensign, a great tre^ with many spreading boughs, one of them being cut
off, with this Posie, Vno avulso, etc.
Sic uno avulso non deficit alter Aureus. Dead bones may revive, and out of the
ashes of a Phoenix, another Phoenix spring. Jana jacet Phoenix nato Phoenice,
etc. The two witnesses that were killed, received the spirit of life from God
again, Rev. 11.11. Iobn Baptist revivet^ in our Savior, (qui huic
succentu^iatus est) and Steven in Paul: John Hus in Luther (the Goose in the
Swan) and the suppressed Waldenses in the Protestants. The Papists gave out
that when Luther dyed, all his sect would dye with him: and when Queen
Elisabeths head was laid, we should have strange work in England. A false
Jesuit in a scandalous libell published it, that she wished that she might
after her death, hang a while in the air, to see what striving would be for
her Kingdom. But she both lived and dyed with glory: Camdens Elisab.
her rightful successor came in peaceably, not a dog moving his tongue at
him: The true Reformed Religion was established, and is hitherto maintained
amongst us, maugre the malice of Rome and Hell. It was the Legacy left us by
our Ancestors: the blood of those blessed Martyrs was the seed of our Church,
of which I may say, as he of his City, Victa tamen vinces, eversaque Troja
resurges:
Obruit hostiles illa ruina domos.
When the Devil and his Imps had got Abel into his grave, and saw Adam without
another in his room for an hundred and thirty years space, or near upon, what a
deal of joy was there, think we, amongst them, and sending of gifts? But God in
due time sets up a Seth, instead of Abel, and so cuts the devils comb, confutes
his confidence. He will have a Church, when all is done. The Pope could tell the
Turk so much in a message, Niteris incassum Christi submergere navem: Pius 2.
ad Imperat. Turc.

Fluctuat, at nunquam mergitur illa ratis.


Verse. 26. Then began men to call upon, etc.] Publicly, and in solemn
assemblies to serve the Lord; and to make a bold and wise profession of his
name: (...), Phil. 2.
shining as Lamps amidst that perverse generation of irreligious Ca^nites, who
said unto God, Depart from us, etc. Job 22.17. This Job speaks there of these
wicked, which were cut down out of time, their foundation was overflown with
the flood, Verse. 16.

CHAP. V. Verse 1. This is the Book of the generations.
SEpher, (...)
a ciphering up of their names, acts, and accidents; that we might know, first,
who were Christ's Progenitors; secondly, by whom the Church was continued;
thirdly, how long the old World lasted, viz. one thousand six hundred fifty and
six years. Whence some have grounded a conjecture, that the year of Christ one
thousand six hundred fifty and six, will bring forth some strange alteration in
the world. Alsted. Chron. p. 494.
Others, think the world will be then at an end, and they ground upon this
Chron^gramme, MVnDI Conf Lagrat Io. [In the likeness of God made he him.] This
is much inculcated, that it may be much observed, and we much humbled, that
have parted with so fair a patrimony; striving as much as may be, (...). Heb.
1.3.
to recover it in Christ, who being the express Image of his Fathers Person, is
both apt and able to renew that lost Image of God in us, by his Merit and
Spirit, by his Value and Virtue.

Verse. 2. Blunts Voyage, p. 122.
Male and female, created he them.] The Jews at this day have base conceits of
women: as that they have not so divine a soul, as men; that they are of a lower
creation, made only for the propagation and pleasure of man, etc. And
therefore, they suffer them not to enter the Synagogue, but appoint them a
gallery without. Matthew, 22.
Thus they err, not knowing the Scriptures. See the Notes on Chap. 2. v. 22.

Verse. 3. Adam lived one hundred and thirty years, and begat] This was a great
trial to his faith, to wait so long for a better issue, when the Cainites spread
amain, erected cities, and perhaps meditated Monarchies. [After his own image]
Corruptus corruptum: For who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean, Job
14.4. John 3.
says Job? That which is of the flesh is flesh, says our Savior, and we can
say no better of it. This is hard to persuade men to; for each one is apt to
think his own penny good silver: And a dead woman will have four to carry her
forth, as the Proverb has it. The Pharisee, bad enough, though he be, yet is
very brag of his good estate to Godward: And Novatus cries out, Non habeo,
Domine, quod mihi ignoscas. How much better Saint Augustine, Ego admisi,
Domine, unde tu damnare potes me; sed non amisisti, unde tu^salv^re potes me.
One has destroyed me, but of thee is my help; my safety here, and salvation
hereafter. Lord I am Hell, but thou art Heaven, as that Martyr once said, etc.
B. Hooper. Psalm. 42.
One depth calls upon another; the depth of my misery, the depth of thy
mercy. Heaven denies me, earth groans under me, Hell gapes for me: Help Lord,
or thy servant perishes, Psalm. 51 2.
Wash me thoroughly from mine iniquity, and purge me from my sin; whether that
imputed to me, inherent in me, or issuing from me.

V. 4. He begat sons and daughters.] Philo and Epiphanius give him twelve sons,
Beda thirty sons, and as many daughters.

Verse. 5. Nine hundred and thirty years,] Till the fifty sixth year of the
Patriark Lamech. In all which time, he (doubtless) instructed his good nephews,
in all those great things, which himself had learned from Gods mouth, and
proved in his own experience, what that good, and holy, and acceptable Will of
God was. Moreover, out of his mouth, as out of a Fountain, Romans 12.^.
flowed whatsoever profitable Doctrine, Discipline, Skill and Wisdom, is in the
world. [And he dyed.] This is not in vain so often iterated in this Chapter;
for there is in us by nature, a secret conceit of immortality, and we can
hardly be beaten out of it. That all must dye, every man will yield; but that
he may live yet, a day longer at least, there is none but hops. We can see
death in other men's brows, but not in our own bosoms. It must make forcible
entry, and break in violently: (...), Matthew. 24.51. 2 Cor. ^.4.
God must cut men in twain, and tear their souls from their bodies, ere they
will yield to die. The best are too backward, and would not be unclothed, but
clothed upon, if they might have their will. Moses himself prays, Psalm 9^.12.
Lord teach us so to number our days, that we may apply, (or, as the Hebrew
has it,) that we may cause our hearts to come to wisdom: Cause them to come,
whither they will or no; for naturally they hang off, and would not come to any
such bargain. How needful is it therefore to be told us, that Adam died, that
Seth, Enos and C^inan died, etc. That this may be, as a handwriting on the
Wall, to tell us, That we must also dye, and come to judgment.

Verse. 9. Enos begat Cainan.] Enosh, that is, Sorry man begat Cainan; i. e. A
man of sorrows. Thus the Fathers, though long-lived, were not unmindful of
their mortality and misery.

Verse. 20. Nine hundred sixty and two years.] Rabbi Levi, citante Genebrardo,
Genebr. Chron.
long aevitatem patriarcharum opus providentiae, non naturae appellat. Their
children also, that they waited so long for, were not more the issue of their
bodies, then of their faith.

Verse. 23. All the days of Enoch, were three hundred sixty and five years.] So
many years only lived Henoch, as there be days in the year. But what he wanted
in the shortning of his time, was made up in his son Methuselah the longest
liver: Besides that, God took him to a better place, transplanted him, as it
were out of the Kitchin-garden into his heavenly Paradise; Cant 6.2. To gather
Lillies, i. e. To transplant his people into Heaven.
which was not more to his own benefit, then to the comfort of the other
Patriarks, that survived him, against the fear of death, and the crosses of
life: Since in Henoch (what discouragement soever they had in Abels death) they
had an ocular demonstration, that there is a reward for the righteous, and that
it is not altogether in vain to walk with God.

Verse. 24. And Enoch walked with God.] And so condemned the World: First, Heb.
11.
by his life; secondly, at his death. By his life, in that he kept a constant
counter-motion to the corrupt courses of the times; not only not swimming down
the stream with the wicked, but denouncing Gods severe judgment against them,
even to the extreme curse of Anathema Maranatha, Jude 14.
as Saint Jude tells us. Secondly, By his death he condemned them: In that so
strange a Testimony of Gods grace and glory, in his wonderful translation, did
not affect and move them to amend their evil manners. The Heathens had heard
somewhat afar off, concerning this Candidate of Immortality, Alsted. Chron. p.
85.
as the Ancients call him, and thence grounded their Apotheoses. Eupolemon
says, That their Atlas was Henoch, as their Janus was N^ah. Gentes sunt
Ant^^brislus ^um suis asseclis. Pa^aeus. Jac. Rev^i hist. Pontif. Romans p 309.
And how fitly are the Papists called Heathens by Saint John, Revel. 11.2. Since
besides their Atlas of Rome, on whose shoulders the whole Church (that new
heaven) must rest; there was at Ruremund in Gilderland a play acted by the
Jesuits, Anno 1622, under the title of the Apotheosis of Saint Ignatius.

Verse. 27. And all the days of Methuselah.] He lived longest of any, yet wanted
thirty one years of a thousand. Nemo patriarcharum mill annos complevit, qu^a
numerus iste typum babeat perfectionis. ^ic nulla perfectio pietatis.
Occolampad.
Oecolampadius thinks there was a mystery in this, that they all dyed short of
a thousand, which is a type of perfection; To teach us, says he, that live we
never so long here, and grow we never so fast in Grace, we cannot possibly be
perfect, till we get to Heaven. Henoch lived long in a little time; and
foreseeing the flood, named his son Methuselah; that is to say, He dies, and
the dart (or flood) comes. And so it fell out; for no sooner was his head
laid, but in came the flood. Isai. 57.1.
The righteous are taken away from the evil to come: And their death is a sad
presage of an imminent calamity. Hippo could not be taken, whiles Augustine
lived, nor Heidelberg while Paraeus. Semen sanctum statumen terrae, Isai. 6.13.
Junius.
The holy Seed upholdeth the State. Tertul.
Absque stationibus non staret mundus. The innocent shall deliver the Island,
and it is delivered by the pureness of thy hands alone, Job 22.30. When, one
sinner destroys much good, Eccles 9.18. Paulin. Nolan. in vita Ambros. De
Fabio Cunctatore, Silius.
Ambrose is said to have been the Walls of Italy. Stilico the Earl said, That
his death did threaten destruction to that Country.

Hic patria est, murique urbis stant pectore in uno. Verse. 29. This same shall
comfort us.] Herein a figure of Christ. And Peter Martyr thinks that Lamech was
in hope, that this son of his would have been the Christ: A pardonable error,
proceeding from an earnest desire of seeing his day, whom their souls loved,
and longed for: Saluting the promise afar off, (...), Heb. 11.
Heb. 11. and waiting for the consolation of Israel, Luke 2.25.

Verse. 32. And N^ah begat Sem, Ham, and Japheth.] Twenty years he had heard
from God, That the world should be destroyed, before he had any child. Revel.
14.
Here was the Faith and patience of this Saint. At length he has Japheth
first; though Shem be first named, because he was in dignity preferred, before
his brother, to be grandfather to the Messiah. Now any relation to Christ,
ennobleth either place or person. If it were an honor to Mark to have been
Barnabas his sisters son, what is it then to be allied to the son of God? Mic.
5.2. Matthew. 2.6.
Bethlehem where he was born, though it were least, says Micah; yet it was not
the least, says Matthew, among all the cities of Judah, because out of it
should come Christ the Governor.

CHAP. VI. Verse 1. When men began to multiply.]
NOt good men only, but bad men too; who therefore took them more wives then
one, that they might multiply amain. A numerous offspring is no sure sign of
Gods special favor. It is well observed, That when God promised children as a
blessing, he said, Psalm. 118.3. Psalm. 104.15. Judge. 9.13.
The wife should be as the vine, and the children as olive plants: Two of the
best fruits, the one for chearing the heart, the other for clearing the face;
the one for sweetness, the other for fatness. Blessed is the man that has his
quiver full of such, as are as the arrows of a strong man. Whence it follows,
That they must have more in them th^n nature; for arrows are not arrows by
growth, but by art: So they must be such children, the knottiness of whose
nature is refined and reformed, and made smooth by Grace. This workmanship of
God in the hearts and lives of children, is like the graving of a Kings
Palace, or the pollished corners of the temple. Psalm. 144.12. This preserves
Jacob from confusion, and his face from waxing pale. This makes religious
parents to sanctify Gods name, even to sanctify the holy One, and with
singular encouragement from the God of Israel, Isai. 29.22, 23. It never goes
well with the Church, but when the Son marries the Mother, Isai. 62.5.

Verse. 2. That the sons of God saw the daughters.] Sons of God, such as had
called themselves by his name, Chap. 4.26. his peculiar professant people,
called Sons of Jehovah, Deuteronomy. 14.1. yea, his firstborn, and so higher then the
Kings of the earth, Psalm. 89.27. Dan. 7.17, 18.
Hence Dan. 7. after mention made of the four Monarchies, a greater then them
all succeeds; and that is the Kingdom of the Saints of the most high. Saints
at large he means; all that have made a covenant with him by sacrifice, Psalm.
50.5. Now we read of sacrificing Sodomites, Isai. 1, 10. sinners in Sion, Isai.
33.14. profligate professors, Matthew. 7.23. That, though called Israel yet, are
to God as Ethiopians, Amos 9.7. Such were these Sons of God. [Saw the daughters
of men, that they were fair.] Beauty is a dangerous bait, and lust is
sharp-sighted. It is not safe gazing on a fair woman: How many have died of the
wound in the eye? No one means has so enriched hell, as beautiful faces. Take
heed our eyes be not windows of wickedness, and loop-holes of lust. Make a
covenant with them as Joh: Job 31.1.
Pray against the abuse of them with David, Psalm. 119.37.
and curb them from forbidden objects, as Nazianzen, who had learned (...) to
nurture his eyes, as himself tells us. See the Note on Chap. 3.6. [They took
them wives.] Of their own heads without Gods license, or parents consent, as
Esau did: And of all which they chose, that is, That they liked and loved.
Thus, Amor sormae rationis est oblivio, insaniae proximus, turbat cousilia,
altos and gencrosos spiritus frangit. Jerome. Eccles. 11.
as some marry by their ears, upon mere hearsay; others, by their fingers
ends, for money: so these gallants married by their eyes, they were led by the
lust of their hearts, and sight of their eyes, as Solomon's yonker; not
considering that favor is deceitful, beauty, vanity, etc. And that many a woman
is like Helen without, but Hecuba within, or an Earthen potsherd covered with
silver-dross, Prove. 26.23.

Verse. 3. My spirit shall not always strive.] That is, I Will consult no longer,
but resolve to ruin them (as some gloss it:) Or, I Will pull the sword out of
the sheath, the soul out of the body; as others gather out of the Hebrew word
here used. Sunt qui deductum volunt a Nadan Vagina.
But they do best (in my mind) that sense it thus: My Spirit, wh^reby I
hitherto went and Preached, by Noe and other Patriarks, to those spirits (once
in pleasure, now) in prison, but prevailed not, 1 Pet. 3.18, 19.
shall not always strive with perverse men by preaching, disputing, convincing,
in the mouths of my servants, whom I have sent unto them; nor in their own
minds and consciences, by inward checks and motions, which they have made no
good use of. Delicata res est spiritus Dei. Grieve it once, and you may drive
it away for ever. Ideo det^riores sumus, quia meliores esse d^b^mus. Sa^v.
It blows where it lists, and will not be at your whistle. [For that he
also is flesh,] He is therefore the worse, because he ought to be better. God
expects singular things from his people, and takes it ill, when they are carnal
and walk as men, 1 Cor. 3.3. They should be higher then others by head and
shoulders, as Saul was; and all that is in them, or comes from them, should be
as the fruit of the trees in Paradise, fair to the eye, and swe^t to the taste.
[Yet his days shall be an hundred and twenty years.] It shall be so long ere I
destroy. 1 Pet. 3.19, 20. 2 Pet 2.5.
This long-suffering of God is celebrated by St. Peter, and well it may; for
had he not been God, and not man, he could never have held his hands so long.
Neither indeed did he; for so extreme was the provocation, that he cut them off
twenty years of this promised count: That all the earth might know to their woe,
Numb. 14.34.
his breach of promise.

Verse. 4. There were Giants.] Gigantes, quasi (...), Earthsprung. John 3.31.
They were of the earth, they spoke of the earth, and the earth heard them.
Heard them. I say, and fell before them; as the beasts of the field do before
the roaring Lion. Hence they are called in Hebrew Nephilim; (...)
such as being fallen from God, fell upon men, Job 1.15. and by fear and force,
made others fall before them. Thus they sought to renown and raise themselves,
by depressing others, and doing violence. But this was not the way: For now
they lie shrouded in the sheet of shame. To do Worthily in Ephrata, is to be
famous in Bethlehem, Ruth 4.11. To be patiently perseverant in well-doing, is
to seek for glory and honor; yea, to attain immortality and eternal life,
Romans 2.7.

Verse. 5. The wickedness of man was great in the earth.] Which was now grown so
foul, that God saw it but time to wash it with a flood; as he shall shortly do
again with streams of fire. He destroyed the world then with water, for the
heat of lust, he shall destroy it with fire, for the coldness of love, as says
Ludolfus. Devita Christi. l. 2. c. 7.
[And that every imagination of the thoughts,] Omne figmentum cogitationum: The
whole fiction, or every creature of the heart, as the Apostle has it, Hebr.
4.13. speaking there of the thoughts, All the thoughts extensively are
intensively only evil, and protensively continually.
and intents of the heart. There is a general ataxy, the whole frame is out of
frame. The understanding dark as hell, and yet proud as the devil. The will
cross and overthwart. The memory slippery and waterish, to receive and retain
good impressions; but of a marble firmness, to hold fast that which is evil.
The affections crooked and preposterous. The very tongue a world of wickedness,
what then the heart? Si trabes in oculo, strues in cord. The operations
thereof are evil, only evil; Every day evil, says this Text: And assigns it
for the source of the old worlds wickedness. David also resolves his adultery
and murder, into this pravity of his nature, as the principle of it, Psalm.
51.5. so does Job, Chap. 40.4. Paul, Romans 7.24. Isaiah, Chap. 6.5. The whole
Church ( Isai. 64.6.) cries out, Unclean, Unclean; and Chap. 53.6. Lev. 13.45.
Esa. 1.3.
All we like sheep have gone astray. Now as no creature is more apt to wander,
so none less able to return, then a sheep. The Ox knows his owner, the Ass
his masters crib. The very Swine accustomed to the trough, if he go abroad,
yet at night will find the way home again: Not so the Sheep. Lo such is man.
Quintilian therefore was quite out when he said, It is more marvel that one
man sins, then that all men should live honestly: sin is so against the
nature of man. But he erred, not knowing the Scripture. For do ye think, Jam.
4.5.
says St. James (alluding to this text) that the Scripture says in vain, The
spirit that dwells in us lusts to envy? The civil man's namans nature is as
bad as the worst, not changed, but chained up: Truly said Tully, Cum primum
nascimur in omni continuo pravitate versamur. We are no sooner born then buried
in a bog of wickedness.

Verse. 6. And it repented the Lord, etc. and it grieved him] These things are
spoken of God, (...), after the manner of men; but must be taken and understood
(...), as it beseems God. Perkins.
When Repentance is attributed to God (says Mr. Perkins) it notes only the
alteration of things and actions done by him, and no change of his purpose and
secret decree, which is immutable. M. Gataker.
Gods repentance (says another learned Divine) is not a change of his will,
but of his work: Repentance with man, is the changing of his will: Repentance
with God, is the willing of a change: Mutatiorei, non Dei; effectus, non
affectus; facti, non consilii.

Verse. 7. I will destroy man] See here the venomous and mischievous nature of
sin: It causes God to make a World, and again to unmake it: it sets him
against Man his Masterpiece, and makes him (though he be (...)) not only to
devise, but to delight in the destruction of his own creature, to mock at, and
make merry in his calamity, Prove. 1.26. to deliver the beloved of his soul
into the hands of the destroyer. Time was, when Christ, being by at the
Creation, Jer. 12 7.
rejoiced in this habitable part of Gods earth, and his delights were with the
sons of men, Prove. 8.31. But since the Fall it is far otherwise; Haba^. 1.
for he is of more pure eyes the^^ to behold sin with patience: He hates it
worse then he hates the Devil: for he hates the Devil for sins sake, and not
sin for the Devils sake. Now the natural and next effect of hatred, is
revenge. Hence he resolves, I will destroy man. [Both man and beast, the
creeping thing, etc.] Why, what have those poor sheep done? They are all
undone by man's sin, and are (for his punishment) to perish with him, as they
were created for him. This is a piece of that bondage they are still subject
to; and grievously groan under, waiting deliverance, Romans 8.21, 22.

Verse. 8. But No^h found grace] Because in Covenant with God; who of himself
was a child of wrath, and saved by grace only, though just and perfect in his
generation. The Mercy-seat was no larger then the Arc; to show, that the grace
of God extends no further then the Covenant: As all out of the Arc were
drowned, so all out of the Covenant are damned.

Verse. 9. Justitia Impu^a^a, Impertita.
Noah was a just man] By a twofold justice, 1. Imputed. 2. Imparted By the
former he was justified; by the latter sanctified: and note, that he found
grace in Gods eyes, before he was either of these; for Grace is the foundation
of all our felicity, and comprehends all blessings, as Mannah is said to have
done all good tastes. Ecclesiasticus.
[Perfect in his generation] At best in those worst times, which is a singular
commendation; and perfect, that is, upright; (...) Heb. 13.18.
aiming at perfection, willing in all things to please God; and yet not more
desiring to be perfect, then hating to seem only to be so. Or, Noah was
perfect, compared to that sinful generation; which yet gloried in the title of
the sons of God, and children of the Church. But was not Judas called Friend,
and Dives Son? Matthew. 26. Luke 16.
Has not many a Ship been known by the name of Safeguard and Good-speed, which
yet has dashed upon the rocks, or miscarried by Pirates? External privileges
profit not, where the heart is not upright, but increase wrath. It was an
aggravation to Solomon's sin, That God had appeared unto him twice; and that he
had been timely forewarned by his mother to beware of wine and women, 1. King.
11.9. Prove. 31.3.4.
Prove. 31. both which he was afterward, nevertheless, most inordinately
addicted to, Eccles. 2.

Verse. 11. The earth also was corrupt before God] Or, rotten, putrid, and
stanke again. Sin is an offense to all Gods senses; yea to his very soul, as
he complains, Esa. 1.1. to 16. Oh that it were so to ours then would we not
hide it under our tongues (as a child does sugar) and harbor it in our
hearts; yea let it eat of our meat, and drink of our cup, and lie in our
bosoms, as the poor man's lamb did in Nathans parable. Lust was but a stranger
to David, 2 Samuel 11.3
as the Prophet there intimates, verse. 4. At other times, and when himself, I
hate vain thoughts, says he, Psalm. 119, 113. yea every false way, 104. as the
vomit of a dog, as the devils excrements, as the putrefaction of a dead soul,
dead in trespasses; dead and rotten, as here, stinking worse before God, (...).
Job. 11.
then Lazarus did or could do, after he had lain four days in the grave.

Verse. 12. All flesh had corrupted his way] General defection precedes
general destruction; as here all sorts and sexes were fallen from God. All
kind of sins were common amongst them. In the family promiscuous lusts,
unlawful marriages, etc. In the State tyranny, violence, injustice: In the
Church contempt of Gods word, abuse of his patience to presumption; of his
bounty to security in sin. For they eat, they drank, they married, they
planted, they builded, etc. And all this they did constantly and pleasantly,
passing from eating to drinking; from drinking to marrying; (for Venus in
vinis, and gluttony is the Gallery that wantonness walks through) from
marrying to planting, for the use of posterity, as St. Luke ^weetly sets forth
by an elegant Asynd^^^. (...), etc. Luke 17.27.
All this they did, and God was silent, therefore their hearts grew fat as
brawn, and they knew nothing, says our Savior, nor would know, till the very
day that the flood came: Into such a dead lethargy were they cast by their
sins, which were therefore grown ripe, and ready for the sickle.

Verse. 13. The end of all flesh is come before me] I will surely, Certissime
citissimeque.
and swiftly destroy them. A like threatening there is used, Ezekiel 7.2, 3, 6.
against Israel, when once their sins were full ripe, and hanged but for mowing,
as we say. The end is come, is come, is come, and so some ten or twelve times,
is come, is come, q. d. destruction is at next door by, and Noah must know it
too: Not by his skill in Astrology, as Berosus belyes him, but by divine
praemonition. Genesis 18.17. Psalm. 25.14. Amos 3.7.
For shall I hide from Noah (from Abraham) that thing which I do? No surely;
they shall know all: they shall be both of Gods Come and Co^^^ell; For the
secr^^ of the Lord is with them that fear him. And the Lord will do nothing
(of this nature) but he will first reveal it unto his servants the Prophets.
And even to this day, the more faithful and familiar we are with God, so much
the sooner, and better do we foresee his judgments, and can foreshew them to
others; as those that are well acquainted with men, know by their looks and
gestures that which strangers understand not, but by their actions. As finer
tumpers are more sensible of the changes of weather, etc. [I will destroy
them]: I will corrupt them (so the Hebrew has it) I will punish them in kind,
pay them in their own coin, corrupt them from the earth, as they have corrupted
themselves in the earth, which also now is burdened with them, and cries to me
for a vomit to spue them out.

Verse. 14. Make thee an Ark] Or chest, or coffin. And indeed by the description
here set down, the Arc, in shape, was like to a coffin for a man's body, six
times so long as it was broad, and ten times so long as it was high: And so fit
to figure out (says an Interpreter) Christ's death and burial, Mr. Ainsworth.
and ours with him, by mortification of the old man: as the Apostle applies
this type to baptism, 1 Pet. 3.20, 21. whereby we are become dead and buried
with Christ, Romans 6.3, 4, 6.

Verse. 16. A window shall thou make] The Arc had little outward light, so the
Church, till she become triumphant. There could not but be much stench among
all those creatures, though shut up in several rooms; Heb. 5. ult.
so here, there is much annoyance to those that have their senses exercised to
discern good and evil. Compare the estate of Prince Charles, in his
Queen-mothers womb with his condition at full age, in all the glory of his
fathers Court, there is a broad difference. And it may fitly resemble (says
One) the difference of our present and future estate; while the Church does
here travel of us, we are pent up in dark cloisters, and annoyed with much
stench of sin, Baines Let.
both in our selves and others; but when we come to heaven, we shall see and
enjoy the light of life, our feet shall be as hindes feet, upon the everlasting
mountains.

Verse. 17. And behold I, even I] Verba stomachantis, and confirmantis veritatem
comminationis suae. Abused mercy turns into fury. Mimus.
God will not always serve men for a sinning-stock. Crudelem medicum^
intemperans ager facit. [Every thing, that is in the earth, shall dye] A
dismal doom; and God is now absolute in his threatening, because he will be
resolute in his execution: Oh tremble and sin not; Psalm. 4.
while others sin and tremble not. Kiss the Son, lest he be angry; Who knows
the power of his anger? Surely according to our fear, Psalm. 90.11.
is his wrath. It is a just presage and desert of ruin, not to be warned. God
has hanged up the old world in gibbets, as it were, for our admonition.
Worthily are they made examples, that will not take them. Who pities the second
Captain, consumed by fire with his company, 2 King. 1. since he had a fair
warning, but would not beware by it. Mal. 4.1.
Behold the day of the Lord comes, that shall burn as an Oven. This last day
was foretold by Enoch, before the deluge was by Noah. Longer it is before it
comes, but shall be more terrible when it is come.

Verse. 18. Thou and thy sons] Yet Ham, soon after, degenerated: for the present
he concealed his wickedness from men, from God he could not. He bears with
hypocrites in his visible Church for a season, till the time of separation.
Augusti^. Matthew. 3.12. Zach. 14.21.
In area nobiscum esse possunt, in horreo non possunt. He will thoroughly purge
his floor. The Canaanite shall not be in the land any longer; nor the unclean
spirit, Zach. 13.2. O faelicem illam dieculam*

Verse. 20. Two of every sort shall come unto thee] For they are all thy
servants, says David, they wait upon thy word. Psalm. 119.91.
This Noah might make good use of, and did, no doubt. See how sequacious these
poor creatures are to God their Centurion. If he bid them come, they come; if
go, they go. And shall not I obey God, and follow his call, be there never so
many Lions in my way?

Verse. 21. Take thou unto thee of all food] God could have kept them alive
without either food or arc. But he will have us serve his providence, in use
of lawful means; and so to trust him, as that we do not tempt him.

Verse. 22. Thus did Noah, according to all, etc.] The wicked world could not
slout him out of his faith; Heb. 11.7.
but that moved with fear, he preaches, and builds, and finisheth; He
preached without preaching says Basil of Selucia.
every stroke upon the Arc, being a real Sermon (as Nazianzen has it) to
forewarn them to flee from the wrath to come; which yet they did not: No not
the very Ship-wrights that made the Arc, but were all buried together, in one
universal grave of waters.

CHAP. VII. Verse. 1. For thee have I seen righteous before me]
NOt only before men, as Pharisees, Luke 16.15. and civil Justitiaries, Romans
2.29. but before me who see the inside, and love truth in the hidden man of the
heart. Psalm. 51.6. 1 Pet. 3.5.
And here Noah's sincerity prevailed with God for his safety, as did likewise
Lots, whom God hid in Zoar; and Abraham's, to whom God was a shield to save him
from the deadly thrusts of destruction, when he pursued the four Kings and
foiled them, because he walked before him, and was upright, Genesis 15.1. with
Genesis 14.15, So true is that of Solomon, Prove. 10.9. Prove. 14.26. Isai. 26.3.
He that walks uprightly, walks safely, as if he were in a tower of brass,
or town of war. And again, In the fear of the Lord is strong considence, and
his children have a place of refuge. The old Rock is still ready to relieve
them. [In this generation.] 2 Pet. 2.5.
Called by Saint Peter, a world of ungodly ones, far worse, no doubt, then
those in Henochs days. The greater praise was it to Noah, that (by an holy
Antiperistasis) he kindled from their coldness, and became nothing the worse,
but much the better (as it is the nature of true goodness) by their
oppositions. It was an invincible Faith, whereby he both conquered the world,
and condemned it. What else could have carried him over so many difficulties,
as he must needs encounter? Well might the Apostle say, Heb. 11.7.
By faith he prepared an Ark. For if he had been led by sense, he would have
fled as far as Jonas did, ere ever he had gone about it.

Verse. 2. Of every clean beast, thou shall take by sevens.] Three pair for
generation, and a single one for sacrifice, after the flood was past, as Chap.
8.20. God must have a moyet^, and good reason. But that two only of a sort, of
the unclean hurtful creatures, were preserved, note his fatherly providence. To
this day we see, though sheep and birds be so killed up for man's use, yet there
are far more of them, then of other unserviceable or cruel creatures. Besides,
the weaker creatures go in herds together, the stronger and savager go alone.
For if they should go in multitudes, no man, nor beast could stand before them.
This you shall find set down to your hand, Job 37. Psalm. 104. Ammianus
Marcellinus writes, That in Chaldaea there are a huge number of Lions, which
were like enough to devour up both men and beasts, throughout the Country. But
withal, he says, That by reason of the store of water and mud thereof, there
breed yearly an innumerable company of gnats, whose property is to flee into
the eye of the Lion, as being a bright and orient thing: Where biting and
stinging the Lion, he teareth so fiercely with his claws, that he puts out his
own eyes: And by that means many are drowned in the rivers, Bo^in. in Theatro.
lib. 3.
others starve for want of prey; and many the more easily killed by the
inhabitants. Bodin tells us, That the Wolf never sees his sire, his dam, nor
his young: For that, the herd of Wolves sets upon, and kills that Wolf, which
by the smell they perceive to have coupled with the she-wolf; which unless they
did, what a deal of mischief would be done by them every where among cattle?

Verse. 4. For yet seven days, etc.] God could have destroyed them by water, or
otherwise, in a far shorter space: But, of his Free Grace, he gives them yet
seven days further, and then rains upon the earth forty days, as not willing
that any should eternally perish, but that all should come to repentance, 2
Pet. 3.9. The Hebrew Doctors (as they are very injurious to Noah, because we
read not that he prayed for the old world, but only took care of himself, and
his own family, censuring him therefore of self-love and hard-heartedness; so
they judge very uncharitably of those that perished in the flood; sending them
all to hell, and wresting some Scriptures thereunto: As, that in this present
verse, God says, He will destroy them, or blot them out; That is, R. Menachem,
in loc.
(say they) out of the land of the world to come, the land of the living. I
deny not, but many of their spirits are in prison, so says Saint Peter, 1 Pet.
3.19. But withal, in the next Chapter, the same Apostle tells us, That for this
cause, the Gospel was preached also to them that are dead, that they might be
judged according to men in the flesh, but live according to God in the Spirit.
Compare these words with those 1 Pet. 3.18, 19, 20. and it will appear, the
Apostle speaks of these Antediluvians. All were not saved that were in the Ark,
nor all damned, we may well think, that were out of it. Could they see their
foundation overflown with a flood (as the phrase is, Job 22.16.) and not lay
for themselves a good foundation by laying hold on eternal life? 1 Timothy 6.19.
Saint Ambrose conceives, that Noah was seven days in the Ark, before the flood
came: That as God was six days in creating the world, and rested the seventh;
so these perishing persons, admonished by the number of the days of the
Creation, Eccles. 12.1.
might remember their Creator, and make their peace. Nunquam sero, si serio.

Verse. 5. And Noah did according unto all.] This (All,) is a little word, but
of large extent, He does not his masters, but his own will, that does no more
then himself will. A dispensatory conscience is an evil conscience. God cries
to us, Quicquid propter D^^m fit, aqualis or fit.
(...). He will have universal obedience, both for subject and object. We must
be entirely willing in all things to please God, or we utterly displease him.
Herod did many things and was not a button the better. Jehu's golden calves
made an end of him, though he made an end of Baals worship. He that does some,
and not all Gods wills, (...), Acts 13.22.
with David (in desire and affection, at least) does but as Benhadad, recover
of one disease and die of another: yea, if he take not a better course for
himself, he does but take pains to go to hell. Psalm. 119.6.
Then shall we not be ashamed, when we have respect (at least) to all Gods
Commandments.

Verse. 7. And Noah went in and his sons, etc.] Not till he was compelled by the
coming in of the flood, say the Jews: Of no good will, but because there was no
other remedy. Thus they belie the good old Preacher. Let no man think much to
be mis-judged. Jo. Woove^ius in Polymath.
Novit sapiens ad hoc scomma se productum, ut depugnet cum iis, qui maledictis
aluntur, ut venenis capreae.

Verse 9. There went in two and two,] Of their own accord, by divine instinct.
Noah was not put to the pains of hunting after them, or driving them in. Only
he seems to have been six days in receiving, and disposing of them in their
several cells, and fetching in food. When God bids us do this or that, never
stand to cast perils; but set upon the work, yield the obedience of Faith, and
fear nothing. The creatures came into Noah, without his care or cost. He had no
more to do, but to take them in, and place them. The Prophet all^des hereto,
^sai. 11.6, 7. all bloodiness and rapine laid aside.

Verse. 10. The waters of the flood were upon the earth,] God is as faithful in
his menaces, Zeph. 3.5.
as in his promises. The wicked think them but wind, but they shall feel them
to be fire, Jere. 5.14. Your fathers where are they? Vexatio dat intellectum.
Did not my words (though never so much slighted) lay hold upon them? And they
returned (that is, changed their minds, when they smarted) and said, Like as
the Lord thought to do unto us, so has he dealt with us, Zach. 1.5, 6. There
wanted not those in the old world, that held all the threats of a flood to be
interrorem only; and, when they heard Noah thundering, Luke 20.16.
put off all, as those in the Gospel with, God forbid. We cannot get men to
believe, that God is so just, or the devil so black, or sin so heavy, or hell
so hot; till it has even closed her mouth upon them. Prove. 14.16. Prove. 12.3.
The fool rages and is confident, passes on and is punished, and will not be
better advised. But what said the Martyr, Br^dford.
They that tremble not in hearing, shall be crushed to pieces in feeling. Gods
wrath is such as none can avert or avoid.

Verse. 11. In the second moneth] In April, as it is thought; then when every
thing was in its prime, and pride, birds chirping, trees sprouting, etc.
nothing less looked for then a flood; then God shot at them with an arrow
suddenly, as says the Psalmist: Psalm 64.7. 1 These. 5.3.
So shall sudden destruction come upon the wicked at last day, when they lest
look for it. So the Sun shone fair upon Sodom the same day, wherein, ere night,
it was fearfully consumed. What can be more lovely to look on, then the
corn-field a day before harvest, or a vineyard before the vintage? Nos quasi
medios inter duo s^pulchra posuit.
[All the fountains of the great deep, etc.] So, we live continually betwixt
two deaths, the waters above and below us. Serve the Lord with fear.

Verse. 13. In the self same day.] Things are repeated, that they may be the
better observed, and the greatness of the mercy the more acknowledged; that God
should single out so few, and save them, etc.

Verse. 16. And the Lord shut him in.] A mean office, one would think, for God
to shut the door after Noah. He could not well do it himself, (the door
doubtless being great and heavy,) and others that were without would not do him
so much service. God therefore does it himself, and therefore it could not but
be well done indeed. In a case of necessity, we need not question Gods
readiness, to do us any good office, so long as we keep close to him in a holy
Communion. In a Letter of B. Hoopers, 2 Chronicles. 15.2.
to certain good people, taken praying in Bow Churchyard, and now in trouble,
thus he writes. Read the second Chapter of Luke; there the shepherds that
watched upon their sheep all night, as soon as they heard Christ was born at
Bethlehem, by and by they went to see him. They did not reason, nor debate with
themselves, Act. and Mon. fol. 1347.
who should keep the Wolf from the sheep in the mean while; but did as they
were commanded, and committed their sheep to him, whose pleasure they obeyed.
So let us do; now we be called, commit all other things to him, that calls
us. He will take heed that all things shall be well; he will help the husband,
comfort the wife, guide the servants, keep the house, preserve the goods: yea,
rather then it shall be undone, he will wash the dishes, and rock the cradle.
Cast therefore all your care upon God, etc. Thus he.

Verse. 17. It was lift up above the waters.] Afterward, it went upon the face
of the waters; till at last, the highest hills were covered with waters, the
Ark floting upon the surface of them, and not swallowed up by them. In
reference whereunto David prays, Psalm. 69.15.
Let not the water-flood overflow me, neither let the deep swallow me up. The
true Christian may be tossed on the waters of affliction, yea, dowced over head
and ears: and as a drowning man, sink twice to the bottom; yet shall up again,
if out of the deep, he call upon God, as Jonah did. Then I said, I am cast out
of thy sight, Jonas 2.4.
(there you may take him up for dead) yet I will look again toward thy holy
Temple, (there he revives, and recovers comfort:) yea, though Hell had
swallowed up a servant of God into her bowels, yet it must, in despite of it,
render him up, as the Whale did Jonas; which, if he had light upon the
Mariners, would have devoured and disgested twenty of them in less space.

Verse. 19. And all the high hills.] So high, some of them, that their tops are
above the clouds and winds. And yet as high as they were, they could not save
those from the flood that fled to them. Surely, (might they say) in vain is
salvation hoped for from the mountains, Isaiah 3.23. Well for them, if (taught
by their present distress and danger) they could go on with the Church there,
and say, Surely, in the Lord our God is the salvation of Israel. Happy storm,
that beats us into the Harbor!

Verse. 21. And every man died.] Now these mockers behold that Ark with envy,
that er'st they beheld with scorn; they wish themselves in the darkest corner
of it, that lately laughed at it; and perhaps did what they could, Veris^mile
est non abstinuisse manus ab opere turbando. Piscat.
to hinder the finishing of it. Yea some, likely, to save them from drowning,
caught at and clang as fast to the outside of the Ark, as Joab for the same
cause, did to the horns of the Altar. But all in vain: For

Verse. 22. All in whose nostrils was the breath of life died, of all that was
in the dry land.] This last clause exempteth fishes; though the Jews would
needs persuade us, that these also died; for that the waters of the flood were
boiling hot. But rainwater uses not to be hot, we know; and therefore we
reject this conceit as a Jewish fable.

CHAP. VIII. Verse. 1. And God remembered Noah]
HE might begin to think that God had forgotten him; having not heard from God
for five months together; Fuit in arca per annum integrum and december dies.
Piscator.
and not yet seeing how he could possibly escape. He had been a whole year in
the Arc, and now was ready to groan out that doleful Vsquequo Domine: Have
thou forgotten to be merciful, etc? But forgetfulness befalls not the
Almighty. The Butler may forget Joseph, and Joseph, his fathers house:
Ahashuerosh may forget Mordecai, and the delivered City, Eccles. 9.15.
the poor man that by his wisdom preserved it: The Sichemites may forget
Gideon; But God is not unfaithful to forget your work and labor of love,
says the Apostle. Heb. 6.10.
And there is a book of remembrance written before him, Mal. 3.16.
says the Prophet, for them that fear the Lord. A metaphor from Kings that
commonly keep a Callendar or Chronicle of such as have done them good service;
as Ahashuerosh and Tamerlain, Esth. 6.1.
who had a catalogue of their names and good deserts, which he daily perused,
oftentimes saying that day to be lost, Turk. hist. p. 227.
wherein he had not given them something. God also is said to have such a book
of remembrance. Not that he has so, or needs to have: for all things both
past and future, are present with him: he has the Idaea of them within
himself, and every thought is before his eyes, Psalm. 139.16.
so that he cannot be forgetful. But he is said to remember his people (so he
is pleased to speak to our capacity) when he shows his care of us, and makes
good his promise to us. We also are said to be his remembrancers, when we plead
his promise, Esa. 62.6.
and press him to performance. Not that we persuade him thereby to do us good,
but we persuade our own hearts to more faith, love, obedience, etc. whereby we
become more capable of that good. [God made a wind] So he works usually by
means, though he needs them not. But many times his works are, as Luther
speaks, in contrariis mediis. As here he asswageth the waters by a wind,
which naturally lifts up the waves thereof, and inrageth them, Psalm. 107.25.
(...).
Jon. 1.4. God works by contraries, says Nazianzen, that he may be the more
admired.

Verse. 2. And the rain from heaven was restrained] These four keys (say the
Rabbines) God keeps under his own girdle; 1. Of the Womb: 2. Of the Grave: 3.
Of the Rain: 4. Of the heart. Revel. 3.
He opens, and no man shuts; he shuts, and no man opens.

Verse. 3. And the waters returned continually,] Or, hastily. Heb. (...)
In going and returning; or, heaving and shooving, with all possible speed to
return to their place, at ^ods appointment. See a like cheerfulness in Gods
servants, Zach 8.21. Isai. 60.8. Psalm. 110.3.

Verse. 4. Mountains of Ararat.] On the tops of the Gordaean Mountains (where
Noah's Ark rested) we find many ruins, The Pre^^bers travels by Job.
Cartwright. p. 32. Joseph. Antiq lib. 1. cap. 5.
and huge foundations (says the Preacher in his travels) of which no reason
can be rendered, but that which Josephus gives; That they that escaped the
flood, were so astonished and amazed, that they durst not descend into the
Plains, and Low Countries, but kept on the tops of those Mountains, and there
builded.

Verse. 5. The waters decreased.] Not all on the sudden, but by little and
little, Isa^. 28.16.
for exercise of Noah's faith. He that believes, makes not haste. God limiteth
our sufferings for time, manner, and measure. Joseph was a prisoner till the
time came. Smyr^^ was in tribulation for ten days. Physic must have a time to
work, and Gold must lie some-while in the fire. In the opportunity of time,
(...). 1 Pet. 5.6.
says Peter, God will exalt you. Prescribe not to him, with those Bethulians
in Judith: but wait his leisure, and let him do what is good in his own eyes.
He waits a fit season to show us mercy, Isai. 30.18. and thinks as long of the
time, as we do.

Verse. 7. And he sent forth a Raven] Which when it is made tame, though it
delights in dead carcases, whereof Noah knew the earth was now full; yet does
not easily forget its station, but returns thereto, when nature is satisfied.
[Which went forth to and fro.] Fluttered about the Ark, but kept out of it.
Manet foris cum voce corvina, qui non habet simplicitatem columbinam, August.

Verse. 8. Also he sent forth a Dove.] A bird that being swift and simple, ^^ai.
60.8.
willingly flies back to his Windows, through love and faithfulness to his mate
and young. Besides, he flees a long while together, and very near the ground,
and so was fitter for this service. Josephus says, That he came into the Ark
with his feet and wings, wet and dirty, which could not but be good news to
Noah.

Verse. 9. Psalm. 38.10. My heart pa^t^th (...), as Merchants run from Countr^y
to Couan^y. Buch^l^.
And the Dove found no rest] No more does man's soul (Gods Turtle) till it rest
in God. Domine, (says Saint Augustine) fecisti nos ad te, ideoque cor nostrum
inquietum est, done^ requieverit in te. Hic finis nostrae formationis, says
another, ut homo sit templum Dei, and Deus ara hominis. How often does the good
soul cry, Oh that I had the wings of a Dove, etc. Or, if that Oh will not set
him at liberty, she takes up that (woe) to express her misery: Woe is me that I
sojourn in Meshec, etc.

Verse. 11. In her mouth was an olive-leaf.] The olive never casts her leaf,
and is greenest in the spring, says Pliny. It might very well continue so
under water, during the flood. It may also very well, by an allegory, set forth
that Grace and Peace by Jesus Christ, brought in the mouth of his Ministers in
this Evening of the World, Romans 10.15. The Dove returned at first without her
errand; but sent again, she brought better tidings. (...). 2 Timothy 2.24. (...).
Epictet.
The Man of God must not only be apt to teach, but patient, in meekness
instructing those that oppose themselves; proving, if at any time God will give
them repentance. All are not sent into the vineyard at the same hour of the
day. Holy Melancthon, being himself newly converted, thought it impossible for
his hearers to withstand the evidence of the Gospel. But after he had been a
Preacher a while, it is said he complained, That old Adam was too hard for young
Melancthon. And yet, he wanted not afterward the Seal of his Ministry. For,
among many others converted by him, was that sweet Saint, George Prince of
Anhalt, whose house was Ecclesia, Academia, Curia; Melch. Adam.
and whose heart was so upright with God, his life so laudable amongst men,
that Melancthon once, (publicly defending the certainty of our future felicity
by this Argument, that godly men must be hereafter rewarded, wicked men
punished,) he named this pious Prince, Scultet. ex ore Bucholceri, qu^
Melancthonis fuit auditor.
as an unquestionable example of such a man, as might assuredly expect the
promised Crown of Life eternal, which God the righteous Judge will give to all
his, 2 Timothy 4.8.

Verse. 16. Go forth of the Ark] Learn we of this holy Patriark, to do all by
Gods direction, and not dare to attempt any thing without his warrant;
approving our selves to him in our comings in, and goings out. Psalm. 91.
He has charged his Angels with us so long as we keep the Kings high way:
Jere. 20.7.
But if we go out of his precincts, we go out of his protection. Take counse^
at his mouth, and then we may safely say, Lord, if I be deceived, thou have
deceived me. This, as at all times we have need to do, so now especially, when
there is (as 2 Chronicles. 15.5) (...) peace to him that goes out, nor to him that
comes in, but great vexation upon all countries. Nation being destroyed of
Nation, and City of City, etc.

Verse. 19. Every beast after their kind.] Heb. after their families: That is,
not confusedly and pell-mell (as we say) but distinctly and in order: The Lion
with the Lyoness, etc. every male with his female, the clean by themselves, and
the unclean by themselves. And as these latter came to the Ark unclean, and
unclean they departed; so do millions now-adays, to the Ordinances. A Preacher
has as much joy to see them there, as John Baptist had to see the Pharisees
thronging to his Baptism, when he cried out, Matthew. 3.
O generation of vipers, who sent for you? who has forewarned you, etc?

Verse. 20. And Noah builded an altar to the Lord.] This was his first care, and
so it was Abraham's wherever he came. It must be also ours, after great
deliverances especially. Gods mercies are binders: Beneficium post^lat
officium. He is content we have the comfort of his blessings, so he may have
the praise of them. This Pepper-corn is all the rent he looks for. O cover we
Gods Altar with the calves of our lips, Heb. 13.15. Psalm. 69.31.
giving thanks to his name. This will please him better then an ox that has
horns and hoofs. Only let it be done, the first thing that we do, after the
receipt of a benefit, which else will soon wax stale and putrify as fish. No
part of the thank offering might be kept unspent to the third day. Hezekiah
wrote his song the third day after his recovery. Noah was no sooner out of the
Ark, but he offered on his new-built Altar; as well for testification of his
thankfulness, as for confirmation of his Faith, in that Lamb of God, slain and
sacrificed from the beginning of the world. 2 Cor. 5.19.
God was now also in Christ reconciling this new world to himself.

Verse. 21. And the Lord smelled a sweet savor,] Heb. a savor of rest. -- Minimo
capi^ur thuris honor^ Deu^. (...). Isai. 1.
Greek, (...), which the Apostle follows, saying, That Christ gave himself
for us an offering, and a sacrifice to God, for a small of sweet savor, Ephesians.
5.2. All our sacrifices are accepted for this of Christ, which otherwise would
be turned off, with who required these things at your hands? The sacrifice of
the wicked is abomination to the Lord; yea, though he should bring thousands of
rams, Micah 6.7.
and ten thousand rivers of oy^, with those miscreants in Micah, that by their
munificence would fain have purcreants chased a dispensation to sin: whereas
Noah with his Ox, Ram, Propter animalia multa vel grandia non placuit. Peter.
(...).
He-goat, Turtle, and young Pigeon, laid in for him by God himself for this
same purpose, is highly accepted in that beloved One, as Christ is called, Ephesians.
1.6. [The Lord said in his heart] All his promises are heart-sprung, the issue
of a most faithful and righteous will, void of any the least insincerity and
falsehood: whatsoever he speaks, he speaks from his heart; we may write upon it.
The Eternity of Israel cannot lie, 1 Samuel 15.29. [I will not again curse the
ground, etc for the imagination of man's heart] As who should say, Man does but
his kind now, in committing evil before me. He has by his fall brought upon
himself a miserable necessity of sinning, so that he cannot but do wickedly
with both hands earnestly; which though it be no excuse, Mic. 7.3.
but an aggravation rather of his actual sin (that he does it out of the
pravity of his nature) yet I will not take advantages to deal with him after
his deserts; for then there would be no end of making worlds, and unmaking them
again. I will not curse, I will not smite any more. Esa. 9.13.
Where note, That Gods smiting his creature, is a fruit of sin, and a piece of
the curse. And unless men return to him that smites them, all that they
suffer here, is but a typical hell. Here the leaves only fall upon them, the
trees will fall upon them hereafter.

Verse. 27. While the earth remaineth] Heb. All the days of the earth. The
earth then (though Solomon in some sense say it endures for ever) has its set
and certain number of days appointed it by God. For the earth also, and the
works therein shall be burnt up, 2 Pet. 2.10. And this the Heathen had heard
of, and hammered at; as Lucretius who disputes the matter out of natural
causes. So does Tully, de not. Deorum, lib. 1, 2. And Ovid. Metamorph. 1. Esse
quoque in fatis meminit, etc. There he has also a large relation of the
general flood in Deucalions days; so he calls Noah. Lucian has the like in
his book, de Dea Syriae. And Plutarch speaks of the sending forth of the
Dove, Dialog. de industr. animal.
and of her return unto Deucalion into the Ark. But we have a more sure word of
Prophecy. [Cold and heat, and summer and winter, etc.] Lopez de Gomar^, says
that the Kings of Mexico, when they are consecrated, Lopez de Gom.
use to take their oath after this manner: I swear that the Sun, during my life
shall bold on his course, and keep his wonted glory and brightness and that
the clouds shall send down rain, the rivers shall run, and the earth bring
forth all manner of fruit, etc. But can any of the vanities of the Heathen give
rain, etc?

CHAP. IX. Verse. 1. Be fruitful and multiply]
HEre God renews the world by the same word wherewith he had created it; and
being reconciled to mankind, he blesses them in like manner, as before the
Fall. Sin once pardoned, is as if it never had been committed. Christ tells his
returning Shulamite, that she was as amiable in every point as she had been
before her relapse, Cant 7.1.
Chap. 4.1. her hair, teeth, temples, all as fair, and well featured as ever.

Verse. 2. And the fear of you, etc.] Timor, quo a bestiis timeamini, and
terror quo bestias terreatis. Piscat. This is a piece of Gods Image yet
remaining in man, that every nature of wild beasts, birds, Jam. 3.7. Monoceros
interimi potest, capi nan potest Solin.
creeping things, and things in the sea is tamed, and has been tamed of the
nature of man.

Verse. 3. Every moving thing that lives shall be meat for you] God of his
goodness grants here to mankind, after the flood the use of flesh and wine,
that the new and much-weakned world might have new and more strengthening
nourishment. For it is not to be doubted, but that by the deluge, a great decay
was wrought both in the earth with its fruits, and also in man's nature. Diverse
wales and scarres as it were, of Gods wrath and malediction did abide and
appear in the earth. Sundry maladies also and infirmities befell man's body, not
felt before the flood. God therefore in great mercy provides, penu quoddam and
pharmacopolium mundo senescenti, new food and physic for the languishing
world. Every moving thing that lives, etc. Only, as the green herb have I
given you all things. That is, as you may use them as freely as you used to do
herbs, so you must use them soberly, and without curiosity; taking such things
as are at hand, and eating to live, not living to eat, as the rich glutton,
that fared deliciously every day; Ingluvies, Horat.
and tempestas, barathrumque macelli.

Verse. 4. But flesh with the life thereof, the blood] Blood was forbidden,
First, as not so wholesome food. Secondly, lest by being flesht in blood, they
should become bloody minded. Thirdly, blood, the organ of life, is holy to God
the author of life (who was also to be pacified by the blood of his Son) and
therefore they should not pollute or profane it, by devouring thereof.

Verse. 5. Your blood of your lives will I require] i. e. I will punish it
either by the Magistrate, or (if he fail to do his office) by mine own
immediate hand; as he did in David, Flac. Illyric.
Charles the ninth of France, Richard the third of England, Felix Count of
Waterburg, and others, that either were above Law, or escaped the lash of it.
See for this, The Thunderbolt of Gods judgments, lib. 2. cap. 4, 5, 16.
Richard the third, Daniels Chro. continued by Trussel.
used the instruments of his bloody plots, as men do their candles; burn the
first out to a snuffe^ and then having lighted another, tread that under foot.

Verse. 6. Who so sheddeth man's blood] Some are of opinion, that before the
flood, the punishment of murder and other capital crimes, was only
excommunication, and exclusion from the Church and their fathers family. And
that now first, God made murder to be a matter of death. The firstborn had
power, at first, over their own families, to bless, curse, cast out,
dis-inherit, yea and punish with death, Genesis 38.24. even in case of adultery,
Godw. Heb. Antiq.
as some will have it thus among the people of God. But what a madness was that
in the Egyptians to make no conscience of murder, that they might enjoy their
lust? And what a blindness to make less account of murder then adultry? Genesis
12.13. The Preachers Travels by Jo Cartwright.
I have seen (says the Preacher in his travels) the King of Persia many times
to alight from his horse, only to do justice to a poor body. He punishes
theft and manslaughter so severely, Les ombres des defuncts sciurs de Villemor
and de Fonta^ues. page 46.
that in an age a man shall not hear either of the one, or of the other. A
severity fit for France; where within ten years, six thousand Gentlemen have
been slain, says he, as it appears by the Kings pardons.

Verse. 9. And I, behold I establish my Covenant with you] This Covenant God had
made with them before the flood; but here he renews it for their further
confirmation; for he knows our infirmities, and therefore seals again. This
Covenant is said to be made with an oath, Isa. 54.9. yet we find no such thing
here expressed, because Gods bare word, is as sure as an oath. So God is said
to have sworn to Abraham, that which he said to him only, Exodus 32.13. with
Genesis 12.7.

Verse. 10. And with every living creature, etc.] Note this against Anabaptists,
who exclude Infants, for that they want the use of reason. And yet that was but
a foolish reason of the Canonist, that Infants are therefore to be baptized,
Sphinx Philos. page 229.
because the Disciples brought to our Savior, not the Ass only, but the Foal
also.

Verse. 12. This is the taken of the Covenant, etc.] See here the antiquity of
confirming men's faith, by outward signs, as by the two trees in Paradise: and
here, the Word and Sacrament go together. And as God, in Noah, made a Covenant
with his posterity also, and confirmed it with a sign, so does he in Christ
with the Church, and ratified it with the Sacraments; besides, witnesses we
have three in heaven, and three in earth, etc.

Verse. 13. I do set my bow in the cloud, etc.] There it was before, but not
till now as a token of the Covenant; as still it is applied for a sign of grace
from God to his Church, Rev. 4.3. and 10.1. Ezekiel. 1.28. It is planted in the
clouds, as if man were shooting at God, and not God at man. This bow with both
ends downward, and back to heaven, must needs be an emblem of mercy; for he
that shoots, holds the back of the bow from him. Of Gods bow we read,
Ambros.
but not of his arrows, says Ambrose on this text. Psalm. 7.12, 13.
He has bent his bow, and made it ready, says David but if he ordain his
arrows, it is not, but against the perse^^tours. If he shoot at his servants,
it is as Jonathan shot at his friend David; to warn them, not to wound them.
They are arrows of the Lords deliverance, 2 King. 13.17, 19. Psalm. 32.7.
which therefore he multiplyes, that they may compass him about with songs of
deliverance. If he bend his bow like an enemy. Lam. ^.4. yet in wrath he
remembers mercy.

Verse. 14. The bow shall be seen in the cloud] In this heaven-bow, there are
many wonders: First, the beautiful shape and various colors; In which respect
Plato thinks the Poets feign Iris, or the Rainbow, to be the daughter of
Thanmas, or admiration. The waterish colors therein signify (say some) the
former overthrow of the world by water. The fiery colors, the future judgment
of the world by fire. The green, that present grace of freedom from both, by
virtue of Gods Covenant, whereof this bow is a sign. Next, the Rainbow has in
it two contrary significations, viz. of rain, and fair-weather; of this in the
evening, of that in the morning, says Scaliger. Add hereunto, that whereas
naturally it is a sign of rain (and is therefore feigned by the Poets to be the
messenger of Jun^, and called imbrifera, or showry) yet it is turned by God
into a sure sign of dry weather, and of restraint of waters. Let us learn to
look upon it, not only in the natural causes, as it is an effect of the Sun
in a thick cloud; but as a Sacramental sign of the Covenant of Grace; Esa.
54.9, 10.
a monument of Gods both Justice in drowning the world, and Mercy in conserving
it from the like calamity. The Jews have an odd conceit, That the name Jehovah
is written on the Rainbow. And therefore, as often as it appears unto them,
they go forth of doors, Maimo^y.
hide their eyes, confess their sins, (that deserved a second deluge*) and
celebrate Gods goodness, in sparing the wicked world, and remembering his
Covenant. Set aside their superstition, and their practice invites our
imitation. Bern.
Tam Dei meminisse opui est quam respirare.

Verse. 15, 16. I will remember] That is, I will make you to know and remember
by this visible Monitor. Segnius irritant animum demissa per aures,
Quam quae sunt oculis commissa fidelibus.
The Rainbow is a double Sacrament, answering both to Baptism and the Lords
Supper; and declares by its colors (says One) how Christ came by water and
blood, 1 John 5.6.

Verse. 17. This is the token of the Covenant.] This is often repeated, that it
may be the better observed, and we full assured; Deuteronomy. 6.7. Exacues ea, i^ est,
accurate and commodissime inculcabis. Buxtorf. Lexic.
as Pharaohs dream was for this cause doubled. God goes over the same thing
often with us, as the knif does the Whetstone, which is the Scripture-allusion.
He well knows how slow of heart we are, and how dull of hearing; and therefore
whets and beats things of high concernment upon us, that we may once apprehend
and embrace them, Revel. 10.1. Revel. 10.1. exp.
Christ is said to have a Rainbow on his head, to show that he is faithful and
constant in his promises, and that tempests shall blow over. Let us see Gods
love in his corrections, as by a Rainbow we see the beautiful image of the Suns
light, in the midst of a dark and waterish cloud.

Verse. 20. And Noah began to be an husbandman] Veteres si quem virum, bonum
colonum appellassent, amplissime laudasse existimabant. Cic. Nunquam vilior
erat annona Romae, referente Pliuio, quam cum terram colerent iidem qui Remp.
regerent; quasi gauderet terra laureato vomere, scilicet, and Aratore
triumphali. See 2 Chronicles. 26.10. [And he planted a vineyard.] Hence Berosus, and
the Poets call him Janus Oenotrius. Janus, of the Hebrew iajin vinum, and
Oenotrius of (...), whence our English word Wine.

Verse. 21. And was drunk.] For his own shame, but our learning. Instruunt nos
patres tum docentes tum labentes. Augustine.
The best have their blemishes, and a black-part, as that cloud had, that
conducted Israel out of Egypt; Heb. 12.1.
which while the Egyptians followed, they fell into the Sea. [And was uncovered
within his tent.] Operta recludit.
One hours drunkenness bewrayes that, which more then six hundred years
sobriety had modestly concealed. Well might Solomon say, Wine is a mocker: For
it mocked Noah with a witness; and exposed him to the mockage of his own
bosom-bird.

Verse. 22. And Ham, the father of Canaan, saw] The Hebrews say, That Canaan
first saw it, and then showed it to Ham his father, who looks upon it with
delight, Vt vultures ad male olentia feruntur, says Basil, As carrion-kites
are carried after stinking carcases. [And told his two brethren without.] Sic
and impii hodie ex Ecclesiae tragoediis comoedias componunt. How glad are the
wicked, if they can but get any hint to lay hold on, whereby to blaspheme,
Jere. 20.10.
and blaze abroad the Saints infirmities. Report, say they, and we will report:
yea, rather then want matter against Gods people, they will suck it out of their
own fingers ends. But if such a thing as this fall out, that Noah be drunk,
though but once in an age, the banks of blasphemy will soon be broken down, and
the whole race of Religious persons must rue for it; among these Canaanites
some also will be found to excuse them in it, as Scaliger does Ham.

Verse. 23. And Sem and Japhet took a garment.] Ham had no hand in this good
work; Constant. Mag. Theodoret. lib. 1. Eccles. hist. ^ap. 11.
which shows, what a good one he was, and how far from being of that good
Emperors mind, who said, That if he should find a Bishop committing adultery,
he would rather cover that unclean act with his imperial cloak, then suffer it
to come abroad to the scandal of the weak, and the scorn of the wicked.

Verse. 24. And Noah awoke from his wine.] And returned no more to it. Once was
enough: the time past may well suffice, to have walked in excess of wine, 1
Pet. 4.3.
says Peter. We Will buy repentance so dear no more. It is expressly noted of
Judah, that he knew Tamar again no more. Genesis 38.26.
And we may be well assured, That Noah was never drunk again. Prove. 23.35.
Solomon's drunkard cries, When shall I awake! I will seek it yet again. As
Swine break their bellies, so do such men their heads, Hos. 4.11. Malle se
vitam quam vinum cripi. August. de temp. sermon. 131.
with filthy quaffing; yea, Whoredom and wine, and new wine, take away the
heart, says the Prophet: They besot and infatuate, yea, rob a man of himself,
and lay a beast in his room. Our drunkards say, as the Vine in Jothams parable.
Non possum relinquere vinum meum. Take away my liquor, you take away my life.
Mr. Harris his drunkards cup.
How often (says a grave Divine) have I seen vermin sucking the drunkards
blood, as fast as he that of the grape and malt, yet would he not leave his
hold, or loose his draught! Some be buckt with drink, and then laid out to be
sun'd and scorned. [And knew what his younger son had done unto him.] It is
probable, That finding himself covered with a cloak, he asked his wife and
children how he came covered? Piscator.
and that then Sem and Japhet told him all the matter; which moved him to bless
them. It is our wisest way, to do what good we can to others. And though they,
for present, being drunk with malice, or rash anger, know it not, yet a
waking-time may come, when they may see the good, and bless us for it, as David
did Abigail, 2 Samuel 25.33. When he had slept out his drunken passion, he saw
cause to bless God, to bless her, and to bless her counsel. Master Gilpins
plain-dealing with the Bishop of Durham how well it succeeded; See his life
written by Bishop Carleton, page 58.

Verse. 25. And he said, Cursed be Canaan.] Because an imitator, and abbettor of
his fathers sin: Neither good egg, nor good bird, as they say. God himself has
cursed such caytiffs with a curse. Prove. 30.17. The eye that mocketh at his
father, and despises to obey his mother; the ravens of the valley shall pick
it out, and the young eagles shall eat it. Now they are cursed with a witness,
Effossos oeidos voret atro gutture corvus. Catul. Per coacervatos poreat domus
impia luctus. Oedip. apud Ovid. Daniels Chron. page 112.
whom the Holy Ghost thus curses, in such emphatical manner, with such
exquisite terms. Their parents also through their unnaturalness are compelled
to curse them, as Noah here: As Oedipus of old, and our Henry the second, who
seeing a few hours before he died, a list of their names, that had conspired
with the King of France, and Earl Richard (his son and successor) against him;
and finding therein his son John to be the first, falls into a grievous
passion, both cursing his sons, and the day wherein himself was born; and in
that distemperature, departs the world, which so often himself had distempered.
The causeless curse indeed (though from a parents mouth) shall not come, Prove.
26.2. Such as was that, that befell Julius Palmer Martyr, who when he asked his
mother blessing, Thou shall, said she, have Christ's curse and mine, wheresoever
thou go. He pausing a little, as one amazed at so heavy a greeting, at
length said, O mother, your own curse you may give me, which God knows I
never deserved; but Gods curse you cannot; for he has already blessed me, and
I shall be blessed. As for money and goods, said she, which thou suest to me
for, as bequeathed thee by thy father, I have none of thine. Thy father
bequeathed nothing for heretics: Faggots I have to burn thee; more thou
gettest not at my hands. Mother, said he, wherea^ you have cursed me; I again
pray to God to bless and prosper you, all your life long. And so he departed,
and shortly after, valiantly suffered for the truth, Act. and M^n. fol. 1755.
and 1761. The wild Irish inflict an heavy curse on all their posterity, if
ever they should sow corn, build houses, or learn the English tongue. Heyl.
Geog. 508. Camdens Elisab. p. 116, 117.
at Newbury in Barkshire, having sometimes been Fellow of Magdalen College in
Oxford; and all King Edwards days an obstinate Papist. Thus for the causeless
curse of parents. But where it is just, it lights heavy. The very complaint of
a parent makes a loud cry in Gods ears, Judge. 9.56. It is said, That God, by
cutting off Abimelech, rendered the wickedness that he did to his father. And
who can read with dry eyes that pitiful supplication of the old Emperor
Andronicus, to his young nephew of the same name, Turk. hist. fol. 172? But
when it proceeds to a corse, lamentable effects have followed. Leonard son of
the Lord Dacres (one of the Rebels in the North against Queen Elizabeth) whose
father prayed God upon his deathbed, to send him much sorrow for his
disobedience, drew forth a most poor life in the Netherlands, whither he
escaped, living upon a very slender pension from the Spaniard. That Rebellion
(like the bubbles which children blow up into the air,) was no sooner blown up,
then blown out; and fell into the eyes of those, which with the blasts of
ambition, and superstition held it up. But most remarkable is that, and
apposite to our present purpose, that Manlius reports of a certain mother, J^^.
Manlii. loc. co^. 228. Invole^ in te diab^^us.
whom he and many others had seen leading about her miserable daughter, who was
possessed by the devil upon her cursing her, and bidding the devil take her.
Luther and others prayed publicly for the Girl; and when Luther said to the
Devil, Increpet te Them*
The Lord rebuke thee Satan, the Devil answered, muttering through the Maids
lips, Increpet, increp^t. Another like example, the same Author has, of a
certain angry old man, Idem ibidem.
in the Town of Friburg in Misnia; Who bidding his son do some business for
him, and he making no have to do it, nor stirring from the place he stood in;
the father cursed him, and wished he might never stir alive from that place.
God said Amen to it: and although he lived seven years after, yet there he
stood, leaning upon a desk while he slept, eating little, and speaking not
much. When he was asked how he did? he would answer, That he was chastised
justly by God, in whose hand it was, what should at length become of him here.
But of his eternal salvation by the merits of Christ alone, he nothing doubted;
being chastised of the Lord, that he might not be condemned with the world. The
prints of his feet are to be seen in the pavement, where he stood to this day,
says the Historian. After seven years suffering, he departed in the true Faith
of Christ, with good hopes of a better estate in Heaven, September the
eleventh, Anno 1552. [A servant of servants shall he be to his brethren:] In
which title, the Pope of Rome (not without the providence of God) will needs be
his successor. A servant of Gods servants, he will by all means be called. And
yet he stamps upon his coin, That Nation and Country that will not serve thee,
shall be rooted out. What pride equal to the Popes, making Kings kiss his
Pantofles, (upon which he has Christ's Cross shining with Pearls and precious
stones, Vt plenis faucibus crucem Christi derideat?) Sands his Relation of
West. relig. sect. 12.
What humility greater then his, shriving himself daily to an ordinary Priest?
One while he will be filled, Servus servorum Dei; another while, Dominus
regnorum mundi* which is one of the Devils titles; yea, Dominus Deus noster
Papa, Johan. 23. i^ Extravag.
taking upon him a power to excommunicate the very Angels also; yea, lifting up
himself above Christ, who is called Pontifex Magnus, Hebrews 4.14. but the Pope
calls himself Pontifex maximus. Gregory the Great was the first that styled
himself, A servant of servants; in opposition forsooth, to that proud Prelate
of Constantinople, who affected to be called Universal Bishop. But after the
death of Mauricius, Ph^cae adular^ suppariseri, etc. Ut suam po^^statem per
favorem parricidae extenderet. Revii hist pontif. p. 45.
when Phocas the Traitor came to be Emperor, this Gregory clawed him
shamefully, and all to attain that dignity and dominion, that he so much
condemned in another. The Pope of Constantinople could not bear a superior, nor
the Pope of Rome an equal. The one sought to subdue to himself the East, the
other East and West too; and thence grew all the heat betwixt them. See the
like ambition under the color of zeal for their Religion in Selymus the Turk
and Hismael the Persian, Turk. histor. foli^ 515.

Verse. 26. Blessed be the Lord God of Shem.] Shem seems to have been the chief
actor and perswader of that reverent behavior; and therefore, as he is first
named, Verse. 23. before his elder brother Japhet; so here he has the first and
chief blessing. It is good to be first in a good matter, yea, prompt and
present to every good work, (...), Tit. 3.1.
as Paul has it. [And Canaan shall be h^s servant.] This curse was not
fulfilled of many hundred years after; till the sins of the Amorites were grown
full, and then it was accomplished. Gods forbearance is no acquittance. He can
also turn a curse into a blessing, as he did this to Araunah the Jebusite, 2 Samuel 5.7.
of the worst and most stubborn of the Canaanites: For they held the Tower of
Jebus from the posterity of Sem, after all the rest had yielded: Yet he became
a godly Proselyte, and gave as a King his freehold to King David, to build an
Altar on, 2 Samuel 24.18. And this deed of his was long after remembered. Zach.
9.7. The like may be said of the Gibeonites, who are called Nethinims in Ezra
and Nehemiah. They were made servants to the Shemites, drawers of water to the
Temple, as a kind of punishment. God made this Cross a Mercy. Their employment
so near the house of God, gave them fit occasion to be partakers of the things
of God. And the Lord, we see, did wonderfully honor them; the nearer they were
to the Church, the nearer to God. It is good getting into his house, though to
be but a doorkeeper with David, or a tankard-bearer, with these Gibeonites.
Stand but in Gods way as he passes, and thou shall be preferred.

Verse. 27. God persuade Japhet,] Formone else can do it. Men may speak
perswasively, but to persuade, is proper to God alone. He speaks to the heart,
Hos. 2.14. we to the ear only. He persuades and allureth not only by a moral
persuasion, but by an irresistible inward drawing, Acts 11.17. In the Hebrew
there is a sweet Agnomination, q. d. God shall persuade the perswasible. He
shall draw them to faith and obedience, Monendo potius quam minando, docondo
quam ducendo, says Saint Austin, by informing not enforcing. He brings in his
Elect by a merciful violence. He sent forth at first not swordmen, but
fishermen; and prevailed by them in those places, Britannorum inaccessa
Romany lo^a, Christo tamen subdit^. Tertul.
where the Romans could never come with all their forces. Elisha could do more
with a kiss then his man could do with a staff, in raising the dead child. Let
him kiss me with the kisses of his mouth, Cant. 1.2. And then follows, Draw me,
we will run after thee. [And he shall dwell in the tents of Sem.] The Churches
abode here, is but in tents: She has no continuing City on earth, Heb. 13.14.
1 Timothy 3.16.
but seeks one to come. This, whether prophecy or prayer, was fulfilled when
God manifested in the flesh, was preached unto the Gentiles, and believed on in
the world, some thousands of years after. The Gentiles were converted by virtue
of this prayer (as Paul was by Saint Stevens,) and as we enjoy the Gospel by
Latimers yet once more, and the prayers of other Martyrs.

Verse. 28, 29. And Noah lived after the flood, etc.] This man, if ever any that
was born of a woman, had a long life, Job 14.1.
and full of misery. He saw the tenth generation after him before his death.
But oh how often was he occasioned to get under the Juniper-tree with Elias, and
desire to dye? Before the flood, what a deal of wickedness and disorder beheld
he in family, Church, and Commonwealth, and all this punished by the deluge to
his unspeakable heart-break? Soon after, he was mocked by his own son, and
despised by almost all the rest of his posterity; whose unheard of hardiness in
building the Tower of Babel, he was nolens volens, forced to see and suffer;
and then shortly after, the confusion of tongues as their just punishment. What
should I speak of their so many and so great cruelties, insolences, tyrannical
usurpations, effusions of innocent blood, wars, stirs strifes, superstitions,
and abominable idolatries under Nimrod, Jupiter Belus, Semiramis, Vix mihi
persuadeo virum ex homi^e miseriorem natum fu^sse quam Noah. Funccii Chron.
fol. 17.
Zoroaster, (the Magick-Master,) and other Emims and Zamzummims of the Earth?
Of all which, and a great deal more, this good old Patriark was, to his sorrow,
not only an ear but an eyewitness? All which considered, it must needs be
granted, that, living so long, never any Martyr or other, out of Hell, suffered
more misery then Noah did. And the like may be said of Athanasius, of whom
Master Hooker witnesses, That for the space of forty six years, from the time
of his consecration to succeed Alexander Archbishop of Alexandria, till the
last hour of his life in this world, his enemies never suffered him to enjoy
the comfort of a peaceable day. Was not he to be reckoned a Martyr though he
dyed in his bed? Erasm. in vitae Chrysostom.
Cur veriar Chrysostomum appellare Martyrem? says Erasmus. And why may not any
man say as much of Luther, etc.

CHAP. X. Verse. 5. By these were the the Isles of the Gentiles]
THat is, (...) en (...), and (...), quasi dila^atio. (...) Ignis Domini. Q.
Curtius says of Darim, that he called upon the sacred and eternal fire.
the Countries of Europe and Asia the less, inhabited by Japhets posterity.
Europe has its name, in Greek, from the latitude, and large surface of it;
which answers well to the name of Japhet (signifying enlargement) who together
with his offspring, was by Gods appointment, to rule there far and wide toward
the West and North. Asia has its name from two Hebrew words that signify the
fire of the Lord, which in Persia and other parts thereof, they superstitiously
deified. Asia the less, was so called first by Attalus King of Pergamus; who
being the last of that name, and race, made the Romans his heyrs by will. They
turned his Country into a Province, and called it Asia by the name of the
Continent; as devouring, doubtless, in hope, that whole part of the world, by
this small beginning. Hence, likely, came that first distinction of the lesser
Asia.

Verse. 8. Nimrod, he began to be a mighty one] His name signifies a Rebel: he
was the chief Babel-builder, and there began to be a mighty one, a Giant,
says the Greek (such another as Goliath was in his generation, 1 Samuel 17.51.
where the same word is used) a Magnifico, a Grandio, such a one as sought to
make himself great even to a proverb, verse. 9. But there is a double greatness:
First, Genuine. Secondly, Belluine. This latter is no such commendation; a
beast in this may, and does exceed us; as in the latter, we exceed our selves,
and others.

Verse. 9. He was a mighty hunter] Of men, whose lives he sacrificed to his
lust, not of beasts for sacrifice to the Lord, as Aben-Ezra will have it, and
takes occasion thereupon highly to commend him. Epiphan. here is. 38.
But there wanted not those that commended Cain also for killing his brother,
and were therefore called Cainites. Of others we read, that extolled the
Sodomites, Core and his accomplices, Judas the Traitor. Yea there was one Bruno
found, that wrote an Oration in commendation of the Devil, who has given him
his Guerdon, no doubt, by this, unless he recanted that monstrous madness.

Verse. 11. Out of that land went forth Assur] Either because wickedness dwelt
there, Zach. 5.11. for Ashur was a son of Sem; and might have so much goodness
in him, verse. 22. Or else he was hunted there-hence by Nimrod, who made himself
the first Monarch, and had Babel, in the land of Shinar, or Chaldea, for the
beginning of his Kingdom.

Verse. 12. The same is a great City] As consisting of three Cities, and having
more people within the walls, then are now in some one Kingdom. See the
greatness of this City set forth in the, Preachers Travels, page 89. The
greatest City in the world at this day, is said to be Quinsai in Tartary, Paul.
Venet.
which is a hundred miles about, as M. Paulus Venetus writes, who himself
dwelt therein, Turk. hist. fo. 75
about the year 1260. Cambalu the Imperial City, and seat of the great Cham of
Tartary is in circuit twenty eight miles about. Nineveh was three days journey
in Jonah's days: Now it is destroyed (as was long since prophesied by Nahum)
being nothing else then a sepulcher of her self, a little Town of small trade,
Nah. 2. and 3.
where the Patriarch of the Nestorians keeps his seat at the devotion of the
Turk. As Susa in Persia, once a Lilly (as the name signifies) for the sweet
site, and so rich, as afterward is reported, ( cap. 11. Preachers Travels, 88.
verse. 30) is now called Valdac of the poverty of the place.

Verse. 20. These are the sons of Ham] More in number, and more sweetly
situated, then the posterity of either Shem or Japheth^ thirty sons and nephews
of cursed Ham are here recited and registered; when of blessed Shem we find but
six and twenty, and of Japheth, but fourteen. And for their Countries, Canaan
has the navell of the world ( Sumen totius orbis, as one calls that Country) a
land that flows with milk for necessity, and honey for delight; where the
hardest rocks sweat out honey and oil, Deuteronomy. 32.13. Exodus 3.17. Nihil mollius
c^^lo, nihil uberius solo, L. Flor. l. 1. c. 16 See Deuteronomy. 8.7, 8, 9, and cap.
11.11, 12.
as Florus says of Campania; a land that God had spied out among all lands for
his own peculiar people, yea for himself to dwell in. Lo this was Hams
possession; when his two better brethren, dwelt in the more barren waste
Countries of the East and West. God deals by his people here, as the host does
by his guests, who lets them have the best meats, and fairest lodgings, but
reserves the inheritance for his children. The Lord holds his servants to
hard-meat many times (but then they have it of free-cost) whereas the wicked
eat of the fat and drink of the sweet, but their meat in their bowels is turned
into the gall of ^spes, God shall cast it out of their bellies, Job 20.14, 15.
In fatting them he does but fit them for destruction, as he did these
Canaanites, whose pleasant land he afterward made a spoil to his own Israel.
They grew a burden to that good land, which therefore for their wickedness
spued them out, Lev. 18.25. after they had filled it from corner to corner,
with their abominable uncleanness, Ezra 9.11.

Verse. 25. Peleg, for in his days was the earth divided] Eber (of whom came
the Ebrews or Israelites, Exodus 1.15.) that he might have before his eyes a
perpetual monument of Gods just displeasure against the ambitious
Babel-builders, ^alls his son Peleg, or Division, because in his days was
the earth divided. It is good to write the remembrance of Gods worthy works
whether of mercy or justice, upon the names of our children, or otherwise as we
can best, to put us in mind of them; for we need all helps, such is either our
dullness or forgetfulness. What was it else that made David so often to put the
thorn to his breast? Psalm. 103.1, 2, 3. And why would God have the plates of
the censers of those sinners against their own souls, to be a covering to the
Altar, but to be a memorial to the children of Israel, that no stranger come
near to offer incense, that he be not as Corah and his company, etc? Numb.
16.38, 40.

Verse. 26. Jok^an begat Almodad, etc.] This man with his sons may seem to have
seated in the East Indies. But fallen from Hebers faith to Hethenisme, they are
written in the dust: there is little mention of them in the Scriptures. They
have lost their Genealogy, as those degenerate Priests, who in the time of the
captivity took scorn to be in the register, and were therefore worthily
afterward rejected by the Tirshata. ^^ra 2.61.


CHAP. XI. Verse. 1. And the Whole earth was of one language]
UNity without verity, is no better then conspiracy. A legion of Devils could
accord to get into one man; and, though many, yet they speak and act as one in
that possession. That infernal Kingdom is not divided against it self. A
shame for Gods Saints to be at difference: What should sheep do snarling, like
dogs, one at another? The children of this world are wiser, a fair deal, in
their generation; they can combine and comply, as here, though their society be
as unsavory as the slime and filth that is congealed, when many Toads and
other Vermin meet together.

Verse. 2. In the land of Shinar] Which was a part of the garden of Eden, as
most Geographers think, fat and fruitful still above belief, Herodot. l. 1.
c. 193. Plin. l. 6.26.

Verse. 3. And they said one to another] One broached this counsel, and the
rest soon consented. Heb. 3. (...). Act. 18.5. Intus and apud se aestuabat prae
^el^ ardore.
Let us consider one another to whet on to love and good works: One live-coal
may set a whole stack on fire. When Silas came, Paul burned in spirit, and
preached lustily. [Let us make brick* etc.] Thus, wanting stones they devised
matter for their cursed building. Good cause has the Church to be as ingenious
and sedulous in building Stair-cases for heaven, as the Devil and his Imps, in
digging descents to hell. Apud Babylonem Trajanu^ Imp. vidit lacum bitumi^is,
ex quo moenia Babylonis aedificata suerant Cujus tanta vis est, ut permixtum
cum lateribus, quovis saxs sit aut ferro potentius. Dio in vita Trajan. Jam cum
Jove de divitiis licet certetis, Cassiod l. 7. Var. ^pist, 15. Habac. 2. Matthew
11.12. Diri^iunt, metapb, a castris aut arc^ quapiam, quae irrumpeutib.
host^bu^ diripitur. H^lar.
[And they had brick for stone and slime for morter] And yet though the walls
were high and huge, this City was taken first by Cyrus, afterward by
Alexander, and plundered at several times by many other enemies. Shusa in
Persia was first built by Tithonus and his son Memnon, who was so exceeding
prodigal, that, as Cassidorus writes, he joined the stones together with
gold; so rich it was, that Aristagoras thus cheared up his soldiers that
besieged it: This City if you can take, you may vye with Jove himself for
wealth and riches. Here Alexander found 50000. talents of gold, besides silver.
But what is all this to the heavenly Jerusalem, whose pavement is pure gold,
and her walls garnished with all precious stones (...) Rev. 21.19. Why do we
then labor in the fire, to load our selves with thick clay? Why does not this
Kingdom of heaven suffer violence by us, since the violent take it by force, or
make a prey, a prize of it (so Hilary renders it) as soldiers do of a City
they have taken? Oh that we could say of heaven, as Sixtus Ruffus does of
Cyprus, Cyprus famosa divitiis paupertatem populi Romans ut occuparetur,
sollicitavit! This Island was anciently called, Macaria: Heaven more truly.

Verse. 4. Let us build us a City and a Tower] This Tower raised a head of
Majesty, 5164. paces from the ground, having its basis and circumference equal
to the height. The passage to go up, went winding about the outside, and was
of an exceeding great breadth; there being not only room for horses, carts,
etc. Hey! Geog.
to meet and turn, but lodgings also for man and beast, and (as Verstegan
reports) grass and corn*fields for their nourishment. [Let us make us a
name] This is a disease that cleaves to us all, to receive honor one of
another, and not seek the honor that cammeth from God only, Joh. 5.44. A rare
man he is surely, that has not some Babel of his own, Dr. Pride. contra Eudamon
Joh.
whereon he bestows pains and cost, only to be talked of. Hoc ego primus vidi,
was Zabarelles (...). Epicurus, would have us believe, that he was the first
that ever found out the truth of things. Secum literas esse natas, and
mori^uras, Sucton. Aug. de Civit. D^^, l. 16.
P^lamon gave out, that all learning was born, and would dye with him. Aratus
the Astrologer, that he had numbered the Star^, and written of them all.
Archimedes the Mathematician, that if he had but where to set his foot. he
could move the earth out of its place. Herestratus burnt Diana's Temple for a
name: And Plato writes of Protagoras, that he vaunted, Plat^ in Me^^^ Tusc. 3.
Pro Archi^ Pocta.
that whereas he had lived sixty years, forty of them he had spent in
corrupting of youth. Tully tells us, that Gracchus did all for popular
applause; and observes that those Philosophers that have written of the
contempt of glory, have yet set their names to their own writings, which shows
an itch after that glory, they persuaded others to despise. These two things
(says Tully somewhere of himself) I have to boast of, Epist. famil. l. 7.
Optimarum artium scientiam, and maximarum rerum gloriam, my learned works, and
noble acts. Julius Caesar had his picture set upon the globe of the world, with
a sword in his right hand, a book in his left, Gabriel Sim^on in Symbo^is. Dion
Cass in Tyberto.
with this Motto, Ex utroque Caesar Vibius Rufus used the chair wherein Caesar
was wont to sit, and was slain; he married also Tullies widow, and boasted of
them both, as if either for that seat he had been Caesar, or for that wife an
Orator. When Maximus dyed in the last day of his Consulship, Caninius Rebilus
petitioned Caesar, O vigilantem Consulem qui tuto consulat^^ sui tempore,
somnum non vidit.
for that part of the day, that he might be said to have been Consul. So many
of the Popish Clergy have with great care and cost procured a Cardinals hat,
when they have lain adying, that they might be entitled Cardinals in their
Epitaph, as Erasmus writes. But for men's enobling themselves by building,
those seven wonders of the world were made merely for a name. Pharos a
watchtower in Egypt (being one of the seven) was built by Ptolomie Philadelph,
all of white marble; the chief Architect was Sostratus of Gnidos, who engraved
on the work this inscription, Sostratus of Gnidos, son of Dexiphanes, to the
Gods protectours, for the safeguard of Saylors. Heyli^s Geog. 750.
This Inscription he covered with plaster, and thereon engraved the name, and
title of the King the founder: that (that soon wasted and washed away) his own
that was written in marble, might be eternized to posterity. This Tower, says
Wickam, is a known story. B. God wines Catalogue.
And Phidias the famous carver so cunningly enchased his own countenance into
Minerva's shield at Athens, That it could not be defaced, but the shield it
self must be disfigured. Heyl. Geog. page 140.
The Hague in Holland has two thousand households in it. The inhabitants will
not wall it, as desiring to have it counted rather the principle Village of
Europe, then a lesser City. And Sextus Marius, being once offended with his
Neighbor, invited him to be his guest, for two days together. The first of
those two days he pulled down his Neighbors Farmhouse; the next, he set it up
again, far bigger, Dio in Tiberio.
and better then before. And all this for a name, that his Neighbors might see
and say, What good or hurt he could do them at his pleasure.

Verse. 5. And the Lord came down] Non motu locali, sed actu judiciali. To see
the City, etc. that so his sentence grounded not upon hearsay, or uncertain
information, might be above all cavillation or exception. A fair president for
Judges. Caiaphas first sentenced our Savior, and then asked the Assessors what
they thought of it? The chief captain first commanded Paul to be scourged, and
then examined, Acts 22. This was proposterous. God though he knew all before,
yet is said to come down to see. Let his actions be our instructions. No man
must be rashly pronounced a Leper: And the Judges must make diligent
inquisition, Deuteronomy. 19.18. as flints they must carry fire, but not easily
express it. Potiphar was too hasty with Joseph, and David with Mephibosheth.
Aeneas Sylvius tells us of some places, Aene. Sylvius. Europ. cap. 20.
where thieves taken but upon suspicion, are presently trussed up, and three
days after, they sit in judgment upon the party executed. If they find him
guilty, they let him hang, till he fall. As if not, they take down the body,
and bury it honorably at the public charge. This is not God-like, nor a point
of wisdom; for Nervus est sapientiae non temere credere. [Which the children of
men builded.] Nimrod chiefly, with his fellow Chamites. But that some of Shems
and Japh^ts posterity had a hand in it, is more then probable, by their common
punishment, the confusion of tongues, Heber and his, had nothing to do with
them; and therefore retained the Hebrew tongue, called thenceforth the Jews
Language, Isai 36.11. Until they were carried captive to Babylon, where grew a
mixture amongst them of Hebrew and Chaldee: Whence came up the Syri^^k tongue
common in our Saviors time, as appears by many Syriack words in the Gospels.

Verse. 6. Behold the people is one, etc.] This benefit they abused to their
pride and ambition, which they should have used to the help of humane society,
and common intercourse. They built, and God bare with them for a time, that he
might make fools of them in the end. And this he does daily.

Verse. 7. Go to, let us go down] Go to, say they: Go to, says he. Let us build
to Heaven, say they: Let us go down and see it, says he. Let us make us a
name, say they: Let us confound their Language, that they may not so much as
know their own names, says he. Lest we be scattered, say they; Let us scatter
them abroad the world, says he. Thus God words it with them, and confutes
their folly from point to point. Thus he sets himself in battle-ray against the
proud, (...), Jam. 4.7.
as Saint James has it, and overthrows them in plain field. He dealt more
severely with David for numbering the people, then for the matter of Vriah. He
turned Nebuchadnezzar a grazing among beasts, for pruning and priding himself
upon this Babel. Is not this great Babel, that I have built? Why no, Nimrod
built it, and Ninus, and Semiramis: Nebuchadnezzar only beautified it, or, at
utmost, enlarged it. But pride detracts from God and man, and is therefore
justly hated and scorned of both. [And there confound their Language.] When men
began once (...), they were compelled by God (...).

Bring me, quoth one, a trowel quickly, quick
One brings him up a hammer; hew this brick
Another bids, Dubartas.
and then they cleave a tree;
Make fast this rope, and then they let it flee.
One calls for plank; another mortar lacks:
They bring the first a stone, the last an ax.
Neither is there any better understanding and agreement among the
Babel-builders at this day, ( Babylon enim altera, nempe propinquior atque
recentior adhuc stat, cito itidem casura, si essetis viri, said Petrarch long
since) witness their many sects and deadly dissensions among themselves, De
rem. utriusque fort. dial. 118.
of which, read the Peace of Rome, Rhemes against Rome, and diverse other
English Treatises to the same purpose. Bellarmine teaches, That the bread in
the Sacrament is not turned into Christ's body productive, but adductive. And
this says he, Cade of the Church. 247.
is the opinion of the Church of Rome. This Suarez denies, and says, It is not
the Churches opinion. Thus these great master builders are confounded in their
Language, and understand not their own Mother. The greatest Clarks amongst
them, cannot yet determine how the Saints know our hearts and prayers: Whether
by hearing or seeing, or presence every where, or by Gods relating or revealing
men's prayers, and needs unto them. M^^tons Appeal lib. 2. cap. 12. sect. 5.
All which ways some of them hold, as possible or probable; and others deny and
confute them as untrue.

Verse. 8. So the Lord scattered them abroad] Which was the evil they ^eared,
and by this enterprise, sought to prevent. But there is neither counsel, power,
nor policy against the Lord. The fear of the wi^ked shall come upon him, Prove.
10.24. As it befell those wretched Jews. John 11.48. The Romans shall come, etc.
and come they did accordingly. Pilate for fear of losing his Office, delivered
up Christ, and was by Caius kicked off the bench.

Verse. 9. The Lord did there confound the Language.] A sore cross and
hinderance of interchange of commodities between Nation and Nation. This great
labor also has God laid, hereby, upon the sons of men, that a great part of
our best time is spent about the shell (in learning of Language) before we can
come at the kernel of true wisdom; Scripture-wisdom especially. Our Saviors
Epitaph written in Hebrew, Greek and Latin, as it sets forth Christ unto us to
be, First, The most holy (for the Hebrew tongue is called the holy Tongue.)
Secondly, Lashon haccadosh.
The most wise (for in Greek, is all humane wisdom written.) Thirdly, The most
powerful (for the Latins were Lords of the earth, and propagated their tongue
amongst all Nations.) So it signifies that God would have the dignity and study
of these three tongues, to be retained and maintained in the Churches of Christ
to the worlds end. Hebricians (says Reuchlin) drink of the Fountains, Hebraei
bibunt fontes, Graeci rivos. Latini paludes. Reuchl. Joh. Man^^i. loc. com. p.
130.
Grecians of the Rivers, Latinists of the standing pools only. There were that
mocked at the multitude of tongues, Acts 2.13. And the Monks were mad almost at
such Camilli literarii, as chased out barbarism, and brought in the learned
Languages. But let us acknowledge it a singular gift of God, as for the
gathering of the Church at first, Acts 2. Ephesians. 4.13.
So still for the edifying of the body of Christ, till we all come unto a
perfect man, to speak the Language of Canaan, in the Kingdom of Heaven. [And
from thence did the Lord scatter them.] The Hebrew Doctors say, R. Menahem in
Genesis 11.
That at this dispersion there were seventy Nations with seventy sundry
Languages. Epiphanius says, That their one Language was divided into seventy
two; for so many men were then present, and each man had his several dialect,
and went his several way with it. Cleopatra is famous in history for her skill
in tongues: She could give a ready answer to Ambassadors that came; whether
they were Ethiopians, Hebrews, Arabians, Syrians, Medes, or Parthians: Yea, she
could tune and turn her tongue, as an instrument of many strings (says
Plutarch) to what language soever she pleased. (...). Plut.
This minds me of those cloven tongues, and of that utterance the Spirit gave
them, Acts 2. Parthians, Medes, Elamites, strangers of Rome, Jews and
Proselytes, Cretes and Arabians, heard the Apostles, speak in their own tongue
the wonderful works of God, to the singular advantage of the Church, that was
then out of all Nations to be collected, and that by a like means, as these
Rebels were scattered.

Verse. 11. And She^ lived after he begat, etc.] He saw ten generations, and
lived till Isaac was fifty year old, who might well be his Pupil; which (if
Shem were Melchisedech) is so much the more likely. Heber also lived till
Abraham was dead; a singular blessing to them both. This comfort the Patriarks
had of their tiresome and tedious pilgrimage; that as Shem saw Lamech, so
L^mech saw Adam, and Isaac saw Shem. Now, ipse aspectus viri boni delectat,
says Seneca. How much more, when they that fear the Lord, speak often one to
another, Mal. 3.16. for mutual edification and encouragement. This the mad
world calls faction, and caprichiousness. Tert. Apel. advers. geutes, cap. 39.
(...). 520.
But what says Tertullian to it? Cum boni, cum probi coeunt, cum pii, cum
casti congregantur, non est factio dicenda, sed curia: Et e contrario illis
nomen factionis accommodandum est, qui in odium bonorum and proborum conspirant.

Verse. 28. And Haran died before his father Torah.] The Hebrews say he died a
Martyr, being burnt with fire by his Countrymen the Chaldees, because he would
not worship the Fire, which they had made their god. Martyrdom came early into
the world, as we know in Abel; who as he was the first that died, so he died
for Religion. Now if this be true of Haran, as the Jew Doctors will have it;
then he had, for ought we know, the maidenhead (as a certain Martyr phrased it)
of that kind of Martyrdom. The first that were burnt for Religion, since the
Reformation, are said to be Henry and John, two Augustine Monksat Brussels,
Anno 1523. under James Hogostratus the Domician Inquisitor. The executioner
being demanded, whether they recanted in the flames, he denied there was any
such thing: But said, That when the fire was put to them, they continued
singing the Creed, and T^ Deum, Erasm. lib. 24. E^ist. 4.
till the flame took away their voice. All this Erasmus testifies, though he
were no Lutheran; and thereupon makes this good, but wary note, Damnari,
dissecari, suspendi, exuri, decollari, piis cum impiis sunt communia: da^^ere,
dissecare, in cruoem agere, exurere, decollare, bonis judi^ibus cum piratis ac
tyrannis communia sunt. Varia sunt hominum judicia, ille faelix qui judice Deo
absolvitur. Our Protomartyr in Queen Mary's days was Reverend Master Rogers; he
gave the first adventure upon the fire. His wife and children, being eleven in
number, ten able to go, and one sucking at her breast, Act. and M^n. fol. 1356.
met him by the way, as he went toward Smithfield. This sorrowful sight of his
own flesh and blood, could nothing move him, but that he constantly held out to
the death, and so received a crown of life. Neither has God left himself
without witness among the very Heathens. For in the City of Lima in Mexico, not
two months before our coming thither (says Captain Drake) twelve persons were
condemned by the Spaniards there, The world encompassed by S. Fr. Drake. p. 59.
for profession of the Gospel: Of which, six were bound to one stake and burnt;
the rest remained yet in prison, to drink of the same cup within a few days.

Verse. 30. But Sarai was barren.] Till she had prayed for a child thirty
years, and then she had him with abundance of joy. At first she believed not
the promise, but laughed at the unlikelyhood and was checked for it. But when
she had better bethought her self, Through faith she received strength to
conceive seed, because she judged him faithful who had promised, Heb. 11.11.
She was, (when past age) delivered of a child; who was not more the child of
her flesh, then of her Faith. Whether she were that Iscah spoken of in the
verse next aforegoing, the Doctors are divided. Some say, Ea quae clavum
administration is tenes.
that Iscah in Chaldee signifies the same that Sa^ai in Hebrew. Others more
probably make Sarai another woman, and the daughter not of Haran but of Terah:
How else could Abram say of her, That she was the daughter of his father, (...)
not of his mother? Genesis 20.12.

Verse. 31. And Terah took, etc.] Being admonished of the Divine Oracl^, Act^
7.12^^ by his son Abraham, he rebuked him not, neither charged him, upon his
blessing, to abide in his native Country, as many a father would have done
(for, what? was he wiser and better then his forefathers?) but abandoned his
idols, and went as far as his old legs cou^^ carry him toward the Country that
God should show them. Heb. 11.
For as yet they went forth, not knowing whither they went. Instar caeci oculos
claufit. vo cantemque Deum secu^us est. Bucholcer.
But having God by the hand, they knew they could not go amiss. This was a
blessed blind obedience, not to dispute but to dispatch; to wink, and put
themselves into Gods hand, to be led about at his pleasure, to follow him
without sciseitation.

CHAP. XII. Verse 1. Now the Lord had said to Abraham]
BUt was not this to command him to do that which was against nature? No, but
only against corrupt nature, which must be denied, and mortified, or there is
no Heaven to be had. Father and friends must be hated, (that is, not loved, as
Esau have I hated) where they hang in our light, or stand in our way to keep us
from Christ, Matthew. 10.37. [Get thee out of thy Countrey] This is a hard saying
to flesh and blood, for Nescio qua natale solum, etc. But hard, or not hard, it
must be done, because God bids it; and difficulty in such a case, does but whet
on heroic spirits, making them the more eager and resolute. It pleased David
well to be set to fetch a hundred foreskins of the Philistims. Gods Kingdom
must be taken by violence. It is but a delicacy to dream of coming thither in a
Feather-bed. Too many with Joseph dream of their preferment, but not of their
imprisonment. He that will be Christ's Disciple here, and coheire hereafter,
must deny himself; that is an indispensable duty. Abraham was old-excellent at
it. [And from thy kindred, and fathers house] Who set out fair with Abraham, as
did likewise Orphah with Ruth: But settled in Haran, which was also in Chaldea,
not far from Vr, and would go no further, after the old man's death. There they
had feathered their nests, gathered substance, and got souls, that is servants,
verse. 4. and therefore, there they would set up their staff, and afterward
turned again to Idolatry, Genesis 31.30, 53. Joshua 24.2. Many follow God as
Sampson did his parents, till be light upon a honycomb; or as a dog does his
master, till he meet with carrion; and then turn him up. Demas forsook God, and
embracing this present world, became afterward a Priest in an Idol-Temple, as
Dorotheus tells us. [Vnto a land, that I will show thee.] Yet told him not
whither, Dorotheus.
till he was upon the way, but called him to his foot; that is, to follow him,
and his direction, Isai. 41.2. Magnus est animus qui se Deo tradidit; says
Seneca. Eundum quocunque Deus vocarit, says Another, Etiamsi in ea loca
migrandum esset -- Pigris ubi nulla lampas
Arbor aestiva recreatur aura:
Quod latus mundi nebulae malusque
Jupiter urget:


Verse. 2. And I will make of thee a great Nation.] Pareus in Romans 11.25. See my
true Treasure. ^ 297
Why then should the scornful Jews call us Nations or Gentiles in contempt?
yea, Heathen-bastards, Heathen-dogs, as they do at this day? Surely, either
themselves are of this great Goi or Nation here mentioned, or else they have
not Abraham to their father; choose them which. [I will bless thee] As a father
his children, with all spiritual comforts and earthly contentments; Ephesians. 1.3.
Judge. 1.
with the blessings of the right hand, and of the left; with the upper and
nether springs, as Caleb blessed his daughter Achsah. He will give grace and
glory, and (if that be not enough) no good thing will he withhold, etc. Psalm.
84.11. Hence Moses cries out, Happy art thou O Israel: Who is like unto thee,
etc. Deuteronomy. 33.29. [And make thy name great] A great name then is a great
blessing. So David took it, 2 Samuel 7.9. And it was no small comfort to him,
that whatever he did, pleased the people. Blessing and praise (or good name) is
expressed, by one and the same word in both Testaments, Prove. 27.21. Only (as
it is in the same Text) it then proves a blessing, (...).
when it is to a man as the fining pot for silver, and furnace for gold; when
it melts us, and makes us better; when it works in us a care to walk worthy of
the praise is given us, to purge our selves from all filth, that we may be as
pure vessels, meet for the Masters use, fit to be set upon the celestial shelf,
as that Martyr phrased it. Act. and Mon.
Since thou have been precious in my sight, thou have been honorable, Isai.
43.4. Virtue is instead of a thousand Escucheons. [And thou shall be a
blessing.] That is, in a high degree blessed; Vir bonus est commune bonum.
or a common blessing to all, wherever thou come, who shall fare the better
for thee. Or, a public pattern of blessing (so some Hebrews expound it.) Those
that wish well to themselves, or others, shall pray God, that Abraham's
blessedness may befall them. The contrary hereunto is now befaln his unhappy
posterity for their obstinacy. A curse they are become among the Gentiles, In
execrationibus dicunt Judaeus sim si fallo. Sanct.
as was foretold them, Zach. 8.13. Sanctius upon that text tells us, That all
over Turkey they have taken it up for a curse, I would I might die a Jew then:
And let me be a Jew if I deceive thee.

Verse. 3. And I will bless them that bless thee] Some there are, that will
curse those whom God blesses, but nothing so many as they that will rise up
and call them blessed. These are expressed here in the plural number, those in
the singular only. For who is he that will harm you, if ye be followers of
that which is good, 1 Pet. 3.13. But say there be some Balaams that would curse
Gods Israel, or some Esaus that could wish them unblest again; yet God will
turn Balaams curse into a blessing, Neh^. 13.2.
(which is reckoned as a great favor,) and he will tell Esau (if not in his
ear, yet in his conscience) that Jacob is blessed, and he shall be blessed. If
Isaac, Genesis 27.33.
drawn aside by natural affection, would go about to reverse the blessing, God
will cause him to tremble very exceedingly, and so over-aw him, that he shall
not be able to do it. But see here (as in a mirror) the wonderful love of God
to his children: So dear they are unto him, that he cannot but love all that
love them, and bless those that bless them. They have a powerful speech in
Spain, He that wipes the childs nose, kisseth the mothers cheek. Surely, as
natural parents take the kindnesses and unkindnesses, showed to their children
as done to themselves, so does God. [And in thee shall all families, etc.] That
is, In thy seed, as it is interpreted, Acts 3.25. Gal. 3.9, 16.
Genesis 22.18. To wit, In Christ that shall take flesh of thee, as both Peter and
Paul expound it. Hence Christ is called the gift. John 4.10. and the benefit, 1 Timothy 6.2. by an excellency; and the desire of all Nations, Haggai 2.7. sent a
purpose to bless us, in turning every one of us from our iniquities, Acts 3.25.

Verse. 4. So Abram departed,] He had now enough, having such precious promises,
though he had had nothing else. He parted with his friends and kindred, but is
now become the friend of God, and akin to Christ. Let their money perish with
them, who esteem all the gold in the world worth one days society with Jesus
Christ, and his holy Spirit, said that Noble Marquess Galeacius Caracciolus,
His life set forth by Master Crashaw.
who being Nephew to Pope Paul the fifth, and a Prince of great wealth and
power, left all for Christ, living and dying a poor exile at Geneva, that he
might enjoy the liberty of his Conscience, and serve God according to the truth
of the Gospel. Remarkable is that which Calvin writes of him in his Dedicatory
Epistle to him, set before his Commentary upon the first to the Corinthians.
Etsi neque tu, etc. [And Lot went with him] Herein Abraham was more happy then
Caracciolus. For he being converted by Peter Martyrs Lecture on the first
Epistle to the Corinthians, and resolving thereupon to leave all, and go to
Geneva, opened his mind to some of his most familiar friends, and wrought upon
them so far, as they promised and vowed to accompany him, etc. But when they
came to the borders of Italy, and considered what they forsook, they first
looked back with Lots wife; and then, without any entreaty, went back as
Orphab; so going out of Gods blessing, into the worlds warm Sun, Ibid. p. 11.
as they say, which yet they long enjoyed not: For they were after taken by the
Spanish Inquisition, and forced to abjure Christian Religion, being neither
trusted nor loved of one side nor other. [And Abraham was seventy five years
old when he departed] So he continued a Pilgrim for a hundred years together,
Genesis 25.7. having ten sore trials, and every one worse then other.

Verse. 5. And Abraham took Sarai his wife] The faithful companion of all his
travels and troubles, One that did him good, and not evil all her days: Prove.
31.
And although she suffered much hardship with him, and for his sake, and was
often put to it, yet she was not afraid with any amazement, as many a woman would
have been, 1 Pet. 3.6. A valiant woman she was, and no less violent then he,
for Gods Kingdom, whereof Canaan was but a type.

Verse. 6, 7. And the Canaanite was then in the Land. And the Lord appeared to
Abram.] The sight of those wicked Canaanites might discourage him, and unsettle
his faith. But then the sight of God relieved him, (he is the first man that
God is said to appear to) and the promise unto thy seed will I give this Land,
could not but put spirits into him, and make his good old heart to dance
L^valtoes in his bosom. When the poor soul even sinks sometimes at the sight of
these Canaanites (corruptions) and despairs almost of a Conquest, God lets in a
beam of his own Light, and comforts it with some cordial promise, which is as
Boaz was to Naomi, A restorer of his life, and a nourisher of his old age, Ruth
4.15.

Verse. 8. And there builded he an altar to Jehovah] Although the Canaanite was
then in the land. God has promised when he cleanses his Church, that the
Canaanite shall be there no more, Zach. 14.21. Philip. 2 15.
But while they are there, we must shine as lamps amidst a crooked and cursed
generation, Holding forth the word of life, as an ensign, bearing up Gods name
as a badge, or beacon; wearing his mark in our foreheads, Rev. 9. the place of
open profession; setting up an altar even amidst Idolaters as Abraham, and
calling it Jehovah Nissi, The Lord is my banner, as Moses, Exodus 17.15. Some
that seemed to wish well to Edmund. Allin Martyr, bid him keep his conscience
to himself, and to follow Baruchs counsel. Act. and Mon. fol. 1796.
Chap. 6. wherefore when ye see the multitude of people worshipping them
behind and before, say in your hearts, O Lord, it is thou that ought only
to be worshipped. These had more of Nicodemus in them, then of Nathaniel.

Verse. 8. And he removed from thence] Because his building altars to Jehovah
was offensive to the Canaanites: Indeed it was a wonder they stoned him not;
but God restrained them. [And there he builded an altar to the Lord] This was
still his first care, where ever he came, and should be ours. We are a Kingdom
of Priests, and have an altar, Heb. 13.10. which is Christ, who sanctifies the
offering, Matthew. 23.19. By him therefore let us offer the sacrifice of praise
to God continually, Heb. 13.15. Imo altar extruamus non lapideum, sed carneum
in cordibus.

Verse. 9. Going on still toward the South] As toward the Sun, whereby may be
figured, says an Expositor, his progress in faith and grace, as Prove. 8.14. 2
Cor. 3.18.

Verse. 10. Abram went down into Egypt] Which the Hebrews much condemn him for,
saying that it was out of distrust, and that for this fault of his, the
Israelites suffered so long and hard bondage in Egypt. But that is but a rash
judgment, and as weak an argument: For God, though he must be trusted, yet he
may not be tempted. But tempted he is, First, when men are too much addicted to
the means, as Thomas. Secondly, when they reject them, as Ahaz, who would not
ask a sign, though offered him; it was not diffidence, but obedience in Abraham
to go down to Egypt (that Granary of the world) when now by the want of food in
Canaan, he found it was Gods will he should seek out.

Verse. 11. Behold now I know that thou art a fair woman] And yet she was now
sixty five years of age; wherein she was a figure of Jerusalem the mother of us
all, Gal. 4.26. with Cant. 1.14. and 4.1. Sarahs chief beauty was that of the
hidden man of the heart, as says St. Pet. 1 Pet. 3.4, 6. But outward beauty is
very lovely and attractive. Plato calls it the principality of nature:
Aristotle, a greater commendation then all Epistles: And being asked, whether
beauty were amiable? He answered, (...).
That Is a blind man's question. The Poet could say, Gratior est pulchro veniens
in corpore virtus, That virtue has a better grace,
That shines from a virtuous face.
Howbeit, Seneca says, he was out in that saying; Ipsa magnum sui decu^ est,
and corpus suum consecrat. Sen. Epist. 67.
for that Virtue needs no ornament more then she has of her own, but
beautifies her self sufficiently, and consecrates the body, wherein she dwells.
But by the leave of so great a Philosopher, I am of the Poets mind: And
although I grant that favor without grace, Salvian. Gu^us praeter formam nihil
unquam, bonus laudavit. Salust. (...). Dio. Artax omnium hominum pulcher. ait.
Aemil. Prob. Aelia^ var. hist. l. 12. c. 1. Cavete ab hoc quem natura notavit.
is but a gold ring in a Swines snout, as Solomon has it, or ornamentum in
luto, as another (so it was in Alcibiades for a man, and in Aurelia Orestilla
for a woman) yet surely, where they meet, they make a happy conjunction, and
draw all hearts to them, as in Germanicus (for a man) in whom beauty and virtue
strove for precedence: and Artaxerxes Longimanus, the son of Esther, who is
said to have been of all men the most beautiful and most bountiful. So in
Esther (for a woman) who obtained favor in the sight of all that looked upon
her, Esth. 2.15. And Aspasia Milesia the wife of Cyrus, who deserved to be
styled (...), Fair and Wise, as Aelian relates: As on the other side in
Vatinius, deformity of body strove with dishonesty of mind, adeo ut animus
ejus dignissimo domicilio inclusus videretur, says Paterculus.

Verse. 12. Therefore it shall come to pass, etc.] Note here (says Pererius)
the raging affection of the Egyptians, that made no conscience of murder to
enjoy their lust. 2. Their blindness, that made less account of murder then
adultery. Note again (says Piscator) that beauty exposes a body to the danger
of dishonesty, and that, as the Poet has it, Lis est cum forma magna
pudicitiae. Let those therefore that have beauty, look to their chastity, and
possess their vessels in holiness and honor; Thesaurum cum virgo, tuum vas
fictile servet,
Vt caveas quae sunt noxia, tuta time.
Filthiness in a woman is most abominable; therefore is a Whore called a
strange woman.

Verse. 13. Say I pray thee, thou art my sister.] The truth was here not only
concealed, but dissembled. As the Moon has her specks, so the best have their
blemishes: A Sheep may slip into a slough as soon as a Swine, and an Apple Tree
may have a fit of barrenness, as well as a Crab-tree.

Verse. 14. The Egyptians beheld the woman] Pleasure is blamed, in Xenophon, for
this, that she ever and anon looks back upon her own shadow, Decet haber^
oculos continenter. ma^^^ and linguam.
and gives her eyes leave to rove and range without restraint. An honest man
(says Plautus) should have continent eyes, hands, and tongue. Nihil enim
interest, quibus membris cinoedi sitis posterioribus an prioribus, said
Archelaus the Philosopher to a wanton yonker. The eye (that light of all the
members) is an ornament to the whole body. And yet that lightsome part of the
body, draws too too often the whole soul into darkness. Job. 31.1.
This Job knew, and therefore made a Covenant to look to his looks; ^^th of
looking came lu^^ing. Charles the fifth, when the City of Antwerp thought to
gratify him in a Mask, Job. Mauli^ loc. Com. p. 34^. Saepe claufit senestram,
n^ inspic^r^t formosiores ^^^mi^^^ etc. De Carolo 5. P^reu^ hist. pres medul.
page ^08. Matthew. 5.28, 29
with the sight of certain fair Maids brought in before him almost naked, he
would not once look at them. The young Lord Harrington when he should meet with
fair women in the streets, or elsewhere, would usually pull his hat over his
eyes, as knowing that of our Savior, He that looks upon a woman to lust after
her, etc. whereupon immediately follows, If thine eye offend thee, etc. Eckius
was sharply rebuked at a feast, by a modest matrone, for his uncivil glances,
and carriages in these words (as Melancthon relates) Es tu doctor? Joh. Manlii
loc. com. p. 32^.
Non existimo te in honesta familia, sed in lupanari educatum: Thou a Doctor?
I do not believe thou wast bred any where else but in a brothel-house. See the
Notes on Chap. 6. Verse. 2.

Verse. 15. The Princes also of Pharaoh, etc.] Flattering Courtiers please
Princes humors, and serve their delights, though to the procuring of their
plagues as here, and in young King Joash. If a ruler hearken to lies, (...).
Herod. l. 3.
says Solomon, all his servants are wicked Prove. 29.12. Aulicisunt instar
sp^^uli, says One. And Mirifica est symp^thia, says another, inter magnates
and parasit^s. Her^dorus writes, that when Cambyses demanded of his Courtiers
and Counselors, whether it were not lawful for him to marry his own sister
whom he greatly desired? they answered: That they found no law to license such
a match: but another law they found, that the King of Persia might do what he
would. [And the woman was taken into Pharaohs house] Not for any worse purpose,
then to get her good will to become his wife.

Verse. 16. And he entreated A^ram well for her sake] To the end, that he might
solicit his sister to yield consent; or might not be a back-friend, at least,
out of displeasure, because they had taken away his sister from him to the
Court. So K. Hen. 8. advanced all Anne Bullens kindred, etc.

Verse. 17. And the Lord plagued Pharaoh] Plagued him with plagues, says the
Hebrew: tormented him with torments, or set him on the rack, says the Greek.
And for this, he might thank his Court-parasites, who put him upon this rape.
Chrysostom thinks that Sarah was abed with the King; and that in the bed,
God by his plague so restrained him, that she remained untoucht. But we cannot
gather by the text, that he intended to commit adultery, sed quod levitate and
vaga libidine peccavit, but offended only, in going after the sight of his
eyes, a and lust of his heart, as Solomon has it.

Verse. 18. What is this that thou have done unto me] God had reproved Pharaoh
(according to that, Psalm. 105.14.
He suffered no man to do them wrong, but reproved Kings for them) and now
Pharaoh reproves Abraham. It is a sad thing, that Saints should do that for
which they should justly fall under the reproof of the wicked: we should
rather dazzle their eyes, and draw from their consciences, at least, a testimony
of our innocence, as David did from Saul's, when he said, Thou art more
righteous then I my son David: Whose ox have I taken, says Samuel? And which
of you can condemn me of sin, says Christ? Now the life of a Christian should
be a Commentary upon Christ's life, 1 Pet. 2. Ye are a holy nation, (...). 1
Pet. 2.9.
a peculiar people, that ye should preach forth his virtues, and not hang his
picture (his image and graces) in a dark hole, but in a conspicuous place.
Bucer so lived that neither could his friends sufficiently praise him, nor his
foes justly blame him, for any miscarriage. Act and Mon.
And Bradford was had in so great reverence and admiration for his holiness,
that a multitude which never knew him, but by fame, Ibid. 1458.
greatly lamented his death; yea and a number also of Papists themselves wished
heartily his life. But to have Egyptians jear us, and that for sin, is
threatened as a grievous misery, Hos. 7.16.

Verse. 19. Why said thou she is my sister?] He might have answered, because I
was afraid. His fear it was that put him upon this exploit. So it did David
when he changed his behavior, and Peter when he denied his Master, etc. Men
should rather dye then lie. Firmus Episc. Togastensis.
Nec prodam, nec mentiar, said that good Bishop in St. Augustine. And that was
a brave woman in St. Hierome, that being on the rack resolved, and answered the
tormentour, Non ideo negare volo, ne peream, sed ideo mentiri nolo, ne peccem.
The Chamaeleon, says Pliny, is the most fearful of all creatures, and does
therefore turn into all colors, to save it self. So will timorous persons, See
Zeph. 3.13. Let us fortify our hearts against this cowardly passion.

Verse. 20. And Pharaoh commanded] Thus God comes as it were out of an Engine,
(...).
and helps his people at a pinch. Abraham had brought himself into the briars,
and could find no way out. Many a heavy heart he had, no doubt, for his dear
wife (who suffered by his default) and she again for him. God upon their
repentance provides graciously for them both: She is kept undefiled, he greatly
enriched for her sake; and now they are both secured, and dismissed with the
Kings safe conduct. Oh who would not serve such a God, as turns our errors and
evil counsels to our great good, as the Athenians dreamt their goddess
Minerva did for them.

CHAP. XIII. Verse. 1. And Abram went up out of Egypt]
THere must be likewise daily ascensions in our hearts, out of the Egypt of
this world, to the heavenly Canaan, where Christ our altar is. The Church is
compared to pillars of smoke ascending, Cant. 3.6. Black she is as smoke in
regard of infirmities, yet has a principle to carry her upwards. Who is this
that ascends out of this Egypt below with pillars of smoke, elationibus fumi,
that is, with her affections,, thoughts, desires, upward, heavenward? Our
Edward the first had a mighty desire to go to the holy land; Act. and Mon.
and because he was hindered, he gave his son a charge upon his deathbed, to
carry his heart thither, and prepared 32000. pound to that purpose. The
children of faithful Abram, though their bodies be on earth, yet they take
much pains, and are at great charge to get up their hearts to heaven. Matthew.
14.28. Cant 7 4.
Hence they are called Eagles for their high-soaring, and are said to have
noses like the tower of Lebanon. for their singular sagacity in resenting and
smelling after Christ the true all quickening carcass.

Verse. 2. And Abraham was very rich] All rich men therefore are not rejected of
God, though it be hard for such to hit on heaven. Poor Lazarus ^lyes in the
bosom of rich Abraham there. Riches neither further nor hinder in themselves,
but as they are used: As a cipher by it self is nothing, but a figure being set
before it, it increases the sum. Wealth, if well used, is an ornament, an
encouragement to duty, and an instrument of much good: All the danger lies in
loving these things. Have them we may, and use them too as a traveller does his
staff to help him the sooner to his journeys end; but when we pass away our
hearts to them, they become a mischief, and (as the word here rendered rich,
signifies in the original) a burden. Let not therefore the bramble be King:
let not earthly things bear rule over thy affections; fire will rise out of
them that will consume thy Cedars; Judge 9.15.
emasculate all the powers of thy soul, as they did Solomon's, whose wealth did
him more hurt then his wisdom good. How many have we now adays, that when
poor, could pray, read, etc who grown rich, resemble the Moon, which grown full
gets furthest often from the Sun, never suffers eclipse but then, and that by
earths interposition. Socrates diviti^s comparabat tunicis talaribus. Quis
generum meum ad gladium alligavit? Cic. Dio in Augusto. Herodot.
Let rich men therefore take heed how they handle their thorns; let them gird
up the loins of their minds, lest their long garments hinder them in the way
to heaven: Let them see to it, that they be not tied to their abundance, as
little Lentulus was said to have been to his long sword: that they be not held
prisoners in those golden fetters, as the Kings of Armenia was by Anthony, and
so sent by him for a present to Cleopatra; lest at length, they send their
Mammon of unrighteousness, as Craesus did his fetters, for a present to the
Devil, who had deluded him with false hopes of victory.

Verse. 3. And he went on his journeys] Many a weary step, and rested not, till
he came to his old altar at Bethel. Lo here a pattern of great piety and
singular zeal, in Father Abram. Egypt with all her plenty and pleasure, had not
stolen away his heart so as not to hold his own in the promised Land. Neither
had he so laden himself with thick clay, but that he went from strength to
strength (as those good souls did, Psalm. 84.7.) he took long strides, perexit
per profectiones suas, as it is here, He went journey after journey, till he
appeared before God at his altar, there to sanctify that good he had got in
Egypt, and to give God thanks for it; yea to consecrate all to him the bestower
of it. Oh let us show our selves children of Abraham indeed, by walking in
these steps of our father Abraham, Romans 4.12. Otherwise our outward profession
and privileges will profit us no more then it did Dives in hell, Luke 16.
that he could call Abraham, Father.

Verse. 4. Unto the place of the altar, etc.] There he had found God to his
comfort, and there he looks now to find him so again. It will be some help to
us, for the strengthening of our faith in prayer, to hol^ our selves to the same
place, to have a set Or^^ory.

Verse. 5. And Lot also which went with Abram] So he lost not all, by leaving
friends and means, to go with Abram. They that fide with the Saints, shall
thrive with the Saints. God had promised to bless Abram, and he did it; for it
is the blessing of God that makes rich. God had promised again, to bless them
that blessed Abram, or wished well to him, and did him any favor or
furtherance. (...) pecudes, and postea synecdochico^s opes significant.
Let Lot speak now whether this were not made good to him in those flocks and
herds of his (that is, in all kind of riches) and tents, that is, servants
dwelling in tents? Jer. 49.29. 1 Chronicles. 4.41.

Verse. 6. And the land was not able to bear them] This was sour sauce to their
sweet meat, lest they should surfeit of their abundance. All earthly comfort^
are dissweetned with crosses, and there are pins in all the worlds roses. It is
seldom seen that God allows any, though never so dear to himself, a perfect
contentment. Something they must have to complain of, that shall give an
unsavory verdure to their sweetest morsels, that they may long after heaven.
It could not but be a great cut to this good couple, to be now at length
sundered, and deprived of mutual society.

Verse. 7. And there was a strife between] How often do servants set masters at
variance? But the devil is in it, when good folk fall out especially. He is
restless himself, and does what he can to disquiet others. He loves to fish in
troubled waters; and well knows out of his divelish wisdom (says St. James)
that where envying, and strife is, Jam. 3.15, 16.
there is confusion, and every evil work. But what was it that made the
herdsmen fall out, but penury of pasture? and what bred penury of pasture, but
plenty of cattle? Great riches many times breed great brabbles. This the
Heathen found, and therefore feigned that Mars was the son of Juno, Natalis
Comes.
because Juno is the goddess of riches, which prove the cause of strife, and
stirs amongst many. [And the Canaanite and the P^rizite was then in the la^d]
This is added, either as a cause of their being straightened of fit pasture,
because the Canaanites possessed the better grounds: Or else, to set forth how
unseasonable and unsavory it was, for such men to jar, and so to expose
themselves to the scandal and scorn of such wicked neighbors, Nisi Lyra ^y
rasset. etc.
as desired no better sport then to see them falling out. This latter is Lyra's
gloss, and I like it well. One of the main scandals the Jews take at this day
from Protestants, is their dissentions. Scultet. Annal. Cyprianus inexpiabilem
discordia maculam martyrii sanguine ablui, and passione purgari negat.
Error condonari potest, modo fides adsit in Christum: discordiam, neque si
sanguinem fundamus, expiabimus, said Reverend O^^^lampadius in a letter to the
litigious Lutherans of Sueveland.

Verse. 8. And Abram said to Lot] Speech ends anger, Silence nourishes it.
Much malice and grudge would be avoided, and the very poison of it drawn out,
did we but give it a vent at first, by reasoning with the party that wronged
us, and expostulating the injury, which, most times, is but a mere mistake. Now
many (on the contrary) harbor this viper in their bosoms, till it has eaten
to their hearts; Ephesians. 4.26.
they not only let the Sun go down, but go its whole round upon their wrath,
and cannot find time from one end of the year to the other, to utter their
minds, and compound their discords. Not only Abraham, but Aristippus shall
rise up in judgment against such Pseudo-Christians, and condemn them. For when
Aeschines and he had been at long debate; and there was, I stout, and thou
stout, and neither could find in their hearts to go to other; Aristippus went
at length to Aeschines, and said unto him, Shall we not agree to be friends,
Plutarch. de cobib. ira. Laer. l. 2.
before we make our selves a common scorn to the whole Country? Whereunto when
Aeschines answered, that he was content to be friends with all his heart;
Aristippus replied, Remember then, that although I were the elder, and the
better man, yet I first sought unto thee. In very deed, said Aeschines, Thou
art a far better man then I; for I began the quarrel, and thou have been first
in making up the breach. And thus, these two became fast friends for ever. [For
we are brethren] This is a cooler; and should be like the Angel that staid
Abrams hand, when the blow was coming.

Verse. 9. Is not the whole land before thee] Abraham chooses rather to take
wrong then to strive for his right, which he here parts with for peace sake.
They that do otherwise, though they think they do bravely, and get the ^^tter
of their adversary, yet (if St. Paul may judge) they sit down by the loss. For
he purposely disgraceth their contentious courses, in standing for their utmost
right, without respect to peace and quietness, by a word that signifies
disgrace, (...).
or loss of victory, 1 Cor. 6.7. Now therefore there is utterly a fault, or a
d^fect of true manhood amongst you, because ye go to law one with another:
Why do ye not rather take wrong? (...) E^hic.
why do ye not rather suffer your selves to be defrauded? Aristotle by the dim
light of nature, could see and say, that it is better to suffer wrong then do
it. It was a brave speech of Calvin, Though Luther call me Devil, yet I will
honor him as a servant of God. And when a fierce Friar, in dispute with Beza
and his colleagues, called them Foxes, Apes* Ass^s, etc. Beza answered no more
but this, Nos non magis credere, quam Transubstantiationem. In rixa is
i^feriorest, qui victor est says Basil. And Demosthenes when he was reproached
by One, thought it sufficient to say, Interdum disjunctio meliu^ alit
amic^^iam, etc. Buchol^.
Nolim tecum in hoc genus certaminis descendere, in quo quivincitur ipso
victore est melior. [Separate thy self I pray thee from me] Sometimes, and
betwixt some natures, separation one from another better nourishes friendship
then nearer familiarity. There are that can never fadge together. [If thou will
take the right hand, etc.] As who should say, We will not be far asunder,
though we cannot be together) but still helpful one to the other, Pe^erius.
as the right hand is to the left.

Verse. 10. And Lot lifted up his eyes] This was the lust of the eye, The leper
shaved ^his eyebrows to teach us to mortify the lust of the eyes.
St. John speaks of, 1 Ep. 2.16. as he afterward fell into the lust of the
flesh, Chap. 19.33. his incestuous posterity into the pride of life. We have
heard of the pride of Moab, and the ambition of Ammon, Jer. 48, and 49. Lot
might not be suffered so much as to look at Sodom, whiles it was burning, as
Abram might. God knew his weakness, and so prevented the temptation. He should
have had the good manners to let his Uncle choose first; but the dust of
covetousness had put out his eyes, that he saw not what beseemed him for
present* as afterward he did, when God so crossed him, De Triboniano,
Procopius.
in that which he chose and so blessed Abram in that which was left him. Lot
was a good man, but this, (...), somewhat obscured his virtues. [That it was
well watered every where] And so fruitful. Hence the inhabitants, Psalm. 66.12.
Psalm. 107.33.35.
through abuse of their plenty, became wholly drowned in fleshly delights. It
faring with them in this respect, as with the Inhabitants of Oenoe, a dry Island
besides Athens, who bestowed much labor to draw into it a River to water it,
and make it more fruitful. But, when all the passages were opened, Una est ex
tetrapoli Attica. Steph. 1 Timothy 6.9. (...). It^ immergunt, ut in aquae
summitate cursu^ ^on ^bulliant.
and the receptacles prepared, the water came in so plentifully, that it
over-flowed all, and at the first tide, drowned the Island, and all the people.
They that will be rich, says the Apostle (that are resolved to rise in the
world, by what means it matters not, these) fall into temptation, and a snare,
as Lot, (that is the least evil can come of it) and into many foolish and noysom
lusts, as his neighbors the Sodomites did, which desperately drown men in
double destruction. [Like the land of Egypt.] Which was called of old publicum
orbis horreum; The worlds great granary. A Country so fair and fertile, that
the Egyptians were wont to boast, they could feed all men, and feast all the
gods without any sensible diminution of their provision.

Verse. 13. But the men of Sodom were wicked, etc.] See their chief sins set
down, Ezekiel. 16.49, 50. The Chaldee Paraphrast here translateth, they were first
unrighteous with their Mammon, and secondly, sinners with their bodies, before
the Lord. (...).
That unnameable sin had its name from them, who against nature were scalded in
their lust, one toward another, Romans 1.27. The Apostle there gives it in of the
Heathen Philosophers, many of whom were patrones of this abhorred filth; Sen^ca
delectabatur exol^^is, etc. Dio in Nerone. Jam. 1.17.
as Cicero complains of Plato; and Socrates was shrewdly suspected, to be no
honester then he should be with Alcibiades; nor Seneca with Nero. The wisdom
from above is pure, says Saint James; and in this wisdom is truth and purity,
says Solomon, Prove. 8.7. whereas all worldly wisdom is stained with error or
leudness. God punishes the pride of all flesh with some foul sin, and so sets
a Noverint universi, as it were, upon the worlds wisards, That all men may know
them to be but arrant fools. [And sinners before the Lord exceedingly] They
were grown so debauched, and impudent in evil, That neither fear of God, nor
shame of men could restrain them. Though God looked on, they were no whit
abashed or abased before him. God found not out their sins by secret search,
Jere. 2.34. he needed not to search them with lights. Zeph. 1.12. For the show
of their countenance did witness against them; they could blush no more then a
sackbut: shamelesness sat in their foreheads, they declared their sins, even to
a proverb, Isai. 3.9. They se^ them in open view upon the cliff of the rock,
Ezekiel. 24.7. They faced the Heavens, and held their heads aloft, as if they
deserved commendation, rather then else. This is a high degree of sin, and an
immediate forerunner of destruction.

Verse. 14. After that Lot was separated from him] Till Lot was departed and the
strife ceased. God appeared not. He is the God of peace; and hates contention;
which as it indisposeth us to holy duties, 1 Pet. 3.7. so it keeps God from
us by his comforts and influences. They say of Bees, that stir and strife
amongst them, is a sign their King is about to remove, to leave the hive, and
to be gone some where else. God refuses to be served till the matter be
agreed, Matthew 5.24. [Lift up now thine eyes,] Gods comforts are therefore most
sweet, because most seasonable. Abram had now parted with Lot, to his great
grief. God makes up that loss to him in his own gracious presence and promise:
which he here repeateth, to teach us moreover, that the countinual weakness of
man needs continual comfort from God.

Verse. 15. For all the land which thou see is thine.] God gave him no
inheritance in it, Acts 7.5.
no not so much as a foot breadth; yet he promised, that he would give it to
him: And that Abram took for good freehold. Men use to reckon their wealth,
not by what ready money they have, only, but by the good Bonds and Leases,
they can produce. A great part of a Christians estate lies in Bonds and Bills
of Gods hand.

Verse. 16. And I will make thy seed as the dust of the earth] Afterward, Genesis
15.5. God promises that his seed shall be as the stars of heaven. Moses his
choice by Mr. Burr.
Abraham's seed, says One, are of two sorts: Some are visible members of a
Church, yet have earthly hearts: Others are as the stars of Heaven, for
spiritual Light, motion, and influence.

Verse. 17. Arise, walk through the Land.] Thus God rewards contented Abram with
the whole Country. He never suffers any man to lose by an humble remission of
his right, in a desire of peace. Matthew. 5.5.
The meek shall inherit the earth, and have Heaven to boot; which was the chief
thing here promised to Abraham, in this survey, Heb. 11.10, 16.

CHAP. XIV. Verse 2. That these made War.]
War is the slaughterhouse of mankind, and the hell of this present world.
It hews it self a way through a wood of men, and lays heaps upon heaps, (as
Sampson did, Judge. 15.16.) not with a jaw bone of an Ass, and one after
another, but in a minute of time, and by the mouth of a murdering piece.
Alphonsus D. of Ferrara, Peachams Valley of varieties.
had two of these Cannons of a wonderful bigness; the one whereof he called
Archidiabalo, the other, the Earthquake. Revel. 9 17. Fire, smoke and brimstone
seem to note out the Turks Guns and Ordnance. For the drawing of that Gun that
Mahomet used in besi^ging Constantinople, seventy yokes of Oxen, and two
thousand men were employed. Deuteronomy. 2 20.
The Turks battered the Walls of the Rhodes, with twelve Basilisks, so aptly
named of the Serpent Basiliscus, who (as Pliny writes) kills man or beast,
with his very sight. But before these bloody instruments of death were heard of
in the world, men could find means to slaughter one another in war; witness
these five Kings, that came with Chedarlaomer, and smote the Rephaims or
Giants, the Zuzims, or Zamzummims, and the Emims or terrible ones, as their
name imports. These they slew by the way, besides what they did in the vale
of Siddim, where they joined battle with the five Kings, and cut off many. If
we may judge of one battle by another, hear what was done in a bloody fight
between Amurath the third, King of Turks, and Lazarus Despot of Servia. Many
thousands fell on both sides; the brightness of the Armor and Weapons was, as
it had been the Lightning; the multitude of Lances and other Horsemens Staves,
shadow the light of the Sun. Arrows and Darts fell so fast, that a man would
have thought, Turk bist. fol. 200.
they had poured down from Heaven. The noise of the instruments of War, with
the neighing of horses, and out cries of men, was so terrible and great, That
the wild Beasts in the Mountains, stood astonished therewith; and the Turkish
Histories, to express the terror of the day, vainly say, That the Angels in
Heaven, amazed with that hideous noise, for that time, forgot the heavenly
Hymns, wherewith they always glorify God. In conclusion, Lazarus was slain,
and Amurath had the victory, but a very bloody one, and such as he had no great
joy of. For he lost abundance of his Turks; as did likewise Adrian the Emperor
of his Romans, when he fought against the Jews, and had the better: but with
such a loss of his own men, that when he wrote of his victory to the Senate,
Dio in Adriano.
he forbore to use that common exordium, that the Emperors in like ease were
wont to use, Si vos, liberique vestri valeatis, been est: Ego quidem and
exercitus valemus. There was no such thing, believe it, nor but seldom is
there. But as the Dragon sucks out the blood of the Elephant; Plin.
and the weight of the falling Elephant oppresses the Dragon, and both usually
perish together; so does it many times fall out with those, that undertake war.
These four Kings beat the five; but ere they gat home, became a prey to Abraham
and his confederates. The Low-Countrey-men are said to grow rich, Heyl. Geog.
page 253.
(whereas all other Nations grow poor) with war. But they may thank a good
Queen, under ^od (Queen Elisabeth, I mean) who first undertook their protection
against the Spaniard. An^o 1585. Camdens Elisab.
For the which act of hers, all Princes admired her fortitude: and the King of
Sweden said, That she had now taken the Diadem from her head, and set it upon
the doubtful chance of War. Dulia sane est Martis alea, ne^ raro utrique parti
noxia, says Bucholcerus. And I cannot but (as the case stands with us,
Bucholc. Chro^. p. 583.
especially at this present, by reason of these unnatural, uncivil Wars stirred
up amongst us,) go on, and give my vote with him. Ideo pons aureus (ut vulgato
proverbio dicitur) hosti fugienti extruendus est, and magno precio, precibus,
patientia ac prudentia, alma pax redimenda, ne infoelicitatis portas, pacis
tempore clausas, Dulce bellum inexpertis.
infaustum bellum aperiat. War is sweet, they say, to them that never made
trial of it. But I cannot sufficiently wonder at Pyrrhus King of Epirus, Nulli
ma orem ex imperio quam Pyrrho ex bello voluptatem fuisse. Tit. 1.12.
of whom Justin witnesses, That he took as much pleasure in War, as others do
in Supreme Government. He might have learned better of his own Prophets (so
Saint Paul calls their Poets.) Homer (the Prince of them) ever brings in
Mars, as most hated of Jupiter, above any other god, as born for a common
mischief, and being right of his mother Juno's disposition, which was fierce,
vast, contumacious, and malignant. We that are Christians, as we cannot but,
with the Prophet Isaiah, count and call War a singular evil: So we must
acknowledge with him, M^lum per (...) ut b^llum quia minim^ b^ll^m per
autiphrasin.
that it is an evil of Gods own creating, Isaiah Chap. 45. verse. 7. I make
peac^, and create evil, that is, War. I, is emphatical and exclusive, as who
should say, I and I alone. Whence-soever the Sword comes, it is bathed in
Heaven, Isaiah Chapter 34. verse 5. God is pleased for this, to style himself A
man of war, Exodus 15.3. The Chaldee expresses it thus, The Lord and Victor of
wars, Genesis 17.1. Eundem vict^rem and vastatorem esse oportet.
Genesis 17.1. God elsewhere calls himself, El Shaddai. Aben-Ezra
interprets Shaddai a Conqueror. And indeed the Hebrew word Shadad signifies
to dissipate and destroy: both which, he must needs do that becomes a
Conqueror. Gods seems to glory much in his workings, about warlike affairs.
Hence Psalm 24.8. Who is the King of glory? Psalm. 24.8.
The Lord strong and mighty; the Lord mighty in battle. He is in Scripture said
to send the Sword, Ezekiel 14.17. To muster the men, Isaiah 13.4. To order the
Ammunition, Jeremiah 50.25. To bring up both van and rear, Isaiah 52.12. To
give wisdom, valor, and victory, Psalm 144.1. Ezekiel 30.24. Ecclesiastes 9.11.
The whole battle is his, 1 Samuel 17.47. And he often thereby revengeth the
quarrel of his Covenant. Levit. 26.
So he has done already upon the Jews and Germans: so he is now doing, alas,
upon Ireland and England. And here I cannot but insert that which I find
observed by a prime Preacher of our Kingdom. The late battle at Edgehill, was
fought in a place called, The Vale of the Red Horse; as if God had said, I have
now sent you the Red Horse, to avenge the quarrel of the White, Revel. 6.2, 4.
The blood spilt at Edgehill the same day of the month, in which, the
Rebellion brake out in Ireland, the year before, October 23. Yea, and upon the
self-same day (if our Intelligence be true) in which, that bloody battle was
fought near Leipsick in Germany: This Conjuncture is a sad Presage, That
England is to drink deep in Germany's and Irelands Cup. Father, if it be thy
will, let this Cup pass from us. A Cup of trembling it is, surely, to my self,
among many others; such as makes my Pen almost to fall out of my fingers,
whiles I write these things: and affects me no otherwise (when I consider of
the many fearful convulsions of our Kingdom, tending doubtless to a deadly
consumption,) then the siege of Rome did Saint Jerome. For hearing that that
City was besieged, Hieron. Conn. in Ezekiel. Pr^oem.
at such time as he was writing a Commentary upon Ezekiel, and that many of his
godly acquaintance there were slain; he was so astonished at the news, That for
many nights and days, he could think of nothing. When I think of what should
move the Lord to make this breach upon us, and notwithstanding that he has
been so earnestly besought; yet for all this, his anger is not turned away,
Haec s^ri^si cord^cit^s do o^s August. 21. 1643.
but his hand is stretched out still: that of Cajetan comes before me; who then
Commenting upon Matthew, when the French Soldiers having broken into Rome,
offered all manner of abuse, and violence to the Clergy, inserts this passage
into his N^^^s on Matthew. 5.13. Te are the salt of the earth, as my former
Author alleges, and rendereth him. We the Prelates of Rome, Mr. Arrowsmith.
ub^ supra. ^p.
do now find the truth of this by woeful experience, being become a scorn, and
a prey, not to Infidels, but Christians, by the most righteous judgment of God,
because we, who by our places, should have been the Salt of the Earth, had lost
our savor, and were good for little else, but looking after the rites and
revenues of the Church. Evanuimu^, a^ ad nibilum utiles, nisi ad extern^^
caeremonias, externaque bona, etc. Heyl. Geog.
Hence it is, that together with us, this City comes to be trodden under foot,
this sixth of May, 1527. That City, till it became idolatrous, was ever
victorious: But since it has been the nest of Antichrist, it was never
besieged, but it was taken and sacked. The God of Heaven purge out of our
Church, daily more and more, that Landdesolating sin of Idolatry, Zach. 14.11.
and mass good his promise, That there shall be no more the Can^^^ite in the
house of the Lord of h^stes, no evil spirit left in the Land. Fiat, Fiat. For
of England we may now well say, Tacit. bist. lib. 1. cap. 1.
as he once did of Rome: Nunquam magis justis judiciis approbatum est, non esse
curae De^ securitatem nostram, esse vindict^^.

Verse. 8 And there went out the King of Sodom, etc.] These five neighboring
Kings, were combined against the four Kings that invaded them. It was not then
a civil Dissension (that worst of Wars) such as was that of France, (and is
now, alas, Hist. of Coun^. of Tre^t. 647.
of England,) wherein the sons fought against their Fathers, and Brothers
against Brothers; and even women took Arms on both sides for defense of their
Religion. That was not more monstrous, Heyl. Geog. page 289.
That the Snevi^^^ women threw their young children at the Romans, their
enemies, instead of darts, then that other was pitio^s, between the Romans
themselves, those that were for Vitellius, and the other for Vespasian; That
when the women brought the Vitellians victuals by night, into the Camp, they
not only refreshed themselves, but their adversaries also, with meat and
drink. Each man called to his adversary by name, Dio in vit^ visellii.
and said, Accipe, micommillto, ede: Non enim tibi gladium praebeo, sed panem.
Accipe rurs^m and bibe: Non euim tibi scutum, sed poculum trado: ut sive tu me
interficias, sive ego t^, moriamur facilius: atque ut ne me, enervata atque
imbecilla manu occidas, aut ego te. Hae nostrae sunt exequi^, nohis adhuc
viventibus. Thus they greeted over night, (...). Dio.
and the next day dispatched one another; they gave wounds and took wounds; they
slew, and were slain, as the same Author has it. Which as often as I think on, I
cannot but highly commend that Speech of Oth^ the Emperor to his Soldiers, a
little before he took his end: I hate civil wars, though I were sure to
overcome. (...). Dio. In vita Othonis. Daniels Chr^n. continued by Yrussel.
fol. 249. Om^e bellum sumitur facile, caeterum aegerrime desinit. Non enim in
ejusdem potestate est initium belli, ejusque finis. Salust, ^n Jugu^.
I know not why any Englishman should love it; that shall call to mind, that
in the civil Dissentions between the Houses of York and Lancaster, there were
slain (^re the quarrel ended) fourscore Princes of the Blood Royal, and twice
as many Natives of England, as were lost in the two Conquests of France. War is
easily taken up (says the Wise Historian) but not so easily laid down again:
Neither is the beginning and the end of a War, in any one man's power. If the
Scots should come in on the one side, and the French or Irish on the other,
What an Acheldam^ should we soon become; what an Ire-land, a seat of Wrath,
because a seat of War? It is never to be forgotten by us, That the Dissension
between England and Scotland consumed more Christian blood, wrought more spoil
and destruction, and continued longer then ever quarrel we read of did, between
any two people of the World. Our Edward the first, adjured his Son and Nobles,
That if he dyed in his journey into Scotland, they should carry his Corpse about
Scotland, and not suffer it to be interred, till they had absolutely subdued
the Country. A desire more Martial then Christian; a design of revenge beyond
his life: Such spirits are raised in men that delight in war, Psalm 68.30. O
pray for the peace of Jerusalem. So says David, Psalm 122.6. And so does David
in the next verse, Peace be within thy walls, and prosperity within thy
palaces. The Athenians, when they had gotten the better at Sea of the
Lacedaemonians, were so overjoyed, Tum primum arae Paci publicae sunt factae,
eique Deae pulvina^ inst^tutum. Cornel. Nepos. Psalm. 85.9, 10. Luke 1.74.
That they then first s^t up Altars to the Public Peace; and appointed a
Cushion to be laid thereon, for that godess to rest upon. Oh would the Lord,
but once more grant us, that Righteousness and Peace might kiss each other, and
Mercy and Truth meet in our Land; How happy should we hold our selves; how
infinitely obliged to sing Servati sumus, ut serviamus! How should we prize
our restored Peace, and improve it as Abraham did here, to the paying of
Tithes, in token of thankfulness; yea, to the seting up of Altars (not to
Public Peace, as those Heathens,) but to the God of peace, as Abraham after
this did, when he had concluded a peace with King Abimelech, and his General
Phicol? Genesis 21.32, 33.

Verse. 10. And the vale of Siddim was full of slime-pits.] Chosen therefore on
purpose by the five Kings, who fled and fell there; or (as some understand the
Text) made haste to fall down there; Celeriter se dejecerunt. Piscat. Eo
co^silio ut hosts ignari locorum, etc. Idem.
sculking and scouting, till their enemies should pursue them, and so perish in
those Pits. But their cunning failed them: For as they had traveled with
iniquity, and conceived-mischief, so they brought forth a lie. They made a Pit
and dug it, but fell into the ditch, that themselves had made, Psalm. 7.15,
16. The way of this world (says One) is like the vale of Siddim, slimy and
slippery, full of Lime-pits, and Pit-falls, Springs, and Stumblingblocks, laid
by Satan to maim or mischieve us, to procure our ruin or ruth. To defeat him
therefore (as these four Kings did the five,) Let us tread gingerly, st^p
warily, lift not up one foot, till we find sure footing for the other: Let us
look ere we le^p. Alioqui saliens antequam videat, Bern. de bon. deser.
casurus est antequam debeat, as Saint Bernard has it.

Verse. 11. And all their victuals.] Ezekiel. 16.49. Amos 4.
Fullness of bread was a part of their sin; and now cleanness of teeth is made a
piece of their punishment, in Gods just judgment.

Per quod quis peccat, per idem punitur and ipse. Verse. 12. And they took Lot]
God passes not by the sins of his dearest Saints, without a sensible check.
Lot for his affecting the first choice, had soon enough of it. Strong
affections bring strong afflictions, as hard knots require hard wedges. Earthly
things court us, that they may cut our throats: These Hoasts welcome us into our
Inn with smiling countenance, that they may dispatch us in our Beds. Beware of
the worlds cut throat kindnesses; consort not with Sodomites, lest ye partake
of their plagues. Hamath lies nigh to Damascus in place, and fares the worse
for its neighborhood, Zach. 9.2. Lot loses his goods and liberty, 2 Chro.
18.31. and 19.2.
Jehosaphat had well-nigh lost his life, for loving those that hated God.

Verse. 13. And there came one that had escaped] A Sodomite likely, but a
servant to Gods good providence, 2 Pet. 2.9. Ephesians. 4. Psalm. 126 4.
for Lots rescue. The Lord knows how to deliver his, etc. He that led
captivity captive, can turn our captivity as the streams in the South.

Verse. 14. He armed his trained servants] Or, catechized, such as he had
painfully principled both in Religion, and Military Discipline, tractable, and
trusty, ready pressed for any such purpose. It is recorded to the commendation of
Queen Elisabeth that she provided for war, even when she had most perfect peace
with all men. Camdens Elis. fol. 164.
Darts foreseen are dintless.

Verse. 15. Smote them, and pursued them] Abram came upon them as they were,
secure, sleepy, and drunken, as Josephus writes. So did David upon the
Amalekites, 1 Samuel 30.16. and Ahab the Syrians, 1 King. 20.16. The division of
his company, and taking benefit of the night, wacheth the use of godly policies
and stratagems.

Verse. 16. And he brought back all the goods] The five Kings were deprived of
the whole victory, because they spared not a man whom they should have spared.
One act of injustice, often loses much that was justly gotten. Beware (says a
Reverend Writer hereupon) of swallowing ill gotten wealth; Mr. Whatelyes
Archetypes.
it has a poysonfull operation: and like some evil simple in the stomach,
will bring up the good food together with the evil humors. [And also brought
again his brother Lot] Many a crooked nature would have thought of the old jar,
and let Lot taste of the fruits of his departure. In a friends distress, let
former faults be forgotten, and all possible helps afforded. [And the women
also, and the people] The hope of this might happily move that officious
messenger to address himself to the old Hebrew, verse. 13. little set by, till
now that they were in distress. General Vere told the King of Denmark, Spec
bellisacri. 253.
that Kings cared not for soldiers (no more did the King of Sodom for
Abraham, and his Reformado^s) until such time, as the Crowns hang on the one
side of their heads.

Verse. 18. Melchizedek King of Salem] Who this Melchisedek was, is much
controverted, Some would have him to be the holy Ghost. Others, the Lord Christ
in the habit of a King and Priest. The Jerusalem Targum says, Hu Shem Rabba.
This was Shem the Great; and of the same opinion are not a few of the Hebrew
Doctors, and others. But what should Shem do in Canaan; which Country fell not
to him, but to his brother Ham? To this they answer; That by the instinct of
the Holy Ghost, he left his own posterity now fallen away, for most part, to
Idolatry, and came to the land of Canaan, a type of Heaven, and the place from
whence peace and salvation should be preached to all people. If this were so,
it might very well be, that Amraphel, who was of Shems lineage, Dr. Prideaux
L^^t, de Melchis. p 95.
and his fellow soldiers, moved with reverence of this their great
Grandfather Shem, might forbear to molest him at Salem, or invade his
territories, when they wasted and smote all the neighbour-nations. But then, on
the other side, if Melchisedek were Shem; why does not Moses calf him so* but
change his name? 2. Why did not Abram, dwelling so near, visit him all this
while, that was so near allied to him, and so highly respected by him, as it
was meet? 3. Why did Melchisedek the Grandfather, take tithes of his Nephew,
to whom he should rather have given gifts and legacies? 2 Cor. 12.14. Most
likely, Melchisedek was a Canaanite of the Canaanites; yet a most righteous
King and Priest of the most High God, and so a pledge and first fruits of the
calling of the Gentiles to the knowledge and obedience of Jesus Christ, of whom
he was a lively type, Heb. 7.2. [Brought forth brend and wine] This he did as a
King; as a Priest he blessed Abraham; which latter therefore the Apostle
pitcheth upon, Heb. 7.1. as being to treat of Christ's Priesthood. The Papists
think to find footing here for their unbloody sacrifice in the Mass.
Melchisedee, say they, as a Priest offered bread and wine to God; for he was a
Priest of the living God. So they render it, Tert. de Praescrip. advers. haeret.
or rather wrest this text, to make it speak what it never meant. Caedem
Scriptuarum faciunt ad materiam suam, they murder the Scriptures to serve
their own purposes, says Tertullian. Where can they show us in all the Book of
God, that the Hebrew word Hotsi here used, signifies to offer? But any thing
serves turn, that has but a show of what they allege it for. A Sorbonist,
finding it written at the end of St. Paul's Epistles, Missa est, Bee-hive of
Romans Church, chap. 3. fol. 93. Nelancthon orat. de encom. eloquentiae. Pref. to
his book of the Sacraments.
etc. bragged he had found the Mass in his Bible. So another reading, Joh.
1.41. Invenimus Messiam, made the same conclusion. A third, no whit wiser then
the two former, speaking of these words I now write upon, Rex Salem panem and
vinum protulit, fell into a large discourse of the nature of Salt. Agreeable
whereunto Dr. Poynes writes, that it was foretold in the Old Testament, that
the Protestants were a Malignant Church, alleging 2 Chronicles. 24.19. Mit^^batque
prophetas, ut r^v^rterentur ad Dominum, quos ^rotestantes illi audire nolebant.

Verse. 19. And he blessed him] Lo here an instance of the communion of Saints:
Melchisedek does all good offices to Abraham (a believer, though a stranger)
not of courtesy only and humanity, but of charity and piety.

Verse. 20. And he gave him tithe of all] Not of the Sodomites goods, which he
restored wholly, ver. 23. but of the other lawful spoil he had taken from the
four conquered Kings; in testimony of his thankfulness to God the giver of all
victory.

Verse. 21. And the King of Sodom said] He, that a few days since, faced the
heavens, and cared not for four Kings, can now become suppliant to a forlorn
forreigner. Affliction will tame and take down the proudest spirits; they
buckle in adversity, that bore their heads on high in prosperity. In their
month you may find these wild-asses. [Give me the persons] Abram did so, Jer.
2.24.
and yet they were no whit amended by their late captivity, or former
servitude; from both which now they are freed by Abraham, but still held
captive by the Devil, who owes them yet a further spite, as we shall see
Chapt. 19.

Verse. 22. I have lifted up my hand] A swearing gesture, Dan. 12.7. Rev.
10.5.6. Neither does he this rashly, but for very good reason; First, that by
this oath, as by a buckler, he might fence himself against all covetous desires
of the spoil. Secondly, to show that he did seriously remit of that which was
his right, and went not to war for wages. Thirdly, hereby to profess his faith
and Religion, in opposition to their superstitious vanities, etc [The
possessour of heaven and earth] The true and rightful proprietary, whose
tenants at pleasure we all are, Philo.
as Philo from this text well observes. And here take notice how Melchisedek
and Abraham concut in the very terms of professing their faith, The most high
God possessour of heaven and earth. Whereunto Abram adds Jehovah, by which
name Melchisedek happily knew not God as yet; like as Apollos was ignorant of
many needful truths, till better instructed by Aquila and Priscilla, Act.
18.26.

Verse. 23. That I will not take from a threed] Melchisedek from God had made
Abram heir of all things; for says he, I am the Priest of the most High God,
possessour of heaven and earth, who has sent me with this bread and wine, as
by turfe and twig, as by an earnest, and a little for the whole, to give thee
possession of both. Now therefore when the King of Sodom, presently after
offers him the goods he had taken, Abraham would none; he was grown too great
to accept of such an offer; God was his exceeding great reward, Chap. 15.1.
Aquila non captat muscas. [Lest thou should say, I have made Abram rich]
Occasion must not be given to any to speak the least evil of us, lest Christ
be dishonored: For every Christian quartereth arms with Christ. And if Abram
do any thing unbeseeming himself, Abraham's God shall be blasphemed at Sodom.

Verse. 24. Let them take their portion] In things indifferent, we may abridge
our selves, we may not prescribe to others, as if they must needs be just of
our make. My brethren be not many masters, Jam. 3.1. as Magistri nostri
parisienses. See 1 Cor. 9.14, 15.

CHAP. XXV. Verse. 1. Fear not Abram]
EIther as Daniel feared upon sight of a like vision, Dan. 10.7, 8. Or as Jacob
feared after the sack of Shechem, lest he should be set upon by those whom he
had lately discomfited. Or, fear not lest thou shall dye childless; which
seems to be that that chiefly affrighted and afflicted him at this time. The
heart is not in case to receive promises, till freed of false fears. These are
quelled and killed by faith only. [I am thy shield] From the envy of thy
neighbors, and enmity of others, whom thou have lately vanquished; yea I will
deliver thee from all danger, as I have done from this. See a like promise to
all believers, Psalm. 115.9, 10, 11. The shield is betwixt the body, and the
thrust; so is God betwixt his and harm. He bears them as on Eagles wings: The
Eagle flees with her young on her back; Deuteronomy. 32.11. Aquilae pullos suos in
ali^ portant; alites reliqui^^ter pedes. Munster. in Scho. ex Rab. Salom.
there is no shooting them but through her body: no more can any devoratory
evil (as Tertullians phrase is) befall the Saints, but through God. [And thy
exceeding great reward] So that thou shall lose nothing, by refusing the King
of Sodoms offer. God is a liberal play master, and his retributions are more
then bountiful. A hundred fold here, and heaven hereafter. Not only Caleb
shall have Hebron for his valor; but Nebuchadnezzar shall have Egypt, as his
pay, for his pains at Tire. Never ask with Peter, What shall we have? you shall
have whatever heart can wish, or need require. The world gives hard wages; but
Gods reward is exceeding great. He will also recompense our losses for his
sake, as the King of Poland did his noble servant Zelilaus; having lost his
hand in his wars, Cromerus.
he sent him a golden hand for it. So Caius gave Agrippa that had been
imprisoned for his sake, a chain of gold as heavy as his chain of iron had been.

Verse. 2. Lord God, what will thou give me, etc.] Dominator Johovah. Adonai cum
Camets sonat Dominator: A stately style. We must magnify God, when we have got
him into our hearts, and enlarge his room there, when we conceive of him, as
much as may be: Do our utmost, and then say, Claudicat ingenium, Lucr^t.
delirat linguaque, mensque. [Seeing I go childless] He had no great joy of
his former victory, or the present promise, because childless. His mouth was so
out of taste with the sense of this want, that he could relish no comfort. This
was his fault, and is often ours: Like children, if we have not that piece we
would have, we grow sullen, and will have none. Had not God been to Abraham
instead of ten children? Is he not All in All to his? [And the steward of my
house] Filius discursitationis, vel derelictionis domus m^ae He that now runs
about my business, and to whom I am likely to leave all. A faithful steward he
was, and fearing God, Prove. 22.29.
Genesis 24.2, 3. etc. and therefore might look not to live long in a low place.
[This Eliezer of Damascus] Or Eliazar, as Exodus 6.25. Whence Lazarus, said in
the parable to be in Abraham's bosom, Luke 16.23. as dear to him, and set next
him in heaven.

Verse. 3. And Abram said, Behold to me, etc.] He harps again upon the same
string; when we fall upon crosses, we add, we multiply, we rise in our
discourse, we are eloquent above measure, and beyond truth sometimes. But how
comes Abram to speak thus to God once and again? In former visions God only
spoke, here Abram answers It appears he grew in an holy familiarity with the
divine Majesty, and an humble boldness, as Cajetan here observes.

Verse. 4. And behold the word of the Lord etc.] Abrams Behold of grief, is
answered with Gods Behold, of grace. The Greek renders it, And straightway.
God was straight at hand to help Abrams infirmity, and to raise up his faith
that began to flag and hang the wing, as the best faith will, if long put to it.
Adeo nihil est in nobis magni, quod non queat minui.

Verse. 5. And he brought him forth abroad] Abram having prayed a good part of
the day within, Joh. 16.24. 1 These. 5.16, 17
is now drawn forth at night to receive the promise. Pray that ye may joy,
says Christ: And, if ye will rejoice evermore, Pray continually, says the
Apostle. [If thou be able to number them] Then may thou number thy posterity;
and they, their privileges. It is God only that counts the stars, and
calls them all by names, Psalm. 147.4. No man can number them, Jer. 33.22. And
yet Aratus and Eudoxus vainly vaunted (says St. Augustine) that they had cast
up the stars, Aug de Civ. Det. l. 16.
and could call them all by their names.

Verse. 6. And he beleeved] When thus the promise was repeated. So needful it
is, that the word should be often preached, and the sweet promises of the
Gospel beaten to the smell; that Gods name being as an ointment poured out,
The Virgins may love him, believe in him, Cant. 1.3. 1 Pet. 1.8.
and rejoice with joy unspeakable, and full of glory. [And he counted it to him
for righteousness] This imputative righteousness the Papists scoff at, calling
it putative, or imaginary. This the Jews also jear at, to this day, as their
Fathers did of old, Romans 10.2, 3. so do they. For being asked, whether they
believe to be saved by the righteousness of Christ imputed to them? they
answer, That every Fox must pay his own skin to the Fleaer. But is not Christ
called, Jer. 23.6.
in their law, Jehovah our righteousness? And how so, but by means of that
imputation so often hammered on by the Apostle? Romans 4. adding after all, that
what is said here of Abram, is not written for his sake alone that it was
imputed to him, but for us also, to whom it shall be imputed, if we believe on
him that raised up Jesus, etc. Romans 4.24. If Adams sin be mine, though I
committed it not; why should it seem so strange, that the merit of Christ's
entire obedience should by the like means be mine, though I wrought it not? See
Romans 5.19. 2 Cor. 5.19. If he has wronged thee ought, reckon that to me, said
Paul to Philemon, Philem. 18.
concerning Onesimus; says Christ to his Father, concerning us. And (to stop
the Papists mouth.) If another man's faith may benefit Infants at their
Baptism, as Bellarmine affirms; why should it seem so absurd, that believers
should be benefited by Christ's righteousness imputed?

Verse. 7. I am the Lord that brought thee] Let the remembrance of what I have
done for thee, confirm thy confidence, since every former mercy, is a pledge of
a future. God gives after he has given, as the spring runs, after it has
run: And as the eye is not weary of seeing, nor the ear of hearing, no more is
God of doing good to his people. Draw out thy loving kindness, Psalm. 36.10.
says David, as a continued series or chain, where one link draws on another
to the utmost length.

Verse. 8. Lord God whereby shall I know] He desires assign, not that he
believed not before, but that he might better believe. How great is Gods love
in giving us Sacraments, and therein to make himself to us visible, as well as
audible?

Verse. 9. Take me an heifer, etc.] Here God commands him abusie sacrifice, and
then casts him into a terrible sleep; the better to prepare him to receive the
ensuing oracle, and to teach him, that he may not rashly rush upon divine
mysteries. Heathens could say, Non loquendum de Deo absque lumine; that is,
Pythag^ra^.
without praemeditation and advised consideration.

Verse. 10. Divided them in the midst] In signum exitii foedifrago eventuri.
This was the federall rite both among Jews, Jer. 34.18, 19. and Gentiles, as is
to be seen in Virgil, Aeneid. l. 8.
describing the covenant of Romulus and Tatius. (...)
God also threatens to cut the evil servant in twain; that forgets the
Covenant of his God, Matthew. 24. These dissected creatures are the oppressed
Israelites; the parts laid each against other, signify, that God will make
them up again, though dis^jected; the fowls that came down upon them, are the
Egyptians; Abrams huffing of them away, is their deliverance by Moses after
four hundred years, signified by those four kinds of creatures, as Luther
interprets.

Verse. 12. And when the Sun was going down] Heb. when he was ready to enter, to
wit, into his Bride chamber, Psalm. 19 6.

Verse. 13. Know of a surety that thy seed] Must first suffer, before they can
enter; and so be conformed to Christ their Captain, Heb. 5.9.
who was perfected by sufferings, and came not to the Crown, but by the Cross.
Dissicile est ut prasemibus bonis quis fruatur and futuris; ut hic ventrem,
illi^ mentem resiciat ut de delici^s ad delicias transeat; ut in coelo and in
terra gloriosus appareat, says St. Hierome. Erigito tibi scalam Aco^^^, and
solus ascen^ito. Constant. Mag.
Through many tribulations we must enter into heaven. He that will go any
other way, let him (as the Emperor said to the H^retick) erect a ladder, and
go up alone.

Verse. 14. Afterward they shall come out, etc.] All the Saints abasements, are
but in order to their advancement. As God brought forth his Israel with jewels,
and other wealth; so the afflicted Church, and tossed with tempest, shall build
her walls, and lay her foundations with Sapphires, and Agates, Esa. 54.11, 12.
See Esa. 62.3.4.

Verse. 15. Thou shall go to thy fathers] The spirits of just men made perfect;
all the court of Heaven shall meet thee and welcome thee into their society,
that brave Panegyris, Heb. 12.22, 23. [In peace] So Josiah did, Bellum, cui nos
instamus pax est, non bellum. Zuingl. apud Melch. Adam. Prove. 16.31.
though he dyed in battle, according to the promise, 2 Chronicles. 34.28. God made
war to be peace to him [In a good old age] Heb. With a good hoar head, which is
a Crown, when found in the way of righteousness.

Verse. 16. The iniquity of the Amorites, etc.] A metaphor from a large vessel
filled by drops; as elsewhere, from an harvest ready for the sickle, and from
the vine ripe for the wine press. Pererius the Jesuit writing upon this text
says, Perer. in loc.
If any marvel why England continues to flourish, notwithstanding the cruel
persecution of Catholics there? (just execution of Cacolikes he should have
said) Answers because their sin is not yet full. (God grant it, Jer. 28.6.) Sed
veniet tandem iniquitatis complementum, says he. Ezekiel. 7.6, 7, 10
A true Prophet, I fear me. That terrible text rings in mine ears, An end is
come, the end is come, it watches for thee, behold it is come, it is come.

CHAP. XVI. Verse. 1. Now Sarai Abrams wife bare him no children]
GOd had foretold him of his childrens affliction, and yet gave him no child,
but holds him still in suspense. He knows how to commend his favors to us by
withholding them, Cito data cito vilescunt; we account it scarce worth taking,
that is not twice worth asking. [A handmaid, an Egyptian] One of those maids,
belike, that were given her in Egypt, Genesis 12.16.

Verse. 2. The Lord has restrained me] She faults herself, not her husband, as
many a crank dame would have done. [It may be that I may obtain children by
her] Heb. Be builded by her, as God made the midwives houses; that is, gave
them children, for their mercy to the poor children, Exodus 1.21. and as he
promised to make David an house, 2 Samuel 7.11, 12
that is, to give him seed to sit upon his Throne. Saraies aim was good here,
but the means she used naught. She was too hasty, Abram too facile, both to
blame for want of faith, and violation of wedlock. Albeit this might be a sin
of ignorance in them, as was also polygamy. God had promised a seed to Abram,
but not expressly as yet unto Sarai. Now, Ainsworth.
by the Law, bond-servants children were their masters, Exodus 21.4. And among
the Heathens, Stratonice the wife of King Diotarus being barren, Plutarch.
gave secretly her maid Electra unto her husband, by whom she had an heir to
the Crown.

Verse. 3. After Abram had dwelt ten years] The Rabbines tell us of a tradition
that the Hebrews grounded from hence; That if a woman had no child in the first
ten years, she might be held barren, and another wife taken. But this is like
one of their ill glosses that marred so many good texts, Matthew. 5. and refuted
by our Savior the Lawgiver, who best understood his own meaning.

Verse. 4. Her Mistress was despised in her eyes] Heb. Allevata est, sive
elevata est, and so she was beaten with her own rod, and yet complains. Neither
is it any wonder; For, for three things the earth is disquieted, says Agur,
and two of them are, Prove. 30.21, 23
For an odious woman, when she is married, and a^ handmaid that is heir to her
mistress. Asperius nihil est humili dum surgit in altum. Set a beggar on
horseback, and there is no hoe with him.

Verse. 5. My wrong be upon thee] The greatest wrong-doers are the greatest
complainers commonly, as Exodus 2.13, 14. guiltiness is ever exceptions, and
clamorous. Here be verba stomachant is atque imprecantis. Or as some think
rather, verba implorantis vindictam divinam seque consolantis spe defensionis
divinae. Take it which way you will, as a passionate person she powrs out
foolishness, and (besides the false charge she lays upon her husband) takes
Gods name in vain. Fret not thy self to do evil. Prove. 15.2. Psalm. 37.
[The Lord judge] He must be sent for all in haste, to decide the controversy;
who if he had come, you may soon see which of them would have had the worst of
it. The best, we see, have their domestical contentions; some household words
will now and then pass betwixt them: we match not with Angels, but men and
women. Two flints may as soon smite together, and not fire come forth, as two
persons meet in marriage, and not offenses fall out: Pub. Rubius Celer was held
a happy man among the Romans, that commanded it to be engraven upon his
gravestone, That he had lived three and forty years and eight months with G.
Ennia his wife, sine querela, without the least quarrel. Another I have read
of, that complained that his conjugium, was a continual conjurgium; and when
he dyed, Legitur id Roma citante Phil. Camerar. cen^. 1. (...). 51.
gave order it should be written upon his tomb, He^^, Vi^ter, miraculu^^! hic
vir and uxor non litigant, etc. This to prevent, Alphons^^ King of Arragon was
wont to say, that to procure a quiet life, the husband must be deaf, and the
wife blind. But they say better that advise to a mutual forbearance, lest no
offense be given on either side; or if given, yet not taken; the second blow
makes the fray, we say. Be not both incensed together. If Abraham were to blame
in conniving at Hagars contempt of her Mistress, (as it may be he was somewhat)
yet it was his wisdom to bear with Sarah when she was in her passion. Let two
fires meet, and it will be hard quenching them. A choleric couple being asked
how they agreed so well? the husband made this answer, When my wives fit is on
her, I bear with her (as Abraham did with Sarai) and when my fit is on me,
Greenham.
she bears with me; and so we never chide together, but asunder. Those unkind
husbands had much to answer for, Malach. 2.13. that caused their wives to cover
the Louds altar with tears, with weeping, and with crying out, so that he
regarded not the offering any more. And those wi^es can never answer it to God,
that live customarily in the sin of frowardness, or rebellion against their
husbands. Amongst all the infirmitie^ noted in any godly woman in the
Scriptures, there is no example of any that did so. This of Sarah is but of one
only fact: And for that of Zipporah, the error seems to be as much in her
judgment, as in her affections. Those couples that are even warbling, can
neither be at peace within themselves, 1 Cor. 7.15. nor pray as they should do
to God, 1 Pet. 3.7. which if they did often, as Isaac and Rebecca did, they
could not disagree. For either praying together would make them leave jarring,
or jarring, will make them leave praying; which the Apostle accounts no small
hindrance.

Verse. 6. But Abram said to Sarai, Behold, etc.] Here that of Solomonis
verified, A soft answer pacifieth wrath. Hard to soft does no hurt, as a bullet
against a wooll-sack. Vxoris vitium aut tollendum, aut tollerandum, said Varro,
(...) The woman is the wants, (...).
and has many provocations among children and servants, that the man me^t^ not
with. This must be considered, and all bitterness abandoned. (...). pracep*
(...).
The Heathens when they sacrificed at their marriage feasts, used to cast the
gall of the beast sacrificed out of doors. (...). 7.
Viper^ virus, ob venerationem nuptiarum, ^v^mit (says St. Basil): and in
d^ritiem animi, in feritat^m, tu crudelitatem ob unionis rever^utiam non
deponis? What kin art thou to him whose name is Wormwood? Rev. 8.11. [And when
Sarai dealt hardly with her] Beat her, belike: For a servant will not be
corrected by words, Prove. 29.19. and then he must have blows, and be buffeted,
1 Pet. 2.20. Not so a wi^e. M. Aurelius the Emperor, though a Heathen, could
say to the shame of many Bedlams amongst us: Vxor admonenda persapt,
reprehendendararo, violentis manibus tructanda nunquam. [She fled] This was her
fault, Eccles. 10.4. But our natures are refractory, and will sooner break then
bend, till God subdue them.

Verse. 7. In the way to Shur] Which lay between Canaan and Egypt. So she was
hying homewards to her own country. Oh that our afflictions might drive us
heavenward!

Verse. 8. Hagar Sarai's maid] This was a good item to her, that she was out of
her way, because out of her place. [Whence came thou? and whither wilt t^^]
Such is the sweet and secret voice of Gods Spirit (that Angelus Tutelaris, as I
may say) in our hearts, when extravagant; So that we cannot do the evil we
would, Gal. 5.17. [I flee from the face of my mistress Sarai] Who happily had
over-done, as we are all apt to do, when we are judges in our own causes, and
concernments. She should have thought of that of Job, chap. 31.15. Did not he
that made me in the womb* make her? and that of Paul, Have not I also a master
in Heaven? Colos. 4.1. But passion is headlong, and like heavy bodies, down
steep hills, once in motion, rest not till they come to the bottom. Look to it
therefore, in corrections especially.

Verse. 9. Return to thy Mistress] When now she had smarted, she is in case to
be counseled. There Is great skill in the choice of a fit time for admonition.
It is not to give a man a purge in a fever-fit. [Submit thy self] Heb. Afflict
thy self, or suffer thy self to be afflicted or humbled under her hands. Jam.
4.9.
The like counsel is given us all by St. James, Be afflicted, and weep, and
mourn, etc. Humble your selves under the mighty hand of God, and he will lift
you up.

Verse. 10. I will multiply thy seed] Thus God contemns not poor servants:
nay, if they be faithful, Coloss. 3.24.
he will give them the reward of inheritance, even a child's part, as Hagar, and
her child had. We read not that she cried to God; but her affliction spoke for
her; and he is often (ont of his mere Philanthropie) found of them that sought
him not. He hears the young Ravens that cry to him only by way of
implication. P^al. 147.9.
The Lord has heard thy affliction, says the Angel in the next verse.

Verse. 12. And he will be a wild-man] Heb. A wild-asse, which is fierce,
untractable, and untameable. And such by nature is every mothers child of us,
Job 11.12. A wild-asse-colt. An Ass is none of the wisest creatures, much less
an Asses-colt; least of all, Vigimus, inque vicem praebemus tela sagit^is.
a wild-asse-colt. Lo such is man. [His hand will be against every man] This
was first accomplished in his person, and th^n in his posterity. For himself,
he was ferus and pugnax, ever quarrelling and contending. Now a quarrelsome man
is like a Cock of the game, that is still blood, with the blood of others, and
of himself. As for his posterity, the Saracens, Mahomet, the mischief of
mankind, had his generation from this wild-asse. And Sarai was utterly
disappointed; for these Agarens were ever enemies, and so continue to be to her
seed.

Verse. 13. Thou God see me] This shows she had been well trained and tutored
in her Master Abrams house. Before, she told the Angel the plain truth, and
lied not, verse. 8* And here she thankfully acknowledges Gods goodness in
looking upon her forlorn solitariness, setting up a memorial of that mercy to
all posterity. The greater was her sin again, that being so well principled,
she should have any thoughts of returning to Egypt, there to forsake her faith
learned in Abrams family. [Have I also here looked, Genesis 32.30. Exodus 24.11.
Ju^g. 1^.23.
etc.] q. d. Have I found God here also in the wilderness, as I had done often
before in my Masters house? Or, am I yet alive, though I have seen God?

CHAP. XVII. Verse. 1. The Lord appeared to Abram]
AFter thirteen years absence and silence, for ought we read; so that Abram
began to conclude that Ismael surely was the promised seed, and all the sons he
was likely to have to inherit the land: The Church then may err, when she
cleaves not close to the word; though God at length will direct her into the
right way, (...), Aquila. (...), Plato (...).
as here he did Abraham. [I am God All-mighty] Or Al. sufficient,
Self-sufficient (so Aquila)* Independent, Absolute, the Original, Universal
good. Aben-Ezra interprets Shaddai, a Conque^or: Others a Destroyer, which a
Conqueror must needs be. Eundem victorem and vastatorem esse oportet, says
Cameron. And to this the Scripture alludes, when it says Shod shall come from
Shaddai, Destruction from the Almighty, Esa. 13.6. Some there are that derive
Shaddai of Shad a dug, because God feeds his children with sufficiency of all
good things, as the loving mother does the child with the milk of her breasts.
Hence the Heathen called Diana (and likewise Ceres) (...) and Mammosam, as if
she were the Nurse of all living creatures. God is the only satisfactory good,
proportionable and sitting to our souls, as the dug to the childs stomach.
[Walk before me] Heb. Indesinenter ambula, Walk constantly, step for step, and
keep pace with me. Austin would not, for the gain of a million of worlds, be an
Atheist for half an hour, because he ^new not but God might in that time make
an end of him. Am. 3.3.
For can two walk together and they not agreed, says the Prophet? Ye cannot
serve the Lord (says Joshua to the people that promised fair) that is, J^sh.
24.19.
unless ye will serve him entirely, walk uprightly, as Abram here; walk evenly,
without halting or halving with him. Holiness must run thorough the whole life,
as the warp does thorough the woof: all the parts of our line of life must be
straight before God. As for such as turn aside to their crooked ways (as the
Planets steal back by a secret slow motion of their own, contrary to that of
the Primum Mobile) The Lord shall lead them forth with the workers of iniquity,
with openly profane persons ( Psalm. 125.5.) when peace shall be upon Israel,
upon all that are Israelites indeed, in whom there is no guile. Surely, as an
unequal pulse shows a distempered body, so does uneven walking an unsound
soul, such as is not verily persuaded that God is All-sufficient, able and
ready to reward the upright, and punish the hypocrite.

Verse. 2. And I will make my Covenant] This is now the fifth confirmation of
the Covenant; which shows that it is the prora and puppis, the first, second
and third of our salvation; and it is fit we should be well studied in it, and
assured of our interest. For as the Mercy-seat was no larger then the Ark, so
neither is the Grace of God then the Covenant. And as the Ark and Mercyseat
were never separated; Exodus 25.10. to 17.
so neither is his mercy from his people.

Verse. 3. And Abram fell on his face] It Was sit he should, now that God talked
with him. Such a posture of body befits us at the hearing of the word, as may
best express our reverence, and further our attention. Balac is bid to rise up
to hear Balaams parable. Eglon though a fat unweildy man, rises up from his
seat to hear Gods message from Ehud. Neh. 8.5.
The people in Nehemiah stood to hear the Law read and expounded. Constantine
the Great, Eusebius.
would not be entreated to sit down or be covered at a Sermon: No more would
our Edward the sixth, whose custom was also to take notes of what he heard,
Act and M^n.
which (together with his own applications of the word to himself) he wrote in
Greek characters, that his servants might not read them. The Thessalonians are
commended for this, that they heard Paul's preaching as the word of God, and not
of man. Had Samuel thought it had been God that called to him (and not Eli) he
would not have slept, but fallen on his face before the Lord as Abram here, who
was no novice, but knew well, that though God loves to be acquainted with men
in the walks of their obedience, yet he takes state upon him in his Ordinances,
and will be trembled at in his word and judgments.

Verse. 4. As for me] Ego ecce. An abrupt speech, to show what haste God made to
comfort and confirm Abram, now fallen at his feet. [Thou shall be a father of
many nations.] The Israelites, Ismaelites, Edomites, Keturites, etc. besides
all Believers, Gal. 3.28, 29.

Verse. 5. Neither shall thy name any more, etc.] This is reckoned for an high
favor by those holy Levites, Neh. 9.7. The Jews say, that for honors sake;
God inserted one of the letters of his own incommunicable name Jehovah into the
name of Abram, now Abraham. Sure it is, that by stiling himself the God of
Abraham, he does him more honor then if he had engraven the word Abraham upon
the firmament, or in the clouds in letters of gold.

Verse. 6. I will make thee exceeding fruitfull] Heb. Foecundabo te valde valde:
And as often as thou think upon thy new name, thou shall remember my promise,
and rest assured of my performance. See how God of his grace, condescends unto
us, and accommodates us.

Verse. 7. For an ever lasting Covenant] Circumcision, the outward sign of it,
was temporary, and changeable into baptism; but the Covenant of grace, thereby
then, and by baptism now sealed up unto us, is eternal; being stablished and
ratified by the death of the Testatour, by the blood of the Arch-shepherd, Heb.
13.20. Here it must be considered, that there is a twofold Covenant; 1. Single,
such as God makes with children, when baptized; viz. If ye will repent, believe
and walk with me, ye shall be saved. Now if they break the condition, God is
freed, D. Preston of Gods Attrib.
he is not bound any further. 2. Double, such as God ^^kes with his elect
only; and that is to perform both parts, sc. If you will believe, repent,
obey, ye shall be saved. And further, I will give you a new heart, so that you
shall repent, believe, etc. and be saved. Thus God undertakes for both parts,
and so it becomes an everlasting Covenant; such as has the sure or unfailable
mercies of David. And here those, that are thus in Double-Covenant with God,
(...).
are fitly compared to them that are gone in at a Church-door: some are further
in then others, but yet all are in. So, though the weak in faith be not so
forward, yet they may be in, though not so far in. [And to thy seed after thee]
See the Note on the next Verse.

Verse. 8. All the land of Canaan for an everlasting possession] And yet now,
for their inexpiable guilt, in putting to death the Lord of life, they are
utterly dispossessed of that pleasant land. In Jerusalem it self there are not
to be found a hundred households of Jews. Adri^^ the Emperor drove them utterly
out of Jewry, Breerewood
and commanded them by proclamation not so much as to look toward it, from any
Tower or high-mountain: Yea long before this, the Lord, for their wickedness,
counted them but usurpers, Funceiu^.
and called them sojourners in that land, Ezekiel. 20.38. and 11.15. If men
forfeit their privileges, God may, at his pleasure, take the forfeiture and
dis-priviledge them, as he did Saul, and Judas, who by transgression fell from
his office, that he might go to his own place, Act. 1.25. [I will be their God]
This is a singular comfort for all believing parents. Their greatest care is
for their poor little ones, what they shall do another day: why, cast them upon
God, their God as well as thine: for is not he in Covenant with them too? It
would be a great stay of mind, if God should say to us for our children, as
David said to Mephibosheth, or to Barzillai for his son Chimham; Chimham shall
go with me, and I will do to him that which shall seem good unto thee, and
whatsoever thou shall require of me, that I will do for thee. Behold God says
all this and more to us, 2 Samuel 19.38.
when he says, I will be a God to thee, and to thy seed after thee. I remember
a sweet passage of Mr. Saunders the Martyr in a Letter to his wise: Act. and
Mon. 1364.
Though we do shortly depart hence, and leave our poor Infant (to our seeming)
at all adventures, yet shall he have our gracious God to be his God: For so
has he said (and he cannot lie;) I will be thy God, and of thy seed. Yea, if
you leave him in the Wilderness, desti^u^e of all helps, being called of God to
do his will, either to die for the confession of Christ, or any work of
obedience; that God which heard the cry of the little poor Infant of Hagar, and
did succor it, will do the like to the children of you, or any other fearing
him, and trusting in him.

Verse. 9. Thou shall keep my Covenant.] This is the stipulation on Abraham's
part, by receiving the Sacrament of Circumcision, to avouch God to be his God,
Deuteronomy. 26.17. Now to the making the Lord to be our God, it is required that with
highest estimations, most vigorous affections, and utmost endeavors we bestow
our selves upon him. Thus if we choose God for our God, Psalm. 73.25. We shall be
assured, that he has chosen, and avouched us for his people, 1 John 4.19.

Verse. 10. Every man-child amongst you.] Infants were circumcised, to signify
that we had better be flayed, and have our skin quite stripped off, then to
have it as a skin-bottle hanging in the smoke of filthy desires, and blown full
of unclean motions with the breath of Satan. That wretched Renegado that
betrayed the Rhodes was well served. For his promised wife and portion were
presented: but the Turk told him, that he would not have a Christian to be his
son in law, Spec. bol. sac. p. 157.
but he must be a Mussle-man, that is, a believing Turk, within and without.
And therefore he caused his baptized skin (as he called it) to be fleyed off,
and him to be cast in a bed, strawed with Salt, that he might get a new skin,
and so he should be his son-in-law. But the wicked wretch ended his life with
shame and torment.

Verse. 11. It shall be a token of the Covenant.] It seals up nothing then to
those that are not in Covenant. Circumcision to such is but as a seal to a
blank. Unregenerate Israel was to God as Ethiopia, Amos 9.7. Circumcision of it
self, avails nothing, if the heart be uncircumcised. The Apostle distinguishes
of Circumcision, Colos. 2.11. and tells us that the true Circumcision is made
without hands, and is that of the heart in the Spirit, and not in the Letter,
(...).
Romans 2.29. It is a wonderful work of the Spirit, wrought by the Word, upon the
Saints in their first Conversion, whereby corruption of nature is wounded,
beloved sins cast away with sorrow, and the sinner received into an everlasting
communion with God, and his Saints. Labor this, or you are not a button the
better for your Baptism. A man may go to Hell with Fontwater on his face, if
not baptized with the Holy Ghost, and with fire. Circumcision seals not up any
Covenant of Grace to Turks, as it did not, of old, to Ismaelites, Edomites, and
Midianites, who yet would needs be circumcised.

Verse. 12. And he that is eight days old.] This warrants our baptising of
Infants of both Sexes. See the Notes on Chap. 9. Verse. 10.

Verse. 13. He that is born in thy house,] Householders must see to it, that
their families fear God: They walk not in a perfect way, that do otherwise,
Psalm. 101.2. that look not Aedibus in propriis, quae prava, aut recta gerantur.
[My Covenant shall be in your flesh.] That is, the sign of my Covenant (by a
Metonymy of the Subject) seem it never so simple, and prove it never so painful
and shameful. The foolishness of God is wiser then men, that cry Credat Judaeus
Apella, etc.

Verse. 14. That soul shall be cut off.] From the Commonwealth of Israel: So
shall those be from benefit by Christ, that are uncircumcised in heart; As
hateful to him, as Goliath was to David. Pray therefore, that God will thrust
his holy hand into thy bosom, and pull off that abominable foreskin. He had
much ado to forbear Moses, when he met him in the Inn; and we know why, Exodus
4.24.

Verse. 15. Thou shall not call her name Sarai, but Sarah.] The Chaldee Sarai,
is made Hebrew Sarah: One of the four Letters of Jehovah being also added (as
before in Abraham) that she may be absolutely a Lady or Princess.

Verse. 17. Abraham fell upon his face, and laughed.] Not as doubting, much less
deriding, Romans 4 19. but as rejoicing and admiring the goodness and power of
God. The narrow mouthed vessel of his heart not quickly capable of so great
comfort, (for Tarda solet magnis rebus inesse fides) he fell upon his face and
laughed.

Verse. 18. Oh that Ishmael might live.] The life of grace here, and of glory
hereafter: That he be not killed with death when he dies, as Jesabels children
were, Revel. 2.23.

Verse. 19. I will establish my Covenant with him.] This was a far greater
favor, th^n that bestowed on Ismael in the next verse. Twelve Princes shall he
beget. Nothing so ennobleth, as Christ, Graces, being in the Covenant, etc.
Isai. 19.25. Assyria is the work of Gods hands, but Israel his inheritance.

Verse. 20. And as for Ismael, I have heard thee.] Faithful prayer may have any
thing at Gods hands. It is but ask and have with Abraham: As Zedekiah said to
his courtiers glosingly, God says to his servants seriously; The King can deny
you nothing. Let this encourage to pray for our selves and children; for by
prayer we may take out of Gods treasury, plentiful mercy for our selves and
ours.

Verse. 21. But my Covenant.] This is the thirteenth time that the Covenant is
named in this Chapter, says an Interpreter; and hereby is meant the promise of
Christ and salvation by him. A subject so sweet to every sanctified soul, that
Saint Paul cannot come off it. He names the Lord Jesus Christ, ten times
together in ten verses, 1 Cor. 1.1. to 10. It was to him Mel in ^re, melos in
aure, Bernard.
jub^lum in cord.

Verse. 22. And he left off talking with him.] As a man with his friend. Mr.
John Holland, Bach. of Divin. See my True Treas. p. 373.
Such honor have all his Saints. O speak it when I am gone, and preach it at my
funeral, God deals familiarly with man, said that heavenly Spark, how ready
to be extinct. Saint Paul calls prayer (...), an entreparlance with God, 1 Timothy
2.1. and (...), the confident intergatory or rejoyndre of a good conscience
toward God, 1 Pet. 3.21. The Persian Monarks held it a piece of their silly
glory, to secret themselves from their greatest subjects, Esther 4.11. And
Jupiters Image at Creet was made without ears. Plutarch gives the Reason, Non
enim convenit audiri ab eo quenquam, qui omnium rerum sit Dominus at que
princeps. A pretty plea for Baal. He is too great to talk with men. Our God
thinks not himself so. He sollicites suitors, and loves to be, interchangeably,
solicited by them.

Verse. 23. Abraham took Ismael.] To make the other more willing. [Circumcised
the flesh.] Not regarding the affliction, danger, scandal, shame of the action
in the eyes of the world.

Verse. 26. In the self same day.] To show his prompt and present obedience,
without shucking and hucking, without delays and consults.

Verse. 27. All the men of his house.] Faciles se praebent in re ardua and
ridicula. An excellent pattern of a well ordered family.

CHAP. XVIII. Verse. 1. And the Lord appeared unto him]
1. UT praeludium incarnationis. 2. Ex Philanthropia: his delight is in the
habitable part of Gods earth, Prove. 8.31. [And he sat in the tent-door] He
dwelt in a tent (let us be content though we dwell not to our minds) yet kept a
good house. A very hearty householder he was. [In the heat of the day] The
usual time of rest and repast, when travelers wax faint and hungry.

Verse. 2. And he lift up his eyes and looked]. As pursuing hospitality (that is
the Apostles expression, Rom 12.13.) and waiting an opportunity of doing good.
Charity is no churl. The liberal man devises liberal things, Aug. in Psalm.
103. (...) Usibus non necessitatibus. Nequis existimet prius non succurrendum
proxime quam ad necessitatem fit redactus. Act and Mon. so. 1369. Ibid. 1388.
Cicero.
Esa. 32.8. he considers the poor and needy, Psalm. 41.1. Praeoccupat vocem
petituri, as Augustine expounds it; he stays not till he is asked a good turn,
he ministers to the uses, not only to the necessities of the Saints, as the
Apostles word is, Romans 12.13. And as Bishop Hoopers, and Dr. Taylours practice
was. The one had his board of beggars sent for, and served every day with whole
and wholesome meats, ere himself sat down to dinner. And the other went once a
fortnight at the least to the Almeshouse, and other poor men that had many
children, and were sick, to see what they lacked, and to supply them. [And
bowed himself toward the ground] Piety is no enemy to courtesy; it does not
remove, but rectify it, that it be not only complementall and ridiculous.
Potest Augur Augurem videre and non ridere? So it may it be said of our common
cringers.

Verse. 5. For therefore are ye come to your servant] He means not, that they
therefore came to him to taste of his cheer; but that God by his providence,
had so ordered that he should see them passing, and invite them to his house.
How glad was this good man of an occasion to show kindness, acknowledging Gods
good providence! And how improvident are we for our selves, that will not offer
a sacrifice, when God sets up an altar before us? [So do as thou have said] The
Angels needed not his courtesy, yet kindly accept of it. Good offers or
offices, even from inferiors, are not to be rejected, but regarded, yea
rewarded.

Verse. 6. Make ready quickly] Habent aulae suum Ci^o, Ci^o, says One. So had
Abraham's house here. He, she, the boy, and all hasted, and had their several
offices. The very expression it self here used, is concise and quick: Much like
that of the Prophet in the case of returning to God, If ye will enquire,
enquire; return, come. Esa. 21.12. Silius.
Praecipitatempus; mors atra impendet agenti. [Three measures of fine meal]
Three pecks, for three men's dinners; and the best of the best too, fine meal,
the fat calf, butter and milk, Gods plenty of all, and hearty welcome; the
good man himself standing by, and bidding them, Go to: which shows his
humanity, and his humility also.

Dat been, dat multum, qui dat cum munere vultum. Verse. 9. Behold in the tent]
David compares a good woman to the vines upon the walls of the house, because
she cleaves to her house. Others to a snail, that carries her house on her
back. St. Paul reckons it for a virtue in a woman to keep at home; Tit. 2 5.
Prove. 7.11.
and Solomon for a sign of a lewd huswife, that her feet abide not in her house.

Verse. 10. According to the time of life] That is, when this time shall return
again; this time twelve-moneth. See verse. 14. with the Note to it. [Sarah heard
it in the tent door] She was listening, out of womanish curiosity. Yet some
think, the Angel asked for her on purpose, that she hearing her name mentioned
might listen.

Verse. 11. Now Abraham and Sarah were old] So, when we were altogether without
strength, according to the time of life, Christ dyed for the ungodly, Romans 5.6.

Verse. 12. Sarah laughed] Gods promises seem absurd and ridiculous, many of
them, to humane reason, which therefore must be silenced, and shut out, as
Hagar was; for it will argue carnally, as that unbeleeving Lord, 2 King. 7.2.
storms at Gods offers as Naaman at the message, looks upon Gods Jordan with
Syrian eyes, as he, and after all, cries out with Nicodemus, How can these
things be? measuring God by its own model, and casting him into its own mould.
[After I am waxed old, shall I lust?] Old and cold, (...).
is our English proverb; and the Greek word for an old body signifies one, in
whom natural heat is exstinct. It is a most undecent thing to see the
pleasures of youth prevailing in times of age, among old decrepit goats. Were
it not monstrous to behold green apples on a tree in winter? [My Lord being old
also] This was the only good word in the whole sentence: God takes notice of
it, and by St. Peter records it to her eternal commendation, 1 Pet. 3.6. yea,
he was so well pleased with her subjection to her husband, whom she here in her
heart calls Lord, that he is content to forgive her great sin of unbelief.

Verse. 1.3. Said to Abraham, wherefore did Sarah laugh?] The wives sin reflects
upon the husband. But Solomon shows that some wives are so intemperate and
wilful, that a man may as well hide the wind in his fist, or oil in his hand,
as restrain them from illdoing, Prove. 27.15, 16. Liberum arbitrium, Hcidfeld.
pro quo tantopere contenditur, viri amiserunt, ^^xores arripuerunt, says One
wittily.

Verse. 14. Is any thin^ ^oo hard for God] He can do all things pessi^le and
honorable. He cannot lie, dye, deny himself, for that implies impotency. He
could not do any mighty work in his own Country because of their unbeleef, Mark
6.5, 6. He could not, because he would not. He can do more then he will, as of
stones raise up Churches, Matthew. 3.9. Call for legions, Matthew. 26.53. Create
more worlds in an instant. But whatsoever he wills, that he does in heaven
and earth, and none can sa^, What do thou? Our God can deliver us, Dan.
3.17. Lord if thou will, thou can make me clean, Matthew. 8.2. etc. [I will
return to thee according to the time of life] He returned not personally, that
we read of; but virtually he did, by making good his promise at the appointed
time. That of Doctor Sands, afterward Bishop of Worcester, is wonderful, and
worth relating. He departing the land for fear of Q. Mary, took his leave of
his Host and Hostess who was childless, and had been married eight years. When
the wind served, as he went toward the ship, he gave his Hostess a fine
hand-kerchief, and an old royal of gold in it, thanking her much, and said, Be
of good comfort, Act and Mon. fol. 1874.
ere that one whole year be past, God shall give you a child, a boy. And it
came to pass, that day twelve-moneth, lacking one day, God gave her a fair son.

Verse. 15. I laughed not, for she was afraid] And well she might; for as every
body has its shadow, so has every sin its fear. Her sin she saw was detected,
and her conscience she felt was troubled; hence her fear. [Nay, but thou did
laugh] A lie must be roundly reproved, and the truth asserted. She laughed but
within her self, but as good she might have laughed out aloud; for God
searches the heart. I pray thee, O Lord, was not this my saying, when I was in
my Country? Jon. 4.2. No, Jonas, it was not thy saying, it was only thy
thinking: but that is all one before him, who understands thy thoughts afar
off, Psalm. 139.2.

Verse. 16. To bring them on the way] A special piece of courtesy, and much
spoken of in Scripture, 3 John 6. Acts 20.38. and 21.5. Ram. 15.24. 1 Cor.
16.11. Tit. 3.13.

Verse. 17. Shall I hide from Abraham.] My bosom-friend. He shall be both of
Gods Court, and his Council. His secret is with them that fear him. The Kings
of Israel had some one Courtier, called the Kings Friend by a specialty; to
whom they imparted arcana Imperii, State-secrets. Such an Office had Abraham
about God, who calls him Abraham my Friend. See what our Savior says to all
his, John 15.15. This honor have all his Sai^as.

Verse. 18, 19.] Seeing that Abraham, etc.] Gods first motive here is, from his
own antecedent love to Abraham, as the second from his consequent.

Verse. 19. For I know him.] God has a quick eye to see our good works. He
weighs and rewards every circumstance. Christ could tell, that the people had
come from far to heat him; that they had fasted three days; John 6.
that they went in a Wilderness, where they could not cater for themselves;
that if they should be sent home, so, they would faint by the way. What was it
that he took not knowledge of? I know thy works, and thy labor, in doing them,
Revel. 2.2. [That he will command his children, etc.] A good housh^^der,
whatsoever he gets abroad, he brings home to his family, Prove. 10.21.
as Bees bring all their honey to the hive. The lips of the righteous feed many,
those under his own roof especially. Welfare Popery for that. Old folks will
tell us, that when, in those days, they had holy bread given them at Church,
they would bear a part thereof to those that did abide at home. The way to get
more, it to communicate that we have, according to that, H^benri dabitur. No
man has received ought from God for private use: Neither is any one born for
himself, much less newborn. He that kid his talent, was soon shred of it.

Verse. 20. Because their sin is very grie^o^^.] Or, very heavy, such as the
very ground groans under: The A^^le-tr^e of the ^arth is ready to break under
it. Sin is a burden to God, A^^^. 12. It was so to Christ; he fell to the
ground when he was in his agony. It was so to the Angels, who sunk into Id^ll
under in. It was so to Kore, and his company, the earth could not bear them. It
was so to the Sodomites; (...). James 1.23.
they were so clogged with this excrement of naughtiness (as Saint James
calls it) that God came from Heaven, to give their land a vomit.

Verse. 21. I will go down now, and see, etc.] The Sodomites sined as freely and
securely, as if God knew nothing. Now therefore he is come to know, that is, to
give them to know, that he knew all, as well as if he had been in their bosoms.

Verse. 22. Abraham stood yet before the Lord] And without such to stand and
pray, the world could not stand: they bear up the pillars of it. Oh the price
with God, and profit to men, of praying persons! God will yield something to
such, when most of all enraged, Matthew 24.20. or resolved. Lot was saved for
Abraham's sake, when all the rest perished.

Verse. 23. And Abraham drew neer] A privilege proper to ^uch, as have a true
heart, full assurance of Faith and a good conscience, Heb. 10.22. The hypocrite
shall not come before him, Job 13.16. He must stand without as a vagrant at the
gate, that knows not whether the master is providing for him an alms, or a
cudgel. But the upright comes into the ^arlor; yea dwells in Gods presence,
Psalm. 140.13. In the light of his countenance. [Wilt thou also destroy the
righteous?] Single suites speed not: we must back them with sound Arguments,
and Reason the case with God concerning his judgments, Jere. 12.1.

Verse. 24. Peradventure there be fifty righteous] Charity presumes the best,
hopes the best. The Disciples could not imagine that Judas was so very a
Traitor: each one suspects himself sooner then him: And when our Savior said,
What thou do, do quickly; they thought he had meant of making provision, or
giving something to the poor.

Verse. 25. Shall not the Judge, etc.] He fills his mouth with Arguments. Let us
also: This will increase Faith and Fervency.

Verse. 26. If I find fifty righteous] The Saints are the Salt of the earth,
that keep the rest from rotting and putrefying.

Verse. 27. Which (...) but dust and ashes] G^aphar veephar, (...) and cinis:
None so humble as they that have nearest communion with God. The Angels that
stand before him, cover the^^ (...) with two wings, as with a double scarie,
Isaiah, Chap^^^ 6. verse 2.

Verse 29. Alsted.
And he spoke unto him yet again] Cum in colloquium descendimus cum Deo,
replicemus licet, duplicemus, triplicemus, and quadruplicemus. The bolder we
make, the better welcome.

Verse. 30. I will not do it, etc.] If God so yielded to Abraham interceding for
wicked Sodom, will he not hear us for his laboring Church? Joa^ never pleased
David better, then when he sued to him for Absol^m. What shall we think of God
in like case? How angry is he with those that help forward the anger? Zach.
1.15. How ready to answer those that speak to him for his Church, with good
words, and comfortable words? Zach. 1.13. Yea, should there be no praying
Christians amongst us (as there are many thousands,) yet there is hope, if any
of another Kingdom make intercession for us, as Abraham here did for Sodom, to
the which he was a stranger.

Verse. 32. Peradventure ten shall be found there] Lo, all that slavery and
misery they had sustained, has not yet made ten good men in those five bad
Cities. Till God strike the stroke, and work upon the heart, afflictions, Gods
hammers do but beat upon cold Iron. The wicked are no whit better by them, but
much the worse, as water becomes more cold after a heat, and naughty boys more
stubborn and stupid after a whipping.

Verse. 33. And the Lord went his way] Abraham hucked with the Lord so long,
till he had brought him down from fifty to ten: And mark, that he left begging
are God left bating. Let us find praying hearts, and he will find a pitying
heart.

CHAP. XIX. Verse 1. Lot sat in the gate]
NOt as a Judge (as the Hebrews will have it,) nor as a Merchant; much less as a
Noveller, but as a good householder, looking for his herds, and as a good
housekeeper looking for guests.

Verse. 2. Nay, but we will abide in the street] They would have done so, Luke
24.
but for Lots importunity. So our Savior would have gone further, but that the
two Disciples constrained him to stay. This was no simulation; or if so, yet it
was only exploratory without deceit or hypocrisy. And if Solomon sinned not
in making believe he would do that which was unlawful to be done. 1 King. 3.24.
It can be no sin to do the like in things indifferent.

Verse. 4. Both old and young] Nulla aetas erat culpae immunis, ideo nec exitii,
Ambros. Sin spreds as leaven, and is as catching as the plague; like the
Jerusalem Artichoke, plant it where you will, it over runs the ground, and
chokes the heart.

Verse. 5. That we may know them] O faces hatched with impudency! They shroud not
their sin in a mantle of secrecy, but hang out these sour Grapes to the Sun to
ripen.

Verse. 6. Lot went out] So he exposed himself, to save his strangers, hoping to
save them from that abominable violence. The right of strangers is so holy,
that there was scarce ever any nation so barbarous, that would violate the
same. When Steven Gardener had in his power the Renowned Clark Peter Martyr,
then teaching at Oxford, he would not keep him to punish him: but when he
should go his way, as it is reported, gave him wherewith to bear his charges.
But these Sodomites had not so much humanity left in them. They had put off the
man, and were become dogs and worse, Deuteronomy. 23.18. The price of a dog, that is,
of a buggerer, says Ju^ius and Deodatus, on that Text. And, Am I a dog, says
Abuer; that is, 2 Samuel 3.8.
so given as dogs be to lust?

Verse. 7. Do not so wickedly] They were the first that fell into this foul sin,
and were therefore worthily hanged up in gibbets by God for a terror to others;
and besides, they suffer the vengeance of eternal fire, Jude 7. The Pope
pretends to be Christ's Vicar, and presumes to assume the title of Holiness. But
how far he is from expressing God to the World, appears by his (if not
commiting, yet conniving at) this detestable sin of Sodomy. To speak no more of
that debauched villain Johannes a Casa (that Printed a Poem in commendation of
this wickedness, Act. and Mon. 417. Caesar B^rgis buggerd a grave Bishop by
force. Ignat. concl. 58. Heyl. Geog. page* 2^3.
being at the same time Dean of the Popes Chamber, and Bishop of Beneventum.)
One Petro Alvegi Faruesis committed an unspeakable violence on the person of
Cosmus Chaerius, Bishop of Fanum, and then poisoned him. For which execrable
action, he received no other chastisement of his father, Pope Paul the third,
then Haec vitia, me non commonstratore, didicit; He never learned these tricks
of his father. But whom did the Cardinal of Saint Lucia learn it of? J^cob.
Revius de vis. Pontif.
To whom and his whole family Pope Sixtus quartus permited, by license, the
free use of this fil^hiness, for the three hotter mo^eths of the year, June,
July, and August; with that Apostilla of his, Fiat ut petitur. Lupanar etiam
utriusque veneris Romae (...), Ibid. p. 119.
says Agrippa. In the time of Pope Nicolas the second (when Priests marriage
was termed the heresy of the Nicolaitans) Inva^^^s ^^^^^menter Sodomiticum
scel^^, says mine Author; Sodomy was held no sin (as at this day it is not
among the Turks.) Blounts Veyage. p. 79.
In (...) and those parts, Whoredom and Sodomy, those Spanish ver^u^s, are
common without reproof. The Popes pardons being more rife there, then in any
part of Europe, for these filthinesses, whereout he sucketh no small advantage.
Notwithstanding, the Indians abhor this most loathsome living; The World
encompassed by Sir Fr. Drake. p. 58.
showing themselves in respect of the Spaniards, as the Scythians did in
respect of the Grecians; whom they so far excelled in life and behavior, as
they were short of them in learning and knowledge. God has delivered up these
Pagans (as he did those Pagans, Romans 1.) to reprobate sense, to vile
affections, to dishonor their own bodies between themselves, for that they have
worshipped, and served the creature more then the Creator, Verse. 24, 25, 26.
Hence it is, that Rome is called Sodom in the Revelation. Revel 11.8.


Verse. 8. Behold now, I have two daughters] This was an inconsiderate motion,
such as the best minds easily yield, when once troubled. It was proper to the
Lord Christ to be subject to natural passions and perturbations, yet without
sin: as a Crystal Glass full of clear water remains still pure, howsoever it
be shaken. The Hebrews think, That for this sinful offering to prostitute his
daughters, he was given up by God, to commit incest with his daughters.

Verse. 9. Stand back, etc.] They set up the bristles at Lots admonition, a sure
forerunner of destruction, as in Elies sons.

Verse. 10. But the men] Thus Lot is rescued at a dead lift: that is Gods
opportunity, who knows how, etc. 2 Peter 2. verse. 9.

Verse. 11. With blindness] Subite scotomate, says Junius: With blindness both
of body and mind, says Aben-Ezra: Such as tormented their eyes, as if they
had been pricked with thorns, as the Hebrew word signifies. And yet they
continue groping for the door, as if they were ambitious of destruction, which
now was at next door by. Dous quem destruit dementat. So Pharaoh, when under
that palpable three days darkness, rages against God, and threatens Moses
with death. Though doomsday should be to morrow next, wicked men must and will
serve their lusts. Vale lumen amicum, said Theotimus in St. Ambrose, who chose
rather to lose his sight then his sin.

Verse. 12. Have thou here any, etc.] It is something for safety, to be Lots
Kinsman. So the Kenites in Saul's time, receive life from Jethro's dust, many
ages after his death, 1 Samuel 15.6.
and favor from his hospitality.

Verse. 13. For we will destroy this place] Even the good Angels are Gods
executioners. And the first execution they did in the world, that we read of,
was upon these filthy Sodomites. So will it be (likely) at the last day. And
Saint Peter seems to say as much, 2 Pet. 2.9. The Lord reserves the unjust to
the day of judgment, to be punished, But chiefly them that walk after the
flesh, in the lust of uncleanness. Mark that (chiefly.)

Verse. 14. But he seemed as one that mocked] Sed fuit habitus tanquam
jo^abundus. Graceless hearts jear when they should fear, and are senceless and
secure, as if they were out of the reach of Gods rod, and needed not to fear
his wrath. Ridetur cum suo Jehoua: sed risus impiorum est Sardonius. Par.
Lot here is counted but a Lob, of his own sons in law. Wonder not, if we meet
with the same measure.

Verse. 15. Left thou be consumed] So Revel. 18.4. Come out of her, that ye
receive not of her plagues. Musculirui^is immin^ntibus pramigrant, and aranei
cum telis primicadunt, says Pliny. Plin. lib 8. cap 28. (...). Septuag.
Swine live home, before a storm.

Verse. 16. And while he lingred] Or distracted himself with much business,
which David did not, Psalm. 119 60. [The Lord being merciful unto him] What is
he then to us, in delivering us from the ^^^th to come? 1 These. 1.10, Acts 2.40
Why save we not our selves from this unto ward generation? Why see we not his
mercy to us in our losses and crosses? His hand laying hold on us, when he
takes away that, that may hinder us from Heaven?

Verse. 17. Look not behind thee] As loath to depart. Non minus difficulter a
deliciis Sudemorum abstrabimur, quam canis ab uncto cori^.

Verse. 18. O^ not so my Lord] But who shall, prescribe to the Almighty? Or
limit the holy One of Israel? Are we wiser then he* Have we a trick bey^nd him?
He lets us sometimes have our way but to our woe at last.

Verse. 19. Behold now thy servant, etc.] We can receive and commend Gods
favors, but be backward enough to obey him.

Verse. 20. Is it not a little one?] Let no man use this plea for his sin.
(...). Arist. Rhet. lib. 1.
Even the Philosopher tells us, That the smallest errors prove many times most
dangerous. It is as much treason to coin pence, as bigger pieces.

Verse. 21. I will not overthrow this City] Zoar, of all the five Cities, was
preserved by Lots prayers, says Jerome. See Deuteronomy. 29.23. Isai. 15.

Verse. 22. For I cannot do any thing] Not that the execution of the divine
decree, depended simply upon Lots remove to Zoar; but upon another decree, for
Lots remove ere Sodom were destroyed.

Verse. 23. The Sun was risen upon Sodom] But ere night, there was a dismal
change. Nescis quid serus vesper vehat.

Verse. 24. Then the Lord rained, etc.] Lot was no sooner taken out of Sodom,
but Sodom was soon taken out of the world. The wicked are reprieved for the
godlies sake; who, but for them, would suddenly be ruined. Isai. 30.33.
[Rained upon Sodom, etc.] Rained, not sprinkled; and not fire only, but
brimstone and fire for increase of torment, and for an Hell above ground, and
aforehand, Jude 7. Hot fire they had for their burning lusts; and stinking
brimstone for their stinking brutishness. Charles the second, King of Navarre,
was much given to sensual pleasures, which so wasted his spirits, that in his
old age, he fell into a kind of Lethargy. To comfort his benumbed joints he
was bound and sewed up naked in a sheet, Hryl. Geog. page 42.
steeped in boiling Aqua vitae: The Surgeon having made an end of sewing him,
and wanting a knife to cut off the thread, took a wax candle that stood lighted
by him. But the flame, running down by the thread, caught hold on the sheet;
which, according to the nature of the Aqua vita, burned with that vehemence,
that the miserable King ended his days in the fire.

Verse. 25. Lib. 5. de bell^ Jud. Omne carcus vita in profundam mergitur, squid
vivum art alique immerseri^ super enibis.
And he overthrew, etc.] Some footsteps of this overthrow, are to be read of in
Solinus and Tacitus. Josephus tells us of the mock-apples of Sodom, and says,
That an Ox, having all his Legs bound, will not sink into the lake of Sodom,
the water is so thick.

Verse. 26. But his wise looked back] Whether out of curiosity, or foolish pity,
or as loath to leave so sweet a Country, she turned her about, and she was
turned. Some think she was a Sodomite, and some tell us her name was Tytea. Her
sin, Tyteam dictam volunt uxorem Loti, etc. He^delf.
seem it never so light, was a compound of many sins. And her punishment was
part of the plague of Sodom, which was Brimstone and Salt, so that it became a
Sea of Salt, Deuter. 29.23. And all this to Season us, says Augustine; to
Caution us, says our Savior, that we look not back. The Fable of Eurydice,
lost by her husbands looking back upon her, was devised by the devil to elude
this holy History.

Verse. 27. And Abraham gat up] So sollicitous he was for Sodom, that (as Luther
thinks) he could not sleep all night. Lot was delivered by his prayers, though
Abraham knew it not.

Verse. 28. And he looked] Abraham might look upon the smoke of Sodom, Lot might
not; because it would work more on Lots heart, then on Abraham's, who had more
grace. [The smoke of the countrey] Nothing else was now to be seen of that fair
and fruitful Plain. Sic transit gloria mundi. When we most greedily grasp
earthly things, we embrace nothing but smoke, which wrings tears from our eyes,
and soon vanishes into nothing.

Verse. 29. God remembered Abraham, etc.] And shall he forget us, who have Christ
to intercede for us?

Verse. 30. Lot went up out of Zoar, etc.] So he should have done at first; and
so he had obeyed God, saved his wife, and prevented that sin of incest with his
daughters.

Verse. 31. And the first born, etc.] Its dangerous to live in a wicked place:
For though thy self may escape infection, thy children may be tainted, as
Lots were.

Verse, 32. Come let us make our father drink.] So the great Whore comes forth
with a Cup. Revel. 17.
She knew too well, that Venus est in venis, ignis in igne furit. It is like
they had wine from Zoar: they sinned against conscience; and therefore
intoxicated their father, who now forgets that he is a father, and does that in
a drunken pang, that Heaven and Earth were afterward ashamed of.

Verse. 33. Nor when she arose] There is a tittle extraordinary in the Hebrew,
to note that this is a thing incredible, Appungunt desuper quasi incredibile;
quaest. in Genes.
Coire quempiam nescientem. Cajetan and Pererius conclude it possible, and give
Reasons for it. Calvin says best, That it was not so much his wine, as a
spirit of slumber sent upon him from God, for a scourge of his intemperance.
Luther adds, No nos abeamus in securitatem, That we may watch against security.

Verse. 35. (...). Athenaus.
And they made, etc.] Decepit ebrietas Lotum, quem Sodoma non decepit, says
Origin. Well might Athenaeus call drunkenness the metropolis of mischief.

Verse. 37. Called his name Moab] That is, the begotten of my father: So
Benammi, that is, begotten of one of my near kindred, viz. her father. Isai. 3.9.
Thus they declared their sin as Sodom, they hid it not, but gloried in their
shame. It is as hard to come from Sodom, and not taste of the sap of such a
soil, as to walk barefaced in the hot Sun, and not be tanned.

CHAP. XX. Verse. 1. And Abraham journeyed from thence, etc.]
EIther as grieved at the sight of Sodom; or annoyed by the ill air thereof;
Inde tam gravis halitus manat, ut cum nulla animalia perferant, cujus solo
^lfactu intereant. Hom. Odyss.
or as loathing Lots incest; or driven out by a famine; or desireous of doing
good to many. Whatever it was that occasioned his remove, we find him ever and
anon journeying from one place, and sojourning in another. Gods people are a
brood of travelers. This was Abram the Hebrew, of Heber, which signifies,
Pilgrim or stranger. They look toward Heaven in their home, as Ulysses is said
to do toward Ithaca, as a bird looks to her nest on the highest Rocks.

Verse. 2. She is my sister] This is the second time he thus sinned, both
against Piety by distrust, and Charity, in exposing his wife to other men's
pleasure, and his neighbor thereby to Gods displeasure. 2 Chronicles. 19.2. and
20.37.
So Jehosaphat was twice taken tardy in Ahabs amity. Jonah twice reproved for
Rebellion, and John for Angel worship. Judge. 15.20. and 16.1.
Sampson, twenty years after he had loved the Philistim-woman, goes down to
Gaza, and went in to Dalilah. Lot committed incest two nights together. Indeed
the orifice of his lust was not yet stopped by repentance. But Jonas had surely
repented of his former frowardness; and so had Sampson, Jehosaphat, Non dubium,
quin Abram poenitudire ductus, etc. Pareus in Genesis 12.16.
and Abraham too, of his former dissimulation; which made the Lord to move
Pharaoh to deal kindly with him, so that he had sheep and oxen, etc. Genesis
12.16. But what shall we say to that example of the Apostles, Luke 22.24.
Amongst whom there was a strife who should be accounted the greatest? And this
was not the first, but the third time they had thus offended by ambition; and
ever, after our Savior had discoursed unto them of his Cross. But this last
time, most absurdly, and unseasonably, after that he had foretold his Passion
to follow within two days; had taught them that he was anointed by the woman
against the day of his burial; had administered to them the Sacrament, that Seal
of Mutual Love; had washed their Feet, to teach them Humility and Charity, etc.
Oh the incredible perverseness of corrupt Nature! How strongly do the best
still smell of the old cask, taste of the old stock, though ingrafted into
Christ, and though poured from vessel to vessel? And this have ye done again,
says the Lord, Mal. 2.13. John 5.14.
A great aggravation; as numbers added to numbers, are first ten times more,
and then a hundred, and then a thousand. Psalm. 78.40.
How often did they provoke him in the wilderness, and grieve him in the desert?
A regenerate man may fall into the same sin again that he has truly repented
of: Nor can we define how often, and into how heinous; but surely, not often into
the same, that is heinous and scandalous. That Is a graceless person that has
eyes full of adultery, and that cannot cease to sin, 2 Peter 2.19. An enemy to
God, that goes on in his trespasses, Psalm. 68.21. It is expressly noted of
Judah, Genesis 38.26. that he knew Tamar again no more. [And Abimelech King of
Gerar] A fit name for a King; and a common name to the Kings of this Country:
It signifies Father-King. I was a father to the poor, says Job. Job 29.16.
And Kings shall be nursing fathers to the Church, says Isaiah. Isai. 49.23.
(...). Dio. Ibi^. in vita. Bucholc. in Indice Chronol. Orbis amor and deliciae.
Corculum appel. latut est. Tusc. quast. l. 1. Parei Medul. Hist. pro^an. p. 482.
Augustus was styled ' Pater Patriae. And Trajan gloried most in his title
Optimus. He desired more to be loved, then honored, and counted it a greater
dignity, Prodesse quam praeesse. He tare his own Garment to bind up therewith
the wounds of his Soldiers; and professed, That he would so carry himself to
private persons, now that he was Emperor, as he wished, when he was a private
man, that the Emperors should carry themselves toward him. Titus, for his sweet
nature and carriage, was called the Worlds darling. Scipio the Cities
Sweetheart. Julian the Apostate, as he came not short of the greatest
Philosophers for learning; so neither of Titus for Lenity, of Antoninus for
Clemency, of M. Aurelius for Moderation, setting aside his Satanical hatred of
Christian Religion. Queen Elisabeth ever accounted Devotion and Mercy, Camd.
Elis. 494.
the brightest Stars in the Sphere of Majesty. She always thought it more fit
to offend a man, then to hate him, says Master Camden. In the year 1579. a
young man discharged a piece out of a Boat, and shot one of the Barge-men in
the Queens Barge (where she was then) through both his arms; who was soon
apprehended, and led to the Gallows for a terror to him. But whereas he
religiously affirmed, That he did it unwittingly, and thought no hurt, he was
discharged: Idem ibid. fol. 205.
The Queen many times, saying, That she could believe nothing of her people,
that Parents would not believe of their children. This made her so beloved at
home, and admired abroad. Queen Elisabeth was the most glorious and happy woman
that ever ware a Crown, said that thrice Noble princess Anna Atestina, Thuan.
hist. lib. 129. (...) Dio.
the Mother of the Dukes of Guise and Nemours, as Thuanus has Recorded it. Her
Subjects were ready to say to Her, as the Senate said to Severus, All is well
with us, so long as thou rulest well over us.

Verse. 3. And God came to Abimelech in a dream] Dreams are either natural, or
supernatural. Natural dreams are not much to be regarded, Eccles. 5.7. Diviners
and Dreamers we are forbid to hearken to, Jere. 27.9. Cicero confutes them that
do, in his Books de Divinatione. Somnia ne cures, nam men's bu^a^a quod optat,
etc.
That use there is of them, is in Physic, to discern our temperatures in
Divinity, our beloved sins. Supernatural dreams are sent by God, and his
Angels; and that either to comfort us, as Matthew. 2.19. or to chasten us, Job
7.13, 14. And these are, first, usually repeated, till they are regarded, as
Pharaohs, and young Samuels dreams: Secondly, they do much affect us, and leave
a certain persuasion, an inward sense of Gods presence in the soul; as Daniels,
Joseph's, and Pareus his dreams. In the Calends of April (says he, in his
domestical Diary or Day-Book,) 1618. I had a terrible dream at four of the
clock in the morning. Vidi Heidelbergam totam occulto incendio undiquaque
fumigantem, etc. Philip. Par. in vita Davidis Parei, operib. ejus praefina.
For me thought, I saw all Heidelberg on a thick smoke, but the Prince his
Palace all on a light fire. O Deus clementissime averte sinistrum omen, and
serva Sareptam tuam a vastatione hostium intus and foris. Thus that good man
dreamed, and thus he prayed: but the decree was passed, and shortly after
executed, according to his dream. There are also dreams diabolical. Eusebius
tells us, that Simon Magus had his dream-haunting Devils, (...), his familiars
by whom he deluded men in their dreams, and drew them into the admiration of
himself. These devilish dreams are either mere illusions, as that of Eliphaz is
thought to be no better, Job 4.12, 16, 17. Marbury of Repent.
Or else they tend to sin, as nocturnall pollutions, and other evil dreams;
whereby the devil sometimes fasteneth that sin upon the Saints when asleep,
that he cannot prevail with them to commit whiles awake. As for Pilats wives
dream, some Divines think it was from the devil, seeking thereby to hinder the
work of our Redemption. [For she is a man's wife] Adultery, even in Kings, is
punishable by death. Emperors and Popes have been cut off by the just hand of
God, in, and for this filthy sin. Society and the purity of posterity could not
otherwise continue amongst men, if this crime were not capital. Moritur Paulu^
4. nimto Veneris usu etc. Valentinian. Imp. Heyl. Geog.
At Geneva they punish fornication with nine days fasting; Adultery with
death. God appointed that such should be stoned. He stoneth them, howsoever,
with the stone in the heart, Hos. 4.11. Prove. 7.22. Hetfer the Anabaptist was
put to death for this sin at Constance: He being a learned man, and a Preacher,
insinuated himself into the familiarity of many women of good rank and repute,
and defiled them; when he came to execution, he confessed that he would many
times have repented of that foul sin, but could not; Joh. Manlii lec. com. p.
322.
so fast was he held in the devils bonds: and that now he was willing to dye,
and accept of the chastisement of his iniquity. Howbeit, Ibid. 487.
it is an opinion held and maintained by the Anabaptists, that Adultery is not
to be punished by men, because the Scripture says, Whoremongers and adulterers
God will judge. Others would prove the same from those words of our Savior (
Joh. 8.11.) to the woman taken in adultery, Neither do I condemn thee. But
they may as well say, That inheritances are not to be divided betwixt brethren,
because Christ would not divide them, when required thereto, Luke 12.14.

Verse. 4. But Abimelech had not come near her] Being hindered by sickness, verse.
17. Well might St. Ambrose call siekness, Morbos virtutum officinas vocat
Ambros. Nuper me amici* cujusdam languor admonuit opimos esse not dum in^irmi
sum^^. Plin. Epist. 26. l. 7. Manl. loc. com. p. 667.
The shop of virtues. When men are fastened to their beds, and their bones made
to rattle in their skin, lust will be laid asleep, and little leisure left for
luxury. This made King Alured pray God to send him always some sickness,
whereby his body might be tamed, and he the better disposed and affectioned to
Godward. If it be painful to the vine to bleed, it is worse to wither. Better
be pruned to grow, then cut up to burn. Otho tertius, Imperator, dictus
miraculum mundi, amoribus periit. How much happier he that sang, Periissem nisi
Periissem? [Lord will thou slay also a righteous Nation?] For he knew, that
whole Nations had smarted for the sins of their Rulers; this sin of Adultery
especially, as we read of Shechem, Troy, etc. How wore the Greeks plagued for
the rape of Chrysis? and the Lacedemonian Common wealth utterly overturned by
Epaminendas in the battle of Leuctra, for a rape committed upon the two
daughters of Scedasus by a couple of Spartan Gentlemen, traveling to Delphos:
This might make Abimelech afraid, lest for his fault, wrath should fall upon
his people also.

Verse. 5. Said he not unto me, She is my sister, etc.] Here Abraham and Sarah,
Romans 4. 1 Pet. 3.
though both famous, he for his faith, and she for not being afraid with any
amazement, 1 Pet. 3.6. yet here they show some trepidation. Sense (says One)
fights sore against faith, when it is upon its own dunghill, I mean in a
sensible danger. Natures retraction of it self from a visible fear, M. Vines
his Fast-Sermon. Elias fulminator ad Jezabalis minas trepidat.
may cause the pulse of a Christian that beats truly and strongly in the main
point, (the state of the soul) to intermit and faulter at such a time. [In the
integrity of my heart] Great is the boldness of a clear conscience, be it but
in some one particular, as here in Abimelech; a man that was magis extra vitia
quam cum virtutibus (as Tacitus says of Galba) rather not evil then good; one
whose nature was not changed, Tac. l. 1. c. 12.
but chained up only. Civil men are but Wolves chained up, tame Devils, Swine
in a fair meadow; and yet these are the worlds honest men, and as high a price
set upon them, as was once upon a cab of Doves-dung in the famine of Samaria.
But these Abimelechs, these Catoes, these civil Justiciaries, they want
sincerity in the first Table, and integrity in the Second; for they stand not
upon the inward corruptions, nor lesser breaches of the Law. Abimelech (for all
his confidence here) was to blame for his wandering rash lust. And Cato, that
mirror of morality, was a griping Usurer, prostituted his wife, and slew
himself. Hist. lib. 2
And yet Paterculus will tell you, that he was, Homo virtuti simillimus, and
per omnia virtute Diis quam hominibus propior, etc.

Verse 6. Yea I know that thou did this, etc.] God takes his excuse, and yet
chastises him; to teach us, says Calvin, Non prorsus vacare culpa qui humane
modo puri sunt. He can find flawes in that, for which we may look for thanks.
This makes Nehemiah. crave pardon of his zealous reformations; and David cry^s
out, Enter not into judgment, etc. Sordet in conspect^ judicis, quod fulget in
conspectu operantis, says Gregory. Ye are they that justify your selves
before men (says Christ to the Pharisees) but God knows your hearts: for
that which is highly esteemed amongst men is abomination in the sight of God,
Luke 16.15. A thing which I see in the night may shine, and that shining
proceed from nothing but rottenness. But be not deceived (or if ye be, yet) God
is not mocked. Sacco soluto apparuit argentum. Ambro^.
When he comes to turn the bottom of the bag upwards (as the Steward did
Benjamins) all our secret thefts will out, all our collusions come to light.
His Law is a Law of fire, Deuteronomy. 33.2. His tribunal of fire, Ezekiel. 1.27. His
pleading with sinners, in flames of fire, Esa. 60.15, 16. The trial of our
works shall be by fire; and God before whom is a consuming fire, Heb. 12.29.
Happy are they that are here purged by that Spirit of judgment and burning,
Esa. 4.4. These shall stand in judgment, yea dwell with everlasting burnings,
Esa. 33.14. [For I also with held thee] Either by sickness, as aforesaid, or by
a spirit of restraint, a gift that God gives to men, yea to the rebellious
also, that the Lord God might dwell amongst them, Psalm. 68.18. in his Religion
and worshippers; which else the wicked would never suffer. Thus God chained up
Laban, and made Saul to melt over David, etc. Now many take this poor counter,
(that is, I am not as some others are, so bad as the worst) and set it down for
a thousand pound. Our Savior indeed is said to have looked upon the young
Pharisee, and to have loved him, Mark. 10.21.
because he saw him to be a tame man, free from foul crimes, and fit to live
in a Commonwealth: But no otherwise then as we love pictures, which are pretty
things to look on, and that is all they are good for. A better nature, if rested
in, is but a beautiful abomination, a smooth way to hell. And yet, say what we
can, this kind of men grow crooked and aged with good opinions of themselves,
and can seldom or never be set straight again. They will trust in Moses, Job.
5.45. and when they have sick fits and qualms of conscience, lick themselves
whole by their repentance, and so rest in it: Which made Austin say, that
Repentance damneth more then sin. They seek not to be saved by the
righteousness of faith, neither see they any necessity of growing from faith to
faith. No, they are set, they are as good as ever they mean to be; they that
outstrip them are too forward, they that fall short of them, are deeply
censured.

Verse. 7. Now therefore restore] Let knowledge reform what ignorance offended
in. The times of ignorance God winked at, but now commands all men every
where to repent, Act. 17.30. As a Master, when he sets up his servant a double
light, expects more work and better. We have a privilege not only above the
blind Ethnicks, but above the Church of the Old Testament. The sea about the
Altar was brazen, 1 King. 7.23. And what eyes could pierce thorough it? Now our
sea about the Throne is glassie, Romans 4.6. like to Crystal, clearly conveying
the light and sight of God to our eyes. God has destroyed the face of the
covering cast over all people, Esa. 25.7. And we all with open face beholding,
as in a glass, the glory of the Lord, must see to it, that we be changed into
the same image from glory to glory, 2 Cor. 3.18. If those good souls passed
from strength to strength, Psalm. 84.7.
traveling many a weary step, to see the face of God in Sion, in the obscure
glass of the Ceremonies; vae torpori nostro, woe to us, if now, that such a
light is sprung up, we walk not as children of that light! To know heavenly
things, is to ascend into heaven, Prove. 30.3, 4. And to know our masters will
is a great talent; of all other, there is a much in that, Luke 12.48. But then,
not to do his will so known, is to be beaten with many stripes. None so deep in
hell, as your knowing men, because they imprisoned the truth (which is as a
Prophet from God) in unrighteousness, Rom 1.18. they kept it in their heads, as
rain in the middle region, Sapientes sapien ter descendunt in infernum. Bern.
not suffering it to warm their hearts, or work upon their affections;
therefore came wrath upon them to the utmost. None are oftener drowned then they
that are most skillful in swimming. So none sooner miscarry then men of
greatest parts. [For he is a Prophet, and he shall pray for thee] The proper
work of a Prophet, Jer. 27.18. If they be Prophets, let them entreat the Lord;
they shall be heard, when others shall not, as the fathers blessing is most
effectual; as the child could not be raised till Elisha came himself, nor the
sick be healed, till the Elders of the Church be called for, Jam. 5.14. The
Apostles divided their time betwixt praying and preaching, Act. 6.4. So did the
Priests of the Old Testament, Deuteronomy. 33.10. They shall teach Jacob thy
judgments, they shall put incense before thee. As with every sacrifice there
was incense, so should every Ministerial duty be performed with prayer. St.
Paul begins his Epistles with prayer, and proceeds and ends in like manner.
What is it that he would have every of his Epistles stamped with by his own
hand, but prayer for all his people? 2 Thessalonians. 3.17, 18. [Thou shall surely dye]
So dear to God are his Saints, that he grievously punishes, even Kings for
their sakes; as Jehoram in his bowels with an incurable disease, 2 Chronicles. 21.18
Non desunt qui ad phthiriasin referunt, quo av^s quoque ipsius Herod. mag.
periit. Beza Annot. in Act. 12. Oro^ius. He protested, siquam sui corporis
partem Lutherianismo sciret insectam revulsurum illice, ne longius serperet.
Sleid. Comment. l. 9. Act and Mon. 1914.
the two Herod's by the lousie malady. Maximinus the Emperor, a cruel
persecutor, cast upon his bed of sickness by God, was glad to crave the prayers
of the Church, as Eusebius relates it. Valens being to subscribe an Order for
the banishment of Basil, was smitten with a sudden trembling of his hand, that
he could not: Afterward he was burned to death by the Goths, whom he had
corrupted, by sending them Arrian teachers. The putting out of that French
Kings eyes, which promised before with his eyes to see Anne du Bourg (one of
Gods true servants) burned, who sees not to be the stroke of Gods own hand?
Then, his son Francis not regarding his fathers stripe, would needs yet proceed
in the burning the same man. And did not the same God, give him such a blow on
the ear, as cost him his life? As for Charles the ninth, author of the French
massacre, though he were wittily warned by Beza to beware (upon occasion, of
that new Star appearing in Cassiopeia, Novem 1572. which he applied to that
Star at Christ's birth, and to the infanticide then) with, Tu vero, Camdens
Elis. sol. 165.
Herodes sanguinolente, time; yet because he repented not, God gave him blood
to drink, as he was worthy; for the fifth month after the vanishing of this
Star* Constans fama est illum, Act. and Mon. fol. 1949.
dum e variis corporis partibus sanguis emanaret, in lecto saepe volutatum,
inter terribilium blasphemiarum diras tantam sanguinis vim projecisse ut,
paucas post horas, mortuus fuerit. This Charles the ninth, in the massacre of
Paris, beholding the bloody bodies of the butchered Protestants, Spec. bell. sac
p. 248.
and feeding his eye upon that woeful spectacle, is said to have breathed out
this bloody speech, Quam bonus est odor hostis mortui! Another great Queen,
seeing the ground covered with the naked carcasses of her Protestant Subjects
said, M. Newcom^n Fast Sermon. 27. Like Hannibals O formosum spectaculum. De
Alexandra Josephus. Act and Mon. fol. 1 901.
that it was the bravest piece of Tapestry that ever she beheld; but it was not
long that she beheld it. Our Queen Mary, though non natura sed Ponti^iciorum
art ferox (Ipsa solum nomen regium ferebat, caterum ^mnem reg^i potestatem
Pharisaei possidebant) dyed of a Tympany, or as some (by her much sighing
before her death) supposed, she dyed of thought and sorrow, either for the loss
of Callice, or for the departure of King Phillip. This King going from the
Low Countries into Spain by Sea, with resolution never to remove thence, fell
into a storm, in which almost all the Fleet was wracked, his household stuff of
very great value lost, and himself hardly escaped. Hist. of Coun. of Trent. 417.
He said he was delivered by the singular providence of God, to root out
Lutheranisme, which he presently began to do; protesting that he had rather
have no Subjects, then Lutheran Subjects. Whether it was this Phillip or his
successor* I cannot certainly tell. But Carolus Sexiba^^^ tells a lamentable
story of one of those two Phillips: Hear him else, Vlcerum magnitudinem,
multitudinem, acorbitatem, fatorem, lecto tanquam durae cruc^, ^^^o integra,
affixionem, ut in nullam prope commoveri partem possit, acres continuosque
ann^r um sex podagrae dolores, febrim (...) cum dup^ici per an^os (...) intima,
Carot. S^rib^n. Instit. princip, c. 20.
adeoque and ossi^^^ medullas depascentem gravissimam 22. dierum dysenteriam,
qu^ n^c moram dar^t, nec detersion^m admitteret, perpetua stoma^hifastidia,
nullo po^u sitim medicandam, capitis and oculorum insanos dolores, ingentom
puris ex ulcaribus redundanti^^* quae binas indie^ scutellat divite padere
impleret: Inter her, malignissimi oder is gravitat (...), quae om^^em illi
sou^^um ademerat; hac, inquam* Rex potentissimus longo tempore perpessus est.
So true is that of an Ancient. Potentes pot^uter torquebuntur. Be wise now
therefore* Psalm. 2.10.
O ye Kings: Kiss the son, lest he be angry. He can soon break men with his
iron Mace, and dash them in pieces as a potters vessel. Ingentla, heresicia,
ingentia slagitia, ingentia supplicia, as the Centurists have it. Christ shall
reign, when Kings and Kesars shall lie in the dust. Rev. 19.16. expounded.
His name is King of Kings, and Lord of Lords; and this name is written upon
his Vesture (that all creatures may see his power) and upon his Thigh, to show
the eternity of his Monarchy, in his children and posterity. This everlasting
Father shall have an endless government, Esa. 6.6,7. He shall see his seed (the
fruit of his thigh;) he shall prolong his daye^, and the pleasure of the Lord
shall prosper in his hands, Esa. 53.10. I shut up this Discourse with the story
of Ladislaus King of Bohemiae and Hungary, who most unjustly had caused
Ladislaut, son to Hunniade^, to be beheaded; and together with many other
Popish Princes, had conspired to root out the true Christians in Bobemia; which
should have been put in execution at the time of hi^ ma^riage: immediately
before, in the midst of his great preparation^ he sell sick, Bu^^^^^ru^
and within thirty six hours dyed of a postilent sore in his gro^^. Paul. (...).
Like as Attila^ that King of Hunnes, and scourge of Christendom, had dyed
before, being suffocated in his own blood, at such time as he celebrated his
wedding, having distempered his body with excess in wine and venery, adeo ut
proverbio deeo dictam fit, eum per eandem partem animam profudisse, Jacob.
Revius.
per quam accepera^. He went out of the world the same way that he came into
it, and sent his soul, as a harbinger to the devil, to provide room for his
body

Verse. 8. Therefore Abimelech rose early, etc.] He made hast^, and delayed not
to keep Gods Commandments, Psalm. 119.60. This is check to out dullness, whom so
many exhortations and menaces of Gods month move not to amend. Some are semper
victur, as Seneca says, they defer so long till the Draw bridge be taken up,
till the gale of Grace be blown over, till the Bridegroom go by, and so are
shut out with the foolish Virgins, for their lingering and futhring. Nol^te vero
tempus in ^^gis ter^^e, vel Crus, ut ille, (...). Vox crat Archiae illius
Thcban^rum praefecti.
Seria, rejectis in hilari compotatione, literis indiciis hodie (...),
proteliere. At the next pu^^e of breath thou may blow away thy life; or, by
not discerning thy time, thou may lose thy soul, as Saul did his Kingdom.
Opportunities are headlong. [And culled all his servants] Nature taught
Infidels to take ^^re of their own famillies. Socrates is said to have called
Philosophy down from heaven to earth; that is, W^l^^^ in Tiliani (...).
Philosoph.
to have directed men to be good at home, and setting aside other studies,
chiefly to mind, Aedibus in propriis quae prava aut recta gerantur. Cato said
that he could pardon all men's faults, (...) Dio in vita. Suetou in Aug. c. 65.
save only the faults of his own family. And Augustus, when he went about to
restrain garish attire, and looseness of life in others, was scared and
upbraided at Rome, with the excesses and enormities of his own household. He had
three untoward children whom he was won^ to term tres vomicas, tri^
carcinomara. So many mattery impostumes, ulcerous sores. His wife Livia was
thought to be too familiar with her friend and Physician, Endemus; Pliny calls
him her Paramour. Tacitus says, he was specie artis, frequens secretis. All
this might be without his fault, but not without his reproach. The malicious
Pharisees could object it to our Savior; Thy Disciples wash not, thy Disciples
fast not, etc. As if he were much to blame for suffering such things. And
surely, he is not a complete Christian, walks not in a perfect way, Psalm. 101.2.
that is not good at home, that is not relatively good. The fifth Commandment
is called by Philo, (...), a mixed Commandment, and made a part of the first
Table. It is therefore set betwixt both Tables of the Law, says Another,
because all we get from God or men, we bring it home to our houses (as
Abimelech here relates his divine dream to his servants) the place of
well-employing it. [And the men were sore afraid]. This fear freed them; for
according to men's fear, Bradford of Repent.
so is Gods displeasure, Psalm. 90. Cavebis si pavebis, Romans 11.21. But they
that tremble not in hearing, shall be crushed to pieces in feeling, said that
Martyr. This was a sign that the Israelites feared God, when they believed God,
and his servant Moses, Exodus 4.31. The best way of prevention is to tremble at
Gods judgments, whiles they hang in the threatenings. But frequentissimum
initium calamitatis, securitas, says Paterculus. Sola igitur securit as est,
nunquam esse securum, sed semper pavidum and trementem, R. Grostbead. Coloss.
3.23.
says another. Should servants fear their masters, because they have power
over the flesh, and not we fear God, etc?

Verse. 9. 'What have thou done unto us, etc.] Some warmth must be in a reproof,
but it must not be scalding hot. Words of reviling and disgrace, Aegros, qu^s
potus fortis non curavit, ad salutempristi^am aquatep^us rev^eavit. Greg.
they scald as it were; but words that tend to stir up the conscience to a due
consideration of the fault (as here) they be duly warm, and tend to make the
physic work more kindly. How could Abraham resist this sweet and sovereign
reprehension? How could he but be much ashamed, that he should give occasion to
it? No oratory is so powerful with good natures as that of mildness. Remember
to reprove with modesty and moderation.

Verse. 11. Surely the fear of God, etc.] The only best curb to restrain from
evil, and spur to incite to good. All honesty flows from this holy fear. It is
a problem in Aristotle, why men are credited more then other creatures? The
answer is, On (...) Man only reverenceth God, therefore you may trust him,
therefore you may commit your self to him. Sed quia aliter facere non potuit.
Velleius.
He that truly fears God is like unto Cato, of whom it is said, He never did
well that he might appear to do so, but because he could do no otherwise. You
need not fear me, said Joseph to his brethren, for I fear God, and so dare do
you no hurt. Ought ye not to have feared God, said Nehemiah to those usurious
Jews? Neh. 5.9.


Verse. 12. And yet indeed] See the Notes on Chapt. 11.29.

Verse. 13. When God caused me to wander] Cum facerent Dii, when they, even God,
caused me. The mystery of the Trinity, though Calvin interpret it of the
Angels; Mysterium Triados. Jun.
as Cartwright likewise does that of Solomon, which Junius conceives to be
spoken of the blessed Trinity, There be higher then they, Eccles. 5.8. sc.
That Three in One, and One in Three.

Verse. 14. And Abimelech took oxen] Great men should be bountiful to good men.
Aeneas Sylvius was wont to say of learning (how much more may it be said of
grace?) Popular men should esteem it as silver, Noblemen as gold, Princes prize
it as pearls. Arcadius the Emperor gave his Schoolmaster Arsenes, (a holy man)
the revenues of all Egypt, desiring him to pray for him. Pecuni^ nonegere, quod
mundo jampridem mortuus esset. Par^i hist prosau. medul. page 495. Romans 12.17.
Arsenes promised him his prayers, but refused his rich offer; saying, that he
wanted no money, as being long since dead to the world.

Verse. 16. I have given thy brother] Not thee, to avoid suspicion. Provide, we
must, things honest in the sight of all men: and not only keep a good
conscience, but a good name as much as may be; learning this of the unjust
Steward, by lawful (though he did it by unlawful) means. For our Savior noted
this defect, when he said, The children of this world, etc. Luke 16.8. It was
good counsel that Livia gave her husband Augustus, (...). Dio in vita.
It behooves thee not only, not to do wrong, but not to seem to do so, etc. We
must shun, and be shy of the very show and shadow of sin, if either we tender
our credit abroad, or comfort at home. The Church took it ill, that her veil
was pulled off, and that she was judged to be a dishonest woman, Cant. 5.7. As
in the first Chapter, She prays her Spouse to tell her where she may come to
him: for why should she be as one that turns aside, or as one that was veiled
or covered, a sign of lightness and dishonesty, Genesis 38.14, 15. She was
willing to eschew all appearance of evil. Some sense the Text thus: I have
given thy husband money to buy thee a veil, to cover thy face that all may know
thee to be a married woman

Verse. 17. So Abraham prayed, and God healed Abimelech] Here was that of Saint
James verefied. Jam. 5.15.
The prayer of faith shall save the sick; and if he have committed sins, they
shall be forgotten him. So he is healed on both sides. Melch. Adam in vita
Luther.
The story of Luther is well known, how by his prayers he recovered Theodorus
Vitus of a Consumption, after the Physicians had given him up for dead. The
Saints are Gods favorites, they may have any thing of him. Sejanus found
Tiberius so facile, that he needed only to ask, Life of Sejanus by P. M p. 5.
and give thanks. He never denied him any thing, and oft-times prevented his
request. What shall we think of Gods good will to his faithful servants and
suppliants?

Verse. 18. For the Lord had fast closed up all, etc.] In quibus peccamus, in
iisdem plectimur. God often takes notice of the offending member. Dives was
tormented most in his tongue, Quia lingua plus peccaverat, Ev^g. lib. 1.
says Cyprian. Nestorii lingua vermibus exesa. Archbishop Arundel was so
smitten in his tongue, that he could neither swallow nor speak, for diverse days
before his death. Atque id multi tum fieri putabant, Tho. Gascon. in Diction.
Theolog. Acts and Mon. 1622. Zonaras.
quod verbum Dei alligasset, ne suo tempore praedicaretur, says the Historian.
The like is reported of Steven Gardener, Fertur Heraclius Imp. inguine sursum
converso faciem suam perminxisse, nisi urina (tabella imo ventri apposita)
averteretur. Idei accidisse creditum, ob incestum cum fratris filia coitum.

CHAP. XXI. Verse 1. And the Lord visited Sarah]
GOd pays not his people with words only, Plutarch.
as Sertorius did his Soldiers. He fools them not off with fair promises, as
Ptolomee (surnamed therefore (...)) did his favorites. Pollicitis dives
quilibet esse potest.
But is real, yea, royal in his promises and perfomances. Of many promisers it
may be said, as Tertullian of the Peacock, All in changeable colors; as often
changed as moved. Italians all; as Aeneas Sylvius said of Italy, Novitate
quadam, nihil habet stabile. Not so their Ancestors, the Romans. They had a
great care always to perform their word. Insomuch, that the first Temple built
in Rome, was dedicated to the godess Fidelity. Great men's words, says One, are
like dead men's shoes: he may go barefoot that waits for them. Not so good men,
they will stand to their oath, though it tend to their loss, Psalm. 15.4. They
are children that will not lie, Isai. 63.8. Tit. 1.2. Isai. 65.16.
Their Father is a God, that cannot lie. He is the God of Amen, as Isaiah
calls him; and all his promises, are Yea and Amen in Christ Jesus, the
faithful and true witness, 2 Cor. 1.20. Revel. 3.14. Judah would not break
promise with the Harlot, lest he should be shamed, Genesis 38.23. One of the laws
of the Knights of the band in Spain was, That if any of them broke his promise,
he went alone by himself, and no body spoke to him, nor he to any. When God
serves any so, let him be so served. But the promises are ancient, Tit. 1.2.
And not any tittle of them, as yet, ever fell to the ground. Wherefore, gird up
the loins of your minds, and trust perfectly on the Grace that is brought unto
you, 1 Peter 1.13. Faithful is he that has promised, who also will do it. 1
Thessalonians, chapter 5. verse. 24.

Verse. 2. For Sarah conceived] By the force of her Faith, though at first she
faltered, Heb. 11.11. [And bare Abraham a son, in his old age] Beatae
senectutis and emeritae fidei filium, Buc hole.
as One well calls Isaac. St. Paul for this says, he was born after the
Spirit, Gal. 4.29.

Verse. 3. And Abraham called the name, etc.] A ridiculous name, but such as God
had imposed. All Gods ways are foolishness to the World, Christ and all. But
(as old men use to say to young) They think us fools; we know them to be so. It
will not be long ere they shall wail and howl out; Nos insensati, Wisd 5.
we fools held their life madness, etc. Say therefore with David, If this be to
be vile, we will be more vile. God has a barren womb for mocking Michal. He is a
fool, we say, that would be laughed out of his coat; but he is a double fool
that would be laughed out of his skin, that would hazard his soul, because
loath to be laughed at. Caligula socerum Scyllanum, molestum ei propter
virtutem and affinitatem, ad mortem sibi consciscendam ludibriis adegit. More
fool him.

Verse. 4. And Abraham circumcised his Son] At Circumcision (so as now at
Baptism) names were given. Let them be such as are significant, and may immind
us of some good, either person or thing; all will be found little enough,
Optima nomina, Columel. ^e re rust. l. 1. c. 7. Ho^at. Epod. 2.
non appellando, mala fieri, Alphius foenerator dixisse verissime fertur. We
read of a good woman, that had named her three daughters, Faith, Hope, and
Charity. And when she was to be condemned by Bonner; My Lord, said she, If you
burn me, I hope you will keep Faith, Hope, and Charity; no by my troth, will I
not, quoth the Bishop; Act and Mon. 1798.
keep them who will, I Will take no charge of them. We read also of another, that
courting an harlot, asked her name: she answered, Mary; whereupon, remembering
Mary Magdalen that penitent harlot, he repented him of his evil purpose; and
advising the curtisan, to repent by her example, departed, and lived honestly.
St^a^ge Viney. in Palest.
We cannot have too many monitors to mind us of our duty.

Verse. 5. And Abraham was an hundred years old] After twenty years praying, and
waiting the fulfilling of the promise; besides, thirteen of those years
silence, for ought we read, after the promise of a child. This was a sore
trial; but God knew him to be armor of proof, and therefore tried him thus with
Musket Shot. Heb. 10.36.
Well might the Apostle say, Ye have need of patience, that after ye have done
the will of God (and suffered it too) ye might receive the promise. The
spoiling of their goods required patience: but this waiting much more. Good men
find it casier to bear evil, then to wait till the promised good be enjoyed.
This waiting is nothing, Importuno tempore poma decer^unt. Cyprian.
but hope and trust lengthened. Which they that cannot do, like children, they
pull Apples before they are ripe, and have Worms bred of them; as those hasty
Ephraimites, that set upon the Philistims, and were slain in Gath. They had
indeed a promise of the Land, but the time was not yet come: See my Lovetokens,
page 94.
They were weary of the Egyptian bondage, and would have thus got out; but they
were too hasty. Fugientes erg^ fumum, incidebant in ignem, 1 Chronicles 7.21,
2^. Psalm 78. v. 9.

Verse. 6. Prove. 10.1.
God has made me to laugh] A wise son makes a glad father. Monstri autem
simile est, quando pro risu sunt fletus, sunt flagellum. And yet this is many a
good man's case. How many parents are put to wish Moses his wish, Number. 11.11.
Lord, If I have found favor in thy sight, kill me, that I behold not my misery.
Had he lived to have seen, what ways his grandchild Jonathan took, what a
grief would it have been unto him! Judge. 18.30. Ac proinde studio inseruisse
literam Nun, suspensam tamen; in fignum, ^am adesse vel abesse posse, ut fit
and filius (...) vel (...) istius prosapia, hujus imitatione. Buxtorf. Tiber.
(...). Eusebius.
Jonathan, the son of Gershom, the son of Manasseh, etc. In the best Hebrew
Copies, Nun is suspended in that name: whereupon the Hebrews descant, that this
Gershom was the son of Moses; but because he and his posterity walked not in
the ways of Moses, but rather of Manasses, 2 King. 21. and did his works;
therefore the Penman of this Book, would not so far disgrace Moses, as to make
him his son, as indeed he was, Exodus 2.1 Chron. 23.14. but rather of Manasses,
whom he imitated and resembled. How much better and happier had it been for
them both, if they had expressed their fathers manners, as Constantines sons
did: of whom it is said, That they had put on whole Constantine, and in all
good things did exactly resemble him.

Verse. 7. That Sarah should have given children suck] So she had a double
blessing, of the belly, and of the breasts. Milk she had at those years, and
great store of it too: whence she is said to give children suck, not a child
only. She could have nursed another for a need, besides her own. Note, that
though she were a great Lady, yet, she was a nurse. Let it not be niceness, but
necessity that hinders any mother from so doing; lest she be found more
monstrous then the sea monsters, that draw out their breast, and give suck to
their young, Lam. 4.3. If the child must be set out, let a fit nurse be looked
after. Quidam scrofae lacte nutritus cum esset, Sphinx Philosoph. p. 235.
in coeno sese identidem volutabar.

Verse. 8. And Abraham made a great feast] A laudable custom, says Cajetan,
That the beginning of the eating of the firstborn, should be celebrated with a
feast. St. Augustine observes here, That this solemnity at the weaning of
Isaac, was a type of our spiritual regeneration: at, and after which, the
faithful keep a continual feast. Let us keep the festivity, or holy day, says
Paul, (...). 1 Cor. 5.7. (...). Diog. ap. Plutarch.
that feast of fat things full of marrow, of wines on the lees well refined,
Isai. 25.6. proceeding from milk to stronger meat, Heb. 5.12. and being to the
world, as a weaned child. His mouth does not water after homely provisions,
that has lately tasted of delicate sustenance.

Verse. 9. And Sarah saw the son of Hagar mocking] At that mystical name Isaac,
as a gaud, or laughing stock. At the feast also, made upon such a frivolous
occasion. As who should say, What care I, though this ado be made now about
Isaacs weaning? I am the firstborn, and beloved of my Father, who will not
deny me the inheritance. This Sarah had soon spyed, or overheard, Liberorum
curiosi sunt parents. The mother especially observes the wrong done to the
child. And besides, Dislike soon spies a fault. Textor. epist.
A fault it was no doubt, and a great one too. Otherwise, the Apostle would not
have called it persecution: Gal. 3.
nor God have punished it with ejection. Machiavel, that scoffing Atheist,
rotted in the prison at Florence. Jearing Julian had his payment from Heaven.
Sir Thomas Moor (qui scoptice and scabiose de Luthero and Religione Reformata
loquebatur) lost his head. Another lost his wits for mocking at James Abbes
Martyr, as a mad man; for that, Act. and Mon. fol. 1904.
having no money, he gave his apparel to the poor; some to one, some to another,
as he went to the stake. What Is truth? Joh. 18.38.
said Pilate to our Savior, in a scornful profane manner. Not long after
which, he became his own deaths-man. Appian scoffed at Circumcision, Joseph^^.
and had an Ulcer at the same time, and in the same place. Surely, God is the
avenger of all such: he calls it blasphemy in the second Table, and shows his
wrath from Heaven against it, as that which proceeds from the very superfluity
of malice (as here in Ismael) and tends to murder. The Hebrew word here used,
signifies, that he not only mocked Isaac, but also made others to mock him.

Verse. 10. Cast out this bond-woman] Who had been (likely) either an Author or
Abbettor of her sons sin, in ambitiously seeking the inheritance. Out they must
therefore together: as all Hypocrites one day must be cast out of Gods Kingdom.
Heaven is an undefiled inheritance: no dirty dog ever trampled on that Golden
pavement. There is no passing e coeno in coelum. Heaven would be no Heaven to
the unregenerate. Beetles love dunghils better then ointments; and Swine love
mud, better then a garden. Paris ut vivat, Horat* epist. 2.
regnetque beatus Cogi posse negat. --

Verse. 11. And the thing was very grievous, etc.] See; there is grief sometimes
betwixt the best couples, as abovesaid, Chap. 16.5. But why was it so grievous
to cast out Ismael, when in the next Chapter, it seems no such grief to him, to
slay Isaac? Surely for that, here, he hears only his wives voice: there he
well understood it to be the will of God. Baldassar in epist. ad Oecolamp.
Veniat, veniat verbum Domini, and submittem^^ illi, sexcenta si nobis essent
colla, said that Reverend Dutchman. When Abraham came to know is was Gods will,
as well as Sarahs, he soon yielded.

Verse. 12. In all that Sarah has said unto thee, etc.] The wife then is to be
harkned to, when she speaks reason. Sampsons mother had more faith then her
husband: And Priscilla is sometimes set before Aquila. Paul's hearers at
Philippi, were only women at first, Acts 16.13. And Saint Peter tells
Christian wives, that they may win their husbands to Christ, 1 Pet. 3.1.
by their chaste conversation coupled with fear. The Scripture is said to say,
what Sarah here says, Gal. 4.30.

Verse. 13. Because he is thy seed] So bountiful a master is God, so liberal a
Lord; that he blesses his servants in their seed too. We count it a great
favor, if an earthly lord give an old servant a country cottage, with some
small annuity for life; but Gods love extends beyond life: as David's love to
Jonathan preserves Mephib^sheth from the Gallows, yea, promoteth him to a
princely allowance, Act and M^^. ^ol. 1481.
and respect at court. Your children shall find and feel it, double and
treble, (said that Martyr) whatsoever you do or suffer for the Lords sake.

V. 14. And Abraham rose up early] He was not disobedient to the heavenly
vision, but set upon the execution of Gods will with expedition. Voluntas Dei,
necessitas rei. A godly man says Amen to Gods Amen, go it never so much
against the hair with him: He puts his Fiat, his Placet to Gods; and says, as
Acts 21.14. The will of the Lord be done, which was Vox vere Christianorum, as
One says.

Verse. 15. And the water was spent in the bottle] All creaturecomforts will
fade and fail us; as the brook Cherith dried up whiles the Prophet was drinking
of it; as those pools about Jerusalem, that might be dried up, with the
tramplings of horse and horsemen, 2 King. 19.24. But they that drink of Christ's
water, shall never thirst: For it shall be in them (as the widows oil, or
Aarons ointment) a well springing up to eternal life, Joh. 4.14. [She cast the
child, etc.] Whom till then, she had led in her hand, faint, and ready to dye
for thirst; who erst lived at the full in his fathers house, but could not be
contented. God loves to let us see the worth of his favors by the want of them:
Carendo p^tius quam fruend^.
To chasten men's insolency with indigency, as he did the prodigal in the Gospel.

Verse. 16. Let me not see the death of the childe] This, Babington.
says an Interpreter, was but poor love. Give me a friend that will not leave
in the instant of death, Genesis 46.4. [She lift up her voice and wept] As Hinds
by calving, so we by weeping cast out our sorrows, Job 39.3.

Expletur lathrymis, egeriturque dolor.

Verse. 17. And God heard the voice of the lad] Weeping has a voice, Psalm. 6.8.
And as Music upon the Waters sounds farther and more harmoniously then upon
the Land, so Prayers joined with Tears. These, if they proceed from Faith, are
showers quenching the devils cannon-shot; a second Baptism of the soul, wherein
it is rinsed anew, nay, perfectly cured: As the tears of Vines cure the
Leprosy, as the lame were healed in the troubled waters. Whether Hagars and
Ismaels tears were for sin, Lachrymas angustiae, exprimit crux; Lachrymas
poenitentiae, peccatum.
or for the present pressure only, I have not to say. But God is so pitiful,
that he hears and helps our affliction, as he had done Hagars once before, Genesis
16.11. And as our Savior raised the young man of Nains, though none sought to
him, merely because he was the only son of his mother, a widow, the stay of
her life, and staff of her old age. See a sweet place, 2 King. 14.26, 27.

Verse. 18. For I will make him a great nation] A Nation by himself, as he had
promised to Abraham. This had not come to pass, had not she missed of her way
to Egypt, and wandered in this wilderness. God, by his providence, orders our
disorders to his own glory. Gregor.
Divinum consilium dum devitatur, impletur: Humana sapien^ia dum reluctatur,
comprehenditur.

Verse. 19. God opened her eyes* etc.] The well was there before; but she saw it
not till her eye, were opened. So till God irradiate both the Organ and the
Object, we neither see nor suck those breasts of consolation, Isai. 66.11. We
turn the back, and not the palm of the hand, to the staff of the promises.

Verse. 20 And God was with the lad, etc.] The fountain of Hagar (says a
Divine) lying between Bared and Kadesh-barnea, was afterward called the well of
the living God; and seems my^^ically to represent Baptism, the laver of
regeneration. For the Church like Hagar, with her son Ismael, traveling
through the wilderness of this world, is pressed with a multitude of sins and
miseries, etc. Wherefore they joining together in Prayer, crave to be refreshed
with the water of life. For Hagar signifies a Pilgrim. Itinerar. script. fol.
95.
Ishmael, a man whom the Lord hears; who traveling together with her Mother
the Church in this World, fights against the enemies thereof, and shoots
the Arrows of Faith against all infernal and cruel beasts and lusts. Thus he.

Verse. 21. And his mother took him a wife] Adeo est juris non gentium, sed
ipsius naturae, ut parents matrimonia liberis procurent. Children are a chief
part of their parents goods; therefore to be disposed of by them in marriage.
When Satan had commission to afflict Job in his goods, he fell upon his
children: Yet in the Church of Rome, Parents consent is not much regarded.

Verse. 22. God is with thee in all that thou doest] Natural conscience cannot
choose but stoop to the Image of God stamped upon the Natures and Works of the
godly. When they see in them that which is above ordinary, they are afraid of
the name of God called upon by them. Deuteronomy. 28.9, 10.
Their hearts even ache and quake within them.

Verse. 23. Swear unto me here by God, etc.] This visit, we see, was more of
fear then of love (there can be no hearty love indeed, but between true
Christians.) Kings then have their cares, Crowns their crosses: Thistles in
their arms, and Thorns in their sides. This made one cry out of his Diadem, O
vilis pannus, etc And Canutus set his Crown upon the Crucifix. Frederick, the
Elector of Saxony, is said to have been born with the sign of a Cross upon his
back: S^^^et. Aunal.
and the next night after that, Rodulphus Rufus was crowned Emperor of Germany,
An. Dom. 1273. over the Temple, where the Crown was set upon his head, a golden
Cross was seen to shine, like a Star, to the admiration of all that beheld it.
These were the same Emperors Verses concerning his Crown Imperia^, Nobil^s es
fatcor, rutilisque onera a lapillis: Don. Pa^e. hist pro^an. medulla. 7 23. and
728.

Innunieris curis sed comitata venis;
Quod been si nossent omnes expendere, nemo
Nemo foret, qui te tollere vellet humo.


Verse. 24. I will swear] Abraham quickly consents to so reasonable a request,
from so honorable a person. The wisdom from above is easy to be entreated. The
churl Nabal holds it a goodly thing, Jam. 3.17. Matthew. 6.
to hold off. It is but manners to reciprocate: very Publicans can find in
their hearts, to do good to those that have been good to them.

Verse. 25. And Abraham reproved Abimelech] Inferiors may reprove their
superiors, so they do it wisely and modestly.

Verse. 26. I wot not who has done this thing] A fault it might be in Abraham,
not to complain to the King. For many a good Prince, is even bought and sold by
his Officers and Counselors, as it was said of Aurelian the Emperor; who might
know nothing but as they informed him. As of another German Prince it was said,
Esset alius, si esset apud alios. Bucholc.


V. 27. Abraham took sheep and oxen] In token of true and hearty
reconciliation. Reconciliatio^es, says Menander, Menander.
sunt lupina amicitiae Let it be so among heathens. But we have not so learned
Christ.

Verse. 31. They swear both of them] Or, they were sworn. (...)
The Hebrew is passive: To show, that an oath is not rashly to be undertaken,
but by a kind of necessity imposed. It comes of a root that signifies to
satisfy; because he, to whom we swear, must therewith be contented. An oath is
an end of strife, Heb. 7.
says the Apostle: The Greeks call it (...) quasi (...), a hedge, which a man
may not break.

Verse. 32. A Covenant] Foed^s (...). Sic fidus (...)


Verse. 33. Abraham planted a grove] That he might have a private place, for
prayer and meditation. And thus he improved and employed that late place, he
had made with Abimele^h. Oh that God would once more try us, and trust us with
the blessing of peace! How should we now prize it, and praise him for it. Bona
a tergo formosissima.

Verse. 34. Many days] Twenty five years at least: for so old was Isaac when he
went to be sacrificed. Some Halcyons God vouchsafes to his afflicted, and
tossed with tempest: Isai. 54.1^.
Some rest and repose to his poor Pilgrims. Laus Deo.

CHAP. XXII. Verse. 1. God did tempt Abraham]
TEmptation is twofold; 1. Probationis. 2. Perditionis. The former is of God,
the latter of the devil. God is said to tempt, when he puts us upon the trial
of our faith and obedience, that he may do us good in the latter end, Deuteronomy.
8.26. Satan ever seeks to do us hurt. He, when he comes to tempt, comes with
his sieve as to Peter. Christ with his fan, Matthew. 3.12. Now a Fan casts out
the worst, and keeps in the best; a Sieve keeps in the worst, D. Playfere.
and casts out the best. Right so Christ (and histrials) purges out
corruption, and increases grace: contrarily the Devil, if there be any ill
thing in us, confirms it; if faith, or any good thing in us, he weakneth it.
Now the temptations of Satan are either, 1. Of seducement, Jam. 1.15. ^r 2. of
buffetting and grievance, 2 Cor. 12.7. In seducement we are pressed with some
lesser or darling corruption, whereto our appetites by nature are most
propense. And here Satan has his machinations, 2 Cor. 2.11. methods, Ephesians.
6.11. depths, Rev. 2.24. darts, Ephesians. 6.16. fiery darts pointed and poisoned
with the venom of Serpents, which set the heart on fire from one lust to
another. In buffettings we are dogged with foulest lusts of Atheism,
self-murder, etc. such as Nature startleth at, and abhors; and these, if we
resist, and be merely passive, are only our crosses, Satan's sins. For before a
temptation can be a sin, it must have somewhat of coveting in it. And trialls
are only taps to give vent to corruption.

Verse. 2. Take now thy son, thine only son Isaac, etc.] This was the last of
Abraham's ten trialls, and the forest. All our troubles to this, are but as the
slivers and chips of that cross, upon which this good Patriarch was crucified.
Origin hence persuades parents to bear patiently the loss of their children.
Laetus offer filium Deo, esto sacerdos animae filii tui, etc. Abraham was not
only to kill his only son (which yet was more then to have tome out his own
heart, with his own hands) but to cut him in pieces, to lay him orderly on the
Altar, after the manner of a sacrifice, and to burn him to ashes; himself
making and tending the fire, and putting him in, piece after piece, when any
was out. A hard and heavy task; especially, since it directly crossed the
promise, that in Isaac all nations of the earth should be blessed; and seemed
to involve the utter ruin of all mankind. Here Reason was at a stand: It was
faith only that could extricate the perplexed Patriarch, by giving him to know
that God was able to raise him up even from the dead, Heb. 11.19. Hoc,
Abrahamum fecit, (...). This was it that kept him from tripping. [Get thee into
the Land of Moriah] Both Abraham's great temptations began with one strain vade
tibi, Get thee gone, Genesis 12.1. Genesis 22.2 Here God led Abraham into temptation,
but delivered him from evil. Have you not been tempted (says a Holy man) in
this or that kind? It is because God in mercy would not lead you into
temptation. Baines Letters.
Yea this is in some sort more to be acknowledged then victory, when you are
tempted. For not to be tempted is more immediately from God, and less in man's
power then to prevail against temptation: Since nothing does overcome us against
our will: but without our will God does lead us into trial: for he knows we
would taste little of these if we might be our own carvers.

Verse. 3. And Abraham rose up early, etc.] To show his prompt and present
obedience. He neither consulted with his wife, nor with his own reason. Exodus 4.
She might have happily hung upon him and hindered him, as Zipporah did Moses to
the hazarding of his life. He captivates all the powers of the soul to his
Creator, goes after him without sciscitation, and so shows himself to be
renewed in the spirit of his mind; that is, in his natural reason: for that
like an old Beldam, is the mother and nurse of all our distempers and
outstrayes. Cassianus tells us of a young man that had given himself up to a
Christian life: And his parents, Cassianus.
misliking that way, wrote letters to dissuade him from it; which when he knew,
he would not once open them, but threw them in the fire. Let us do so, by the
suggestions of flesh and blood, and the counsel of carnal friends, or we
shall never rest and feast in Abraham's bosom. I know not by what reason (said
Borthwick the Scotch Martyr) they so called them my friends, Act and Mon. fol.
1157.
which so greatly labored to convert me (as they called it:) neither will I
more esteem them, then the Madianites, which in time past called the children
of Israel to do sacrifice to their Idols.

Verse. 4. Then on the third day] A great while for him to be plodding, ere he
came to the place. But we must conceive that his brains were better busied,
then many of ours would have been therewhile. We must not weigh the cross, for
then it will prove heavy: we must not chew the pill, but swallow it whole, else
it will prove bitter. We must not plod too much, but ply the Throne of Grace
for a good use and a good issue of all our trialls and tribulations.

Verse. 5. Abide you here with the Asse] This the Hebrews use for a proverb,
against such as are dull and incapable. Zophar says, That man is born as a
wild-asses-colt. As an Asses foal for rudeness, and a wild-asses for
unruliness. Job. 11.11.
It imports that he is untamed and untractable, till a new heart be put into
him. Agur had not the understanding of a man, till he spoke to Ithiel and Vcall
for it, Prove. 30.1, 2. He wants the totum hominis, that does not fear God and
keep his Commandments. Eccles. 12.13. Tu and Asinus unum estote, Alex. Cook.
his Abatement of Popish brags. Epist.
will not do it, which was the counsel given to a young Novice, entering a
Monastery. [And come again to you] Nesciens formam rei futurae, prophetavit
sciens de eventu, prophetavit quod ignoravit, says Amb.

Verse. 6. And laid it upon Isaac his son] Who was herein a lively type of
Christ, bearing the cross, whereon he was offered up. (...), says Plutarch,
speaking of the Roman fashion of crucifying malefactors. And surely it was by a
wonderful providence of God, that the Jews brought our Savior to Pilate to be
put to death; since they hated nothing more then to confirm or countenance the
Roman tyranny among them, by any means. Hence Gamaliel gave counsel to dismiss
the Apostles, Act. 5.38. And hence the chief Priests and Rulers took it so
exceeding haynously, that Paul was taken out of their hands, by the chief
Captain, Act. 23. But God had a hand in it, that this and other types and
Scriptures might be fulfilled, that foretold the very manner of his death on a
tree. Let the Jews stumble now at the cross, and fall backward. Let the
Gentiles jear us, (...) (borreo dicere) (...) In vita peregr. Omnis hom^ aut
est cum Christo regnaturus, aut cum Diabolo cruciandus. Aug. Justin. l. 18.
as Luci^n does, for that we deny the multitude of their gods, and yet believe
in a crucified God. Let us desire to know nothing but Christ, and him
crucified; and if ever we desire to be Kings in heaven (and every man must be
aut Caesar, aut nullus, a King, or a caytiffe.) Let us seek by the eye of faith
to see the Sun of righteousness in the West (as Stratoes servant taught him:)
Let us look upon Christ hanging on the cross, dying on that Altar, and we shall
live for ever.

Verse. 7. Where is the Lamb, for a burnt offering] Isaac was not to be told
now, what belonged to a sacrifice. He had been long since taught by his father,
what was to be done in the service of God. When I was young, my father taught
me, says Solomon, Prove. 4.4. so did his mother also, Primas in Philip. Greg.
Moral. l. 27. c. 14.
Prove. 31. in her Lemuels lesson. Plantas tenellas frequentius adaquare
proderit, says Primasius.

Verse. 8. God will provide himself a Lamb] A pious and precious Proverb; much
to be mused on, and made use of, Qui finxit alas papilioni, is curabit omma.
when we are in an exigent, and see not whither to turn us. Then say, Deus
viderit* God will with the temptation also give an issue, 1 Cor. 10.13. Necesse
est adesse divinum, ubi humanum cessat auxilium, says Philo. Sciat etiam
Celsitudo vestra (says Luther in a letter to the Prince Elector of Saxony;)
S^u^tet. Ann.
I would your Highness should well know, that businesses are far otherwise
carried, and concluded in heaven then at the Diet at Norinberg, etc. And to
Phillip Melancthon he writes thus: Si nos ruemus, ruet Christus una, ille
regnator mundi: and esto ruat, etc. Sed scribo haec frustra, quia tu, Scu^tet.
Annal
secundum philosophiam vestram, has res ratione regere* hoc est, ut ait ille,
cum ratione insanire pergis, and occidis teipsum; nec vides prorsus extra manum
tuam and consilium positam esse causam, etiam extra curam tuam velle agi.

Verse. 9. And they came to the place] Mount Moriah where the Temple was
afterward built. This was a little from Salem, 2 Chronicles. 3.1.
as Mount Calvary also, was a little from Jerusalem. [And bound Isaac his son]
Who strugled not, neither resisted, though able for his age (being twenty five
year old, as Josephus makes him; others thirty three) to have overmastered his
old father. He was acquainted with Gods counsel, says Luther, wherein he
rested. Yet he was bound, 1. For that the rite of sacrifices so required. (^ee
2 King. 10.12.) 2. Lest any involuntary motion by pangs of death, should be
procured. Whence diverse of the Martyrs, as Ridley, Rawlins, etc. desired to be
bound fast to the stake, lest the flesh should play its part. R^^^ins)* when
the Smith cast a chain about him at the stake, I pray you, good friend, said
he, Knock in the chain fast; for it may be, Act. and Mon. ^ol. 1415.
that the flesh would strive mightily. But God of thy great mercy give me
strength and patience, to abide the extremity. Nature at death will have a bout
with the best, whether he dye as Elis^a, slowly, or as Eliah, suddenly.

Verse. 10. And Abraham stretched forth his hand, etc.] What Painter in the
world can possibly express the affection of Abraham, when thus he bound his
son, and bent his sword? Surely that Painter that set forth the sacrificing of
Iphigenia, Aspi^^ vulius ecce meos, uti^amque ^culos in pectora po es Inser^re.
Sol Phetonti, apud Ovid 1 Cor. 3.
would here also have drawn Abraham, as he did Agamemnon, with his face veyled;
as not able to delineate his unconceivable grief. But a man in Christ is more
then a man, and can do that that other men, cannot reach unto. It was a matter
of blame to the carnal Corinthians, that they walked as men: And our Savior
looks for some singular thing to be done by those that pretend to him, Matthew.
6.47. Abraham had denied himself in his beloved Isaac, and therefore went an
end with his work, hard though it were. Another that has not done so, shall
find a heavy business of it, an unsupportable burden. Sozomen tells of a
certain Merchant, whose two sons being taken captives, Sozom l. c. 14.
and adjudged to dye, he offered himself to dye for them; and withal promised
to give the Soldiers all the gold he had. They pitying the poor man's calamity,
admitted of his request for one of his sons (which he would) but let them both
escape they could not, because such a number must be put to death. The miserable
man therefore, looking at and lamenting both his sons, could not find in his
heart to make choice of either (as overcome with an equal love to them both)
but stood doubting and deliberating, till they were both slain. At the siege of
Buda in Hungary there was among the German Captains a Nobleman, called Erkius
Raschachius, whose son a valiant young Gentleman being got out of the Army
without his fathers knowledge, bore himself so gallantly in fight against the
enemy, in the sight of his father and the Army, that he was highly commended of
all men, and especially of his father that knew him not at all. Yet before he
could clear himself, he was compassed in with the Enemy, and valiantly
fighting, slain. Raschachius exceedingly moved with the death of so brave a
man, ignorant how near he touched himself, turning about to the other Captains,
said, This noble Gentleman, whatsoever he be, is worthy of eternal
commendation, and to be most honorably buried by the whole Army. As the rest
of the Captains were with like compassion approving his speech, the dead body
of the unfortunate son rescued, was presented to the most miserable father;
which caused all them that were there present, Tu^kish hist.
to shed tears. But such a sudden and inward grief surprised the aged father,
and struck so to his heart, that after he had stood a while speechless, with
his eyes set in his head, he suddenly fell down dead, Anno Dom. 1541. Heb. 11.
[And took the knife to slay his son] The Apostle says* He did offer him up a
slain sacrifice. God took it in as good part as if indeed he had done it,
because he would have done it. Every man is so good before God, are he truly
desires to be. Bernard.
In vitae libro scribuntur omnes, qui quod possunt faciunt, etsi quod debent,
non possunt, says one Father. And another, Augustine. Basil.
Tota vita boni Christiani sanctum desiderium est. Ambulas, siamas. Non enim
passibus and Deum sed affectibus currimus. Tantum velis, and Deus tibi
praeoccurret, says a Third.

Verse. 11. And said, Abraham, Abraham] Twice for hastesake: yet not at all,
till the very instant. When the knife was up, the Lord came. God delights to
bring his people to the Mount, yea to the very brow of the hill, till their
feet slip, and then delivers them. He reserves his holy hand for a dead lift.
Only be sure you look to your calling; for it was otherwise with Jepthta,
Judge. 11. whom St. Augustine calls facinorosum and improbum, a lewd and naughty
man, in his questions upon the Old Testament. What then would he have said to
Thomas the Anabaptist, Stumpf. l. 5.
who beheaded his brother Leonard, in the sight of his parents, at Sangall in
France, Anno 1526. pretending the example of Abraham? As did likewise those
odious Idolaters of old, that offered their children in sacrifice to Moloch, in
the valley of Hinnom; which was so called because the poor child put into the
arms of the red-hot image, was (...) nohem that is roaring; or because the
Priests comforting the parents said, Condime^tum crit tibi. Jalkut ^n Jerem.
Jeheun^h Lach. It shall be profitable or pleasant to thee, as Kimchi has it.
So because Abraham planted a grove to serve God in, Genesis 21.33. the Devil, Gods
Ape, set the blind Heathens a work to plant a thicket near the altar of their
god ' Priapus, whereinto his worshippers stepped, when the sacrifice was ended,
and there, like bruit beasts promiscuously satisfied their lusts, thereby, as
they conceived, best pleasing their God; which was the true cause, as it seems,
that the true God commanded, that no Groves should be planted near the place of
his worship; and if any were, they should be cut down.

Verse. 12. Lay not thine hand upon the Lad] As he was about to do, having armed
his pious hand, not only with the knife, but with faith that works by love; as
had likewise David, when going against the Giant, he slyes upon him, Bucholcer.
perinde ac si fundae suae tunicis non lapillum, sed Deum ipsum induisset a^
implicuisset. [Now I know that thou fear me] With a fear of love, Hos. 3.5.
Fulgentius.
And here that of Fulgentius is true, and takes place. Deum siquis parum
metuit, valde contemnit; hujus qui non memorat beneficentiam, auget injuriam.
God knew Abraham's fear before, but now he made experience of it. Nunc expertus
sum, says Junius. Nune omnibus declarasti, says Chrysostom.

Verse. 13. Behold behind him a Ram] Belike the Angel called behind him; which
when he turned to listen* to, he spied the Ram caught in a thicket, Heb.
Sab^ech; which signifies the perplexity, winding or binding of a bush or briar.
And to this both David seems to allude, Psalm. 94.19. and the son of David in
that famous Lammah Sabachtani of his, Bastards Sermon. on Genesis 22.1.
Mark. 15.24. [And Abraham went and took the Ram, etc.] How likely is it, says
One, that we will offer to God Isaac our joy, which will not sacrifice the Ram;
that is, mortify our sinful lusts, and the desires of our flesh? God tempts
us now (says Mr. Philpot Martyr) as he did our Father Abraham, commanding him
to slay his son Isaac, which by interpretation signifies mirth and joy; who by
his obedience preserved Isaac unto life, and offered a Ram in his stead.
Semblably, we are to sacrifice to God, our Isaac; that is, our joy and
consolation; which if we be ready to do, our joy shall not perish, but live and
be increased: although our Ram be sacrificed; that is, the pride and
concupiscence of our flesh entangled, through sin, with the cares of this
stinging world, for the preservation and perfect augmentation of our mirth and
joy, Act. and Mon. 1667.
sealed up for us in Christ. Thus he. And as God provided another sacrifice
(says a Third) for Abraham, that so he might save his Son, which was a Ram
tied and entangled in thorns: Itinerar. Scripturae, fol. 99.
so God provided a sacrifice for the salvation of the world, Christ that
immaculate Lamb; whose head being crowned with thorns, and hanging on the
Cross, by his death opened unto us the door of life, and made us capable of
eternal happiness. It is probable, says Bucholcerus, that Abraham, when he
slew and sacrificed the Ram, looked up to heaven with new eyes full of divine
light; and that being filled with the Spirit of God, and carried beyond
himself, he thought of more things, he felt more, he seemed to see and hear
more then was possible to be uttered. Ipse Deus quodammodo expositurus, and
declaraturus Abrahae actionis praesentis augustam significationem, Bucholc. in
Chron^. p. 187.
and manu eum ducturus ad introspicienda hujus sacrificii sui adyta,
promissionem de Christo repetit, and jurejurando confirmat.

Verse. 14. In the mount of the Lord it shall be seen] God will be found of his
in fit time and place. To him belong the issues of death, Psalm. 68.20. None can
take us out of his hands. He knows how to deliver his, and when, as Peter spoke
feelingly, 2 Pet. 2.9. with Act. 12.11. [And Abraham called the name of that
place, Jehovah Jireh] To perpetuate the memory of Gods mercy, not of his own
obedience, which yet was notable, and not to be matched again. If we honor
God, we shall have honor; that is a bargain of Gods own making, 1 Samuel 2.31.

Verse. 16. By my self have I sworn] God swears for the further confirmation of
our faith. For here he swore, not more for Abraham's sake, then ours, as the
Apostle shows, Heb. 6.13, 14, 17, 18. As when he spoke with Jacob at Penuel,
there he spoke with us, Hos. 12.4. and what he said to Joshua, he said to all,
I will not leave thee, nor forsake thee, Heb. 13.5. [And have not withheld thy
son, thine only son] And yet what was this to that sic without a sicut, that
hyperbole, that excess of love in God, that moved him to send his Son to dye
for our sins? He loved Christ far better then Abraham could love Isaac; and yet
he gave him up freely, which Abraham would never have done without a command:
and to dye as a malefactor, and by the hands of barbarous and bloody enemies;
whereas Isaac was to dye as a holy sacrifice, and by the hand of a tender
father. How much more cause have we to say, Now I know the Lord loves me; Psalm.
119.106.
and to swear as David did, to keep his righteous judgments?

Verse. 18. Because thou have obeyed] This (because) is not so much causall, as
rational. Significat non causam meritoriam, sed subalternam, and sine qua non.

Verse. 19. Went together to Beersheba] The Hebrews conceive, because here is no
mention of Isaac's return, that he was sent by his father to Shem, or that he
remained for certain years in Mount Moriah. But this is uncertain.

Verse. 20. It was told Abraham] Good news out of a far Country; God usually
chears up his children after sharpest trialls; brings them, as once from M^rah
to Elim, etc.

Verse. 23. And Bethuel begat Rebeccah] Rebeccah is born, Sarah dies: Thus one
generation passes, and another comes. Our children are the Danes that drive
us out of the Country.

CHAP. XXIII. Verse. 1. And Sarah was an hundred, etc.]
IT is observed by Divines, that God thought not fit to tell us of the length
of the life of any woman in Script^^e, but Sarah, to humble that sex, that
because they were first in bringing in death, deserved not to have the
continuance of their lives recorded by Gods Pen.

Verse. 2. And Sarah died] The Jews would persuade us that the Devil
represented to her the offering of Isaac, whereat she took a conceit and dyed.
This is but a mere conceit of theirs; for Abraham then dwelt at B^orsheb^, now
at Hebron. [And Abraham came to mourn for Sarah,] So she was the first, that we
read of, mourned for at death; and it is mentioned as an honor to her. Solons
Mors m^a ne carea^ luchrymis, is to be preferred before, Hin^ (...), and Justa
defunctorum. Testamentum Augusti praeleg it tanto simulato gemitu, u^ non medo
^^x, sed and spirit^ deficere^ (...). Dio Eumse l^gere simulaban^ quem
nec^vera^t. Dio in Claud. Genesis 37.35. Jer. 31.15.
Ennius his Nemo me decoret lachrymis. It is one of the dues of the dead, to be
lamented at their funerals; and the want of it is threatened as a curse in many
Scriptures. It is a practice warranted by the best in all ages; and mourn we
may in death of friends, so we mourn 1. In truth, and not fainedly. 2. In
measure, and not as men without hope. For the first, how grossly did Tiberius
dissemble at the death of Augustus, and at the funeral of Drusus? Whereupon
Tacitus makes this note, Vana and irris^ vero and honesto fidem adimunt. So
when Julius Caesar wept over Pompey's head presented to him in Egypt, they that
saw it, laughed in their sleeves, and held them no better then Crocodiles
tears. So the mourning that Nero and his mother made over the Emperor Claudius,
whose death they had conspired and effected, was deep dissimulation. This is no
less hateful, then to mourn heartily, but yet immoderately, is unlawful. Here
Jacob forgot himself, when so overgrown with grief for his Joseph, and Rachel
for the rest of their children, that they would not be comforted. So David for
his Absalom: Alexander the Great for his friend Hephesti^n; when he not only
clipped his horse and mules hair, Plutar. in vita ^^lop.
but plucked down also the battlements of the walls of the City, etc. The
Soldiers of Pelopidas were no less excessive, when for grief of his death they
would neither unbridle their horses, nor untie their armor, nor dress their
wounds. Something here may be yielded to nature, nothing to impatiency.
Immoderate sorrow for losses past hope of recovery, is more sullen then
useful: Our stomach may be bewrayed by it, not our wisdom. The Egyptians
mourned seventy days for Jacob: Joseph (who had more cause, but withal more
grace) mourned but twenty days. Mark. 5.38. (...). ut Iam. ^.1.
God flatly forbad his people those heathenish customs, of shaving their
heads, and cutting their flesh, Lev. 21. intoken of mourning for the dead. We
read in the Gospel of minstrels and people making a noise at the terming-house,
as they call it, Matthew. 9.23. And the Jews that were comforting Mary, Perinde
ac (...) intercute laberantes salsamenta comederent. Cartwr.
when they saw her rise up hastily, and go forth, followed her, saying, She
goes unto the grave to weep there, Joh. 11.31. Such customs, it seems, they
had in those days amongst them, to provoke themselves to weeping and
lamentation; which was (says One) as if they that have the dropsy, should eat
salt meats. How much better Father Abraham here, who came indeed from his own
tent to Sarahs, to mourn for her (as good reason he had) but exceeded not, as
the Jews think is signified by that one letter less then ordinary in the Hebrew
word for weep (Libcothah) used here in the text. Baal-turim gives but a bald
reason of it, parum flevit; erat enim vetula. Abraham wept not much for her,
she being but an old-wife, and past her best. Buxtorfe gives a better, p^tius
quia luctus ejus fuit moderatus. And therefore also in the next verse it is
said, that he stood up from before his dead (where in likelihood he had sitten
a while on the earth, as was the manner of mourners to do, Job 2.12, 13. Esa.
47.1.) to take order for her burial, as having good hopes of a glorious
resurrection. Excellent for our purpose is that of St. Hierome, Lugeatur
mortuus, sed ille quem Gehenna suscipit, quem Tartarus devorat, in cujus poenam
aeternus ignis aestuat. Nos, quorum exitum Angelorum turba comitatur, quibus
obviam Christus occurret, etc. gravemur magis, si diutius in tabernacul^ ist^
habitemus. Mourn for none, but such as are dead in their sins, killed with
death, as those, Rev. 2.23.

Verse. 3. And Abraham stood up from before his dead] So she is called eight
several times in this Chapter; Pareus in loc.
to note that death makes not any such divorce between godly couples and
friends, but that there remains still a blessed conjunction betwixt them, which
is founded in the hope of a happy resurrection. Jobs children were still his,
even after they were dead and buried. How else could it be said, that God gave
Job twice as much of every thing as he had before, Job. 4^.10, 13.
since he had afterward but his first number of children, viz. Seven Sons,
and three daughters?

Verse. 4. That I may bury my dead out of my sight] She that had been the desire
of his eyes, Ezekiel. 24.16. the sweet companion of his life, is by death so
defaced, that he loathed to look on her. This we are to think on in our
mourning for the dead; to bewail the common curse of mankind, the defacing of
Gods image by death through sin, etc. And yet to comfort our selves in this,
that these vile bodies of ours, shall once be conformed to Christ's glorious
body (the standard) in incorruption, Phillip. 3. ult.
agility, beauty, brightness, and other most blessed and unconceivable parts
and properties.

Verse. 6. Thou art a Prince of God amongst us] That is, excellent or
prosperous, as Genesis 21.22. and it was their ingenuity and candor to acknowledge
it. Gods people are Princes in all lands, Psalm. 45. Kings they are in
righteousness and peace: but somewhat obscure ones, as was Melchisedec, and
therefore little set by, 1 John 3.1, 2. Vnkent, unkist, as the Northern Proverb
is. So was Christ the heir of all. But we know that when he shall appear, we
shall be like him; that is enough for us. In the mean space, the righteous is
more excellent then his neighbor (let him dwell by whomsoever) and shall be
more prosperous, if it may be for his good.

Verse. 7. Abraham stood up and bowed himself, etc.] It is very comely in
Christians to salute willingly; and in words and gestures to show civil
respect even to wicked men. Abraham's behavior to these Hittites may shame the
most Christians; yea the very Hittites themselves, D. Hall.
may teach them good manners. Even the savage Cannibals (says a grave Divine)
may receive an answer of outward courtesy. If a very dog fawn upon us, we
stroke him on the head, and clap him on the side. Much less is the common band
of humanity untied by grace. If Elisha bad his man, or our Savior his
Disciples, salute no man by the way, that was for haste sake; they should not
hinder themselves in their journey by overmuch courtesy. Our Savior was sweet
and sociable in his whole conversation, and the proud Pharisees upbraided him
with it. He never refused to go to any man's table when invited, yea to Zacheus
he invited himself: Not for the pleasure of the dishes, but for the benefit of
so winning a conversation. Corn. Nepos in vita Atti^i.
Courtesy allureth men's minds, as fair flowers do their eyes. Pomponius
Atticus so carried himself at Athens, Harpocrat. in voce (...).
ut communis infimis, par principibus videretur. Alexander the Great, got the
hearts of his Foot-souldiers, by calling them (...), his fellow-footmen.
Aristotle, the better to insinuate into his hearers, read not to them (as other
Philosophers used to do) from a lofty seat or desk, but walking and talking
with them familiarly, as with his friends, (...). Di^g.
in Apollo's porch, he made them great Philosophers. Vespasian was as highly
esteemed by the people for his courtesy, as Coriolanus contemned and condemned
of all for his rusticity. With one churlish breath Rehoboam lost ten tribes,
whom he would, and might not recover with his blood. But whatsoever David did,
pleased the people. What a deal of courtesy passed betwixt Boaz and his
reapers? The Lord be with you, said he; The Lord bles^ thee, said they, Ruth
2.4. The Turks salutation at this day is, Salaum al^ek Peace be to thee; the
reply is, Aleek sal^um, Peace be to thee also. Blounts voyage into the Levant
The Romans had their (...) and their (...), answerable to our Good Morrow, and
Good even. That finger next to the thumb they called Salutaris, Dio in vita
Adriani Becman. de Origin. in verbo Digitus.
because they put that finger to their mouth (as at this day the Roman Dames
do) when they saluted any. Charles the fifth is renowned for his courtesy:
when he passed by John Frederick the Elector of Saxony, he ever put off his hat
and bowed to him, though he were his prisoner, and had been taken by him in
battle. Parei Hist. prosan. Medul. 90^
And when he had in his power. Melancthon, Po^eran and other Divines of the
Reformed Religion, he courteously dismissed them. As he is the best Christian
that is most humble; Peachams Compl. Gentle.
so is he the truest Gentleman, that is most courteous. Your haughty upstarts,
the French call Gentle* villains.

Verse. 8. If it be your mind that I should bury my dead] Alexander the Great,
lay unburied thirty days together. His conquests above ground purchased him no
title for habitation under ground. So Pompey the Great, Nudus pascit aves,
jacet en qui possidet orbem, Ciaudiau.

Exiguae tellu^ is i^ops --
Vt cui modo ad victoriam terra defuerat, d^esset ad sepulturam, says
Paterculus. So Will. the Conquerors corpse lay unburied for three days; Daniels
Chron. fol. 50.
his interment being hindered by one that claymed the ground to be his. Abraham
therefore does well to make sure of a place of Sepulture for him and his; and
this at Hebr^n, which signifies society or conjunction* for the^e lay those
reverend couples, Abraham and Sara, Isaac and Rebecca, Jacob and Leah, etc.
These dyed upon the promised Land, and being there buried, kept possession, as
it were, for their posterity; as those that are dead in Christ do of heaven,
Veieres sepulchrum mortuorum domicilium credebant, and portum corporis
appellabant. Turn^b. (...).
for the Saints that survive them. Sepulchr^s are symbols of the communion of
Saints, and of the Resurrection of the dead. Hence the Hebrews call Churchyards
Beth-chajim the ^ouse of the living. Job also calls the grave the Congregation
house of all living, Job 30.23. As the Apostle, after him, calls Heaven the
Congregation-house of the firstborn, Heb. 12.23. The Hebrews call it gu^lam
hammaliachim, the world of Angels; and the Author to the Hebrews says that the
Saints are come by Christ to an in^umerable company of Angels. Heb. 12.
When godly mo^ dye they are said to be gathered to their people. They do no
more then repatriasse, as Bernard has it; they are not put out of service, but
removed only out of one room into another, out of the out houses into the
Presence Chamber; D Pres^^^.
They change their place, but not their company, as that good Doctor said upon
his deathbed: they are gathered by Christ's hand, as Lillies, Cant. 6.2. and
transplanted into the Paradise of God. And this, Plotinus the Philosopher had a
notion of, (...). Synes. Epist. 139. (...).
when breathing his last, he said; That in me, that is Divine. I resign up to
the first Divine, that i^ to God. As for the body it is but the case, the
cabinet, the suit, the slough, the sheath of the soul, as Daniel calls it,
Scaligeri quodr^liquum est, was Julius Scaligers Epitaph. It returns to its
original dust. and is sown as seed in the ground till the Resurrection* 1 Cor.
15.35.

Verse. 9. For a possession of a burying-place] It is remarkable, that the first
purchase of possession mentioned in Scripture, was a place to bury in, not to
build in. The Jews also had their Sepulchr^^ h^wn out long before their deaths,
to mind them of their mortality. Joseph of Arimathea had his tomb in his
garden, to season his delights with the meditation of his end. The Egyptians
had a deaths-head carried about the table at their feasts. The Emperors of
Constantinople had a Mason came to them on their Coronation day with choice of
Tomb-stones, and these Verses in his mouth, Elig^ ab his saxis ex quo
(invictissime Caesar)
Ipse tibi tumulum me fabricare velis.
Our first parents (says One) made them garments of Fig Leaves: D. Plays.
But, God misliking that, gave them garments of Skins. So in the Gospel he
cursed the Fig Tree, which did bear only leaves to cover our sin, but
commended the Baptist who did wear Skins to discover our mortality.

Verse. 11. The field give I thee, etc.] A brave speech of a bountiful spirit,
to a stranger especially; and in that respect beyond that of Araunah the noble
Jebusite to David his liege Lord, All these things did Araunah as a King give
to the King, 2 Samuel 24.23. Indeed, to give is a Kingly employment; making men
like, to the Father of lights, from whom comes every good gift and perfect
giving. Kings are styled Benefactors; Jam. 1.17. (...). Diodo^ Sic. l. 1.
(...). Epicur.
and of the ancient Kings of Egypt, it is recorded, and was rehearsed amongst
other of their praises, that they were, (...), willing to distribute, ready to
communicate, which are the Apostles two words, 1 Timothy 6.18. Gyrus took more
delight in giving then possessing, as his Soldiers could say of him in
Xenophon. It is not only better, but sweeter to do good, then to receive good,
said Epicurus. It is a more blessed thing, says our Savior. Titus would say,
when he had done none good, he had lost a day, and molesti^s erat Severo
Imperatori nihil peti, quam dare. Our General Norrice, like that Bishop of
Lincoln, never thought he had that thing, which he did not give. Few such now
adays.

Verse. 13. I will give thee money] Full money, as he had said, verse. 7. or as
much money as it is worth. Such is the care of the conscientious, that they had
rather lose of their own, then usurp of another. And that he gives a just
price for the field, was an act of great wisdom; for hereby he provided that
his posterity might not hereafter be put beside it.

Verse. 16. In the audience of the sons of Heth] Whom he takes to witness, and
so provideth for his security and quietness afterward; as did also Jeremy in
the purchase of his Uncles field. Wisdom and circumspection is to be used in
Contracts and Covenants. [Currant with the Merchant] It may well be said of
Money-hoarders, they have no Quicksilver, no current money.

Verse. 19. And Abraham buried Sarah his wife] The last office of love to bring
the deceased Saints honorably to their long home, to lay them in their last
bed, Eccles. 12.5. Esa. 57.2. Job. 14.14.
to put them into the grave as into a haven and harbor, where they may rest
from their labors, till their change shall come. This is to deal kindly with
the dead, Ruth. 1.8. To show mercy to them, 2 Samuel 2.5. especially when the
mourners go about the streets, Eccles 12.5. when there is a great mourning made
over them, as for Steven, Act. 8.2. and a great burning for them, as for Asa, 2 Chronicles. 16.14. Of whom also it is further added, as an honor, that he was
buried in his own. Sepulcher which he had dug for himself among the Kings of
Israel in the City of David, and laid in the bed that was filled with sweet
odours, etc. Of Joram, Joas, and Ahaz, it is expressly noted in the Chronicles,
that they were buried in the City of David, but not in the Sepulchers of the
Kings of Judah. A worse place was thought good enough for them, unless they had
been better. As of Tiberius the Emperor it is storied, that he was so hated
for his tyranny, S^^lae Gemonia. Quidam etiam Terram matrem orarent, etc.
Pareus. Cornel Nepos in vita Dionis. Dionys. Lambin. in Annot. ad locum.
that when he was dead* some of the people would have had him thrown into the
River Tiber; some, hanged up at such another place as Tiburn. Others also made
prayer to mother Earth, to grant him, now dead, no place but among the wicked.
Contrarily when Dio died, the people of Syracuse would have gladly redeemed his
life with their own blood; which because they could not, they buried him very
honorably in an eminent place of their City. Whereas anciently (as Lambinus
well notes) Kings and Princes, in Homer and other Poets, are not read to have
been buried, but without the gates, somewhere in the fields and gardens; as the
Patriarchs also were, looking for the return of that everlasting Spring.

CHAP. XXIV. Verse. 1. And Abraham was old]
NOn tam canis and annis, Beurer. in vita Attici.
quam virtutibus and sapientia gravis, as One says of Atticus. Abraham had a
good gray head, as it is elsewhere said of him: Hence, so honored not only at
home, but of the Hittites, Chap. 23. Cognata sunt (...) ( ut (...) and (...))
old age and honor are near a kin in the Greek tongue. And God bids, honor the
face of the old man, Levit. 19.32. for the hoary-head is a crown, Psalm. 111.9.
Si prolixa facit sapientem barba, qu^d obsta^ Barbatus posset quin caper esse
Plato? Baron. Annal.
so that it be found in the way of righteousness. God is called the Ancient of
days: and, because holy, therefore reverend is his name, as says the
Psalmist. But it is a poor praise to Nectarius, who succeeded Nazianzen in the
Church of Antioch, that he was veneranda canitie and vultu sacerdote digno, a
comely old man, and of a Bishop-like visage, and that was all that could be
said for him.

Verse. 2. Put I pray thee, thy hand under my thigh] Either as a token of
subjection, or for the honor of circumcision, Quae erat in part femoris. q. d.
I adjure thee by the Lord of the Covenant, whereof Circumcision is a sign. Or
(which is most likely) in reference to Christ, who was to come of Abraham,
according to that phrase, Gea. 46.26. The souls that came out of Jacobs thigh.

Verse. 3. I will make thee swear by the Lord] Who alone is the proper object of
an oath, Isaiah 65.16. Jere. 12.6. Howbeit, in lawful contracts with an Infidel
or Idolater, we may admit of such oaths, whereby they swear by false gods; as
those of old, that swore by God and Malcom; and the Turks great oath nowadayes
is, By the immortal God, Turk. Hist. fol. 345.
and by the four hundred Prophets, by Mahomet, by his Fathers soul, by his own
children, and by the sword wherewith he is girt, etc. [That thou shall not take
a wife unto my son, etc.] Lest they should turn away his heart from following
God, Deuteronomy. 7.3, 4. as those Outlandish wives did Solomon, Neh. 13.26. whom
therefore God Almighty punished both in himself and his successor Rehoboam, his
only son (that we read of) by so many Wives and Concubines; and he was none of
the wisest, nor happiest: 2 Cor 6.14.
tam auspicata sunt conjugia contra Dei legem contracta, says the Divine
Chronologer. Be not unequally yoked therefore, with any untamed heifer that
bears not Christ's yoke. If Religion be any other then a cipher, how dare we not
regard it in our most important choice? D. Hall.
I wish Manoah could speak so loud (says a Reverend Divine) that all our
Israelites might hear him: Is there never a woman among the daughters of thy
brethren, or among all Gods people, that thou go to take a wife of the
uncircumcised Philistimes? What Is the reason, the Pope will not dispense in
Spain or Italy, if a Papist marry a Protestant (yet here they will;) but in
hope to draw more to them? For they well know what power wives many times get
over their husbands, as Jesabel did over Ahab; the Hen was suffered to crow,
and all went as she would have it. And therefore the Legates in the Council of
Trent, Hist. of Count. of Trent, fol. 680.
were blamed for suffering the Article of Priests-marriage to be disputed, as
dangerous; because it is plain, that married Priests will turn their
affections and love to wife and children; and by consequence to their house and
Country. So that the strict dependence that the Clergy has upon the
Apostolic See, would cease: And to grant Marriage to Priests, would destroy
the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy, and make the Pope to be Bishop of Rome only.

Verse. 4. But thou shall go unto my Country, etc.] N^hors stock were neither
pure in Religion, nor precise in life, Josh. 24.2. Genesis 31.30. yet far better
in both, then those cursed Canaanites. Some knowledge they retained of the true
God, of whom they speak much in this Chapter, and concerning whom they hear
Eleazer here relating, how he had answered his prayer, and prospered his
journey. And for their manners, we find them hospitable, and their daughter,
though fair, yet a pure Virgin. Now, Lis est, cum forma, magna p^dicitiae. Like
unto these are the Greek Church at this day, Breerewoods Enquiries, p. 139. B.
Vshers Sermon. at Wansteed. D. Field of the Church. Jac Reviue de vit. Pentif. p.
320.
which is far greater then the Roman: And though in some points unsound, and in
other very superstitious, yet holds sufficient for salvation. Cyrill their
good Patriarch of Constantinople, set forth the Confession of the faith of
those Eastern Churches, Anno 1629. agreeable in all things for most part, to
the Reformed Protestant Religion, but diametrally opposite to that they call
the Roman Catholic. He is also busy about a general Reformation among them,
and has done much good.

Verse. 5. Peradventure the woman, etc.] He swears cautelously, he does not
rashly rush upon his oath; he swears not in jest, but in judgment; so must we,
Jer. 4.2. duly considering the conditions and circumstances, as the nature of
an oath, the matter whereabout, the person by whom, and before whom, the time,
the place, our calling, and warrant thereunto, Eccles. 5.2. Be not rash; the
best that can come of that, (...), as the Romans in Plutarch said of P^mpey.
is repentance, that fair and happy daughter of an ugly and odious mother.
Swear not in heat and choler, as David did when he was going against Nabal;
but soon after blessed Abigail for better counsel. Swear not in jest, lest ye
go to hell in earnest, Jam. 5.12. Swear not petty oaths, those civilified
complements, and interjections of common talk, Faith and Troth, etc. Thou must
not swear by thy hairs, thou can not make one of them white or black; much
less by Faith and Troth, that is more worth then hairs. Remember that large
roll, ten yards long, and five yards broad, full of curses against the swearer,
Zach. 5.2. And it re^^s upon his house, where he thinks himself most secure.
When we are called to take a lawful oath, we must be reverently affected (as
this good servant in the text) according to the excellency of the duty, and
greatness of the person, whom we attest and invocate. The ancient form of
taking and imposing an oath was, Give glory to God, Josh. 7.19. Joh. 9.24. And
he that took the oath was said, to confess to God, Esa. 45.23. with Romans 14.11.
Therefore also St. Paul in swearing, uses a word of attention, and says,
Behold I speak it before God. Gal. 1.20. Lewis the French King was taken
prisoner by Meletisaka the Sultan; and conditions of peace being concluded
between them, for more assurance thereof, the Sultan offered to swear, that if
he failed in performance of any thing, to renounce his Mahomet; Turk. Hist.
requiring likewise of the King to swear, if he failed in any thing that he had
promised, to deny his Christ to be God: which profane oath the King detesting,
and wishing rather to dye then to give the same, the Sultan wondering at his
constancy, took his word without any oath at all, and so published the League.
As o'tother side, King John of England, being overlaid in his Barons Wars, when
he sent Ambassadors to the Monarch of Morocco for aid, Heyl. Geog. p. 714.
offering to swear fealty unto him, and to receive the law of Mahomet, he grew
into such dislike of our King, that ever after he abhorred the mention of him.

Verse. 6. That thou bring not my son thither again] Where yet he had never
been, but in his fathers loins. He would not, his son should part with the
promised Land for any out ward accommodations. Let us fear, (...). Heb. 4.1.
lest a promise being left us of entering into Gods rest, any of us should seem
to come short, to fall back. or be l^ft behind. Take we all heed, lest for our
lingering and hankering after the fleshpots of Egypt, God carry us back again
into Egypt, which was the last and greatest curse, threatened against the people
of Israel, and is the greatest misery can come upon this Nation, Deuteronomy. 28.68.

Verse. 7. He shall send his Angel] There are myriads of Angels, and all sent
out for the solace and safe conduct of the Saints. Dan. 7. Heb. 1.14.
Oh the dignity and safety of a child of God! [Thou shall take a wife] He
argues from what God has done for him, to what he will do. Every former
favor, is a pledge of a future. Thou have, thou will, is a Scripture
demonstration. See Psalm. 86.1, 2, 3, 4 Six Thou-hasts, whereupon he infers and
inforceth his, Turn us O God of our salvation, etc.

Verse. 8. Only bring not my son thither again] This second time he lays
charge on his servant not to do it. Better no wife, then displease God, then
violate conscience. He purchases his pleasure at too dear a rate, that pays
his hones^y to get it. He has less of the ballast, and more of the sail,
makes more haste then good speed, that thus speeds himself.

Verse. 9. And the servant put his hand, etc] That, and the lifting up of the
hand to heaven, Genesis 14.22.
was the ceremony of old, as now it is, laying the hand upon the book. Let it
be what it will, if not wicked, we need not struple it. Henry the Third of
England undertaking the croysade, in taking his oath laid his right hand on his
breast (according to the manner of a Priest, Daniels Chron.
says the History;) and after on the book, and kissed it as a Layman. The
Moors, when they swear to be faithful to any, Turk. Hist. fol. 747.
they put their sword to their own throats. At the siege of Norwich by Ket and
his accomplices in Edward the sixths time, the Earl of Warwick General for the
King, Life of Edw. 6. by Sir Jo. Heywood, p. 75.
drew his sword, and caused others to do the like; and (according to a Souldery
custom in cases of extremity) by enterchange of a kiss by every of them upon
the swords of others, they bound themselves, as by an oath, to maintain the
place.

Verse. 10. Took ten Camels] Creatures that are famous for their swiftness,
strength, hardiness; for they will travel, they say, three days together,
without water; which, in those hot Countries, is in many places hard to come
by. Sir Francis Drake in his Travels tells us of certain Sheep in America as
big as a Cow, World encomp. p. 55.
and supplying the room of Horses for burden or travel. The Mule, they say,
must have the bag hang by his mouth; so must some, the pipe or the pot at their
elbows.

Verse. 11. And he made his Camels kneel down] Or, rest themselves, Prove. 12.10.
Romans 8.22.
as the Greek interprets it. A good man is merciful to his beast; but the poor
creature groaneth and travelleth in pain under our abuses.

Verse. 12. And he said, O Lord God] Begin we all our enterprises with prayer.
God may give good success without, but it will be nothing so sweet: See
therefore that.

Hoc primum repetas opu^, Hor. Ep. 6.
hoc postremus omittas. Verse. 13. And the daughters, etc.] So did Rachel, and
those in Deborahs Song, that rehearsed the Acts of the Lord at the places of
drawing water, Judge 5.11. and Jethro's daughters, though he were Prince of
Midian: Oh the simplicity and plainness of those times! They that plead
Rebecca's ornaments for their garish attire, would be loath to take her office,
be at the pains that she was.

Verse. 14. Drink, and I will give thy Camels, etc.] This argued a good nature,
a kind courteous disposition; which therefore it may be he singled out, as a
token of a meet wife, as a thing especially to be looked at in a wife. Good
dispositions sanctified, become more useful, because more amiable; and so more
graceful to the Gospel, and powerful with others. As if not yet sanctified, yet
there is more hopes they may be. For where a good nature is, the Soul is a
plain smooth board, whereon a Painter may more easily draw a Picture: and a
harsh crabbed nature, is as a board full of knots, and rugged, whereon the
Artificer cannot so well show his workmanship. ^ee Mr. Valent Fast. Sermon.
And though the power of God will show it self, wheresoever he intends to make
a vessel of Mercy, yet it is with more ado; and will cost a man the more
sorrow, and him that has the working of it, the more pains.

Verse. 15. Before he had done speaking] So quick is God, many times, in the
answer of prayers, Isai. 65.24. Dan. 9.23. The Angel had even tired himself
with flight, to tell Daniel, that his prayers were heard. David did but say, I
will confess my transgressions unto the Lord; and before he could do it, God
forgave the iniquity of his sin, Psalm. 32.5. [Rebeccah came out] She took her
name, says One, as it may seem, Itinera^. Script. page 97.
from the expectation of eternal life. For Rebecca denotes a woman, which
expects a free delivery from all calamity, and an inheritance of eternal
life. Therefore, she is a notable type of the Church, which is the Spouse of
Christ shadowed in Isaac.

Verse. 16. And the damosel was very fair] (...), Aelian. var. hist. l. 12. c. 1.
Fair and wise, as it was said of Aspasia Milesia. Here beauty was not ill
bestowed, as a Gold-Ring in a Swines Snout, but (as the History reports of the
Lady Jane Gray) adorned with all variety of moral Virtues, as a clear Sky with
Stars, Life of Edw. 6. p. 176. (...). Bucholcer.
as a princely Diadem with Jewels. Beauty is of it self very attractive, as the
Poet has it. For which cause, Heraclonas the young Emperor of Constantinople,
being sent into banishment, together with Martina his mother, had his nose cut
off, lest his beauty should move the people to pity. And Angli tanquam Angeli,
(...) ab (...) quod ab (...) ve^cratio. Sic ^a^^us quasi (...) ornatus.
said Gregory the Great, of the English boys presented to him. How much more
when accompanied and accomplished with Chastity, as in this Damosel? [A Virgin,
neither had any man known her] This latter clause is added, because many pass
for Virgins that are not so; if that of the Poet be true, especially Quae, quia
non licuit, non facit, illa facit; and that of the Orator, (...). in declan^t.
Incesta est, and sine stupro, quae stuprum eupit. The Romans cashiered a
Vestal Virgin for uttering this Verse, Foelices nuptae! moriar, nisi nubere
dulce est. The Strumpet when she eats ftoln bread, has such dexterity in
wiping her lips, that not the least crum shall be seem to her shame. So that
Solomon shows it to be as hard to find it out, Prove. 30.18, 19, 20.
As the way of an Eagle in the air, the way of a Serpent upon a Rock, the way
of a Ship in the Sea, and the way of a man with a maid, that is a close and
chaste Virgin; Muffet. in locum.
one that should be haste at least, as being kept close from the access of
strangers. [Filled her pitcher, and came up.] Here was no tarrying, gazing,
gos^ipping. Not slothful in business, Romans 12.11. She had not been delicately
or wantonly bred, but inured to hard labor, Thucyd. lib. 2.
and she followed it close. Thucydides scribit Lacedaemoniis (...).

Verse. 20. And ran again to the Well] In the City of Haran, at this day, (says
One) there is to be seen a Well of very clear water, where Rebecca gave drink
to Eleazer, and his Camels; there likewise, Rachel Labans daughter, first spoke
to Jacob, etc. It is called by the Townsmen Abraham's Well. This water has a
very pleasant taste, Itinerar. Script. p. 83.
and is a notable type of holy Baptism. For as the Patriarchs took their Wives
by this Well; so Christ receives his Spouse the Church, by that Sacrament;
which is, Beersheba, the Well of an Oath, where we pass into the Covenant, and
are betrothed unto Christ in faithfulness, Hos. 2.20. the Thistle to the Cedar,
2 King. 19.4.

Verse. 22. The man took a golden Ear-ring] Abiliment or Jewel, Vt imponeret
naso ejus, says Junius, to hang upon her nose, or forehead, as verse. 47. Each
Country has their fashions, and garnishes. In very many places of America,
they have their lower lips bored through; as likewise, the upper parts of their
ears, and something put into them. Archb. Abbots Geog. 278.
Which, as it seems to themselves to be a point of beauty; so it makes them
appear to others, to be wondrous ugly.

Verse. 25. She said moreover unto him, etc.] It is well observed by an
Interpreter, Ai^sworth.
that in the Narration of this story (which yet seems to be of light and
trivial matters) the Spirit of God is very exact and large; whereas other
things wherein great Mysteries are infolded (as the History of Melchisedech,
etc.) are set down in few words. That men might consider Gods Wisdom, and
Providence in things of least esteem amongst men. I add, that all may see what
delight he takes in the meanest actions and speeches of his dearest children;
when the great acts and exploits of Nimrod, Ninus, and other Grandees of the
world are not once mentioned, but lie shrouded in the sheet of oblivion or
shame.

Verse. 26. And the man bowed down his head] See how he rellisheth of his
masters house, and shows a gracious heart, ready to offer up a sacrifice of
praise, wherever God shall please to set it up an Altar. The same word in
Greek signifies, (...).
Grace and Thanks; to show, that as any man has more grace, he is more
grateful to God and man. It is observable also, that our Savior sets these two
together, the unthankful, and the evil, Luke 6.35. He is kind to the
unthankful, and the evil.

Verse. 30. These make earth their throne, Heaven their footstool. August.
When he saw the ear-ring and bracel^ts] These were the bones that Laban looked
after; these drew the churl forth, and made him so courteous. Worldlings in
serving God, serve themselves of God; they follow him for loaves, more then for
love. Vix diligitur Jesus propter Jesum. Hypocrites would use Christ as a bridge
to get to Heaven by; which if they could compass, let Christ fink or swim for
them, they would not much care: Their love is meretricious, their obedience
mercenary; they work only for wages. Fac me pontificem and ero Christianus,
Ezra 2.62.
said one Pammachius a Heathen, to the Pope. Those degenerate Priests would
fain have had Pri^sts places, when something was to be got, but might not.

Verse. 33. I will not eat, till I have told mine errand.] He preferred his work
before his food. So did our Savior at the Well of Samaria, John 4. And another
time, when he thought to have slaked his hunger at the barren fig tree, and
found nothing but leaves, he went on to Jerusalem; and forgetting his hunger,
as he had before forgot his break-fust, he turned not into a victualing-house,
but went to the Temple, and taught the people; and confuted the Elders all that
day long, till the evening. Matthew. 21.18, etc. with Mark 11.13, etc. Job 23.12.
Job esteemed Gods word more then his necessary food; not only more then his
dainties or supers^uities.

Verse. 35. And the Lord has blessed my master] Ministers, Christ's Paranymphs,
must likewise woe for Christ, by setting forth his great wealth; and not speak
one word for Christ, and two for themselves, as those did, Phil. 1.15. John
Baptist was no such spokesman, Joh. 3.29. It is the special office of the
Ministry, to lay Christ open, to hold up the Tapistry, and let men see him as
he is set forth, Heb. 1.2, 3. that they may be sick of love; for otherwise,
Christ is like to have but a cold suit of it.

Verse. 39. Peradventure the woman will not] Here he leaves out, in his
discretion, Abraham's charge, verse. 6. For that would but have offended and
irritated. Part of the truth may be concealed sometimes, as Jer. 38.27.

Quid, quod, ubi, per quos, quoties, cur, quomodo, quando,
Quilibet haec animo reputet, medicamina dando.
Verse. 44. The woman, whom the Lord has appointed] God is the Match-maker, and
Marriages are made in Heaven, as very Heathens have yielded. The Governor of
Eski-chisar hearing Othomans relation of a fair Lady, with whom he was in love,
seemed greatly to like of his choice; Turk. Hist. fol. 136.
saying, that she was by the Divine Providence (for so the Turks religiously
use to speak) appointed only for him to have.

Verse. 47. And I put the ear ring upon her face] So did Christ put upon his
Spouse his own comeliness, which was as a jewel on her forehead, an ear-ring
in her ear, and a beautiful Crown upon her head, Ezekiel. 16.12, 14. whence she
is called Callah, of the perfection of her beauty and bravery, Vxor splender
radiis mariti. A maxim in the Civil Law
Jer. 2.32. And Hephzibah, Isa. 62.4. of his delight in her; since he has
purified her, as Esther, sanctified her, Ephesians. 5.26. and so beautified her,
that now he rejoices over her as a bridegroom does over his bride, Esa. 62.5.
Yea he rests in his love, and will seek no further; he joyeth over her with
singing, as wel-apaid of his choice, Zeph. 3.17.

Verse. 53. And gave them to Rebeccah, he gave also] Note that the custom was
then, Heyl. Geog.
to give gifts to the bride and her friends. Now it is otherwise. Yet in
Hungary their women have no portion (they say) but a new coat at their wedding.
Mor is est apud Thraces (says Solinus) ut nupturae non parentum arbitratu
transeant ad maritos; sed quae prae caeteris specie valent, subhastari volunt;
Solin. cap. 14.
and lic^ntia taxationis admissa, non moribus nubunt, sed praemiis.

Verse. 54. And they did eat and drink] It is lawful to be honestly merry,
after business dispatched.

Verse. 55. Let the Damsel abide with us] Men promise in haste, perform by
leisure.

Verse. 56. Hinder me not] Say we so to Satan soliciting us to stay a while in
our old courses and companies.

Verse. 57. And enquire at her mouth] Eve was not dragged, but brought by God to
her husband. There must be a mutual consent, or it is not of God.

Verse. 59. And her nurse] Deborah, who was a great stay to Jacobs family, and
her loss much lamented, Genesis 35.8.

Verse. 60. Be thou the mother of thousands] Votum nuptiale, Hebraeis solenne.
We wish them joy, we assure them sorrow, and that in the flesh, where they look
for most felicity.

Verse. 61. They rode upon the Camels] A tiresome and tedious journey it was,
but for a good husband. Suffer we with, and for Christ, that we may be
glorified together, when the marriage shall be consummated. Heaven will pay for
all. What though thou ride on a trotting Camel; it is to be married. He that
rides to becrowned, will not think much of a rainy day.

Verse. 63. To meditate in the field] Or to pray; there he had his Oratory,
there he used to pray secretly (but now more earnestly, upon so important an
occasion) with deep meditation or soliloquy. Domitiau, about the beginning of
his Empire, Sueton.
usually sequestered himself from company an hour every day; but did nothing the
while, but catch flies, and kill them with a penknife: Gods people can better
employ their solitariness, and do never want company, as having God and
themselves to talk with. And these secret meals are those that make the soul
fat. It was a witty and divine speech of Bernard, that Christ, the souls
Spouse, is bashful; neither willingly comes to his Bride, in the presence of
a multitude.

Verse. 65. She lighted off the Camell] To meet him with the more reverence and
submission; for which cause also, she veyled her self. Here that of the Poet
hold not, Fastus inest pulchris, sequiturque superbia formam. Ovid.


Verse. 66. And the servant told Isaac] Ministers also must give account of
their Stewardship. Happy he, that can present his people as a chaste Virgin to
Christ, with Paul, 2 Cor. 11.2. that can say with the Prophet, Here am I, and
the children that thou have given me: And with that Arch-Prophet, I have
glorified thee on the earth: I have finished the work which thou gave me to
do, Joh. 17.4. Reverend Mr. Stork was wont to protest, Abrab. deceas by M.
Gat^k.
that it was more comfort to him, to win one of his own charge, then twenty
others.

Verse. 67. Isaac brought her into his mothers tent] There to rest till the
marriage-rites were performed; till he had got her good will, till their
affections were knit, and in some sort settled; till they had plighted their
mutual troth, sought God for a blessing, and performed such solemnities as the
time required. Youth rides in post to be married: but in the end, finds the
Inn of repentance to be lodged in. [And took Rebeccah] Not as Shechem took
Dinah, or Amnon Tamar, to desloure her; but as Boaz took Ruth, and David
Abigail, to make her his wife by lawful wedlock. [And he loved her] Not only
as his Country-woman, or his kinswoman, or a good woman, etc. but, as his woman
with a conjugall love. And he had reason: For 1. She was his wife, the proper
object of his love. 2. A wife of Gods providing, a mate meet for him, none in
all the world so meet. 3. She was love-worthy, because fair, courteous,
virtuous: And as meat pleases us better in a clean dish, so does virtue in
comely persons, says Hugo. 4. She forgot her fathers house, and forsook all
her friends for him, etc. [And Isaac was comforted] If God takes away one
comfort, he will give another. Cheer up therefore.

CHAP. XXV. Verse. 1. Then again Abraham, etc.]
AFfter Sarahs death, though Calvin thinks otherwise. His body dry and dead
forty years before, is now, by Gods blessing, made lively and lusty.

Verse. 5. Abraham gave all, etc.] So Esa. 19.25. Assyria is the work of Gods
hand, and Israel his inheritance.

Verse. 6. (...). Sopb. Gasp. E^s. Panis mica quam dives pater-familias projicit
canibu^.
Abraham gave gifts] So does God to reprobates, but they are giftless gifts,
better be without them. Saepe Deus dat iratus quod ^egat propitius. God gives
wealth to the wicked, non aliter ac siquis crumenam auro plenam latrinae
injiciat. The Turkish Empire (says Luther) as great as it is, is but a crust
cast to the dogs by the rich House-holder, or as Joseph's cup, etc. [East-ward
to the East-countrey] To both the Arabia's, which were Countries rough, but
rich; looked rudely, but searched regularly, afforded great store of fine gold,
precious stones, and pleasant odours.

Verse. 8. Gave up the Ghost] Defecit, leniter expiravit. Describit Moses
placidam and optatam quasi (...), which in Abraham Gods friend, is no wonder.
But how could that Apostate Julian say, trow, Vitam reposcenti naturae, tanquam
debtor bonae fidei, rediturus, exulto? Sure it was but a copy of his
countenance, but not of his dying countenance; for no wicked man alive, can
look death in the face, with blood in his cheeks. [Dyed in a good old age] Or
with a hoar head, after a hundred years troublesomepilgrimage, in the promised
land. We, if for one year, we suffer hardship, think it a great business. Non
quia dura, sed quia molles patimur, says Seneca. [An old man, and full of
years] The godly have often a satiety of life: as willing they are to leave the
world, as men are wont to be, to rise from the board, when they have eaten
their fill, Cur non ut plenus vitae conviva recedis? Said the Heathen Poet: and
they feign that when Tithonus might have been made immortal, he would not,
because of the miseries of life. This made Plotinus the Platonist account
mortality a mercy, Aug. de Civ. Dei, l. 4. c. 10. Siquis Deus mihi largiatur ut
ex hac aetate repurascam, and in cunis vagiam, valderecusem. Cato ap. Cic. de
senect. Camd. Elisabeth, fol. 325.
and Cato protest, that if any God would grant him, of old to be made young
again, he would seriously refuse it. As for me, said Queen Elisabeth (in a
certain speech) I see no such great cause why I should be fond to live, or
afraid to dye. And again, whiles I call to mind things past, behold things
present, and expect things to come, I hold him happiest, that goes hence
soonest.

Verse. 9. And his sons Isaac and Ismael, etc.] It is like, that Abraham, a
little before his death, sent for his two sons, and reconciled them. This
joining with Isaac in the burying of Abraham, some take for an argument of his
repenance; whereunto also they add, that his whole life time is recorded in
holy Scripture (which cannot be showed of any reprobate) and that he is said,
when he dyed, to be gathered to his fathers. [Which is besides Mamre] Where,
seventy six years before, he had entertained the Lord Christ, and heard from
his mouth, the promise of the Messiah. Wherefore, in remembrance of that most
amiable apparition, and for love and honor of the divine promise there
uttered, he would there be buried, in full hope of a glorious Resurrection; and
that his posterity might take notice that he even dyed upon the promise. As
that brave Roman Captain told his Soldiers, Xiphilinus.
that if they could not conquer Britain, yet they would get possession of it by
laying their bones in it.

Verse. 13. These are the names of the sons of Ishmael] When Isaac was twenty
years married, and had no child; and afterward, nothing so many as Ishmael,
nor so great in the world. This is Gods usual way of dealing forth his favors:
Saints suffer, wieked prosper. This made Pompey deny Divine Providence, Brutus
cry out, (...). Dio Cassius. (...). Thucyd. Psalm. 73.10. expounded. Exoriuntur,
sed exuruntur, Hos. 14.
(...): O miserable Virtue, slave of Fortune, etc. The Athenians, in
Thucydides, when they had lost Nicias their good General, (who, together with
his whole Army perished in Sicily) were at a great stand, and much offended;
seeing so pious a person fare nothing better then those that were far worse.
And what wonder, when Jeremiah and David stumbled at the same stone, ran upon
the same rock, and were well-high shipwrackt? Jer. 12.1. Psalm 73.3, 4. Neither
they only, but many other of Gods dear servants, as it is in the same I salm,
verse. 10. Therefore his people return hither; that is, are every whit as wise
(or rather, as foolish) as I have been, to mis-censure and misconstrue Gods
dealings on this manner; to repent me of my repentance, and to condemn the
generation of the just, because waters of a full cup are wrung out to the
wicked. When David went into Gods Sanctuary, and there consulted his Word, he
was better resolved: Then he saw, that the sunshine of Prosperity does but
ripen the sin of the wicked, and so fits them for destruction: as fatted ware
are but fitted for the slaughter. What good is there in having a fine suit with
the plague in it? Poison in wine works more furiously, then in water. Had Haman
known the danger of Esthers banquet, he would not have been so brag of it. The
prosperity of the wicked has ever plus deceptionis, quam delectionis, says
One; more deceit then delight; able to entice, and ready to kill the entangled:
As cunning to do that, as the spirit that seduced Ahab; and as willing to do
the other, as the Ghost that met Brutus at the battle of Philippi. In which
respect, David, Psalm. 17. having spoken of these men of Gods hand, that have
their portion in this life, etc. wishes them, make them merry with it, and
subjoyns, As for me, I will behold thy face in righteous^ess; I shall be
satisfied, when I awake, with thy likeness: As who should say, I neither envy,
nor covet their happiness, but long after a glorious resurrection; and have, in
the mean while, that which is sufficient to sustain me, I shall behold thy face
in righteous^ess, Menach. on Levit. 10.
that is, Beshechinah, in Christ, as Rabbi Menachem expounds it. And one good
look of God, is worth all the world. It is better to feel his favor one hour,
then to sit whole ages, as these Ishmaelites did, under the worlds warmest
sunshine.

Verse. 14. And Mishma, and Dumah, and Massah] Out of these three names, (which
signify Hearing, Silence, and Suffering) the Masorites gather the three
principal duties of man, in common conversation; viz. to hear, keep silence,
and bear: these (say they) make a quiet and good life. Sustine and Abstine,
(...). Epict^t. Camd. Elisab. Psalm. 120.6.
is the Philosophers counsel: Video, Taceo, I see, and say nothing, was Queen
Elizabeth's Motto: and, I am for peace, was David's; (or, as the Hebrew has it,
I am peace) He heard the slander of many, fear was on every side, Psalm. 31.13.
but he as a deaf man heard not, and as a dumb man, so he opened not his mouth,
Psalm. 38.13. Facile est in me dicere, cum non sim responsurus, said One once,
to another that reviled at him: Thou shall fight without an adversary; for I
will hear and bear, and say nothing. The best answer to words of scorn and
petulancy, (says learned Hooker) is Isaac's apology to his brother Ishmael,
patience and silence, no apology. (...). A man would not be bound to such a
slavery, as to answer every calumny. Qui nescit far calumnias, convitia,
injurias, nescit vivere, says Chytraeus. He that cannot patiently bear
reproaches and injuries, may make up his pack, and get him out of the world;
for here is no being for him. Vitus Theodorus sent to advise with Melancthon,
what he should do when Osiander preached against him: Melch. Adam.
Melancthon per Deum obtestatur, ut taceret, and se it a gereret quasi non
audiret: Melancthon besought him, for Gods sake, to say nothing in that case,
but to carry himself so, as if he heard not. Vitus writes back, that this was
very hard; yet he would obey. It is hard to swallow down Physical Pills: but
better swallow them whole, then chaw them between the teeth.

Verse. 15. Naphish and Kedamah] Twelve in all, Princes of their Tribes, as was
promised, Genesis 17.20. See, says One here, B. Babington.
what God can do for a poor boy, sent out with a bottle of water on his back.
God set^eth the solitary in families, Psalm: 68.6. he raises the poor out of
the dust, and lifts up the beggar from the dung*hill, to set them among
Princes, etc. 1 Samuel 2.8.

Verse. 16. These are their names by their towns] which they called after their
own names, as Cain did that first built City Fnoch, after his sons name; that
he might be styled Lord Enoch of Enoch. So, the many Alexandria's, Caesarea's,
Augusta's, etc. See Psalm. 49.11.

Verse. 17. And he gave up the ghost, and died, and was gathered] Sc. to the
Congregation-house of all living, (as the grave is called, Job 30.23.) and (for
ought we know) to the Congregationhouse of the firstborn, (...).
(as heaven is called, Heb. 12.23.) Abraham prayed, that Ishmael might live in
Gods sight: Ishmael joined with his brother Isaac in burying their father
Abraham, verse. 9. of this Chapter. Here he has his whole lifetime recorded;
(the like whereof cannot be showed of any reprobate:) and at his death, he is
said gently to give up the ghost* or yield up the spirit, (as Abraham also did,
verse. 8.) and to be gathered to his people, as he. These are probable
arguments, that (however he lived) yet he died in the faith of his father
Abraham. He runs far, we say, that never turns. Nunquam sero si seri^.

Verse. 18. And they dwelt from Havilah unto Shur] A large tract and territory;
but nothing so large as his posterity the Saracens, (called more rightly
Hagarens, Psalm. 83.6.) proved to be; whose Name and Empire notwithstanding is
now swallowed up in the greatness of the Turkish Empire; Turk. hist.
which labors with nothing more, then with the weightiness of it self.

And he died] Or, dwelt, as some read it. Compare Chap. 16, 12.

Verse. 19. And these are the generations] That is, the affairs and occurrences.

Verse. 20. And Isaac was forty years old] He was not overhasty to marry in the
heat of his youth: but by hard labor, ardent prayers, and pious meditations,
kept under his body, and brought it into subjection, as Saint Paul likewise
did, 1 Cor. 9.27. We are not debtors to the flesh, Romans 8.12. we owe it nothing
but stripes, nothing but the blue eye, that the Apostle gave it.

Verse. 21. (...)
And Isaac entreated the Lord for his wife] He did it constantly and instantly,
(as the word signifies) he multiplied prayer, which (as those arrows of
deliverance, 2 Kings 13.19.) must be often iterated, ere the mercy can be
obtained.

And the Lord was entreated of him] though it were long first, even full twenty
years. God knows how to commend his mercies to us, and therefore holds us long
in suspense. Cito data, vilescunt. Manna, lightly come by, was as lightly set
by.

Verse. 22. Jitbrotsatsu.
And the children struggled together] Heb. They ran at tilt, (as it were) and
justled one against another, even to bruising and hurting. Esau (that he might
lose no time) began to set against Jacob, before he was born.

If it be so, why am I thus?] A passionate abrupt speech: q. d. Better no
children, then so troubled with them. See Chap. 27.46. compare Chap. 3.16. I
will greatly multiply thy sorrow, and thy conception. This she should have born
more patiently: but she presently bethought her of the best course; for she
went to enquire of the Lord: she got into a corner, and prayed, and was
answered. She prayed down her passions, (as a man sleeps out his drunkenness)
and sets to work lustily, and so got the ensuing oracle.

Verse. 2^. And the Lord said unto her] Either by an Angel, or a Prophet, or
some divine answer in her own heart.

Two nations are in thy womb] So, what can a man see in the Shulamite, (in
every sanctified soul) but as it were the company of two armies? Cant. 6.13.)
Every good man is a divided man: every new man, two men.

Verse. 24. And when her days to be delivered] Which fell out fifteen years
before Abraham's death, to his great comfort, no doubt. God does for his, his
best at last.

There were twins in her womb] See Cant. 4.2. with Isai. 66.8.

Verse. 25. And the first came ont red] Red and rough, cruel and crafty, as that
red old dragon, Rev. 12.3. who inhabited in him, and both acted and agitated
him. Ephesians. 2.2. ab ascensore su^ daemone perurgebatur, says Bernard. And so are
those Romish Edomites, Esauites, Jesuits, etc.

And they called his name Esau] Factus and perfectus pilis, a bearded man, one
that had every thing more like a man then a babe; a manly child.

Verse. 26. And after that, came his brother out] God could have brought Jacob
out first, (for it is he that takes us out of the womb, Psalm. 22.9.) but he
suffers Esau for a time to enjoy the first birthright, till his own time
came to set things to rights. God waits to be gracious; for he is a God of
judgment, Isai. 30.18.

And his hand took hold on Jacobs heel] As if he would have turned up his
heels, and got to the goal before him.

And his name was called Jacob] Calcanearius, an heel-catcher, or supplanter,
as he afterward proved to Esau, who hit him also in teeth with it, Genesis 27.

Convenient rebus nomina saepe suis.

And Isaac was threescore years old] He lived twice threescore years after
this, being an hundred and eighty, when he died, Genesis 35.28. five years longer
he lived, then his father Abraham, Genesis 27.5. being bison for the last forty,
Genesis 27.

Verse. 27. And the boys grew] Nature, Art, Grace, all proceed from less perfect
to more perfect. Grow in grace, says Peter: grow unto a perfect man, says
Paul, even unto the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ, says
Paul. Ephesians. 4.13.

And Esau was a cunning hunter] Like Nimrod and Ishmael, whom he chose to
imitate, rather then Abraham, and those holy Patriarchs that had lived before
him,

A plain man] Sept. (...), without welt or guard, guile or gall. Gregory hereby
notes the diverse dispositions of worldly and godly men.

Verse. 28. And Isaac loved Esau, etc.] Here (as likewise in Manoah's wife) more
grace appears in the woman, then in the man; whose blind and misplaced love,
for carnal ends, commends and illustrates the divine adoption.

Verse. 29. And Jacob sod pottage] Pottage of lentiles, which was a kind of
pulse much like to Vetches or small Pease: so frugal and sparing was the diet
of those precious Patriarchs, to the shame of our Luxury. Seneca. (...).
Quicquid avium volitat, quicquid piscium natat, quicquid ferarum discurrit,
nostris sepelitur ventribus. We devour the wealth of earth, air, and sea.

Esau came from the field, and he was faint] Labor est etiam ipsa voluptas. Of
carnal pleasures, a man may break his neck sooner then his fast. Nor is it want
of variety in them, but inward weakness, or the curse of unsatisfyingness, that
lies upon them. The creature is now as the husk without the grain, the shell
without the kernel, full of nothing but emptiness; and so may faint us, but not
fill us.

Verse. 30. Feed me, I pray thee, with that red, red] He doubleth it, Geminatio
indicat vehementiam appetitus. Pareus.
(and could not, for haste and hunger, tell what to call it) to show his
greediness. And says, Feed me, or let me swallow at once; as Camels are fed by
casting gobbets into their mouth. He thought he should never have enough. Our
proverb is, As hungry as a hunter: but this hunter has no ho with him, and is
therefore branded for a profane sensualist, Edom. The word used for a glutton,
Jer. 15.19.
Deuteronomy. 21.20, is used for a vile person, or a losel, Jer. 15.19.

Verse. 31. Sell me this day thy birth-right] Which he knew, by the instruction
of his mother, to be his by Gods appointment; and therefore takes this
opportunity to get it. A well-chosen season, is the greatest advantage of any
action.

Verse. 32. What profit shall this birthright, etc.] Pluris faci^ pulticulam
bonam, quam titulum inanem. Sensualists look only at the present pleasure, and
sell their souls for it. Earthly things are present and pleasant; therefore we
so cleave to them; striving (like the toad) who shall fall asleep with most
earth in his paws.

Verse. 33. Swear to me] With fickle men, make all firm and fast.

Quo teneam vultus mutantem Protea nodo? Horat.
And he sold his birth right to Jacob] And with it heaven also, as the
Jerusalemy Paraphrast adds, whereof the birthright was a type and pledge. So
his sin was in unthankfulness for such a dignity; in limiting it to this life;
in selling it so light cheap: but especially, in his profane parting with a
spiritual blessing, for a temporal. Such a foolish bargain makes every
impenitent person, in the sale of his soul for a thing of naught: which Christ
(who only went to the price of a soul) says, is more worth then a world. Let
there be no fornicator, (as every worlding is, Jam. 4.4.) or profane person
amongst us, as Esau, Heb. 12.16. And that there may not, let not men take
pleasure in pleasure, spend too much time in it, shoot their affections
over-far into it. It is no wisdom, to go as far as we may. It was not simply a
sin in Esau to go a hunting: but yet the more he used it, the more profane he
grew by it, and came at length to contemn his birthright. Adrian the Emperor
was a great hunter, brake his leg in hunting; called a city that he built in
Mysia, by the name of Adrians huntings: Dio in vita. Adeo venandi rabie
perc^^us ut 7 continuis an^is, nec urbis, nec ruris tecto fit u us.
but how little care he took for his poor soul, that Animula vagula blandula of
his, abundantly testifies. The maddest hunter that ever I read of, was
Mithridates; who was so set upon it, that he came not into any house, either of
city or country, for seven years together, To lawful delights and recreations,
God allows men to stoop, for their bodies sake; as the eagle to the prey* or as
Gideons soldiers, to soop their handful, not to swill their belly-full. An
honest man's heart is where his calling is: such a one, when he is elsewhere, is
like a fish in the air, whereunto if it leap for recreation or necessity, yet
it soon returns to his own clement.

Verse 23. He did eat and drink* and rose up, etc.] Hac congerie, Piscator.
impoenitentia Esaui describitur. Away he went, without showing the least
remorse or regret, for what he had done. Lysimachus soon repented him for
parting with his Crown, O dii, quam brevis voluptatis gratia ex rege me feci
servum!
for a draught of cold water, in his extreme thirst. Wine is a prohibited ware
among Turks; which makes some drink with scruple, others with danger. The baser
sort, when taken drunk, are often bastinadoed on the bare feet. And I have seen
some (says mine Author) after a fit of drunkenness, Blounts voyage, page 105.
lie a whole night, crying and praying to Mahomet for intercession, that I
could not sleep near them: so strong is conscience, even where the foundation
is but imaginary; to the shame of many profligate professors, cauterized
Christians.

XXVI. Verse. 1. Besides the first famine.]
NEw sins bring new plagues. Flagitium and flagellum, ut acus and filum. Where
iniquity breaks fast, calamity will be sure to dine, to sup where it dines, and
to lodge where it sups. If the Cana^nites had amended by the former famine,
this later had been prevented; for God afflicts not willingly, nor grieves the
children of men, Lam. 3.35. Polybius wonders, why Man should be held the wisest
of creatures, when to him he seems the foolishest. For other things, says
he, where they have smarted once, will beware for the future. The Fox will not
rashly return to the snare; the Wolf to the pitfal, the dog to the cudgel, etc.
Solus homo, ab avo ad aevum peccut fere in iisdem, and in iisdem plectitur.
Only Man is neither weary of sinning, nor wary of smarting for it.

And Isaac went to Abimelech] As Abraham had done before to Pharaoh, Genesis
12.10. The trials of Gods servants, in several ages, are much alike: we suffer
the same things that our betters have done before us: which both Paul and Peter
press as a lenitive to our miseries, and a motive to patience, 1 Cor. 10.13. 1
Pet. 5.9. The same fable is acted over again in the world, as of old; the
persons only changed. That which has been, is now; and that which is to be,
has already been: and there is no new thing under the sun, Eccles. 13 5. and
1.9, 10.
says Solomon.

Verse. 2. And the Lord appeared unto him] God knows our souls, and our souls
him, best, in adversity. See Zech. 13.9. This famine was to the Canaanites in
the nature of a curse, to Isaac, of a cure. Hinc distinctio illa poen^ in
conferentem and nocentem, sive in suffocantem and promoventem; item in poenam
vindictae and poenam cautelae, sive in condemnant em and corrigentem.

Verse. 3. Sojourn in this land] Though it lay under the common lash; that he
might see Gods power in providing for him, amidst greatest straights and
difficulties. Alex. Ales. p. 3. q. 5. m. 1.
Poena duplicem habet ordinationem: unam ad culpam quae praecedit, alteram, ad
gloriam Dei quam praecedit.

Verse. 5. Because that Abraham] His obedience was universal to all the wills of
God; and is here alleged, not as the meritorious cause, but as an antecedent,
of the blessing. Our good works do truly please God in Christ, and move him,
after a sort, Rolloc. de Vocatione, p. 25.
to do us good; yet not as merits, but as certain effects of Christ's merits
alone, and such as testify of his merit.

Verse. 7. She is my sister] How apt are children to imitate their fathers
infirmities! 1 Pet. 1.18. which yet is no excuse, (...).
Ezekiel. 18, 14. but an aggravation, Dan. 5.22, 23. The Orator therefore was far
wide, that said, Me ex ea opinione, Tull. de nature. Deor.
quam a Majoribus accepi, de cultu deorum immortalium, nullius unquam oration
aut docti aut indocti movebit. Isaac's fault here, was greater then Abraham's,
because he was not warned by domestical examples. See thou another make
shipwreck of a good conscience? look well to thy tacklings. Sin is worse, after
warning.

For he feared to say, etc.] Fear and infidelity is found in the most faithful.
Corruption, in the best, will have some flurts, some out-bursts. As therefore
Luther entreats his Readers, if they find in his writings any thing, that
smells of the old cask of Popery, to remember he was once a poor Monk: So
when we see the Saints humanum aliquid pati, to play some mad pranks; we must
consider, they were but lately cured of a spiritual frenzy.

Because she was fair to look upon] Beauty therefore is not much to be desired,
or the want of it to be bewailed; Sabiua, cum aliquando se non satis bona forma
in speculo cerneret, mori priusquam senescerct, optavis. Dio.
because it creates so many dangers to them that have it, and their dearest
husbands. The British virgins deformed themselves, that the Danes might not
deflower them.

Verse. 8. Sporting with Rebeccah his wife] Or, laughing and rejoicing;
according to that of Solomon, Prove. 5.18, 19.
Rejoice with the wife of thy youth: let her be as the loving hind, and
pleasant roe, etc. The Hind and Roe are the females of the Heart, and Roe-buck.
Now of the Heart and Roe-buck it is noted (says a grave Divine) that of all
other beasts, D. Gouge.
they are most enamoured (as I may so speak) with their mates, and even mad
again with heat and desire after them. Which being taken in a good sense, does
set forth the lawful vehement affection that an Isaac may bear to his Rebeccah;
which may be such, as that others may think he even doats on her. And so much
is imported in that which follows: Let her breasts satisfy thee at all times,
and earn thou always in her love. Not but that a man may be out in this lawful
error too, and exceed in love to his wife; as he in Seneca did, who, when ever
he went abroad, wore his wives fillet on his bosom for a favor, would never
willingly be without her company, nor drink, but when she drank to him; with
many the like fooleries, in quae improvida vis affectus erumpebat, says he.
The beginning of this love was honest; but the nimiety was not without
deformity. Est modus in rebus.

Verse. 9. Lest I die for her] See the Notes upon Genesis 20.11, 12, etc.

Verse. 10. Brought guiltiness upon us] Or, a shameful crime, subjecting us to
condign punishment. This is more then many pseudo-Christians will yield; who
hold adultery a light sin, if any at all, a trick of youth: being of the same
mind with that old dotard in Terence: Non est, mihi creed, flagitium,
adolescentem belluari, potare, scortari, fores effringere.
It is nothing for a young man to be found potting, piping, drinking, drabbing,
swearing, whoring, etc. And this poisonful position passed (it seems) for
current at Corinthus; whence the Apostle Paul so strives to stock up by the
roots that wretched opinion, by many arguments, 1 Cor. 6. And Chap. 10.8, in
stead of the cloak of heat of youth, he puts upon fornication a bloody cloak,
bathed in the blood of three and twenty thousand.

Verse. 11. He that touches this man, etc.] So sweetly does God, many times,
turn even our sins to our safety here, and to our salvation hereafter* What is
not God able to do for his?

Verse. 12. Then Isaac sowed in that land] In ground hired for his use, and
managed by himself: for it was anciently a great commendation, Veteres siquem
virum bonum colonum appellassent, amplissime lau^asse exstimabant. Cic.
says Cicero, to be a good husbandman. M. Curious, after three triumphs,
returned to the plow, and held it no disgrace; neither ever was there more
plenty at Rome than then, says Pliny; Quasi gauderet terra laureato vomere,
and Aratore triumphali. This good husband in the text, sowing in that barren
land, and in a time of famine too, has an hundredfold increase; which is the
utmost that our Savior mentions, Matthew. 13.23.
in the parable of the sower: And in reference hereunto, Matthew. 19.29.
he elsewhere assures such as part with all for his sake and the Gospels, they
shall receive an hundredfold here, and eternal life hereafter. (...) Her. lib.
1. Plin. l. 6. c. 26.
That which Herodotus and Pliny report of Babylon, is beyond belief; That the
land thereabouts returns two hundredfold increase. But grant it were true, yet
he that is a good husband for his soul, sowes in a better ground, and shall
have a better return: For, Gal. 6.8, 9.
he that sowes to the Spirit, shall, of the Spirit, reap life everlasting.
Only it is required, that he be not weary in well-doing: for in due season we
shall reap, if we faint not. We must not look to sow and reap all in a day, as
he says of the Hyperborean-people far north; Heresbach. de re rustica.
that they sow shortly after the sunrising, and reap before the sunset;
because the whole half year is one continual day with them. We must wait, with
the husbandman, for the precious fruit of the earth, and have long patience for
it, until we receive the former and later rain, James 5.7. And be diligent in
the mean while, that when Christ comes, we may be found of him in peace, 2 Pet.
3.14. Heaven will pay for all our pains and patience. He which sows
sparingly, shall reap sparingly; and he that sows bountifully, shall reap
bountifully, even blessing upon blessing, (...). 2 Cor. 9.6. Psalm. 126.6.
as the word there signifies: be shall doubtless come again with joy, bringing
his sheaves with him.

Verse. 13. And the man waxed great] Because the Lord blessed him, verse. 12. for
it is his blessing that makes rich. He sowed, and feared God, and the Lord
blessed him. Godliness has the promises of both lives, 1 Timothy 4.8. Now the
promises, are the unsearchable riches of Christ, Ephesians. 3.6, 9. who is the heir
of all, Heb 1.2, and has made godly men his coheirs, Romans 8.17, entailing
upon them riches and honor, delight and pleasure, Prove. 3.16, 17. and 8.18.
Deuteronomy. 28. Psalm. 112.2, 3.
life and length of days, the blessings of both hands. Godly men, in Scripture,
are read to have been richer then any; as Abraham, Isaac, David, etc. so they
might be now, (likely) if they would be as godly. Bonus Deus Constantinum
Magnum, Aug. de civ. Dei, l. 5. c. 25.
tantis terrenis implevit muneribus, quanta opt are nullus auderet, says
Augustine. If God deny gain to godliness, it is, that it may be admired for it
self, as having an autarky, a self-sufficiency, (...)
1 Timothy 6.6. he makes up in the true treasure: and a grain of grace is worth
all the gold of Ophi^; a remnant of faith, better then all gay clothing. Achans
wedge of gold served for no better purpose, then to cleave asunder his soul
from his body; and the Babylonish garment but for a shroud. Prove. 31.12.
But, contented godliness, like Solomon's good wife, does a man good, and not
evil, all his days: for it brings his mind and his means together, and makes
him rest well assured of a sufficiency, though he miss of a superfluity.

Verse. 14. And the Philistims envied him] Envy is the constant companion of
prosperity, as David felt, and complained. Succoth and Penuel contemn Gideon,
out of envy of his victory; Joseph's brethren cannot abide him, because more
favored of his father. Corah maligneth Moses; Saul, David; the Pharisees, our
Savior; Dio in vita Caligulae.
their malice wilfully crossing their consciences. Caligula sacrificed to
Neptune and Envy, ne sibi, ut ipse dicebat, invideretur. He thought other men
sick (belike) of his disease, (as the devil accused God of envy, to our first
parents;) for certainly, there was not a more envious person living, Sueton.
cap. 3 and 4. Lucano, quod art poetica clarus erat, vetitum suit, ne carmen
saceret. Dio in Nerone.

Seneca. Dio in vita Tiberii. Sueton. c. 53. Am. Marcell. lib. 30. cap. 29.


then he; witness his throwing down the statues of all famous men, and defacing
their titles; forbidding any new to be set up, without his leave and liking.
So, that Tiger Tiberius laid hold, with his spiteful teeth, on all the
excellent spirits of his time: He put a Poet to death, for making an excellent
Tragedy; and banished a certain Architect, for building a curious Porch at
Rome, which he could not choose but admire, and reward with money. Nero envied
all men that were any whit gracious with the people. Valentinian hated all that
were well apparelled, or well learned, or wealthy, or noble. Fortibus etiam
detrahere solebat, ut solus videretur bonis artibus eminere, says Ammianus.
Germanicus had not any more deadly enemies, then his own ornaments: Tacitus.
and his adversaries (as here Isaac's) had nothing to complain of him, more
then his greatness. So true is that of Salust. Salust. in Catil.
Difficillimum inter mortales est, gloria invidiam vincere. Hercules had not
more ado with Hydra, then a good man shall have with this beast. Envied he
shall be of his neighbor, for his labor, and right work. Eccles. 4.4. This is
also vanity, and vexation of spirit.

Verse. 15. The Philistims had stopped them] They deprived themselves of the
benefit of those Wells, so that Isaac might not water at them. Aug. in Psalm.
139.
Envy does nothing with reason. It is vitium diabolicum, says Augustine. The
devil, of pure spite, hinders men from heaven: he rages and rangeth, roaring
up and down, seeking whom to devour; and not caring to be double-damn'd
himself, so that others may not be saved. We should be so far from envying at
the happiness of others, that we should rejoice in it. This were to be as the
Angels of God; and the contrary, is to be like the devils of hell: as Saul was;
who, because he could not see David's heart, fed upon his own. Envy devours it
self, as the worm does the nut out of which it grows.

Verse. 16. Go from us; for thou art, etc.] Isaaco ob benedictionem Dei
Ostracismus indicitur. It was well, they had nothing worse against him. Of
Isaac it may be more truly said, then of Mithridates, Virtute eximius,
aliquando fortuna, Paterculus.
semper animo maximus. (...), Dio, lib. 41.
as Dio says of Pompey.

Verse. 17. And Isaac departed thence] was compelled to do so; though, not long
before, the king of the country had charged all his people, on pain of death,
not to disquiet him. Antipho.
(...). So near neighbors are Prosperity and Adversity. Friends are very
changeable creatures, says Plato. Friends, (...). Plato. (...). Trussels
contin. of Dan. Chronicle.
there is no friend, says Socrates; no fast friend. Faithful friends (quoth the
Duke of Buckingham to Bishop Morton, in Richard the third's time) are in this
age, all, for the most part, gone in pilgrimage; and their return is uncertain.
Sejanus his friends showed themselves (as did likewise Hamans) most passionate
against him; saying, that if Caesar had clemency, he ought to reserve it for
men, not use it toward monsters. Carnal friends were never true to any that
trusted to them: whereas, trust in God, at length, will triumph, as we see in
this Patriarch.

Verse. 18. Isaac dug again the wells, etc.] Both for more certainty to find
water, a scarce commodity in those hot countries; and because the labor was
the easier, and his right the better, since they had once been his fathers.

Verse. 19. A well of springing water] Heb. living; so called, for their
continual motion. Life consists in action: and the godly esteem of life, by
that stirring they find in their souls. O Lord, says Hezekiah, by these
things men live, and in all these things is the life of my spirit. And thus,
many a man lives more in a shorter, then others in a longer time. S. Jerome
tells of One, Hieron. Epist. ad Fri.
qui in brevi vitae spacio tempora virtu^im multa replevit. As Seneca of
another, qui non diu vixit, sed diu fuit: Non multum navigavit, sed multum
jactatus est. Oh live, live, live, (says a Reverend man) quickly, much, long:
else, you are but histed, and kicked off this stage of the world, as Phocas was
by Heraclius. Nay, Abners fun. by M. Harris.
many (as Job 27.23. and v. 15.) who were buried before half dead.

Verse. 20. And the herd-men of Gerar*] Not content to have cast him out, they
pursued him, with cruel hatred; and, by denying him water, went about to
destroy both him and his herds. Crosses seldom come single, Eccles. 12.2.
but in a crowd. James 1.2. The clouds return after the rain, and cluster
against a new storm. See therefore, that ye keep your cloak close about you.

Verse. 21. And he called the name of it Sitnah] Of Satan; to hate deadly, as
the devil does. So the Preacher in his travels, tells us of a place called The
mouth of hell. And we read of a Country called Terra del fuego. Preach. trav.
page 106. Heyl. Geog. 130.
Savoy, for the strait passages infested with thieves, was once called Malvoy;
till a worthy adventurer cleared the coasts, and then 'twas called Salvoy, or
Savoy, quasi salva via. Ibid. 474.
So, King Alfred, as he divided the kingdom into shires, so the subjects, in
the several shires, into Tens, or Tythings; every of which should give bond for
the good abearing of each other. The ancientest of the ten, was called the
Tything-man. And the Kingdom was called Regnum Dei, Polyd. Virg.
and Albion, quasi Olbion, happy; as Angli quasi Angeli; for that then, a poor
girl might safely travel with a bag of gold in her hand, and none durst meddle
with her.

Verse. 22. And he removed from thence, etc.] See here a pattern of a patient
and peaceable disposition; not broken by the continual injuries and affronts of
the Philistims, that maligned and molested him. Psalm. 120.7.
I am peace, says David; and I, says Isaac, and I, says every son of peace,
every child of wisdom. How well might good Isaac take up that of David, Psalm.
26.12. Psalm. 4.2.
and say, My feet stand in an even place, (now that he was at Rehoboth
especially, and God had made room for him:) The scales of his mind neither
rose up toward the beam, Barthol. Westmer. in Psalm. 26.
through their own lightness; nor were too much depressed with any load of
sorrow: but hanging equally and unmoved between both, gave him liberty, in all
occurrences, to enjoy himself. Our minds (says a Divine) should be like to
the Adamant, Ambros. Hexam. 4.
that no knife can cut; the Salamander, that no fire can burn; the Rock, which
no waves can shake; the Cypress-tree, which no weather can alter; the hill
Olympus, higher then storm or tempest, wind or weather can reach unto; or
rather, like mount Sion, Psalm. 1^5.1. Philip. 4.11. Act. and Mon.
that cannot be removed, but stands fast for ever. Thus Paul had learned how
to abound, and to be abased. Bradford, if the Queen would give him life, he
would thank her; if banish him, he would thank her; if burn him, he will thank
her; if condemn him to perpetual imprisonment, he will thank her; as he told
one Creswel, that offered to intercede for him. Praeclara est aequabilitas in
omni vita, and idem semper vulius, eademque frons, Aelian. lib. 9. Solin. cap.
8.
ut de Socrate, idemque de C. Laelio accepimus, says Tully, in his books of
Offices; which book the old Lord Burleigh, Peachams comp. Gent. page 45.
Lord high Treasurer to Queen Elisabeth, would always carry about him, to his
dying day, either in his bosom or pocket: And what use he made of it, take M.
Camdens testimony: Camd. Elis. fol. 495.
Burleigh Lord Treasurer was wont to say, that he overcame envy more by
patience then pertinacy. His private estate he managed with that integrity,
that he never sued any man, no man ever sued him. He was in the number of those
few, that both lived and died with glory.

Verse. 23. And he went up] to the place of Gods worship. Strabo writes, that
the Metapontines, Dedicasse in Delphis, (...).
when they were enriched by a good year of corn, dedicated to Apollo a golden
harvest.

Verse. 24. Fear not] for the continued opposition of the Philistims, or
whatever other discouragement. The best minds, when troubled for any long
time, yield inconsiderate motions, and suffer some perturbation; as water that
is violenly stirred, sends up bubbles. They cannot be so much master over their
passions, as not otherwhiles to be disquieted: for, not the evenest weights,
but at their first putting into the balance, somewhat sway both parts thereof,
not without some show of inequality; which, after some little motion, settle
themselves in a meet poize. Potissimum vero fidei murus, Bucholcer. Chronol.
320.
tentationum ariete durius aliquanto pulsatus and concussus, facile nutare ac
ruinam minari incipit, nisi divinitus sustentetur.

Verse. 25. And called upon the Name of the Lord] that had made room for him;
and now, by his presence and promise, comforted him. Let the streams of Gods
bounty lead us, as the watercourse does, either to the spring upward, or
downward to the main Ocean, to the source and fountain whence they flow. Let
God taste of the fruit of his own planting. Otherwise, it is no better then the
refreshing of him that stands by a good fire, and cries, Ah, ah, I am warm.
Isai. 44.16.
We are no better then bruit beasts, if, contenting our selves with a natural
use of the creatures, we rise not up to the Author; if, in stead of being
temples of his praise, we become graves of his benefits. Isaac first built an
altar, and then dug a Well.

Verse. 26. And Abimelech went to him] Not of any great love, but as 1. pricked
in conscience; 2. to provide for posterity. It was a mercy to him, howsoever,
that strangers and Heathens should do him this honor: as it was to Luther,
that when the Pope had excommunicated him, the Emperor proscribed him, two
Kings written against him, etc. the Elector of Saxony should nevertheless stick
to him; Manh. loc. com.
and that the Great Turk should send him word, not to be discouraged, for he
would become his gracious Lord, etc. through From such a Lord, said Luther,
good Lord deliver me.

Verse. 27. Wherefore come ye to me] Here was his magnanimity, and his modesty
both, in expostulating the wrongs they had done unto him. He could not but be
sensible of their discourtesies. though he dissembled them. A sheep feels the
bite of a dog, as well as a swine, though she make no such noise. Isaac having
now a fit opportunity, Job 6.
gives them the telling of it: and how forcible are right words! There is a
real confutation of injuries: and we should consult, whether, in such a case,
it be best to deal with the wrong-doers, at all, by words. Gods way is by
works: and he must get an Isaac-like temperance and prudence, that thinks
himself able to convince them by reason, and to set them down.

Verse. 28. Let there be now an oath] See here, says Chrysostom, how great the
power of virtue is, Quanta virtutis potentia, quantum mansuetudinis robur, etc.
Chrysostom. Hom. quinta. Prove. 16.7.
and the might of meekness: For they that lately drove him out from amongst
them, now come to him in courtesy, though a forlorn forraigner; and not only
give him satisfaction, but seek his friendship. Thus, When a man's ways please
the Lord, he makes his enemies to be at peace with him.

Verse. 29. Thou art now the blessed of the Lord] This they had observed, and
therefore did him this honor. So the King of Babylon sent Ambassadors, and a
Present, to Hezekiah, because he had heard of the miracle of the Suns going
back for him. Now because the Sun, which was their god, had honored him so
much, the King of Babylon would honor him too, Abulens. in 2 Reg. 20.
as Abulensis has well observed.

Verse. 30. And he made them a feast] Not to mischief them thereat, as Absalom
did Amnon, as Alexander did Philotas, as the Great Turk does the Bashaws whom
he intends to strangle; Turk. hist.
but to show, there was no rancour, or purpose of revenge.

Verse. 31. And they rose up betime, etc.] The proverb is, De sero convivium, de
mane consilium. It was the Persians barbarous manner, in the midst of their
cups, to advise of their weightiest affairs, as Pererius here notes: Ardua
negotia, praesertim in quibus juramentum intervenit jejuno stomacho suscipi
peragique debent, says Piscator. Weighty businesses are best dispatched
fasting.

Verse. 32. We have found water] As crosses, so mercies, seldom come single, but
by troops; as she said, when her son Gad was born, A company comes.

Verse. 33. Je Beershebah to this day] So it was before; Genesis 21.31.
but the name was almost worn out, the Well being stopped up: Isaac therefore
new names it, and so preserves it for a monument of Gods mercy to his father,
and to himself.

Verse. 34. And Esau was forty years old] In an apish imitation of his father,
who married not till that age; keeping under his body, and bringing it into
subjection, as Paul, being inured by good education, to hard labor, prayer,
and pious meditation. 1 Cor. 9.
But Esau did not so, a pleasure-monger; he was a profane person, and, as the
Hebrews say, a filthy whore-master. So much also the Apostle seems to intimate,
when he sets them together, and says, Let there be no fornicator, or profane
person, as Esau, Heb. 12.16. [He took to wife] Not consulting his parents, or
craving their consent. This was abdicationis praeludium; Deus quem destruit,
dementat.

Verse. 35. Which were a grief] because idolatresses, Rev. 2.2. and untractable,
because given up by God, Hos. 4.17. Romans 1.28.

XXVII. Verse. 1. Isaac was old, and his eyes di^]
Old Age is of it self a disease, and the sink of all diseases. This Solomon
sweetly sets forth, Eccles, 12. by a continued allegory, Vbi quot lumina imo
flumina orationis exserit? says One. In general, he calls it The evil day,
Eccles. 12.2, 3. etc. expounded.
the years that have no pleasure in them. In particular, the Senses all fail;
the hands tremble; the legs buckle; the teeth cannot do their office, as being
either lost or loosened; the silver cord, that is, the marrow of their backs,
is consumed; the golden ewre, that is, the brain-pan, broke; the pitcher at the
well, that is, the veins at the liver; the wheel at the cistern, that is, the
head, which draws the power of life from the heart: all these worn weak, and
wanting to their office: So that sleep fails, desire fails Sept. (...),
quum and ^ppetitum and Veuerem irritat.
; neither spring nor summer (signified by the almond-tree and grasshopper) shall
affect with pleasure: the daughters of music shall be brought low, as they
were in old Barzillai: the sun, moon, and stars are darkened, for any delight
they take in their sweet shine: yea, the clouds return after rain; a continual
succession of miseries, like April-weather, as one shower is unburthened,
another is brewed, and the sky is still over-cast with clouds. Lo, such is old
age: and is this a fit Present for God? will thou give him the dregs, the
bottom, the very last sands, thy dotage, Mal. 1.8.
which thy self and friends are weary of? Offer it now to thy prince, will he
be pleased with thee? The Circassians (a kind of mongrel-Christians) as they
baptize not their children till the eighth year, so they enter not into the
Church (the Gentlemen especially) till the sixtieth year, Brerewoods Enquires,
135.
but hear Divine Service standing without the Temple; that is to say, till,
through age, they grow unable to continue their rapines and robberies, to which
sin that Nation is exceedingly addicted: so dividing their time betwixt sin and
devotion; dedicating their youth to rapine, and their old age to repentance.
But God will not be so put off: He is a great King, and stands upon his
seniority, Mal. 1.14. In the Levitical Law, there were three sorts of
first fruits: 1. Of the ears of corn, offered about the Passover. 2. Of the
loaves, offered about Pentecost. 3. About the end of the year, in Autumn. Now
of the two first, God had a part; but not of the last: to teach us, that he
will accept of the services of our youth or middle-age: but for old age, vix
aut ne vix quidem. Besides Abraham in the Old Testament, and Nicodemus in the
New, I know not whether we read of any old man ever brought home to God.

Verse. 2. I am old, I know not the day of my death] No more does any, though
never so young. There be as many young sculls as old, in Golgotha. But, young
men, we say, may die; old men must die. To the old, Death is projanuis; to the
young, in insidiis. Senex, quasi seminex. Old men have pedcm in cymba
Charontis, one foot in the grave already. Our decrepit age both expects death,
and sollicites it: it goes grovelling, as groaning for the grave. Ter. in
Adelph. Vel quod curvus scilices cernat; vel quod mox silentibu^ umbris
cer^end^^ sit. (...).
Whence Terence calls an old men Silicernium; and the Greeks, (...), of looking
toward the ground, whither he is tending; or (as others will have it) of loving
earth and earthly things; which old folk greedily grasp at, because they fear
they shall not have to suffice them while alive, and to bring them honestly
home (as they say) when they are dead; (...).
as Plutarch gives the reason.

Verse. 3. Take me some venison] It is some blemish to holy Isaac, that he so
over-loved Esau, and that because he did eat of his venison, or because venison
was in his mouth, Genesis 25.28. All things are lawful for me, but I will not be
brought under of any thing. 1 Cor. 6.12.
It is a shame to a Saint, to be a slave to his appetite; that it should be
said of him, as it was of Epicurus, Ennius.
Dum palato quid sit optimum judicat, coeli palatium non suspexit.

Verse. 4. That my soul may bless thee, before I die] The words of dying men,
are living oracles. It was the Patriarchs care, and must be ours, to leave a
blessing behind us; to seek the salvation of our children whiles we live, and
to say something to same purpose when we die, that may stick by them. So, when
we are laid in our graves, our stock remains, goes forwards, and shall do, till
the day of doom.

Verse. 5. Esau went to the field to hunt, etc.] But before he returned, the
blessing was otherwise bestowed. The hope of the hypecrite shall perish. How
many lie languishing at hopes hospital, as he at the pool of Bethesda, and no
help comes! Joh. 5.
they repair to the creatures, as to a Lottery, with heads full of hopes, but
return with hearts full of blanks. Or, if they draw nigh to God, they think
they take hold of him; but it is but as the child that catches at the shadow
on the wall, which he thinks he holds fast in his hand; but it vanishes. The
common hope is ill bottomed. Hope unfailable, Romans 5.5, is founded upon faith
unfeigned, 1 Timothy 1.5. Deo consist nunquam confusi. Hos. 2.13.
He speaks sweetest comfort to the heart, in the wilderness.

Verse. 6. I heard thy father] She overheard what Isaac spoke secretly. Women
will be listening, as Sarah behind the door; when she laughed, and little
thought to be questioned for it.

Verse. 7. That I may eat, and bless thee] Being cheared up by thy good cheer
and wine, I may be the fitter instrument of the Spirit of God. So the Prophet
called for a minstrel, 2 Kings 3.14, 15. Plato called Wine and Music (...),
the mollifying medicines of humane miseries. Cheerfulness is called for in all
services.

Verse. 8. Now therefore, my son, obey my voice] Which yet he ought not to have
done, because she commanded him that which was evil: and they that do thus, are
peremptores, potius quam parents; rather parricides then parents, as says S.
Bernard.

Verse. 9. savoury meat for thy father, etc.] She knew his diet, and could fit
his tooth. The wife is to take care to please her husband; (...).
to use her wits, and busy her thoughts how to give him content in diet, and
other things of the world, as the Apostle has it, 1 Cor. 7.34. It was
devilish policy in Agrippina, (the mother of Nero; Dixit Nero boletos (...),
quod Claudius boleto in numerum Deorum relatus esses. Dlo.
and it came home to her) to temper the poison that she gave her husband
Claudius the Emperor, in the meat he most delighted in, and then to make a
jest of it. Let us be sure to bring God such service as he loves: He will eat,
not only our honey, but our honeycomb: he will drink, not only our Wine, but
our milk, Cant. 5.1. take in good part unperfect performances, so the heart be
upright: But displeasing service is a double dishonor. The fat of rams was
rejected with infinite disdain, Isai. 1.11, 15.
where the hands are full of blood, the heart of sin. The Philosopher could
complain of his countrymen, D^^g. Laert.
that when they went to offer sacrifice to Health, they did then banquet most
riotously against Health.

Verse. 10. And thou shall bring it to thy father] Though this action, in the
general intendment, was good, yet the execution of it wanted not particular
error. Her course had been, rather, to have minded her husband of Gods promise
to Jacob, and gently to have exhorted him to do nothing against it; and then,
to have entreated the Lord, to bend his mind to the obedience of his divine
will, though to the crossing of his own. But the Saints righteousness (while
here) is mixed; as light and darkness, dimness at least, in a painted glass,
dyed with some obscure and dim color: it is transparent, and gives good, but
not clear and pure, light.

Verse. 11. Esau my brother is an hairy man] This, Rebeccah thought not of. Plus
vident oculi, quam oculus. Two is better then one; but woe be to him that is
alone. We want much of our strength, in the want of a faithful friend, who
might be our monitor: Whence David so bemoans the loss of his Jonathan; and S.
Paul counted it a special mercy to him, that Epaphroditus recovered, Cyprian.
epist.
Phil. 2.27. This the Heathen persecutors knew, and therefore banished the
Christians, and confined them to Isles, and mines, where they could not have
access one to another. Doctor Tailor rejoiced that ever he came into prison,
there to be acquainted with that Angel of God (so he calls him) John Bradford.
While Ridley and Latimer lived, they kept up Cranmer from entertaining counsels
of revolt. It was not for nothing, surely, that our Savior sent forth his
disciples by two and two: He knew by experience, that Satan is readiest to
assault, when none is by to assist. Aaron may be for a mouth to Moses, Exodus
4.16.
Moses for a God to Aaron.

Verse. 12. My father peradventure will feel me] Our heavenly Father will
certainly feel us, and better feel us; and we shall feel him too, in his
fatherly corrections, before he bless us. Suffer we must, or ere we reign: no
coming to the Crown, but by the Cross. Christ himself was perfected by
sufferings; Heb. 5. Romans 8.29.
and we must be conformed to his image. When Ignatius came to the wild beasts,
Now, says he, I begin to be a Christian. Qui non est Crucianus, non est
Christianus, says Luther, on the 29 of Genesis: And in another place; I have
no stronger argument, says he, Luth. T.2.
against the Popes kingdom, then this, that he reigns without the Cross. [And
I shall seem to him as a de^eiver] So shall all complementing hypocrites to
God, that pretend his service to their wicked or worldly ends and aims. They
think, belike, Sa^iens nummularius D^us est nummum fictum non recipiet. Bern.
Job 36.13. Bern.
to deceive him; but therein they are fairly deceived, (for he searches the
hearts) and bring a curse, in stead of a blessing, upon themselves and their
posterity. The hypocrite in heart heaps up wrath. Nemo enim magis iram meretur,
(says a Father) quam amicum simulans inimicus. Where shall we read of an
hypocrite received to mercy.

Verse. 13. Upon me be thy curse, my son] A bold speech: but she respected the
promise by faith; she relied on that oracle, Genesis 25.23. which Isaac might
mis-interpret, understanding it not of the persons of his sons, but of their
posterity. Bernardus non vidit omnia. Isaac was not more blind in his eyes,
then in his affection to his firstborn; and that might mislead him. But
Rebeccah saw further then he, and therefore made this bold adventure (not
without some mixture of infirmity) to procure Jacob the blessing, against her
husbands will and intention. A wife is not to perform such blind obedience to
her husband, as Plutarch prescribes; when he lays it as a Law of Wedlock, on
the wife, Plut. Moral. 318.
to acknowledge and worship the same gods, and none else, but those whom her
husband honors and reputes for gods. Men be they pleased or displeased, God
must not be displeased.

Verse. 15. And Rebeccah took goodly raiment] The Priestly garments (some think)
proper to Esau, had he kept his birth right; but kept, not by Esau or his
wives, but by the mother of the family. The Hebrew calls them, Vestes
desiderabiles, garments of desires, goodly, sweet, precious; yet far inferior
to that rich and royal robe of Christ's righteousness, that garment of our elder
brother; wherewith arrayed, we obtain the blessing. We read of Solomon's bravery,
Athenaeus.
of Herod's cloth of silver, of Alcisthenes the Sybarite's cloak, sold to the
Carthaginians by 'Dionysius, for 120 talents; Propter invidiosam impendii
magnisicentiam.
of Demetrius his robe of estate, which, for the exceeding costliness of it, no
Prince that came after him would ever put on. But all these were but rags to
the robe of righteousness, that fine White linen, and shining, Rev. 19.

Verse. 16. And she put the skins of the goats] This, by some, is excused, as if
it were only dolus bonus, to keep her husband from wrong-doing; as, when the
Physician deceives his Patient, that he may heal him. But howsoever that she
did may be extenuated, it can hardly be justified, albeit God ordered it to his
own purpose.

Verse. 19. I am Esau, thy first born, etc.] Here he utters three lies in a
breath; besides his intitling God to that he did, verse. 20, so taking that
Reverend Name in vain. This was his sin, and he smarted for it, to his dying
day: for he had scarce a merry hour after this; but God followed him with one
sorrow upon another, to teach him and us, Jer. 2.19. Arist. Ethic. lib. 4. c. 7.
what an evil and bitter thing sin is, and how it ensnares and ensnarls us.
Aristotle could say, that a lie is in it self evil and wicked. The Hebrews call
it Aven, a great iniquity. And the Scripture reckons it among monstrous sins,
Rev. 21.8, and condemns it to hell; whether it be the officious, merry, or
pernicious lie. Indeed every lie is pernicious to our selves, or others, or
both; because flatly forbidden of God, and because it is against the order of
nature, 1 John 2.21. Joh. 8.44.
and for that no lie is of the truth, (as S. John has it) but of the devil,
who began, and still upholds his kingdom by lies. Contrarily, God is Truth, and
his children are all such as will not lie, Isai. 63.8. Rev. 14.5. at least, not
get a haunt and a habit of lying, which David calls a way of lying: Remove from
me the way of lying, says he, that I make not a trade or common practice of
it. We find, that, 1 Samuel 21.2, he very roundly tells two or three lies
together, (as Jacob here did;) and all deliberate. 1 Samuel 27.8, ^10, 11.
So that tale he told Achish, of invading the South of Judah, when he had been
upon the Geshurites and Gerarites, I know not how it can be excused. But this
was not David's way, his common course; pity it should. Honest Heathens
condemned lying: The Persians punished it severely in their children: Xenoph.
Cytop. lib. 1. (...). Hom. Cor. Nepos, in vita Epam.
Homer censures it in Dolon, Ulysses, and others. Clitarchi historici (says
Quintilian) ingenium probatur, sides infamatur. Nepos reports of Epaminondas,
that he so loved truth, that he would not once lie, no not in jest. A shame to
many Christians, who think the officious and sporting lie to be nothing.
Whereas, Gal. 1.10. we must not speak the truth to please men, much less lie.
And for saving our selves, we must rather die, then lie: else Peter had not
sinned, in denying his Master. As for profiting others, Job 13.7, 8, 9.
we may not lie, though it were to save a soul, Romans 3.7. We may as well commit
fornication with the Moabites, to draw them to our Religion; or steal from rich
men, to give to the poor; as lie to do another man a good turn.

Verse. 20. How is it that thou have found it so quickly] A man may very well
ask our common Protestants this question, concerning the Faith they so much
boast of, but came by it too quickly, to be right. They were never yet in the
furnace of Mortification, felt the spirit of bondage, the terrors of God in
their consciences. Their Faith is like Jonah's gourd, that grew up in a night;
or a bullet in a mould, that is made in a moment. Let ours be like the water of
Bethlehem, much longed for, and hardly come by, etc.

Verse. 21. That I may feel thee, my son] Here Isaac used all his Senses, and
yet is cozened. There is neither Wisdom nor counsel against the Lord. Gasp. Ens.
Mihi hominum prudentia similis videtur talparum labori, non sine dexteritate
sub terra fodientium, sed ad lumen Solis caecutientium.

Verse. 22. The voice is Jacobs voice] Jacob must name himself Esau, with the
voice of Jacob. It is hard, if our tongues do not bewray us, in spite of our
habit, as it did the wife of Jeroboam.

Verse. 24. Art thou, etc. and he said, I am] Thus one sin entertained, fetches
in another; a lie especially, which, being a tinkerly blushful sin, is either
denied by the liar, who is ashamed to be taken with it; or else covered by
another and another lie, as we see here in Jacob; who being once over shoes,
will be over boots too; but he will persuade his father, that he is his very
son Esau.

Verse. 25. Bring it near to me] Divinum consilium dum devitatur, impletur:
humana sapientia, dum reluctatur, comprehenditur, says Gregory, Here Isaac
does unwilling and unwitting justice.

Verse. Arist. lib. de mirab. auscult.
27. As the smell of a field] Compare Cant. 2.13. and 4.12, 13, 14. Aristotle
writes of a parcel of ground in Sicily, that sends such a strong smell of
fragrant flowers, to all the fields and leazes thereabouts, that no hound can
hunt there, the scent is so confounded with the sweet smell of those flowers.
Labor we so to resent heavenly sweetnesses, so to savor the things above,
that we may have no mind to hunt after earthly vanities, etc. Alexanders body
is said to be of such an exact constitution, that it gave a sweet scent where
it went. Christ (the true carcass) smells so sweet to all heavenly eagles,
Matthew. 24. Joh. 12.
that, being now lifted up, he draws them after him.

Verse. Esau likewise has the like, but not with a God give thee.
28. God give thee of the dew] For that country was dry and thirsty: They had
rain, say some, but twice a year; the former in seed-time, and the later rain
in May. The blessings here bestowed, are plenty, victory, domestical
preeminency, and outward prosperity. But beyond all these, some better thing
was provided and promised. Erant enim speculum, and pignus coelestium. The
Church of Rome borrows her mark from the market-plenty, or cheapness, etc. she
vaunts of her temporal felicity, and makes a catalogue of the strange victories
which the Catholics have had. Immo vix unquam fuerunt Haeretici superiores
quando justo praelio dimicatum est, Bell. tom. 2. lib. 4. cap. ult.
says Bellarmine. Upon one of the Easter-holydays, says George Marsh, Martyr,
Master Sherburn and Master More sent for me, persuading me much to leave mine
opinions; saying, All the bringers up and favorers of that Religion, had ill
luck, Act. and Mon. fol. 1421.
and were either put to death, or in prison, and in danger of life. Again, the
favorers of the Religion now used, had wondrous good luck, and prosperity in
all things. These wizards, these disputers of this world, as the Apostle calls
them, 1 Cor. 1.20, either knew not, Ecclesia baeres Crucis.
or believed not, that the Church is the heir of the Cross, as an Ancient
speaks; that Opposition is (as Calvin wrote ^o the French King) Evangelii
genius, the bad genius that dogs the Gospel; Veritas odium parit. Ter.
that Truth breeds hatred, (as the fair Nymphs did the ill-favored Fawns and
Satyrs) and seldom goes without a scratcht face. Some Halcyons the Church has
here, as in Constantines time, ( Repugnante contra temetipsam tua foelicitate,
says Salvian, in his first book to the Catholic Church;) but grace she shall
be sure of here, with persecution; and glory hereafter, without interruption.
As for outward things, aut aderunt sane, aut non oberunt; either she shall have
them, or be as well without them. God shall be her Cornu-copia, her
All-sufficient, her shield, Sine Deo, om^is copia est egestas.
and exceeding great reward.

Verse. 29. Let thy mothers sons bow down to thee] That is, thy brethren; which
are therefore denominated from the mother, quod certior est a matre progenies,
quam a patre, Castalio in Annotat. ad locum
says an Interpreter. But this blessing is pronounced in an higher style then
ordinary; therefore sentences are doubled; and that kind of speech is here
used, which, with us, is either Poetical, or not far from it.

Verse. 30. Esau his brother came in] All-too-late. Detained he was by the
devil, (say the Hebrews) who not seldom makes a fool of hunters, and leads them
about. A sweet providence of God there was in it, certainly, that he should
come in as soon as Isaac had done, and Jacob was gone, and no sooner. Like as
there was in that which Master Fox reports of Luther, that on a time, Act. and
Mon. fol. 793.
as he was sitting in a certain place upon his stool, a great stone there was
in the vault, over his head, which being staid miraculously so long as he was
sitting, as soon as he was up, immediately fell upon the place where he sat,
able to have crushed him in pieces. A Warrant once came down, under Seal, for
the execution of the Lady Elizabeth; Steven Gardener was the engineer, and
thought he had been sure of his prey: But God pulled the morsel out of his
mouth; Englands Elizabeth, by Heywood.
for one Master Bridges, mistrusting false play, presently made haste to the
Queen, who renounced and reversed it. Another time, while Sir Henry Benning
field her Keeper was at Court, one Basset, a Gentleman, and a great favorite
of Steven Gardiners, came, with twenty men well appointed, to Woodstock, to
have murdered her: But, by Gods great providence, Sir Henry had left so strict
a charge behind him, that no living soul might have access unto the Princess,
upon what occasion soever, till his return, that they could not be admitted;
whereby, their bloody enterprise was utterly disappointed. The Lord knows how
to deliver his: Psalm. 34.
he keeps all their bones, not one of them is broken.

Verse. 31. And he also had made savoury meat] Esau's works here, are better
then Jacobs. Election is not of works, but of grace, Romans 9.11. Quis te
discernit? says the Apostle. Cor. 4.7.
Greevinchovius the Arminian sawcily answers, Ego meipsum discerno. And surely,
had the cause of our election been either by our faith, or good works foreseen
(as the Papists and Arminians would have it) Saint Paul might have spared his
question, or soon received a ready answer.

Verse. 33. And Isaac trembled very exceedingly] The fear of God reined him, in
that he durst not reverse the blessing, (though happily he had a mind to it;)
nay, he stablished it to Jacob here, and more advisedly, in the next Chapter.
Noli peccare: nam Deus videt, Angeli astant, diabolus accusabit, conscientia
testabitur, infernus cruciabit. A reverend and religious man had this written
before his eyes, in his Study, says M. Gataker.

Verse. 34. He cried with a great and exceeding bitter cry] Not for his sin, Non
dolet de peccato venditionis, sed de damno perditionis. Par. Hos. 7.14.
in selling the birthright; but for his loss, in missing the blessing: though,
having sold the birthright, he had no right to the blessing. This is the guise
of the ungodly. He cries Perii, not Peccavi. If he howl upon his bed, it is for
corn and oil, as a dog tied up howls for his dinner, It never troubles him,
that a good God is offended, which to an honest heart is the prime cause of
greatest sorrow.

Verse. 35. Thy brother came with subtilty] Junius observes, that Isaac here, to
please his son, commits some oversight, in transferring the fault upon
Jacob. He might have seen how God chastised his seeking to cross the Oracle, in
the sin of Rebeccah and Jacob, who beguiled him. But our minds are as ill-set
as our eyes, neither of them apt to turn inwards.

Verse. 36. Is he not rightly named Jacob] He cavils and quarrels at his
brothers guile, at his fathers store; ( Have thou but one blessing, etc.) but
not a word we hear of his own profaneness. How apt are men to mistake the cause
of their sufferings, and to blame any thing sooner then their own untowardness!

Verse. 38. Esau lift up his voice, and wept] Yet, found no place for
repentance, Heb. 12.17. that is, he could not, by his tears, prevail with his
father, to reverse the blessing. See the fruit of Gods holy fear. Moses his rod
was not so famous for being turned into a Serpent, (for even the Magicians did
as much) as for devouring the Magicians rod: So the true fear of God is most
eminent and effectual, when set in emulation or opposition to other fears, or
carnal aims and affections.

Verse. 39. Answered and said unto him] Dixit, non benedixit, quia p^tius fuit
praedictio futurae conditionis, quam benedictio, says Pareus. And whereas we
read, Behold, thy dwelling shall be the fatness of the earth, and of the dew of
heaven; Castalio renders it thus: Tua quidem seeds a terrae pinguitudine, and a
supero coeli rore aberit. For Mishmanne, says he, signifies ab pinguitudine,
sive sine pinguitudine; as it does also, Psalm. 109.24. Sic dicimus Ab re,
(...), and composite, Amens, abesse, (...).
My flesh fails from fatness, (that is, for lack of fatness;) or, Without
fatness. So the sense he sets upon this Text, is; Thou shall dwell far from the
fatness of the earth, in a barren country, etc. For Isaac could not give Esau
what he had given Jacob before: and this was that, that Esau so grieved at, and
threatened his brother for. Or if he could, what cause had Esau so to take on?
why should it trouble me, that another partakes of the sun-light with me, when
I have never the less? etc. Object. But the Apostle says, Heb. 11.20.
Isaac blessed Jacob and Esau. Sol. It was a blessing, no doubt, that Edom
should shake off Isreal's yoke; as it follows, verse. 40. and fell out, 2 Kings
8.20.

Verse. 40. When thou shall have the dominion] Cum planxeris, says Junius; when
thou have, for some time, undergone hard, troublesome, and lamentable servitude,
the grief whereof thou do greatly groan under; as in David's time, who cast
his shoe over them, Psalm 60.8. The Sodomites, those worst of men, 2 Samuel 8.14.
were the first that we find in Scripture brought in bondage to others, Genesis
14.4. When the Danes and other forraigners domineered in this Kingdom, was it
not a lamentable time? were not men's dearest lives sold as cheap, as sparrows
were among the Jews, five for two farthings? Did we but live a while in Turkey,
Persia, yea, or but in France, (says One) a dram of that liberty we yet enjoy,
would be as precious, as a drop of cold water would have been to the rich man
in hell, when he was so grievously tormented with those slames. Take we heed,
lest for the abuse of this sweet mercy, God send not in the Midianites to
thresh out our corn, the Assyrians to drink up our milk, to make a spoil of our
cattle, Jer. 49.32, and to cause us to eat the bread of our souls in the peril
of our lives, as our fathers did in Queen Mary's days.

Verse. 41. And Esau hated Jacob, etc.] Because God said, Jacob have I loved.
And, as all hatred is bloody, he resolves to be his death. The righteous is
abomination to the wicked, says Solomon. Prove. 29.27.
Moab was irked because of Israel, or, did fret and vex at them, Number. 22.3, 4.
who yet passed by them in peace. But the old serpent had set his limbs in them,
transfused his venom into them: hence that deadly hatred, that is and will be
betwixt the godly and the wicked. Pliny speaks of the Scorpion, that there is
not one minute, wherein he does not put forth the sting: So does that
serpentine seed, acted by Satan. The Panther so hates man, that he flies upon
the very picture of a man, and tears it to pieces. So does Satan and his imps
upon the image of God, in whomsoever they find it. Psalm. 35.19. Scito quia ab
ascensore suo daemone perurgetur. Bern.
They Satanically hate me, says David of his enemies. And see thou thy
persecutor full of rage? (says Bernard) know thou, that he is spurred on by
the devil that rides him, that acts and agitates him, Ephesians. 2.2. [And Esau said
in his heart] Effutiverat etiam minaces voces; he had also bolted out some
suspicious speeches, (as our Gunpowder-traitors did) whereby he was prevented.
[The days of mourning for my father] No matter for his mother: Levit. 19.3.
yet God says, Ye shall fear every man his mother and his father. The mother
is first mentioned, because usually most slighted. Vindicab^ me afferendo Patri
luctum, caede fratris. Luth.
Luther thinks, he threatens his father also, in these words; as if he should
say, I will be avenged, by being the death of my brother, though it be to the
breaking of my fathers heart. A bloody speech of a vindictive spirit, whom
nothing would satisfy, but to be a double parricide. [I will slay my brother]
But threatened men live long: for even Isaac, who died soonest, lived above
forty years beyond this. Psalm. 31.15.
My times are in thy hand, says David.

Verse. 42. And these words of Esau, etc.] For he could not hold, as Absalom
did; who, intending to murder Amnon, spoke neither good nor evil to him. These
still revenges are most dangerous, as a dog that barks not. That Esau vented
himself in words, was a great mercy of God to Jacob. He thought nothing, (good
man) but followed his calling, not knowing his danger. But his provident mother
hearkened it out, and took course to prevent it. So does the sweet fatherly
providence of God take care and course for the safety of his servants, when
they are either ignorant or secure. Masses were said in Rome, for the good
success of the Powder Plot; but no prayers in England, for our deliverance: and
yet we were delivered. A sevenfold Psalmody they had framed here, which
secretly passed from hand to hand, with tunes set, to be sung for the chearing
up of their wicked hearts, with an expectation (as they called it) of their day
of Jubilee. The matter consists of railing upon King Edward, Queen Elizabeth,
and King James; Spec. bell. sacri.
of petition, imprecation, prophecy, and praise. This Psalter is hard to be
had: for they are taken up by the Papists, as other books be, that discover
their shame. But Mendoza, that liar, (convenient rebus nomina saepe suis)
sounded the Triumph before the Victory. That blind Letter of theirs brought
all to light, by the mere mercy of the Father of lights, who was pleased to put
a divine sentence into the mouth of the King. Sorex suo perit indicio. Hunc
tibi pugionem mittit Senatus, dixit ille: detexit facinus fatuus, and non imple
vit. So here. See the like, 1 Samuel 19.2. Acts 9.24. and 23.16. [And she sent
and called Jacob] Why did she not call both her sons together, and make them
friends, by causing the younger to resign up his blessing to the elder?
Because she preferred heaven before earth, and eternity before any the worlds
amity or felicity whatsoever. The devil would fain compound with us, when he
cannot conquer us; as Pharaoh would let some go, not all; or if all, yet not
far. Religiosum oport et esse, sed non religentem. He cannot abide this
strictne's, etc. But we must be resolute for God and heaven. It Is better flee,
with Jacob, yea, die a thousand deaths, then, with the loss of Gods blessing,
to accord with Esau.

Verse. 43. Flee thou to Laban] Flee then we may, when in danger of life; so it
be with the wings of a dove, not with the pinnions of a dragon. God must be
trusted, not tempted. Means must be neither trusted, nor neglected.

Verse. 44. Tarry with him a few days] Heb. unos dies. Sed facti sunt viginti
anni. She reckoned upon a few days; but it proved to be twenty whole years: and
she never saw Jacob again, as the Hebrew Doctors gather. Thus Man purposes,
God disposes. Some think she sent Deborah her nurse, to fetch him home, who
died in the return, Genesis 35.8.

Verse. 45. And he forget, etc.] Whiles wrongs are remembered, they are not
remitted. He forgives not, that forgets not. When an inconsiderate fellow had
stricken Cato in the Bath, Sen. de ira, lib. 1.
and afterward cried him mercy; he replied, I remember not that thou did
strike me. Our Henry the sixth is said to have been of that happy memory, that
he never forgot any thing but injuries. Esau was none such: He was of that
sort, whom they call (...), soon angry, but not soon pleased. His anger was
like coals of juniper, Psalm. 120.4. which burn extremely, last long, (a whole
twelve-moneth about, as some write;) and though they seem extinct, revive
again: Flamma redardescit, quae modo nulla fuit. Ovid.


Verse. 46. I am weary of my life, etc.] A wise woman (says an Interpreter) not
willing to grieve her husband, she conceals from him Esau's malicious hatred of
Jacob, and pretends another cause of sending him away, to take him a fit wife.
Let women learn, not to exasperate their husbands with quick words, or froward
deeds; but study their quiet. Livia, wife to Augustus, being asked how she
could so absolutely rule her husband, D^o in Aug.
answered, By not prying into his actions, and dissembling his affections, etc.

XXVIII. Verse. 1. Isaac called Jacob, and blessed him]
HE does not rate him, or rail at him. Anger must have an end. The Prodigals
father met him, and kissed him, when one would have thought, he should rather
have kicked him, killed him. Pro peccato magno, Terent.
paululum supplicii satis est patri.

Verse. 2. Arise, go to Padan-aram] Jacob was no sooner blessed, but banished: so
our Savior was no sooner out of the water of Baptism, and had heard, This is
my beloved Son, etc. but he was presently in the fire of temptation, and heard,
If thou be the Son, etc. When Hezekiah had set all in good order, 2 Chronicles. 31.
then up came Sennacherib with an army, Chap. 32.1. God will put his people to
it; and often, after sweetest feelings.

Verse. 3. And God Almighty bless thee] Here Isaac stablisheth the blessing to
Jacob, lest happily he should think, that the blessing so got, would be of no
force to him. God passes by the evil of our actions, and blesses the good.

Verse. 4. And give thee the blessing of Abraham] Here he is made heir of the
blessing, as are also all true Christians, 1 Pet. 3.9. Caesar, when he was sad,
said to himself, Cogita te esse Caesarem: so, think thou art an heir of heaven,
and be sad if thou can.

Verse. 5. Isaac sent away Jacob] with his staff only, Genesis 32.10. and to serve
for a wife, Hos. 12.12. It was otherwise, when a wife was provided for Isaac.
But Jacob went as privately as he could, probably, that his brother Esau might
not know of his journey, and wait him a shrewd turn by the way. Hos. 12.12. he
sled into Syria.
Theodoret says, it was, that the divine providence might be the better
declared toward him, no better attended or accommodated.

Verse. 6. When Esau saw, (...).
etc.] But he was ever too late, and therefore that he did, was to little
purpose. An over-late sight is good neither in piety nor policy. They will
find it so, that are semper victuri; and never can find time to begin, Seneca.
till they are shut out of heaven for their trifling. How many have we known
taken away in their offers and essays, before they had prepared their hearts to
cleave to God!

Verse. 7. And was gone to Padan-aram] Which was distant from Beer-sheba almost
five hundred miles. This was the father of the brood of travelers; and his
affliction is our instruction, Romans 14.4. 1 Cor. 10.11.

Verse. 8. pleased not his father] Whether himself or they pleased God, or not,
was no part of his care. God is not in all the wicked man's thoughts. That he
strives for, is, to be well esteemed of by others, to have the good will and
good word of his neighbors and friends, such especially as he hopes for
benefit by. Thus Julian counterfeited zeal, till he had got the Empire:
afterward, of Julian, he became Idolian, as Nazianzen says he was commonly
called, because he set open again the Idols temples, (which had been shut up by
Constantine) and restored them to the Heathens.

Verse. 9. Then went Esau unto Ishmael] Stulta haec fuit (...), and hypocrisis,
says Pareus rightly. Apes will be imitating men: Spiders have their webs, and
Wasps their honey-combs. Hypocrites will needs do something, that they may seem
to be somebody: but, for want of an inward principle, they do nothing well:
they amend one error with another, as Esau here; and as Herod prevents perjury
by murder. Thus, while they shun the sands, they rush upon the rocks; Incidit
in Scyllam, cupiens vitare Charybdim.
and while they keep off the shallows, they fall into the whirl-pool. Sed nemo
it a perplexus tenetur inter du vitia, quin exitus pateat absque tertio, says
an Ancient.

Verse. 10. And Jacob went out from Beer-sheba] A long journey; but nothing so
long as Christ took, from heaven to earth, to serve for a wife, his Church; who
yet is more coy then Rachel, and can hardly be spoken withal, though he stand
clapping and calling, Open to me, my sister, my spouse. Stupenda dignatio,
says One; a wonderful condescending.

Verse. 11. And he lighted upon a certain place] Little thinking to have found
heaven there. Let this comfort travelers, and friends that part with them.
Jacob never lay better, Mal^ cubans suaviter dorm^^ and s^liciter som^^^t.
then when he lay without doors; nor yet slept sweeter, then when he laid his
head upon a stone. He was a rich man's son, and yet inured to take hard on.

Verse. 12. Behold a ladder] Scala est piorum in hoc mundo peregrinatio, says
Pareus, after Iunius. But besides this interpretation, our Savior offers us
another, Ioh 1.51, applying it to himself, the true ladder of life, per quem
solum in coelum ascendere possimus. He that will go up any other way, must, as
the Emperor once said, erect a ladder, and go up alone. He touched heaven, in
respect of his Deity; earth, in respect of his humanity; and joined earth to
heaven, by reconciling Man to God. Gregory speaks elegantly of Christ, (...),
that he joined heaven and earth together, as with a bridge; being the only
true Pontifex, or bridge-maker. Heaven is now open and obvious, to them that
acknowledge him their sole Mediator, and lay hold, by the hand of faith, on his
merits, as the rounds of this heavenly ladder: These only ascend; that is,
their consciences are drawn out of the depths of despair, and put into heaven,
as it were, by pardon, and peace with God, rest sweetly in his bosom, calling
him Abba Father; and have the holy angels ascending, to report their
necessities; and descending, as messengers of mercies. We must also ascend
(says S. Bernard) by those two feet, (as it were) Meditation, and Prayer: yea,
there must be continual ascensions in our hearts, as that Martyr said: M.
Philpot.
And as Jacob saw the Angels ascending and descending, and none standing still;
so must we be active, and abundant in Gods work, as knowing, that our labor is
not in vain in the Lord; Bern.
and that, non proficere, est deficere; not to go forward, is to go backward.

Verse. 13. I am the Lord God of Abraham, etc.] What an honor is this to
Abraham, that God was not ashamed to be called, His and his sons God! Euseb^^s
the Historian, was called Eusebius Pamphili, for the love that was betwixt him
and the Martyr Pamphilus, as S. Hierome testifies. Friend to Sir Philip Sidney
is engraven upon a Noble-mans Tomb in this Kingdom, The old Lord Brook.
as one of his Titles. Behold the goodness of God, stooping so low, as to
style himself, The God of Abraham, and Abraham again, The friend of God.

Verse. 14, 15. And thy seed shall be as the dust] Against his fourfold cross,
here is a fourfold comfort, (as Pererius well observes) a plaster as broad as
the sore, and sovereign for it. Against the loss of his friends, I will be with
thee: 2. of his country; I will give thee this land: 3. against his poverty;
Thou shall spread abroad, to the east, west, etc. 4. his sol^tariness and
aloneness; Angels shall attend thee; and, Thy seed shall be as the dust, Number.
23.10.
etc. And who can count the dust of Jacob? says Balaam, that Spelman of the
devil, as One calls him. Whereunto we may add that which surpasses and
comprehends all the rest; In thee, and thy seed shall all the families of the
earth be blessed. Now whatsoever God spoke here with Jacob, he spoke with us,
as well as with him, says Hosea, Chap. 12.4.

Verse, 16. And I knew it not] Viz. that God is graciously present in one place,
as well as in another. Our ignorance and unbelief is freely to be confessed,
and acknowledged. Thus David, Psalm. 73.22. Agur, Prove. 30.2. Pray for me, In
his Letter to Ridley, Act. and Mon. 1565. Se^m. in 3 Sund. in Advent.
says Father Latimer to his friend; pray for me, I say: for I am sometimes so
fearful, that I would creep into a mouse-hole. And in a certain Sermon; I my
self, says he, have used, in mine earnest matters, to say, Yea by S. Mary;
which indeed is naught.

Verse. 17. How dreadful is this place! The place of Gods public Worship, is a
place of Angels and Archangels, (...).
(says Chrysostom;) it is the Kingdom of God; it is very heaven: What wonder
then, though Jacob be afraid, albeit he saw nothing but visions of love and
mercy? Psalm. 5.7.
In thy fear will I worship toward thy holy temple, says David. The very Turk,
when he comes into his Temple, lays by all his State, and has none to attend
him all the while. Omnino oportet nos, orationis tempore, curiam intrare
coelestem, (says S. Bernard) in qua Rex regum stellato sedet solio, Bern. de
diverse. 25.
etc. Quanta ergo cum reverentia, quanto timore, quanta illuc humilitate
accedere debet e palude sua procedens and repens vilis ranuncula? Our addresses
must be made unto God, with the greatest reverence that is possible.

Verse. 18. And set it up for a pillar] The better to perpetuate the memory of
that mercy he had there received; and that it might be a witness against him,
if hereafter he failed of fulfilling his vow. It is not amiss, in making holy
vows, to take some friend to witness, that, in case we be not careful so to
fulfill them, may mind us, and admonish us, of our duty in that behalf. Jacob,
that was here so free, when the matter was fresh, to promise God a Chapel at
Bethel, was afterward backward enough; and stood in need that God should pull
him by the ear, once and again, with a Go up to Bethel, and punish him for his
delays, in the rape of his daughter, cruelty of his sons, etc. Genesis 35.

Verse. 20. And Jacob vowed a vow] The first holy votary that ever we read of:
whence Jacob also is called, The father of vows; which, out of this Text, may
be thus described A Vow is nothing else, but a religious promise made to God in
prayer, and grounded upon the promise of God; whereby we tie our selves, by way
of thankfulness, to do something that is lawful, and within our power; with
condition of obtaining some further favor at the hands of God. Thus Jacob vows
to God only: he is the sole object of Fear, therefore also of Vows. See them
set together, Psalm. 76.11. Next, he prays when he vows. (...): a vow and a
prayer are of near and necessary affinity. See Psalm. 61.6. Judge 11.30, 31. That
was a blasphemous vow of Pope Julius, that said, Act. and Mon.
he would have his will, al despito di Dio. And not unlike of Solomon the Great
Turk, in a Speech to his Soldiers: So help me great Mahomet, Turk. hist.
I vow, in despite of Christ and John, in short time to set up mine Ensigns
with the Moon, in the middle of the Marketplace in Rhodes. Jacob, as he vowed
only by the Fear of his father Isaac; so he presented his vow in an holy
prayer, not in an hellish execration. I add, that it is a promise, grounded
upon Gods promise: so was Jacobs here, in all points; as is to be seen, if
compared with verse 15 of this Chapter. Next, I say, that by this Vow we bind
our selves, etc. Not as casting any new snare upon our selves thereby; but
rather a new provocation to the payment of an old debt. For what can Jacob vow
to God, that he he owes him not before hand, without any such obligation? This
he does too, by way of thankfulness; as does likewise David, Psalm. 116.8, 9.
and other-where. And that which he voweth, is lawful, and possible: not as
theirs was, that vowed Paul's death, Acts 23. or as Julian the Apostata's; who,
going against the Persians, made this vow, that, if he sped well, he would
offer the blood of Christians. Act. and Mon. 1914.
Or as that Constable of France, who covenanted with God, that if he had the
Victory at S. Quintins, he would set upon Geneva. These men thought, they had
made a great good bargain with God; but did not his hot wrath kindle against
them? Camd. Elisab. fol. 258. A. D. 1583.
So Gerald Earl of Desmond's Irish men were justly consumed with famine^^^d
sword, which had barbarously vowed to forswear God, before they would forsake
him. Lastly, all this that Jacob does, is on condition of some further favor:
If God will be with me, and will preserve me, and provido for me, etc. All
which he doubts not of, as having a promise; but yet helps forward his faith by
this holy vow; then shall God have the utmost, both in inward and outward
worship: for God shall be his God; and he will build him an house, and pay him
Tithes, etc. [And will give me bread to eat] Having food and raiment, (says
the Apostle) let us therewith be content. Nature is content with little; grace,
with less. Insaniae damnandi sunt, quitam multa, Vir bonus paucis indiget.
tam anxie congerunt, quum sit tam paucis opus, says Lud. Vives. (...), says
Clem. Alex. Cibus and potus sunt divitiae Christianorum, says Hierome. Bread
and water, with the Gospel, are good cheer, says Greenham. Cui cum paupertate
been convenit pauper non est. Seneca.
The disciples are bid pray for bread, not biscuit: they dined, on a
Sabbath Day, with corn rubbed in their hands, with broiled fish, Melch. Adam.
etc. Luther made many a meal of a herring; Junius, of an egg. One told a
Philosopher, If you will be content to please Dionysius, you need not feed upon
green herbs. He replied; And if you be content to feed upon green herbs, you
need not please Dionysius.

CHAP. XXVI. Verse. 1. Then Jacob went on his journey]
HEb. lift up his feet: indefessi cursoris instar; as it were a generous and
manly horse, refresht with his bait by the way, he went lightly on his long
journey. Neh. 8.10.
The joy of the Lord was Jacobs strength: it became as oil; wherewith his soul
being suppled, he was made more lithe, nimble, and fit for action. He that is
once soaked in this oil, and bathed, with Jacob, in this bath at Bethel, will
cheerfully do or suffer ought for Gods sake. Tua praesentia Domine Laurentio
ipsam craticulam dulcem fecit, says One. Gaudebat Crispina cum tenebatur, eum
audiebatur, cum damnabatur, Aug. in Psalm. 137. Crux enim inuncta est, etc.
Crucem multi abhom inautur, crucem videutes, sed non videntes unctionem. Bern.
Act. and Mon. fol. 857. Ibid. 813.
cum ducebatur, says Austin. So did many of the Marian Martyrs, as were easy
to instance. Bernard gives the reason: The Cross is oiled, says he; and, by
the grace of the Spirit helping our infirmities, it is made, not only light,
but sweet; and not only not troublous and terrible, but desirable and
delectable. From the delectable Orchard of the Leonine prison: so that Italian
Martyr Algerius dated his Letter. Another Dutch Martyr, feeling the flame to
come to his beard, Ah, said he, what a small pain is this, to be compared to
the glory to come! Let us pluck up our feet, pass from strength to strength,
and take long and lusty strides toward heaven. It is but a little before us; and
a ready heart rids the way apace.

Verse. 2. Three stocks of sheep lying by it] Semblab^y Christ, the chief
Shepherd, Rev. 7.16, 17. Psalm. 23.2.
feeds and leads his flock to the lively fountains of waters; commanding his
under-shepherds, the Ministers, to roll a way the stone, by opening the
promises, that his sheep may drink water with joy, Isai. 12.
out of those wells of salvation.

Verse. 3. And he put the stone again upon the wells mou^^] To keep the waters
clean and filth-free. Turk, hist.
The Turks had procured some traitor in Scodra (where Scanderbeg ruled) to
poison the Town-well. The Pope has endeavored the like, by pouring out his
deadly poison upon the rivers and fountains of water (the Scriptures) that they
might become blood: Rev. 16.4.
witness that Heathenish Decree of the Council of Trent; equalizing, if not
preferring, the Apocrypha, to the Canonical Scripture; the vulgar Translation,
to the Original; Traditions, to holy Writ: and affirming, that the holy Ghost
himself is not to be heard, D. Pride. Lect. de Testib.
though he bring never so plain Scripture for himself, nisi accedat meretricis
pnrpuratae effrons interpretatio, says a learned Doctor; unless the Pope may
interpret it. Horrible blasphemy! Had not Gods servants need to see to the
cleansing of this Well, and the keeping it free from the tramplings and
defilements of this foul Beast? The Council of Constance comes in with a
Non-obstante, Licet Christus, post coenam, instituerit, and suis discipulis
administraverit, etc. Caranza, Sum. Council. sess. 13. Bee-hive of Rome, p. 12.
against Christ's Institution; withholding the Cup from the Sacrament. Before
that the Gospel was corrected, amended, and expounded, (^^y the Canonists)
there were many things permitted, (as Priests Marriage;) which now, since the
time is come that all things are made perfect, are clearly abolished and taken
away. When the Hussites denied to admit any Doctrine that could not be proved
by the holy Scriptures, the Council of Basil answered them, by Cardinal
Cusanus, that the Scriptures were not of the essence of the Church, but of the
well-being of it only; That the Word of God was so much the better taught the
people, Tauto dignius verbum Dei tradi, quanto remotiu^ ab omni Scriptura: came
explicandam juxta currentem Ecclesiae ritum, etc. Revius de vit. Pontif. p. 235.
by how much it had less of the Scriptures in it: That the Scripture was to be
interpreted according to the current Rite of the Church; qua mutante
sententiam, mutetur and Dei judicium. Can any hear this, and his ears not
tingle? This was then the Popes Express: for in Popish Councels, the Bishops
and others have no more to do, but simply, inclina^o capite, to say Placet to
that, which in the Popes name is propounded to them: As nothing was resolved by
the Trent-Fathers, but all in Rome: whence grew that blasphemous Proverb, Hist.
of Counc. of Trent, 497. Rev. 16.3. Brightman.
which habhor to relate. This Council was that sea, upon which the second Angel
poured out his vial, and it became as the blood of a dead man; and every living
soul died in that sea. Cavete.

Verse. 4. And Jacob said] These petty passages are recorded, when the acts of
mighty Monarchs are unmentioned; to show Gods dear respect to his poor
servants. The Lion and Eagle were not offered in sacrifice, as the Lamb and
Dove were. Master Fox being asked, whether he knew such an honest poor man;
answered, I remember him well: I tell you, I forget Lords and Ladies, to
remember such. So does God.

Verse. 6. And behold Rachel his daughter] Note, that our least and ordinary
actions, are ordered and directed by God; as Nathaneel's being under the
fig tree, etc. Joh. 1.48.
Birds flying seem to fly at liberty, yet are guided by an overruling hand of
Heaven: so are our thoughts, affections, actions. Sic curat Deus universos,
quasi singulos; sic singulos, quasi solos, says Augustine. Rachel, by a divine
providence, meets Jacob at the Well: so does the Church (that shepherdess,
Cant. 1.7.8.) meet Christ in his Ordinances, Psalm. 23.2, 3.

Verse. 7. Neither is it time, etc.] Time is a precious commodity, and must be
thriftily husbanded. The common complaint is, We want time: But the truth is,
we do not so much want, Non parum habemus temperis, sed multum perdimus. Sen.
as waste it; as the Heathen observed: which they that do, are wastfullest
prodigals: for, of all other possessions, two may be had together; but two
moments of time cannot be possessed together. This made the Philosopher so
parsimonious of time; Senec. Epist.
Nullus mihi per otium exit dies; I cannot afford to cast away a day; partem
noctium studiis vendico; part of the night I take for my studies. So did
Charles the Great; and after him, Charles the fifth, He had, for that purpose,
as his Instructor, Turrianus of Cremona ever with him.
who (when at any time in the field against the enemy) spent what hours he
could spare, in the study of the Mathematics. As if he had been of Cato's
mind, That great men must be able to give good account, non minus otii. quam
negotii; no less of their leisure, then of their labor. His constant custom
was, says Cicero, Cato in Orig. Cic. desenect.
to call to mind, at evening, what thing soever he had seen, read, or done,
that day. King Alfred, that reigned here, Anno Dom. 872, is said to have cast
the natural day into three parts: Eight hours he spent in praying, study, and
writing; eight in the service of his body; eight in the affairs of State. Which
spaces, (having then no other engine for it) he measured by a great wax light,
Dan. Chron. fol. 13.
divided into so many parts; receiving notice by the keeper thereof, as the
several hours passed in the burning. Qui nescit quo vita modo volat, audiat
horas:
Quam sit vita brevis, nos docet ille sonus.


Verse. 8. We cannot, until all the flocks] As we are not (by the example of
these shepherds) to enterprise things above our strength, Psalm. 131.1. so
neither to be discouraged by every dissiculty; but to lend, and borrow help one
of another; each man pleasing his neighbor for his good, Romans 14.2.
and serving him in love, to edification. Divisae his operae, sed men's suit
unica, pavit
Ore Lutherus oves, flore Melancthon apes.


Verse. 9. For she kept them] Leah might be left at home, for the tenderness of
her eyes. A man is to see, that all under his roof have a fit employment; as
the Master gave each servant his task, Matthew. 25.15.
his talent, according to his several ability, secundum peritiam and potentiam.
And every one has some excellency or other in him, can we but find, and
improve it. God has dispensed his gifts diversely, for the common benefit. And
as, in the same pasture, the ox can find fodder, the hound a hare, the stork a
lizard, the fair maid flowers: so there is none so worthless, but something may
be made of him; some good extracted out of the unlikeliest. Yea, wisdom is such
an Elixar, as by contaction (if there any disposition of goodness in the same
metal) it will render it of the property.

Verse. 10. Went near, and rolled the stone, etc.] If he did this alone, as the
Text seems to say, it was very strange. He might put forth his strength, to
gratify Rachel, and to insinuate himself into her love.

Verse. 11. Lifted up his voice, and wept] For joy, that he had so happily light
upon his kinswoman. It argued also his great affection, and passion of mind,
for her sake: Love is exstatical; -- nec juris se sinit esse sui. Animus est
ubi amat, non ubi animat. He kisseth Rachel, as if he would have transfused his
soul into her: Ovid. Amor. lib. 2. Magin, in Geogr.
and wept aloud; not as those vain lovers, who ut flerent, oculos erudiere
suos: Nor as the Brasileans, whose faculty is such, that tears are for a
present salutation; and as soon gone, as if they had said, How do you? But as
Joseph wept over Benjamin; the Prodigals father over him, etc.

Verse. 12. That he was her fathers brother] And therefore made so bold with
her, upon no further acquaintance. His kisses were not unchaste, but modest;
such as were common among kindred. And yet here care must betaken, that Satan
corrupt not our courtesy, or more intimate acquaintance, with never so near an
alliance. Flies may settle upon the sweetest perfumes, and putrify them. S.
Paul saw cause to exhort Timothy, 2 Timothy 5.2.
(that mortified young man) to exhort the younger women, as sisters, With all
purity; because, through the subtilty of Satan, and the deceit of his own
heart, even whiles he was exhorting them to chastity, some unchaste motions
might steal upon him. A great deal of caution does no hurt. Abundaus cautela
non nocet.


Verse. 13. He ran to meet him, and embraced him] All in hypocrisy, as the
Hebrews hold. There be many Labans; hot at first, cold at last; friendly in the
beginning, froward in the end. A free friend at first, a kind friend to the
last, is Rara avis in terris. Mic. 7.5.
Trust not in a friend, put not confidence in a brother, etc. Look rather unto
the Lord, as the Church does there he is the only Suresby, as they say; and
will never fail us: when the World, as Laban, will show it self at parting, if
not before. [He told Laban all these things] why, and how he came so poorly to
him; when as Abraham's servant, coming upon a like errand, came far better
attended and appointed: which was the thing that Laban, likely, looked after,
when he ran out to meet Jacob.

Verse. 14. Surely thou art my bone, etc.] Good words cost nothing; and the
veriest carls are commonly freer of them, then of real courtesies. Pertinax the
Emperor was surnamed (...), quod blandus esset, magis quam benignus. But that
of Nero was abominable; who, the very day before he killed his mother, (...).
Dio in Ner.
most lovingly embraced her, kissed her eyes and hands; and accompanying her,
when she departed, used these sweet words; All happiness attend you, my good
mother: for in you I live, and by you I reign. As a potsheard covered with
silver-dross, so are burning lips, and a wicked heart, Prove. 26.23.

Verse. 15. Should thou therefore serve me] He pretends loveand equity, to his
covetous aims and reaches. Candid he would needs seem, (according to his name)
and considerate. Laban, est candidus.
But as Blackmoors have their teeth only white; so is Labans kindness from the
teeth outward. He was as a whited wall, or painted sepulcher, or an Egyptian
temple; fair and specious without; but within, some cat, rat, or calf there
idolized, and adored. Hypocrites, whatever they pretend, have a hawks eye to
praise or profit: they must be gainers by their piety or humanity; which must
be another Dianae, to bring gain to the crafts-master. The Eagle, when she
soareth highest, has an eye ever to the prey.

Verse. 17. Leah was tender-eyed] Purblinde, or squint, as One interprets it.
Turk. hist. fol. 483.
Now a froward look, and squint eyes, (says the Historian) are the certain
notes of a nature to be suspected. The Jerusalemy Targum tells us, that her
eyes were tender with weeping and praying. Mary Magdalene is famous for her
tears; and Christ was never so near her, as when she could not see him for
weeping. Heidfeld.
After which, she spent (as some report) thirty years in Gallia Narbonensi, in
weeping for her sins. [ But Rachel was beautiful, etc.] Plate calls beauty, the
principality of nature: Aristorle, a greater commendation then all Epistles.
See the Notes on Chap. 24 16.

Verse. 18. I will serve thee seven yeers] He had nothing to endow her with; he
would therefore earn her, with his hard labor: which, as it shows Labans
churlishness to suffer it, and his baseness, to make a prize and a prey of his
two daughters; so it sets forth Jacob's meekness, poverty, patience, and hard
condition here, mentioned many years after by the Prophet Hosea, Chap. 12.12.
He was a man of many sorrows; and from him therefore the Church has her
denomination: neither were the faithful ever since called Abrahamites, but
Israelites.

Verse. 19. It is better that I give her to thee] Indeed, he sold her to him,
for seven years service. This was Laban, or Nabal, choose you which. Their names
were not more like, then their conditions. Labans daughters, and Nabals wife,
were also alike handled by their unkind parents. He has sold us, said they,
and has also quite devoured our money, Genesis 31.15. And, He has married me,
might Abigail have said, to the money, and not to the man; and though he named
me his joy, yet he has caused me much sorrow. How many a child is so cast
away, by the covetous parents! It was better with Labans two daughters; but no
thanks to their father. Nox longa quibus mentitur amica, diesque longa videtur
opu^ debentibus, and piger annu^ pupillis.


Verse. 20. And they seemed unto him but a few days] And yet lovers hours are
full of eternity. But love facilitated the service, and made the time seem
short. Should any thing seem hard or heavy to us, so we may have heaven at
length? The affliction is but light and momentany; the glory massy, and for
all eternity. Hold out, Faith and Patience. Love is a passion, and seen most in
suffering; much water cannot quench it. Nay, like fire, Cant. 8.7.
it devours all delays and difficulties; spending and exhaling it self, as it
were, in continual wishes to be at home, to be with Christ, (...). Phil. 1.23.
which is far far the better. Oh let the eternal weight of the Crown, weigh
down, with us, the light and momentany weight of the Cross.

Verse. 21. Give me my wife; for my days, etc.] Jacob had served out his time,
and now demands his due. David also is said to have served the will of God, for
his own age; and John Baptist, Acts 13.35.
to have fulfilled his course, (in the same Chapter.) Verse. 25.
Moses also was faithful in all Gods house, as a servant. Yet these could not
call for heaven, as their wages, because they were (as the best are, at their
best) but unprofitable servants, and did not, in any measure, Luke 17.10.
what their duty was to do. We have not a bit of bread of our own earning; and
are therefore taught to pray, Give us this day our daily bread: we get our
living by begging. Our best plea is, Domine, non sum dignus, nihilominus tamen
sum indigens: Lord, I am not worthy, but I am needy, as Pomeran said. Then will
God, of his free grace, supply all our necessities, and afterward receive us
to glory. He will bring us into the Bride-chamber of heaven, and there will he
give us his loves. He will let out himself into us, to our infinite delight. Of
all natural delights, that of Marriage is the most, because there is the
greatest communication of one creature to another; and according to the degrees
of communication, are the degrees of delight. Think the same in the mystical
Marriage.

Verse. 22. And made a feast] Never more seasonable, surely, then at the
recovery of the lost rib. The Wedding Day is called, The day of the rejoicing
of a man's heart, Cant. 3.11. Our Savior graced such a feast, with his
presence, and first miracle: Ho supplied them with wine, to glad their hearts:
not with a little, for healths sake only; but with a great quantity, for sober
delight, and honest affluence. It is noted, as an absurd thing, in Samson's
wife, that she wept all the days of the feast. A feast then there was at
Samson's wedding, and of seven days continuance. Judge. 14.10, 11
And so there was at Jacob's, as may be gathered out of verse. 27. Fulfill her
week, says Laban; to wit, of banquet or Bride-ale, as we call it: Only that
of Chrysostom comes here in fitly; De nuptiis Jacobi legimus; de choreis and
tripudiis, non legimus: Of Jacobs Wedding-feast we read; but of dancing and
dalliance, of tracing, and tripping on the toe, we read not. In maxima
liberate, minima licentia, says Salvian. Merry we may be, at such a time;
but, in the Lord: Deuteronomy. 12.7.
eat and drink we may; but, before the Lord. The old world may be a warning to
us: they fed without fear; and therefore perished, Jude 12.
without favor. Let such look to it, as live in pleasure, James 5.
and are wanton; that cat to excess, and drink to drunkenness; accounting
nothing mirth, but madness; no bread sweet, but stolen; no such pleasure, as
to have the devil their play-fellow: so nourishing their hearts as in a day of
slaughter, Multi apud homines manducant, quod apud i^feros digerunt. Aug.
or belly cheer, James 5.5. and swallowing down those murdering morsels now,
that they must digest in hell.

Verse. 23. He took Leah his daughter] The elder, for the younger; by a like
fraud as Rebeccah his mother had, not long before, in a cunning disguise,
substituted him (...) younger son, for the elder. God pays us often in our own
coin, and measures to us again the self-same measure that we have meted to
others. Plerunque Deus servat legem talionis.
Herod mocked the Wisemen, and is mocked of them: And how often do we see those
that would beguile others, punished with illusion? God usually retaliates, and
proportions jealousy to jealousy, provocation to provocation, Deuteronomy. 32.21.
number to number, Isai. 65.11, 12. choice to choice, Isai. 66.3, 4. device to
device, Mic. 2.1, 3. frowardness to frowardness, Psalm. 18.26. contrariety to
contrariety, Levit. 26.21. Even the righteous shall be recompensed in the
earth, Prove. 11.13.
as was Jacob.

Verse 25. In the morning, behold it was Leah] A foul disappointment: but so the
world ever serves us. The Hebrews have taken up this passage for a proverb,
when a man's hopes are deceived in a wife; or any thing else, wherein he looked
for content and comfort.

Verse. 26. It must not be so done in our country] A sorry excuse: but better,
he thought, then none at all. A subtle fox he was, and far too hard for honest
Jacob, who was simple to evil, but of a large reach for heaven. The children of
this world are wise in their generation^; and so is the Fox in his: but God
will take them in their own craft, 1 Cor. 3.20. (...). Manu capere et firmiter
tenere Cic. ad Attic. 1 Cor. 2.12.
as wild beasts in a snare, made and taken to be destrayed. Let us take heed
how we deal with them, and make our bargains as wise as we can. Crebr^ nobis,
sicut Ciceroni, vafer ille Siculus insusurret Epicharmi cantilenam illam suam,
(...). We have not received the spirit of this world; we cannot skill of the
devils depths: but we have received a better thing; the Spirit which searches
all, yea the deep things of God. 1 Cor. 2 10.


Verse. 27. We will give thee this also] See here the guise of wicked and
deceitful men: when one setch has fadg'd to their minds, they devise another;
and make no end of overreaching; there never wanting (as the Proverb has it)
a new knack in a knaves cap. They will search the devils scull, but they will
find out one slippery trick or another, to cheat, and go beyond those they
deal with. But let them look to it; God is the avenger of all such, 1 Thessalonians. 4.
whose not not heads only, but bellies prepare deceit, Job 15.35.

Verse. 28. And Jacob did so] A mirror of patience; which, in Jacob here, had
line and rope, her perfect work; showing him, James 1.3.
to be perfect and entire, wanting nothing. Godly people can bear wrongs best
of any: com^^^ them to go a mile, they will be content, if it may do good, to go
twain; yea, as far as the shoes of the preparation of the Gospel of peace will
carry them.

Verse. 30. And he went in also unto Rachel] Which incestuous fact cannot
ordinarily be justified, nor may at all be imitated. Wicked Julia soll^^iting
Caracalla to incestuous marriage with her; when he answered, Vollem si liceret,
replied impudently, (and is therefore, by very Heathens, condemned extremely)
Si libet, licet: an nescis te Imperatorem esse leges dare non accipere? etc.
Herod, for marrying his brothers wife, was reproved, and punished.

Verse. 31. When the Lord saw that Leah was hated] That is, less loved and
respected. So God hated Esau; and accounts the neglects of wife or husband, no
better then hatred, Ephesians. 5.25. [But Rachel was barren] God commonly crosses
men's preposterous affections, that he may draw all love to himself. Jonah
loses his gourd, (and we our dearest delights) by over-loving them.

Verse. 32. They t^^ke my husband will love me] This was her greatest care, (and
is every good wives) to please her husband, and to win his love.

Verse. 33. And she conceived again] God usually heapeth his favors upon those,
whom others slight, and look aloof on.

Verse. 34. And she conceived again] So, what she wanted in beauty, she had in
foecundity or fruitfulness: and this redounded to Gods greater glory, by Leah's
thankfulness; who might say, Si mihi difficilis formam natura negavit, Sappho
ap^^ Ovid.

Laud Dei, formae, damna rependo, meae.


Verse. 35. Now will I praise the Lord] So she had done before, at the birth of
her other children: But now she would do it anew, upon the receipt of a new
mercy: according to that, Sing unto the Lord a new song. Isai. 42.10.
A good woman she seems to have been; and the better, because not so well
beloved of her husband; which she could not but see to be just upon her, for
her consenting to the sin (with her father) of deceiving Jacob.

CHAP. XXX. Verse 1. Give me children, or else I die]
SHe was sick of the fret; and could not live, unless Jacob could cure her.
Prove. 14.30.
Envy is the rottenness of the bones, and ever devours it self first; as the
worm does the nut out of which it grows.

Verse. 2. And Jacobs anger was kindled] He that will be angry, and not sin,
must not be angry, but for sin. Reprove thy wife, thou may; chide her, thou
may not, unless the offense be against God, as here, and Job 2.10. And here a
man may carry a severe rebuke in his countenance, as God does, Psalm. 80.16.
though he say nothing: he may chide with his looks only. [Am I in Gods stead?]
who carries this key under his own girdle; as is afore-noted. Lo, children are
an heritage that comes of the Lord, as David once sang for Solomon, who had
the experience of it: for of so many wives, he had but one son, that we read
of; and he was none of the wisest. Eccles. 2.19.
This Solomon foresaw, and bewailed, as one unhappie bird, in his nest of
Vanities.

Verse. 3. Behold my maid Bilhah] Given her by her father on purpose, it may
seem; that in case she proved barren, she might be built up by her. So
Stratonice, the wife of King Dei^tarus, being barren, gave secretly her maid
Electra unto her husband; by whom she had an heir to the Crown, as Plutarch
relates.

Verse. 4. And Jacob went in unto her] Merely to please his wise, he yielded to
that which he could not but disallow, as evil. Heed must be taken, that the hen
crow not, that the wife rule nor. This (...), was a part of Jacob's punishment.

Verse. 6. God has judged me, etc.] A vile profanation of Gods holy Name,
under an opinion and pretense of piety. So they that, brow-beating their
brethren, better then themselves, said, Let the Lord be glorified: and it grew
to a Proverb, Isai. 66.5.
In nomine Domini incipit omne malum. Act. and Mon.
The Conspirators in Edward the sixth's time, indorsed their Letters with Glory
be to God on high, on ^arth peace, etc. A fair glove drawn upon a foul hand.

Verse. 8. With great wrestlings] Heb. with wrestlings of God; Magno defiderio,
precibu^, suspiriis, luctata est adversus sor^rem Parcus in loc.
that is, with excellent and most earnest wrestlings and endeavors; by storms
of sighs, and showers of tears. Stupidity is the low extreme, like the dull
earth. Despair is as much too high, as it were in the element of fire, which
scorches up the spirit. The middle region of Air and Water, Sighs and Tears, is
the best.

Verse. 14. And found mandrakes] Some render it, Lovely flowers; others,
Violets; others, Lilies; others again, Cherries of Jury; the Greek, and most
Interpreters, Mandrakes, or Mandrakeapples. It is a plant very amiable, (...)
Vide Drus. in fine com Ruth.
(according to the name) both for sweetness of smell, Ca^^. 7.13; the
loveliness of the flower, resembling a man; and for the peculiar virtue it
has, to cause sleep, affection, and conception.

Verse. 15. Therefore he shall lie with thee, etc.] Thus he is bought and sold
by his emulous wives: which was no small affliction to him, and a punishment of
his Polygamy.

Verse. 16. Thou must come in unto me] These contentions (says an Interpreter)
were not merely carnal, but partly also, Ainsw.
for desire of Gods ordinary blessing in propagation; and chiefly, for the
increase of the Church, and obtaining the promised seed for salvation.

Verse. 18. God has given me my hire] Wherein she was much mistaken, as having
not her senses exercised to discern good and evil. Here she rejoices, in that
for which she should have repented; and was in the common error, Foelix seclus
virtus vocatur. Tull. de div^n. lib. 2.
of measuring and judging of things, by the success; as if God were not many
times angry with men, though they outwardly prosper. Thus Dionysius, after the
spoils of an Idol-temple, finding the winds favorable, Lo, said he, how the
gods approve of sacrilege.

Verse. 20. God has endued me with a good dowry] That is as it proves, though.
Children are dulcis acerbitas, says One, (...) Plutar. de prolis amore.
certain cares; but uncertain comforts, says Another; yet all men desire them:
How much more should we covet grace, and those things that accompany salvation?
These having gotten, we may safely and surely say, God has endued me with a
good dowry.

Verse. 22. And God remembered Rachel] She begun to think, that God had forgotten
her, because she was so long suspended, and her prayers not answered, This is a
common fault. David bewails it in himself. Basil grew so weary of the Arrian
persecution, Psalm. 77.
that once he cried out, An Ecclesias suas prorsus dereliquit Dominus? an
novissima hora est? etc. So the Church of old; Where is thy zeal and thy
strength, Isa. 63.15.
Lord? the soundings of thy bowels, and of thy mercies toward us? are they
restrained? Here we must check and chide our selves, for once questioning Gods
kind remembrance of us, whom we cannot forget; and learn, and labor not to
waken our Welbeloved, Cant. 3.5. Isa. 30.19. Cant. 2.17.
until he please. He Waits to be gracious; and, when it is fit, will come
leaping over the mountains of Bether, all lets and impediments.

Verse. 23. God has taken away my reproach] That is, her barrenness, (with
which she was often upbraided) when now she was sufficiently humbled; besides
that her children, (as the rest of those women that were long barren) are noted
to have been the best, and most gracious: Ambrose
as Isaac, Jacob, Joseph, Samuel, the Baptist, etc. A child of many prayers
cannot lightly miscarry, as he told Monica.

Verse. 24. The Lord shall add to me another son] A sweet and sure way of
argumentation, God that has thus and thus done me good, Psalm. 138.8. Bernard.
will not be wanting to me in any thing, that may conduce to mine eternal
comfort; but will perfect that which concerns me. Qui ad vituli hortatur
esum, quid tandem mihi negaturus est?

Verse. 26. Exodus 2.
Let me goe] Here Jacob was too hasty; as Moses was, in doing justice before
his time, and therefore fled for it.

Verse. 27. I pray thee, if I have found favor etc.] This miserable muck-worm,
so he may advance his own ends, abaseth himself to his servants, colloguing, or
any thing, to curry favor, and compass commodity. But he that is swallowed up
of the earth (as Core was) his ears stopped, his heart stuffed, and all
passages for Gods spirit obstructed by it, shall have earth enough, when he
dies: his mouth shall be filled with a spade-ful of mould, and his Never-enough
quit with fire enough, in the bottom of hell. Such another courteous caytife as
this in the text, was that Plautianus a rich Roman; Dio in vita Severi. Is
tantum filiae suaededit quantum reginis 50 sa^isesset. Ibid.
of great authority with Severus the Emperor. Omnia enim petebat ab omnibus,
et cupiebat omnia, says the Historian. Herein only he differed from Laban;
when he married his daughter to Antonius the son of Severus, he gave her as
much portion, as would have sufficed for fifty Queens.

Verse. 30. The Lord has blessed thee since my coming] Heb. at my foot. Hence
grew that proverb used in Africa; Homo boni pedis; a man whose coming is
prosperous; and is appliable to the Ministers of the Gospel; whose feet are
beautiful and prosperous, if they faithfully feed the flock.

Verse. 21. What shall I give thee?] Solent multum quaerere, qui cupiunt parum
dare. But Laban would know his price, that he might be out of his pain.

Verse. 32. And of such shall be my hire] As white and black sheep were most set
by in Mesopotamia, so were the party colored in Palestina, ( Jacob's country)
whence the shepherds there are called Nochudim, ( Amos 1.1) that is, keepers of
spotted cattle. This might be a reason, why Jacob desires to be paid in such;
and, perhaps, had learned that skill there, which he used in the following
verses.

Verse. 33. So shall my righteousness, etc.] A good conscience fears no judge,
no not God himself, in some particulars; as Psalm. 7.3, 4. That which Jacob did
here, was of God, Chap. 31.10. It was also a plain bargain between them; and
Laban was handled in his kind. Besides, the means Jacob used, was not
fraudulent, but natural; not depending on man's skill, but Gods blessing: and
all to recover out of the wretches hands, that which was but due to him for his
hard service, and for his wives dowry.

Verse. 34. Behold, I would it might be] He was glad to have him on the hip for
a bad bargain, but is fairly deceived himself. God will see to his servants,
that they shall not lose all: though the world think it neither sin, nor pity,
to defraud them of their due.

Verse. 36. And he set three days journey] Hoping so to disappoint Jacob of
having any thing, and to make his own party good with him. For, naturally, the
cattle would bring forth others like themselves; and so Jacobs part should be
little enough. Sed and hic fallitur sordidus impostor, says Pareus. Laban was
utterly out in his count, and crossed in his design.

Verse. 38. And he set the rods which he had pilled] This was done, partly by
the force of the fantasy, which is much affected with objects of the sight;
or some other cogitation in the time of conception: partly, and chiefly, by the
blessing of God: For, he that shall now try the same conclusion, shall find
himself frustrated.

Verse. 43. And the man increased exceedingly] So shall all those do, (if it be
for their eternal good) that depend upon God for success, and blessing upon
their hard and honest labors. As for others, that will needs care and carve
for themselves, being troubled about many things, but neglecting that One thing
necessary, the Lord either gives the souls of such over to fuster shipwreck, or
else strips them of all their lading and tacklings, breaking their estates all
to pieces, and making them glad to go to heaven upon a broken plank.

CHAP. XXXI. Verse. 1. And he heard the Words of Labans sons]
THese were chips of the old block* as they say: as like the father, as if spit
out of his mouth. Avarice made them think, as Seja^us did, Tacitus.
Quicquid non acquiritur, damnum; all lost, that fell beside their own lips. As
a ship may be over-laden with gold and silver, even unto sinking, and yet have
compass and sides enough to hold ten times more: so, covetous men, though they
have enough to sink them, yet have they never enough to satisfy them. [Hath he
gotten all this glory] That is, all this wealth, which easily gets glory; and
goes therefore joined with it, Prove. 3.16. and 8.18. This regina pecunia does
all, Eccles. 10.19.
and has all here below, says Solomon. Money bears the mastery, and is the
Monarch of this world. None so admired, or so soon admitted, as he that is well
moneyed. The Chaldee word for money, (...), of (...) strong, and (...), to
prepare. (...). Plut. in Emyl. Manl.loc.com. P. 441.
signifies to do some great work. It was commonly said in Greece, that not
Philip, but his money, took their Cities. And a certain Grecian coming to Rome,
where the honor of a Lord was offered unto him, answered, (...). Alli^ had a
Cardinals that there bestowed upon him by the Pope: but because his hat had so
thin lining; he wanted wealth, I mean, to support his state, he was commonly
called, The starveling Cardinal; and no body cared for him.

Verse. 2. And Jacob behela the countenance of Laban] He said little, for shame,
but thought the more; and could not so conceal his discontent, but that it
appeared in his lowering looks. That which he had parted with in his riches,
was, as it were, raked out of his belly, Job 20.11. he had as lief have parted
with his very heartblood. And this was plain to Jacob by his countenance, which
had been friendly, smoothe, and smiling; but now was cloudy, sad, spiteful. The
young men were hot, and could not hold or hide what was in their heart, but
blurted it out, and spoke their minds freely. This old fox held his tongue,
but could not keep his countenance.

En, quam difficile est animum non prodere vultu. Verse. 3. Return to the land
of thy fathers] Labans frowns were a grief to Jacob; the Lord calls upon him
therefore to look homeward. Let the worlds affronts, and the change of men's
countenances, drive us to him, who changes not; and mind us of heaven, where
is a perpetual serenity and sweetness.

Verse. 4. And Jacob sent, and called Rachel, etc.] He consults with his wives;
so should we in matters of weight, of remove especially. They are our
companions, the wives of our covenant, Mal. 2.14. not our vassals, or
foot-stools; and must therefore be both of our court and counsel.

Verse. 5. I see your fathers countenance, etc.] Merces mundi. (...). Pindar.
Orat. pro Planc.
This is the worlds wages. All Jacob's good service is now forgotten. Do an
unthankful person nineteen kindnesses, unless you add the twentieth, all is
lost. Perraro grati homines reperiuntur, says Cicero. Nemo benesicium in
Calendarium scribit, says Seneca. And the Poet Ausonius not unfitly, Sunt
homines humeris quos siquis gest at ad urbem
Ausoniam, domiti quae caput orbis erat:
Nec tamen ad portam placide deponat eosdem,
Gratia praeteriti nulla laboris erit.


Verse. 6. With all my power I have served] The word translated power,
signifies that natural moisture of the body that makes it lively and lusty,
vigorous and valorous to do service. So it is used, Genesis 49.3. Psalm. 22.15. Now
if Jacob served Laban with all his might, should not we the Lord, a far better
Master? Baruch repaired earnestly, Nebem. 3.20. Caleb fulfilled after God, Number.
14.24 Nehemiah traded every talent, with which divine providence had trusted
him: He works, warreth, watches, 2 Samuel 6.14.
commands, encourages, threatens, punishes, etc. David danced with all his
might, and did all the wills of God to his dying day; painfully serving out his
time, to the last. Happy is he that can say, in a spiritual sense, as it was
said of Moses, that, after long profession of Religion, he remits not of his
zeal; his sight is not waxed dim, nor his natural heat or force abated; that he
is not slothful in business, but fervent in spirit, serving the Lord.

Verse. 7. Changed my wages ten times] And ever for the worse. The matter
mended, with poor Jacob, as sour ale does in summer. Laban the churl, the
richer he grew by him, the harder he was to him: like children with mouths
full, and hands full, who will yet rather spoil all, then part with any. It is
the love, not the lack of money, that makes men churls.

Verse. 9. Thus God has taken away, etc.] He is the true Proprietary, and gives
and takes away these outward things at pleasure; Psalm. 75.6.
as Hannah ^^th it, 1 Samuel ^.7. And, Promotion comes neither from the east,
nor west, says David; nor yet from the south, where the warm sunshine is:
much less from the north; (for, Ab Aquilone nihil boni:) But God is the Judge;
he puts down Laban, and sets up Jacob: he spoiled the Egyptians, and enriched
the Israelites with their jewels; which yet proved a snare to them, perhaps,
Exodus 32.13.
in the matter of the golden calf; as riches always do, when sent in to men by
Gods providence only, and not out of his favor, (as here to Jacob) and by
virtue of the promise.

Verse. 10, 11, 12. I saw in a dream, etc.] Of divine dreams, such as this was,
see the Notes above, upon Chap 20.3.

Verse. 12. I have seen all that Laban doth] And am resolved to fleece him for
thy hire. Gain ill got, will burn men's fingers, and burn through their purses.
Yea, the greater wealth, the greater spoil awaits such Misers; as, a tree with
thick and large boughs, every man desires to lop him.

Verse. 13. I am the God of Bethel, etc.] Here God pulls Jacob by the ear, as it
were, and minds him of his vow, which he had well-nigh forgotten: But the Lord
looked for a performance, and afterward punished him for his slackness. Most
men's practice proclaims, that, having escaped the danger, they would willingly
deceive the Saint. Sciapato il morbo, fraudato il Sante.
And of those that vow against sin, how many have we, who, when temptations,
like strong Philistims, are upon them, break all bonds of God? whereby foul
breaches are made into their consciences, such as nothing can cure, but the
Blood of that great Votary, that Nazarite, Christ Jesus. Vows are solemn
services; and they have much to answer for, that care not either to make or
keep them; that dally and play with them, as children do with nuts and gawds.
When the Cardinals meet to choose a Pope, they make a Vow, Whosoever is chosen,
Sleid. Comm.
he shall swear to such Articles as they make. And Sleidan says, The Pope is
no sooner chosen, but he breaks them all, and checks their insolences; as if
they went about to limit his power, to whom all power is given, both in heaven
and earth. Is not this pretty collusion? But God is the avenger of all such.

Verse. 15. Are we not counted of him as strangers?] Isidor. P^lus. lib. 3. cp.
24. 1 Timothy 6.10.
Well might that Father say, (...). The love of money is the root of all evil,
as the Apostle has it. This Kyte-footed corruption, wheresoever it seizes and
domineereth, it blasteth and banisheth all nobleness of spirit, natural
affection, humanity, reason, discretion, manliness, mutual entertainment,
intercourse of kindness and love: so that, for any fair dealing, a man had as
good converse with a Cannibal, as with a ^ruely covetous caitiff. Well might
the Apostle set covetousness, and want of natural affection, together, as
signs of a reprobate sense, Romans 1.29, 31. Laban sells his own daughters here,
and devours also their price. Match. 15.
And the covetous Pharisees taught children to starve their parents, to offer
to the altar; that is, to their paunches and purses.

Verse. 16. For all the riches, etc.] Here they speak the truth; but offend, 1.
In that they utter it passionately, and with perturbation of spirit: 2. In that
they seem somewhat to obscure Gods blessing; as though it were but their due,
as daughters. In dealing with those that have done us wrong, it is hard not to
offend, either in the matter or manner of our expressions. [ Now then,
whatsoever God has said, etc.] Thus they prefer an husband to a father. So did
Michal, though there was no great store of religion in her. And so Nature had
taught that daughter of women to do, Dan. 11.17. Antiochus the Great gave
Cleopatra his daughter to Ptolomee Epiphanes, thinking to use her as an
instrument to destroy him: But she, contrary to his expectation, clave to her
husband.

Verse. 19. Rachel had stolen the images] She was somewhat tackt with her
fathers superstition, though somewhat reclaimed. Little children, keep your
selves from idols, 1 John 5. Nothing so natural to us, as Image Worship.
Nothing so retained by us, when once entertained. After all that airing in the
wilderness, Micah's mother smells of Egypt, and has her molten and graven gods,
Judge. 17.3 Rachel also had her Mawmets long time after this, Genesis 35.2, 4. The
devil is (...), says Synesius, and so he would have us. Fence we therefore our
selves and ours, against this abomination: the itch of it, once got, is hardly
ever cured and clawed off.

Verse. 20. And Jacob stole away] Gods Saints are put upon the use of such means
sometimes, for their own safety, as render them contemptible to worldly men.
All whose contumelies they can bravely bear, so long as their consciences clear
and cheer them: yea, then can rejoice, and say, It is a mercy they know no
worse by me. It is a great work of nature, to keep the filth of the body, when
it is in man, from being unsavory to others. But it is a greater work of God
to keep the filth of the soul, that is so unsavory to him, from the knowledge
of those that wait all occasions to blaze and blaspheme us.

Verse. 21. He passed over the river] Euphrates; and so declined the ordinary
way, that Laban might not overtake him; which yet he did. So God would have it,
that he might have the greater glory of Jacobs deliverance.

Verse. 23. And he took his brethren] The wicked may band themselves, and bend
their strength against the Saints; but they are bounded by God. He lets them
have the ball on their foot, many times, till they come to the very goal, and
yet then makes them miss the game. He lets out their tedder, and then pulls
them back again, to their task.

Verse. 24. Take heed thou speak not good or bad] That is, that thou seek not,
either by flattery or force, by allurement or affrightment, to bring him back.
They write of the Asp, that he never wanders alone, without his companion with
him. So the flattering promises of the Churches adversaries, go ever
accompanied with cruel menaces, their tising tongues with their terrifying
saws, Heb. 11.37. None of them shall want their mate; as the Scripture speaks
of those birds of prey and desolation, Isai. 34.16.

Verse. 25. Jacob had pitched his tent] Seeing Laban so near, he set himself in
as good order as he could, fearing the worst, says Musculus. But God was
better to him, then his fears. He spoke for him; and so he can, and does often,
for us, in the hearts of our enemies. See Isai. 41.9. Charles the fifth, (then
whom, all Christendom had not a more prudent ^rince, Act. and Mon. fol. 1784.
nor the Church of Christ almost a sorer enemy) when he had in his hand Luther
dead, and Melancthon, Pomeran, and certain other Preachers of the Gospel alive,
he not only determined not any thing extremely against them, or violated their
graves; but also, entreating them gently, sent them away, not so much as once
forbidding them to publish openly the doctrine that they professed.

Verse. 26. As captives taken with the sword] No such matter; but that the old
churl must have somewhat to say: for Jacob had their good-wills to go with him:
and besides, they were now his, more then Labans. Jacob had them in Marriage,
and not in bondage: he carried them not as his captives, but companions.

Verse. 27. That I might have sent thee away with mirth] A likely, matter: but
it is the hypocrites best now, to say the best. He durst do no other; for God
had overawed him, Isai. 58*5.
and put his hook into his nostrils. Hypocrites are likened to bull-rushes,
which are green and smoothe; and he is curious to a miracle, that can find a
knot in them: but within is nothing, but an useless and spongie pith. Compared
they are also to vipers, that are painted, Matthew. 3.7.
as it were, without, but poisonful within: they have their teeth also buried
in their gums, says Pliny, so that one would think him to be harmless beasts,
and that they could not bite: So hypocrites seem most innocent. Who would have
thought otherwise of Laban, that had not known him; considering his
contestation here with Jacob, his protestation, afterward, of deep and dear
love to his daughters; and lastly, his attestation, and taking God to witness
for their good usage, and his heap of stones to witness (together with his heap
of words to small purpose) calling it first Jegar-sahadutha, as a witness
betwixt man and man; and then Mizpeh, as a watchtower or witness betwixt God
and Man. Who could take Laban for less now, then a loving father, yea, and an
honest man? But, as the Historian says of another, so may we of him; Palam
compositus pudor, intus summa adipiscendi libido. Tacit. de Sejano. 1 Thessalonians.
2.5. Pers.
All this was but blanched hypocrisy, and colored covetousness, as Saint Paul
calls it.

Astutam vapido servat sub pecctore vulpem. Verse. 28. Thou have done foolishly]
And yet he had done no more then God bade him do. Wretched men dare reprehend
that, which they do not comprehend. But if a wise man speak evil of thee, or to
thee, endure him; if a fool, pardon him. Shake off reproaches, and hard
censures, as Paul did the viper; yea, in a holy scorn, laugh at them, as the
wild ass does at the horse and his rider. Diotrephes prates against us, says
Saint John, 3 Epist. 10. In the Greek it is, trifles against us with malicious
words. (...).
Although his words were malicious, and he a great man, yet all was but
trifles, to a clear conscience.

Verse. 29. It is in the power of my hand] It was, he might have said, till God
forbade him: though indeed it never was, (as our Savior told Pilate, upon a
like bravado, Joh. 19.10, 11.) further then given him from above. To God belong
the issues of death, whatever tyrants dream they can do. Rideo, dicebat
Caligula, Consulibus, quod uno nutu meo jugulare vos possim, and uxori tam bona
cervix, simul ac jussero, demetur. And Caesar told Metellus, that he could as
easily take away his life, as bid it be done. But what says our Savior?
Matthew. 10.28.
Fear not them that kill the body; to wit, by divine permission He says not,
them that can kill the body, have power to do it at their own pleasure: for
that is a royalty belongs to God only. [ But the God of your fathers spoke unto
me, etc.] Hypocrites forbear sin, as dogs do their meat; not because they hate
the carrion, but fear the cudgel. These are as wicked, in their fearful
abstaining from sin, as in their furious committing of it. Lupus venit ad
ovile: Aug. de verb. Apost. sermon. 21
quaerit invadere, jugulare, devorare. Vigilant pastores, latrant canes --
Lupus venit fremens, redit tremens: lupus est tamen, and fremens and tremens,
says Augustine.

Verse. 30. Why have thou stolen my gods?] Goodly gods, that could not save
themselves from the thief. See Jer. 10.5, 11, 15. But Jacob, a just man, is
here made a thief of. The best must look to be blasted; as deceivers, and yet
true, 2 Cor. 6.8. Wicked men's throats are open sepulchers, 2 Cor. 6.8.
wherein the good names of Gods innocent ones too often lie buried: their breath,
as fire, shall devour you, Isai. 33.11.
says the Prophet. Joseph suffered as a dishonest person; Elisha, as a
troubler of the State; Jeremiah, as a traitor; Luther, as the trumpet of
rebellion. Tuba rebellionis
Nay, in one of his Epistles to Spalatinus, Prorsus Satan est Lutherus, says
he; sed Christus vivit and regnat, Amen. He adds his Amen to it; so little was
he moved at it. He had learned, and so must we, to pass through good and evil
report, 2 Cor. 6.8.
with Paul. Epiphanius says, somewhere, that the Jews give out, that Saint
Paul turned Christian for spite, because he could not obtain the highpriests
daughter in Marriage. We are made the filth of the world, (...).
the sweepings of all things, says Saint Paul of himself and his companions;
who yet were the very glory of Jesus Christ, 2 Cor. 8.23. Phagius reports a
story of an Egyptian, who said, The Christians were a company of most filthy
lecherous people. And for the keeping of the Sabbath, he says, they had a
disease upon them, and were therefore fain to rest the seventh day.

Verse. 31. Because I was afraid] Note the Patriarch's simplicity and veracity,
without cunning or coloring. Truth is like our first parents; most beautiful,
when naked. It was sin covered them, and so this, for the most part.

Verse. 32. Let him not live] This was a rash sentence. Hasty speech may work
much woe. How sorry would Jacob have been, if Laban had found the images under
Rachel, and taken him at his word! What a snare befell Jephtah, by his rash
speaking ^ It is a Proverb among the Arabians, Scal. Prove. Arab. Cent. 1. Prove.
75. James 3.2, 8.
Cave ne feriat lingua tua collum tuum. He is a perfect man, that offends not
in word, says Saint James: for the tongue is an unruly evil. Sooner may a man
teach a Camel to dance upon a rope, then bridle his tongue from evil-speaking.
Pareus reckons up five virtues of the tongue, Veracitas, Constantia, doeilitas,
taciturnitas, urbanitas. Pareus in Jac. 3.5. Perald. tom. 1. page 264.
that perfect a man: but Peraldus recounts four and twenty several vices of it,
that, if not restrained, will work his ruth and ruin. It should seem by that
of our Savior, Matthew 12.37, that a man's most and worst sins, are his words.
And Saint Paul, making the anatomy of a natural man, stands more upon the organ
of speaking, then on all the other members, Romans 3. Let therefore thy words be
few, true, and ponderous. An open mouth is a Purgatory to the master. Carry a
pair of balances betwixt thy lips. Cassiod. lib, 10. Ep. 4.
Nescit poenitenda loqui, qui proferenda prius suo tradidit examini, says
Cassiodore. Jacob might have learned of the Heathen Romans, to speak warily in
passing sentence on, or giving testimony of another. Romani semper Videri in
sententiis, in testimoniis Arbitrari, dicebant, says Cicero.

Verse. 32. And Laban Went into Jacobs tent] Hypocrites are suspicious of
others, better then themselves; and impudently inquisitive: Curiosi ad
cognoscendam vitam alienam, desidiosi ad corrigendam suam; as S. Augustine has
it Those that are most inquisitive about other men's manners, are most careless
of their own.

Verse. 34. Put them in the camels furniture, and sat upon them] Presumptuous
sinners deal as homely with the dear mercies of Almighty God, pleading and
pretending them to their wicked courses; and so kicking against his bowels;
which are therefore fast closed against them.

Verse. 35. For the custom of women is upon me] A subtle, but sinful excuse, to
shift a shame. Women's wits, we say, are best at (...) pinch: but they must take
heed they be not as C. Curio the Roman, Velleius.
ingeniose nequam, wittily wicked. Wit will not bear out sin.

Verse. 36. And Jacob was wroth, and chode] An angry expostulation; but not
without some error, in the heat of altercation. Be angry, and sin not, is
(says One) the easiest charge, under the hardest condition, that can be. It is
difficult to kindle and keep quick the fire of zeal, (which is the best kind
of anger) without all smoke of sin.

Verse. 37. Set it here before my brethren] See the confidence of a clear
conscience! Happy is be, that can be acquitted by himself in private; in
public, by others; in both, by God. Lucrum in arca, saepe facit damnum in
conscientia. But all such as conceive with guile, by that time they have
reckoned their months a right, though they grow never so big, shall bring
forth nothing but wind and vanity. Yea, they that sow the wind, shall reap
the whirlwinde. Let that thou have, be well gotten, and thou needst not care
whom thou lookst in the face; thou shall not be ashamed to speak with thine
enemies in the gate.

Verse. 38. The rams of thy fleck I have not eaten] A lively picture of a
careful Pastor. He fats not himself, but feeds the flock: he seeks not theirs,
2 Cor. 11.
(neither fleece, nor flesh) but them, and their welfare. He takes not to him
the instruments of a foolish shepherd, Zech. 11.15. that is, forcipes and
mulctram, that he may carry away lac and lana^^; but feeds the flock of God,
and takes care of the cure, 1 Pet. 5.2.
as Peter bids; not for filthy lucre, but of a ready mind, etc. About the year
of Christ 1260, the People and Clergy of England (the Popes Ass, as it was
called) opposed themselves to the Legat's exactions. And when Rustandus the
Legate alleged, that all Churches were the Popes; Leonard, a learned man of
those times, Jac. Revius, de vitis Pontif. page 178.
answered, Tuitione, non fruitione; defensione, non dissipatione.

Verse. 39. Of my hand did thou require it] Which was against all right and
reason, Exodus 22.10, 13. but that weighed little with this covetous cormorant.
God smites his fists at such dishonest gain, as Balak did at Balaam, in token
of extreme indignation, Ezekiel. 22.13. And lest Laban, or any like, should
object, that these were but great words, The Lord would not do it, They would
deal well enough with the Lord for that matter; he adds, in the ne^^ verse,
Can thine heart endure, or can thine hands be strong, in the day that I shall
deal with thee? I the Lord have spoken it, and I will do it; verse. 14.

Verse. 40. Thus was I in the day, etc.] Non-residents do none of all this,
those Idol, and idle shepherds: they cry out, as he, Vi^g.
Pan curet oves, oviumque magistros; (...). Odyss..
being herein not only worse then this good shepherd in the text, but also
then Ulysses his swinehord, in Homer, who would not lie from his charge.

Verse. 41. I served thee fourteen years, etc.] If all this, to be son-in-law to
Laban; what should not we do, or suffer gladly, to be the sons of God?

Verse. 42. The Fear of Isaac] God, the proper object of fear; whence he is
absolutely called, the Fear: Psalm. 76.12. Bring presents to Fear; that is, to
him, to whom all dread is due. The Cha^dee Paraphrast rendeth Teraphim, (verse
32 of this Chapter) Labans fear. It was an atheistical speech of Statius,
Primus in orb deos fecit Timor. But it was a true saying of Varro, Qui primi
deorum simulachra induxeru^^, err^rem auxerunt, metum dempserunt. Va^.
as Calvin cites his words; They that first brought in Images of the gods,
increased men's error, but took away their fear.

Verse. 43. These daughters are my daughters, etc.] All this is a flaunt, or
rather a flattery. Now he seeks to curry favor, where he could not exercise
cruelty; smoothing over the matter, as if he meant them no hurt: when he was
merely bridled, and could not do them that hurt that he desired. This is still
the guise of hypocrites, and false brethren; they would be taken for friends,
and seek to build up themselves upon better men's ruins: as here Laban would
render Jacob suspicious to his daughters, as one that would hereafter deal
hardly with them, if not bound by him, in a covenant, to his good abearance
toward them.

Verse. 44. Now therefore come thou, etc.] A fool is full of words, says
Solemon. Which odious custom of his, is expressed (...), in his vain
tautologies: A man cannot tell what shall be; and what shall be after him, who
can tell? Eccles. 10.14. Laban likewise talks a great deal here; and is up with
the more, and down with the less, (as they say.) A Covenant he will have, a
pillar he will have, and a heap he will have; and that heap shall be a witness,
and that pillar a witness, and God a witness, and a judge too, Qui nou quid,
sed quantum dicat, ponderare com^^vit. Hic^on. in Apol. ad Domnion.
etc. there is no end of his discourse; as if, ' Domnio-like, he cared not so
much what, as how much he spoke. The basest things are ever most plentiful.
History and experience tells us, that some kind of mouse breeds an hundred
and twenty young ones in one nest: whereas the Lion and Elephant bears but one
at once. So the least worth, yields the most words.

Verse. 53. And Jacob swear by the fear of his father] The Chaldee Paraphrast
sometimes uses the word Fear, or Terror, for God, for the reason above-given,
verse. 42. Hence Jacob, coming from Syria, and being to swear to a Syrian,
swears here by the Fear of his father Isaac. Where note, that he rises up no
higher then his father; whereas Laban the Idolater pretends Antiquity, appeals
to the Gods of Abraham, of Nahor, and of their father Terah, who served strange
gods, Josh. 24.2. Papists boast much of Antiquity, as once the Gileonites did
of old shoes, and moldy bread. A Gentleman being importuned by a Popish
Questionist, to tell where our Religion was before Luther; answered, That our
Religion was always in the Bible, (...) Ignat.
where your Religion never was. Mine Antiquity is Jesus Christ, says Ignatius,
and we with him.

Verse. 54. Called his brethren to eat bread] And so overcame evil with good;
which is the noblest of all victories. God cannot but love, in us, this
imitation of his mercy; and that love is never fruitless.

Verse. 55. Laban rose up] Laban leaves him, Esau meets him, and both with a
kiss. When a man's ways please the Lord, etc.

CHAP. XXXII. Verse. 1. Angels of God met him.]
SEnsibly and visibly, as servants meet their masters, as the guard their
Prince. Oh the dignity and safety of the Saints! who are in five respects, (say
some) above the Angels. 1. Our nature is more highly advanced in Christ. 2. The
righteousness whereby we come to glory, is more excellent then theirs; which,
though perfect in its kind, is but the righteousness of mere creatures, such
as God may find fault with, Job 4.18. such as may need mercy; therefore the
Cherubims are said to stand upon the Mercy-seat, and to be made of the matter
thereof. 3. The sonship of the Saints is founded in a higher right then theirs;
viz. in the Sonship of the second Person in Trinity. 4. They are members of
Christ, and so in nearer union then any creature. 5. They are the Spouse, the
Bride; Angels only servants of the Bridegroom, and ministering spirits, sent
out (as here) to minister for them that shall be heirs of salvation. They meet
us still, as they did Jacob: they minister many blessings to us, yet will not
be seen to receive any thank of us: they stand at our right hands, Luke 1.11.
as ready to relieve us, as the devils to mischief us, Zech. 3.1. If Satan, for
terror, show himself like the great Leviathan; or, for fraud, like a crooked
and piercing serpent; or, for violence and fury, like the dragon in the seas:
yet the Lord will smite him by his Angels, as with his great, and sore, and
strong sword, Isai. 27.1. Angels are in heaven, as in their watchtower,
(whence they are called watchmen, Dan. 4.10.) to keep the world, the Saints
especially, their chief charge; in whose behalf, they stand ever before the
face of God, waiting and wishing to be sent upon any design or expedition,
Matthew. 18.10.
for the service and safety of the Saints. They are like Master^ or Tutors, to
whom the great King of heaven commits his children: these they bear in their
bosoms, as the nurse does her babe, or as the servants of the house do their
young Master; glad to do them any good office; ready to secure them from that
roaring Lion, that rangeth up and down, seeking to devour them. The Philosopher
told his friends, when they came into his little and low cottage, (...), The
gods are here with me. The true Christian may say, though he dwell never so
meanly, God and his holy Angels are ever with him, etc.

Verse. 2. This is Gods host] So called, for their number, order, obedience,
strength, etc. God has a complete hest of horse and foot. Angels, and heavenly
bodies, are his horse, as it were; horses and chariots of fire, 2 Kings 6.17.
yea, both horse and foot: for there are whole legions of them, Matthew. 26.53.
Now a Legion is judged to be six thousand foot, and seven hundred horse. Daniel
tells us, there be millions of Angels, Dan. 7.10. yea, an innumerable company,
says the Author to the Hebrews, Chap. 12.22. The Greek Poet could say, There
were thirty thousands of them here upon earth, keepers of mortal men, and
observers of their works: (...) Hesiod.
Some think they are meant in the Parable, by the ninety and nine sheep; as if
they were ninety and nine times as many as mankind, in number. All these, how
many soever, pitch camp round about the godly, Psalm. 38.8. make a lane for
them, as they did here for Jacob at Mahanajim, (which signifies a double camp;)
fight in battel-ray against their enemies, Dan. 10.20. and convey them at
death, as they did Lazarus, through their enemies country, the air, Luke 16.
into Abraham's bosom. So that all Gods children may call death, as Jacob did
this place, Mahanaim; because there the Angels meet them. And as the
palsie-man, in the Gospel, was let down with his bed through the tyling before
Jesus. Luke 5.18. so is every good soul taken up in a heavenly couch, (or
coach, rather) through the roof of his house, and carried into Christ's presence,
by the blessed Angels.

Verse. 3. And Jacob sent messengers] Means, he knew, was to be used by him,
though well assured of safeguard. God must be trusted, not tempted: means must
be used, but not trusted. Jacob was as one that fled from a Lion, Amos 5.19.
and a Bear met him. Laban, as a Lion, had some shamefacedness, says a Rabbi:
Esau, as a Bear, had none. Pirkei R. Eliez. c. 37^
Jacob therefore prays, and sends, and submits, and presents him; and all to
pacify him. He that meets with a Bear, will not strive with him for the wall,
but be glad to escape by him.

Verse. 4. to my lord Esau, Thy servant Jacob, etc.] This was not baseness of
spirit, much less a renouncing of his birthright and blessing; but a necessary
submission for a time, (such as was that of David to Saul) till the prophecy
of his superiority should be fulfilled. 1 Samuel 24.7, 9.
That was baseness in the Samaritanes, that in writing to Antiochus Epiphanes,
that great king of Syria, because he tormented the Jews; to excuse themselves
that they were no Jews, they styled him, Josephus.
Antiochus the mighty God: the Scripture styles him a vile person, Dan. 11.21.
So was that also in Teridates king of the Parthians; who, with bended knee, and
hands held up, worshipped Nero, and thus bespake that monster of mankind: To
thee I come, (...) Dio, in vita Neronis.
as to my god; and thee I adore, as I do the sun: what thou decreest of me, I
will be, and do; for thou art, to me, both Fate and Fortune, etc. And what
shall we think of those superstitious Silicians, who, when they were
excommunicated by Pope Martin the fourth, laid themselves prostrate at his
feet, and cried, O Lamb of God, that take away the sins of the world, grant
us thy peace. The Venetians also, being excommunicated by Pope Clemens the
fifth, Jac. Rev. de vitis Pontif. p. 198 Unde et Gavis cognomentum apud suos.
Ib.
could not be absolved, till such time as their Ambassador Dandalus had not
only fallen at the Popes feet, but lain also under his table as a dog, with an
iron chain about his neck, feeding on such scraps as were cast unto him. Had
this dog dealt by the Pope, as the Earl of Wiltshire's Spaniel did, he had
served him but right. This Earl, with Doctor Cranmer, and others, being sent
Ambassador to Rome, about King Henry's divorce; when he should have kissed the
Popes foot, Act. and Mon. fol. 1690.
his Spaniel (as though he had been of purpose appointed thereunto) went and
caught the Pope by the great toe; which the Spaniel happily mistook for some
kind of repast. But this by the way only. What hard servitude Kings and
Emperors were forced to undergo in former times, and how basely to avile
themselves to the Beast of Rome, is better known, then that it need to be here
related. Henry the second of England Henry the fourth of France, and Henry the
fourth Emperor of Germany, for instance. This last came, in the midst of a
sore winter, upon his bare feet, to the gates of the Castle of Canusium; and
stood there fasting, from morning to night, for three days together, waiting
for the Popes judicial sentence, and craving his pardon: which yet he could not
obtain, by his own or others tears, or by the intercession of any Saint,
Brightm. upon the Revel. fol. 449.
save only of a certain harlot, with whom the Pope was then taking his carnal
pleasure. The good Emperor mistook, who thought that the Pope could be
pacified by fasting and prayer. This god required another kind of sacrifice
then these. And here that of Solomon was fulfilled, Eccles. 10.7.

Verse. 5. And I have oxen and asses, etc.] This, Jacob mentions in his
message, that Esau might not think, that he sought to him for any need; but
only for his favor. And this was something, to a man of Esau's making; for
such like not to hear of, or be haunted with their poor kindred. Luke 15.30.
This thy son, (...) Et cum fortuna statque caditque fides.
says he, that felt no want: He says not, This my brother: he would not own
him, because in poverty.

Verse. 6. And four hundred men with him] Four hundred cutthroats as appears,
verse. 8. And here, good Jacob is brought again into the briars. When he was
well rid of his father-in-law, he thought all safe; and his joy was completed,
by the sight of that army of angels. Presently upon this, Ex coelo repent
quasi in insernum detruditur.
he is so damped and terrified with this sad message of Esau's approach, and
hostile intentions, that he knew not what course to take to. Out of heaven, he
is thrust suddenly, as it were, into hell, says Pareus. (...).
This is the godly man's case, while here. Fluctus fluctum trudit: one trouble
follows in the neck of another. Ripen we apace, and so get to heaven, if we
would be out of the gunshot. The Ark was transportative, till settled in
Solomon's temple; so, till we come to heaven, shall we be tossed up and down,
and turmoiled: within will be fears, 2 Cor. 7.
without fightings, whiles we are in hoc exilio, in hoc ergastulo, in hac
peregrinatione, in hac valle lachrymarum, as Bernard has it; in this
pilgrimage, in this purgatory, in this vale of tears.

Verse. 7. Then Jacob was greatly afraid] This was his weakness, (and may be
ours, in like case) as looking to the present peril, and forgeting the
consolation (as the Apostle speaks) that he might have drawn from the promise
of God, Heb. 12.5.
and presence of angels. Faith quelleth and kills distrustful fears: but
Satan, in a distress, hides from us that which should support us, and greatens
that that may appale us. But what says the Spanish proverb? The Lion is not so
fierce as he is painted; nor danger, usually, so great as it is represented.
Some hold, that Esau was here wronged, by being presumed an enemy, when he was
a friend. Pessimus in dubiis augur Timor.

Verse. 8. If Esau come, etc.] It is a point of prudence, if we cannot keep all,
to save what we can.

Verse. 9. The Lord which said unto me] Promises must be prayed over. God
loves to be burdened with, and to be importuned in, his own words; to be sued
upon his own bond. Prayer is a putting the promises into suit. And it is no
arrogance, nor presumption, Act. and Mon. fol. 1553.
to burden God, as it were, with his promise; and of duty to claim and
challenge his aid, help, and assistance, in all perils, said Robert Glover,
Martyr, in a Letter to his wife. Such prayers will be nigh the Lord day and
night, 1 Kings 8.59. he can as little deny them, as deny himself.

Verse. 10. I am not worthy of the least, etc.] In prayer, we must avile our
selves before God to the utmost; confessing our extreme both indigency and
indignity of better. I am dust and ashes, says Abraham. I am a worm, and no
man, says David. I am more brutish then any man, (...) Luke 5.8.
says Agur. I am a man, a sinner, says Peter. I am not worthy to be called
thy son, says the Prodigal. Pharisaeus non vulnera, sed munera ostendit: The
proud Pharisee sets forth, not his wants, but his worth: God, I thank thee,
etc. But if David were so humbled before Saul, 1 Samuel 26. 20.
that he called himself a flea, what should we do to God? Unworthy we should
acknowledge our selves of the least mercies we enjoy, with Jacob; and yet not
rest satisfied with the greatest things in the world, for our portion, as
Luther. Melch. Adam. in vita Luth.
Valde protestatus sum me nolle sic a Deo satiari: he deeply protested, that
God should not put him off with these poor things below. [For with my staff I
passed over this Iordan] Paupertatem baculinam commemorat. Jacob, though now
grown great, forgets not his former meanness; but cries out, with that noble
Captain, (...): From how small, to how great an estate, Iphierates.
am I raised I So did Agathocles, who, of a Potters son, became King of Sicily;
yet, would ever be served in earthen vessels. And in the year of Christ 1011,
one Willigis, Bishop of Ments, being son to a Wheel-wright, caused wheels, and
such like things, Siffridus Bucholc.
to be hanged on the walls, up and down his Palace, with these words written
over them, in capital letters; Willigis, Willigis, recole unde veneris.
Excellent was that counsel that Placilla the Empress gave her husband
Theodosius: Remember, O husband, what lately you were, Hist. Trip.
and what now you are: so shall you govern well the Empire, and give God his
due praise, for so great an advancement.

Verse. 11. And the mother with the children] It seems to be a metaphor taken
from birds, when fowlers take away the young and the dams together; which God
forbad, Deuteronomy. 22.6. See the like also of the ewe and the lamb, not to be slain
in one day, Lev. 22.28. But Homo homini Iupus, nay demon. The Indians would
say, that it had been better for them, that their country had been given to the
devils of hell, then to the Spaniards, (such has been their cruelty toward
those poor creatures;) and that, if Spaniards went to heaven, they would never
come there. Three poor women were burnt at the Isle of Garnesey for Religion;
Act. and Mon. fol. 1392.
together with the infant-childe falling out of the mothers womb, and cruelly
cast back into the flames. Another sweet child of eight or nine years old,
coming to Bonners house, to see if he might speak with his father, a prisoner
in the Lollards Tower, was, Ibid. 1864.
for some bold answer that he gave the Bishops Chaplain, so cruelly whipped, that
he died within four days after. At Merindol in France, besides other execrable
outrages and butcheries there done by Minerius, one of the Popes Captains; the
paps of many women were cut off, which gave suck to their children; Ibid. 868.
which looking for suck at their mothers breasts, being dead before, died also
for hunger. Was not this, to kill the mother with the children? And was not
that a barbarous act of Pope Honorius the third, in the year of grace 1224, to
cause four hundred Scots to be hanged up, and their children gelt! and all for
the death of Adam, Bishop of Cathnes, who was burnt in his own kitchen, by his
own Citizens, Jacob. Rev. de vitis Pontif. page 163.
for that he had excommunicated some of them, for non-payment of Tithes.

Verse. 12. And thou said, I will surely do thee good] So Jacob interprets
that promise, I will be with thee: which, indeed, has in it whatsoever heart
can wish, or need require. This promise was so sweet to the Patriarch, that he
repeats and ruminates it, rolling it, Psalm. 62.11.
as sugar, in his mouth, land hiding it under his tongue. God spoke it once, he
heard it twice; as David, in another case. He sucks, and is satisfied with
these breasts of consolation; he presses and oppresses them, (such a metaphor
there is in that text, Isai. 66.11.) as a rich man does the poor man, till he
has gotten out of him all that he has. A fly can make little of a flower;
but a be will not off, till he has the sweet thyme out of it. The promises
are precious spices, which, being beaten to the smell, by the preaching of the
Word, yield an heavenly and supernatural scent in the souls of Gods people. Oh
it is a sweet time with them, when Christ brings them into his banqueting house
of the holy Scriptures, and there stays them with flagons of divine
consolations, and bolsters them up with apples of heavenly doctrines. These,
when by the Spirit they are applied to the lovesick soul; then is Christ's left
hand under their head, and his right hand (which teaches him terrible things,
Psalm. 45.5.) does embrace them. All in Christ, is for their support and
succor: his love also is displayed over them, as a banner. And this does so
fully satisfy their souls, and transport them with joy, that now they are
content to wait Gods leisure for deliverance; and would not have their Beloved
wakened, until he please, See all this, Cant. 2.4, 5, 6, 7.

Verse. 13. And took of that which came to his hand, etc.] Or, that was in his
power. Such as he had, he sent. Silver and gold he had none; cattle he had, and
of these he made no spare: for he knew, that A gift (such a rich gift,
especially) makes room for a man, and brings him before great ones, Prove.
18.16. And here Jacob (for our instruction) takes a right course, observes a
right method; Reusner.
which is, to pray, and use means; to use means, and pray. Ora and labora, was
the Emperors Symbol; and, Admota manu invocanda est Minerva, the Heathens
proverb. Why criest thou unto me? Exodus 14.15.
(says God to Moses;) speak unto the children of Israel, that they go forward.
There was a fault: Moses craved help, but was not forward in the course,
whereby to make way for Gods help. Josh. 7.10, 11.
So, Get thee up, (says God to praying Joshun;) wherefore lie thou thus upon
thy face? Israel has finned, and thou must go search, etc. So, he that would
have knowledge, must not only beg for it, but dig for it, says Solomon, out
of his own experience, Prove. 2.3, 4, 5.

Verse. 14. Two hundred she-goats, etc.] A very great present for a private
person to send. Five hundred and fifty beasts, of sundry sorts, for store. He
spares for no cost, that he may buy his peace, and enjoy his birthright.
Heaven, he knew, (whereof Canaan was a type and pledge) would pay for all. Get
but a Patriarchs eye, to see heaven afar off, and we shall be soon ready to buy
it at any rate: The pearl of price cannot be a dear bargain, though we part
with all, to purchase it. Moses was forty years old, (and therefore no babie)
when he preferred the reproach of Christ, Heb. 11.24.
(the worst thing about him) before the treasures of Egypt. Egypt was a country
rich, fruitful, and learned: 2 Chronicles. 9.
Thence Solomon had his chief horses; thence the harlot had her fine linens,
Prove. 7.16. Moses might, in likelihood, have been king of Egypt, yea, and of
Ethiopia too, as some think: but he had a better prize in his hand, and
therefore slights all the worlds flitting and flattering felicities. When Basil
was tempted with money and preferment, he answered, Pecuniam da quae permaneat,
ac continuo duret, gloriam quae semper floreat. This the world cannot do, nay
it cannot keep off diseases, death, etc. Non domus and fundus, etc. When
Miachael Paleologus, Emperor of Constantinople, Nunquid calamitates, morbos,
aut mortem depellere possent? Pachymer, hist. lib. 5.
sent to Nugas the Scythian Prince, for a present, certain royal robes and rich
ornaments; he set light by them, asking, Whether they could drive away
calamities, sickness, death. No, no: this, nothing can do, but the favor of
God, and interest in Christ. Wherefore should I die, being so rich? was the
foolish question of that rich and wretched Cardinal, Henry Beauford, Bishop of
Winchester, Act. and Mon. fol. 925.
and Chancellor of England, in the reign of Henry the sixth. Fie, quoth he,
will not death be hired? will money do nothing? No, Prove. 10.2.
says Solomon: Treasures of wickedness profit nothing; but righteousness
delivers from death. Many are loath to die, because they have treasures in
the world; as those ten men had in the field, Jer. 41.8. The Irish ask, What
such men mean to die. But such men must die; nor can their riches reprieve
them. Oh happy is he, that, with Jacob, lays hold on the heavenly inheritance,
though with the loss of earthly possessions; that cares not to part with his
cattle, so he may have his Crown; with his swine, so he may have his Savior.
This is the wise merchant, this is the true tradesman, that traffiques for
heaven; looking upon the world as a great dunghill, with Paul, Phil. 3.8.
(...), dogs dung.


Verse. 16. Every drove by themselves] That Esau, having occasion of viewing the
present, questioning the servants, and hearing Jacob's submission, might be
somewhat mollified, and his anger abated. Be wise as serpents. Vt fragilis
glacies, occidit ira mora.

Verse. 18. They be thy servant Jacobs] A soft answer turns away wrath,
Frangitur ira gravis, quand^ est responsio suavis.
(Prove. 15.1.) but grievous words stir up anger. And it is easier to stir
strife, then stint it. Still rain softens the hard earth: and though nothing be
more violent then the winds, Iidem tamen imbribus sopiuntur, says Pliny.
Lenis alit flammas, grandior aura necat. How daintily did Gedeon disarm the
angry Ephraimites, (Judge. 8. 1, 2, 3.) by a mild answer! [ It is a present
sent, etc.] For, a gift in secret, pacifieth anger, Prove. 21.14. This proverb,
in an abbreviature, Godw. Heb. Antiq. ex Buxtorf.
after their manner, the Jews wrote upon their Alms-box. [And behold also, he
is behind us] He sends not only, but comes after us himself; to salute thee,
and offer his service unto thee. Thus, by all means, he seeks to assuage the
wrath of that rough man.

Verse. 21. And himself lodged that night] But lay upon thorns, and had little
rest. (...). The master is the greatest servant in the house, and has most
business. Jo. Manlii loc. com.
This verse did so please Luther, that he translated it in certain Dutch rhymes.

Verse. 24. And Jacob was left alone] Purposely, for secret prayer: so the
Church gets her into the clefts of the rocks, Cant. 2.14. Isaac, into the
fields; Daniel, to the rivers side; Christ, into the mount; Peter, up to the
leads, or house top; that they might pour out their prayers, and solace
themselves with God, in secret. This an hypocrite may seem to do, either of
custom, or vainglory: as the Pharisee went up to the Temple, to pray
solitarily, as well as the Publican; the Temple being then, in regard of
Ceremonial holiness, the place as well of private as public prayer. But will
the hypocrite delight in God? Job. 27.10.
will he pray always? [There wrestled a man with him] In a proper combat, by
might and slight; to the raising of dust, and causing of sweat; as the word
imports. This strife was not only corporal, but spiritual; as well by the
force of his faith, Hos. 12.4. Luke 22.44. Romans 15.30. (...).
as strength of body. He prevailed, says the Prophet, by prayers and tears.
Our Savior also prayed himself into an agony; and we are bidden to strive in
prayer, even to an agony. Nehemiah prayed himself pale; Nehem. 2 6. Dan. 8.27.
1 Samuel 1. 1 Kings 18.42.
Daniel prayed himself sick; Hannah prayed, striving with such an unusual
motion of her lips, that old Eli, looking upon her, thought her drunk. Elijah
puts his head betwixt his legs, as straining every string of his heart in
prayer: He prayed, and prayed, says S. James; and, by his prayer, James 5 17.
he had what he would of God. Whereupon also he infers, (as a Consectary) that
the effectual prayer of a righteous man, James 5.16.
avails much, if it be fervent, or working; (...).
if it be such as sets all the faculties awork, and all the graces a work, then
it speeds. Every sound is not Music; so neither is every uttering petitions to
God, a prayer. It is not the labor of the lips, but the travel of the heart.
Common beggary, is the easiest and poorest trade: but this beggary, as it is
the richest, so the hardest. A man can with more ease hear two hours together,
then pray half an hour, Jude v. 20.
if he pray in the holy Ghost, as Saint Jude has it. He must strive with his
own indevotion, with Satan's temptations, with the worlds distraction: he must
wrestle with God, and wring the blessing out of his hands, as the woman of
Canaan did: Isai. 64.7. 2 Kings 4.30. Cant. 3.4.
he must stir up himself to take hold of God, as the Shunamite did of Elisha,
as the Church did of her Spouse; and not let him go, till he bless us. This is
to wrestle; this is to threaten heaven, as Gorgonia did, thus to be modestly
impudent and invincible, as her brother speaks of her; in beseeching God, to
besiege him, and get the better of him, as Jacob; whose wrestling, was by
weeping; and his prevailing, by praying.

Verse. 25. And when he saw that he prevailed not] He, that is, the Angel,
(Christ) that redeemed Jacob from all evil, Genesis 48.16. and here held him up
with the one hand, as he strove against him with the other; and yielded himself
overcome by the Patriarch's prayers and tears. Deus ipse, qui nullis contrase
viribus superari potest, precibus vincitur, says Hierome. [He touched the
hollow of his thigh] That, if he would needs have the blessing, he might have
somewhat with it, that might keep him humble, Victoria non fit fine vulnere*
luxat nobis semur: immittit stimulum carni, etc.
not ascribing the victory to his own strength. Pride is a weed that will grow
out of any ground, (like Missleto, that will grow upon any tree;) but, for most
part, from the best. Like air in all bodies, it will have a being in every
soul, and creeps into every action, either in the beginning, proceeding, or
conclusion. Now therefore it is Gods care, to cure his people of this dangerous
disease, as he did Jacob here, and afterward Paul; who, if he had not been
buffeted, had been exalted, 2 Cor. 1^.
and carried higher in conceit, then ever he was in his ecstasie.

Verse. 26. Let me go, etc] Pugna suum finem, cum rogat bostis, habet. Jacob,
though lamed, and hard laid at, will not let Christ go, without a blessing: To
teach us, as our Savior did, by the parable of the importunate widow, Luke
18.1.
to persevere in prayer, and to devour all discouragements. Jcob holds with his
hands, when his joints were out of joint. The woman of Canaan will not be put
off, either with silence, or sad answers. The importunate widow teaches us, to
press God so far, till we put him to the blush, yea leave a blot in his face,
(...). Luke 18.5.
(as the word, there used, signifies) unless we be masters of our requests.
Latimer so plied the throne of grace with his Once again, Act. and Mon.
once again, restore the Gospel to England, that he would have no nay at Gods
hands. He many times continued kneeling and knocking so long together, Ibid.
that he was not able to rise without help. His knees were grown hard, like
camels knees, as Eusebius reports of James the Lords brother. 2 Cor. 12.
Paul prayed thrice, that is, often; till he had his desire. Nay, Paulus
Aemylius, the Roman General, being to fight against Perses King of Macedony,
when as he had sacrificed to his god Hercules, and it proved not to his mind,
Sabellicus.
he slew twenty several sacrifices one after another; and would not give over,
till in the one and twentieth he had descried certain arguments of Victory.
Surely, his superstition, shames our indevotion; his importunity, our
faint-heartedness, and shortness of spirit. Surely, as painfulness of speaking
shows a sick body; so does irksomness of praying, a sick soul.

Verse. 27. What is thy name?] As if the Angel should say, Thou art such a
fellow as I never met withal: Titles of honor are not worthy of thee. Kneel
thou down Jacob, rise up Israel: Thou art a conqueror, Bucholc.
if ever any were. Factus and teipso fortior, and Creatore tuo superior. O quam
hic honos no^ est omnium!

Verse. 28. No more Jacob, but Israel] That is, Not only, or not so much Jacob,
as Israel. Both these names he had given him, of striving and struggling. All
Gods Israel are wrestlers by calling, Ephesians. 6, Nu^quam bella bo^^s, ^unquam
discrimina desunt.
12. and, as good soldiers of Jesus Christ, must suffer hardship. Nothing is
to be seen in the Shulamite, but as the appearance of two armies, maintaining
civil broils within her. The spirit would always get the better of the flesh,
were it upon equal terms: but when the flesh shall get the hill, (as it were)
of temptation, and shall have the wind to drive the smoke upon the eyes of the
combatant, and so to blind him; upon such a disadvantage, he is overcome. For
it is not flesh and blood only, that we wrestle against, (whether we take the
Apostles meaning, for the weakness of our nature, or the corruption of it;) but
against principalities, against powers, etc. against many, mighty, malicious
adversa^ies, spiritual wickednesses in high places, that are above us, and hang
over our necks. Wherefore, we have more then need to take unto us the whole
armor of God, and to strengthen our selves with every piece of it: whether
those of defense; as, the girdle of truth, Ephesians. 6.14.
the breast plate of righteousness, the shoes of peace, and patience, the
shield of faith, the helmet of hope: or those of offense; as, the sword of the
spirit, and the darts of prayer. At no place must we lie open; for our enemy is
a serpent: If he can but bite the heel, he will transfuse his venom to the
heart and head. Gods Spirit, in us, sets up a standard, Isai. 59.19, The
Apostle sounds the alarm, Arm, arm, Ephesians. 6. The holy Scripture is our Armory,
Cant. 4.4.
like Solomon's tower, where hang a thousand shields, and all the weapons of
strong men. God himself is the' (...), that both ordains and orders our
temptations with his own hand; as he dealt with Jacob. And the Lord Christ
stands over us, Acts 7.
(as he did once over Steven) with a crown upon his head, and another in his
hand, with this inscription, Vincenti dabo; To him that overcomes, Revel. 2.
will I give, etc. Fight but with his arms, and with his armor, and we are
sure to overcome, before we fight: for he has made all our foes our footstool,
and has caused us to triumph. 2 Cor. 2.14.
Let therefore the assaults of our already-vanquished enemies, not weaken, but
waken us: let their faint oppositions, and spruntings before death, encourage
us, or rather enrage us, to do them to death: we are sure to be more then
conquerours, D. Ussier. de Britan. Eccl^s^ primord. p. 332.
and to have Victoriam Halleluiaticam, as the Britains, fighting for their
Religion, had once against the Saxons and Picts in this kingdom.

Verse. 29. And he blessed him there] That was a better thing to Jacob, then to
answer his curious request of knowing the Angels name. So when the disciples
asked our Savior, Acts 1.6, Wilt then at this time restore again the Kingdom
to Israel? It is not for you to know the times, says he; but ye shall receive
the holy Ghost; that is better for you, etc. verse. 8. God, sometimes, does not
only grant a man's prayer, but fulfill his counsel, Psalm. 20.4. This if he do
not, because we sometimes ask we know not what; yet some better thing we shall
be sure of. Zech. 10.6. I will strengthen the house of Judah, and they shall be
as if I had not cast them off; and I will hear them.

Verse. 30. I have seen God face to face] Christ would not tell Jacob his name,
to lift up his mind above what he saw of him; and to insinuate, that his name
was Wonderful, his essence incomprehensible. Judge. 13.17, 18
And whereas Jacob said here, he had seen God face to face; he means only
praesens praesentem, as Moses spoke with God mouth to mouth, Number. 12.8. He saw
not Gods Majesty and Essence: Isai. 8.17. 1 Timothy 6.16.
for he is a God that hides himself, and dwells in the light unapproachable.
But he saw him more apparently and manifestly, then ever he had done before. We
can see but his back parts, and live; we need see no more, that we may live.
God that fills all, (says Nazianzen) though he lighten the mind, yet flies
before the beams thereof; still leaving it, as it is able, in sight, to follow
him; draws it, by degrees, to higher things* but ever interposeth between it
and his incomparable Essence, as many vails, as were over the tabernacle. Some
created shape, some glimpse of glory, Jacob saw; whereby God was pleased, for
present, to testify his more immediate presence; but not himself.

Verse. 31. He halted upon his thigh] Yet had the blessing. So Gods people are
promised an hundred fold here, with persecution; that is tied, as a tag, to the
profession of Christianity. No heaven can be had, without tribulation. Christ,
our Captain, had a bloody victory of it. Gal. 6. 1 Cor. 12. Joh. Manl. loc.
com. 127.
Paul bare in his body the marks, or scars, of the Lord Jesus; and glories in
these infirmities, as he calls them. These are Gods gems, and precious
ornaments, (said Munster to his friends, pointing them to his sores and ulcers)
wherewith God decketh his children, that he may draw them to himself. This he
said, a little before his death. At death, (says Piscator) God wrestles with
his people, laying hold on their consciences, by the menaces of the Law. They
again resist this assault, by laying hold upon God, by the faith of the Gospel:
well assured, that Christ has freed them from the curse of the Law, by being
made a curse for them on the Cross. God yields himself overcome, by this
reencounter; but yet touches their thigh, takes away their life. Howbeit, this
hinders not the Sun of life eternal to arise upon them, as they pass over
Pe^^el.

Verse. 32. Therefore the children, etc.] This custom, Josephus says, continued
till his time. A ceremony indifferent in it self, and good by institution, (in
remembrance of that famous conquest) might become evil, by abuse, if it turned
into superstition.

CHAP. XXXIII. Verse. 1. He divided the children.]
CArnal fear often expectorates a man's wisdom, and leaves him shiftless. But
Jacob, after he had prayed, and prevailed, was not so moped, as not to know
what to do in that great danger: he masters his fears, and makes use of two the
likeliest means: 1. The marshalling of his wives and children in best manner,
for the saving of the last, at least. 2. The marching before them himself, and
doing low obeisance. So Esther, when she had prayed, resolved to venture to
the King, whatever came of it. And our Savior, though before fearful, yet,
after he had prayed in the garden, goes forth, and meets his enemies in the
face, asking them, Whom seek ye? Great is the power of prayer, to steel the
heart against whatsoever amazements.

Verse. 2. He put the handmaids, etc.] Of children and friends, some may be
better beloved then others: And whereas all cannot be saved or succored, the
dearest may be chiefly cared for.

Verse. 3. And he passed over before them] As a good Captain and Shepherd, ready
to be sacrificed for the safety of his charge. So the Captain of our salvation,
the Arch-shepherd, Christ. So should the under-shepherds, the captains, (as
Ministers are called, Heb. 12.5.) fight in the front, and bear the brunt of the
battle; not loving their lives unto the death, so they may finish their course
with joy; de scuto magis quam de vita solliciti, as Epaminondas. The diamond in
the Priests breast plate, showed what should be their hardness, and hardiness,
for the peoples welfare.

Verse. 4. And kissed him] The word kissed has a prick over every letter, in
the Original: to note, say the Hebrew Doctors, that this was a false and
hypocritical kiss, a Judas-kiss. (...), says Philo: Amor non semper est in
osculo. But our Interpreters are agreed, that this kiss was a sign, Qui
probabil^us loq^untur, aiuns co ipso^o^ari animi Esauici c^^ver^ionem. Am.
that his heart was changed from his former hatred; and that those
extraordinary pricks do denote the wonder of Gods work therein: which is
further confirmed, in that they both wept; which could not easily be
counterfeit; though they were in Ishmael, that notable hypocrite, Jer. 41.6,
and in the Emperor Andronicus, who, when he had injuriously caused many of the
Nobility to be put to death, pretended himself sorry for them, Turk. hist. fol.
50.
and that with tears plentifully running down his aged cheeks, as if he had
been the most sorrowful man alive. Ibid. fol. 175.
So the Egyptian Crocodile, having killed some living beast, lies upon the
dead body, and washes the head thereof with her warm tears; which she
afterward devoureth, with the dead body. We judge more charitably of Esau here.
And yet we cannot be of their mind, that here-hence conclude his true
conversion and salvation. We must take heed we neither make Censures whip, nor
Charities cloak too long: we may offend in both, and incur the curse, Isai.
5.20. Joh. Manl. loc. com. 496.
as well by calling evil good, as good evil. Latomus of Lovain wrote, that
there was no other a faith in Abraham, then in Cicero. Another wrote a long
Defense and Commendation of Cicero, and makes him a very good Christian, and
true penitentiary; Ibid. 483.
because he says, somewhere, Reprehendo peccata mea, quod Pompeio confisus,
ejusque parts secutus fuerim. I believe neither of them.

Verse. 5. The children which God has graciously given] Sept. (...). For
children are Gods gifts, as David taught Solomon, Psalm. 127. It is well
observed, that good Jacob, before a bad man, speaks religiously; ( God of his
grace, etc.) and Esau, as bad as he was, makes no jest of it. There is no surer
sign of a profane heart, then to jeer at good expressions; then which, nothing
now adays is more familiar. Carnal spirits cannot hear savoury words, but they
turn them off with a scorn, as Pilate did our Savior, speaking of the truth,
with that scornful profane question, What Is truth? Shall these scoffers be
counted Christians? Could any that heard Elijah mocking the service and
servants of Baal, believe, that Baal was god in his esteem? Shall not Esau rise
up in judgment against such profane persons? And shall not Jacob disclaim all
such profligate professors for having any relation to him, that dare not speak
religiously, for fear of some Esau in company? that are ashamed to seem what
they are, with Zedekiah, lest they that are fallen to the Chaldeans should mock
them?

Verse. 7. After came Joseph near, etc.] Jussus accedere Joseph, (says Junius;)
for he was but a little one of six years old; therefore he did nothing, but as
his mother bade him; and, because he went before her, he is first named.

Verse. 8. What meanest thou by all this drove, etc.] He met it, but had not yet
accepted of it: either that he might take occasion, at their meeting, more
mannerly to refuse the Present; or, that he might show his brotherly affection
frankly and freely, not purchased or procured by any gift or Present. Piscator.
Vtrunque liberale and civil est, oblata munera modeste recusare, praesertim
si grandia sint, and eadem ab instante humaniter acceptare.

Verse. 9. I have enough, my brother] Here Is no mention of God: God is not in
all the wicked man's thoughts: he contents himself with a natural use of the
creature, (as bruit beasts do;) the godly takes all as from God; and finds
no such sweetness, as in tasting how good the Lord is, in the creature. Tam Dei
meminisse, opus est, quam respirare, says One. But profane Esaus will neither
have God in their heads, Psalm. 10.4, nor hearts, Psalm. 14.1, nor ways, Tit.
1.16, nor words, Psalm. 12.4. They stand in a posture of distance, nay of
defiance to God.

Verse. 10. As though I had seen the face of God] I cannot but see God, and his
goodness, in thy so unexpected kindness. The Lord has done great things for
me, whereof I am glad, and think my Present well bestowed.

Verse. 11. I have enough] Heb. I have all. Esau had much, but Jacob had all,
because he had the God of all. Habet omnia, qui habet habentem omnia, says
Augustine. Esau's enough, in the Original, is not the same with Jacob's. (...)
There are two manner of enoughs: Godliness only has contentedness, 1 Timothy
6.6.

Verse. 12. Let us take our journey] The Hebrews note, that Esau speaks in few,
Jacob more fully: because it is the guise of proud stately persons, to speak
briefly, and hardly to bring forth half their words. The poor speaks
supplications, says Solomon; Prove. 18.23.
but the rich answer roughly.

Verse. 13. If men should over-drive] A pattern of a good Pastor, ever to have
an eye to the weak ones; and so to regard all in his flock, as he over-drive
not any. Zech. 4.10. Romans 14.1.
Who has despised the day of small things? Weak ones are to be received, but
not to doubtful disputations. Novices are not to be put upon the austerities of
Religion, Matthew. 9.15. Christ preached as they were able to hear, Mark 4.33.
Peter was specially charged to look to the lambs, Ioh. 21.15. Christ bears them
in his bosom, and gently leads those that are with young, Isai. 40.11.

Verse 14. Until I come to my lord, to Seir] Which yet he never meant, say some:
it was but an officious lie, says Tostatus. Others think, that he did go to
Seir, though it be not recorded. It is like he purposed to go, but was
otherwise warned by God; as the wisemen were, Matthew. 2. or necessarily
hindered, as Saint Paul was, in many of his intended journeys.

Verse. 15. Let me find grace] That is, Condescend unto me, and leave none.

Verse. 16. On his way, unto Seir] Whither God had sent him aforehand, to plant,
out of Jacobs way. He was grown rich, desired liberty, and saw that his wives
were offensive to the old couple; therefore he removed his dwelling to mount
Seir, and left better room for Jacob; who, perhaps, had intelligence thereof
from his mother, by Deborah, and so was the rather willing to return.

Verse. 17. built him an house, and made boothes] So did his posterity, at their
going out of Egypt, Exodus 12.37. and, for a perpetual memorial thereof,
Tuguria, a tege^do dicta.
were appointed to keep a yearly feast of boothes or tabernacles, Lev. 23.34,
made of green boughs of trees, in praise of God, who had now vouchsafed them
better houses. And here one would wonder, M. Th. Goodw.
(says a Divine) that all along, during the reign of David and Solomon, (who
gave a pattern of, and built the Temple) and all those succeeding reformers,
there should something be omitted about this feast of tabernacles, till their
return from Babylon: Yet so it was, Neb. 8.16, 17. This feast was kept (as it is
thought) by Solomon, 2 Chronicles. 7.8, and by these same Jews, Ezra 3.4. yet not in
this manner, Neh. 8.14. Now they had learned, by sad experience, to keep it
aright, in dwelling in boothes, by having been lately strangers out of their
own land: to signify which, and profess themselves strangers, (as this Syrian
ready to perish, Deuteronomy. 26.5.
their father, was now at Succoth) was the intent of that feast, and that rite
of it, dwelling in boothes. This is intimated, verse. 17. They did read also out
of the law, etc. verse. 19. which, till then, they had not done.

Verse. 18. Came to Shalem] Or, came safe and sound to Shechem, as the Chaldee
interprets it.

Verse. 19. Sic pecunia, a pecude.
For an hundred pieces of money] Heb. lambs, (as we call Angels, Jacobusses)
because stamped with the image of a lamb. So Josh. 24.32. Job 42.11.

Verse. 20. And he erected there a^ altar] 1. As a memorial of the promises, and
a symbol of Gods presence. 2. As an external profession of his piety. 3. That
he might set up God in his family, and season all his worldly affairs with a
relish of Religion.

CHAP. XXXIV. Verse. 1. Went out to see the daughters of the land.]
Who went abroad at this time, with timbrels, to play, say the Hebrews; kept a
solemn feast, says Josephus. Hence Dinah's desire to see them. But what says
S. Bernard? Si tu otiose spectas, otiose non spectaris: tu curiose spectas, sed
curiosius spectar^s. Dinah's wanton gadding, and gazing on others, gave
occasion to the adulterer to look and lust after her. See the fruit of her
needless jetting abroad, to see fashions and novelties. The name of a virgin,
in the Original tongues, (...) of (...) a house; (...) of (...) to hide: (...)
of (...) to shadow. (...), of (...), to lay up. (...), a virgin, and the apple
of the eye. Mars vi^et banc, visamqu^ cupit, potiturque cupita. Ovid. Jer. 9.6.
Bond. in Horat.
is derived from the house, hiding, shadow, locked treasure, apple of the eye:
to teach them to refrain ill company, and idle gadding. Young women are taught
to be keepers at home, Tit. 2.2. As when they come abroad among men, they must
be, if not veiled, (as at Venice) yet clothed, and in their right minds, (as
that Demoniack, Luke 8.35.) And this not only in winter, that they take no
cold; but in the summer, that others take no heat from them, (which may rather
burn them, then warm them) as Shechem here did.

Verse. 2. saw her, he took her, and lay with her] Vt vidit, periit. By those
windows of the eyes and ears, sin and death often enter: through them, the devil
throws balls of wildfire into the soul, and sets all into a combustion. Visus,
colloquium, contactus, osculum, concubitus, do too often one succeed another. See
to the Cinqueports, if ye would keep out the enemy. Shut up the five windows,
if ye would have the house (the heart) full of light, says the Arabian
proverb. Joseph's mistress cast her eyes upon him; but when she laid hands on
him, she was the more inflamed, and set agog, as it were. The viewing,
touching, or familiar talking with a woman, either without necessary occasion,
or then, Time well spent, by M. Ezekiel. Culverwel, ^ page 53.
without prayer for holy affection, is dangerous, says a grave Divine. Thou
may not look intently upon what thou may not love. Democritus the
Philosopher pulled out his eyes, that he might not look upon forbidden
beauties. This was no part of his wisdom: But it shall be ours, by
mortification, to pluck the wanton eye out of old Adam, and to set it sober
into the new man: to get that oculum irretortum, that well-ordered eye, that
Job had, Chap. 31.1, that Joseph had; that Gregory Nazianzen had, who could
(...), tutor his eyes: that Charles the fifth, Emperor of Germany, had, who
would shut the casements, Saepe clausit ^enestram, ^e inspiceret formosiores
soeminas, etc. Parci hist. profan. p. 908.
when at any time he saw fair women afar off, or heard that such were to pass
by his window. It is not safe, to pry into the beauty of a fair woman. Circe
may inchant us, the Cockatrice slay us with her sight: Let her not take thee
with her eyebrows, says Solomon; as larks, while they gaze in a glass, are
taken in a day-net. See the Notes on Chap. 6.2. and 26.7.

Verse. 3. And his soul clave unto Dinah] He kicked her not out of doors, (as
Amn^n did Tamar, far sweeter to him in the ambition, then in the fruition;) but
to make amends (as they call it) by Marriage, he seeks to go by the old Rule in
that case, Et dotet, and ducat. Howbeit, Marriage (Gods ordinance) is not to be
entered into through the devils portal.

Verse. 4. Get me this damosel to wife] This is praiseworthy in Shechem, as bad
as he was, that he corrects his base-born love, (or lust rather) by seeking
to make her his wife; not without consent of parents on both sides; which, in
the Church of Rome, is oft-times not regarded. Children are a principal part of
their parents possessions, (as Job's children were accounted by Satan) yea, a
piece of themselves, Matthew. 15.22. Have mercy upon me, that is, upon my
daughter. Fit it is therefore, that they should by the parents be disposed of
in Marriage.

Verse. 5. And Jacob heard] To his very great grief and regret: For she was his
only daughter; a damosel of not above fifteen years of age. The Hebrews say,
she was afterward given to Job in marriage: But that is not likely; for she is
reckoned among those that went down to Egypt, Genesis 46. [And Jacob held his
peace] He felt Gods hand upon his back; he therefore lays his own hand upon his
mouth. And herein he did better in ruling his own spirit, then his sons did,
Prove. 16.32. Lam. 3.28. Levit. 10.3. Psalm. 39.10.
that took the City, verse. 27. He sits alone, and is silent, says the
Prophet of the afflicted person. So was Aaron, so was David, so was the Lord
Christ, as a sheep dumb before the shearer. The Romans placed the image of
their goddess Angeronia, upon the altar of Volupia, with her mouth shut, and
sealed up: Macrob. lib. 1. in Some. Scip.
to signify, says Macrobius, that they that bridle their grief, and say
nothing, shall, by their patience, soon attain to greatest pleasure. Acts
19.35, 16.
Patience in the soul, as the Town Clerk at Ephesus, sends away mutinous
thoughts, as he did the many-headed multitude: it quiets the boiling spirit, as
Christ becalmed the raging sea, with Peace, and be still: it makes a David
dumb: a dumb show, but a very good one: it says, Cedamus: leve fit, quod been
fertur onus.

Verse. 6. And Hamor the father of Shechem] Unruly youth put their aged parents,
many times, to much travel and trouble; as Samson, Shechem, Paris, etc. Green
wood is ever shrinking and warping; whereas the well-seasoned holds a constant
firmness.

Verse. 7. The men were grieved, Heb. exarserit cis nasus.
and very wroth] A pair of unruly passions, when combined, especially: they
ride one upon the back of another, as kine do in a strait passage; and will
make an Alexander kill his best friends, such as he would afterward have
revived, with the best and warmest blood in his own heart. -- qui non
moderabitur irae
Infectum velit esse, dolor quod suaserit, and men's.
Horat.
[Because he had wrought folly in Israel] That is, in the Church, where
fornication should not be once named, much less committed, Ephesians. 5.3. Sin is
odious any-where; most of all, among Saints. A thistle is unseemly in a garden,
filthiness in a vestal, baseness in a Prince. And yet, by the malice of Satan,
there are, many times, more scandals in the Church, then elsewhere: such incest
at Corinth, as not among Heathens; such folly in Jacob's family, as not at
Shechem, or Seir. Sodom thy sister has not done, she nor her daughters, as
thou have done, thou and thy daughters, Ezekiel. 16.48. This is lamentable.

Verse. 8. And Hamor communed with them] A fond father seeks to satisfy the
lust of a loose son, whom he should severely have punished, Such parents are
peremptores potius quam parents, faith Bernard; like apes, that kill their
young with culling them. They show their love as little, as if, by clapping
their hands on their childrens mouths, to keep the cold wind from them, they
should strangle them to death. A fair hand, here, makes a foul wound; when
correction would be a kind of cure. Severitas tamen non sit tetra, sed
tetrica, says Sidonius. For, Sidonius, lib. 4. Ep. 9.
as a cur by tying waxes fiercer; and as new wine breaks weak vessels; so
too much severity overthrows, and quite spilleth a tender mind.

Verse. 9. And make ye marriages with us] The world thinks, we may do as they;
and what need we be so scrupulous and straitlaced? But Saints must walk
accurately, by line, and by rule; (...), Ephesians. 5.15. (...).
not as unwise, but as wise; having their feet where other men's heads are: for
the way of the wise is on high, says Solomon; he goes a higher way to work
then others: he may not buckle, and stoop to their base courses. Singular
things are conferred upon him, singular things are expected from him. An
Israelite dare not yoke himself with any Sichemish heifer, that bears not the
yoke of Jesus Christ. Those that stood with the Lamb, had not defiled
themselves with women, etc. Rev. 14.14. Nec aliunde noscibiles (says
Tertullian of those Primitive Christians) quam de emendatione vitierum
pristinorum. Tertull. ad Scapulam.
They were distinguished from all others, by their holy behavior.

Verse. 10. And ye shall dwell with us, etc.] Thus the world tempts the Saints,
by offer of profits, pleasures, and preferments. Sed surdo cantilenam. For they
answer the world, as here, We cannot do this thing, verse. 14. or as the
children of Israel bespake the king of Edom; Let us pass, I pray thee, through
thy country: We will not pass through the fields of profit, or vineyards of
pleasure, etc. we will go by the kings highway, chalked unto us in the holy
Scriptures: we will not turn to the right hand, or to the left, for any
allurement or affrightment of thine, until we have passed thy borders, Number.
20.17.

Verse. 11, 12] Ask me never so much dowry] Heb. Multiply ye upon me,
vehemently. Genesis 38.18.
Unbridled affection spares for no cost, so it may be satisfied. Judah parted
with his signet, bracelets, and staff, to the harlot. Herod, that old
fornicator, bids the dancing damosel ask what she will, Demosth.
to the half of his kingdom. One there was, that would not buy repentance so
dear, as the harlot demanded. But those miscreants in Micah, will give any
thing for a dispensation to live in sin: they offer thousands of rams, and ten
thousands of rivers of oil; Micah 6.7.
yea, the sons of their body, for the sins of their souls.

Verse. 13. deceitfully, and said, Because he had, etc.] Therefore they thought,
they had reason to do as they did. Satan does so bemist men, many times, that
they think they have reason to be mad, and that there is some sense in sinning:
whenas, indeed, our only wisdom is, to keep God's Laws, Deuteronomy. 4.6. All which
are founded upon so good reason, that, had God never made them, yet it had been
best for us to have practiced them.

Verse. 14. That Were a reproach unto us] And yet the world reproached them with
nothing more, then with their Circumcision; as it is to be seen in Horace,
Juvenal, Tacitus. Appion scoffs at it, and is answered by Josephus. But, as he
were a fool, that would be mo^kt out of his inheritance; so he, much more, that
would be mo^ked out of his Religion. Ye have shamed the counsel of the poor,
says David, because the Lord is h^^refuge; because he runs to God by prayer.
But, to show how little he regarded their reproaches, he falls presently a
praying, O that the salvation of Israel etc. Psalm 14.6, 7. So Nazareth was a
reproach cast upon Christ; and he glories in it, Acts 22.8. I am Jesus of
Nazareth, Whom thou persecutest. He says not, I am the Son of God, heir of all
things, King of the Church, etc. but, I am Jesus of Nazareth. If this be to be
vile, said David, I Will be yet more vile.

Verse. 15. That every male of you be circumcised] Lo, herein was their deceit.
How often is Religion pretended, made a stale and stalking-horse to worldly and
wicked aims and respects! A horrible profanation: as when Na^oth was put to
death at a fast; Henry the seventh, Emperor, poisoned in the Sacramental
bread, by a Monk. He pretends to worship Christ, intends to worry him, etc.
From such stand off, says S. Paul; or, 1 Timothy 6.5. Romans 16, 17, 18
if ye come near them, set a mark upon them. Foenum habet in cornu.

Verse. 16. Then will we give our daughters] Whether Jacob were present at this
whole conference, it is not certain. It is probable, that he was not. For
surely, he would either have dissuaded them from thus doing: or if he had
consented, he would have said something more, to the Shechemites, for their
better assurance. It is a Maxim in Machiavel; Fidem tamdiu servandam esse,
quamdiu expediat. But Jacob had not known this depth of the devil: his sons
better could skill of it. They seem to be somewhat akin to those Thracians, of
whom it was anciently said, Eos foedera nescire; that they knew no covenants:
or the Turks at this day, whose Covenants, grounded upon the Law of Nations, be
they with never so strong capitulations concluded, Turk. hist.
or solemnity of oath confirmed, have, with them, no longer force, then
stands with their own profit; serving, indeed, but as snares, to entangle
other Princes in. There is no faith, say they, to be kept with dogs; that is,
Ibid. 755.
with Christians. And this, perhaps, they have learned of those pseudo
Christians, the Papists, who dealt so perfidiously with them, at the great
Battle of Varna: Where Amurath, the Great Turk, seeing the great slaughter of
his men, against the oath given him by King Ladislaus, (dispensed with by the
Pope's Legate) and beholding the picture of the Crucifix in the displayed
Ensigns of the voluntary Christians; he plucked the Writing out of his bosom,
wherein the late League was comprised; and holding it up in his hand, with his
eyes cast up to heaven, said, Behold, thou crucified Christ, this is the League
thy Christians, in thy Name, made with me; Ibid. 297.
which they have, without cause, violated. Now, if thou be a God, as they say
thou art, and as we dream, revenge the wrong now done to thy Name, and me; and
show thy power upon thy perjurious people, who, in their deeds, deny thee their
God. And it fell out accordingly: For God hates foul and faithless dealing,
Zech. 5.4. Romans 1.31. Heu miser, etsi quis primo perjuriacelat, Sera tamen
tacitis paena venit pedibus. Tibull.
Perjurii poena divina exitium; humana, dedecus. This was one of the Laws of
the twelve Tables in Rome.

Verse. 17. But if ye will not hearken] How often have men found treason in
trust; and murder, under show of marriage! as 1 Samuel 18.17, 25. Dan. 11.17.
and in the Massacre of Paris.

Verse. 18. And their words] See the force of love, and hope of profit!

Verse. 19. And the young man deferred not, etc.] Heb. Neque distulit puer; The
lad deferred not. He is called a lad or a child, that is, a fool; because he
was carried, not by right reason, but blind affection, walking in the ways of
his heart, and sight of his eyes, (...)., of (...), of (...).
Eccles. 11.9. And, verse. 10. the word used to signify youth, signifies
darkness; to note, that youth is the dark age, hot, and headlong, indeliberate
and slippery, such as had need to cleanse their ways, by cleaving to the Word,
says David, Psalm. 119.9. where the word for cleansing, properly signifies the
cleansing of glass; which, as it is slick and slippery; so, though it be very
clean, yet it will gather filth, even in the sun beams, and of it self: which
notes the great corruption of this age.

Verse. 20. And Hamor and Shechem, etc.] These great men easily persuaded, and
prevailed with the people, to have what they would. Great need have we to pray
for good Governors. When Crispus believed, who was the chief Ruler of the
Synagogue, many Corinthians believed also, Acts 18.8. Paul was loath to lose
the Deputy; because his conversion would draw on many others. As on the
contrary, Jeroboam caused Israel to sin; and generally, as the Kings were good
or evil, so were the people; in which, as in a beast, the whole body follows
the head.

Verse. 21. These men are peaceable, etc.] Nothing more ordinary, with
Politicians, then to cover private ends and respects, with pretense of public
good: As Jeroboam told the people, it was too much trouble for them to go up to
Jerusalem to worship; they should take a shorter cut to Dan and Bethel. So
Jehu, in all his reformations, had a hawks eye to a kingdom; his main end was,
to settle the Crown upon his own head. The Turkish Janissaries, Parei Hist.
profan. Medul. 1176.
desirous to be rid of their Sultan Osman, pretended, and persuaded the people,
that he was Jaour, that is, an Infidel; and that he endeavored to betray the
Turkish Empire to Christian dogs, May 18. 1622.

Verse. 23. Shall not their cattle, etc.] Profit persuades mightily with the
multitude: They all look to their own way; Isai. 56.11.
every one for his gain from his quarter. Who Will show us any good? is Vox
populi. And who begs not attention, or inoculates not his faithful endeavor
into his friends Creed and Belief, with a tale of utile!

Verse. 24. And every male was circumcised] Many have lost their blood, and
suffered so much trouble for their lusts, as, had it been for Religion, they
had been Martyrs. But the Cause, and not the Punishment, makes the Martyr.
Samson and the Philistims died together; sed diverso fine ac fato. Multum
interest, says Augustine, and qualia quis, and qualis quisque patiatur.

Verse. 25. On the third day] Which is the worst day, to those that are wounded;
the critical day, as the Surgeons call it. Wicked men are witty, to take
their opportunity to act villainy.

Verse. 26. And they slew Hamor and Shechem] This is commended in Apocryphal
Judith, Chap. 9.2, for zeal; which the Canonical Scripture condemns for
self-will; and Jacob, on his deathbed, cursed it for cruelty, and blessed
himself from their assembly, Genesis 49.6, 7. Quest. But why does he not more
sharply reprove it here? Answ. First, he considered Gods just judgment on the
Shechemites; who, without the knowledge and faith of God, had profaned the
Sacrament of Circumcision. A sin that God suffers not to pass without a
sensible check, in his dearest children; how much less in strangers and
enemies? The Donatists, 1 Cor. 11.29, 30
that cast the holy clements of the Lords Supper to dogs, were devoured of
dogs. He that came without his wedding garment, was taken from the table, to
the tormenter. Secondly, Jacob gave place, for present, to his sons rage and
fury. Discretion in the choice of seasons for reproving, is no less necessary,
then zeal and faithfulness in reproving. Good Physicians use not to evacuate
the body, in the extremities of heat and cold. Good Mariners do not hoise up
sail in every wind.

Verse. 27. Because they had defiled their sister] So it was just in God, though
unjust in the instruments; who were therefore cursed by Jacob; Genesis 49.7.
but yet not rejected by God. His election is of free grace, and not of
foreseen faith or works.

Verse. 28. They took their sheep, etc.] One only sinned, all suffered. A
little leaven leaveneth the whole lump. All the Corinthians were tackt with, 1
Cor. 5.2, 6.
and taxed for the incestuous man's offense, because they bewailed it not,
repressed it not. He knew what he did, that prayed for pardon of his
other-mens-sins.

Verse. 29. And all their wealth] Or, power: For, in a man's wealth, is his
power; yea, it is his tower of strength, Prove. 18.10, 11. and so much he is
valued at, as he is able to disburse. See the Notes on Chap. 31.1. [And spoiled
even all that was in the house] So dealt Minerius, at Merindol; Charles the
fifth, at Magdeburg; the bloody Papists, at the Parisian Massacre. But when the
Lord came to make inquisition for blood, Psalm. 9.12.
he remembered them. He drew Articles of enquiry against them, as strict, and as
critical, as ever the Spanish Inquisition; and dealt with them accordingly.
Cambyses lighting off his horse, Justin.
after he had been showing great cruelty to them of Athens, his sword flew out
of the seabberd, and slew him. If these brethren in iniquity sped better, they
may thank a good God, whose terror fell upon the adjacent Cities. For they did
enough to undo, not themselves only, but their father, and his whole family.
It was good counsel to such, that Tertullian gives to bloody Scapula; Si nobis
non parcis, tibi parce: si non tibi, Carthageni: See thou undo not thy self,
and thy City, by thy cruelty to Christians.

Verse. 30. Cum in auimo, tum in rationihus. Jun.
Ye have troubled me] In mind, and state: and many such trouble-houses and
trouble-towns there are abroad: All places are full of them, and so is hell
too. There God will trouble them another while, as he did Achan, Josh. 7.25.
when he will show mercy to such Jacobs, in whose families that is committed,
that they abhor. Methe mispar.
[I being few in number] So the Saints were ever, a little flock, a poor few,
to the many: Jewels, nothing so much in bulk, as lumber; strangers, few, in
respect of home dwellers; sons of God, few, to common subjects. When Christ
came to his own, Joh. 1.12. Joh. 1.
his own received him not: He wondered at one good Nathaneel, and set an ecce
upon him, as a rare bird.

Verse. 31. Should he deal with our sister as an harlot?] Why no: But should you
therefore speak so big to your father, and deal so cruelly with your
Confederates; whom you first cozened into a Covenant, and then basely
butchered, when not able to help themselves? But anger is outrageous, and
forethinks not what will follow hereafter, or becomes a man for present. Bridle
it therefore.

CHAP. XXXV. Verse. 1. Arise, go up to Bethel.]
THis is not the first time that God tells him of that Vow, and calls for
performance. See Chap. 31.13. It is with us, as with children; Eaten bread is
soon forgotten: deliverances, commonly, are but nine days wonderment, at
utmost; and it is ten to one, that any leper returns to give praise to God. If
any thing arrouze and raise up our hearts to thankful remembrance of former
mercy, it must be the sense of some present misery, as here. Jacob was in a
great straight, and fright: His sons had troubled him; the country was ready to
rise upon him, and root him out: God also was justly displeased with him, for
his forgotten Vow; yet chides him not, now that he was in heaviness; but takes
his opportunity, (for we are best, when at worst) and gently minds him of what
was his duty, and would be for his safety. Numa is said to have put so much
confidence in his gods, that when he was sacrificing, and news came, that the
enemy was at hand; he laughed, and said, At ego r^m divinam facio. (...), Plut.
Those Philistims were even ambitious of destruction, and ran to meet their
ruin, that gathered themselves against Israel, whiles they were sacrificing, 1 Samuel 7.7. Cant. 6.10.
and serving the Lord, in their meet at Mizpeh. The Church, in her Worships, is
terrible as an army with banners; a cup of trembling to all the people round
about; a burdensome stone for all people; a torch of fire in a sheof, Zech.
12.2, 3, 6. Isai. 37.22.
He is a mad man that will meddle with her, whiles she is upon good terms with
Christ, her Champion. Balaam knew this, and therefore gave that villainous
counsel. Germani nondum, vi^o h^^te, Dani o terrore per^^^si iiffugerunt.
Parcus.
All Germany was in arms against that handful of H^ssites in Bohemia vet could
not suppress them. Geneva, a small people inviron^d with enemies, and barred
from aid of neighb^urs, yet ^^ithf^^ with God, has been hitherto strangely
upheld. At the siege of Mountabone in France, Spec. b^lli sacri, 282.
the people of God, using d^ily humiliation, as their service would permit, did
sing a Psalm after, and immediately before their sallying forth. With which
practice the enemy coming acquainted, ever, upon the singing of the Psalm,
(upon which they expected a sally) they would so quake and tremble, crying,
They come they come, as though the wrath of God had been breaking out upon them.

Verse. 2. Then Jacob said unto his houshold] So Gedeon began his reformation at
his fathers house. David also would walk wisely in the midst of his house;
Psalm. 101.2.
and this he calls a perfect way, a sign of sincerity, Psalm. 101. This Psalm,
Bishop Ridley read over often to his family, hiring them to learn it by heart;
and taking care, that they might be a spectacle to all others, of virtue and
honesty. [Put away the strange gods] Strange it was, that such Mawmets should
be suffered among them. Calvin thinks, that Jacob winked at Rachel's
superstition, of a blind love to her; as Solomon gratified his mistresses of
Moab. I should think rather, that they were the idols of Shechem, brought into
the house, either by Jacob's sons and servants, or by the captive women. [Be
clean, and change your garments] God is to be approached unto, with the best
preparation we can make. (...). Plut. Heathens had their Coenapura before their
solemn sacrifices. Godw. Antiq.
Heathens saw, that God is not to be drawn nigh unto, hand over head; but
preparation to be made at home. We wash us every day; but, when to dine with
great ones, we wash us with balls, and put on our best.

Verse. 3. And was with me in the way, etc.] Deducendo, reducendo, franumque
socero, fratri, finitimisque Shecemi injiciendo, ne me ullo pacto laederent,
says Junius. All this called for thankfulness. Prayer and thanks, should be
like the double motion of the lungs. The air that is sucked in by prayer,
should be breathed out again by praises. God had heard Jacob, now he should
hear of him.

Verse. 4. And they gave unto Jacob] Now they were in danger of destruction,
they would do any thing. So those false Israelites, when God slew them, then
they sought him, Psalm. 78.34. So many, Daniels Chro. fol. 58.
when they are deadly sick, are wondrous good; as William Rufus, who vowed,
upon his recovery, to see all vacancies furnished. Dike of deceitf. page 217.
In the Sweating sickness, so long as the ferventness of the Plague lasted,
there was crying, Peccavi, peccavi: the Ministers were sought for in every
corner; You must come to my Lord, you must come to my Lady, etc. The
Walnut-tree is most fruitful, when most beaten. Fish thrive best, in cold and
salt waters. The most plentiful Summer, follows upon the hardest Winter. David
was never so tender, as when hunted like a partridge; nor Jonah so watchful,
prayerfull, as in the Whales belly. Vigilabat in ceto qui stertebat in navi.
Lam. 3.39, 41.
When men suffer for their sin, hands, and hearts, and all, are list up to
heaven; that before were as without God in the world, and thought they could do
well enough without him. A Lethargy is commonly cured by a Fever; worms killed
with alocs: so are crawling lusts, by bitter afflictions. Israel under the
cross, will defile the dols that they had deified, Isai. 30.22. and after that
they were captives in Babylon, they could never be drawn to that sin, whatever
they suffered for their refusal; as under Antiochus. I end with S. Ambrose:
Beata anima, quae est instar domus Jacobi, in qua nulla simulachra, nulla
effigies vanitatis: Blessed is that soul, that, like Jacob's house, has no
Idol in it.

Verse. 5. The terror of God was upon them] The Hebrews tell us, that they
pursued Jacob, and were beaten back by him: whereupon he says, Genesis 48.22,
that he took that country out of the hand of the Amorites, with his sword, and
with his bow, God might send a pannick terror upon them, as they were
fighting against Jacob, and so bridle them from further attempts. The Syrians
heard a noise of chariots and horses in the air, (made by Angels, likely; or
whether it were but their own fancy, as Judge. 9.36. and as the Burgundians
took a field of standing corn for an army of fighting men) and fled for their
lives. 2 Kings 7.7.
Theodosius the Emperor overcame the Persians and Saracens, Alsted. Chronol.
page 300.
by means of a pannick terror smitten into them by God; so that they ran into
the river Euphrates, and above an hundred thousand of them perished in the
waters.

Verse. 6. So Jacob came to Luz] Which was thirty miles from Shechem: a long
journey for such a large family, who went it with hearts full of heaviness;
for, without were fightings, within fears: but this was their comfort, they
went to see the face of God at Bethel. As they that passed through the valley of
Baca, Psalm. 84.6, 7.
though they took many a weary step, yet went from strength to strength,
because they were to appear before God in Zion. Popish Pilgrims, though used
hardly, and put to much expense and inconvenience; yet satisfy themselves in
this, I have that I came for, viz. the sight of a dumb Idol, (as Calvin
notes.) What then should not we suffer, to see God in his Ordinances? Isal.
66.20.
They shall bring your brethren as an offering to the Lord, upon horses, in
chariots, and in bitters, says the Prophet: that is, though s^ck, weakly, and
unfit for travel; yet, rather in litters, then not at all.

Verse. 7. Because there God appeared] Heb. Revelavissent Dii: Not the Angels,
but the sacred Trinity. See the Notes on Chap. 1. verse. 1.

Verse. 8. But Deborah, Rebeccah's nurse, died] A grave matron she was; of great
use, while she lived; and much missed, when she died. This is not every man's
case. Some have their souls, as swine, Suillo peccori anima pro sale.
for no other use, then, as salt, to keep their bodies from putrefaction: And
when they die, there is no more miss of them, then of the sweepings of the
house, or parings of the nails.

Verse. 9. And God appeared, etc.] A sweet allayment of his late heaviness for
Deborah, and a gracious preparative to the ensuing loss of Rachel. The joy of
the Lord is the Christian man's strength, Neh. 8. One sight of him, is enough to
carry one through all conditions with comfort. As a man that has his bones
filled with marrow, and that has abundance of good blood, and fresh spirits in
his body, he can endure to go with less clothes then another, because he is
well lined within: so it is with a heart that has a great deal of fat and
marrow, communion with God, and feeling of his favor; he will go through
troubles, in the fail of outward comforts. And as the lily is fresh, and looks
fair, though among thorns; so will he, amidst miseries.

Verse. 10. And God said unto him, etc.] It is usual with God, to revive and
renew the promises, with fresh supplies of comforts upon the hearts of his
faithful servants, for the further confirmation of their faith and hope. (...).
Phil. 1.19. Ephesians. 1.13. Ephesians. 4.30.
Thus he seals to us at every Sacrament, besides those sweet supplies of the
Spirit of promise, whereby we are daily sealed to the day of redemption, as the
merchants goods are signed with his seal.

Verse. 11. I am God Almighty] This is hardly persuaded; and yet it is the
ground of all true comfort and spiritual security. We are apt to measure things
according to our own model, as to think God so powerful, as our understanding
can reach, etc. But, for a finite creature to believe the infinite
All Sufficiency of God, he is not able to do it thoroughly, without supernatural
grace; nor can he be soundly comforted, till he comes to comprehend it. Of his
will to do us good, we doubt not, till, in some measure, we doubt of his power
to help.

Verse. 13. And God went up from him] Not by local ascension; (for he is
everywhere) but in respect of that visible sign of his glory, which he now
withdrew from over, or from upon Jacob. For the righteous are as Gods chariot,
say the Hebrews on this Text. Confer Cant. 6.12. [Where he talked with him]
Prayer is a free and familiar conference or intercourse with God; a parling
with his Majesty, as Saint Paul calls it; (...). 1 Timothy 2.1.
a standing upon interrogatories with him; especially when Satan, sin, and
conscience accuse. It was a part of the Persian Kings silly glory, to keep
their greatest subjects from coming near them, without special license, Esth.
4.11. To God we have free access, upon all occasions; and are bid to come
boldly, Heb. 4.16. If Seneca could say, Audacter Deum roges, nihil illum de
alieno rogaturus; how much more may the faithful Christian, since All is his,
God and all! 1 Cor. 3.22.
Moses and Luther could have what they would of God. Fiat voluntas mea, says
Luther; and then he adds, Mea voluntas, Domine, quia tua: Let my will be done;
but no otherwise mine, then as thine, Lord.

Verse. 14. And Jacob set up a pillar] Or, had set up a pillar, had poured a
drink offering, etc. to wit, Chap. 28.18, 19. And now he either repeats it in
the presence, and for the edification of his family; or else he repairs the
pillar now ruinated, and new consecrates it, by the old name Bethel.

Verse. 16. She had hard labour] Woman, of all creatures, brings forth with
most pain and peril, as the Philosopher observes, Arist. de anima, l. 7.
and experience confirms. Her only way is, to send for Lady Faith, the best
Midwife; and thereby, to repose upon him, whose voice causes the hindes to
calve, Psalm. 29.9 which yet, of all bruit creatures, bring forth with greatest
trouble; bowing themselves, Job 39.4, 6.
bruising their young, and casting out their sorrows.

Verse. 17. Thou shall have this son also] So she had children, according to her
desire; but this last, to her cost, for a chastisement of her strong
affections, which drew on strong afflictions; as hard knots must have hard
wedges They that would needs have a penny for their pains, had no joy of their
penny: Matthew. 20.13.
when the end of the day came, when they were to go into another world, they
saw, that their penny was no such good silver; that preferment, profit, credit,
were but empty things, and could not satisfy. It is best to be moderate in our
desires after these outward things; and not so set upon it, as to indent with
God for such, and so much: this may be dangerous.

Verse. 18. As her soul was in departing] Viz. To God that gave it. It is a
spiritual, immortal substance, distinct from the body; and can subsist of it
self; Epicharmcum est illud; Concretum fuit and discretum est, rediitque unde
venerat, terra deorsum, spiritus, ursum.
as the Mariner can, when the ship is broken. [For she died] In our birth, we
rent our mothers, (to death sometimes) whom before we had burdened; so far
Nature witnessing our viperous generation, because of sin, which we bring into
the world. [But his father called him Benjamin] Lest the former name should be
a daily revival of his loss. Let men make their burdens as light as they can,
and not increase their worldly sorrow, by sight of sad objects. It will come
(as we say of foul weather) soon enough; we need not send for it. What should
dropsie-men do eating salt meats?

Verse. 19. Ju^aei vitrum ex quo spo^sus and sponsa biberunt, confringunt; ut
memores ^int sponsi fragilitatis humanae.
And Rachel died] We forfeit many favors, by overaffecting them. Our jealous
God will not endure us to idolize any creature: Let them that have wives, (or
any other thing they hold most dear to themselves) be as if they had none. So
love, as to think of loss. Let all outward things hang loose, as an upper
garment, that we can throw off at pleasure.

Verse. 20. And Jacob set a pillar upon her grave] To testify his love, and
continue her remembrance. Dead friends may be lawfully thus honored with
Monuments, modo vitetur luxus and superstitio.

Verse. 21. beyond the tower of Edar] Or, of the flock. This tower was built, it
seems, for the safety and service of shepherds. There it was, probably, that
those shepherds, Luke 2. watched their flocks. There also, Helena, mother to
Constantine the Great, did afterward build a Temple, for a memorial of the
Angels that there appeared to those shepherds, carolling Christ into the world.

Verse. 22. Reuben went, and lay with Bilhah] A foul fault, in so good a family:
but so it sometimes falls out, by the malice of Satan, Selcucus Syriae rex
tradidit filio Antiocho novercam Stratonicen, cujus amore ille decumbebat.
Appian, in Syriacis. Dani. Chron. page 12.
for the discrediting of Religion. Such ugly incest was committed at Corinth,
as was hardly heard of among Heathen, that a man should have his fathers wife,
2 Cor. 5.1. Some such there were among the Kings of Egypt; but not many.
Ethelbald, King of West- Saxons, with great infamy marrying his fathers widow
Judith, enjoyed his Kingdom but two years and a half. But how hateful is that
Spanish incest, by Papal dispensation? King Philip of Spain might call the
Archduke Albert, both Brother, Cousen, Nephew, and Son: for, all this was he
unto him, either by blood, Sands his Relation of West, Religion.
or affinity; being Uncle to himself, Couzen-german to his father, Husband to
his sister, and Father to his wife. Abhorred filth! [And Israel heard it] And
held his peace, because he saw God in it, chastising him for his Polygamy. The
punishment is sometimes so like the sin, that a man may boldly say, Such a sin
was the mother of such a misery. And here is a pause in the Hebrew, to show
Jacob's great amazement at this sad tidings. Dolores ingentes stupent. He was
even dumb, and opened not his mouth, because God was in it, Psalm. 39.9.

Verse. 23. Reuben, Jacobs first-born] Who, though by his sin he fell from his
birthright, yet is here reckoned as a Patriarch; and afterward, upon his
repentance, not a little honored, Exodus 28.21, 29. Rev. 21.12. God is not off
and on with his elect: their frowardness interrupts not the course of his
goodness.

Verse. 24. And Isaac gave up the ghost] Twelve years after Joseph was sold, and
forty years after he first became blind. Three special friends Jacob buries,
in this Chapter. Crosses come thick: be patient.

CHAP. XXXVI. Verse. 1. This is Edom.]
THe name and note of his profaneness. A stigmatical Belialist. It were a
happiness to the wicked, if they might be forgotten, Eccles. 8.10.

Verse. 4. Eliphaz] Job's friend, say some: a good man; but much mistaken in
Job, whom he so sharply censures.

Verse. 6. From the face of his brother Jacob] Or, before the coming of his
brother Jacob; by a special providence of God, to make room for the right heir.
It is he that determines the bounds of our habitations, Acts 17.26. It was he,
that espied out this land for his peculiar people; and that kept the room empty
all the time of the Babylonish Captivity, till the return of the Natives;
though it were a pleasant country, left destitute of inhabitants, and
surrounded with many warlike Nations. Piscator renders this text, propter
Jacobum, and expounds it, Because he knew that the land of Canaan should be
Jacob's, according to Gods promise made to him in his fathers blessing of him.
But I doubt whether Esau would yield to him for any such reason.

Verse. 7. For their riches were more, etc.] And besides, mount Seir was fitter
for a hunter. A good ease it was to Jacob, who had little joy in his
neighborhood. God will not take the ungodly by the hand, Job 8.20. no more
will his people. When they are forced to be in ill company, they cry, Oh that I
had the wings of a dove, that I might flee away! Or if that Oh will not set
them at liberty, they take up that Woe, to express their misery; Woe is me, that
I sojourn in Meshec, etc. It was once the prayer of a good Gentlewoman, when
she came to die, being in much trouble of conscience; Moses his choice, by M.
Bur. page 330.
O Lord, let me not go to hell, where the wicked are: for, Lord, thou know,
I never loved their company here.

Verse. 11. And the sons of Eliphaz] See here the fulfilling of Gods predictions
and promises, even to an Esan: will he be wanting to his obedient people?

Verse. 20. These are the sons of Seir] Esau was by marriage allied to this
Seir; for he married his niece Aholibamah, verse. 2. yet the children of Esau
chased away the Horims of Seir, and dwelt in their stead in mount Seir, Deuteronomy.
2.12. Wicked men are void of natural affection, in their pursuit of profit or
preferment. Abimelech, Absalom, Athaliah, for instance; and that Amida, Turk.
hist. fol. 745 747.642.
son of Muleasses King of Tunes, who rose up against his father, and possessing
himself of his Kingdom, slew his Captains, polluted his wives, took the Castle
of Tunes; and, after all, put out his fathers and brethrens eyes, like as
Muleasses himself, before, had dealt with his own brethren.

Verse. 24. That found the mules] By coupling diverse kinds together, contrary
to Levit. 19.19. Neither did the world, till then, want any perfect kind of
creature; for the mule and the ass differ not, (...). B. Babington. Fuit olim
psittacus Romae aureis centum comparatus, etc. C. Rhodig. l 2. c. 32. Maiolus
in Canic. colloq. 23. Sphinx Philos. page 785. Plin. lib. 7. cap. 12.
but only in degree. The Greeks call mules half-asses. See here (says one)
the busy curiosity of some men's natures, given to news, and strange
inventions. So he that taught a Parrot in Rome to repeat the Creed, every
Article in order, and by it self, distinctly. Another, that painted the whole
story of our Savior's passion (both for persons and things) upon the nails of
his own fingers. Had not he little to do, that learned to write a fair hand
with his feet? ( Heidfeld says he saw it, with wonderment.) And he as little,
that enclosed Homer's Iliads written in a nut? which Cicero tell us, he saw
with his eyes. These were toilsome toys, quae nec ignoranti nocent, nec
scientent juvant, as Seneca says of Sophistry. Hard they are to come by; but
of no use or worth: like an olive, or date-stone; hard to crack the one, or
cleave the other: but nothing, or nothing worth ought, when cracked or cloven,
within either. This same foolish wittiness Alexander wittily scoffed, when he
gave a fellow only a bushel of pease, for his pains of throwing, every time, a
pease upon a needles point, standing a pretty way off.

Verse. 31. Before there reigned any king, etc.] Sicut herba tectorum praecocem
habet vigorem, sed citius arescit. Exoriuntur impii, sed exuruntur. They are
set up on high, but on slippery places, Psalm. 73.18. advanced, as Haman; but to
be brought down again, with a vengeance. This observation the Hebrews make upon
this text. Whiles Edom reigns and flourishes, Israel groaneth under the
servitude of Egypt. ^omp and prosperity, then, is no sure note of the true
Church.

Verse. 40. Duke Timnah, duke Alvah] We had a Duke d'Alva lately in the
Netherlands, Governor there for the Spaniard, Grimston, hist. of Netherlands.
infamous for his inhumanity. For he roasted some to death, starved others, and
that even after quarter; saying, though he promised to give them their lives,
he did not promise to find them meat. This was a right Romish Edomite. The
Hebrews think, the Romans came of the Idumeans. Sure I am, if they be not of
the natural descent, they are of the spiritual, (or unnatural;) and so like,
as, by the one, we may see the face, favor, and affection, of the other.

Verse. 43. These be the dukes of Edom] As the Principality of Edom began with
Dukes, and rose to Kings; so it returns to Dukes again, after the death of
Hadad, in Moses his time, 1 Chro. 1.51. It is likely, (says an Interpreter)
that, upon the unkind dealing of that Hadad, in denying to let Israel pass
through his land, the Lord removed the dignity of Kings from that Commonwealth,
and let it be ruled by Dukes again; whereof, eleven are here by name rehearsed.
So sensible is God, and so severe, in punishing the least unkindness done to
his people. Julius Pflugius complaining to the Emperor (by whom he had been
employed) of great wrong done him by the Duke of Saxony, received this answer:
Have a little patience, Tua caus^ erit mea causa. So says God to his abused:
He reproves, yea deposes even Kings for their sakes; and accounts, that the
whole world is not worthy of them, nay, not worth one of them, how mean soever
in regard of outward; as Chrysostom expounds that, Heb. 11.38.

CHAP. XXXVII. Verse. 1. In the land of his fathers sojournings.]
THe Dukes of Edom had habitations in the land of their possessions, Chap.
36.43. But Jacob, with his father Isaac, were pilgrims in the land of Canaan;
content to dwell in tents here, that they might dwell with God for ever. (...),
etc. Epist. ad Diognetum.
Justin Martyr says of the Christians of his time; they dwell in their own
countries but as strangers; have right to all, as Citizens; but suffer
hardship, as forraigners, etc.

Verse. 2. These are the generations] That is, events, begotten of time, after
he came to live with his father Isaac, who also wept for Joseph, verse. 35, as
Iunius. [ With the sons of Bilhah, etc.] It is thought, that these sons of the
handmaids, for the baseness of their birth, were more modest then the rest; and
that Joseph therefore, out of his humility, sorted himself with them. Probable
it is, they were more unruly then the rest, and ill conditioned, (as such are,
commonly) whereof Joseph made complaint, and was therefore hated. Veritas odium
parit. Truth is a good mistress; but he that follows her too close at heels,
may hap have his teeth struck out. An expectas ut Quintilianus ametur? said he.
Those that are wakened out of sleep, are usually unquiet, ready to brawl with
their best friends. So here.

Verse. 3. Because he was the son of his old-age] The Chaldee Paraphrast renders
it morally, Because he was a wise son, in quo ante canos sapientia: such a one
as Macarius was, of whom Nicephorus says, that, for his prudence and gravity,
whiles he was yet but a youth, he was surnamed (...), The old stripling.
Josephus says, He was very like his mother, Rachel; and therefore his father
so loved him. But Chrysostom says, better, that it was for his virtuous life,
and godly disposition. Goodness is lovely in any, much more in an own child.
John was the best beloved disciple, because best conditioned. But otherwise,
Cavete, says Ambrose, ne quos natura conjunxit, paterna gratia dividat.
Parents partiality, may breed heart-burnings, Ephesians. 6.4.

Verse. 4. They hated him] There is a passion of hatred: This is a kind of
aversness, and rising of the heart against a man, when one sees him; so that
he cannot away with him, nor speak to him, nor look courteously or peaceably
upon him; but ones countenance falls when he sees him, and he even turns away,
and, by his good will, would have nothing to do with him. 2. There is a habit
of hatred: when the soul is so sowred with this leven, so settled in this
alienation and estrangement, that it grows to wish, and desire, and seek his
hurt. And this is one difference betwixt Hatred and Envy: whom men hate, they
will harm; but sometimes men's gifts are envied, against whom no hurt is
intended.

Verse. 5. And Joseph dreamed] Of divine dreams to be regarded as Oracles, see
the Notes on Chap. 20. verse. 3. [They hated him yet the more] So the Jews did
Jesus, for his parables; especially, when he spoke of his exaltation.

Verse. 7. We were binding sheaves] This was fulfilled, when they came to him
for corn into Egypt. Here Joseph dreams of his advancement, but not of his
imprisonment: So do many professors, which therefore prove apostates.

Verse. 8. Shall thou indeed reign over us?] They rightly interpreted the dream,
yet stubbornly resist the revealed will of God. This leaves sin without a
cloak, Ioh. 15.22, as it did in the Pharisees. They rightly interpreted that
place in Micah, Matthew. 2, etc. and yet, when Christ, to whom all their own
signs did so well agree, came amongst them, they would by no means receive
him; nay, they sent a message after him, saying, We will not have this man to
reign over us.

Verse. 9. Beheld, the sun, and the moon] The father of the family should be as
the sun, full of heavenly light, and illightning all about him: The mother, as
the moon, shining out in her husbands absence, and veiling to him, when he is
in place. The children, as stars of light, or rather, as a heaven full of
stars, as one says well of Joseph: Fuit Iosephi vita coelum quoddam
lucidissimis virtutum stellis exornatum. The people of God are called, the host
of heaven, Dan. 8.10: and are bid to shine as lamps, or rather, as those great
lights of heaven, Phil. 2.15.

Verse. 10. And his father rebuked him] Either as not yet understanding the
mystery, or dissembling it. It is wisdom, at some time, and in some place, to
pretend a dislike of another man's fact, (so far as we may with truth) for the
preventing of envy. This, some think, was Jacobs drift here. And therefore he
draws an argument, ab impossibili and absurdo; Shall thy dead mother rise and
reverence thee? A likely matter: and yet, as light as Jacob made of it, (to
deonerate Joseph of the envy) he laid it to heart, verse. 11.

Verse. 11. And his brethren envied him] Envy is a filthy fruit of the flesh,
Gal. 5.25. and the devil; who is called, the envious man, Matthew. 13.20. and
such wisdom is said to be devilish, Jam. 3.15. The Pharisees, envying our
Savior, did the devils Work, Joh. 8. So did Cain, the devils Patriarch, when
he laid his cruel club on the innocent head of his brother Abel. And Saul, when
seized upon by the evil spirit, (more then a melancholy humor) he envied
David, and sought his death. For, this vice, as it makes the heart to boil with
hellish venom; so it blisters out at the tongue, as here; They could not speak
peaceably to Joseph, but scoff, and consult his ruin. It sits also looking out
at the windows of the eyes; Nescio quis teneros, etc. fascino, (...), i. e.
(...).
and, as a Basilisk, blasteth the object. Hence invidere, to see with an evil
eye, and naughty mind: And our English says, to overlook a thing; that is,
to bewitch it. This very looking upon others precellencies, whereby we are
over-shined, so as to lust to have that light put out, that our candle might
shine above it, (this is every man's sin;) though it act nothing, yet it is
abominable, Iam. 4.5. As on the other side, to rejoice in the good parts of
others, though it eclipseth our light; and this from the heart; this is indeed
more then to excel others in any excellency, if this be wanting. For this, it
is good to get the heart fraught with mercy, meekness of wisdom, fear of God,
(whose providence cuts us out our several conditions and proportions) zeal for
his glory, as Moses; humility, charity, ( Love envieth not, 1 Cor. 13.4.) And
to take heed of strife, Romans 13.13. Envy and strife go coupled; they are
brought in there by the brace: and as it were twisted together. Likewise, of
pride, and vainglory, Phil. 2.3. covetousness, Prove. 28.22, logomachies, 1 Timothy
6.4. self-love, ignorance, etc. all which, make the soul sick of the fret, and
to pierce it self through with many sorrows. Psalm. 37. Psalm. 73. (...), of
(...), to consume.
For this sin kills the silly one, Job 5.2, if it kill no other. Envy and
murder go coupled, Romans 1. Gal. 5. An hectic it is to it self, however; the
same that rust is to iron, blasting to corn, or a moth to the cloth it breeds
in. It drinks the most part of its own venom, gnaws on its own heart, is
consumed in its own fire as Nadab and Abih^ were; and, like the snake in the
fable, licks off its own tongue, as envying teeth to the file in the forge.
Serram a^imae.
Socrates called it, The Saw of the soul. David compares it to fire in billets
of Juniper, which burns vehemently; and continues, they say, more years then
one. Simul peccat and plectitur: expedita justitia, says Petrarch. Other sins
have some pleasure; this has none, but torment. It is a very hell-aboveground,
and paves a way to the unpardonable sin, as in Saul, and the Pharisees.

Verse. 13. And he said unto him, Here am I.] Children obey your parents, (
quorum divina est dignitas, says Chrysostom: Our parents are (...), says
Another; and Philo, for this makes the fifth Commandment a part of the first
table,) for this is right, Ephesians. 6.1. Blind Nature saw it to be so. (...).
Aristot. Rhetor.
For it is not fit (says the Philosopher) to cross the gods, a man's own
father, and his Tutor, or Teacher.

Verse. 14. Well with thy brethren, and well with the flocks] His first care is
for the welfare of his children. Many a Laban is more sollicitous of his flock,
then of his family. Macrob.
It was better being Herod's swine, then his son, said Augustus. Hawks and
Hounds are better tended and tutoured in some great houses, then children. Or
if they be taught manners, and handsome behavior, that is all that is cared for.
But piety must be principally planted, where Gods blessing upon posterity is
expected: the promise whereof, is therefore specially annexed to the second
Commandment.

Verse. 15. What seek thou?] This was not the Angel Gabriel, (as the Hebrews
will have it) but some courteous passenger, that thus offers himself to
wandering Joseph, and sets him in his way again. At Athens, Dion. Lambin. in
Corn. Nep.
there were public curses appointed against such as showed not those their
error, that were out of the way. See the like, Deuteronomy. 27.18. Brethren, says
St. James, Jam. 5.19, 20.
if any of you do err from the truth, and one convert him, Let him know that
he saves a soul from death; yea, he pulls him out of the fire of hell, says
St. Jude: for they that err from Gods Commandments, Jude 23. Ex igne
gehe^nali. Pareus.
are cursed, Psalm. 11.21.

Verse 16. I seek my brethren] He staid not at Sh^ch em, whither his father sent
him; but missing of them there, he seeks further, till he found them. This is
true obedience, whether to God or man; when we look not so much to the letter
of the law, as to the mind of the Lawmakers; Apices juris non sunt jus.

Verse. 17. He found them in Dothan] That is, in defection; So found our Savior
his lost sheep, in utter defection, both of doctrine and manners: some four, or
fewer, that looked for the consolation of Israel.

Verse. 18. They conspired against him] So did the husbandmen against Christ,
Luke 20.14 This is the heir, say they, etc. The word is by one rendered, They
craftily conspired. The Greek has it malignantly: craft, and cruelty, go
usually together in the Churches adversaries. The Devil lends them his seven
heads to plot, and his ten horns, to push poor Joseph, that dreads no danger.

Verse. 19. Behold this dreamer] This Captain-dreamer, or, this Architect of
dreams, A lewd scoff, and withal, a cruel calumny. Envy, so it may gall, or
kill, cares not how true or false it be, that it alleges: it usually
aggravates the matter beyond truth, to do mischief, as here. Their hearts were
so big-swollen with spite and spleen, (...)
that they could not call him by his name, but this dreamer. So the Pharisees
called our Savior, this fellow. And the Jews sought him at the feast, Joh.
7.11.
and said, Where is He? they could not find in their hearts to say, Where is
Jesus? as Saul asked not for David, but for the son of Jesse, by way of
contempt. Christ tells his Disciples, that men shall, in hatred of them cast
out their names for evil, Sic apud Latinos dicebautur capitis dimi^utiouem
pati, qui ex albo a censoribus expungebant^r.
for his sake, Luke 6.22. Their persons should be proscribed, and their names
expunged, as unworthy to breathe on the common a^r. That like as we give names
to new-born-babes; so when we cannot afford to mention a man's name, it shows,
we wish him out of the world: Nomine Christianorum deleto, qui Remp.
exercebant. So those bloody tyrants of the primitive times, sounded the triumph
beforehand, and engraved the victory they never got, upon Pillars of Marble;
Vbicunque invenitur nomen Calvini, deleatur, says the Index expurgatorius.
After Stephen Brune the Martyrs death, his adversaries commanded it to be
cried, Act. and Mon. fol. 820.
that none should make any more mention of him, under pain of heresy. So in
Queen Mary's days, one Tooly hanged for felony, for defying the Pope, was,
after his death, suspended and excommunicated; and strict charge given, that no
man should eat or drink with him; or if any met him by the way, he should not
bid him good morrow, Ibidem. 1439.
or call him by his name. It was not for nothing, surely, that our Savior, in
token of hearty reconciliation, requires men to salute their enemies, and to
call them friendly by their names, Matthew. 5.47.

Verse. 20. And we will say] So they consult, to cover their murder with a lie.
One sin admitted, makes way for another. He that has fallen down one round of
Hells ladder, knows not where he shall stop, till he break his neck at the
bottom.

Verse. 21. And he delivered him out of their bands] Josephus relates his
Arguments, whereby he prevailed with them: As 1. That God would surely see
them. 2. Their father would extremely grieve at it. 3. That Joseph was but a
child, and their brother. 4. That they would bring upon themselves the guilt of
innocent blood, etc. It was happy they hearkened to him. God would have it so:
And he will ever have one Reuben or another, to deliver his. It is not in vain,
for some one to stand for God and his people, against many adversaries. When
the Pharisees had destined our Savior to death, Ioh. 7. Nicodemus, though he
had none in the Counsel to second him, spoke in his behalf, ver. 51. and for
that time, frustrated their bloody intention. See the like, Ier. 26.24.

Verse. 22. Shed no blood] Every drop of it has a tongue to cry for vengeance.
Well might K. James say, that if God did leave him to kill a man, he would
think God did not love him. David, Gods darling, falling into that crimson sin,
carried the bruise of that fall with him to his grave, Woe to those Italians,
Sands his Relation of West. Relig. Sect. 13.
that blaspheme oftener, then swear; and murder more, then revile or slander.

Verse. 23. They stripped Joseph out of his coat] For, 1. It was an eyesore to
them. 2. Therewith they would color their cruelty. And this whiles they were
doing, Joseph used many entreaties for himself, but they would not hear him,
Genesis 42.21. Reuben also pleaded hard for the child, but all to no purpose, Genesis
42.22. their tender mercies were cruelties.

Verse. 24. They cast him into a pit] Where they meant he should pine and perish
with hunger, which is a more cruel death, Druso adco alimenta subducta, ut
tomentum a culcitra tentaverit mandere. Tacit.
then to dye by the sword, Lam. 4.5. Thus dyed Drusus by the command of
Tiberius; meat being denied him, he had eaten the stuffings of his bed. I have
heard of a certain Bishop (says Melancthon) who having cast ten men into a
dungeon for their religion sake, kept them there so long without all manner of
meat, that they devoured one another. Joh. Manl. loc. com. 124.


Verse. 25. And they sat down to eat] To weep for their wickedness, they should
have sat down rather. But the Devil had drawn a hard hoof over their hearts,
that either they felt no remorse of what they had done, for present; or else,
they sought to ease themselves of it, by eating, and merry-making. They drank
wine in bowls; but no man was sorry for the affliction of Joseph. Nay,
perhaps, Amos 6.8.
they had so tired themselves with making away their brother, that they were
even spent again, and stood in need of some refreshing. The good providence of
God was in it howsoever, that they should there sit down, till the Merchants
came by from Gilead, which was a Mart for Merchants, Ier. 8.22. and 22.6. All
things cooperate for good to them that love God, Romans 8.28.

Verse. 26. What profit is it, etc.] Cui bono? said that old Judge in Rome. Cic.
orat. pro C. Rabir.
This is a song that most men will listen to, As the Jassians in Strabo,
delighted with the music of an excellent Harper, ran all away, when once they
heard the Market-bell ring, save a deaf old man, that could take little delight
in the Harpers ditties. But it were to be wished, that whenever we are tempted
to sin, we would ask our selves this question, What profit is it? etc.

Verse. 27. For he is our brother, and our flesh] This consideration should be,
as the Angels call to Abraham, to stay our hand from striking another; 1. That
he is our brother, in respect of God, for have we not all one father? has not
one God created us? Mal. 3.10. Next, that he is our flesh, in regard of our
first parents, Act. 17.26. Esaias 58.7.

Verse. 28. For twenty pieces of silver] A goodly price; not all out the price
of a slave, Exodus 21.32. Here they sold the just one for silver, Pirke R.
Eliez. chapter 38.
and the poor for a pair of shoes, Amos 2.6. The Hebrews tell us, that of
these twenty shekels, every of the ten brethren had two, to buy shoes for
their feet. [And they brought Joseph into Egypt] Little knowing what a price
they had in their hand, even the Jewel of the world, and him that should one
day be Lord of Egypt. The Saints for their worth, are called Princes in all
lands, Many righteous, are many Kings. Compare Matthew. 13.17. with Luke 10.24.
Psalm. 45. Kings in righteousness, though somewhat obscure ones; as Melchizedek
Heb. 7. They are called the world, Joh. 3.16. every creature, Mark 16.16. all
things, Col. 1.20. Gods portion, Deuteronomy. 32.9. the dearly beloved of his soul,
Jer. 12.7. a royal Diadem in the hand of Jehovah, Esaias, 62.3. This the cock on
the dunghill, the Midianitish muck-worms take no notice of. They could see no
comeliness in Christ, (though the fairest of ten thousand) nothing more then a
despicable man. Joh. 6.
How can this man give us his flesh to eat? God had hid him (in whom all the
treasures of worth and wisdom were hid) under the Carpenters son: Colos. 2.
This pearl was covered with a shellfish; so are all Gods precious people, for
most part, abjects in the worlds eye; their glory is within; their life is hid:
they are great heirs, but as yet in their nonage; Kings, but in a strange
country, heads destinated to the diadem; but this the world knows not, 1 Ioh.
3.1. Let it suffice us, that God, and all that can spiritually discern, know
it; and so shall others: as Ioseph's brethren did him, in his bravery. For when
Christ, our life, shall appear, we shall appear with him in glory.

Verse. 30. The child is not, and I, etc:] In an old Manuscript, I met with
these words thus pathetically rendered; Heu quid agam! periit puer ille, puer
puer ille: Reuben was the eldest, and therefore thought he should be most
blamed. Besides, he had not forgot how highly his father had been lately
offended with him, for his detestable incest.

Verse. 32. Know now whether it be thy sons coat] One Philip, Bishop of
Beau-vieu in France, in the time of our Richard the first, being a martial man,
and much annoying our borders, was by King Richard in a skirmish happily taken,
and put in prison. The Bishop hereupon complained to the Pope, who wrote in the
behalf of his son, as an Ecclesiastical person, etc. The King sent to the
Pope, the armor he was taken in, with these words engraven thereon, Know
whether this be thy sons coat, or not. Heyl. Geog. page 108.
Which the Pope viewing, swear it was rather the coat of a son of Mars, then a
son of the Church; and so bad the King use his pleasure.

Verse. 33. It is my sons coat, etc.] The Lord may well say as much of
hypocrites. Their outward from of godliness is the garb of my sons and
daughters; but some evil spirit has devoured them, who use it only in
hypocrisy. They are fair professors, but foul sinners. And when the filthy
sinner goes dam^ed to hell, what shall become of the zealous professor? As the
Churl said to the Bishop of Cullen, praying in the Church like a Bishop; but as
he was a Duke, going guarded like a tyrant; Whither think thou the Bishop
shall go, when the Duke shall be damned?

Verse. 34. Mourned for his son many dayes] Puerilitas est periculorum pelagus;
Few live to be old, for one evil beast or another that devours them: As for one
apple, that hangs till it falls, many are endgel'd down, or gathered off the
tree. We should learn to bury children and friends, whiles yet alive; by acting
their death to our selves aforehand.

Verse. 35. And all his sons, etc.] Oh faces hatched with impudence! Oh hearts
hewn out of a rock! Could they cause his woe, and then comfort him? Miserable
comforters were they all; such as the Usurer is to the young Novice; or the
Crocodile that weeps over the dead body that it is devouring. These were the
evil beasts that devoured Joseph. Nullae infestae hominibus bestiae ut sunt
sibi f^^ales plerique Christi^^ti. Am. Marcell. l. 2. c. 2. A sad thing, that a
Heathen should see cause to say so. Heb. 11.34.
[But he refused to be comforted] Wherein he showed his fatherly love, but not
his son-like subjection to Gods good providence: without the which, no evil
beast could have set tooth in Joseph; whom he was sure also to receive safe and
whole again at the Resurrection: which was a great comfort to those afflicted
Jews, Dan. 12.2. and those mangled Martyrs. [His father also wept for him]
Jacobs father Isaac, says Iunius; which might very well be; for he lived
twelve years after this, and likely loved Joseph best, for his great
towardliness.

Verse. 36. And the Midianites] Little knew Joseph what God was in doing. Have
patience, till he have brought both ends together.

CHAP. XXXVIII. Verse. 1. And it came to pass at that time]
BEfore the rape of Dinah, the sale of Joseph, and soon after their return from
Mesopotamia. [Iudah went down from his brethren] A green youth of 13. or 14.
years of age, left his company, where he might have had better counsel. There
is a special tie to perseverance, in the Communion of Saints. They that forsake
the assembling of themselves together, are in a fair way for Apostasy, Heb.
10.25. [To a certain Adullamite] There is a double danger of evil company: 1.
Infection of sin, at least, defection from grace. 2. Infliction of punishment,
Rev. 18.4.

Verse. 2. And Judah saw there, etc.] He saw, took, went in, all in haste: Patre
inconsulto, forte etiam invito; His father neither willing nor witting. Hence,
for a punishment, was so little mercy showed to his sons. These hasty headlong
matches, seldom succeed well. It is not amiss to marry, but good to be wary.
Young men are blamed of folly, for following the sight of their eyes, and lust
of their hearts, Eccles. 11. Sed, Leo cassibus irretitus dicet, Si
praescivissem.

Verse. 3. Bruson. lib. 4. cap. 9.
And she conceived, etc.] St. Hierome tells us of a certain drunken nurse, that
was got with child by her nursling, a boy of ten years old. This he relates as
monstrous, and takes God to witness, that he knew it to be so.

Verse. 6. And Judah took a wife for Er] When he was but 14. Musculus.
years of age (as appears by the Chronicle) seven years after the selling of
Joseph. And here it is well observed, that though Judah took a wife without his
fathers consent, yet he will not have Er to do so.

Verse. 7. Wicked in the sight of the Lord] A Sodomite, In Heb. vi et^y esse
a^lusio seu inver, o neminis, (...) erat (...): q. d. Er erat vigil perversu^.
say the Hebrews; but this is hard to say. As an evil doer, he was soon cut
off, Psalm. 37.9. God would not have such to be his Son Christ's progenitor. Too
wicked he was to live: you may know him to be the son of a Canaanitess. Partus
sequitur ventrem.

Verse. 8. And Judah said unto Ona^] At fourteen years of age likewise. For from
the birth of Judah, to their going down to Egypt, were but 43. years. And yet
before that, Perez had Hezron, and Hamul, being married about the fourteenth
year of his age; which was, doubtless, too soon. Childhood is counted and
called the flower of age, 1 Cor. 7.36. And so long the Apostle would have
marriage forborne. Whilst the flower of the plant sprouteth, the seed is green,
unfit to be sown. Either it comes not up, or soon withers. Over early
marriages, is one cause of our overshort lives. Venery is deaths best
harbinger, says One.

Verse. 9. When ^e went in unto his brothers wife] God, for the respect he bears
to his own Institution of marriage, is pleased to bear with, cover, and not
impute many frailties, follies, vanities, wickednesses that are found betwixt
man and wife. Howbeit, Intemperans, in conjugio, (...) suae adulter est. Aug.
In uxorem alienam ^mnis am^^ turpis est, in suam vero (...) imius. Hieron.
Seneca.
there is required of such an holy care and conscience, to preserve between
themselves, by a conjugal chastity, the marriage*bed undefiled; taking heed of
an intemperate, or intempestive use of it: which by Divines, both Ancient and
Modern, is deemed no better then plain adultery before God. Qui cum uxore sua,
quasi cum aliena concumbit, adulter est, says that Heathen; Onans sin here was
self pol^ution, aggravated much, by his envy that moved him to it, expressed in
these words, lest he should give seed to has decea sed brother. And the more
sinful was this sin of his, Hebraei inquiunt perinde ut homicidam, reum esse
qui temere semen prosurdit. Mercer. in loc.
in spilling his seed; because it should have served for the propagation of the
Messiah; Therefore the Lord slew him: As also; because he was not warned by his
brothers punishment.

Verse. 10. Wherefore he slew him] God often punishes the abuse of the
marriage bed, either with untimely death, (It was well said of One, that Venus
provideth not for those that are already born, Cuffes Differ. of Ages. 106.
but for those that shall be born:) or else with no children, misshapen
children, idiots, or prodigiously-wicked children, etc. Cavete. Let this
consideration be as the Angel standing with a drawn sword over Balaam's
shoulders.

Verse. 11. Lest peradventure he die also, etc.] Judah lays the fault all on
her, whereas it was in his sons. Sarah, on the other side, blamed her self
only for barrenness, Genesis 16.2. Judge not, that ye be not judged: but if we
judge our selves, we shall not be judged. In judging of the cause of our
crosses, we are often as far out as she was, that laid the death of her child to
the presence of the good Prophet.

Verse. 12. The daughter of Shuah, etc.] This was just, in God, upon Judah, for
his fraudulent dealing with Tamar; whom he neither married to his son Shelah,
nor suffered to be married to another. Sin is often punished in kind.

Verse. 13. To shear his sheep] And so to put by his sorrow, as Jonathan did his
anger, by going into the field to shoot. At sheepshearings they had feasts, 1 Samuel 25.8, 11.

Verse. 14. Covered her with a vail] As they that do evil, shun the light. She
was going about a deed of darkness. [For she saw that She was grown] She ran
into this foul sin, partly for revenge, and partly for issue. But this excuses
her not: for the revenge she took, was private; and she should have sought a
godly seed, by lawful Wedlock, and not by abominable Incest. Discontent is the
mother of much mischief; as it was in Judas, Haman, etc.

Verse. 15. He thought her to be a harlot] Because she sat in an open place:
first, In bivio, says Junius, where there is liberty of looking every way; the
guise and garb of harlots, Prove. 7.12. and 9.14. Ezekiel. 16.24, 25. Next, she
sat covered: Whores were not altogether so shameless then, as now: they shun
not to be seen, with bold and bare faces, breasts, and wrists. Such a sight may
soon inflame a Judah; Hos. 2.2. Let her take away her fornication from her
face, and her adultery from between her breasts, laid out, and painted, or
patched.
nay, occasion a Job to break his covenant, Job 31.1. The Ivie-bush shows,
there is wine within: which, though no evil follow upon it; yet the party shall
be damned, says Hierome, because she offered poison to others, though none
would drink it. See Isai. 3.16. [Because she had covered her face] Some read,
Because she had colored, or painted her face. But, that he knew her not by her
voice, one would wonder. Surely, he was so set upon the satisfying of his lust,
that he minded nothing else. Lust is blind; and if the blind lead the blind,
etc.

Verse. 16. Let me come in unto thee] This is recorded, 1. To cut the comb of
those ^^^d Jews, that glory so much of their pedigree, and name of Ju^ah. How
could they say, We be not born of fornication? Joh. 8.41. 2. To mind us, that
there is no Church to be found on earth, without blot and blemish. 3. That we
may consider and admire the utter abasement of our Lord Christ, who would be
born, not only of holy, but of impure parentage. And this, to show, 1. That he
borrowed no grace or glory from his progenitors: and as he needed not to be
ennobled, so neither was he disparaged by them. 2. That by his purity and
passion, all our sins are expiated and done away; like as the sun clears
whatsoever filth is found in the air, or on the earth. Three women only are
mentioned in his Genealogy; Rahab the harlot, Matthew. 1.
Bathsheba the adulteress, and this incestuous Tamar; to show his readiness to
receive the most notorious offenders, that come unto him with bleeding and
believing hearts, 1 Timothy 1.15.

Verse. 17. 1 Timothy 6.9.
Will thou give me] The love of money breeds noisome lusts. Harlots are sordida
poscinummia, as Plautus has it.

Verse. 18. And he gave it her, and came in unto her] He gave her whatsoever she
desired; as the manner of such men is: and although he committed incest
ignorantly, yet not through ignorance, but through heat of lust; which is
brutish and boistrous, burning, as an oven: whence the Greeks have named it:
(...), ardere. Plato appetitum assimilat equo, qui fit, (...).
and Plato compares it to a headstrong horse.

Verse. 20. By the hand of his friend] His broker. Fie upon such Adullamites.
Such cole-carriers as this, (says One) be good to scowre an hot oven withal.
Such another was Jonadab to Amnon. How much better that Heathen, that answered,
Amicus tibi sum, sed usque ad aras.

Verse. 21. Where is the harlot?] The holy whore, as the Hebrew word imports;
such as committed that filthiness, under a pretense of holiness. Such, among
the Heathens, were the lewd worshippers of Priapus; (this is thought to be
Baal-peor;) and Venus at Cyprus; where the maids, in honor of their goddess,
prostituted their chastity to all that would, once a year. So in their
Lupercals and Bacchanals at Rome, in quibus discurrebatur ad publicos
concubitus, for like reason. Of such unclean persons, even by Gods house, we
read, 2 Kings 23.8. and of such as sacrificed with harlots, Hos. 4.14. who
brought their hire for a vow; called therefore, the price of a salt bitch,
Deuteronomy. 23.17, 18. Vah propudium! [There was no harlot in this place] Few places
can say so. Sane hercle bomo voluptati obsequens Fuit dum vixit. Terent. Heyl.
Geog. page 96.
Every house in Egypt had a dead corpse in it; (...) too many houses here have
such, as, living in pleasure, are dead while they live, 1 Timothy 5.6. Of this
sort was that Arlet, a Skinners daughter in Normandy, whose nimblenefs in her
dance, made Duke Robert enamoured, etc. On her, he begat our William the
Conqueror. In spite to whom, and disgrace to his mother the English called all
whores Harlets. But who can read, without detestation, that in Rome a Jewess
may not be admitted into the stews, Espencae. de Continentia, lib. 3. cap. 4.
unless she will be first baptized? as Espencaeus, an honest Papist,
complains.

Verse. 23. Lest we be shamed] His care was more to shun shame, then sin. How
much better that Heathen! S^tis nobis persuasum esse debet, Nihil tamen avare,
nibil injuste, nibil libidinose, nibil incontinenter esse faciendum. Tull.
Offic. Siscirem homines ignoraturos, and Deos ignoscitures, tamen propter
peccati turpitudinem peccare ^on vellem. Sen. (...). Auson.
etc. This we should be fully persuaded of, says he, that although we could
conceal the matter from all, both gods and men, yet we should do nothing
covetously, nothing unjustly, nothing against chastity, or common honesty.
Though I were sure, (says another Philosopher) that all men would be ignorant
of what evil I do, and that all the gods would forgive it me; yet, for the
filthiness that is ^n sin, I would not commit it. Plato condemns the Poets,
for saying, that it were no matter though mon did commit sin, so they could
hide it. Si non cast, sultem caute. How much better the Christian Poet? Turpe
quid acturus, te, sine teste^, time. Wherefore have thou despised the
commandment of the Lord, to do evil in his sight, though none else saw thee?
says God to David, 2 Samuel 12.9. And David, in his sorrowful confession, says
as much to God, upon the matter, Psalm. 51.4. Against thee, thee only, have I
sinned; viz. in respect of the secrecy of my sin; therefore it is added, And
done this evil in thy sight. [ Behold, I sent this kid, etc.] He comforts
himself, Quasi dieat, Ego steti promissis, hoc mihi sufficit.
in the loss of his pledge, that yet he had been as good as his word: but not a
word we hear of sorrow for his sin; which, if he can but keep secret, he rests
secure. This is a piece of natural atheism; and it is general.

Verse. 24. Bring her forth, and let her be burnt] He was willing to be rid of
her, Dio. lib. 57. Verba Judae de vivicomburio Thamarae, non sunt Judicis, sed
Accusatoris. Alsted.
for fear of losing his son Shelah; and therefore passes a precipitate and
savage sentence, to burn a great-bellied woman; which the very Heathens
condemned, as a cruelty, in Claudius. Howbeit, there are, that take these to be
his words, not as a Judge in the cause, but as an accuser. Bring her forth, sc.
into the gates, before the Judges; and let her be burnt, if found guilty,
according to the custom of the country. We read not of any that were, by Gods
Law, to be burnt with fire, but the highpriests daughter only, for adultery,
Levit. 29.1. Hence the Hebrews say, that this Tamar was Melchizedek the
highpriests daughter. But it is more likely, she was a Canaanitish proselyte.
Let us beware of that sin, for which so peculiar a plague was appointed, and by
very Heathens executed. See Jer. 29.22, 23.

Verse. 25. By the man whose these are, etc.] Ut taceant hemines jumenta
loquc^tur. Juven.
So his secret sin comes to light. All will out at length, though never so
studiously concealed, Matthew. 10.26. Eccles. 10.20. That which has wings shall
tell the matter. It was a quill, a piece of a wing, that discovered the powder
plot. [Discern, I pray thee, whose are these] So, when we come to God, though
he seem never so angry, and ill set against us; can we but present unto him our
selves his own; our prayer, Mediator, arguments, all his; and then say, as she
here to Judah, Whose are these? he cannot deny himself.

Verse. 26. She has been more righteous then I] A free confession, joined with
confusion of his sin; for he knew her no more. This was, to confess and forsake
sin, as Solomon has it. Prove. 28.13.
Not like that of Saul; I have sinned, yet honor me before the people; or that
of those in the wilderness; We have sinned; we will go up: they might as well
have said, We have sinned, we will sin, Deuteronomy. 1.41. The worser sort of Papists
will say, When we have sinned, Sands his Relation of West. Relig. sect. 8.
we must confess; and when we have confessed, we must sin again, that we may
also confess again, and make work for new Indulgences and Jubilees; making
account of confessing, as drunkards do of vomiting. But true confession goes
along with hatred, care, apology.

Verse. 27. Behold, twins were in her womb] Betokening two peoples pertaining to
Christ. The Jews first put forth their hand, as it were, willing to be
justified by their works, and to regenerate themselves. For this, they were
bound with a Scarlet thread, condemned by the Law: wherefore, pulling back their
hand, they fell from God. Then came forth Perez, the breach-maker, that is, the
violent and valiant Gentiles; who took the first-birth-right and kingdom by
force: who when they are fully born, then shall the Jews come forth again, Romans
11.11, 25, 26. And that this is not far off, hear what a worthy Divine (yet
living) says: Mr. Case, his Gods, wait: to be grac. page 58.
Dan. 1^.11, we have a prophecy of the final restoration of the Jews; and the
time is expressed, which is One thousand two hundred ninety years, after the
ceasing of the daily sacrifice, and the setting up of the abomination of
desolation, which is conceived to be in Julian's time; who did assay to
re-build the Temple of the Jews, which was an abomination to God; who therefore
destroyed it by fire out of the earth, tearing up the very foundation thereof,
to the nethermost stone. This was Anno Dom. 360; to which if you add 1290
years, it will pitch this calculation upon the year, 1650. Before this Babylon
must down, etc.

CHAP. XXXIX. Verse. 1. And Potiphar an officer of Pharaoh's]
SEe here a sweet providence, that Joseph should fall into such hands. Potiphar
was Provost-Martial, keeper of the Kings prisoners. And what could Joseph have
wished better then this, that, since he must be a prisoner, he should be put
into that prison, where he might, by interpreting the Butlers dream, come to so
great preferment? Chrysostom, in his 19. Hom. on the Ephesians, says; we must
not once doubt of the Divine providence, though we presently perceive not the
causes, and reasons of many passages. And this he sweetly sets forth by apt by
similitudes drawn from the works of Carpenters, Painters, bees, ants, spiders,
swallows, etc. Surely, as a man, by a chain made up of diverse links, some of
gold, others of silver, See M. Renold. on Psalm. 110.5.
some of brass, iron, or tin, may be drawn out of a pit: so the Lord by the
concurrence of several subordinate things, which have no manner of dependence,
or natural co-incidency among themselves, has oftentimes wrought and brought
about the deliverance and exaltation of his children, that it might appear to
be the work of his own hand.

Verse. 2. And the Lord was with Joseph, and he, etc.] The Lord also is with
you, while ye be with him, 2 Chronicles. 15.3. and so long you may promise your
selves prosperity, that of Gaius, howsoever, that your souls shall prosper; and
for most part also, your outward estates. If it fall out otherwise, it is,
because God will have godliness admired for it self. If ungodly men prsper, it
is, that case may slay them, Prove. 1.32. and that they may perish for ever,
Psalm. 37.20. Moritur Zacharias Papa, rebus pro Ecclesiae salute and Apostolicae
sedis dignitate, non tam pie quam prospere gestis, says Sigonius. Sigonius.
This was little to his commendation, that he was not so pious, as he was
prosperous.

Verse. 3. And his Master saw] Though he knew not God, yet he acknowledged that
God was the giver of prosperity, and that piety pleases him. This ran into his
senses, but wrought not kindly upon his heart.

Verse. 4. And Joseph found grace in his sight] This also was of God, who
fashioneth men's opinions; and therefore Paul, though he went to carry alms,
(and such are commonly welcome) yet prays that his service may be accepted of
the Saints. Romans 15.31.
[And he served him] As his Page, or Chamberlain; afterward, he became his
Steward. He that is faithful in a little, shall be master of more.

Verse. 5. The Lord blessed the Egyptian] There Is nothing lost, by any love men
show to the Saints. God is not unfaithful to forget it, nor unmindful to reward
it.

Verse. 6. And he knew not ought he had etc.] Some expound this of Joseph, that
he took nothing for all his pains, but the meat he eat; did not feather his own
nest, as many in his place would have done; nor embezel his masters goods
committed to his trust. But without doubt, the other is the better sense:
Potiphar took what was provided for him, and cared for no more. This is few
men's happiness; for usually the master is the greatest servant in the house.
[And Joseph was a goodly person] But nothing so goodly on the outside, as on
the inside. Pulch^ior in luce cordis quam facile corporis.
His brethren had stripped him of his coat, but could not dis-robe him of his
graces. Still he retained his piety and fear of God, his integrity and
faithfulness toward his master, his chastity and modesty toward his mistress,
his spiritual prudence and watchfulness over himself. How stoutly did he resist
the Devil, despise the world, subdue the flesh? Many archers shot at him, but
his bow abode in strength, and the arms of his hands were made firm by the
hands of the mighty God of Jacob, Genesis 49.23, 24. Of bodily beauty, see notes
on Chap. 6.2.

Verse. 7. After these things] After he had been ten or eleven years in that
house; so long he was safe: Yet at length set upon. Learn we always to stand
upon our guard; to do, as it is reported of the bird Onocrotalus, that she is
so well practiced to expect the Hawk to grapple with her, that even, when she
shuts her eyes, she sleeps with her beak exalted, The Divine Cosmographer
page 94.
as if she would contend with her adversary. A man is to expect, if he live out
his days, to be urged to all sins; to the breach of every branch of the ten
Commandments, and to be put to it, in respect of every article of our Creed.
[His masters wife cast her eyes upon Joseph] She looked and lusted. Non dicit
Moses, Vidit, a^pexit, etc. Hic suit aspectu^ impudicus. Pareus. Pareus in
Medul. hist. profanae, page 786. Haec stultas vocabat virgins pro Christi
nomiue pass^s, quo^ voluptatum gaudia non gustassent.
See for this, Notes on Chap. 34. verse. 2. [And she said, Lie with me] An
impudent harlotry, that could so barely and basely solicit. Such a frontless
propudium was that in the Proverbs, Chap. 7.13, 18. Such were those insatiate
Empresses, Messalin^, wife to Claudius; and Barbara, wife to Sigismund,
Emperor of Germany, foemin^ immensae libidinis and procacitatis inverecundae,
quae saepius viros peteret quam peteretur. Vitam omnem censuit inanem, quae non
coitu, l^xu, ac libidine contereretur. And such were those brazen-faced
curtisans, that Franciscus Junius (that learned man) met with; and for their
sakes, abhorred the company of all women ever after, as himself records, in
his own life.

Verse. 8. But he refused] So would but a few have done of his years, (he was
now about seven and twenty) and that might have committed this sweet sin, (as
they wickedly call it) with so much security and secrecy, etc. The fear of God
is both a virtue, and a keeper of other virtues. It is the bond of perfections,
as Paul says of Charity. It is the riband, or string, that ties together all
those precious pearls, the graces; as Peter says of Humility. It is, (...). 1
Pet. 5.5. (...). Chrysostom.
as Basil says of the same grace, caeterarum virtutum (...), the storehouse
of other virtues; and as Chrysostom, the mother, and root, and nurse, and
foundation, and ligament of all good things in us. [ Behold my master wotteth
not, etc.] Beneficium postulat offic^um. To argue from bounty to duty, is but
right reason: But to argue, as most do, from Gods liberality, to liberty in
sin, is the Devils Logic. Joseph will not deal so basely with his mastor,
though an Egyptian. To render good for evil, is Divine; good for good, is
humane; evil for evil, is brutish; but evil for good, Ezra 9.14.
is divelish. Should we again break thy Commandments, says holy Ezra, after
so many mercies and deliverances? There is so much unthankfulness, and
dis-ingenuity in such an entertainment of mercy, that heaven and earth, he
thinks, would be ashamed of it. Every blessing is a binder; and each new
deliverance, Romans 2.4.
a new tie to obedience. The goodness of God should lead us to repentance,
says Paul. And this, Peter picks out of Paul's Epistles, as one of the
choycest sentences, and urges it upon those to whom he wrote, 2 Pet. 3.15.

Verse. 9. Neither has he kept any thing back from me, but thee] As the beams
of the Sun shining upon fire, does discourage the burning of that; so should
the shining of Gods mercies, or man's favors on us, quench and quell lust and
licentiousness in us.

Because thou art his wife] In primitiva Ecclesia. Eusis, equus, mulicr:
coeiera (...).
Christiani animo animaque inter se miscebantur, and omnia, praeter uxorer,
indiscreta habebant, says Tertullian. Community of wives is a monster in
Religion. [ How then can I do this great wickedness, etc?] So he calls it, not
a trick of youth, a light offense, a peccadillo, but wickedness, and great
wickedness. Abhorred be that Religion of Rome, that licenceth it; nothing
better herein, then that of the Turks, whose Alchoran tells us, Blunt's voyage
into the Levant. 82.
that God did not give men lusts and appetites to be frustrated, but enjoyed;
as made for the gust of man, and not for his torment, wherein his Creator
delights not. [And sin against God] Who makes the marriage-covenant; and
keeps the bonds, Prove. 2.17. Thus David, ^sal. 51.4. Against thee, thee only
have I sinned, etc. The trespass was against Vriah, but the transgression
against God; Psalm. 16.8.
who only can remove the guilt, remit the punishment. And here, though the iron
entered into Joseph's soul, sin could not; because it was fraught with Gods
fear. He had set God at his right hand, with David, and therefore was not moved
by the importunate imp^dency of his wanton mistress. Satan knocked often at that
dooor, but there was none within to answer, or open. He struck fire, but upon
wet tinder. Joseph in Egypt, like a pearl in a puddle, keeps his virtue still,
wherever he came.

Verse. 10. And it came to pass, as she spoke, etc.] A violent temptation
valiantly withstood and vanquished; and that by the force of the fear of God,
that powerful grace, where it may bear sway. Alexander, Scipio, Pompey, tempted
with the exquisiteness and variety of choyeest beauties, forbear that villainy:
Not for conscience sake, or fear of God, whom they knew not, but lest thereby
they should stop the current of their victories, and obscure the glory of their
remarkable valor. But what says Cyprian? As it is the greatest pleasure to
have overcome pleasure, so there is no such victory, as that that is gotten
over a man's lusts. This none but a Joseph fearing God, can do. For the fear of
the Lord is pure, says David, Psalm. 19.9. it is to hate evil, not forbear it
only, says Solomon: and he instanceth in inward evils, as pride, arrogance,
etc. so unchaste thoughts, lustful longings, and hankerings after strange flesh.
These the fear of God purges upon, and represseth; not suffering a man to sin
though he could do it so closely and covertly, that the world should be never
the wiser. Lo, this is Chastity: And it differs herein from Continency; (which
is the best we can say for those Heathens aforementioned.) The Continent person
refrains the outward act of uncleanness; either for love of praise, or fear of
punishment, but not without grief; for inwardly he is scalded with boiling
lust. Whereas the chaste man, (like S. Paul's virgin, 1 Cor. 7.34.) is holy,
both in body and in spirit; and this with delight, out of fear of God, and love
of virtue. Now if upon such a ground, we can refuse proferred pleasures, and
preferments; resolving rather to lie in the dust with Joseph, then to rise by
wicked principles, the trial is as sound, as if we had endured the tortures of
the rack, Heb. 11. [As she spoke to Joseph day by day] Satan will not be said
with a little, (...).
nor sit down by a light repulse. A man must give him a peremptory denial again
and again, as our Savior did; and yet the tempter departed not, but for a
season. He is called Beelzebub, that is the Master-flye, because he is impudent
as a fly, and soon returns to the bait, from which he was beaten. He will be
egging us again and again, to the same sin: and try every way to overturn us.
Many times he tempts by extremes; Mr. Perkins.
as he did Mr. John Knox, on his death bed; first, to despair, by setting
before him his sins; and (when foiled there) afterward to presumption, and
challenging of heaven as his due, for his many good works, and zeal in the
Scottish Reformation. So he dealt here by Joseph: he first set upon him on the
left hand, when he sold him for a slave. And when this prevailed not, he sets
here a Dalilah to tickle him on the right side, and to tie him with the green
withes of youthful pleasures. Sed pari successu; but he lost his labor. Joseph
was semper idem; famous for all the four cardinal virtues, if ever any were.
See here in this one temptation, his fortitude, justice, temperance and
prudence; in that he shuns the occasion: (for he would not only, not lie with
her, but not be with her, says the Text;) And that a man is indeed, that he is
in a temptation; which is but a tap, to give vent to corruption. Exodus 23.7.
Prove. 5.8. 1 Cor. 6.18.
[To lie by her, or to be with her] Keep thee far from an evil matter, says
Moses. Come not nigh the door of the harlots house, says Solomon. Flee
fornication, says Paul. And, fly youthful lusts. Not abstain from them only,
2 Timothy 2.22.
but fly them, as ye would do a flying Serpent. These are Gods commandments:
and they are to be kept as the sight of the eye, Prove. 7.2. The Nazarite might
not only, not drink wine, but not taste a rasin, or the husk of a grape. The
Leper was to shave his hair, Numb. 7.
and pare his nails. 1 Thessalonians. 5.
The good Christian is taught to abstain from all appearance of evil; and to
hate the very garment that is spotted by the flesh. The Devil counts a fit
occasion, half a Conquest; for he knows that corrupt Nature has a (...), a
seed-plot of all sin: which being drawn forth and watered by the breath of ill
company, or some other occasion, is soon set awork, to the producing of death.
Satan cozens us, when he persuades us, its no conquest, except we beat away the
temptation, yet keep the occasion by us. God will not remove the temptation,
till we remove the occasion. And in such case to pray, Lead us not, etc. but
deliver us from evil, is to thrust our finger into the fire, and then pray it
may not be burnt. A bird whiles aloft, is safe; but she comes not near the
snare, without danger. Solomon thought himself wise enough to convert his
wives, and not be corrupted by them. 1 King. 11.4.
But it came to pass, when Solomon was old; that his wives turned away his
heart after other gods, etc. He that can shun, or remove the occasion of his
own proper motion, as Joseph did, he is the Man; this is grace, here is a
victory.

Verse. 10. To do his businesse] To look up his bills of account, says the
Chaldee. Idleness is the Devils opportunity, the hour of temptation. But let a
man be never so busy about his lawful employments, he is to expect assaults.
As he is not idle, so neither is Satan: but walks about, and spreads his snares
for us in all places, and businesses; speaking a good word also in temptations
that come from the flesh, which are therefore called his messengers, 2 Cor.
12.7. and by giving place to them, we give place to the Devil, Ephesians. 4.26.

And there was none of the men of the house within] Josephus says, that they
were all gone forth to a feast; and she only left at home, as faining her self
sick. Sick she was (as likewise Amnon) with the lust of concupiscence, which
the Apostle calls (...); a disease, 1 Thessalonians. 4.5. such as those which the
Physicians say, are corruption totius substantiae; the body and soul, Quod
sanitas in corpore, sanctitas in cord. Bern.
are both tainted and rotted by it. Other diseases consume only the matter of
the body, but this, the holiness and honor of the body. Other sicknesses
sanctify us, but this profanes us, and lets the devil into our hearts.
Behemoth lies in the fennes, Job 40.21. That is, the divill in sensual
hearts; Gul. Paris. Ezekiel. 47.11.
as Gul. Paris. applies it. And when the waters of the Sanctuary slowed, the
miry places could not be healed.

Verse. 12. And she caught him by the garment] By wanton touches and dalliance,
mental adultery is often committed. He that touches his neighbors wife, Prove.
6.29.
shall not be innocent says Solomon. This is the offensive right hand, that
must be cut off, Mat. 5.30. The harlot caught the silly simple, and kissed him;
and with an impudent face said unto him, Prove. 7.13. till a dart struck through
his liver, verse. 23. cogit amare jecur

And he left his garment in her hand] This second time is Joseph stripped of his
garment; before, in the violence of envy, now of lust: before, of necessity,
now of choice: before, to deceive his father; now his master. Infamy and other
misery he was sure to suffer, but that must not drive from duty. 2 Cor. 6.8.
The Church comes from the wilderness, Cant. 8.5. expounded.
that is, through troubles and afflictions, leaning on her beloved; choosing
rather to suffer, then to sin. The good heart goes in a right line to God, and
will not fetch a compass: but strikes through all troubles and hazards, to get
to him. It will not break the hedge of any commandment, to avoid any piece of
foul way. The primitive Christians chose rather to be thrown to lions without,
then left to lusts within: Ad leonem magis quam lenonem; says Tertullian. I
had rather go to hell pure from sin, says Anselme, then to Heaven, polluted
with that filth. Mallem purus a peccato and innocens gehennam intrare etc.
Potius in ardentem rogum iofiluero quam ullum peccatum in deum commisero.
Pintus in Dan. Jam. 1. ult. Psalm. 119.1.
I will rather leap into a bone-fire (says another of the Fathers) then
wilfully commit wickedness against God. Of the Mouse of Armenia they write,
that she will rather dye, then be defiled with any filth. Insomuch as if her
hole be besmeared with dirt; she will rather choose to be taken, then to be
polluted: Such are or ought to be, the servants of God; unspotted of the world,
undefiled in the way.

Verse. 13. And it came to pass, etc.] Incontinency is a breeder. It never goes
alone (as some say the asp does not) but has many vices; Impudency, subtilty,
treacherous cruelty, etc. that come of it, and accompany it; crying out, and
calling to one another, as they once did; 2 King. 3.23.
Now Moab to the spoil.

Verse. 14. See, he has brought in an Hebrew] So she calls him, by way of
contempt; as they called our Savior Nazarene, and his followers Galileans. The
Arrians called the true Christians Ambrosians, Athanasians, Homousians, etc.
And at this day, S. Humph. Lynde. D. Fulk. Rhem. Test. on act 11 sect. 4.
the most honorable name of Christian, is, in Italy, and at Rome, a name of
reproach: and usually abused, to signify a fool, or a dolt.

Verse. 15. And it came to pass, etc.] How many innocents, in all ages, have
perished by false accusation! Here, this vermin, accuses her husband of
foolishness, her servant of filthiness; which she first affirms, secondly
confirms, Rev. 12.
by producing his garment, left in her hands. That accuser of the brethren set
her on; as he did the malicious heathens, to traduce and denigrate those pure
primitive Christians, (purer then snow, whiter then milk; ruddier then rubies;
their polishing was of Sapphire, Lam. Tertullian.
4.7.) as so many murderers, man-eaters, adulterers, Church-robbers, traitors,
etc. Which last, Lipsius calls Vnicum crimen little, Arch. Vssier. de christ.
Eccles. success. and statu. page 236.
qui crimine vacabant. So the Waldenses were spitefully accused of Manichisme,
and Catharisme; and thereupon a Croisado was published against them, as common
enemies. So, a little before the Massacre of Paris, it was given out by the
French Papists, that the Protestants in their conventicles plotted treason,
acted villainy, etc. And after the Massacre, there was a coin stamped; Camd.
Elisab. fol. 163. Qui son chi^n vult tuer, la rage luy met sus. A French
proverb.
in the forepart whereof, together with the Kings picture, was this
inscription; Virtus in rebels: and on the other side, Pietas excitavit
justitiam. Those that kill a dog, make the world believe, he was mad first: So
the enemies of the Church, first ever traduced her to the world, and then
persecuted her; first pulled off her veil, and then wounded her, Cant. 5.6.

Verse. 17. And she spoke unto him, etc.] Here the adulteress hunteth for the
precious life, Prove. 6.26. Her lust (as Amnons) turns into extreme hatred.
This is just the custom of a Curtisan; Aut te ardenter amat, aut te
capitaliter odit. Mantuan.
Heathens tell us the like of their Hippolytus; that when Phaedra his
stepmother could not win him to her will this way, she acensed him to his
father Theseus, as if he had attempted her chastity: whereupon he was forced to
fly his country. Likewise of Bellerophon, a young Prince; with whose beauty
Sthenobaea, Queen of Argives, being taken, solicited him to lie with her;
which when he refused, she accused him to her husband, Ovid. Metam.
that he would have ravished her. This he believing, sent him with letters to
Iobates King of Lycia, to make him away; Iobates put him upon many desperate
services, Homer. Iliad. l. 6.
to have dispatched him. But finding him a valiant and victorious man, he
afterward bestowed his daughter on him, with part of his Kingdom. Which when
Sthenobaea heard of, she hanged her self for woe. So perhaps did this huswife in
the text, when she saw Joseph so highly advanced by Pharaoh. The death,
howsoever, was too good for her.

Verse. 19. His wrath was kindled] Heb. exarsit nasus ejus. Good cause he had;
if all had been true that his wife told him, Prove. 6.34, 35. It is well known
how the rape of Lucrece was punished upon the Tarquines. Valentinian the
Emperor defiled the wife of his subject Maximus. Maximus afterward slew
Valentinian, Eudoniam Valeutiniani uxorem vi compressam, turpi^^^ ^uptiis sibi
copulas.
succeeded him in the Empire, ravished his wife, and forced her to marry him.
She, to be revenged, sent for Gensericus, who seized upon all Italy, etc. But
Potiphar was too light of belief; and should have examined the matter, ere he
had condemned the man. Credulity is a note of folly, Prove. 14.15.

Verse. 20. And Joseph's Master took him] It was a providence, that he had not
presently slain him, upon that false accusation. The Devil is first a liar, and
then a murderer: But he is limited by God. Joh. 3.
Joseph is imprisoned in the round tower; where they hurt his feet with
fetters, Psalm. 105.18.
the iron entered into his soul. He, meanwhile, either pleads not, or is not
heard. Doubtless he denied the fact; but durst not accuse the offender. His
innocence might afterward appear, and thereupon, the chief Keeper show him
favor, ver. 21. But his Master should have been better advised. If he lived
till Joseph was advanced, he had as good cause to fear his power, as ever
Ioseph's brethren did. Cardinal Woolsey was first Schoolmaster of Magdalen
School in Oxford; after that, beneficed by Marquess Dorset, whose children he
had there taught. Where he had not long been, but one Sir James Paulet, upon
some displeasure, Negotiations of Card. Wols. page 2.
set him by the heels: which affront was afterward, neither forgotten, nor
forgiven. For when the Schoolmaster became Lord Chancellor of England, he
sent for him; and after a sharp reproof, imprisoned him: A good president for
men in authority, which work their own wiles without wit; not to punish out of
humor, etc. Discite justitiam moniti, etc. Despise not any man's meanness, we
know not his destiny.

Verse. 21. But the Lord was with Ioseph] A prison keeps not God from his;
witness the Apostles, and Martyrs, whose prisons, by Gods presence, became
palaces; the fiery furnace, a gallery of pleasure; the stocks, a musick-school,
Act. 16.25. Bradford, Act. and Mon. sol. 1489.
after he was put in prison, had better health, then before; and found great
favor with his Keeper, who suffered him to go whither he would, upon his
promise to return, by such an hour, Ibid. 1457.
to his prison again.

CHAP. XL. Verse. 1. Had offended their Lord, the King of Egypt]
What their offense was, is not expressed. The Hebrews say, Pharaoh found a
fly in his cup, and a little gravel in his bread, and therefore imprisoned
these two great Officers. But this had been, to kill a fly (as one said) upon a
man's forehead with a great beetle. Some think they attempted the chastity of
Pharaoh's daughters. Such a thing as this, made Augustus so angry against Ovid.
But most likely it was, for some conspiracy; such as was that of Bigthan and
Teresh, Esth. 4. (...) Thucyd.
The present government is, for most part, always grievous; to some
discontented great Ones especially, who know not when they are well: but are
ready to drive a good Prince out of the world, and then would dig him up again,
if they could; as the swain said of Dionisius. Dionisium refodio.
But what said Alphonsus, that renowned King, to this, in a speech to the Popes
Ambassador? He professed, that he did not so much wonder at his Courtiers
ingratitude to him, who had raised sundry of them from mean to great estates;
as at his own to God. whom by every sin we seek to depose, nay to murder: for
Peccatum est Deicidium, Romans 1.30. with 1 John 3.15.

Verse. 2. And Pharaoh was wroth, etc.] That had been enough to have broke their
hearts: as a frown from Augustus, did Cornelius Gallus; and another from Queen
Elizabeth, Camd. Elizab. fol. 406.
did Lord Chancellor Hatton. Vt mala nulla feram, nisi nudam Caesaris iram
Nuda parum nobis Caesaris ira mali est?
says Ovid. And again, Omne trahit secum, Caesaris ira, malum.

Verse. 3. And he put them in ward, etc.] See the slippery estate of Courtiers:
to day in favor, to morrow in disgrace; as Haman, Sejanus, whom the same
Senators conducted to the prison, who had accompanied him to the Senate. They
which sacrificed unto him, as to their god, which kneeled down to adore him,
now scoffed at him, seeing him dragged from the Temple to the goal, from
supreme honor, Tacit.
to extreme ignominy. His greatest friends were most passionate against him,
etc. they would not once look at him; as men look not after Sun-dials, longer
then the Sun shines upon them. [The place where Joseph was bound] Here was a
wheel within a wheel, Ezekiel. 1. a sweet providence; that these obnoxious
Officers should be sent to Joseph's prison.

Verse. 4. And the Captain of the guard, etc.] This was Potiphar probably; who
by this time, saw his own error, and Joseph's innocence: yet kept him still in
prison, perhaps to save his wives honesty. Truth is the daughter of Time; it
will not always lie hid. (...) ab (...). Caseus in Ethic.
Splendet cum obscuratur, vincit cum opprimitur. Hinc ut pacis templum in media
urbc extruxerunt olim Romani, ita Veritatis statuam in suis urbibus olim
coluerunt Aegyptii.

Verse. 5. And they dreamed, etc.] Of dreams natural, and supernatural, see the
Notes on Chap. 20. verse. 3.

Verse 6. And behold they were sad] Or, angry; and yet knew not how to help
themselves. But carnal men digest their passions, as horses do their choler,
by chewing on the bit. Pope Boniface being clapped up prisoner by Cardinal
Columnus, tore his own flesh with his own teeth, Revius.
and dyed raving. Bajazet the great Turk, could not be pacified in three days,
after he was taken by Tamberlane; Turk. hist. fol. 220.
but, as a desperate man, still sought after death, and called for it. Vivere
noluit, morinesciit, as it is said of that Bishop of Salisbury, Roger Bishop of
Salisbury.
prisoner in King Steven's days.

Verse. 7. And he asked Pharaoh's officers, etc.] Vincula qui sonsit, didicit
succurrere vinctis. Joseph's tender heart soon earned toward them, upon the
sight of their sadness: and unasked, he offers himself to them; as our Savior
did to the widow of Naim, and to those two doubting Disciples, Luke 24.17. S.
Cyprians compassion is remarkable: Cum singulis pectus meum copulo, maeroris
and funeris pondera luctuosa participo: cum plangentibus plango, cum
deflentibus defleo, etc. I weep with those that weep, and am like-affected, as
if like-afflicted.

Verse. 8. And there is no Interpreter] The superstitious Egyptians did
curiously observe their dreams; and commonly repaired to the soothsayers for
an interpretation, Genesis 41.8. Joseph calls these Idolaters from their
superstitious vanities, to the living God; as Esaias did those of his time, Chap.
8.19, 20. and Daniel those of his, Chap. 2.28. and 5.18. He had consulted with
God by prayer, and with the Scripture, which revealed sufficient direction to
him, Ezekiel. 31.1, to 12. and so, soon dispatched the interpretation of
Nebuchadnezzars dream, Dan. 4.10. So Joseph here; he suffered troubles as an
evil doer, even unto bonds: 2 Timothy 2.9.
but the Word of God is not bound.

Verse. 9. Behold, a vine was before me] God, of his infinite grace and wisdom,
gives men such signs, as excellently answer and agree to the thing thereby
signified. Those two Sacraments of the New Testament for instance; which the
Greek Fathers (in the Apostles sense, Heb. 9.24.) call (...), signs and symbols
of better things, signified and sealed up thereby to the Believer. The Lord
(says Venerable Beza) knowing well the vanity of our natures prone to
idolatry, has appointed us two Sacraments only; and those consisting also of
most simple signs, and rites. For signs, he gave us water, bread and wine. The
rites are no more then to sprinkle, eat, drink, Nempe nemiscri mortales in
istorum mysteriorum usu, in rebus terr^strthus haereant, and obstup^scant. Bez.
Confess.
(things of most common use) and a very little of these too; that men may not
too much dote on the elements, or external acts in the Sacrament: but be wholly
raised up to the mystery, and by faith mount up to Christ thereby set forth and
exhibited: and fetching him down, as it were, that we may feed on him. Hence
the outward sign is no further used, then may serve to mind us of the inward
grace. The Minister also stirrs up the people, to look higher then to what they
see, with Sursum corda; Sacerdos parat fratrum mentes, dicendo, Sursum cerda.
Cyprian.
Lift up your hearts. A thing in use among the Primitive Christians.

Verse. 12. The three branches are three days,] That is, they signify three
days. So Chap. 41.26. The seven kine, are seven years. So, this is my body;
that is, this signifies my body, says Zuinglius, after Augustine and Ambrose.
Or, Hun. de Sacram. cap. 14. Him. ^^ad. 3. Victimas quibus so era sancieba tur
(...), i.e. so ^era vo^^t. Vngil. sallere dextram dixi^^^ i.e. fidem, and
jusjurandum, quod datis dextris concipitur.
this is the sign and figure of my body, says Calvin, after Augustine and
Tertullian; whatsoever Bellarmine and Hunnius, prate to the contrary. It is an
ordinary Metonimy, whereby the name of a thing signified, is given to the sign,
for the analogy that is betwixt them, and for the certainty of signification:
Homer and Virgil have the like. As for those Christians that eat their God,
let my soul be with the Philosophers, rather then with them, says Ave^roes the
learned Arabian: When it was objected to Ni^^las Shetterden Martyr, by
Archdeacon Harps-feild; that the words of Christ, when he said, hoc est corpus
meum did change the substance, without any other interpretation, or Spiritual
meaning; he answered. Then belike when Christ said, this cup is my blood, the
substance of the cup was changed into his blood, without any other meaning;
Act. and Mon. fol. 1515.
and so the cup was changed, and not the wine. Harpsfield hereupon, was forced
to confess, that Christ's Testament was broken, and his institution changed from
that he left it; but he said, they had power so to do.

Verse. 13. Yet within three dayes] Joseph foresaw the time of the Butlers
deliverance, he knew not the time of his own. In good hope he was, that now he
should have been delivered, upon the restoration of the Butler, and his
intercession for him; but he was fain to stay two years longer; till the time
that Gods Word came: Psalm. 105.19.
the Word of the Lord tried him; by trying, as in a fire, his faith and
patience in afflictions.

Verse. 14. But think on me, etc.] Liberty is sweet, and should be sought by all
lawful means, 1 Cor. 7.21. The Jews censure Joseph, for requesting this favor
of the Butler; and say, he was therefore two years longer imprisoned. But this
is a hard saying. Possible it is, that Joseph might trust too much to this man,
and be overhasty to set God this time, and no other; and so might be justly
crossed of his expectation. It is hard and happy so to use the means, as not to
trust to them; and so to wait Gods good leisure, as not to limit the holy One
of Israel. We trust a skillfull workman to go his own way to work, and to take
his own time. Shall we not do as much for God? He often goes a way by himself,
and gives a blessing to those times and means, whereof we despair.

Verse. 15. For indeed I was stolen away] Joseph inveighs not against his
brethren, that he may clear himself; but hides their infamy, (...). Sophoel.
with the mantle of charity: which is large enough to cover a multitude of
sins. It is a fault to speak of other men's faults, unless it be in an
ordinance. Infamy soon spreads. [Out of the land of the Hebrews] So he by faith
calls the land of Canaan; which yet was detained from them, till the sins of
the Amorites were become full, But Gods promises are good freehold. Jacob
disposes of this land on his deathbed; though least master of it.

And here also I have done nothing, etc.] We may not betray our innocence by a
base silence, Dan. ^.22. Act. 24.12, 13.
but make seasonable apology; as did Daniel, Paul, Justin Martyr, Tertullian,
and other the primitive Apologists. Francis King of France, to excuse his
cruelty exercised upon his Protestant Subjects, to the German Princes, whose
friendship he sought after, set forth a declaration to this purpose, That he
punished only Anabaptists, that preferred their private revelations before the
Word of God, Scultet. A^n^l. P. 454.
and set at naught all civil government. Which brand, set upon the true
Religion, and all the Professors thereof, Calvin not enduring, though he were
then a young Divine, (of five and twenty years of age,) yot he compiled and set
forth that admirable work of his, called, The Institution of Christian
Religion; In commendation whereof, One writes boldly;

Praeter Apostolieas post Christi tempora chartas Paul. Meliss^^.

Huic peperere libro saecula nulla parem.
Verse. 16. When the chief Baker saw] So when hypocrites hear good to be spoken,
in the Word, to Gods children, they also listen, and fasten upon the comforts,
as pertaining to them: Matthew. 13.
they receive the word with joy: they laugh, as men use to do in some merry
dream: they catch at the sweetmeats as children, and conclude with Haman, that
they are the men whom the King means to honor. But when they must practice
duty, or bear the cross, they depart sad; and Christ may keep his heaven to
himself, if it be to be had on no other conditions.

Verse. 17. And the birds did eat them] He sees not that he did any thing, but
suffers only. He hears therefore an unpleasing interpretation, says Pareus.

Verse. 18. And Joseph answered, etc.] It is probable, he used some preface to
this sad destiny he reads him; Vtinamtale somnium non vidisses. Dan. 4.19.
as Philo brings him in saying, I would thou had not dreamt such a dream: or
as Daniel prefaced to Nebuchadnezzar; My Lord, the dream be to them that hate
thee, and the interpretation to thine enemies. If Ministers, Gods Interpreters,
must be mannerly in the form, yet in the matter of their message, they must be
resolute. Not only toothless, but bitter truths must be told, however they be
taken. If I yet please men, etc. Gal. 1.10.

Verse. 19. And shall hang thee on a tree, etc.] This was cold comfort to the
Baker: so shall the last judgment be to the ungodly; when the Saints, as the
Butler, shall lift up their heads with joy. But what a sweet providence of God
was this, that the Butler should first relate his dream, and receive his
interpretation, as good as he could wish? Had the Baker begun, the Butler would
have been disheartened, and hindered, perhaps, from declaring his dream. And
then, where had Joseph's hopes been of deliverance by the Butler? How could he
have had that opportunity of setting forth his innocence, Piscator.
and requesting the Butlers favor, and good word to Pharaoh, for his freedom?
See how all things work together for good to them that love God.

The birds shall eat thy flesh] Those that were hanged, among the Jews, were
taken down, Deuteronomy. 21.23. Not so among the Gentiles. Effossos oculos v^ret atr^
gutture corvus. Catull. Lib. 1. de cruce. c. 6. Deuteronomy. 21.22.
A sore judgment of God threatened, in a special manner, against those that
despise parents, Prove. 30.17. and fulfilled in Absalom. Abslon Mart furens,
pensilis arbore obit. Gre^ser the Jesuit, to show his wit, calls that tree, a
cross; and makes it a manifest figure of the cross of Christ. Sed o mirum and
delirum figurativae crucis fabrum! Our Lord indeed dyed upon the cross, and
that with a curse. But that Absalom should, in that behalf, be a type of him,
is a new Jesuitical invention. Some say, that in honor of Christ crucified,
Constantine the Great abolished that kind of death, throughout the Empire.

Verse. 20. Which was Pharaohs birth-day] An ancient and commendable custom, to
keep banquets on birth-dayes; in honor of God, our Sospitator, for his mercy
in our creation, education, preservation, etc.

Verse. 21. So he hanged the chief Baker] Gods menaces, as well as promises,
will have their accomplishment. Vengeance is in readiness for the rebellious, 2
Cor. 10.6. Every whit as ready in Gods hand, as in the Ministers mouth.

Verse. 22. Yet did not the chief Butler] Too many such Butlers, that forget
poor Joseph. What cares Nabal though David dye at his door, so he may eat the
fat, and drink the sweet, etc? The Heathens picture of their graces, young and
fresh, two looking toward you, and one from you, bids check to all ungrateful
persons.

CHAP. XLI. Verse. 1. At the end of two full years]
AFter the Butler was restored; by whose intercession, Joseph hoped to have
been presently delivered, but was fairly deceived. So are all such sure to be,
as depend upon living men, (never true to them that trust in them) or deceased
Saints to intercede for them to God, Deus O. M. pro ineffabili sua clementia
dignetur, and in posterum Divo Kiliano intercessore, Amplitudinem tuam contra
fidei and Ecclesiae hosts tueri fortiter, and fovere suaviter, Epist. dedicat.
ad Episcop. Herbipolens.
says Eckius, in a certain Epistle to a Popish Bishop. Such a prayer begs
nothing but a denial, with a curse to boot.

Verse. 2. There came up out of the river] Nilus: which, by overflowing,
fatteneth the Plain of Egypt, filling it with fruits; Mercer.
and so fitly deciphering the seven years of plenty. Blunt's voyage, page 37.
So far as this river waters, is a black mould so fruitful; as they do but
throw in the seed, and have four rich harvests, in less then four months, say
travelers.

Verse. 3. Seven other kine came out of the river] These, by their leanness,
portended drougth and dearth, though they came up out of Nilus also. This
River, when it overflowes unto twelve cubits height only, causes famine; when
to thirteen, scarcity; when to fourteen, cheerfulness; when to fifteen,
affluence; when to sixteen, abundance, as Pliny tells us. The greatest increase
ever known, was of 18 cubits, under Claudius: Suet. in Claudio. Joseph. Antiq.
lib. 20. c. 2. Luc. l. 5. c. 9.
(we read of a general famine in his days, Act. 11.28. mentioned also by
Suetonius, and Josephus;) The smallest, of five cubits; in the history of the
Pharsalian Wars. Such a thing might fall out now, to cause this sore famine. Or
the river, for their sins, might be dried up, as God threatens them, Ezekiel.
29.3, 9. Esaias 19.5, 6. Sen. not. quaest. lib. 4. cap. 2. Creditur Aegyptus
caruisse juvantibus a^va I^bribus, atque annis sicca fuisse novem. Ovid. Art.
1.1.
And as it fell out in the reign of Cleopatra, that prodigiously prodigal
Queen, the river overflowed not for two years together, says Seneca: as at
another time it overflowed not, for nine years together, says Callimachus; and
after him, Ovid. How easy is it for God, to starve us all, by denying us a few
harvests? In case of famine, let us enquire the supernatural cause; as David
did, 2 Samuel 21.1. when he know the natural cause to be the drought.

Verse. 4. Dideat up the seven, etc.] In famine is not only outward want, (...).
Appetitus caninus. Thucyd. Polyb. Joseph.
but a greedy dog-like appetite within, that an ordinary meal suffices not,
Esaias 9.20. but men are ready to eat one another: as they did at Potidea, in the
Peloponnesian War; at Vtica, when it was besieged by Amilcar the father of
Hannibal; at Jerusalem, when it was beleagured by Vespasian; at Tunes, in the
African War, Manl. loc. com. 278.
when the soldiers were tithed; that is, every tenth man was cut in pieces and
devoured. Such a famine there was at Rome in the days of Honorius the
Emperor, that they were ready to eat one another; Alsted. Chronol. page 300.
and this voice was heard in the place of public meeting. Pone pretium humanae
carni. At Antioch in Syria, Turk. hist. fol. 18.
many of the Christians, (in the holy war) through famine, devoured the dead
bodies of their late slain enemies. At the siege of Scodra, they were well
night put to this extremity, when horses were dainty meat: Ibid. 426.
yea they were glad to eat dogs, cats, rats, and the skins of beasts sodd. It
exceeds all credit, to tell at what exceeding great price a little mouse was
sold, or puddings made of dogs guts. And if our relations deceived us not, such
things as these we heard of lately, to have fallen out in Germany. Alterius
perditio, tuacautio. See thou another man perish? see to thy self.

Verse. 5. And dreamed the second time] Divine dreams use to be repeated, and to
take deep impression, as this did, verse. 8. Pharaoh's spirit was troubled. Heb.
behammered.

Verse. 7. Behold, it was a dream] That is, it was but a dream, and no more; yet
a divine dream: whereof, see the Notes on Chap. 20. ver. 3.

Verse. 8. All the Magitians] Or, natural Philosophers, that studied the
secrets of nature, and could give a ready reason of every thing: Magus is a
persian word, and has affinity with the Hebrew (...) a contemplative person;
(...): Such as was Aristotle among the heathens, and Augustine amongst
Christians; the greatest and accuratest of men, after the Apostles, in
contemplation and argumentation, Planudes cum transtulit annis aliquot ante
Constantino* p^lim captam. Manl. loc. com. page 684. 2 Timothy 3.8.
as many are of opinion. The Grecians were so delighted with his learned
labors, that they have translated him wholly into their tongue. As for the
deep Theorems of natural Philosophy; they make one learned indeed, but seldom
better, oft-times worse, mere Atheists; as these wisemen of Egypt, else where
called enchanters, wizards, Exodus 7.11. Of these were Iannes and Iambres that
resisted Moses; learned they were, and lewd, as were those Philosophers, Romans
1. [But there was none that could interpret] Because God had smitten them with
a spirit of diziness* Isai. 29.14.
and made the wisdom of the wise to perish; for else, it had been easy for
them, to have seen plenty in the fat kine, and penury in the lean, etc. But
God had reserved that honor to Joseph, as a step or stirrup to further
preferment.

Verse. 9. I remember my fault this day] Oration vere aulica, says Pareus, a
right courtiers speech. ^e so relates the history of his imprisonment, that he
takes all the blame thereof to himself; gives Pharaoh the full commendation of
his justice and clemency. As for Joseph, he mentions him to the King; (lest if
any esse should have done it before him, he should have been shent for
hi^silence;) but somewhat slenderly, and more for self-respects, then of any
good affection to the innocent prisoner; whom he calls a young man, a bondman,
and hebrew; in whose behalf he neither advises, nor entreats that he may be
sent for. So very little is it, that Joseph owes to this Patron. And such,
for most part, are court*commendations. There you have (...); as one said of
old, delays and changes good store: every man seeking and serving his own aims
and ends; but little minding the good of others, further then subservient to
their own.

Verse. 10. Pharaoh was wroth with his servants, etc.] It is wisdom in a man to
confess his faults, before the Prince whom he has offended; and to commend his
clemency in pardoning them: Orat. pro. M. Marcello, and Q. Ligario, etc.
As Tully did Caesar's, as Mephibosheth did David's, etc. The Lord Cobham, the L.
Gray, Sir Griffin Markham, being condemned for treason, about the beginning of
King James, Anno 1603; B. Carletons thankful remembrance of Gods mercies.
page 181.
and brought forth to execution: as they were upon the scaffold, the Sheriff
notified the Kings pardon, his Majesty's warrant for the stay of the execution:
at which unexpected clemency, besides the great shouts of the people, the
condemned wished, that they might sacrifice their lives, to redeem their fault,
and to repurchase so merciful a Princes love.

Verse. 11. Each man according to the interpretation] That is, no vain dream,
but significant, and deserving an interpreter.

Verse. 12. And he interpreted to us our dreams] And well you requited him: but
better late then never; Paerstat sero quam nunquam.
though a ready dispatch doubleth the benefit; howbeit God had an overruling
hand in it, for Joseph's greatest good: he turns the worlds ingratitude, to
the salvation of his servants.

Verse. 13. As he interpreted to us, so it was] Semblably, as Christ foretold
the two thieves with whom he suffered, so it fell out; the one went to Heaven,
the other to Hell. And so it shall fare with all men at last day, according to
Isai. 3.10.11.

Verse. 14. And they brought him hastily] Heb. They made him run: who happily knew
not, what this haste and h^rry meant, but was betwixt hope and fear, till he
came to the King. It is God that brings low, and lifts up; that raises up
the poor out of the dust, and lifts up the beggar from the dunghill, to set
him among Princes, etc. 1 Samuel 2.7, 8. In the year of Grace 1622. The Turkish
Janissaries (who have learned that damnable art of making, and unmaking their
King at pleasure) drew Mustapha, (whom they had formerly deposed) out of
prison: and when he begged for his life, they assured him of the Empire; and
carrying him forth upon their shoulders, Mustapha subita ill^ mutatione, qua ex
carcere ad summam diguitatem and potentiam evectus erat ita commetus fuit, ut
animi deliquium pateretur, etc. Parei Medul. page 1165. Dan. hist. of Engl. p.
48.
cried with a loud voice; This is Mustapha, Sultan of the Turks, God save
Mustapha, etc. with which sudden change the man was so affected, that he fell
into a swoon for joy, and they had much ado to keep life in him: Our Henry
fourth was crowned the very same day, that, the year before, he had been
banished the Realm. [And changed his raiment, and came in unto Pharaoh] And
should not we get on our best, when we are to come before God? Should we accost
him, in the nasty tattered rags of the old Adam? and not spruse up our selves,
with the best of our preparation.

Verse. 15. I have dreamed a dream, and there is none, etc.] So men send not for
the Minister, till given up by the Physician. Then they cry out with him in the
Gospel: Mark. 9.22.
Sir if thou can do any thing, help us, etc. Whereunto what can we reply, but
as that king of Israel did to the woman that cried to him for help, 2 King 6.27.
in the famine of Samaria; If the Lord help the^ not, whence shall I help thee?
out of the barn-floor, or out of the wine press? Did not I forewarn you,
saying, touch not the unclean thing, etc. and ye would not hear. Genesis 42.22.
with 2 Cor. 6.17. Amor ingenii ^eminem unquam divi^^^ secit. Petron. Nescio
qu^modo bonae mentis soror est paupertas. Ib.
Therefore is this thing come upon you. [ And I have heard say, etc.] Pharaoh
despises not wisdom, how meanly soever habited. Saepe sub attrita latitat
sapientia vest: Paupertas est philosophia vernacula, says he in Apuleius: And
Eumolpus in Petronius, being asked why he went so poorly apparrelled, answered;
the study of wisdom, never made any man wealthy. And afterward he adds;
however it comes to pass, poverty is the sister of piety, and virtue is
forsaken of fortunne. Nudus opum, sed cui coelum terraeque paterent, says
Silius of Archimedes, that great Mathematician. And Aelian observes, Aelian. l.
2. Lactantius quasi quidam fluvius Tullia^ae eloquentiae. Hieror.
that the best of the Greeks, Aristides, Phocion, Pelopidas, Epaminondas,
Socrates, were very poor men: Lactantius, that Christian Cicero, as Hierome
calls him, was so needy, that he wanted necessaries. All that Calvin left
behind him, books and all, came scarce to three hundred French crowns: as Boz^
his colleague witnesses.

Verse. 16. It is not in me, God shall give Pharaoh, etc.] This is the voice of
all that have true worth in them: they are humble, upon the knowledge of their
perfections; they vilify and nullify themselves before God and men; like true
balm, that put into water, sinks to the bottom: or like a vessel cast into
the Sea, which the more it fills, the deeper it sinks. And this is the bottom
and bosom of humility, and very next degree to exaltation, as here.

Verse. 25. The dream of Pharaoh is one] One in signification, but diverse, in
respect of vision. Why it was doubled, see ver. 32. Repetitions in Scripture
are not tautologies, but serve to set forth to us, the necessity, excellency,
or difficulty of the thing so reinforced. To write to the Philippians the same
things, to S. Paul it is not grievous, and for them it is safe, Phil. 3.1.
Seneca.
Nunquam satis dicitur, quod nunquam satis discitur. Occidit miseros crambe
repetita magistros. Iuven.
Away then with those nice Novellists, that can abide to hear nothing but what
is newminted. Ministers meet with many that are slow of heart, and dull of
hearing; these must have precept upon precept, line upon line, etc. Many also
of brawny breasts and horny-heart strings; that as ducklings stoop and dive at
any little stone thrown by a man at them, yet shrink not at the heavens great
thunder, etc. Here a Minister must beat and inculcate; turn himself into all
fashions of spirit and speech, to win and work upon his hearers. He must so
long pursue and stand upon one and the same point, (says Austin) till, Aug. de
doct. Christ. and in Psalm. 10. Psalm. 49.1.2.
by the gesture and countenance of his Auditors, he perceives they understand
and assent to it. Hear this, all ye people, give ear all ye Inhabitants of the
world, (says the Psalmist) Both low and high, rich and poor together. Quid
dignum tanto feret hic promiss^r hiatu, Horat.
will some proud spirit say? what so great matter is there delivered in this
Psalm, that so much attention is called for? Is it not an ordinary argument,
such as we have heard of an hundred times, ( viz. the happy and secure estate
of the Saints, though in trouble, and the miserable and slippery condition of
the wicked, though they prosper in the world?) True, says the Holy Ghost; this
is the subject of this Psalm; and this, how common a theme soever, is the
great wisdom, and the dark saying, that I will here open unto you and that
calls for your utmost attention.

Verse. 33. Now therefore let Pharaoh, etc.] This was good counsel, and it
proved best to the counselor. The Jews injuriously charge him with ambitious
self-seeking: So they did Noah (as is above noted); with hard-heartedness, and
in compassionateness to the old world. These made the worst of things, and so
condemned the generation of Gods Children. How much better had it been, Ea
quemque ansa prebendamus qua commode teneri queat. Epictet. Fran. de Sales c.
28.
to have followed that golden rule of Epictetus? Take every man by that handle,
whereby he may best be held; as Virgill dealt by Ennius, Cyprian by Tertullian,
Hierome by Origin, August in by Tichonius. If an action had an hundred several
faces, we should always cast our sight upon the fairest; and make the best of
every thing. What Joseph did here, he did doubtless, by divine direction.

Verse. 34. Let him appoint officers] Bishops or overseers. Pakid. Episcopu^
Such amongst the Romans were praefecti anno^ae.
The word signifies, any such as have public charge and office, whether in
Church, or commonwealth. But how many of our Episcopi, are now become
Aposcopi, by-seers, rather then overseers; as Espencaeus long since
complained? Our land groans for some Moses, to take away the evil-Officers. Nam
non unum tantum vitulum, sed multos habemus, as honest Ferus said of his times.
And as John Hus, Multa quae illi or dinem dicunt, omnium rerum in christianismo
consufionem pariunt. Bell. Hussiticum. page q.
of his Churchmen; Many things, says he, which they call order, breed
confusion of all things, throughout whole Christendom.

And take up the fifth part of the land] For so much money, as it is worth: the
Egyptians might well spare it, and the King might as well buy it, since he
should sell it again, for very good profit. Neither would Joseph advise, nor
Pharaoh be advised, to take his Subjects goods by violence. When Samuel tells
the people, that their King, Bucholc.
whom they called for, would take their fields and vineyards, the best of them,
and give them to his servants, etc. loquitur non tam de jure quam de more, he
speaks not of the right of Kings, (as if all were theirs, and no man had any
thing of his own) but of the manner, and illimited power that some Kings take
over their subjects goods; as in Turkey, Persia, etc. Let it be the voice of a
Nero, whenever he put any one in office, Scis quid mihi opus sit, Sueton. in
Nerone.
and hoc agamus, nequis quicquam habeat: Of a Seleucus, to proclaim, that the
Kings pleasure is the only law; (...). Appian.
as if it were not enough, to be above men, but above mankind: as those Princes
Would be, says our English Chronicler, that would have their will to be law.
Melancthon tells us of a certain Prince, in those parts, Dan. hist. of Engl. f.
144. Primo un^n d^^^^em ^^^llebat, minitans, etc. Manl. loc. com. 636. Eram
aliquando in die Natali, in cujusdam concione, etc. Erant (...) quibus
gratificabatur and assentiebatur quorundam auribus, etc. Ibid. 479.
that extorted money from his miserable subjects, by knocking out their teeth.
First he knocked out one tooth, threatening to do so by the rest, unless they
brought him in such a sum, by such a time, as he demanded. The same Author
elsewhere relates, that he was at a Sermon on the birthday of our Savior: The
Preacher took his text out of Luke 2.1. There went out a decree from Caesar
Augustus, that all the world should be taxed. And whereas the audience
expected, that the Preacher should have discoursed of Christ's Nativity, of the
hypostatical union, etc. he spent his whole hour (the weather being extreme
cold) in this subject, that Obedience must be yielded to the higher powers;
that they must have as much money given them, as they call for; with a great
deal of such like stuff, little to the purpose, but much to the pleasure of
some Princes then and there present. Such Court-Parasites, many times, do much
mischief in a State; as well by seducing good Princes, (qui essent alii, si
essent apudalios) as by stickling against them, when the world does not favor
them. When Edward the second, surnamed Carnarvan, was pursued by his Queen, and
son, the Bishop of Hereford being to preach before her at Oxford, and to
deliver the cause of her proceeding, took for his text, My head aketh, Dan.
hist. of Engl. fol. 216.
my head aketh; and concluded most undivinely, that an aching and sick head of a
Kingdom, was, of necessity, to be taken off, and no otherwise cured.

Verse. 35. And let them gather all the food] This text warranteth providence,
in laying up for a rainy day. Solomon sends us to school to the pismire, to
learn this lesson, Prove. 6.6. And it is well observed, that our Savior had a
purse for common store for himself and those about him. Neither was this a
penny-pouch, but a bag so big, as needed a bearer. God would have us to be good
husbands, and see that Condus be fortior promo, our comings in, more then our
layings out; Parents must lay up for their children, 2 Cor. 12.14. yea, leave
inheritance to childrens children, Prove 13.22. playing the good husbands abroad
and at home, Prove. 27.26, 27.

Verse. 37. And the thing was good in the eyes of Pharaoh] The Devil, no doubt,
by the Magicians and Politicians of those times, did his utmost to hinder the
Kings purpose of preferring Joseph; as he did here for Cromwell, that great
Reformer, whom King Henry the eight, Act. and Mon. 1070.
of a Smiths son, made Farl of Essex. But these is neither counsel nor wisdom
against the Lord, Prove. 21.30.

Verse. 38. And Pharaoh said unto his servants] He would resolve nothing without
the advice of his Counsel. Val. Max. lib. 9. cap. 5.
He was not like the Persian Monarchs, who gave their Peers no freedom nor
liberty of advice: Nor that wilful King James of Scotland, (that reigned in our
Edward the fourth's time) that would seldom ask counsel, but never follow any:
so wedded he was to his own opinion, (says the Historian) that he could not
endure any man's advice (how good soever) that he fancied not. Dan. hist. of
England, contin. by Trussel. 107.
Pharaoh heard what his servants could say to it; who all, at length,
consented, when the ill-affected saw it was no boot to dissent.

Can we find such a man as this] Hence some collect, that Joseph preached many
more things to the King, of God, his power, providence, goodness, etc. then are
here recorded; and was therefore so admired, Psalm. 105.22.
and advarced to the office of teaching his Senators wisdom. To bind his
Princes to his soul, and make wise his Elders, as the Original has it.

Verse. 39. Forasmuch as God has showed thee all this] Pharaoh, at first, took
him for no other, then a cunning sooth-sayer, and conjecturer of dreams. Now he
finds better worth in him, a spirit of wisdom and discretion: He sees him to
be a man spiritually rational, and rationally spiritual; one that seemed to see
the insides of Nature and Grace, and the world and heaven, by those perfect
anatomies he had made of them all. Briefly, such a heart so well headed, nor
such a head better hearted, he had never met with. Wherefore he resolves to set
him at the stern of the State; there being not any thing that makes a man so
good a Patriot, as true Religion; which admits not of that distinction between
a good man and a good Citizen.

Verse. 40. Thou shall be over my house, etc.] Pharaoh prefers him, because he
found good parts in him. They that bestow places of charge in Church or
Commonwealth, upon undeserving persons, for by-respects, shall have Pharaoh to
rise up in judgment against them. The life of King Edward the sixth; by Sir Jo.
Heywood, page 6.
In King Edward the sixth's minority, Dignity waited upon desert, (says the
Historian) which caused it again to be waited upon by respect. Order also was
taken, that no man should have any benefice from the King, but first he should
preach before him. Ibid. 115.
Tamberlane-never bestowed his preferments upon such as ambitiously sought
them; as deeming them, in so doing, unworthy thereof: but upon such, as whose
modesty or desert, Turk. hist. fol. 227.
he thought worthy of those his great favors.

Verse. 41. See, I have set thee over all, etc.] So Antoninus the Emperor, made
Pertinax (a mean man, Pertinax obres praeclare gestas emsul est factu^: enjus
causa multi indignati sunt, etc. Dio. Idem in vita Pertinacis.
but well qualified) Consul; which many murmured at. But he was afterward made
Emperor; and finding the public treasure woefully wasted by his predecessor
Commodus, he restored it by his good husbandry; which many Magnifico'es laughed
at; caeteri, quibus virtus luxuria potior erat, laudabamus, says the Historian.

Verse. 42. And Pharaoh took off his ring] Pliny therefore is out, that thinks
the use of rings came not up before the Trojan War. How happy had he been,
bell^^o librorum.
(that was so great a book-devourer) had he light upon the Bible. He was
in-sighted in all the secrets of Nature; as appears by his works; Nihil unquam
legit, quin excerperet: nec in Bibliotheca tantum, sed in lectica; sed equitan^
quoque vel scribebat vel scribendum aliquod dictabat. Textor. Officina.
(which is non minus varium quam ipsa rerum natura, says Erasmus:). He never
read any thing but he excerped it; neither in his library only, but in his
couch; and whiles he was on horseback, he either wrote, or dictated somewhat to
be written. When he saw his Nephew walk out some hours without studying, he
said to him, Poteras has horas non perdere. He lived in the days of Vespasian;
and was a great dealer under him. What pity it was, that neither by Jews nor
Christians he came to the knowledge of the Scriptures; where he might have met
with many Antiquities, (as this of the use of the ring, an ornament of honor)
not elsewhere to be read of. But God had hid these things from the wise and
prudent, because it so seemed good in his sight, Matthew. 11.25, 26. [And put a
gold chain about his neck] Behold (says a learned Interpreter) one hour has
changed his fetters into a chain of gold, his rags into robes, D. Hall.
his stocks into a chariot, his jayl into a palace; Potiphar's captive, to his
Masters Lord; the noise of his chains into Abrech. God commonly exalts his
people to the contrary good to that evil, he had cast them into; as Joseph,
here, of a slave, to be a Ruler; Christ judged, to be Judge of all. So Caius,
so soon as he came to the Empire, the first thing he did, was to prefer
Agrippa, (who had suffered imprisonment for wishing him Emperor:) he made him
King of Judaea, (this was that Herod that was eaten with worms, Act. 12) and
gave him a chain of gold, as heavy as the chain of iron, that was upon him in
prison.

Verse. 43. Bow the knee] Or, tender Father, because he was young in years, but
old in wildom, (...), as Macarius was called. Not the ancient are wise, but the
wise ancient.

Verse 44. (...)
I am Pharaoh] Of a root that signifies to make bare, because (say some) he
was to be bared, that is, sifted and manifested by Joseph.

without thee shall no man lift up his hand] And yet the Egyptians (in Seneca's
time however) were a proud peremptory people, A^gyptus loqu^x and ingeniosa in
contumeliam praefectorum provincia: in qua qui vitaveri^ culpam ^on effagit in
samiam. Seneca. Salvator mundi. Hier. (...). Joseph.
apt to cast contempt and contumely upon their Governors, were they never so
upright and unblameable. Joseph had said, without me, God shall answer Pharaoh;
And now he hears, without thee shall no man, etc.

Verse. 45. Zaphnath Pa^neach] That is, says Idiprome, the Savior of the
world. An high style: so the Greeks, when Flaminius, who had freed them from
bondage, came amongst them, called him, Savior, Savior, with such a courage,
that the birds that flew over their heads, amazed at the noise, fell to the
ground. Hunniades, Plutarch.
having overthrown Mesites, the Turks General, at his return into the camp, a
wonderful number of the poor captives came, and falling at his feet and kissing
them, gave God thanks for their deliverance by him. Some called him Father;
some, the Defender of his country; the soldiers, their invincible General; The
captives, their Savior; the women, their protector; the young men and
children, their tender father. He again, with tears standing in his eyes,
cunceously embraced them, rejoicing at the public good; Tur^. hist. fol. 269.
and himself, giving most hearty thanks unto God, commanded the like to be
done, in all the Churches of that province. [ The daughter of Potipherah Prince
of On] Called Aven. Ezekiel. 30.1^. that is, wickedness, because there they
sacrificed to the Sun; whence it was called, Heliopolis. The chief ruler here
under Pharaoh* was Priest of the Sun: belike, Priests were no small men in
those days, amongst the Egyptians. Among the Ethiopians (their neighbors,) the
Priests of Jupiter were grown to that height of insolency, and had so bewitched
the people with their superstitions, Nullo detrectante, donec ad Erganem regem
perventum est, qui omues occidit and sacerdotium Sustulit. Alex. ab Alexandro,
that they would sometimes take upon them to depose, and kill their Kings. This
had been often done there; till at length, when they attempted the same upon
Erganes King of that country, he slew them all, and took away their priesthood.
O that God would once put into the hearts of Christian Kings, to deal so by
that high priest of Rome, who has so long usurped authority, to depose and
abuse them at his pleasure!

Verse. 46. And Joseph was thirty year old] This is mentioned, to show what
wonderful graces he had attained, at those years; what rare endowments, both
of piety and policy. Julius Caesar beholding the picture of Alexander, in
Hercules his temple at Gades, wept, that he had done no worthy act at those
years, wherein Alexander had conquered the whole world. Behold, Joseph at
thirty, showed more wisdom and virtue, then either of them; (as Pererius, on
this text, well observes:) and has for his 13 years service, and
imprisonment, fourscore years liberty, prosperity, and honor: God is a liberal
play master.

Verse. 47. By handfulls] Manipulation. Ex uno grano integer manipulvs
colligebatur, Act. 14.17.
Every grain of corn yields a handful of increase. Thus God filled their
hearts with food and gladness; and so left not himself without witness,
amongst those Infidels.

Verse. 48. And laid up the food of the cities] He provided storehouses for
every city; so they needed not to travel far. It is our happiness, that we have
the Word, that bread of life, brought home to us. Yet some are so wretched,
that unless God will set up a ^ulpit at the Alehouse door, they will not come
to hear him. They will run to hell as fast as they can; and if God cannot catch
them, they care not, they will not return.

V. 50. Asenath the daughter of Potipherah] This was not Potiphar, Ioseph's
Master. Joseph would not marry the daughter of such a huswife. Partus fire
sequitur ventrem. Ingenium ipsum a^que indoles (veluti conclusio sequitur
inferiorem part^m^ plerunque matrissat.

Verse. 51. Manass^^ for God, said he, has, etc.] He writes Gods mercies to
himself, upon the names of his two children; that might be as so many Monitours
to thankfulness and obedience. The Stork is said to leave one of her young ones
where she hatcheth, as it were out of some instinct of gratitude. Doves, at
every grain they pick, look upward, as giving thanks. [And all my fathers
house] Even that toil and those indignities that were offered me in my fathers
house, (so Iunius;) the grief whereof, his preferment allayed and mitigated.

Verse. 53. And the seven years of plenteousness., etc.] All earthly felicities
will determine; they are called a sea of glass mingled with fire; that is,
with affliction. Henry the sixth, Rev. 15.2. Trussels Con^^nuation. s. 189.
that had been the most potent Monarch for Dominions, that ever England had,
was, when deposed, not the master of a molehill, nor owner of his own liberty;
so various are the changes and chances of this mortal life.

Verse. 54. According as Joseph had said] Joseph foresaw and foretold the
famine, but caused it not: so Gods prescience, etc.

In all the land of Egypt] Such a revenue is thrift and parsimony. Optimum
vectigal parsimonia. Cic.

Verse. 55. (...). Dio.
Cried to Pharaoh] Though they knew he had deputed Joseph: So 1 King. 6.27.
(...); we should be as Gods, if we had not businesses, cares and fears, about
any of our subjects; said Augustus to his wife Livia.

Verse. 57. All countries came to Joseph, etc.] Forrainers also should be
relieved, so much as may be; King Edward the 6. sent 5000 pound, Hi frondibus
and gramine vescebantur. Scultet. Annal. page 315.
to relieve Protestants beyond seas. Geneva received our fugitives for
religion, in Q. Mary's time: and Strasborough, the poor banished Lorrainers,
that were well nigh famished, being forced to feed on hips and hawes, etc.

CHAP. XLII. Verse. 1. Now when Jacob saw that there was corn]
A Sale of Corn. Heb. A breaking: so called, either because corn breaks famine;
or, because it is broken and ground to make bread of: or for that they made
their bread in thin cakes, and so broke it. Or lastly, because he that sells
it, breaks the heap, and gives part to the buyer.

Why look ye one upon another?] As hopeless and helpless; or, as at your wits
ends, and not knowing whither to turn you. Youth is one while witless,
another while shift-lesse. Let days speak, and multitude of years teach
wisdom. Convivium sit simile Alphabeto, and.
Job. 32.7. As at feasts, so at other meetings, old men should be vowels, young
men, Mutes; or at most, but semi-vowels.

Verse. 2. Get you down thither] Here the Divine decree of Isreal's sojourning
and suffering in Egypt, begins to be fulfilled, by a wonderful providence. The
fullness of Joseph's barns invites Jacob, first to send, and then to go thither
himself, for relief. Shall not the fullness that is in Christ, incite and entice
us to come to him; as bees to a meddow full of flowers; as Merchants to the
Indies full of spices and other riches; as the Queen of Sheba to Solomon, full
of wisdom; as Jacob's sons to Egypt full of corn, in that extreme famine, that
we may return full fraught with treasures of truth and grace? It pleased God,
that in him should all fullness dwell. Joh. 1.16. Colos. 1.19.
And his fullness is not only repletive, but diffusive; a fullness of plenty and
abundance, but of bounty also, and redundance. He was anointed with the oil of
gladness, not only above, but for his fellows. Heb. 1.9.


that we may live, and not dye] Saints have their share in common calamities.
Jacob tasted of the famine, as well as his neighbors the Canaanites; so had
Abraham and Isaac done before him. Both the good figs and bad figs were carried
captive, Ier. 24. the corn, as well as the weeds, is cut down at harvest, etc.

Verse. 3. And Joseph's ten brethren went] Forty or fifty miles anend: Austin
says three hundred. Should we think much to go a few steps, (say it be miles)
to get food for our souls? Beware that famine, Am. 8.11, 12. The seven Churches
of Asia, Bohemia, the Palatinate, and many other parts of Germany, are under it
already. So is the large Region of Nubia in Africa; which had from the Apostles
time (as it is thought) professed the Christian faith; but now embraced
Mahometisme, through lack of Ministers. For, as Alvarez has recorded; at his
being in the King of Habassia's Court, there were Ambassadors out of Nubia,
Alvar. hist. A^thiopic. cap. 137.
to entreat him for a supply of Ministers, to instruct their Nation, and repair
Christianity, gone to ruin among them: but were rejected. O fearful!

Verse. 4. But Benjamin, Jacob sent not] Because best beloved; as last born, and
likeliest to live longest; and the least, and least able to shift for himself;
and all that was left of his dearest Rachel; his only darling, that had been
always at hand, and in the fathers eye.

Verse. 5. And the sons of Israel came] God could have fed them by a miracle, as
he did Eliah by the ravens; Dedit cis pluviam escatilem, and petram aquatilem.
Tertull.
and Israel in the wilderness, (where he rained them down Manna, and set the
flint abroach:) and Merlin (hid in a haymow in the Massacre of Paris) by a hen
that came thither, and laid an egg by him, every morning. But he works
ordinarily by means, and will have them used, Dikes Mich. and the drag.
but not trusted to.

Verse. 6. And Joseph was the Governour] Of the Hebrew word here used, is made
in Arabic, the title Sultan, given at this day to the great Turk by his
Subjects; among whom the Arabic is now the learned language. Their Alchoran is
written in it, and prohibited to be translated; which both preserves the
tongue, they say, and conceals Religion. [And Joseph's brethren came and bowed]
This, those mockers little thought ever to have done, to that Dreamer. But the
will of the Lord, that shall stand.

Verse. 7. Spoke roughly to them] To bring them the sooner to a sight of their
sin. God also, for like purpose, writes bitter things against his people,
stands afar off, hides his love, as Joseph, out of increasement of love; fights
against them with his own hand, as he threw his brethren into prison, Nihil est
tentatio vel universi mundi and totius enferni in unum conflata, ad eam qua Them
contrariu^ bomini poni^^^. Luther.
etc. then the which there is no greater affliction, says Luther; and all to
show them their sin, and to bring them home to himself by repentance.

Verse. 8. But they knew not him] As being now altered in stature, voice,
visage, his present pomp, and happily also, by his former imprisonment and
affliction. We read of a young man, that being condemned to dye, was turned
gray headed in one night, through forethought and fear of death, and was
thereupon spared.

Verse. 9. Then Joseph remembered the dreams] Event is the best interpreter of
Divine Oracles. The Disciples understood not many things at first, that our
Savior said to them; as that, Ioh. 2.22. Ioh. 12.16. So John Baptists
preaching wrought not, for some years after it was delivered, and then it did,
Ioh. 18.41, 42. The Spouse either heard not, or heeded not that speech of her
Beloved, Open unto me my sister, my spouse, till some while after he was gone,
Cant. 5.2-6. [Ye are spies] This, Joseph speaks not, assertive, but tentative;
not seriously, but by a covert counsel: not as himself thought, Exploratores
deputo bimini meritomendacii vestri. Aug.
but as the Egyptians suspected: or not absolutely, but conditionally; ye are
spies, unless you prove what ye have spoken.

Verse. 10. Nay, my Lord] The world is well changed, since they said one to
another, behold his dreamer comes. Then they could not find in their hearts,
to c^ll him brother; now they call him Lord. God, when he pleases, can change
the note of our worst enemies to us. There is a promise, that they shall bow
down to us, with their faces toward the earth, and li^k up the dust of our
feet, Esaias 49.23.

Verse. 11. We are all man's sons] Therefore no Spies; for what one man would
hazard all his sons at once, upon so dangerous a design? [we are true men] Heb.
Recti. The Popish Doctors reject those ancient Authors, De Christo lib. 1 cap.
4.
that are alleged against them, with, Non sunt Recti in Curia. Bellarmine
says; To Irenaeus, Tertullian, Eusebius, and Luther; I answer, Omnes manifesti
haeretici sunt; when any thing in the decrees likes not the Pope, he sets Palea
upon it, etc.

Verse. 12. Nay but to see the nakedness] That is, the weakness, and where we
may be best invaded; as Number. 13.19. By this wile he gets out of them, that
which he much longed to hear of; his father and brother Benjamines health and
welfare. See verse. 9.

Verse. 13. And one is not] They tell Joseph, that Joseph is not. When God holds
men's eyes, they see not the truth that lies before them; who is blind as my
servant? Isai. 42.19.

Verse. 14. This is it that I spoke unto you] He lays it hard to them still: As
who should say, the longer I hear you, the worse I like you; ere while ye said,
ye were ten brethren of you: Now you acknowledge two more: liars had need to
have good memories, etc. Be we as jealous of Satan, Me^dacem opertet esse
memo^^m.
and as watchful against his wiles, when he comes to set out the nakedness of
our souls; that where the hedge is lowest, this beast may leap over; watch him,
I say, and learn out his haunts, for we have heard and felt, that he is very
subtle; as Saul said of David, 1 Samuel 23.22.

V. 15. By the life of Pharaoh] Joseph, that he might seem enough an Egyptian,
swears heathennishly; Egyptians, partly of flattery, and partly of
superstition, used to swear by the life, or, (as the greek here has it,) by
the health of their King. The Spaniards, in the pride of their Monarchy, are
grown also now to swear by the life of their King. The Hebrews write, to this
day, Sands his relation of West. Relig.
that he which falsely swears by the Kings head, in a money-matter, shall be
put to death; as Pererius upon this text tells us. This grew, doubtless, of
that cursed custom of deifying their Kings; as Antiochus surnamed, (...); and
Caligula would be styled Dominus Deus: as at this day the Popes Parasites call
him Dominum Deum nostrum papam. To be sworn by, is an honor peculiar to God,
Isai. 65.16. Ier. 12.6. That of Saint Paul, 1 Cor. 15.31. Is not an oath but an
obtestation; or, a taking of his afflictions for Christ, to witness. That of
the Spouse, Cant. 3.5. is not an oath, but an adjuration: for he charge his
Churches enemies not to trouble her; and if they do, Roes and Hindes shall
testify against them; which would not do so, had they but Reason. This of
Joseph likewise, Non est forma juramenti, led asseverationit seria, and
o^tes^^tionis dome, (...)
is by some said to be not an oath, but an earnest asseveration: as who should
say; as true as Pharaoh lives; or, so Pharaoh live. Be it what it will, Joseph
cannot altogether be excused, for conforming him self to the Egyptians. The
place had somewhat tainted him; and he might well take up that of the Prophet
Isaiah; We is me, for I am a man of unclean lips; and why? for I dwell amidst
a people of unclean lips. Isai. 6.5.
Courts and great places are ill air, for zeal to breathe in: it is hard for
such, not to remit somewhat of their former fervor, and contract filth of sin,
which is as catching as the plague. As sheep among thorns lose part of their
fleece; so do the Saints, part of their goodness, among the wicked.

Verse. 16. By the life of Pharaoh, surely etc.] See how easily sin enters
twice, where it had once entered. Be not overcome of evil, Romans 12.21. Some
swear, and find it not; they would be sorry their excrements should pass from
them, and they feel it not. Oh, cross this ill custom; and though ye cannot so
soon turn the stream, yet swim against it. It is the devil that says unto
thee, as those Jews did to Pilate; do as thou have ever done, Mark 15.8. God
also will answer such, when they plead for their swearing, that they have got a
custom, and cannot leave it; as the judge did that thief, that desired him to
spare him; for stealing, had been his custom from his youth: the judge replied,
it was also his custom, Barker on the command. Iam. 5.12.
to give judgment against such malefactors, therefore he mu^t be condemned.
Swear neither by heaven, nor by earth, lest ye fall into condemnation, says
Saint James, to the converted Jews. This they had learned of the Pharisees, to
whom it was familiar, to swear by creatures, Hoc (...) a judaismo conversis
tenaciter adbaerebat Pareus in lac. 5.12.
Mat. 5. and 23. And though now converted, they could not leave it: but they
must, or be damned for it, choose them which; as the Apostle there assures them.
And whereas such kind of oaths, are now grown a piece of gallantry; and such as
cannot swear them, are thought to want their tropes and figures, befitting a
gentleman: God will deal with such, as that judge did with one that pleaded for
his life, that he might not be hanged, because he was a gentleman; he told him,
that therefore, You keep a good watch, my Lord. Act. and Mon.
he should have the gallows made higher for him: So shall these have a deeper
damnation, because better bred, and should have kept a better watch; as that
Martyr, told the swearing Bishop Bonner.

Verse. 17. En conclave aliquod ubi custo^iebantur. Piscat Doctor Chetwind Deane
of Bristow.
And he put them all together into ward three dayes] Not into close prison, but
into some chamber, or private room, where they might have opportunity of
reflecting upon themselves, and repenting. I have heard of a grave Divine
(lately living,) that did much good upon many, that came to him to ^ave alms;
by shutting them up in a room by themselves, having first taken great pains
with them by way of direction, what to do to be saved, joining in prayer,
setting them in a course of better living, and then providing for them fit
services.

Verse. 18. And Joseph said unto them the third day] So God, after two days,
will revive his; in the third day he will raise them up, and they shall live in
his sight, Hos. 6.2. Psalm. 125.3.
The rod of the wicked shall not rest on the lot of the righteous, lest they
put forth their hand to folly; lest their spirits fail before him: for others
he cares not so much, as for the choice spirits of his faithful people: when
we beat ordinary spices, we care not for every dust, but let some fly out, and
fall on the ground. But if Bezoar-stone, or some such precious stuff, every
little is looked to. So here. [For I fear God] Deum illum, says Iunius, that
true God, the proper object of fear; and therefore you need not doubt of fair
dealing. See the Notes, on Chap. 20.11. Learn here, that confession of our
faith is to be made as often, as thereby God may be glorified, and our brethren
edified.

Verse. 19. Let one of your brethren be bound] By binding Simeon, he brought
down Benjamin to himself. So does God, by chastening our bodies, save our souls.

Verse. 20. But bring your youngest brother unto me] So says God to all his
worshippers, See that you bring your hearts with you, whatever you leave behind
you. And as David sent to Abner, Thou shall not see my face, 2 Samuel 3.13.
except thou bring Michal Saul's daughter: so here. The poor widows heart, being
put to her mite, gave it weight, above the greater, but heartless largesses of
the Pharisees.

Verse. 21. We are very guilty, etc.] See here the force of Conscience, and
fruit of affliction; to bring old sins to a new reckoning. Conscience, though
for a while still, and seemingly asleep, yet is faithful in recording, and
fearful in accusing. It writes bitter things, and will article against the
sinner in the evil day. Therefore as B. Latimer took special heed to the
placing of his words in his examination before Bonner, Act. and Mon.
when he heard the pen walking in the chimney behind the cloth, and describing
whatsoever he said; So should we; since Conscience is not only Gods Spy, but
Notary: And albeit it does not always execute the acts of accusing, yet has
always the habit of it. And that we shall know, when trouble overtakes us;
then shall we feel those darts of the Almighty, dagging at the heart, and those
arrows of his, drinking up the spirit. Daniel chose rather to be cast into the
den of Lions, then to carry about a Lion in his bosom, an enraged Conscience.

Verse. 22. Spoke not I unto you, etc.] Fellows in sin often fall out, and then
all comes to light. Mahomet the great Turk, had with great rewards, procured
two Turks, to undertake to kill Scanderbeg. These traitors came to Scanderbeg,
making such a show of the detestation, both of Mahomet his tyrannical
government, and vain superstition, that they were, both of Scanderbeg and
others, reputed to be indeed the men they desired to be accounted: And so,
after they had learned the principles of the Christian Religion, were, by their
own desire, baptized. But so it fell out by Gods good providence, that these
false traitors, expecting nothing but opportunity to perform their devilish
device, upon some occasion, fell at variance betwixt themselves; and in their
heat, let some such words fall, as being taken up by some there present, drew
them both into suspicion. And thereupon, being straightly examined, it was,
Turk. hist. fol. 400.
at last, by them confessed, That they were sent for such a purpose; for which
they were both presently executed, as they had well deserved. Evil men are as
glass that is soddered together; as soon as the sodder is melted, the glass
falls in pieces, and all is discovered.

Verse. 24. And wept, and returned, etc.] The better any one is, the more
inclined to weeping; 1 Samuel 20.
as David, then Jonathan.

Nam faciles motus men's generosa capit.
Paulus non tam atramento quam lachrymis chartas inficiebat, says Lorinus.
And took from them Simeon, and bound him.] He is thought to have been the
chief doer in the sale of Joseph; and is therefore singled out for punishment.
Judas Iscariot is said to come of his tribe. Of a turbulent and restless
spirit, Joseph knew him to be; and therefore detained him, says Musculus, lest
he should have hindered the motion of bringing down Renjamin.

Verse. 25. Then Joseph commanded to fill their sacks] This was the revenge he
took upon them, for their many misusages. So Joshua marched all night, and
fought all day, for the Gibeonites, that had deceived him. So Elisha set bread
and water before the Syrians that came to surprise him. So S. Paul bids, If
thine enemy hunger, feed him, etc. Injuries are more bravely overcome with
benefits, then recompensed with the pertinacy of a mutual hatred, Speci^sius
aliquanto injuriae beneficiis vincuntur, quam mu^ni odii pertinacia pensantur.
Val. Max. lib. 4. c. 2.
said a very Heathen.

Verse. 27. To give his Ass provender in the Inn.] Their Innes then, were not
so well furnished as ours are; but they were forced to carry their provender,
which was a trouble.

Verse. 28. My money is restered] Joseph had stolen this benefit upon them,
which they mis-interpret; their own misgiving hearts telling them, that Gods
just hand was in it for their hurt. Conscience, being now awakened, meets them
at every turn; till they were soundly humbled, and had made their peace. Better
a sore, then a seared conscience; as, better a tormentful strangury, then a
senseless lethargy. Bee-masters tell us, that those are the best hives, that
make the greatest noise.

Verse. 29. And they came to Iacob] Who had looked many a long look for them, no
doubt, and was now glad to see their faces, and full sacks. But this joy lasted
but a little while; for no sooner had he heard them speak, but he was
thunderstruck, as it were: so little stability is there in any worldly
felicity. The Saints have all here their back-burdens of afflictions; yet some
have more then some; as Jacob, who was seldom without: God not only gave him a
draught of them, but made him a dyet-drink. Look how your refiners of sugar,
taking sugar, out of the same chest, some thereof they melt but once; other,
again and again: not that it has more dross in it, but because they would have
it more refined: So is it here.

Verse. 35. And it came to pass, as they emptied] Calvin's note on this text,
is, that Joseph was herein overshot, and ill-advised; for that intending to
succor his father, by sending back his money, he grieved and frighted him. But
this might be Jacob's fault, more then Joseph's. We many times mistake God
himself, through selfguiltiness; as if he meant to kill us with kindness, which
is a great unthankfulness. See my Love Tokens, p. 32.

Verse. 36. Simeon is not] That is, As good he were not; for ye have left him
prisoner, and unless ye return the sooner with Benjamin, (which I cannot yield
to) is like to be put to death, as a Spy. See here the pangs and passions of a
parent, and how love descends!

Verse. 37. Slay my two sons] A simple and sinful offer. Reuben was the eldest,
but not the wisest. Age is no just measure of wisdom. Howbeit, of him we may
learn, in our parents fear, no be hardy and hearty; in our brethrens distress,
to be eager and earnest.

Verse. 38. Ye shall bring down my gray hairs, etc.] To the state of the dead,
not to hell, or Limbus Patrum. Many of the Ancients erroneously held, that men's
souls were not judged, till the last day; nor rewarded, or punished, but
reserved in some secret Receptacles, Bell. de Purg. lib. 1.
unto the general Judgment. Bellarmine would hence prove Purgatory. Luther also
seems to approve of that figment of the Fathers. For in his notes upon this
text, he will have Sheol here translated the grave, to be an
under-ground-receptacle of all souls, where they rest and sleep till the coming
of Christ. But gray hairs descend not further then the grave. And Luther
somewhere entreats his Readers, that if they find any thing in his books, that
smells of the old cask, they should consider, he was not only a man, but
sometime had been a poor Monk, etc.

CHAP. XLIII. Verse. 1. And the famine was sore in the Land]
IN the promised Land. Drus. in Adag.
Hold out faith and patience. Os quod in sort tua cecidit, rodas: Bear thy
cross, and be content.

Verse. 2. Buy us a little food] They had learned to live with a little, which
is a great skill; nature is content with a little, grace with less. Paratum se
esse cum jove de falicitate coutendere, fi aquam haberet and offam. A^lian.
Epicurus himself was wont to say, if he might have but aquam and offam, a
draught of water, and a morsel of meat, he could live happily.

Verse. 3. Ye shall not see my face, etc.] No acceptance without Benjamin, that
son of sorrow: So, neither with God, without sound repentance. This is the
rainbow, which if God sees shining in our hearts, he will never drown our
souls.

Verse. 6. And Israel said, etc.] Here he begins to outwrestle his fears, by
resting upon God; and is therefore called Israel.

Verse. 7. Could we certainly know, etc.] Inferences many times are made, upon
what we say or do, such as we never thought of, Aug. lib. 1. de Trint. c. 3. ad
sinem.
Arbitror nonnullos in quibusdam locis librorum meorum opinaturos, me sensisse
quod non sensi, aut non sensisse quod sensi, faith Augustine: And it fell out
accordingly. For as Baronius witnesses, after Saint Austins death, there arose
up diverse, who out of his writings wrested and inconstructed, Quiex ejus
scriptis male perceptis complures invexerunt errores. Annal. tom 6. ad Ann. 450.
brought in many errors; which they endeavored to maintain, by the name and
authority of Saint Augustine. And the like may be said of Luther.

Verse. 8. Send the lad] A large lad, that was thirty year old, and had ten
children. But he is so called, because the youngest son of them, and the fathers
darling.

Verse. 9. I will be surety for him] Herein he was a type of Christ, (that came
of him) who is both our surety to God, for the discharge of our debt, and duty;
and Gods surety to us, for the performance of his promises, Heb. 7.22.

Verse. 10. For except we had lingered, etc.] In the words of God there is not
any hyperbole to be found. In the words of men, related by the Scripture, if we
meet with such kind of expressions, as this, and that, Joh. 21.25. it nothing
derogates from the authority of the Scripture: as Pareus here notes.

Verse. 11. If it must be so now, etc.] Perplexity is blind, and untractable.
Let the mind but settle, and it will soon yield to a reasonable motion, if
seasonable, especially; as this of Judah was: for, besides the weightiness of
his words, necessity now spoke for him, that most powerful Orator. Ex
carmine, vel melodia vel modulatione, vel dentque Psalm, Esaias 65.8.
(...) [Take of the best fruits] De laudatissimis rebus, says Junius; Of the
verse or melody, says the Original; that is, of the most praiseworthy fruits;
such as deserve to be commended in verse, and sung of, to the praise of God,
the Giver.

A little balm, and a little honey] Great men regard not the worth of the
gift, but the will of the giver. If I had had more, (...). Aelian.
I would have given more, said that Greek to Augustus; and it was accepted. The
poor Persian that met Artaxerxes with a handful of water, out of the river
Cyrus, went away well rewarded. So did the gardener, that presented the Duke of
Burgundy with a rape-root; which when the master of his house observed, he
presented his Lord with a brave palfrey, looking for like liberality, but was
disappointed.

Verse. 12. And take double-money] Invaluerat enim fames, verse. 1. ideoque
annonae pretium auctum erat, says Junius: It went hard with the inhabitants of
Samaria, when an asses head, was worth four pounds. [Peradventure it was an
over-sight] Which called for restitution; we must buy and sell by that
standard, Mat. 7.12. Whatever ye would that men should do unto you, do you the
same to them. Now no man would be cozened. Woe be to him that cries, Qui nescit
dissimulare, nescit vivere.
caveat emptor; He that cannot lie, cannot live, etc. 1 Thessalonians. 4.8. God is the
avenger of all such.

Verse. 14. And God Almighty give you mercy] Heb. give you bowels, the seat of
mercy. Here God not only grants Jacob's prayer, but fulfills his counsel, gives
him the very particular he prays for; ver. 30. Joseph's bowels yerned upon
Benjamin.

If I be bereaved, I am bereaved] This is like that of Esther, committing her
self and her attempt to God, Esth. 4.16.
If I perish, I perish; and like that of those Saints in the Acts, The Will of
the Lord be done; which is, says One, Vox vere Christianorum. Jacob prays for
Benjamins safety, but will be content his own will be crossed, so that Gods
Will may be accomplished. This is the right way of praying; this is to draw
near with a true heart, Heb. 10.22. Hypocrites seek God only out of self-love;
which is as little pleasing to him, as if a woman should strive to content to
her husband, not out of love to him, but to another.

Verse. 16. Slay, and make ready] Heb. slay a slaughter of beasts, as at feasts
is usual. Sen.
Quaere nunc cur subito moriamur? says Seneca; quia mortibus vivimus; What
wonder we dye suddenly, that live by the death of others?

Shall dine with me at noon] After serlous business dispatched in the morning.
Aristotle disposed of the morning in studying Philosophy; Of the afternoon, in
Eloquence, or whatever else he made his recreation.

Verse. 18. And the men were afraid] Where no fear was; but that an ill
conscience haunted them, Levit. 26.36.
and so the sound of a shaken leaf put them into a fright: As every body has
its shadow, so has every sin its fear; and fear, torment, 1 Ioh. 4.18.

Verse. 20. O sir, we came indeed, etc.] We must not lie wretchlesly, under
suspicion of dishonesty; but carefully clear our selves, as there is
opportunity.

Verse. 23. Peace be to you, fear not] The feeble-minded must be comforted; 1 Thessalonians. 5.14.
not crushed, or cashiered, as the wounded Deer is by the whole heard. David,
in the spirit of Prophecy, pronounces a bitter curse upon those that
persecuted him whom God has smitten, Psalm. 69.26.
and talked to the grief of those whom he had wounded. Ioseph's Steward had
learned better things of his master.

Verse. 25. And they made ready the Present.] For, a man's gist makes roomth for
him, and brings him before great men, Prove. 18.16. So it does also before
God, who looks for a Prsent, Psalm. 72.10. and loves to hear from us, Praise
waits for thee, Psalm. 65.1.
O God, in Sion, and unto thee shall the vow be performed.

Verse. 29. God be gracious unto thee, my son] Governors should temper clemency
with severity, so as to be at once loved and feared. Mercy is the brightest
star in the sphere of Majesty. Q. Elizabeth, next to the bible, took special
delight in Seneca's tract, de Clementia.

Verse. 30. And Joseph made haste, etc.] He hid his affection, as a wise and
valiant man, till he had once more beaten vehemently upon their guilty
consciences; and so brought them to a more sound and serious sight of their
sin, that they might repent, and make sure work for their souls.

Verse. 31. Set on bread] Which the Latins call Panis of (...), either because
all covet it, or because whatever else the cheer be, Isidor. l. 20.
men always set on bread.

Verse. 32. Because the Egyptians might not eat, etc.] Such was their pride and
superstition. Such was the hatred between the Jews and Samaritans: as is little
at this day, between Papists and Protestants. If a Protestant give thanks at
his meat, though this chaseth not a Catholic from his dinner, (which were to
his loss) yet he must forbear to say Amen to it. As on the other side, some
Roman Catholics will not say grace, though it be at their own table, when a
Protestant is present; Sand's his Relation of West Relig. Sect. 32.
thinking it better to leave God unserved, then that a Protestant join in
serving him. They hold us no better then dogs; worse then Turks or Jews; damned
Heretics, cursed caytiffes, unworthy to live on Gods ground, fit for nothing
but fire and faggot. Certain it is, that whosoever in this new faith and service
has ended this life, is in hell most certainly, says Bristow, in his 36.
Motive. It cannot be, that a Lutheran so dying, can escape the damnation of
hell, (says Coster the Jesuit) If I lie, let me be damned with Lucifer.
Coster. resp. ad Enchirid. Osiand. propos. 8.
Are not Gods Hebrews an utter abomination now, to these Romish Egyptians?

Verse. 33. And they sat before him, etc.] He marshalled them in their right
rank and degree; and this amazed them. He made them an absolute feast, such as
Varro describes with these conditions; Si belli conveniant homines, si temporis
sit habita ratio, In veter. fragm.
so locus sit non ingratus, si non negligens apparatus. This feast is of that
sort in use among the Romans, that were called (...), Val. Max. lib. 2. cap. 1.
to which were invited none but kinsfolks, to continue love, and seek
reconciliation, where had been any breach.

Verse. 34. And he took and sent messes] So did Cyrus in Xenophon, to such as he
favored,

But Benjamins mess, etc.] Love will creep where it cannot go; and good blood
will never belie it self. Ambrose makes it a type and token of S. Paul's
excellent parts and gifts, above the rest of the Apostles, etc.

CHAP. XLIV. Verse. 1. And he commanded the Steward]
PEccata extrinsecus radere, and non intrinsecus eradicare, fictio est, says
Bernard. Humiliation for sin must be sound and soaking, or else it is to no
purpose. Hypocrites hang down their heads as a bulrush, Esaias 58.5.
whiles some storm of trouble is upon them; but in a fair sun-shine-day, they
lift up their heads as upright as ever. Something they do about sin, but
nothing against it. As artificial juglers seem to wound, but do not; or as
Players seem to thrust themselves through their bodies, but the sword passes
only through their clot hes. This Joseph well knew; and therefore, that his
brethren might make sure-work, and have their hearts leavened and sowred (as
David's was, Psalm. 73.21.) with the greatness of godly sorrow^^ that they might
mourn as men do, in the death of their dearest friends, Zach. 10.12. that their
sorrow might be according to God, (...).
2 Cor. 7.10. deep and daily; like that sorrow, 2 Samuel 13.36. that waters of
Marah might slow from their eyes, and their hearts fall asunder in their
bosoms, like drops of water; he puts them to one more grievous fright and
agony, before he makes himself known unto them. And this was an high point of
heavenly wisdom in him. For had he presently entertained and embraced them as
his brethren, they would sooner have gloried of their wickedness, then repented
of it. Neither would a little repentance serve for a sin so ingrained, and such
a long time layn in. Their hearts were woefully hardened by the deceitfulness of
sin, their consciences festered; and had it been fit for him to scarf their
bones before they were set; and lap up their sores before they were searched?
Repent ye, says S. Peter to those that had crucified Christ, and were now
pricked in their hearts, Act. 2.37, 38. He says not; Be of good cheer, your
sins are forgiven, now that you feel some remorse for them; but stay a while
upon the work of repentance, and be thorough in it: leave not circumcising your
hearts, till you find them as sore, as the Shechemites felt their bodies, the
third day. And this the Apostle said to such, as already felt the nails,
wherewith they had crucified Christ, sticking fast in their own hearts, and
piercing them with horror. Take we heed of laying cordials upon full and foul
stomachs: the feeble minded only are to be comforted, such as are in danger to
be swallowed up with grief. But some men's stains are so inveterate, that they
will hardly be got out, till the cloth be almost rubbed to pieces.

Verse. 2. He did according to the word] Servus est nomen officii. (...).
A servant is not (...), one that moves absolutely of himself, says
Aristotle; but the masters instrument, and (...), wholly his. Such was this
servant of Joseph; and such should we all be to God.

Verse. 4. Wherefore have ye rewarded evil for good?] This, blind Nature saw,
to be the sum of all sins. Ingratum dixeris, omnia dixeris: Some vices are
such, as Nature smiles upon, though frowned at, by divine justice; not so,
this. Hercules is much condemned by the heathens, for killing his schoolmaster
Linus; Alexander, for doing the like by his friend Clitus; Nero by his tutour
Seneca: Muleasses King of Tunes is cried out on, Turk. hist. fol. 642.
for torturing to death the Manifet and Mesnar, by whose means especially, he
had aspired to the kingdom. Philip King of Macedony, caused a soldier of his,
that had offered unkindness to one that had kindly entertained him, to be
branded in the forehead, with these two words; Hospes ingratus: Manl. loc. com.
Unthankfulness is a monster in nature, a solecisme in manners, a paradox in
Divinity, a parching wind, to dry up the fountain of further favor.
Benjamines five-fold-mess, was no small aggravation to the theft, here laid to
his charge.

Verse. 5. And whereby indeed he divineth] Iunius reads it thus, Et nonne ipse
experimento certo didicenit per illum, quales sitis? q. d. Has he not by this
fact of yours, found out your fraud and false dealing; whereby ye have hitherto
sought to delude him? Is it not plain, ye are spies, and naughty-packs? The
Ierusalemy Targum, seems to tax Iesoph here fona sooth-sayer; or at least, a
seeker to such; which God forbad, Deuteronomy. 18.10. Calvin also thinks he did
grievously offend, in pretending to be such an one; and did impiously profane
the gift of the Spirit, in professing himself a Magician. But pace tanti viri,
this is too heavy a censure, and a forcing of the text, faith Iunius. All that
Joseph did, was to sift his brethren, and to try their affection to Benjamin.
And if he took upon him to be a Diviner, he did it not seriously; but made use
of that conceit, the vulgar had of him: like as Saint Paul, made use of that
superstitious custom, among the Corinthians; 1 Cor. 15.29. Sealig. Not.
of baptizing over the dead, to prove the resurrection.

Verse. 7. God forbid that thy servants should do] Rapine and robbery was ever
condemned, amongst very heathens, and severely punished. Tamerlane in his
expedition against Bajazet, took such order with his soldiers, that none were
injured; insomuch, that if a soldier had but taken an apple, or other thing of
like value from any man, he dyed for it. One of his soldiers having taken a
little milk, Turk. hist. fol. 313.
from a country-woman, and she thereof complaining, he ripped up his st^m^ck;
where when he found the milk, he contented the woman, and sent her away, who
had otherwise dyed, for her false accusation.

Verse. 9. With whomsoever it be found, etc.] Innocence is bold, but withalli
had need to be wise, for fear of further inconvenience. See notes on Chap.
31.32.

Verse. 12. And he searched, and began at the eldest] The better to avoid
suspicion; for he knew well enough, where to find the cup. So Ionadab, Amnons
carnal friend, but spiritual enemy, could tell David, that not all the Kings
sons (as the report ran,) but Amnon only was slain by Absolon. The devil also
when he has conveyed his cups into our sack, his goods into our houses, (as
the Russians use to deal by their enemies, Heyl. Geog. page 243.
and then accuse them of theft,) his in jections into our hearts; if we fancy
them never so little, will accuse us to God, and claim both them and us too,
for his own.

And the cup was found in Benjamins sack.] Sacco soluto app^r^it argentum,
says Ambrose. When God comes to turn the bottom of the bag upward, all will
out. Sin not therefore in hope of secrecy; on the fair day, (at the last day)
all packs shall be opened.

Verse. 13. Then they rent their clothes] In token of the renting of their
hearts for their sins, which now had found them out, and they their sins: for
misery, is the best art of memory; being like to that helve, Elisha cast into
the waters, which fetched up the iron in the bottom. Conscience is like a
looking-glass, which while it lies all covered with dust, shows not a man
his natural visage: but when it is wiped, then it makes the least blemish
appear Never till now, could we hear these men confess. Now, what shall we say
unto my Lord? what shall we speak (says Judah the Confessor, so his name
signifies?) Or how shall we clear our selves? God has found out the iniquity
of thy servants. Not this, that they were now charged with; (for why should
they be false, to their own innocence?) but their cruelty to Joseph, and other
like foul offenses; for the which God in his just judgment, had now brought
them to condign punishment. How could Joseph hold, when he heard all this; and
not cry out, as Paul did, in a like case, to his disconsolate Corinthians?
Though I made you sorry with a letter, (with a cup,) I do not repent, though I
did repent: for I perceive that this same epistle (cup) has made you sorry,
though it were but for a season. Now I rejoice, not that ye were made sorry,
but that ye sorrowed to repentance: For ye were made sorry, after a godly
manner, that ye might receive damage by us in nothing. For behold this
self-same thing, that ye forrowed after a godly sort, what carefulness it has
wrought in you: yea what apology, yea what indignation, yea what fear, (...),
Satisfaction, says the old Interpreter. It may be he meant a new life, to make
amends thereby to the Congregation offended, says Bradford, Sermon. of Repent.
14. Dan. hist. fol. 51.
yea what vehement desire, yea what zeal, yea what revenge! in all things ye
have approved your selves, to be clear in this matter.

Verse. 14. They fell before him on the ground] Humble submission, they knew, if
any thing, would make their peace, and procure their pardon; Sic ventos vincit,
dum se submittit arundo. It is no hoysing up sail in a storm, no standing
before a Lion, etc. William the Conqueror often pardoned rebels, and received
them into favor; as he held submission satisfactory for the greatest offenses,
and sought not to defeat them, but their enterprises.

Verse. 15. What deed is this that ye have done] As Joseph here, so Christ
sometimes, personates an adversary, when he intends most love. (...) [ Wot ye
not that such a man as I, etc.] If that be true, that some conceive of Joseph,
that he here, and ver. 5. made himself a sooth-sayer, he was certainly too
blame. The lip of excellenoy becomes not a fool, says Solomon, but much less
does lying beseem a worthy man. That is, It is naught when wicked men will be
using gracious words, to seem religious: But it is far worse, when good men
will use the fashion of the wicked, that they may seem impious.

Verse. 16. What shall we say, etc.] An ingenuous and penitent confession,
joined with self-loathing, and self-judging; teaching us how to confess to God.
Sit simplex, humilis confessio, pura, fidelis,
Atque frequens, nuda, discreta et, lubens, verecunda,
Integra, secreta and lachrymabilis, accelerata,
Fortis, and accusans, and se punire parata.
These sixteen conditions were composed in these verses, by the Schoolmen. And
such a Confession is the sponge that wipes away all the blots and blurs of our
lives, 1 Ioh. 1.7. Never any confessed his sin in this sort to God, but went
away with his pardon. Wot ye what? (quoth King Henry the eighth, to the Duke of
Suffolk, concerning Stephen Gardener, when he had confessed his Popery, for
which he should have been, the morrow after, sent to the Tower) he has
confessed himself as guilty in this matter, as his man; and has with much
sorrow and pensiveness, Act. and Mon. fol. 1175.
sued for my pardon. And you know what my nature and custom has been, in such
matters, evermore, to pardon them that will not dissemble, but confess their
fault. How much more will God?

Verse. 17. But the man in whose hand, etc.] This was the white that Joseph shot
at in all this interdealing with them, to try the truth of their love to
Benjamin; and whether they would stick to him in his utmost peril. God has
like ends in afflicting his children, Ezekiel. 21.21. The King of Babylon stood at
the parting way, at the head of the two ways, to use divination. So does God;
he knows that the best divining of men, is at the parting-way: there every dog
will show, to what master he belongs. God shoots at his servants, for trial,
as men shoot bullets against armor of proof, not to hurt it, but to praise it.

Verse. 18. For ihou art even as Pharaoh] This he says, the better to
insinuate; for great men love to hear of their honor, and are tickled with
their great titles. P. Jovius.
Paulus Jovius, writing of Pompey Colomia, Bishop of Reatino, says, that when
the said Bishop, by the means of many great personages, was reconciled again,
and brought into favor with the Pope, whom he had formerly offended; and that
when they signified so much unto him in a short letter, in whose
superscription, Bishop of Reatino, by chance, was left out; he receiving the
letter, threw it away, and bad the messenger go seek some other Pompeio, to
whom the letter was directed.

Verse. 30. Seeing that his life is bound up.] God loved his Son Jesus
infinitely more then Jacob did Benjamin; he exalts his love far above that of
any earthly parent; which is but a spark of his slame, a drop of his Ocean. And
yet he freely parted with him, to certain and shameful death, for our sakes.
God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son. etc. This is a Sic
without a Sicut; there is nothing in nature whereby to resemble it.

Verse. 32. For thy servant became surety] So did Christ for us; and therefore
he must acquit us of all our sins, ere he could go to his father. Lo, herein
lies the strength of that reason, Joh. 16.10. He shall convince the world of
righteousness, because I go to the Father.

Verse. 34. For how shall I go up, etc.] Here love ascends, as fit it should.
Judah (a man wise, and well-spoken) prefers his fathers life, before his own
liberty. He could not live to see the death of his aged father. B. Fulgos. lib.
5.
A certain Citizen of Toledo being condemned to dye, his son ceased not with
prayers and tears to entreat, that he might be put to death instead of his
father. This he obtained after much suite, and most gladly dyed for him. At
Gaunt in Flanders, when a father and his son were condemned to dye together,
the Earl desirous to make trial, whether of the two were more loving, granted,
that he should live, that would cut off the others head. And after much ado
between them, the father, Philip. Came^ar. Cent. 1. cap. 92.
by many arguments, persuaded his son, to be his executioner.

CHAP. XLV. Verse. 1. Then Joseph could not refrain]
NO more can Jesus, in the extreme afflictions of his brethren, Esaias 42.14. he
must cry like a traveling woman; which, though she bite in her pain for a
while, cannot long contain. (...) Herodot.
As Croesus his dumb son burst forth into, Kill not King Croesus: so when the
Church is over-laid by Satan, or his instruments, his bowels work, he can hold
no longer, but cries, Save my child, Do the young man Absalom no hurt. I was
but a little displeased, and they have helped forward the affliction. Zach.
1.15, 16.
Therefore thus says the Lord, I am returned to Jerusalem with mercies, or
bowels; Their groans and moans, as every word of Judah's pathetical speech to
Joseph, are as so many darts and daggers at his heart; he must take course for
their relief and rescue. For he is a very tenderhearted Joseph, (said that
Martyr) and though he speak roughly to his brethren, and handle them hardly, M.
Sanders Act. and Mon. 1^64.
yea and threaten grievous bondage to his best beloved Benjamin, yet can he not
contain himself from weeping with us, and upon us, with falling on our necks,
and sweetly kissing us, etc. (as he sweetly goes on in a letter to his wife)
pray, pray for us every body; we be shortly to be dispatched hence to our good
Christ, Amen, Amen.

Cause every man to go out from me] That he might weep his fill, and not
discover his brethrens faults to strangers. It is wisdom, in plaistering the
wounds of others, to clap our hand on the place, that the world may be never
the wiser. Mercer thinks, that Joseph concealed from his very father, the hard
dealings of his brethren with him; for if he had known, he would, likely, have
set some note upon them for their cruelty, as he did upon Simeon, and Levi, for
their bloody butchering of the Shechemites.

Verse. 3. I am Joseph] What a word was that? At the hearing thereof, what a
strange conflict of contrary passions fell out in the hearts of the Patriarchs?
Wonder, doubt, reverence, fear, hope, guiltiness, joy, grief, struck them at
once. Shall it not be so with the Jews at their glorious conversion, when they
shall hear, I am Jesus of Nazareth, Zach. 12.10. Rev. 1.7.
whom ye have persecuted, and pierced. See the Notes on Chap. 38. ver. 27.

Verse. 4. I am Joseph, your brother] Therefore you are to expect no hard
sentence from a brothers mouth. Christ is not ashamed, nor will be at last day,
to call us brethren. Pattern of Piety.
He that was willingly judged for me, (said that good woman) will surely give
no hard sentence against me. We may say boldly to him, as Ruth did to Boaz,
Spread thy skirt over me, for thou art a near kinsman, Ruth, 3.9.

Verse. 5. Now therefore be not grieved, etc.] See here a lively image of
Christ's love toward his enemies, for whom he prayed and dyed, to give them
repentance and remission, Act. 5.31. This Angel of the Covenant first troubles
the waters, and then cures those cripples that step in. This Sun of
righteousness first draws up vapors of godly grief, and then dispells them. A
bruised reed shall he not break, and smoking wick shall he not quench, Mat.
12.20.
till he bring. forth judgment to victory, that is, weak grace to perfection.

To preserve life] Animant is cujusque vita in fugaest, says the Philosopher;
and must be maintained by means. Isai. 57.10.
Hence it is called the life of our hands, because upheld by the labor of our
hands.

Verse. 7. God sent me before you] He it is that by a powerful providence,
orders all the disorders of the world, by a certain counsel, to his own ends,
and at length to his own glory. The hands that nailed Christ to the cross, were
wicked hands, Act. 2. 23. And Judas was sent to his place, for being guide to
them that took Jesus. And yet they did no more, Act. 1.16.
then what Gods hand and counsel, determined before to be done, Act. 4.28. for
his glory, and the salvation of his elect. This Pliny derides as a strange
doctrine: but Plato hammers at it, when he says, Irridendum ver^ curam agere
rerum humanarum illu^ quicquid est summum. Plin. lib. 2. cap. 7.
that God does always (...). Indeed he does all, in number, weight, and
measure, as the wiseman says. He alters the property of his peoples
afflictions, and, by an Almighty Alchymy, turns dross to gold, etc. As a
skillful Apothecary, he makes of a poisonfull viper, a wholesome triacle.

Verse. 8. It was not you that sent me] Joseph makes the best of an ill matter,
that they may not be overwhelmed with grief, Ier. 31.19. Postquam osten. sum
fuerit mihi. Tremell.
and so made a prey to the devil; 2 Cor. 2.11. After I was made known to my
self, says Ephrahim, I repented. Get thee, says Mr. Bradford, Gods Law, as a
glass, to look in; so shall thou see thy face foul-arraie^, and so shameful,
saucy, mangy, pocky and scabbed; that thou can not but be sorry, at the
contemplation thereof, etc. Especially if thou look to the tag, M. Bradf. Sermon.
of Repent. page 26.27.
tied to Gods Law, the malediction, which is such, as cannot but make us to
cast our currish tails betwixt our legs, if we believe it. But here, to clear
our eyesight, and keep us upright, we must annoint our eyes, with Christ's
eye salve Rev. 3.17. We read of a sensible eye salve, made of Christ's spittle
and clay. Ioh. 9.6. As it were, Bright. in. loc.
of the knowledge of Christ by his word, which proceeds out of his mouth, as
also of the knowledge of our selves; who being made of earth, do savor nothing
else but earth. Both of these two knowledges, are to be joined, and beaten
together in a lump: else they help not. For our misery acknowledged, without
Christ, breeds desperation: and Christ, without sense of our vileness,
presumption.

Verse. 9. Come down unto me, tarry not] Christ seems to send from Heaven, and
say unto us in like sort, God has made me Lord of all; come up unto me, tarry
not. Should the King call us to court, upon no other condition, then to have
and enjoy the pleasures and treasures, there to be had; old Jacob never went so
willingly into Egypt, as we should gladly accept, and embrace such a motion.

Verse. 10. Thou shall be near unto me] So sweet a comfort to friends, Cyprian.
epist.
that death it self, is called but a departure. This the heathen persecutours
knew, and therefore banished the Christian Confessors far asunder. One man may
be by his counsel, an Angel to another, Ezra 10.3. As Bradford was to D.
Taylour in prison: communion with such, 1 Samuel 25.
is the being bound up in the bundle of life, which was the blessing of Abigail
upon David. St. John trusted to come unto the Elect Lady, 2 Ioh. 12.
and speak face to face, that their joy might be full. When one desired to see
Alexanders treasure, he bid one of his servants show him, not (...), but (...),
Liban. Progyn. Chria. 1. Ioh 15.14.
not his wealth, but his friends. What an honor is that, that Christ should
say to us; ye are my friends, if ye do whatsoever I command you: And should say
to his Father; Father, I will that they also whom thou have given me, Ioh.
17.24. 1 Timothy 5.4. A thenis capitale suit, parentibus (...) non persolvere.
Melancth. Not. in Hesiod. Plin. I 10. c. 23. Propriam matrem crudeliter
deverat, currucam silicat. Melancth. Mures genitores fuos alunt infigal pietate
Sphinx Philos. p. 230. Macrob. lib. 1. Satur. cap. 6. (...). Ariston de Mundo.
cap. 6.
be with me were I am; that they may behold my glory, which thou have given me?
what could Joseph say more, for his father and brethren?

Verse. 11. And there will I nourish thee] To requite parents, is good and
acceptable before God. At Athens it was death, not to be kind to parents, and
cherish them. The Stork nourishes her old sire and damme, with admirable
piety, says Pliny; and is therefore called by the Hebrews Chasidah, or
Merciful: and by the Latins Pietati-cultrix. The cuckooe, on the other side,
is worthily hated, for that she cruelly devoureth her own damme, the
hedge-sparrow, says Melancthon: Mice are said to nonrish their old ones, that
cannot shift for themselves, insigni pietate. Cornelius, among the Romans, got
the name of Scipio, by his kindness to his blind father; to whom he was the
staff of his old age; as Macrobius relates. And Aristotle tells a strange
story, how that, when from the hill Aetna, there ran down a torrent of fire,
that consumed all the houses thereabouts; in the midst of those fearful
stames, Gods special care of the godly, shined most brightly. For the river of
fire parted it self; and made a kind of lane for those, who ventured to rescue
their aged parents, and pluck them out of the jaws of death. Our Savior much
distasted and detested that damnable doctrine of the Pharisees, teaching
children to starve their parents, Matthew. 15.
under pretense of devotion. And what would he have said to the Popish
Pharisees, that say, that a Monk may not leave his cloister to relievo his
father, but rather let him dye for hunger in the streets? Christ upon his
Cross, though as full of sorrow as heart could cold, comm^^ded his mother to be
kept by the Disciple whom he loved, with (...), Joh. 19.27. Agreeable
whereunto, was that speech of the Samians, I give thee this woman for a mother,
(...).
when to the richer of the Citizens, the Mothers of those who dyed in the wars,
were given to be maintained by them.

Verse. 13. And you shall tell my father] So the Lord Christ bad Mary Magdalen
tell his Disciples and Peter, (because he was most dejected for denying his
Master, and in his dumps, he must know with the first,) I ascend unto my
Father, and your Father, and to my God, and your God.

Verse. 14. And he fell upon his brother, etc.] Gods people are not senseless
Stoics, or flinty Nabals; but have natural affections in them, as others; yea
above others, that have banished good nature, and can weep as little as
witches. The enemy has stopped the Wells, and staid the watercourse, as
Holophernes: what should hinder him now from taking the town?

Verse. 16. It pleased Pharaoh well, and his servants] And therefore his
servants, because Pharaoh. For, Aulici sunt instar speculi, says Pareus.
Courtiers are their Princes looking-glasses; If he laugh, so do they; where he
loves, they love, in pretense at least; Cic. de Divinatione, lib. 2.
for all is but counterfeit. And here, Potest Augur Augurem videre, and non
ridere? says Cato in Tully. The Senate gave public thanks to the gods, for
all that Nero did, (even when he had killed his mother,) though they never so
much abhorred it. When he sang at any time, though it were never so ill, (for he
had a small harsh voice) his Courtiers would sooth him up, with, Quam pulcher
Caesar, Apollo, Augustus, (...), Dio in Norone.
etc. And because he hated the Senate, (notwithstanding all their flatteries)
Vatinius was greatly in favor with him, for saying, Odi te Caesar, quod
Senator es. Parasiti principum sputa, instar canum lingunt.

Verse. 17. And Pharaoh said unto Ioseph] Pharaoh is good to Jacob and his
house, for Ioseph's sake; so is God to us and ours, for Jesus sake. As any man
was intimate with Sejanus, so he found favor with Tiberius. Ut quisque S^jano
l^timus, it a ad Caesaris amicitiam vali^us^ contra, quibus inse^sus esset,
metu ac sordidus conflictabantur, Tacit. Matthew. 11.
As if any were at odds with him, they lived in continual danger and durance,
says Tacitus; so here. O miserabilis humana conditio, and, sine Christo, vanum
omne quod vivimus, says S. Hierome. Epitaph. Nep. tom. 1. p. 25. O the misery
of those that be without Christ in the world!

Verse. 8. Come unto me, and I will give you etc.] So says Christ, Come unto
me, and ye shall find rest to your souls, health to your bones, all the
blessings of this life and a better. Say you meet with some trouble by the way,
as happily Jacob had foul weather erc he came down to Egypt; Non sunt condignae
passiones ad praeteritam culpam quae remittitur, ad praesentis consolationis
gratiam, quae immittitur, ad futuram gloriam, quae promittitur, says Bernard,
sweetly. What is a drop of vinegar, put into an Occan of wine? No country has
more venomous creatures then Egypt, none more Antidotes. So godliness, says
One, has many troubles, and as many helps against trouble.

Verse. 19. Take you wagons out of the land of Egypt] Christ also will send his
wagons for us, his Cherubims, and clouds to fetch us up to him to heaven, at
the last day, 1 Thessalonians. 4.15. as they did Moses and Elias, Matthew. 17. This,
David foresaw, and therefore envied not the pomp and state of those men of Gods
hand, that are whirled here up and down in wagons and chariots, etc. Psalm.
17.14, 15.

Verse. 20. Also regard not your stuff] The same says God to his; Care not for
your lumber and trumpery, suffer with joy, the loss of your goods: Come, come
away in your affections, I have far better things for you above; the good of
all the land of the living is yours, etc. And should we not cheerfully follow
the Divine call? Many play loath to depart, because they have treasure in the
world, as those ten men had in the field, Ier. 41.8. But all that this world
affords, is but trashto the truly religious: Alexander hearing of the riches of
the Indies, divided his Kingdom of Macedony among his Captains and Soldiers.
And being asked what he had left for himself? he answered, Hope. And should not
the hope of heaven make us slight all earthly vanities? Spes in terrenis
incerti nomen boni: spes in divinis, nomen est certissimi, Heb. 11.1.

Verse. 21. And gave them provision for the way] So does God give all his, meat
that the world knows not of, joy that the natural heart never tasted of, the
white Stone, the hidden Manna, the continual feast, the foretaste of eternal
life, to hold up their hearts till they come home to heaven. On the cates of a
good conscience, he goes on feeding as Sampson did on his honeycomb, till he
came to his parents; as Joseph's brethren here did on their venison, till they
came to their father Jacob.

Verse. 22. But to Benjamin, 1 Timothy 4.10.
he gave, etc.] Gods gives his best blessings to his Benjamins. He is the
Savior of all men, but specially of them that believe. The Lord opens the
eyes of the blind, the Lord raises them that are bowed down. These are common
favors; but behold a better thing, The Lord loves the righteous. Psalm. 146.8.
This is more then all the rest. Outward things God gives to the wicked also,
but as Joseph put his cup into their sack, to pick a quarrel with them; or at
best, as he gave them here change of raiment, to show his general love to them:
but three hundred silverlings, and five suites, none but a Benjamin shall have
the honor and favor of. Artabazus in Xenophon complained, when Cyrus had
given him a cup of gold, and Chrysantas a kiss, in token of his special
respect and love, saying, that the cup that he gave him, was not so good gold,
as the kiss that he gave Chrysantas. When David said to Ziba, All is thine that
pertained to Mephibosheth, 2 Samuel 16.4.
Ziba answers, I humbly beseech thee, that I may find grace in thy sight: As
who should say, I had rather have the Kings favor, then the lands. Valde
protestatus sum, said Luther, me nolle sic ab eo satiari. He would not be put
off with lands, and large offers. And Moses would not hear of an Angel to go
along with them. He would have God himself, or none. Psalm. 134.3.
The blessings that come out of Sion, are choice, peculiar, even above any that
come out of heaven and earth.

Verse. 24. Fall not out by the way] Such a charge lays Christ upon all his,
to love one another; and to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace.
Si collidimur, frangimur, If we clash, we are broken; according to the old
fable of the two earthen-pots, swimming in the Sea. The daughter of dissension,
is dissolution, said Nazianzen. And every subdivision, in point of Religion, is
a strong weapon in the hand of the contrary party, Hist. of Coun. of Trent.
fol. 49.
as he upon the Council of Trent, wisely observed. Castor and pollux, if they
appear not together, it presageth a storm.

Verse. 26. Joseph is yet alive] This was the joyfullest news that ever Jacob
heard, and the sincerest pleasure that ever he had; which therefore, God
reserves for his age. How did his good heart, after he had recollected himself,
dance Levaltoes in his bosom, to hear of Joseph's honor, but especially of his
life? what shall ours do, when we see Christ in his Kingdom? [Jacobs heart
fainted, for he believed them not] They had told him a tale before; and he that
once has cracked his credit, is hardly, after, believed, Besides, he thought
the news was too good, to be true. Tarda solet magnis rebus inesse sides: The
joy of heaven is so great, that we must enter into it, it cannot enter into us.
Enter into thy Masters joy.

Verse. 27. When he saw he waggons] Such assurance have deeds above words.
Segnius irritant animos demissae per aures, Quam quae sunt oculis commissa.
(...).
Nos non eloquimur magna, sed vivimus, said those Primitive Christians. And no
Christian is an ill-lived man, unless he be a pretender only to that religion,
says Athenagoras, in his Apology for them. For as one said of David's words, in
the 119. Psalm, that they are verba vivenda, non legenda; so is Religion to be
credited, by the power and practice of it. Christians should lead convincing
lives; and, by their piety and patience, muzzle the malevolent, thrattle envy
it self. I have read of a woman, Mr. Ward's Sermon. The happ. of Paradise.
who living in professed doubt of the Godhead, after better illumination and
repentance, did often protest, that the vicious life of a knowing man in that
town, did conjure up those damnable doubts in her soul. The difference betwixt
Divinity and other sciences, is, that it is not enough to know, but you must do
it; as lessons of Music must be practiced; and a copy not read only, but
acted. [The spirit of Jacob their father revived] How will our spirits exalt
and triumph, when we shall hear the last trump, see the mestengers and wagons
sent for us? consider the crowns, scepters, Kingdoms, glories, beauties,
Angelical entertainments, beatifical visions, sweetest varieties, felicities,
eternities, that we are now to be possessed of? Surely, as Aeneas and his
company, when they came within view of Italy, after long tossing in the
Mediterranean and Aegean Seas, joyfully cried out, Italiam, Virg.
Italiam primus conclamat Achates;
Italiam socii laeto clamore salutant:
And as when Godfrey of Bulloine, and his company went to Jerusalem; as soon as
they saw the high turrets, they gave a mighty shout, that the earth rang; so
when we shall see the battlements of the new Jerusalem, what acclamations will
it ring of, etc?

Verse. 28. It is enough, Joseph is yet ali^e] l^cob rejoices more for his
life, then his honor. Why is living man sorrowful? Lam. 3.39.
yet he is alive; that is a mercy, amidst all his miseries.

before I dye] This he speaks after the manner of old men, whose song is' My
breath is corrupt, my days extinct, the graves are ready for me, Job 17.1.

CHAP. XLVI. Verse. 1. And came to Beersheb^.
A Place, 1. Consecrated to Gods worship. 2. Where he and his fathers had met
God, and received many mercies. 3. That lay in his way from Hebron to Egypt.
But say it had been out of his way, yet it had been nothing out of his way to
go thither, and seek God. A whet, is no let; a bait by the way, no hinderance;
the oyling of the wheel, furthers the journey. As it is, Tithe, and be rich;
so, Pray, and be prosperous. But say it should be some prejudice, Is it not
wisdom, 2 Chronicles. 25.9
to make Gods service costly to us? Cannot he make us amends? give us much more
then the hundred talents? Is any thing lost by his service? Prayer furthers
thrift. The night of Popery will shame many of us; who in their superstitious
zeal, had this proverb, Mass and meat, hinders no man's thrift. The very
Heathen offered sacrifices, when they took journeys; as Festus witnesses.
Fest. lib. 14.


Verse. 2. Here am I.] Josephus tells us, he said, who is there? He seems never
seriously to have read the Bible; Lib. 1. Antiq.
but only in transcursu, and quasi aliud agens. Quod vere ad bisto^iam Vet.
Test. came suse et magis ex vulgi intellectu in Josepho inveniunt. Barcl. paraen.
Is not that then a proper excuse for the Church of Rome her sacriledg, in
robbing the vulgar of the holy Scriptures, that she allows them to read
Josephus; where they may find the history of the old Testament more plainly and
plentifully set forth, then in the Bible? But Barclay, that made this apology,
was of the mind (belike) of Walter Mapes, sometimes Archdeacon of Oxford; who
relating the gross simony of the Pope, for confirming the election of Reginald,
bastard son to Iocelin, Bishop of Sarum, into the Sea of Bathe: concludes his
narration thus. D. Sanderson.
Sit tamen domina materque nostra Roma baculus in aqua fractus, et absit
credere quae vidimus. Howbeit, far be it from us, to believe our own eyes.

Verse. 3. Fear not to go down to Egypt] Cause of fear he might see sufficient:
But God would have him not to look downward on the rushing and roaring streams
of miseries, that ran so swiftly under him and his posterity; but steadfastly
fasten on his power and providence, who was his God, and the God of his father.
He loves to perfect his strength in our weakness; as Eliab would have the
sacrifice covered with water; that Gods power might the more appear in the fire
from heaven.

Verse. 4. I will go down with thee] That was as good security, as could be.
P^rge contra tempestatem forti animo. Caesarem fers, and fortunam Caesaris.
For if Caesar could say to the fearful Ferry-man, in a terrible storm, Be of
good cheer, thou carriest Caesar, and therefore can not miscarry; how much
more may he presume to be safe, that has God in his company? A child in the
dark fears nothing, whiles he has his father by the hand. [And I will also
surely bring thee up again] So says God to his dying people, when they are to
enter into the grave. He will surely bring them back from the jaws of death,
to the joys of eternal life. Yea by rotting, he will refine their frail
bodies; as the Goldsmith melts a picture of gold, or bruised piece of plate,
that is out of fashion, to make it up better. [And Joseph shall put his hand
upon thine eyes] An ancient and an honorable custom, in use among the Romans
also; as Pliny tells us. The eyes are commonly open, lift up to heaven, when
men are adying; unless they be such as that Pope was, who breathing out his
last, Joh. 24. Sic Benedic. 9. Alexander 6. and Leo 10. Bell. de art moriendi,
lib. 2. cap. 10.
said, Now I shall know whether the soul be immortal, or not. Or that desperate
Advocate in the Court of Rome, mentioned by Bellarmine, who dying, used these
words, Ego propero ad inferos, neque est, ut aliquid pro me agat Deus. But
Jacob had hope in his death; and Joseph had the honor of closing up those
eyes, that shall shortly see God again in the flesh, Job 19.26.

Verse. 5. And Jacob rose up from Beersheba] The word (rose up) is Emphatical,
and imports, that his heart was lightened, and his joints oyled, and nimbled,
as it were, with the heavenly vision. As when he had seen God at Bethel, he
lift. up his feet, and went on his way lustily, Genesis 28.1. so here, as fast as
his old legs would carry him; Act. and Mon.
as Father Latimer said to Ridley, when they were going to the stake. And as it
is recorded of good old Rawlins White, Martyr; that whereas before, he was wont
to go stooping, or rather crooked, through infirmity of age, having a sad
countenance, Act. and Mon. fol. 1415.
and very feeble complexion, and withal, very soft in speech and gesture; now
he went and stretched up himself, not only bolt upright (as he went to the
stake,) but also bare, withal, a most pleasant and comfortable countenance,
not without great courage and audacity, both in speech and behavior. In like
sort, Jacob here, having sought God, and received a gracious promise of his
presence and protection, rose up merrily from Beersheba, and doubts not to
follow God, whithersoever he shall lead him.

Verse. 6. And they took their cattle and their goods] Though Pharaoh sent to
them they should not, yet, not willing to be much chargeable, they brought that
they had. It is a happiness so to live with others, as not to be much beholden;
but rather helpful, then burdensome. He that receives a courtesy, we say,
sells his liberty: And the borrower, is servant to the lender. Saint Paul
glories in this, to the liberal Corinthians; that when he was present with
them, he was chargeable to no man. (...), I dunnied no man, I was no man's
trencher-fly. (...) torped^ piscis, cujus ea est natura ut prepius accedentes
seque tangentes obstupefaciat. Hine (...) obstupe^, cum alicujus incommode
Pas^r. Heil. Geog^ page 291. Turk. hist. fol. 477.950.
He was not of those, that served not the Lord Jesus Christ, but their own
bellies, Romans 16. The Duke of Bavaria's house, is so pestered with Friars and
Jesuits, that, notwithstanding the greatness of his revenue, he is very poor;
as spending all his estate, upon these Popish Parasites. Such among the Turks
are the Dervislars and Imailers, that under pretense of religion, live, like
body-lic^, upon other men's sweat and labors.

Verse. 7. His daughters, and his sons daughters] That is, by a Synechdoche
integri; his niece Serah, and his daughter Dinah; who came down with the rest
into Egypt, and therefore was not Jobs wife, as the Jews would persuade us.

Verse. 12. And the sons of Pharez were Hezron] Hezron and Hamul, not yet born,
are reckoned in stead of Er and Ona^, who were dead before the descent into
Egypt. See Funccius his Chronolog. Comment. A. M. 2273.

Verse. 26. Which came out of his loynes] Heb. e femore ejus, A modest
description of generation, by the isntrumental and material cause thereof.
And because it is said, that so many souls came out of Jacobs body; Augustine
moves the question here, whether souls also are not begotten, as well as
bodies? Annon igitur animae propage^tur extraduce? Argumenta post trid^um demum
solve. Melancthon. Chemnitius.
And when the learned Father demurred, and would not presently determine the
point; a rash young man, one Vincentius Victor (as Chemnitius relates it)
boldly censured the Fathers unresolvedness: and vaunted that he would
undertake, to prove by demonstration, that souls are created, de novo,, by God.
For which peremptory rashness, the Father returned the young men, a sober
reprehension. But, souls are, doubtless, here put for persons, which the
Latins call Capita.

Verse. 27. Threescore and ten] Saint Steven reckons 75. Act. 7.14.
And so the Greek translateth here, which Steven seems to follow; as does
likewise Saint Luke for Cain^n, Chap 3. 36. That translation being then
received, and they not willing to alter it. The Jews say, that these seventy
souls were as much as all the seventy nations of the world. And Moses tells
them, that whereas their fathers went down into Egypt, with seventy souls; now
Jehovah had made them, as the stars of Heaven for multitude, Deuteronomy. 10.22.

Verse. 28. And he sent Judah before him] A good man guides his affairs with
discretion, Psalm. 112.5. Colos. 2.5.
does all things decently, and in order. It was great joy to the Apostle, to
behold the Colossians order, etc.

Verse. 29. Presented himself unto him] Joseph a Prince, was no whit ashamed of
the poor old shepherd his father, before so many his compeeres, and other
Courtiers, that accompanied him; and abhominated such kind of persons.
Colonel Edmonds is much commended, for his ingenuous reply to a countryman of
his, newly come to him, into the low countries, out of Scotland. This fellow
desiring entertainment of him, told him; My Lord his father, and such Knights
and Gentlemen his cousins, and kinsmen, Peacham's complete Gentlem. page 5.
were in good health. Quoth Colonel Edmonds, gentlemen, (to his friends by,)
believe not one word he says; my father is but a poor baker; whom this knave
would make a Lord, to curry favor with me, and make you believe, I am a great
man born. See the notes, on Chap. 32. Verse. 10.

And he fell on his neck, and wept, etc.] For exceeding joy; what then shall be
the meeting of Saints in Heaven! Christ shall say, come ye blessed of my
father. As if he should say, where have ye been all this while, my dear
brethren? It was a part of his joy, when he was on earth, that we should be
where he is, to behold his glory, Ioh. 17.24. And this he now prays not, but,
Father I will that they be with me; ^ugie^dum ad ^l^^issrmam p^triam: ibi
pater, ibi omnia. Aug. de civit. Dci. l. 9. c. 16.
as that which he had merited for them. And now, what joy there will be, to see
them and suaviate them, for whose sake, he shed his most precious blood;
through which they may safely sail, into the bosom of the Father. Surely, if
Plotinus the Philosopher could say, let us make haste to our heavenly country;
there is our Father, there are all our friends: how much more triumphantly, may
Christians say so? If Cicero could say, O praeclarum diem cum ad illud animorum
concilium caetumque pro ficiscar, ad Catonem meum etc. Cic. de sen. (...): Heb.
12.23.
O praeclarum diem cum ad illum animorum concilium coetumque proficiscar, etc.
O what a brave day will that be, when I shall go to that council and company
of happy souls; to my Cato, and other Roman worthies, dead before me: How much
more may Christians exult, to think of that glorious night-less day, as
Nazianzen calls it, when they shall be admitted into the congregation house of
the first born; as the Apostle calls Heaven; and joyfully welcomed by Abraham,
David, Paul, etc. Who shall be no less glad of their, then of their own
happiness? Who can conceive the comfort of Jacob and Joseph? Or, of those two
cousins, Mary and Elizabeth, at their first meeting? But for the joys of
Heaven, it is as impossible to comprehend them, as to compass Heaven it self
with a span, or contain the ocean in a nut-shell. They are such, says
Augustine; ut quic quid homo dixerit quasi gutta de mari, quasi scincilla de
foco. Aug. de tripl^ci habitu. c. 4. (...). Luke 1.44.
If the presence of Christ, though but in the womb, made John to spring, and
dance a galliard, as the word imports; what shall it do, when we come to
Heaven? Sermo non valet exprimere, experimento opus est, says Chrysostom. It Is
fitter to be believed, then possible to be discoursed, says Prosper. Nec
Christus nec coelum patitur hyperbolen, says another. The Apostle, after he
had spoken of Glorification, breaks forth by way of admiration, into these
words; what shall we say to these things? Romans 8.31. (...), 2 Cor. 4.
these word-less words, as he elsewhere phraseth it; and ever utters himself,
in a transcendent expression, as 2 Cor. 4.17. Where he calls it a weight of
glory; such as, if the body were not by the power of God upheld, it were not
able to bear. Jacob could hardly hear the news of Joseph, and live: but when
once he saw him; Now let me dye, says he, etc.

Verse. 30. Now let me dye] What would this good old man have said, had he s^en
Christ in the flesh, Optavit se videre potuisse Romam in flore, Paulum in ore,
Christum in corpore. Luke 2.29, 30.
which was one of Augustines three with ^s? how merrily would he have sung out
his soul, as Simem did, who had long looked for the consolation of Israel; and
having now laid in his heart, what he lapt in his arms, cries, Nunc dimittas
domine: I fear no sin, I dread no death; (as one englisheth it:) I have lived
enough, I have my life; I have longed enough, I have my love: I have seen
enough, I have my light: I have served enough, I have my Saint: I have sorrow'd
enough, I have my joy. Sweet babe, let this song, serve for a lullaby to thee,
and a funeral for me. O sleep, in my arms; and let me sleep in thy peace.

Because thou art yet alive] If this were so great a matter to Jacob, what
should it be to us, that Christ was dead, and is alive; yea that he ever lives,
Act. 7.56.
to make request for us? and that he stands at the right hand of his father,
(when any Steven of his is stoned;) as ready pressed to interpose betwixt them
and any hurt, that may thereby come unto them? If Seneca could say to his
Polybius. Fas tibi non est salvo Caesare de fortuna tua queri; how much less
cause have we to complain, so long as Christ is a live? Can our hearts dye
within us, whiles our head is the Lord of life? yea our life, as Saint Paul
calls him.

Verse. 32. The men are shepherds] The truly virtuous or valorous, are no whit
ashamed of their mean parentage, but rather glory in themselves, that their
merit has advanced them above so many thousands, far better descended. Doctor
Cox Almoner, and Sir John Cheek, Sir Jo. Heyw. in his Edw. 6.
Tutor to King Edward the sixth, were men of mean birth, but so well esteemed
(says the Historian) for virtue and learning, that they might well be said to
be born of themselves. So were Iphicrates, that brave Athenian, the son of a
cobbler; Eumenes, one of Alexanders best Captains, the son of a Carter;
Agathocles King of Sicily, of a potter, etc. And these would many times freely
discourse of their beginning, and plainly relate their bringing up, and what
their parents were. [And they have brought their flocks] As choosing rather a
poor shepherds life in Gods service, then to ruffle it, as Courtiers, out of
the Church. So did Moses afterward, and David, Isal. 84, 10. and the poor
Prophet that dyed so deep in debt; and Micaiah, and those that wandered about
in sheepskins, Heb. 11.37.
and goat skins, who happily might have rustled in silks and velvets, if they
would have strained their consciences. Origin was contented to be a poor
Catechist at Alexandria, every day in fear of death, when he might have been
with his fellow-pupill Plotinus, in great author^^y and favor, if not a
Christian. Luther was offered a Cardinalship, to have held his tongue.
Galeacius Cara^ciplus, a great sum of gold, to have returned to his Marquesdom
in Italy, etc. God takes it kindly when men will go after him in the
wilderness, in a land not sown, Ier. 2.2. that is, choose him and his ways in
affliction, and with self-de^iall.

Verse. 33. When Pharaoh shall call you] At Athens every man gave an yearly
account to the Magistrate, by what trade, Lex illa Solonis inprimis
commendatur, ut, quisque quot annis, etc. Textor Epist. Peacham.
or course of life, he maintained himself; which if he could not do, he was
banished. By the law, Mahomet, the great Turk, himself is bound to exercise
some manual trade or occupation, (for none must be idle:) as Solomon the
Magnificent, his trade was, making of arrowheads. Achmat the last, horn-rings
for Archers, etc.

Verse. 34. Thy servants trade has been, etc.] They were not ashamed of their
trade, though mean and despicable. Tertull. de fug. Persee.
Malo miserandum quam erubescendum, says Tertullian; No lawful calling, but
has an honor put upon it by God; unlawful only, are shameful. Ask a poor
scavenger, what his occupation is, he will answer, I am a Scavenger,
Tankerd-bearer, etc. Ask an Usurer, Gamester, etc. that question, and he will
not say, I am an Usurer, etc. [That ye may dwell in the land of Goshen] Which
as it was next to the land of Canaan, so it was most fat, fertile, and fit for
their cattle. Sumen totius regionis, the like to Egypt, that Campauia was to
Italy; of which, Florus thus writes; L. Flor. lib. 1. cap. 16.
Nihil mollius coelo, nihil uberius solo, nihil hospitalius mari, etc. Liberi,
Cererisque certamen dicitur. [ For every shepherd is an abomination, etc.] An
Israelite is still an abomination to an Egyptian, the righteous to the wicked,
Prove. 29.27. and will be to the worlds end. And there is no love lost betwixt
them. The shepherds of Israel especially, are by profane great ones, thought
scarce worthy to wait upon their trenchers; the baser sort make songs of them,
and the abjects vilify them. Papists make more of hedge-Priests, then most
amongst us do of powerful preachers: A sad forerunner of the departure of the
gospel. If dishonor kept Christ from Nazareth, Joh. 4.44. much more will it
drive him thence, when he is come.

CHAP. XLVII. Verse. 1. Then Joseph came and told Pharaoh] Scipioni obtrectabat
Carbo; Alcibiadi Hyperbolus; Homero Zoilus; Ciceroni Clodius. Habuerunt and
suos cuculos omnes docti and heroici*

THis was great wisdom in him, to do nothing for his friends, (though he were
so great a favorite) without the Kings privity and approbation. There wanted
not those that waited for his halting; envy attends upon honor, and always
aymeth at the highest; as the tallest trees are weakest at the tops. Melancthon
tells us, he once saw a certain ancient piece of coin, having on the one side,
Manl. loc. com. p. 414. Corn. Nepos in vita Batamis and Hannib. Sal. in Catilin.
Zopyrus; on the other, Zoilus: It was an emblem of Kings courts, says He;
where calumnies accompany the well-deserving; as they did Daniel, Datames,
Hannibal, etc. Difficilimum inter mortales est gloria invidiam vincere, says
Salust. How potent that quick-sighted and sharp-fanged malignity is, we may
guess by that question, Prove. 27.4.

Verse. 3. Psalm. 104.26.
What is your occupation?] That they had an occupation, Pharaoh took for
granted. God made Leviathan to play in the sea, but none to do so upon earth.
Turks and Pagans will rise up in judgment against the idle. See Notes on Chap.
46.33. Periander made a law at Corinth, that whosoever could not prove that he
lived by his honest labor, he should suffer as a thief. The Apostle bids him
that stole, Ephesians. 4.28.
steal no more, but labor with his hands the thing that is good, etc. Not to
labor, then, with hand, or head, or both, is to steal. Every one must bring
some honey into the common hive, Ig^avum suc^s pecus, etc. Matthew. 25.
unless he will be cast out as a drone. Thou idle and evil servant, says our
Savior. To be idle then, is to be evil; and he shall not but do naughtily,
that does nothing. God wills that men should earn their bread before they eat
it, 2 Thessalonians. 3.12. neither may they make religion a mask for idleness, ver. 11.

Verse. 4. For to sojourn in the land are we come] And had they returned home
again after the death of Joseph, they had taken a right course for themselves.
But as God had otherwise decreed it, so they thought it best being there; and
therefore, not without their own fault, they fell into servitude.

Verse. 5. And Pharaoh spoke unto Ioseph] Kind he was, and constant, Herodot.
lib. 4. Cromerus.
to so good a servant, as Darius likewise was to his Zopyrus, whom he preferred
before the taking of twenty Babylons; the King of Poland, to his noble servant
Zelislaus, to whom he sent a golden hand, instead of that hand he lost in his
wars.

Verse. 6. If thou know any man of activity] Or ability of body and mind; 1
King. 11.28.
such as Jeroboam, a mighty man of valor, and fit for the work; prudent and
diligent, ingenious and industrious, that has a dexterity and handiness to the
business. Such S. Paul would have all Christians to be, Tit. 3.8, 14. Let them
that have believed in God, (...). Homer.
says He, be careful to maintain good works, or profess honest trades, for
necessary uses, and that therein they be, their craftsmasters, and excel
others, (...). This was Cicero's posie from his youth, as himself witnesses.
(...). Plut.
And Plutarch tells us, that all his strife and drift was, all his life long,
to leave others behind him, and to be the best at any thing he ever undertook.
This should be every man's endeavor in his place and station, as that which is
good before God, and profitable unto men, as the Apostle there subjoyneth.
Solomon also assures us, that such shall stand before Kings, and not live long
in a low place, Prove. 22.29.

Verse. 7. Jacob blessed Pharaoh] That is, he prayed God to bless him, both at
meeting and parting. To salute, is comely, but see that ye be hearty, not
frothy; prayerful, not complementall. We are heirs of blessing, and must
therefore be free of it, 1 Pet. 3.9.

Verse. 8. And Pharaoh said unto Iacob] This King took not pleasure (as those
Persian Kings did) in a wild retiredness, or stern austerity, but in a mild
affableness, and heart-attracting courtesy. He shows not himself strange, or
Stoicall; but sweet and sociable. So Atticus seemed in his carriage, communis
infimis, Cor. Nepos Spartan. Dio.
par principibus. Adrian the Emperor would most courteously confer with the
meanest. Vespasian was wont, not only to salute the chief Senators, but even
private persons; inviting them many times to his table; himself again going to
their houses, especially, if he found them learned and virtuous. Pharaoh might
find Jacob both these; and so make very good use of him, as his faithful
Counselor. Princes had learned men ever with them, called Monitours, or
Remembrancers; as Dio, had his Plato; Scipio, his Polybius, (...). Patriarchae
prae^ipue professionis medicae studi^si fuerunt, ut Abraham, Isaac, Jacob: unde
regibus grati, quos postea in doctrina Christiana simul institucru^t. Meclancth.
etc. Abimelech made much of Abraham, and afterward of Isaac; some think it
was for their skill in Physic and Astronomy. Why might not Pharaoh find and
favor the same worth in Jacob, and learn the same wisdom from him, that his
Senators, by his appointment, did of his son Joseph?

Verse. 9. The days of the years of my pilgrimage] All Saints here are
Sojourners, all good people pilgrims and strangers, 1 Pet. 2.11. Heb. 11.13,
14. Far they are from home, meet with hard measure; as Israel did in Egypt, as
those three worthies in Babylon, Dan. 3. Their manners, are of another manner:
hence the world owns them not, Ioh. 15.19. But God both owns, Isa. 63.13. Psalm.
32.8. Isa. 40.11.
and honors them: he knows their whole way, Psalm. 1.6. Leads them in his
hand, guides them with his eye, bears them in his bosom, when ways are rough
and rugged: provides mansions for them, Joh. 14.3.
where they shall rest in their beds; Isa. 57.2. Matthew. 8.11. Genesis 25.8. Jer.
50.4, 5. Psalm. 84.7. Ruth 2.10. Gal. 4. Psalm. 119.63. Neh. 2.3. 1 Pet. 2.11.
Philip. 3.21.
feast with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob; walk arm in arm with Angels, Zach.
3.7. Be gathered to their people, Heb. 12.23. to their God, to their Christ,
etc. Provided that in the mean while, they set their faces toward Sion;
enquiring the way, that they walk therein, from strength to strength; that they
take in good part any kindness, as Ruth did; that they put up any unkindness,
as Paul did; that they make much of any company, send home by any hand, abstain
from fleshly lusts, and have their conversation in Heaven; eating, drinking,
and sleeping eternal life; so wishing to be at home, yet waiting the Fathers
call: sighing out, when moved to be merry; as the French King did, when
prisoner here in England, in the days of King Edward the third: how can we sing
songs, in a strange land?

Verse. 11. In the land of Rameses] That is, in the whole territory where
Ramases was afterward built, Exodus 1.11.

Verse. 12. And Joseph nourished his Father] For which end, he was sent before
by God: and for whose sake, so many thousands were preserved, that else would
have perished. What fools then are they, that hunt out the Saints, their only
safeguard! and hate them, to whom they owe all the good they have? This is,
with the foolish dear, to eat up the leaves, that hid them from the hunter.

Verse. 13. The famine was very sore] Of this famine, mention is made by Justin:
lib. 1. and Orosius, lib. 1. cap. 8. [So that the land of Egypt fainted]
Furebat, See Prove. 26.18.
says Junius. The Egyptians in the fifth year of the famine began to rage, if
they could have told at what; and were well-nigh mad. So Mark 3.21. Our
Saviors friends, went out to lay hold of him: for they said, he is besides
himself. Or, as some render it, he will faint: for, verse. 20. The multitude
came so together, (...) So Genesis 45.26. (...). Sept.
that they could not so much as eat bread. These Egyptians, whether they
fainted or fretted, it was for want of bread, Joseph had foretold them, of this
seven years famine: but saturity and security had so besotted them, that they
feared nothing, till they felt it. Fullness bred forgetfulness; and now, they
are ready to let fly at others; because pinched with that penury, Prove. 19.3.
that they might have prevented. The Wickedness of a man perverts his way, and
his heart fret a against the Lord. See it in that furious King, 2 King. 6.33.

Verse. 14. And Joseph gathered up all the money] There is something then
(besides grace,) that is better then money: though Misers will as easily part
with their blood, as with their good: Chaldaei nummum (...), id est, Sanguinem
appellant.
Constantinople was lost, through the Citizens covetousness: the like is
reported of Heydelberg. Worthy they were, in this name, to have been served, as
the great Chaliph of Babylon was, by the great Cham of Tartary. He was set in
the midst of those infinite treasures, which he and his predecessors had
most covetously amassed; and bidden to eat of that gold, silver, Turk. hist.
fol. 113.
and precious stones, what he pleased, and make no spare. In which order, the
covetous Caytiffe kept for certain days, miserably dyed for hunger: Money is a
baser thing, then food and raiment: 1 Timothy 6.8.
these if we have, let us be content.

Verse. 15. Why should we dye, in thy presence] When it is in thy power, to save
us alive, in this our extreme indigency. Qui non cum potest, juvat, occidit,
says the Proverb. And is it lawful on the Sabbath, to do good, or to do
evil; to save, or to destroy a life? Mark. 3.4.
Intimating, that not to save, when we may, is to destroy. The Egyptians
therefore put Joseph to it: Money they had none, but must have answered, if now
it had been required of them, as those Inhabitants of Andros, did Themisto^les.
Ingens telum. Necessitas.
He being sent by the Athenians for tribute money, told them, that he came on
that errand accompanied with two goddesses; Eloquence to persuade, and Violence
to enforce them. Whereunto the Andraeans made this answer; that they had on
their side, also, two goddesses as strong; Piutarch.
necessity (they had it not;) and impossibility, whereby they could not part
with that, which they possessed not.

Verse. 17. And Joseph gave them bread in exchange] An ancient, and yet usual
way of trafick, with Savages and Barbarians especially; as in Virginia, etc.
Where they usually change, as Glaucus did with Diomedes; (...). Homer. II. lib.
6


Verse. 18. We will not hide it from my Lord] Confess we our pitiful indigence
also to God, and he will furnish us, with food and feed. Say with learned
Pomeran; Eltamsi non sum dignus, nihi lominus tamen sum indigens.

Verse. 19. Buy us, and our land for bread] It was their own desire, therefore
no injury. Nay it was charity in Joseph, in remitting their services, and
taking only their ands: yea liberallity, in reserving the fifth part, only, to
the King; when husbandmen usually till, for half the increase. And this the
Egyptians thankfully acknowledge, Verse. 25.

Verse. 20. So the land became Pharaoh's] Regi acquisivit imperium despoticum.
This the Egyptians would never have yielded unto, but that stark hunger drove
the wolf out of the wood, as the proverb is. Philo Iudaeus reports, of an
heathenish people, who in their wars, used only this expression, to put spirit
into their soldiers; Dan. hist. of Engl.
Estote viri, libertas agitur. The contention was hot in this land, between
Prince and people, for fourscore years together, about liberty, and property;
and ceased not, till the great Charter, made to keep the beam right, bet wixt
sovereignty, and subjection, was in the maturity of a judicial Prince, Edward
the first, freely ratified.

Verse. 21. And as for the people, he removed them] So to alter the property of
their land, and to settle it upon Pharaoh; who with his own money, had bought
it. See his prudence, and policy, for his Lord and Master. So Daniel, though
sick, did the Kings business, with all his might. These were, as the
Philosopher says, (...); few such now a days. Great need we have all to fly
to Christ, who dwells with prudence Prove. 8.12. as Agur did, when he found his
own foolishness: It was he, that made Aholiab wise-hearted.

Verse. 22. Only the land of the Priests, bought he not] Ministers maintenance,
we see, is of the law of nature. Jezabel provided for her Priests; 1 Cor. 9.13.
Micah for his Levite. Do ye not know (says that great Apostle,) that they
which Minister about holy things, live of the things of the Temple ^ and they
which wait at the altar, are partakers with the altar? Where, by holy things,
Saint Ambrose understands the law of the Gentiles: by the Altar, the law of the
Jews. Before them both, Melchizedec (...), tithed Abraham; by the same right,
whereby he blessed him, Heb. 7.6. As after them, the Apostle rightly inferrs,
Even so, has the Lord ordained, 1 Cor. 9.14.
that they which preach the Gospel, should live of the Gospel. But where has
the Lord ordained it? Mat. 10.10. The labourer is worthy of his meat, says
Matthew; of his hire, says Luke: of both, no doubt; as the laborers in
harvest, who have better fare provided, then ordinary, and larger wages. See
Nehemiah's zeal, for Church-maintenance; Chap. 13.10, 14. He knew well, that a
scant offering, makes a cold Altar; and that, ad tenuitatem beneficiorum
necessario sequitur ignorantia sacerdotum; Panormitan. Heyl. Geog. page 504.
as in Ireland, where, in former time, some of the Bishops had no more revenue,
then the pasture of two milch-kine, etc. In the whole Province of Connaught,
the stipend of the incumbent is not above forty shillings; in some places, but
sixteen shillings. Melancthon complains of his Germany, that the Ministers, for
most part, were ready to say with him in Plautus: Ego non servio Manl. loc.
co^. 472.
libenter: herus meus me non habet libenter, tamen utitur me ut lippis oculis.
Such use Micah made of his Levite; more fit to have made a Gibeonite, to cleave
wood, then to divide the word; and yet he maintained him; and doubted not,
thereupon, to promise himself Gods blessing. He is a niggard to himself, that
scants his beneficence to a Prophet; whose very cold water, shall not go
unrewarded. Many rich, Mat. 10.
refuse to give any thing to the Ministers maintenance; because they cannot be
tithed. Perstringit tenaces. Par^us.
But be not deceived; God is not mocked (says the Apostle, in this very case,
Gal, 6.6, 7.) Let him that is taught in the word, communicate unto him, that
teaches, in all his goods. Such tribes as had more cities in their
inheritance, were to part with more, to the Priests: such as had less, with
fewer, Number. 35.8. The equity of which proportion, is still in force. The Jews,
at this day, though not in their own country, nor have a Leviticall Priesthood;
yet those who will be reputed religious among them, do distribute, in lieu of
tithes, the tenth of their increase, unto the poor: being persuaded, that God
does bless their increase the more; Godw. Heb. Antiq. 277.
according to that proverb of theirs, tithe and be rich. But how is both the
word, and the world, now altered amongst us? All Is thought, by the most, to be
well saved, that is kept from the Minister; whom to deceive, is held neither
sin, nor pity. Fisco potius apud multos consulitur quam Christo, ac tonsioni
potius gregis, Episc. Winton.
quam attentioni; as one complains. Covetous Patrons, Virgill.
care not to sauce their meat, with the blood of souls; whiles by them, Et
succus pecori, lac et subducitur agnis: Besides, they bestow their Benefices,
non ubi optime, sed ubi quaestuosissime; being herein worse then these
Egyptians, shall I say? nay then the traitor Judas. He sold the head, they the
members: he the shepherd, they the sheep; he but the body, they the souls; like
that Romish strumpet, Rev. 18.13. of whom they have learnt it. But let them
look to it, lest they rue their wages of wickedness, with Judas. In the mean
while, let them give us a just commentary upon that, Prove. 20.25. and tell us,
M. Harris.
who has authority to take that (from a Church shall I say? nay,) from God,
that has been once given him? We can tell them a sad story, of five servants
of Cardinal Wolsey's, employed by him, in tot priorum hominum, donariis
intervertendis, Sculter. Annal. page 332.
says the Annalist, and came all to fearful ends. Two of them fell out; and
challenging the field, One killed the other, and was hanged for it. A third
drowned himself in a Well. The fourth, from great riches, fell to extreme
beggary, and was hunger-starved. The last, one Doctor Alan, being Archbishop of
Dublin, was there cruelly murdered by his enemies. Now, if Divine Justice so
severely and exemplarily pursued and punished these, that converted those
abused goods of the Church, to better uses without question, though they looked
not at that, but at the satisfying of their own greedy lusts: What will be the
end of such Sacrilegious persons, as enrich themselves with that, which should
be their Ministers maintenance? Sacrum, sacrove commendatum qui clepserit
rapseritque Ex duod. tab. Neand. Chron.
parricida esto, said the Roman law. It is not only sacriledg, but parricide,
to rob the Church.

Verse. 25. Let us find grace] That is, do us the favor, to intercede for us to
Pharaoh, that we may be his perpetual farmers, and hold of him. It seems that
Pharaoh was no proper name, but common to the Kings of Egypt; as Caesar, to the
Emperors of Rome; a title of honor, as (His Majesty) amongst us. Otherwise
these poor people had been over-bold with his name.

Verse. 27. Grew and multiplied exceedingly] Here that promise, Chap. 46.3.
began to be accomplished. God dies not in any man's debt.

Verse. 28. Jacob lived in the land of Egypt seventeen years] So long he had
nourished Joseph; and so long Joseph nourished him; paying his (...) to the
utmost penny. These were the sweetest days that ever Jacob saw. God reserved
his best to the last. Mark the perfect man, and behold the upright, for (be his
beginning and his middle never so troublesome) the end of that man is peace.
Psalm. 37.47.
A Goshen he shall have, either here, or in heaven.

Verse. 29. Bury me not, I pray thee, in Egypt] This he requested, partly, to
testify his faith concerning the promised land, heaven, and the resurrection;
partly, to confirm his family in the same faith; and that they might not be
glewed to the pleasures of Egypt, but wait for their return to Canaan. And
partly also, to declare his love to his ancestors, together with the felicity
he took in the communion of Saints.

Verse. 30. Bury me in their burying-place] That he might keep possession, at
least, by his dead body, of the promised land. There they would be buried, not
pompously, but, reverently, that they might rise again with Christ. Some of the
Fathers think, that these Patriarchs were those that rose corporally with him,
Matthew. 27.57.

Verse. 31. And Israel bowed himself] In way of thankfulness to God, framing
himself to the lowliest gesture he was able; rearing himself up upon his
pillow, leaning also upon his third leg, his staff, Heb. 11.21. In effoeta
senecta, fides non effoeta.

CHAP. XLVIII. Verse. 1. Behold, thy father is sick]
ANd yet 'twas, Jacob have I loved. So, Behold, he whom thou love, is sick,
Joh. 11.3. Si amatur, quomodo infirmatur? says a Father. Very well, may we
say. The best, before they come to the very gates of death, pass often thorough a
very strait, long, heavy lane of sickness; and this in mercy, that they may
learn more of God, and depart with more ease, out of the world. Such as must
have a member cut off, willingly yield to have it bound, though it be painful;
because, when it is mortified and deaded with strait binding, they shall the
better endure the cutting of it off: So here, when the body is weakened and
wasted with much sickness, that it cannot so bustle, we dye more easily. Happy
is he, (says a Reverend Writer) that after due preparation, D. Hall. Contemp.
is passed through the gates of death, ere he be aware; happy is he, that by the
holy use of long sickness, is taught to see the gates of death afar off, and
addresseth for a resolute passage. The one dies like Henoch, and Eliah; the
other, like Jacob and Elisha; both, blessedly.

Verse. 2. And Israel strengthened himself] Ipse aspectus viri boni delectat,
says Seneca; sure it is, that the sight of a dear friend reviveth the sick.
One man, for comfort and counsel, may be an Angel to another; nay, as God
himself. Such was Nathan to David; B. Ridley to King Edward the sixth; and that
poor Priest to Edward the third, who (when all the Kings friends and favorites
forsook him in his last agony, leaving his chamber quite empty) called upon him
to remember his Savior, Dan. hist. of Engl. 255.
and to ask mercy for his sins. This none before him would do, every one
putting him still in hope of life, though they knew death was upon him. But
now, stirred up by the voice of this Priest, he showed all signs of contrition;
and at his last breath, expresses the name of Jesu.

Verse. 3. God Almighty appeared unto me at Luz] The truly thankful, keep
calenders and catalogues of Gods gracious dealings with them, and delight to
their last, to recount and reckon them up; not in the lump only, and by
wholesale, as it were; but by particular enumeration, upon every good
occasion; setting them forth one by one, (...)
as here, and Ciphering them up, as David's word is, Psalm. 9.1. we should be
like civet-boxes, which still retain the scent, when the civit is taken out of
them. See Psalm, 145, 1, 2. Exodus 18.8.

Verse. 5. As Reuben and Simeon, they shall be mine.] God has, in like part, 2
Cor. 6.18.
adopted us for his dear children; saying, I will be a father unto them, and
they shall be my sons, and my daughters, says the Lord Almighty. This, S. John
calls a royalty, or prerogative, Joh. 1.12. such as he elsewhere stands amazed
at, 1 Ioh. 3.1. And well he may; for all Gods children are firstborn, and so
higher then all the Kings of the Earth, Psalm. 89.27. They, in the fullness of
their sufficiency, are in straits, Job 20.22. Whereas the Saints, in the
fullness of their straits, are in an All Sufficiency.

Verse. 6. After the name of their brethren] That is, of Ephraim and Manasseh;
as if they were not their brethren, but their sons. Thus Jacob transfers the
birthright from Reuben to Joseph, 1 Chro. 5.1, 2.

Verse. 7. And I buried her there] He could not carry her to the cave of
Machpelah; and he would not bury her at Bethlehem among Infidels. This he tells
Joseph, to teach him and the rest, not to set up their rest any where, but in
the land of Canaan.

Verse. 8. Who are these?] Here Jacob seeing Ioseph's two sons, and now first
understanding who they were, breaks off his speech to Joseph, till the two last
verses of the chapter, and falls a blessing his sons; Titus 3.1.
teaching us to be ready to every good word and work; laying hold of every hint
that God puts into our hands, accounting it a mercy that we may have
opportunity.

Verse. 9. They are my sons, whom God, etc.] The Lord Christ in like sort,
presents us to his heavenly Father with, Here am I, and the children whom thou
have given me. Whereunto the Father replies, as Jacob here, Bring them now unto
me, and I will bless them.

Verse. 11. I had not thought to see thy face] God delights to out-bid the hopes
of his people, and to be better to them then their deserts, then their desires,
yea then their faith, Esaias 64.2, 3, 12, 14. As it is storied of a certain
Fmperour, that he delighted in no undertaking so much, as in those that his
Counselors and Captains held impossible: And he seldom miscarried. So God,
Exodus 15.11.

Verse. 12. from between his knees] That is, from between his fathers knees,
that he might place them right, to receive the blessing, presenting them again
according to their age. This he did for the best; but God only wise had
otherwise ordered it. We many times think we do well, when it proves much
otherwise. Lean not therefore to thine own understanding, says the Wise man,
Prove. 3.5. but make out to him, that dwells with prudence, Prove. 8.12.

Verse. 14. Guiding his hands wittingly] Cognoscebat palpando manibus suis,
says Iunius: Intelligere fecit manus says Parleus. An emphaticall Metaphor:
As if he should say: Jacob with his eyes, could not distinguish them, but his
hands shall, therefore, Bartol. lib. 1. de ver. oblig.
do the office of his eyes. Bartolus writes of Doctor Gabriel Nele, that by
the only motion of the lips, without any utterance, he understood all men;
perceived and read, in every man's countenance, what was their conceit. But that
is far more credible, Hier. in Catalogo vitor. illushium.
and no less admirable, that Hicrome reports of Didymus of Alexandria; that
though he had been blind of a child, little; yet hew as excellently skilled in
all the liberal arts; and had written commentaries upon the Psalms and
Gospels, being at this time, says he, eighty three years of age.

Verse. 15. God, before whom my fathers walked] This is the highest praise, that
can be given to ancestors: this is the crown of all commendation, to have
walked with God, as a man walks with his friend. This is better then a
thousand escucheons. [The God which fed me all my life long] As a shepherd
tends and feeds his sheep, Psalm. 23.1. and 80.1. Jacob looks beyond all second
causes, and sees at once, at Bethel, God on the top of the ladder, Genesis 28.

Verse. 16. The Angel which redeemed me] Christ the Angel of the Covenant, the
Mediator of the new Testament, the Redeemer, the Lamb slain, from the
beginning of the world. For we were not redeemed with silver and gold, but with
the blood of Christ, as of a Lamb undefiled, 1 Pet. 1.19. Paul by that
freedom, Act. 22.28. escaped whipping: we by this, the pain of eternal
torment. [And let my name be named on them] Lest any should think it to be some
prejudice to them, that they were born in Egypt, and of an Egyptian mother, he
adopts them for his own.

Verse. 17. And when Joseph saw that, etc.] So great a Prophet and diviner, as
Joseph was, in this was out in his judgment. He sees not, that man's dignity is
not by works, or nature, but grace and election, Romans 9.7, 8, 11, 12.

Verse. 18. Not so my father, etc.] Here are a couple of Holy Prophets,
differing in their judgments; yet not about the substance of the blessing, but
the circumstance of it: wonder not though such things still fall out it in the
true Church, and the Doctors be eft-soons divided, in points less material,
and that touch not the foundation. Luther interprets those words of Christ,
this is my body. Synechdochiaelly; Calvin, Metonimically. Hence the Jesuits
straight cry out; the Spirit of God dissents not from it self: but these
interpretations dissent one from another, See the peace of Rome.
therefore they are not of the Spirit. Now it were easy, to stop their foul
mouths, by telling them of their own, far worse differences. But is it not a
doleful thing, that we should, with those birds, agnoscere in nostris
vulneribus nostras pennas. Brother go to law with brother, and that before
infidels? This is the devils malice, to sow tares, etc. Christ came to destroy
his works; yet never were so many possessed, as about that time.

Verse. 19. And his father refused, and said] Here are father and son divided,
in matter of ceremony; as Bishop Babington observes. This has been an ancient
quarrel, from the very cradle of the Christian Church. The Jewish converts
stood hard for a mixture, of Christ and Moses: their rites they called the
rudiments of the world, Coloss. 2.8. Because they held them as needful, as the
four elements of the world; or as the first letters of the book, to school Gods
people: Soon after, what a coil was there, among the Primitive Christians,
even unto blows, and blood-sheed, Queritur. Aug. suo tempere Ecclesiam, quam
miserecordia dei esse liberam vosuit, etc. Pareus in Mat. 15.2.
about the time of keeping Easter; and other like trifles, and niceties. Saint
Augustine complains, that in his time the Church (which the mercy of God would
have to be at liberty,) was woefully oppressed, with many burdens and bondages
this way; so that the condition of the Jews was, in this respect, more
tolerable; for that they were held under, by legal injunctions, and not by
humane presumptions. What would this Father have said, to the following times,
under the rise and reign of Antichrist? wherein the formality of Gods worship,
had utterly eaten up the reality of it, (as Pharaohs lean kine did the fatter)
and gotten out the very heart, and life of it; as the ivy deals by the oak
it grows on. Our Heroical reformers; Luther, Zuinglins, etc. pruned and pared
off these luxuriancies, for the most part; which caused John Hunt a Roman
Catholic, in his humble Appeal to King James, thus to blaspheme. The God of
the Protestants, is the most uncivile, D. Sheldons Ma^k of the Beast. op. ded.
Scultet. Annal.
and ill-mannered God of all those, who have born the name of gods, upon the
earth; yea worse then Pan, god of the clowns, which can endure no ceremonies,
nor good manners at all. But yet, what a grievous stir was there, about these
indifferents, Alsted. Chron. page 559.
between Luther and Carolostadius, at Wittenberg; between the Doctors of
Magdeburg and Leipswick, Anno Dom. 1549. and between Calvin, and his Auditors
of Geneva, about wafer-cakes, at the communion; insomuch as he was compelled to
depart the city, till he had yielded they should be used, though he never liked
them, B^za in vita
but could have wished it otherwise. Who knows not what jarrs and heartburnings
were here between Ridley and Hooper, two godly Bishops, in King Edward the
sixths time, about cap and surpliss. They could never agree, till they met in
prison; and then misery bred unity; then they could heartily bewail their
former dissentions, about matters of no more moment. Epist. 36. ad Reg.
Elizabeth.
Peter Martyr commends it to the care of Queen Elizabeth; that
Church Governors endeavor not to carry the Gospel into England, upon the
cart of needless ceremonies. By his advice (among others,) in King Edward the
sixths day^s, some people contending for one image, some for another; the King
took down all those Bal^ams-blocks. And the very self-same day and hour,
wherein the reformation enjoined by Parliment, was pat in execution at London,
by burning of idolatrous images; the English put to slight their enemies, Act.
and Mon. (...)
in Muscleborough field, is Mr. Fox has well observed. We had Images and other
like pop^sh paltrement, pressing in upon us again, and amain, not long since:
till God stirred up the spirit of our religious Nehemi ths, to step between,
and stop the torrent: whom therefore God, I doubt not, will crown with
conquest, over all their and his Churches enemies.

Verse. 20. And he set Ephraim before] God, many times, sets the younger, before
the elder; makes the last to be first; and the first, last; to show the freedom
of his grace, and that, he sees not, as man sees, 1 Samuel 16, 7. The maids
were first purified, and perfumed, before Ahashuerosh chose one: But Christ
first loves, and then parifies his Church, Ephesians. 5.25, 26. and loves, because he
loves, Deuteronomy. 7.7, 8. And has mercy, on whom he will have mercy, Romans 9.18.

Verse. 21. Behold I dye] This was a speech of faith, uttered without the least
fear, consternation, or dismayment, As it was no more, betwixt God and Moses,
but go up and dye, so betwixt God and Jacob; but behold I dye. Death, he knew,
to him should neither be total, but of the body only; nor perpetual of the
body, but for a season only. See both these set forth, by the Apostle; Romans
8.10, 11.

Verse. 22. I have given thee one portion] Joseph had the double portion, (as
Judah the dignity) from Reuben; who had forfeited both, by his incest. And here
it appears, that the right of the firstborn, to a double portion, was in
force, and in use, before that law, Deuteronomy. 21.17. as was also the Sabbath,
circumcision, and the raising up seed, to a deceased brother [With my sword,
and with my bow] That is, with the warlike weapons of my sons, Simeon and Levi,
whose victory he ascribes to himself; not as it was wickedly got by his sons;
(for so he disavows and detests it, Chap. 49.) but as by a miracle from heaven,
the Canaanites were held in from revenging that slaughter, and made to fear his
force and valor. The Chaldee Paraphrast expounds it metaphorically; I took it
with my sword and my bow, hoc est, oratione and deprecatione mea, says He, by
my prayer and supplication. Prayers, indeed, are bombardae and instrumenta
bellic a Christianorum, says Luther, a Christians best Arms and Ammunition.
The Jesuits pretend and protest, that they have no other weapons, or ways to
work, but preces and lachrymas. Whereas, it is too well known, that they are
the greatest Incendiaries and boutefeau's of Christendom; and their faction a
most agile sharp sword, whose blade is sheathed, at pleasure, in the bowels of
every Commonwealth; but the handle reaches to Rome and Spain.

CHAP. XLIX. Verse. 1. Gather your selves together]
THis is Jacobs swan-like song* his last bequeath, Sic ubi fata v^cant, u^is
abjectus in herbis, Ad vada Maeandri conciuit albus olor. Ovid. Epist.
his farewell to the world; and it is a most heavenly one. The wine of Gods
Spirit is usually strongest, and best at last, in the hearts of his people: his
Motions quickest, when natural motions are slowest; most sensible, when the
body begins to be senseless; most lively, when holy men are adying. Look how
the Sun shines most amiably toward the descent; and Rivers, the nearer they
draw to the sea, the sooner they are met by the tide; so is it with the Saints,
when nigh to death, when grace is changing into glory, they deliver themselves
usually to the standers by, most sweetly. So, besides Jacob, did Moses,
Joshuah, Paul, and He, (in whose one example is a globe of precepts) Our Lord
Jesus Christ, in that last heavenly Sermon and Prayer of his, Ioh. 14.15.16.17.
Whereunto, let me add that faithful Martyr, John Diazius, who was cruelly
butchered by his own brother, Alphonsus Diazius, and that merely for his
religion. See the Notes on Chap. 4. ver. 8. I remember (says Senarclaeus. his
friend and bedfellow, who wrote the history of his death) when he and I were
at Newburg, the very night before he was murdered, he prayed before he went to
bed, more ardently then ordinary, and for a longer time together. After which,
he spent a good part of the night in discoursing of the great works of God; and
exhorting me to the practice of true piety. Ego vero illius oratione sic
incoudebar, ut cum eum ^iss^^ entem audirem, ^piritus ancti verba me audire
ex^stimarem. Ibid. Quest. Answ.
And truly, I felt my self so inflamed and quickened by his words that when I
heard him discoursing, methoughts I heard the Spirit of God speaking unto me.
This, and much more, Senarclaeus writes to Bucer; who at that time, had
employed Diaz^us to overlook the right printing of a book of his, that was
then in the Press. [That I may tell you that which shall befall you] But how
knew Moses this last speech of Jacob being born so long after? Partly, by
Revelation, and partly also by Tradition. For the words of dying men, are
living Oracles; and their last speeches are long remembered. And the
accomplishment of all these Prophecies in their due time, as the following
Scriptures show, adds much to the authority of Moses's writings, and confirms
them to be faithful and true, as He says, Joh. 21.24.

Verse. 2. Hear ye sons of Jcaob, and hearken] Draw up the ears of your souls,
to the ears of your bodies, that one sound may pierce both at once. Let him
that has an ear to hear, hear: not only with that outward gristle that grows
upon his head, but with his utmost intention of mind, attention of body, and
retention of memory, and of prac^c^ also. He that hears the Word of God, must
hear, as if he did (for so he does) hear for life and death; he must, as Jacob
bids his sons, hear, and hearken.

Verse. 3. Virgil.
My might and beginning of my strength.] Nate meae vires --. The word here
used, signifies the straining of the body forcibly, (...).
to effect a thing much desired; such as was that of S. Paul, Phil. 3.13. and
that of Eliah, 1 King. 18.42. when he prayed and prayed, (...) Jam. 5.17.
as St. James has it, that is, with utmost intention of affection. [The
excellency of dignity, and the excellency of power] That is, says the Cha^^ee
Paraphralt. Excellens principatu and sacerdotio. Both these he forfeited and
fell from; so cannot Chr^stians, Rev. 1.6.

Verse. 4. Vastable as waters] Easily drawn to sin, and suddenly down from his
dignity. Reuben, for a short sinful pleasure, lost great privileges and
blessings. So do all Epicures, that lose heaven for a base lust, their sonls
for their sin. As Ambrose reports of one Theotinus, that having a diseased
body, and told by the Physician, that unless he lived temperately, he would
lose his eyes; Vale lumen amicum, said he; if my eyes will not away with my
lusts, they are no eyes for me. So here; Men will have their swing in sin,
whatever come of it. They may so, and for a time, hear no more of it; as Reuben
did not, for almost forty years after his incest was committed. (...).
But, quod defertur non statim ausertur. The Heathen Historian could see, and
say, That, sooner or later, great sins will have great punishments from Cod.
Deus horrenda peccata horrendis poenis immutabiliter vindicat, says Paveus on
this Text. [He went up to my couch] The fact was so odious to Jacob, that,
abhorring the very thought of it, he turns his speech from Reuben to the
rest. Romans 12.9. (...). Ephesians. 5.3.
Hate as hell, that which is evil, says Paul. And, as for fornication, and all
uncleanness, let it not be once named amongst you. Spit it out of your
mouths, as the Devils drivel.

Verse. 5. Simeon and Levi are brethren] Nobile par fratrum, Horat. Metaphora et
la. tens Antanaclasis. Piscat.
not more in nature, then in iniquity. Here Moses blancheth not over the
blemishes, of his progenitors, but wrote as he was inspired, by the inpartiall
Spirit of truth. If it could be said of Suetonius, that in writing the lives of
the twelve Caesa^s, Eal bertate sori^sit Imperatorum vitas, qua i^^i vix^runt.
he took the same liberty to set down their faults, that they took to commit
them: how much more truly may this be said of the holy p^nmen? they spared not
themselves, much less their friends. See my true treasure, page 21. Mekerah
alii relaumper Graecam ^^con, Machaerae ^^ram Nonincomm^^e. Pareus. (...). D^o.
The world en^^mp. by Sr. Fr. Drake. page 53.
[Instruments of cruelty are in their habitations] Or, are their swords.
Barbarous and brutish persons they were, skillful to destroy, Ezekiel. 21.31. Such
a one was Drusus, the son of Tiberius the Emperonr; so set upon bloodshed, that
the sharpest swords were, from him, called in Rome, 'Drusians. The Spainards
are said to try the goodness of their swords, upon the bodies of the poor
Indians: and they suppose (says Sir Francis Drake,) that they show the
wretches great favor, when they do not, for their pleasure, whip them with
cords; and day by day, drop their naked bodies with burning bacon; which is o^e
of their least cruelties.

Verse. 7. O my soul come not thou, etc.] Jacob here means, that neither
should any, neither would he approve of their perfidie, says an Interpreter.
And yet Th^a us writes, Thuah.
that the Pope caused the Massacre of Paris, to be painted in his Palace.
Another of them highly extolled in his Consistory the noble act of Clement the
Monk, that killed the King of France, I^cob. Revins de vi^is Pont. f. page 291.
comparing it with the work of creation, incarnation, etc. ^rier Garnet our
chief powder plotter, had his picture set among the rest of their Saints, in
the Iesu^^es Church at Rome. And Cornel. a Lapide, upon Apocalypse. 7.3. crowns
this traitor, with fresh Encomiasticks. [In their anger they slew a man] Yea,
^^r. r. Apol. contra lesuit.
many innocents; and then cried out, O remregiam! as Valesius did, when he had
slain three-hundred: O pulchrum speaculum; as Hannibal, when he saw a pit full
of man's blood; Quam bonus est odor hostis mortui! as Charles the ninth, in the
Massacre of Paris; where they poisoned the Queen of Navarr, pistold the Prince
of Condee, murdered the most part of the peereess Peers of France, their wives
and children; Answ. to Cathol. Supplic, by Gab. Powell.
with a great sort of the common people, in diverse parts of the Realm; 30000 in
one month, 300000 in the space of a year. Mahomet the first, Emperor of
Turks, was thought, in his time, to have been the death of 800000 men. Selymus
the second, in revenge of the loss he had received, at the battle of Lepanto,
would have put to death all the Christians in his dominion, in number infinite.
Mithridates King of Pontus, Ibid. 885. Val. Max. lib. 9.
with one letter, slew fourscore thousand Citizens of Rome, in Asia, that were
scattered up and down the country, for traffique-sake. It was the cruel manner
of Vladus, Prince of Valachia, Turle. hist. fol. 363.
together with the offenders, to execute the whole family; yea, sometimes,
the whole kindred. Did not these two brethren in sin, do so, and worse.

Verse. 7. Cursed be their anger] Of the mischief of rash anger, and means to
repress it, See the notes, on Chap. 34. verse. 7. See my Commonplace of anger.
[I will divide them in Iacob] A punishment, suitable to their sin: they
conspired to do mischief, and are therefore divided in Jacob. Of Simeon, Judas
Iscariot is said to have come; who tumbled, as a stone, till he came to his
place. Levi had his habitation among the other tribes; and this curse was
afterward turned to a blessing; when they were consecrated, as Priests, to
preserve, and present knowledge to their brethren; Deuteronomy. 33.9, 10.
to teach Jacob Gods judgments, and Israel his laws.

Verse. 8. Judah, thou art he whom thy brethren] All this is chiefly verified in
Christ, and of him to be understood. In him is beauty, bounty, goodness,
greatness, and whatsoever else is praiseworthy. Rev. 6.2.
He goes forth, riding on his white horse, conquering and to conquer, Saint
Paul, his chief Herald, proclaims his victory, with a world of solemnity and
triumph, 1 Cor. 15.56. and calls upon all his brethren, to bow down before him,
Philip. 2.10. as they do, Rev. 12.10. casting down their crowns at his feet,
Rev. 4. Apud. Romans siqui servati essent, solebant Servato rem suum coronare.
(...). Polyb. lib. 6, In in^^diis. In subsidiis.
ult. and setting the crown upon his head; as the manner was, among the Romans,
that the saved should crown their Saviors, and honor them, as their fathers,
all their lives long, being wholly at their service. It was not without
mystery, that David did reverence to his son Solomon, when he was newly
crowned: what would he have done, think we, to his Lord (as he calls Christ,
Psalm. 110.1.) had he been there in his Royalty?

Verse. 9. Judah is a Lions whelp] Many Lion-like Lysimachusses came of this
tribe: that, as Sampson, and David, first fought with lions, and then with
their enemies; all which were types of that lion of the tribe of Judah, Rev.
5.5. The devil is a roaring, lion, Leo (...), lies in wait for the Church: but
Christ her invincible Champion, is ever at hand for her help, who is also Leo;
(...), as Saint Paul has it, the Lion of the tribe of I^dah, 2 Thessalonians. 1. ult.
that delivers us from the wrath to come. And when this Lion roareth, all
creatures tremble, Amos 3.8. Saint Ambrose tells us, that when the Lion puts
forth his voice, many creatures that could outrun him, are so astonished at the
terror of his roar, that they are not able to stir from the place. And Isidore
writes, that the Lions whelp, for the first three days after it comes into
the world, lies as it were asleep, and is afterward rouzed and raised by the
old Lions roaring, which makes the very den to shake. Christ, at the last day,
shall come with the voice of the Archangell, and trump of God, etc. And then
shall they that sleep in the dust of death awake, some to everlasting life, and
some to everlasting horror and amazement, Dan 12.2.

Verse. 10. Till Shiloh come] Shiloh is by some expounded, Vsque dum venturae
erunt secundinae ejus, id est Judae, ut masculin genua in Heb. ostendit.
Athemate Shalab, unde Shaluab, Tranquillitas. Unde Lat. Salvere, Salvus,
salvare. Amama. Sub August^ cuncta atque continua totius generis humani aus pax
fuit, aut pactio. Flor. hist. l. 4.
the son of his secundines. The Hebrew word implies, His son, and Her son; that
is, the son of the Virgin, that came of the line of Judah. Secundines are
proper to women. He therefore, whom Secundines alone brought forth, without
help of man, is Christ alone, the promised seed. Others render Shiloh,
Tranquillator, Salvator, The Safe-maker, The Peacemaker, The Prosperer. This
Prince of Peace, was born in a time of peace, not long after that Pompey had
subdued Iudaea to the Roman Government, and reduced it into a Province. Then
was the Scepter newly departed from Judah; and Herod, an Edomite, made King of
the Country.

And unto him shall the gathering of the people be] As unto the
standard bearer, Cant. 5.10. the carkase, Matthew. 24.28. the desire of all
nations, Hag. 2.7. with Heb. 12.25. Totus ipse desideria, says the Church,
Cant. 5.16. and, When I am lifted up, says He, I will draw all men after me,
Joh. 12.32. they follow the Lamb wheresoever he goes; as the hop and
heliotrope do the sun.

Verse 11. Binding his foal unto the vine] Vines shall be so plentiful, that as
Countrymen tie their asses to briars and shrubs, so shall Judah to the vines,
that shall grow thick every where. Where Christ is set up in the power and
purity of his ordinance, there is usually a confluence of all inward and
outward comforts and contentments. He is the Cornu-copia of both to his Church
and chosen.

Verse. 12. His eyes shall be red, etc.] Wine and milk are used, to signisie
plenty of spiritual blessings in heavenly things, Esaias 55.1. and 25.6.

Verse. 13. Act. 17.
Zebulun shall dwell, etc.] It is God that appoints us the bounds of our
habitations. Be content therefore; and although we have not all things to our
minds, yet having God for our portion, let us cry out with David, The lines are
fallen unto me in a fair place, etc. Zebulon is placed by the seaside. Now
shore men are said to be borridi, immanes, latrocini^^ dediti, omnium denique
pessimi. Hence the Proverb, Maritimi mores. And h^^ce, happily, that rash and
harsh character that Scal^ger gives of us, Scal. de re Poet. cap. 16. Heyl.
Geog. p. 468.
Angli p^rfidi, inflati feri, contemptores, stolidi, amentes, inertes,
inh^^pitales immanes. His bolt, you see, (says One) is soon sh^t; and so you
may happily guess at the quality of the Archer. Be it that our Ancestors were
such, yet the Gospel has civilized us at least* whatever the more be. Christ
left Nazareth, and came and dwelt at Capernaum, which is upon the seacoast, in
the borders of Zabulon and Napbtali. Ever since which, The people which sat in
darkness, have seen a great light, etc. Matthew. 4.13, 16. And when Gilead abode
beyond Jordan, and came not to the help of the Lord against the mighty, Reuben
was busic about his sheep, Dan about his ships, Asher about his breaches, etc.
Zabulon and Naphtali are much commended, Judge. 5.16, 17, 18.
for a people that jeoparded their lives unto the death in the high places of
the field; that studied and promoted the public, more then their own
pirticular interests. Oh, it is a brave thing to be of a pablike spirit, and to
study Gods ends more then our own. Surely, if ^od saw us to be such, we might
have what we would, and God even think himself beholden to us. Shall a Heathen
say, Cicero. Loel.
Non nobis solum nati sumus, etc. And again, Mihi non minoris curae est, qualis
resp. post meam mo^tem futura sit, quam qualis hodie sit? And shall Christians
be all for themselves, looking only to their own things, and not to the things
of one another, the common good of all ^specially? S. Chrysostom upon those
words, 1 Cor. 10.33. Not seeking mine own profit* etc. says, that to seek the
public good of the Charch, (...).
and to prefer the salvation of others, before his own safety and commodity, is
the most perfect Canon of Christianity, the ^^^ghest pitch of perfection, the
very to^-gallant of Religion. And, I could not but love the man (says
Theodosius the Emperor, concerning Ambrose) who when he dyed, Magis de
Ecclesiarum statu, quam de suis periculis angebatur; was more troubled for the
Churches troubles, then for his own dangers. This made the same good Emperor
say, that he knew none that deserved to be called a Bishop, but Ambrose. (...).
Paul n. Nolan. in vita Amb.
He was called the walls of Italy, whiles he lived: As when he dyed, Stilico
the Earl said, that his death did threaten the destruction of that whole
country.

Verse. 14. Issachar is a streng ass, etc.] He so commends his strength, that
withal, he condemns his dullness. This Christ can so little abide, that he said
even to Judas, That thou do* do quickly. God utterly refused an ass in
sacrifice. The firstling of an ass must either be redeemed, or have his ne^^
broke. Bellarmine gives the reason, (and it is a very good one) quia tardum and
pigrum animal, because it is a slow sluggish creature, segnis quasi seignis,
without fire; heavy to action, which God, who is himself a pure act, cannot
abide.

Verse. 15. And he saw that rest was good] He submitted to any burdens and hard
conditions, for quiet life. This was a low poor spirit; and his posterity were,
for the general, very unworthy and vile. For Issachars lot fell in Galilee,
Josh. 19.18. etc. Now, does any good come out of Galilee? The best that we read
of them, was, that they had understanding of the times, 1 Chro. 12.32
to know what Israel ought to do, and were therefore in great account with
David. But for action, it seems they were heavy-spirited, dullmettal'd men;
much like those potters, mentioned, 1 Chronicles. 4.23. that dwelt among plants and
hedges; the base brood of their degenerated forefathers in Babylon. Ho, ho,
come forth and stee from the land of the North, said the Lord unto them, Zach.
2.6. Cyrus also had proclaimed liberty to all that would, to return to
Jerusalem But these dull droans, because they got a poor living by making of
pots for the King of Babylon, they thought themselves well as they were; and
chose rather to stay under the hedges of Babylon. These are res obsoletae, (so
Junius renders the text there) things worn out and forgotten, and indeed they
deserve to be forgotten.

Verse. 16. Dan shall judge] Here is an allusion to his name in the Original; q.
d. the Judger shall judge. This is an high honor, to sit in the seat of
judicature, and no less a burden: Fructu^ honos oneris, fructus honoris onus.
They that are called to this office, must neither spare the Great for might,
nor the mean for misery; as they must have nothing to lose, so nothing to g^t
neither; they must be above all price or sale; and straining out all
self-affections, Deuteronomy. 16.20.
see to it, that Justice, justice, as Moses speaks, that is, pure justice,
without mud, run down as a mighty torrent.

Verse. 17. Dan shall be an adder by the way] He shall subtily set upon his
enemies, and suddenly surprise them: as they did the men of Laish; and as
Sampson, of this tribe, did the Philistims. Moses says, Leonina pelli vulpinam
assuere.
Dan is a Lions whelp, Deuteronomy. 33.22. But when his Lions hide would not serve
turn, he could piece it out with his fox-skin or serpents slough; he could, if
not outfight his enemics, outwit them: And, -- dolus, Virg.
and virtus, quis in host requirat? Of Decebalus King of Dacians it is
reported, to his singular commendation, that he could, optime insidias facere,
praelium committere, optime uti victoria, et acceptam cladem far moderate.
All which were the parts and points, (...) Dio in vita Domit.
of an excellent warrior.

Verse. 18. I have waited for thy salvation] A sudden and sweet ejaculation;
either, as feeling himself faint, and spent with speaking, he desires to be
dissolved, and so to be freed from all infirmities: Or else, foreseeing the
defection of this tribe to idolatry, and their many miseries thereupon; he
darts up this holy desire to God for them, and himself, in them. Good Nehemiah
is much in these heavenly ejaculations: And the ancient Christians of Egypt,
were wont to use very short and frequent prayers, says Augustine; lest, in
longer, their fervor of affection should suffer diminution: N^ per moras
evanesceret et bebetaretur oration. Aug. Exodus 14.15. Ioh. 16.33.
Why cryest thou unto me, says God to Moses? This was but a sudden desire
darted up.

Verse. 19. Gad, a troop shall overcome him, but] This is every good Christians
case, in the Spiritual warfare; he conquers, but comes to it, through many
conflicts and counterbuff^s, Apoc. 13.7. He made war upon the Saints, and
overcame them: for a season it may be, according to humane conceit howsoever.
But Chap. 12.11. They conquered and overcame him, according to the truth of the
thing, by the blood of the lamb, in whom they do overcome, and are more then
conquerours, Romans 8. This was fulfilled in the tribe of Gad, 1 Chronicles. 5.18, 19,
20.

Verse. 20. Out of Asher, his bread shall be fat] The kidneys of wheat, as the
Psalmist has it, Psalm. 81.16. Or choicest bread-corn. Moses expounds this;
Asher shall dip his foot in oil, Deuteronomy. 33.24. That is, he shall dwell in the
horn of the son of oil, as the expression is, Isai. 5.1. Or in a very
fruitful corn-countrey; which was a singular blessing, according to his name,
which signifies bliss and happiness. [He shall yeel^ dainties for a King]
Kings use to feed of the finest. Yet of Augustus we read, that he was never
curious in his diet, but content with ordinary and common viands. He never
drank but thrice at one meal, and lived near fourscore years. Queen Elizabeth
of England, New-landors cure by Sr. Edw. Vaughan. Camd. Elisab. Sabellic.
AEnead. 2. Plures pereunt gula quam gladio, lancibus quam lanceis, crapula quam
capul^, etc. Heidfeld.
did seldom eat but one sort of meat, rose ever with an appetite, and lived
about seventy years: King Edward the sixth, called her by no other name, then
his sweet sister temperance. Contrarily, Sylla the Roman Dictator, by
surfeiting and banqueting, at last gat a most miserable disease, and dyed full
of lice. Surfeters either dig their graves with their own teeth: (The Grecians
called the intemperate, (...), as wanting health:) Or else they come to some
untimely end, by the just judgment of God; as those monstrous Epicures
Caligula, Heliogabalus, Geta the Emperor, who was served in with dainties by
the Alphabet. One while he would have anserem, anatem aprum. Another time, he
would have phasianum, farra, ficus: Sometime again, pullum, pavonem, Bruson.
lib. 3. cap. 1.
perdicem, porcellum, piscem, pernam, etc. This was one of those Caesar's, who
gat nothing by their honor, but ut citius interficerentur.

Verse. 21. Naphtali is a hind let loose] Swift of foot; and which when it
slieth, looks behind it, says the Chaldee Paraphrast, on Cant. 8.14. This
was fulfilled in Barac of this tribe, Judge. 4.6, 10, 15, 16. Veget. lib. 1.
cap. 24.
which who went up on his feet, against Sisera's iron chariots; were first a
terror, and afterward a scorn, as Vegetius says of chariots, armed with
sithes and hooks. Origin observes, that in all the victories God gave his
people in Canaan, he never used the help of horses. The adversaries, both
Egyptians and Canaanites had chariots, and horses; not so Isracl. A horse is a
warlike creature, full of terror, Job 41.20. Prove. 21.31. So swift, that the
Persians (as Pausanias has it,) (...). Paus. Prove. 21.31.
dedicates him to their God the Sun; as the swiftest creature, to the swiftest
God. But what says David; An horse is a vain thing for safety, Psalm. 33.18.
And to the same purpose, Solomon; A horse ^s prepared for the day of battle:
but (when all is done,) salvation is of the Lord. This, Barac with his friend
Deborah, found, and celebrated* in that famous song, Judge. 5. [He gives goodly
words] In the aforesaid Song. Christ also began to utter his words of grace, in
the land of Nepthtali, Mat. 4.13. And this is the Reason, that as of the
children by Leahs side, Judah obtained the first place, among those that were
sealed, Revel. 7. because Christ sprang of him; so of those on Rachels side,
Nephtali is first named, because there he dwelt; (at Capernaum where he had
hired a house,) and preached, ut ubique superemineat Christi praerogativa,
says a learned Interpreter. Medes in Apocalypse.
Compare with this text, Deuteronomy. 3^.23. and then observe, that good words do
ingratiate with God and men.

Verse. 22. Joseph is a fruitful bough] Of the vine, says the Chaldee
Paraphrast. Uno anno septies fructus sufficit. Vnde pomum decerpseris, alterum
fine mora protuberat. Solin.
But it may be, Jacob meant it of the Egyptian fig tree, whereof Solinus
reports, that it bears fruit, seven times in the year; pull one fig, and
another presently puts forth, says he.

Verse. 23. The archers have sorely grieved him] These were his barbarous
brethren, that sold him; his adulterous mistress, that harlot-like, hunted for
his precious life; his injurious Master, that without any desert of his,
imprisoned him; the tumulcuating Egyptians, that pined with hunger, perhaps,
spoke of stoning him, as 1 Samuel 30.6. and the envious courtiers, and
inchanters, that spoke evil of him before Pharaoh, to bring him out of favor:
as the Ierusalemy Targum adds. All these arrow-masters, as the Hebrew here
has it, set against Joseph, and shot at him, as their but-mark; willing to
have abused him, but that Gods grace, providence, and unchangeable decree
(called here, Joseph's bow and strength, verse. 24.) would not permit them; as
those cruel Turks, did one John de Chabas a Frenchman, at the taking of
Tripolis in Barbary. Turk hist. 756.
They brought him into the town; and when they had cut of his hands, and nose,
put him quick into the ground, up to the wast, and there, for their pleasure,
shot at him with their arrows, and afterward cut his throat.

Verse. 24. But his bow abode in strength] He gave not place to them by
subjection, Call. 2.5. Prove. 24.10. (...), Phlt.
no not for an hour. If thou faint in adversity, thy strength is small, says
Solomon. Joseph did not, but as it was said of old Rome; Roma cladibus
animosior; and as of Mithridates, he never wanted courage, or counsel, when he
was at the worst; so neither did Joseph: Virtus lecythos habet in malis. The
sound heart, stands firm under greatest pressures, 2 Cor. 1.9, 12. Whereas if
a bone be broak, or but the skin rubbed up, and raw; the lightest load will be
troublesome; hang heavy weights, upon rotten boughs, they presently break. But
Joseph's were green and had sap.

By the hands of the mighty God of Jacob] It was said of Achilles, that he was
Styge armatus; but Joseph was Deo forti armatus, and thence his safety. He used
his bow against his adversaries, as David did his sling against Goliath. He
slung, says One, Bucholcer.
perinde ac si fundae suae tunicis non lapillum, sed Deum ipsum induisset ac
implicuisset, as if he had wrapped up God in his sling.

Verse. 25. Who shall help thee] God has, God shall, is an ordinary way of
arguing; it is a demonstration of Scripture Logic, as Psalm. 85.1, 2, 3, 4. So
2 Cor. 1.10. Every former favor is a pledge of a future. [ With the blessings
of heaven above, etc.] God shall hear the heaven, the heaven shall hear the
earth; and the earth shall hear the corn, wine, and oil: the genealogy of all
which is resolved into God, Hos. 2.21, 22. [with the blessings of the breasts,
and of the womb] Yet rather then Ephraim shall bring forth children to the
murderer, the Prophet prays God to give them (as a blessing, as some think) a
miscarrying womb, Matthew. 24.19.
and dry breasts, Hos. 9.13, 14. And our Savior says, Woe be to such as are
with child, and give suck in those days of war and trouble.

Verse. 26. Above the blessings of my progenitors] Chiefly, because Jacob
pointed them out the particular tribe, whereof, and the very time, wherein,
Shiloh should come. This mystery was made known to the Church, not all at once,
but by degrees. Adam was told, the seed of the woman should break etc. but
whether Jew or Gentile, he heard not a word. Abraham the Hebrew, long after was
certified, that In his seed all nations should be blessed; but of what tribe
Christ should come, till now, the world never heard. After this, David was made
to know, that Christ should be a male; but that he should be born of a Virgin,
was not known till Esay's time. Thus God crumbles his mercies to mankind; and
we have his blessings by retail, (says One) to maintain trading and communion
betwixt him and us. So the cloud empties not it self at a sudden burst, but
dissolves upon the earth, drop after drop.

unto the utmost bounds of the everlasting hills.] Spiritual blessings in
heavenly things, whereof those temporals before promised, Ephesians. 1.3.
were but types and pledges. Whence David doubts not to argue from temporals to
spirituals, Psalm. 23.5, 6. God in the Churches infancy fed them, and led them
along, Sunt qui autumant hanc proph^tiam Paulo applicari debore. Bez. Annot. ad
Act. 83.
by earthly to heavenly blessings, speaking unto them as they could hear.

Verse. 27. Benjamin shall ravin as a Woolf] There are that think, that this
ought to be applied to S. ' Paul the Benjamite; who while he was Saul, not
content to consent to S. Stephen's death, (though it be all one to hold the
sack, and to fill it; to do evil, and to consent unto it,) Act. 8.1, 3.
he made havoc of the Church, like a ravening Woolf; entering into houses also,
and haling men and women to prison. Yea, Act. 9.1. he lies breathing out
threatenings and slaughter, panting and windless, as a tired Woolf: and having
recovered himself, is marching toward Damascus for more prey: But met by the
chief shepherd, of a Woolf, he is made a Lamb, Esaias 11.6. not once opening his
mouth, unless it were to crave direction; What will thou have me to do, (...),
Philip. 3.14. 2 Cor. 5.13. with Act. 26.11. Sand's his survey of West. Relig.
Lord? After which time, he never persecuted the Saints so fast, as now he
pursues and presses hard toward the high prize; and as mad every whit, he is
thought to be for Christ, as ever he was against him. The papists, some of
them, have censured him for a hotheaded person, and said, that there was no
great reckoning to be made of his assertions. Is this blasphemy in the first or
second table, say you? Porphyry, the Philosopher, could say, that it was pity
such a man as Paul, was cast away upon our religion. And the Monarch of
Morocco, told the English Ambassador in King John's time, that he had lately
read Paul's Epistles, which he liked so well, that were he now to choose his
Religion, Heyl. Geog. page 714.
he would, before any other, embrace Christianity. But every one ought, said
He, to dye in his own religion: And the leaving of the faith wherein he was
born, was the only thing that he disliked in that Apostle.

Verse. 28. Blessed them every one according etc.] These hard blessings (to some
of them especially) hindered not the covenant. Still they were Patriarchs, and
heirs of the Promises. Afflictions, how sharp soever, show us not to be
cast-awayes. If a man should be baited, and used as a dog or a bear, yet so
long as he has humane shape, and a reasonable soul, he will not believe he is
either dog or bear. Let not crosses cause us to take up hard thoughts of God,
or heavy thoughts of our selves, as if out of his favor; but account it a
mercy rather, that we may escape so; and be judged here of the Lord, that we may
not be condemned with the world. Jacob is here said to have blessed all his
sons. He rather seemed to curse some of them. And for his welbeloved Benjamin,
Parum auspicata and honorifera videtur haec prophetia, says Pareus. But
because they were not rejected from being among Gods people, (as Ishmael and
Esau were, for less faults perhaps) though they were to undergo great and sore
afflictions, they are said to be blessed, yea and they shall be blessed, as
Isaac said to his whining son, Esau.

Verse. 29. I am to be gathered, etc.] That is, I am now going to heaven;
whereof being so well assured, what wonder though he were so willing to dye? I
know that my Redeemer lives, says Job; I know whom I have trusted, says
Paul: Ipse viderit ubi anima mca man sura fit, qui proea sic sollicitus suit,
ut vitam pro ea posuerit. Luther Occidere potest, ladere non potest.
And what shall become of my soul when I dye, let him see to it, who laid down
his life for it, said Luther. Death may kill me, but cannot hurt me, said
Another. This assurance of heaven is, as Mr. Larymer calls it, the sweetmeats
of the feast of a good conscience. There are other dainty dishes in this feast,
but this is the banquet.

Verse. 33. He gathered up his feet] He quietly composed himself, as it were, to
sleep in Jesus. He had stretched out himself before (says Musculus) as well as
he could, for reverence to the Word of God, which he delivered, etc. [And was
gathered to his people] To the general Assembly and Church of the firstborn,
whose names are written in heaven, Heb. 12.23. In Jerusalem records were kept
of the names of all the citizens, Psalm. 48.3. So is it in Heaven, where Jacob
is now a denizon.

CHAP. L. Verse. 1. And Joseph fell upon his fathers face]
AS willing to have wept him alive again, if possible; (...), famulor, curo.i.
remedia morbo adhibco. (...). Adrian. Imp. Tritum est, nullum medicum esse
peritum, nisi 30 homines, Orco demiscrit. Farewell Physic, was Chaucers Motto.
Olim exponebatur aeger obvio cuilibet sanandus.
yet more moderate then his father had been in the supposed death of him, by an
evil beast devouring him. But of mourning for the dead, see Notes on Chap. 23.2.

Verse. 2. And Joseph commanded his servants the Physitians] Physicians (it
seems) were formerly of no great esteem; perhaps it was, because, through
ignorance, they many times officiously killed their patients. We know who it
was that cried out, upon his deathbed, Many Physicians have killed the
Emperor. And it is grown to a Proverb; No Physician can be his crafts-master,
till he have been the death of thirty men. The Egyptians, to prevent this
mischief, appointed for every ordinary disease, a several Physician; enjoining
them to study the cure of that only. And till then, the fashion was to lay the
sick man at his door: where every passenger was bound to enquire the nature of
his disease; that if either himself, or any within his knowledge, had recovered
of the like, Plutarch. Herodot. lib. 1.
he might tell by what means, or stay to make trial of that skill he had upon
the Patient. Physic is, without question, the ordinance of God, Exodus 15.26.
Exodus 31.19. He styles himself, Jehovah Rophe, the Lord the Physician. And a
Physician is more worth then many others, (...). Hom.
says the Heathen Poet. Use them we must, when there is need, Mar. 2.17. 1 Timothy 4.4. but not idolize them; as 2 Chronicles. 16.12. [And the Physicians embalmed
Israel] According to the custom of that country; Herodot. Euterpe. Plin. lib.
11. cap. 27.2 Chron. 16.14. and 21.16.
concerning which, he that will see more, may read in Heredotus and Pliny. This
custom continued also in after-ages, as well among Jews as Gentiles. But the
Devil turned it, in time, into most vain superstition, both among the Greeks,
whom Lucian frequently jeers for it; and among the Latins; witness that of
Ennius, Tarquinii corpus bona foemina lavit and unxit. Joseph embalmed his
fathers corpse, partly to honor him with this solemnity; and partly, to
preserve him for so long a journey; but principally, to testify his faith of
the Resurrection, and that incorruption he hoped for at the last day. Some
think the Apostle has relation to this, (...), voce medi^.
in that, 1 Cor. 15.29. and they read it thus; Why do they then wash over the
dead? Confer Act, 9 37.

Verse. 3. And the Egyptians mourned for him seventy dayes] Longer then Joseph
mourned; they did it through ignorance, and as men without hope; (for both
which, see 1 Thessalonians. 4.13.) Joseph could look through h^s own loss, and see his
fathers gain beyond it. Besides, Hieron. ad Julian.
he could say, as Hierome in like case, Tulisti, Domine, patrem, quem ipse de
leras: Non contristor quod recepisti; ago gratias, quo dedisti. Cic. de ^inib.
lib. 2.
And if Epicures could comfort themselves in their greatest dejections, ex
praeteritarum voluptatum recordatione; How much more could Joseph now? not only
by calling to mind this last seventeen years enjoyment of his dear father,
beyond all hope and expectation; but chiefly, that happy change his father had
made, from darkness to light, from death to life, from sorrow to solace; from a
factious world, to a heavenly habitation, where he drinks of that torrent of
pleasure, without let or loathing.

Verse. 4. Speak, I pray you, in the cars of Pharaoh] He spoke not to the King
himself, but set others a work. Not because he was fallen out of favor, Parcus.
(for he had the happiness to be favorite to five Kings, Orus, Amasis,
Chebron, Amenophes, and Mephiris, in the eleventh year of whose reign, he dyed)
but because he was now a mourner; and such were not wont to come before Kings,
Esth. 4.2. though none but such as mourn, are suffered to come before God,
Matthew. 5.4.

Verse. 5. In my grave which I have dug for me] An usual thing of old, 2 Chronicles. 16.14. Matthew. 27.60. See the Notes on Chap. 23. verse. 9. Quintillus
Plautianus, an ancient Senator of Rome, in the days of Severus the Emperor,
Postulavit, ut ea quae ad sepulturam suam comparaverat, etc. (...). Dio.
being wrongfully accused and condemned to dye, desired before his death, to see
those things that he had long since laid by for his burial. Which when he saw
to be little worth with long lying, Quid hoc rei est, inquit? itane cunctati
sumus? What a thing is this, said He? Have we made no more haste to dye then so?

Ver 6. As he made thee swear] Oaths must be religiously kept, even those that
are private, betwixt friend and friend. For although whatsoever is more then
Yea and Nay, in our ordinary communication, is evil, Matthew. 5.37. yet a private
oath, (as betwixt Boaz and Ruth) so it be sparingly and warily used, is not
unlawful. For in serious and weighty affairs, if it be lawful in private to
admit God as a Judge, why may he not as well be called to witness, and to
avenge? But this only in case of necessity, when Yea and Nay will not be taken.

Verse. 7. And with him went up all the servants] That is, most of them; as
Matthew. 3.5. In doing the Patriarch this honor, they stand renowned for
thankful men; and such (says One) are worth their weight in gold. Blessed be
he of the Lord, who leaves not off his kindness to the living and to the dead
Ruth 2.20. But how base was Bonner, that railed so bitterly against his Patron
Cromwell, Act. and Mon. 1089.
(whose creature he had been) after his death; calling him the rankest heretic
that ever lived, and that it had been good he had been dispatched long ago? And
Cardinal Pool played the unworthy man, in having an intent to take up King Henry
the eighth's body at Windsor, and to have burned it. Ibid. 1905.
This the Papists did to Paulus Phagius, a learned German, that dyed at
Cambridge, being sent for over by King Edward the sixth. And although they
never heard him speak, Ibid. 1789.
for he dyed soon after his coming into the Realm, having not time either to
dispute, or preach here, yet they unburied him, and burnt his bones. Of all
fowl, we most hate and detest crows; and of all beasts, those called Jackals,
(a kind of foxes in Barbary) because the one diggs up the graves and devoures
the flesh; the other picks out the eyes of the dead. D. Featly his
Transubstant. exploded. 219.


Verse. 10. And he made a mourning for his father] Not seventy days, as those
Infidels did, verse. 3.

But why mourned he at all, Ob. Sol.
since God had signified his will?

So far forth as something concurs with Gods Will, that is grievous to us, we
may mourn moderately without offense.

Verse. 11. Abel-Mizraim, which is beyond Iordan] A gracious providence of God,
(as Piscator well observes) that for the confirmation of the Israelites faith,
when they were to pass over Jordan, and afterward, there should be a standing
monument there, of the transportation of Jacobs body out of Egypt, into Canaan,
Romans 8.28.
for burial-sake. Thus all things work together for good to Gods beloved.

Verse. 15. Joseph will peradventure hate us] An ill conscience, we are sure,
still haunts them as a hell-hag, and fills them with unquestionable conviction
and horror. B^tter be langold to a lion, then to an unquiet conscience. See
Notes on Chap. 4. ver. 14. and Notes on Chap. 42. ver. 21. Such take no more
rest, then one upon a rack, or bed of thorns. There were not many to kill Cain
besides his father and his mother, and yet he cries, Every one that finds me,
etc.

Verse. 16. Thy father did command, etc] It is a just question, whether there
were ever a true word of all this. For Jacob, probably, never knew how ill they
had used Joseph, as is abovesaid: But if this had been his command howsoever,
as they pretend, would not Jacob have spoken himself for them to Joseph, before
he dyed? Prove. 29.25.
Fear of man causes lying, Zeph. 3.13. and so brings a snare to the soul.

Verse. 17. Forgive I pray thee now] In this case a man is bound, not only to
let fall all wrath, and desire of revenge, but to make a solemn profession of
hearty forgiveness, Luke 17.4. If the wrongdoer say, I repent, you must say, I
forgive; as ever you hope to be forgiven of God. Our Savior, Luke 11.14. seems
to make our forgiving our trespassers, the intervenient cause (that which they
call Sine qua non) of Gods forgiving us. Mark this, lest we be constrained to
do, as Latimer reports of some in his days, that being not willing to forgive
their enemies, would not say their Paternoster, lest they should therein curse
themselves; but instead thereof, took their Lady-Psalter in hand, because they
were persuaded, that, by that, they might obtain forgiveness of favor, without
putting of so hard a condition, as forgiveness of their enemies. [For they did
unto thee evil] Joseph had long agone seen their sorrow; never till now, heard
their confession; and is abundantly satisfied. Think the same of God. Do but
confess, and he must forgive, upon his Faithfulness, 1 Job. 4.9. In the Courts
of men, it is the safest plea (says Quintilian) to cry, Non feci; not so here.
Take away the iniquity of thy servant, says David; and to prove himself so, he
adds, For I have done foolishly, 2 Samuel 24.10. Acknowledge the debt, and God
will forthwith cross the book.

Forgive the trespass of the servants of the God, etc.] Nothing should more
persuade to unity, then religion, Ephesians. 4.3. 4, 5. Others may cleave together,
as the clay in Nebuchadnezzars image; but the Saints only incorporate into each
other.

Verse. 18. Behold we be thy servants] Oh that God might hear such words fall
from us, prostrate at his feet! How soon would he take us up, and embrace us!
Deus redire nos sibi, non perire, desiderat, says Chrysologus, (...), says
Basil; suffundere sanguinem quam effundere, says Tertullian. I agnized my sin,
and the amends was soon made, says David, Psalm. 32.

Verse. 19. Am I in the place of God?] q.d. Can I hurt you, when God intends
good to you? Is it for me to cross his decree?

Verse. 21. I will nourish you] To requite your kindness, that consulted to
starve me, in the waterless pit. This was a noble way of revenging; this was
heroical, and fit for christian imitation. If thy enemy hunger, feed him.

Verse. 22. And Joseph lived an hundred and ten years] Fourscore of these, he
lived in great wealth; and all of them, perhaps, in very good health; as Pliny
reports of one Xenophilus, Plin. lib. 7. cap. 5.
that he lived 105 years without sickness; which yet was a rare thing, and few
men's happiness.

Verse. 23. Brought up on Joseph's knees] Who with great joy, danced and dandled
them. So God is said to do his people, Deuteronomy. Pedibus suis inservit. Metaph. a
parentibus qui filioles suos quos chares habent, sic tracttant. Cartw. hist.
Christi. Sic Shindler. Buxtorf, Qui priu digito coelum attingere videbantur,
nunc bumi derepente serpere siderates esse diceres. Bud. 1 Chronicles. 7.22. Psalm.
78.9.
33.3. As some understand it.

Verse. 24. And Joseph said unto his brethren, I dye] A sad saying to them poor
souls. For now began their misery and slavery in Egypt. When Epaminondas dyed,
his whole country dyed with him; the Thebanes were never after known by their
victories, but by their overthrowes. When Augustus dyed, the Sun seemed to the
Romans, to fall from heaven* such an alteration presently followed in that
State. When Lewis the twelfth departed this world, (says Budaeus) he that
erewhile seemed to touch heaven with his finger, lay grovelling, as if he had
been thunderstruck. All Isreal's prosperity dyed with Josiah; and so did their
liberty and worldly felicity with Joseph. His Nephews, the Ephramites,
attempted, before the time, their own deliverance, not long after Joseph's
death, even whiles their father Ephraim was yet alive, but with ill success, to
his great grief and regret. Hasty work seldom ends well: how this of mine will
do, I know not, made up (as it might be) in little more then four-moneths
space, amidst manifold fears and distractions, at spare-hours: and bearing
date, from mine enlargement, Anno Dom. 1643.
July the 11. that happy day, that saw me both a prisoner, and a freeman, by
the good hand of my God, upon me; to whom be glory and praise for ever. As for
this my book (made purposely, to testify my thankfulness to God, mine Almighty
Deliverer, See mine Epist. Dedicat. set before my Com. on the four Evangel.
and to those, whom he was pleased to use, as instruments of my much-indeared
liberty;) such as it is, (...); as he said of his Rhetoricks: and, if I shall
cast in my verdict,

Cum relego, Ovid. de Pont. Eleg 1.6.
scripsisse pudet, quia plurima cerne, Me quoque, qui scripsi, judice, digna
lini,

Deo Soli Gloria.
FINIS.
A COMMENTARY: OR, EXPOSITION UPON THE Second BOOK of Moses, called EXODUS.
CHAP. I. Verse. 1. Now these are] Heb. And these are etc.
FOR this Book is a continuation of the former history: and this verse a
repetition of what was before recorded. (...).
Genesis 46.8. The whole law (say the Schoolmen) is but one copulative. The whole
Scripture but Cor and anima Dei (says a Father) the Heart and Soul of God,
Luke 1.(...).
uttered by the mouth of the holy Prophets which have been since the world
began.

Verse. 5. And all the souls] That is persons; for souls are not begotten, but
infused, being divine particulae aurae. Eccles. 12.7. Aristotle himself saw
and acknowledged as much. (...) lib. 2. cap. 9. de gene. ar.
Were seventie souls] More worth then the seventie nations of the whole world,
say the Jews: God reckon's of men by their righteousness.

Verse. 6. And all that generation] Ea enim lege nati sumus ut moriamur: God
also makes haste to have the number of his Elect fulfilled; and therefore
dispatcheth away the generations.

Verse. 7. Increased abundantly] Heb. spawned and bred, swiftly as fishes.
Trogus author affirmat in Aegypto septenos vno utero simul gigni. Egypt is a
fruitful Country: it is ordinary there, says Trogus, to have seven children
at a birth; Solinus give's the reason, quod faetifero potu Nilus, non tantum
terrarum, sed etiam hominum faecundat arva. The River Nilus, whereof they
drink, make's men, as well as fields, fruitful. But this increas of the
Israelites was also by the extraordinary blessing of God, that they might
become a mighty and populous Nation, Deuteronomy. 26.5.

Verse. 8. A new King] Called Busiris, a most savage Tyrant, as Heathen
histories report him. Who knew not] Nothing sooner perishes then the
remembrance of a good turn. The Egyptians are renowned in histories for a
thankful people; Diod. Sicul. Lib. 2.
But it ill appeared in their dealing here with Joseph; who (had he now been
alive) might well have said to them as Themistocles once did to his Athenians,
Are ye weary of receiving so many benefits by one man? But herein was
fulfilled that of the Wise man, Eccles. 9.15.

Verse. 9 More and mightier] He speak's as if he had looked through a
multiplying glass. See the Note on Genesis 31.1.

Verse. 10. Com let us deal wisely] So as the world's wisards use to do: (...)
But God takes these foxes in their own craft, 1 Cor. 3.19. Your laboring men
have the most and lustiest children. Every Oppressoris a fool, Pro. 28.16.
Lest when there fall out any war] It may seem by 1 Chronicles. 3.21.22. compared
with Psalm. 78.9. That the Ephraimites, weary of the Egyptian bondage, and
over-hastie to enjoie the promised land, invaded the Philistines, and plundered
them. But were pursued and slain by the men of Gath, to the great grief of
their father Ephraim, and to the further exasperating of the Egyptians against
all the children of Israel; which might occasion also this cruel edict and
proceeding against them. It is a singular skill to bear bondage or any other
burden wisely and moderately. They that break pri^on before God's
gaol-deliverie, get nothing but more irons laid upon them.

Verse. 11. To afflict them] Because they would not serve God with gladness of
heart, Deuteronomy. 28.47, 48. For now they began to go a whoring after the Idols of
Egypt, Ezekiel. 23.8. and 20.5, 7, 8. And they built for Pharaoh treasure-cities]
They built also those famous Pyramides (as some think) of which it is reported
that for the great hight of them, Bucholcer.
a man cannot shoot an arrow so high, as the midst of the lower tower, whereon
the spire stands. Turk. hist. sol. 544.


Verse. 12. The more they multiplied] As the ground is most fruitful that is
most harrowed: and as the wal-nut tree bear's best when most beaten. Fish
thrive better in cold and salt-waters, then in warm and fresh. And they were
grieved] Or irked, as Moab likewise was because of Israel: they did fret and vex
at them, Number. 22.3, 4. Yet they were allied, and passed by them in peace: No
other reason, but the old enmity, Genesis 3. and that utter antipathie, Pro.
29.27.

Verse. 13. To serve with rigor] Heb. With fierceness: (...) Quidam cum ferocia
voce latina ^onserunt. Mercer.
so thinking to cow out their spirits, and to exanimate them. So deal's the
Turk with the Christians.

Verse. 14. Bitter with hard bondage] Did we but live a while (says One) in
Turkey, Persia, yea or but in France, a dream of that liberty we yet enjoie
would be as precious to us, as a drop of cold water would have been to the
rich man in hell, when he was so grievously tormented in those flames.

Verse. 15. To the Hebrew Midwives] In Egypt and Greece, the midwives of old had
their schools; and some of them were great writers; I know not whether the
Priests were then so officious to them as many are now among the Papists; who
say they therefore study Albertus Magnus de secretis mulierum that they may
advise the Midwives: (...). Romans 1.
but I doubt it is for a wors purpose; to gratify and greaten those abominable
lusts, wherewith they are scalded.

Verse. 16. Then ye shall kill him] No greater argument of an ill cause then a
bloody persecution. George Tankerfield the Martyr was in King Edward's days a
very papist, Act and Man. fol. 1535.
till the time Queen Marie came in: And then, perceiving the great cruelty
used on the Popes side, was brought into a misdoubt of their doing, and began,
as he said, in his heart to abhor them.

Verse. 17. And did not as the King etc] Wherein they did no more (though out of
a better principle) then Nature it self dictateth. Antigona says thus in
Sophocles, Magis obtemper andum est Dijs apud quos diutius manendum erit, quam
hominibus, quibuscum admodum breui tempore vivendum est. (See the Note on Act.
4.19) We must rather obeie God then men.

Verse. 18. Why have ye don this thing] They might well have answered, as she
did in Euripides, Obediemus Atridis bonesta mandantibus: Sin vero inhonesta
mandabunt, non Obediemus. If you command things honest we will obeie you; not
else. Or as that brave woman upon the rack, Non ideo negare volo, ne peream: sed
ideo mentiri nolo, Hieronym.
ne peccem.

Verse. 19. For they are livelie] By that voice of the Lord, which makes the
hindes to calv. Psalm. 29. Lady Faith was their midwife: And she has
delivered the graves of their dead. ( Heb. 11.35.) how much more wombes of
their quick Children?

Verse. 20. dealt well with the midwives] God is a liberal paiemaster: and his
retributions are more then bountiful. Be ye therefore steadfast and
unmovable, always abounding in the work of the Lord: since ye know your labor
is not in vain in the Lord. 1 Cor. 15. vlt. Greg. Moral.
And the people multiplied] Sic divinum consilium dum devitatur, impletur:
humana sapientia, dum reluctatur, comprehenditur, as Gregory has it. Prove.
19.21.
There are many devices in the heart of a man: but the counsel of the Lord,
that shall stand. Among the Romans, the more children any man had, the more
he was freed from public burdens. And of Adrian the Emperor it is storied,
that when those that had many Children were accused of any crime, Dio in
Adriano.
he mitigated their punishment, according to the number of their Children. But
these poor Israelites were otherwise used.

Verse. 21. Because the midwives feared God] There is no necessity of granting,
that the midwives told the King a lie, see ver. 19. But if they did, St. Austin
says well. Non remunerata fuit ijs fallacia, sed benevolentia; benignitas
mentis, non iniquitas mentien^is. Their lie was not rewarded, but their
kind-heartedness. That he made them houses] i. e. he gave them posterity:
Thus he builded David an house. 2 Samuel 7. And thus Rachel and Leah are said to
have built the house of Israel Ruth. 4.11. The parents are as it were the
soundation of the house, the children as so many livelie stones in the
building. Hence the Hebrews call a Son Ben of Banah to build, quod sit
aedificium and struciura parentum, quoad generationem and educationem.

Ver. 22. And Pharaoh charged] Imperio non tam duro quam diro. This was a most
bloody edict: therefore when God came to make inquisition for blood, he gave
them blood again to drink, for they were worthy. Tertullian.
The like he did to Nero (qui orientem fidem primus Romae cruentavit) to
Julian, Valens, Valerian, Attilas, Girzerichus. Charles the ninth of France, and
many other bloody Persecutors. See the note on Rev. 16.6.

CHAP. II. Ver. 1. And took to wife]
HIs own Aunt. Exodus 6.20. Number. 26.59. The Law against Incest, Levit. 18.12.
was not yet given, nor the state of Israel settled. But what excuse can there
be for that abominable Incest of the House of Austria by Papal dispensation?
Spec. Europ.
King Philip of Spain was Uncle to himself, Cousin-german to his Father,
Husband to his Sister, and Father to his Wife. And what shall we say of our
Modern Sectaries, whose practicing of Incest is now avowed publicly in Print?
they shame not to affirm that those marriages are most lawful that are betwixt
persons nearest in blood, brother and sister, father and daughter, See Mr Bailey
his disswasion part. 2. and Mr Edwards Gangr. par. 3.
mother and son, uncle and niece. The prohibition of degrees in Leviticus is to
be understood, say they, of Fornication, not of Marriage. Tamar did not doubt
to be her brother Amnon's wife, but detested the act of Fornication, etc. Lo
here, Little Nonsuch. p. 5.6.7.
what noonday devils do now, in this unhappie open-tide, walk with open face
amongst us.

Ver. 2. A goodly child] Fair to God. Act. 7.20. See the note there. Art thou
fair? be not like an Egyptian temple, (...)
where some beast is worshipped: Art thou foul? let thy Soul be like a rich
pearl in a rude shell.

Ver. 3. And she laid it in the flags] This she did by the force of her
Faith. Heb. 11. Casting the child upon God, and under hope believing against
hope.

Ver. 4. And his Sister] by a singular instinct of the holy Spirit, as appears
by the event. The steps of a good man are ordered by the Lord, Psalm. 37.23. He
keeps the feet of his Saints, 1 Samuel 2.9.

Ver. 5. And the daughter of Pharaoh] she was brought hither at this time by a
special providence, to do that which she little dreamt of. So when Heidelberg
was taken by the Imperialists, the copy of Vrsinus's Catechism enlarged by
Pareus, was among many other papers carried away by a plundering Soldier; but
happily dropped in the streets, and found the next day by a young Student: who
knowing his master's hand, restored it to his son Philip Pareus; Vita David
Pa^e^ per Philippum filium.
who afterward published that golden book, to the great Glory of God, who had
so graciously preserved it.

Ver. 6. One of the Hebrews] so called of Heber: see the Note on Genesis 13.14.

Ver. 9. And I will give thee thy wages] The nurs expect's not her pay from
the child but from the parents. Ministers (in case their people prove unkind
or unthankful) must look up.

Ver. 10. She called his name Moses] He was also by the Egyptians called
Mneves, as Diodorus Siculus relates: and Monios, as Aben-Ezra. Musaeus calls
him (...), Water-sprung, because drawn (as David was afterward) out of many
waters, Psalm. 18. ver. 17.

Ver. 11. When Moses was grown] In stature and authority, being mighty in
words and deeds, Act. 7.22. being a great Orator, a great warrior. See the
Note on Heb. 11.24. He was (as Pliny says of Cato Censorius) optimus Orator,
optimus Imperator, optimus Senator, omniumque bonarum artium magister, a man
every way accomplished. That he went out unto his Brethren] Associateing
himself to them, though afflicted, and refusing the pleasures and treasures of
Egypt: for he had respect to the recompens of reward, Heb. 11.26. (...) he
cast an eye, he stole a look from glory, when he was on his journie, and so
got fresh encouragement.

Ver. 12. He slew the Egyptian] This deed of his was heroic and
extraordinary, and therefore not to be imitated by every Birchet, who by this
example of Moses and that other of Ehud, persuaded himself it was lawful to
kill such as oppose the truth of the Gospel: Camdens Elisa. fol. 174.
whereupon he wounded Hawkins, slew his keeper, and thought he had a calling
to kill a great personage in this Kingdom, whom he took to be God's enemy.
The like madness is reported of the Monasterian Anabaptists. Master Baylies
disswas. par. 2.


Verse. 13. Behold two men of the Hebrews strove] What pity was it that
brethren should strive and one Hebrew smite another; as if blows enough were not
dealt them by the Egyptians! Still Satan is thus busy, and Christians are thus
malicious. Thus we have seen doves beat, and sheep butt one another.

Verse. 14. And he said] Yea he thrust Moses away, Act. 7.27. Doing wickedly
with both hands earnestly, Mich. 7. This act of his is imputed to the whole
people, who therefore were deprived of Moses for forty years. So true is that
of the wise man, One sinner destroieth much good. Eccles. 9.18.


Verse. 15. But Moses fled] God by forty years exile sitted Moses for further
light and advancement. Much he had learned in Egypt, Act. 7.22. but more in
Midian. Master Ascham was a good Schoolmaster to Q. Elisabeth, but Affliction
was a better. Men commonly beat and bruis their links before they light them,
to make them burn the brighter. Moses had neither been so illuminate a Doctor
nor so excellent a Ruler, if not first humbled, as here.

Verse. 16. Now the priest] Or Prince. The old Egyptians chose their Kings from
among the Priests. Samuel was both a Priest and a Judge in Israel. The Emperor
of Rome had for one of his Titles Pontifex Maximus the High Priest. Among the
Turks, the Judges at this day are ever Ecclesiastical persons, Blunts voyage.
page 89.
whereby both Orders joined give reputation to one another, and manteinance.
And they came and drew water] They were not so delicately bred as our dainty
dames are now-a days, but did earn it before they eat it.

Verse. 17. And drove them away] From the water that they had drawn, and so had
most right unto. Sic cedit viribus aequum, Might often overcom's right, see here
what we ow to good laws well executed; No man else should enjoie so much as his
own water.

Verse. 18. To Revel their father] Indeed, their grandfather, Number. 10.29. Old
men are usually about hom and can do little else but see to things, and advise.

Verse. 19. Delivered us out of the hand] Moses if he may not in Egypt, he
will be doing justice in Midian. Christ went about doing good: the place is
the better wherever a good man comes: his trade, says one, is a compound of
charity and justice.

Ver. 20. Call him that he may eat bread] If the watering of a sheep were thus
rewarded, how shall God recompens a cup of cold water given to those of his
little Flock?

Ver. 21. (...). Lycophron.
Zipporah his daughter] a peevish piece; a cold armful. He had better, happily,
have been married to a quartan ague. Sylla felix si non hahuisset uxorem, etc.
It is not ill to marry, but good to be wary; lest we make shipwreck in the
haven.

Ver. 22. I have been a stranger] So we are all, whiles here: Our own place is
paradise: haste to it.

Ver. 23. Sighed by reason of their Bondage] They had changed their masters,
but not their miseries, (...). but seldom com's a better. Job's stroke was
heavier then his groaning chap. 23.2.

Ver. 24. God heard their groaning] Yea their breathing. Lam. 3.56. men's very
misery crie's to God, as Hagar's did.

Ver. 25. Had respect] Heb. Knew them. He knew their souls in adversity.
Psalm. 31.7.

CHAP. III. Ver. 1. To the backside of the desert]
HEre it was that Moses wrote the book of GENESIS, (and that of Job too,
Alsted. Chron.
as some conceiv) for the comfort of his poor oppressed countrie-men in Egypt,
that they might lean upon, and live by faith in the promises made to the
Fathers.

Ver. 2. And the Angel of the Lord] Christ that Angel of the Covenant, and of
the great Counsel. [And the bush was not consumed] No more is the Church
(whereof this is an excellent emblem) by the fire of tribulation. Isa. 43.2.
because of the goodwill of him that dwelt in the bush. Deuteronomy 33.16.

Ver. 3. I will now turn aside and see] Moses came out of curiosity, but was
called by God: so do many to the ordinances for noveltie (as the Jews did to
John Baptist) or for some other sinister respect, to catch, it may be, and are
caught, as those Job. 7.46. Or as Austin, who coming to Ambrose to have his
ears tickled, had his heart touched. It is good to hear howsoever: Com, said
Latimer, to the public meetings, though thou come to sleep: It may be, God
may take thee napping. Absence is without hope: what a deal lost Thomas by
being but once absent? This great vision] Great indeed: there was a flame of
sire, else how was the bush burning? There was light, else how did Moses see it?
There was no heat: else how was not the bush consumed? Yet in every of God's
afflicted (says One) you may see this great vision. The voice of the Lord in
his affliction (as in this fire) divides the heat from the light, so that he
is not consumed by the heat (nay rather his infirmities and carnal
concupiscences are consumed thereby) but only illuminated by the light. See
the Note on chap. 2.15.

Verse. 4. And when the Lord saw etc.] God meets him that rejoiceth and
works righteousness. Isa. 64.5. Acti agimus. The Miller cannot command a
wind, yet he will spread his sails, be in the way to have it, if it com. As
our liberty (in external acts) is still some (as to com to church, to hear, to
repeat etc.) so must our indevors be answerable.

Verse. 5. Draw not nigh] Be not rash, but reverent. Heathens could say, Non
loquendum de Deo sine lumine. God will be sanctified of all that draw nigh
unto him. Levit. 10.2.
Put off thy shoos] Of sensuality and other sins. Quid pedes (says Erasmus)
nisi affectus? Quid pedes calceamentorum onere liberi nisi animus nullis
terrenis cupiditatibus oneratus? Affections are the feet of the soul; keep them
unclogg'd.

Verse. 6. Hid his face.] So did the Seraphims with a double scarf as it were.
Esa. 6.2. Let a man but see God, and his plumes will soon fall. For he was
afraid] Yea he trembled and durst not behold. Act. 7.32. This was his first
meeting with God: When better acquainted, he grew more bold.

Verse. 7. For I know their sorrows] That Is a sweet support to a sinking soul,
that God know's all, and bears a part. Mat. 6.
Your heavenly Father know's, etc. That Is enough.

Verse. 8. I am com down] Hamanitus dictum, ut Genesis 11.7. and 18.21. See the
notes there. Milk and honie] plenty and dainties; all things both for
necessity and delight.

Verse. 9. The oppressions wherewith] We are often more beholden to our enemies
insolency, then to any innocence of our own. Deuteronomy. 32.27.

Verse. 10. That thou mai'st bring forth] Which, though as unlikely to be don
as to remove a rock with his shoulder; yet, setting upon it in God's strength,
he effects it. Tantiem velis, and Deus tibi praeoccurret. Chrysostom.
Howbeit, let a man do what he can naturally, and God will meet him
graciously: There is no truth in such an assertion.

Verse. 11. Who am I?] Worth is modest: The proud man asks, Who am I not?
(...), Cyri Majoris sepulcro inscriptum refert Arrianus. Worth with modesty is
(...); nothing is so amiable.

Verse. 12. This shall be a token unto thee] So he had a double sign for his
suller and further confirmation: that of the burning bush, for the present;
this of serving God at Horeb, for the future.

Verse. 13. B^de.
What is his name?] God is above all name, all notion. When Manoah enquired
after his name; It Is wonderful said he: Victorinus.
that is, I am called as I am called, but such is thy weakness that it
surpasses thy conception. Afri vocant Deum ignotum Amon, id est, Heus tu, quis
es?

Verse. 14. Plutarch. de Isid. and Osiride.
I am that I am] Heb. I will be that I will be. The Septuagint render it
(...) I am that He that is; Agreeably hereunto Plato calls God (...) and
(...). This name of God is fully opened Rev. 16.5. It import's two of God's
incommunicable Attributes: 1. his Eternity when he says, I will be. 2. His
Immutabilitie, when he says, That I will be. As Pilat said, what I have
written, I have written; I will not alter it. But how far out was Paulus
Burgensis in denying Ehich to be any of God's names? Whether Aph-hu 2 King.
2.14. be one, Weems.
is far more questionable.

Verse. 15. Unto all generations] The Jews, to countenance their conceit of the
ineffabilitie of the name Jehovah, did corrupt this text: and for This is my
name Legnolam for ever, they read, G^latinus.
This is my name Legnalam to be concealed.

Verse. 16. The God of Abraham, etc.] His friends, with whom he had all things
common. This was a greater honor don to these Patriarchs, then if God had
written their names in the visible heavens, to be read of all men.

Verse. 17. I have said I will bring you up] And now I am com to do it. This is
some part of the import of I am that I am, the same yesterday, Heb. 13.8.
to day, and forever; Ero qui eram, I will be the same to you in my
performances, that I was to your fathers in my promises. A Land flowing with
milk] Sumen totius orbis, as One calls it, where the hard rocks did sweat out
oil and honey. Deuteronomy. 32.13. See verse. 8.

Verse. 18. Has met with us] Of his own accord, and without our seeking.
Nolentem praevenit Deus ut velit, Aug. Enchir. cap. 32.
volentem subsequitur ne frustra velit. I am found of those that sought me
not. Isa. 65.1.

Verse. 19. Will not let you go] A sturdie Rebel he was; but God tamed him and
took him down by those ten plagues, comprised in these four verses, Fit cruor
ex undis, conspurcant omnia ranae;
Dat pulvis cimices, postea musca venit.
Dein pestis, post vlcera, grando, locusta, tenebrae:
Tandem prototocos ultima plaga necat.


Verse. 20. And after that, he will let you go] When he dare hold you no
longer: when I have sufficiently tamed him and taught him, as Gideon taught the
men of Succoth with thorns and briars of the wilderness. Judge. 8.16.

Verse. 21. I will give this people favor] It is God that fashioneth men's
spirits, and speaks oft-times for them in the hearts of their greatest
enemies.

Verse. 22. Ye shall spoil the Aegyptians] By a special dispensation, which
none could grant but the Lawmakers. So Ezekiel. 39.10. These Jewels did afterward
become a snare to the Israeli^es in the matter of the golden Calf.

CHAP. III. Verse. i. They will not believ mee]
THey had formerly refused him, and thrust him away. Exodus 2.14. Act. 7.27. And
so they might again, if he had not somewhat to show for his extraordinary
calling. Quaeque repulsa gravis. Hor.
In the year 434, the Jews of Creet were shamefully seduced by a Pseudo- Moses,
who promised to divide the sea for them to bring them back to their own
Country. Funccius in Comm. Chron.
Those that will not receiv the love of the truth, are justly given up to the
efficacy of error. 2 Thessalonians. 2.10.11.

Verse. 3. And it became a serpent] So does the word to those that cast away the
care of it; it sting's them with unquestionable conviction and horror. With
this rod Moses should guide the Israelites, sting the Egyptians. Isai. 14.29.
Jer. 8.17. And Moses fled from before it] First fly from sin as from a
serpent, says one: But if thou have taken this serpent into thy hand, rest not
till, like Moses serpent, it be turned into a rod again to scourge thy soul.
Be either innocent or penitent.

Verse. 4. Take it by the tail] which was dreadful to be don, because of the
antipathie and likely danger: but faith fortifie's the heart against the fear
of the creature, and carrie's a man thorough the difficulty of duty.

Verse. 5. That they may believ] Miracles are sufficient testimonies of an
extraordinary calling from God: provided that they be true Miracles, (not
such as Deuteronomy. 13) to confirm a calling that is agreeable to God's holy word, as
here.

Verse. 6. Put now thine hand] Here was sign upon sign, as Chap. 3 12. So low
stoop's the most high to our meanness. And does he not the same favor for us
by the often administration of the Lords Supper? Does he not seal again and
again, etc? Was leprous as snow] Let us but lay our hand upon our hearts,
thrust them into our bosoms to rifle there, and we shall be sure to take them
out leprous, all of a tetter.

Verse. 7. As his other flesh] To show him, that God by small means could bring
about great matters, and that in a moment. See Isai. 66.7, 8. Which yet was ill
applied by Card. Pool to this revolting nation in Q. Mary's days.

Verse. 8. The voice of the first sign] God's signs have a voice, and words.
Psalm. 105.27. They speak not only to our eyes, but ears; as those many
prodigies did before the last desolation of Jerusalem; as that terrible tempest
at Rome, (Anno. 1516. The same year that Luther began to stir) that so struck
the Church where Pope Leo was creating his Cardinals, Balcus Centur. 8.
that it removed the Child Jesus out of the lap of his Mother, and the Keys
out of St. Peter's hand. So the two Suns seen in London at the coming in of
King Phillip, (...)
Feb. 15.1553. The new star in Cassiopeia. Anno, 1572. The prodigious Comet.
Anno. 1618, etc.

Verse. 9. Shall become blood] In the year 874, at Brixia in Italy, Funce.
Chronol.
it rained blood for three days and three nights. Anno. 1505. There appeared
in Germany upon the garments of men and women, Act. and Mon. fol. 769.
diverse prints and tokens of the nails, of the sponge, of the spear, of the
Lords coat, and of bloody crosses, Maximilian the Emperor had, and showed the
same to Francis Mirandula, who thereupon wrote his Staurestichon, and therein
thus.

Non ignota cano, Caesar monstravit, and ipsi
Vidimus; innumeros prompsit Germania testes. Ibid. 1853.

In the third year of Q. Marie, William Pikes being at liberty after
imprisonment, and going into his garden, took with him a Bible: where sitting
and reading, there soddainly fell down upon his Book four drops of fresh blood,
and he knew not from whence it came. Whereat he being sore astonished, and
wiping out one of the drops with his finger, called his wife and said, in the
virtue of God, wife, what means this? Will the Lord have four sacrifices? I
see well enough the Lord will have blood: his will be don, and give me grace
to abide the trial, etc.

Verse. 10. I am not eloquent] Heb. A man of words, a master of speech, as Paul
was. Act. 14.12. He had not (that first, second and third of an Orator)
Elocution or Pronunciation. (...).
And yet God made chois of him rather then of eloquent Aaron to pray. Exodus
17. Not gifts but graces prevail in prayer. Slow of speech] Of a letsom
deliverie, word-bound.

Verse. 11. Who has made man's mouth?] There is no mouth into which God cannot
put fit words. Balaam's Ass was enabled by God to convince his Master. Whereas
by a man, never so full and fluent, he cannot bring forth his conceptions,
without the obstetrication of God's assistance. Prove. 16.1.

Verse. 12. I will be with thy mouth] See the Note on Matthew. 10.19.

Verse. 13. By the hand of him whom thou wilt] Or should send, By that
excellent Speaker the Messiah, cujus dicere est facere. Thus when God had
answered all Mose's objections, he forwardly denie's to go notwithstanding,
and bid's him send by his son, as one that was better fitted for the service.
That which made Moses so unwilling, was (whatever he pretended) the fear of
his life: which rub when God had once removed, he went on end, verse. 19, 20.

Verse. 14. And the anger of the Lord] And no wonder: Patientia laesa fit furor.
Where God commands, there to ask a reason is presumption; but to oppose
reason, is a kind of Rebellion. I know that he can speak well] The gift of
utterance is an high favor, a piece of a Christian's riches. 1 Cor. 1.5. See
the Note there. Aaron (as Tully says of Aristotle) had aureum flumen
orationis, a golden gift of speech.

Ver. 15. Will teach you] See the note on ver. 11.12.

Ver. 16. And he shall be thy spokesman] God has made me ill-favored in this
world, and without grace in the sight of men (said Tindal to Frith) speechless
and rude, Act. and Mo^um. p. 988.
dull and slowwitted: your part shall be to supply that which lacks in me:
remembering, that as lowliness of heart shall make you high with God, even so
meekness of words shall make you sink into the hearts of men. [In stead of God]
To dictate unto him my mind and counsel. Such a God to every Christian, is his
sanctified Conscience.

Ver. 17. Wherewith thou shall do signs] God, of his free will joining his
operation thereunto; as likewise he does to the outward signs in the two
Sacraments: and hence their energie, which else would be none.

Ver. 18. Whether they be yet alive] which if they be, though in a low
condition, both they and I shall see cause to be thankful. Lam. 3.39. Eccles.
9.4.

Ver. 19. For all the men are dead] Here the Lord laie's his finger upon the
sore. This was that pad in the straw, the thing that made Moses hang off as he
did; however he pretended the people's incredulity, his own inabilitie, and
this and that, neither did he altogether dissemble: but self-love need's not
be taught to tell her tale.

Ver. 20. Upon an Ass] This may argue his poverty, as, Zach. 9. ver. 9.
Especially if he had but one Ass for the whole Family.

Ver. 21. But I will harden his heart] with a judiciarie penal hardness. And
thus God is in this book eight times said to have hardened Pharaoh's heart:
thrice it is said that he hardened his own heart, and five times his heart is
said to have been hardened viz. by the devil, through the just judgment of God.

Ver. 22. Even my first-born] And so higher then the Kings of the earth. Psalm.
89.27.

Ver. 23. Let my Songo] God commanding Pharaoh to let go his people, and yet
hardening his heart that he would not let them go, is not contrary to himself.
For by so commanding him, he requires his obedience, and by so hardening him,
he punishes his disobedience

Ver. 24. And sought to kill him] to do justice upon him according to Genesis
17.14. and as upon one that was an unmeet man to take care of the Church,
having no better ordered his own house. 1 Timothy 3.5. God passes not by the sins
of his best children without a sensible check, if scandalous especially and
committed against conscience. He has much ado to forbear killing us in such
cases: He is even ready to have a blow at us, and crie's like a traveling
woman (who bite's in her pain while she can) to be delivered of his
judgments. Isa. 42.14.

Ver. 25. Surely a bloody husband] A peevish wife whose frowardness is either
tollenda or toleranda, cured or carried patiently, ne conjugium fiat
conjurgium. She was not so hot, but Moses was as meek.

Ver. 26. A bloody husband thou art] This peal she ring's often in his ears,
and so taught him patience.

Conjugium humanae divina Academia vitae.

Certain it is that we are a bloody spous to Christ: the Church is Acheldama,
a field of blood.

Ver. 27. And the Lord said unto Aaron]. To this religious Family rather then
to any other, God appears: which mercy is remembered. 1 Samuel 2.27. [Met him
in the mount of God] His wife either had left him, or was sent back by him to
her father. God suppli'es that comfort by the coming of Aaron.

Ver. 28. And Moses told Aaron] So clouds, when full, power down, and the spouts
run, and the eavs shed, and the presses overflow, Aromatical trees sweat out
their precious oils; and as Ambergris is nothing so sweet in it self, as
when compounded with other things: so good men are great gainers by
communicating themselves to each other.

Ver. 31. They bowed their heads] An ordinary gesture among the Jews then: as
at this day, the reverence they show is in standing up, Spec. Europ.
and the gesture of adoration in the bowing forward of their bodies: for
kneeling they use none, neither stir they their bonnets in their Synagogues to
any man, but remain still covered.

CHAP. V. Ver. 1. That they may hold a Feast]
CHap. 4.23. That they may serve me. Let us keep the feast. 1 Cor. (...)
5.8. which is the same with Let us serve God acceptably. Heb. 12.28. It is a
Feast and better for a good soul to convers with God. Psalm. 63.5. Isa. 25.6.

Ver. 2. Who is the Lord?] God's attributes either show what he is, or who he
is. To the question of Moses, what he is? God gave a short answer, I am. To
this second by Pharaoh, Who he is? God made a large reply, till Pharaoh was
compelled to answer himself, The Lord is righteous.

Ver. 3. Three days journie] viz. to mount Horeb. They made it three months
journie e're they came there. Exodus 13.17, 18. God lead's his people often not
the nearest, but the safest way to their journies end.

Ver. 4. Let the people from their works] Moses talk's of sacrifice, Pharaoh of
work. Any thing seems due work to a carnal mind saving God's service;
nothing superfluous but religious duties: Aug. de Civit. Dei.
Seneca says, the Jews cast away a seventh part of their time upon a weekly
Sabbath. To what end is this loss said Judas.

Ver. 5. The people of the Land are manie] and nihil agendo male agere descent.
Iphicrates never suffered his soldiers to be out of emploiment; (...), etc.
Polym. stratag. lib. 3.
but, if out of military services, he set them to dig or lop trees, or carry
burdens, etc. to keep them from mutining or wors doing.

Ver. 6. And Pharaoh commanded] He raged the more for the message of
dismission: so wholesome admonitions make ill men wors. Corruptions encreas and
biggen by the Law. Romans 7. ver. 8.

Ver. 7. Ye shall no more give the people straw] Speculum tyrannidis semper
augescentis atque invalescentis. The matter mend's with us, Acts and Mon.
said those Martyrs in prison, as sour Ale does in Summer.

Ver. 8. For they be idle] I heard a great man once say (says Luther) Necesse
est otiosos esse homines qui ista negotia Religionis curant. They must needs
be idle fellows that are so much taken up about the business of religion. See
the Note on verse. 4.

Verse. 9. And not regard vain words] Vain lying words. So this profane Prince
calls, and counts the word of God. What Is Truth? says Pilat scoffingly.

Verse. 10. I will not give you straw] Cold comfort: things commonly go backward
with the Saints before they com forward, as the corn grows downward ere it
grow upward. Hold out faith and patience; deliverance is at next door by. Cum
duplicantur lateres, venit Moses. When things are at worst they will mend.

Verse. 11. Yet not ought]. Such hard service put's Satan his slaves to, and yet
they rejoice in their bondage.

Verse. 12. So the people were scattered] So are most people now-a days busied
about trash and trifles, neglecting the one thing necessary. In the
inthronization of the Pope before he put's on his criple Crown, a wad of straw
is set on fire before him, and one appointed to say, Sic transit gloria mundi,
the glory of this world is but a blaze of straw or stubble, soon extinct. They
that highly es^e^m it rejoice in a thing of naught, feed upon ashes etc. Amos
7.8, 9. with 13.

Verse. 13. And the task-masters] Who were Egyptians, as the officers under them
were Israelites, and beaten. verse. 14.

Verse. 14. Were beaten] It is the misery of those that are trusted with
authority that their inferiors faults are beaten upon their backs.

Verse. 15. Came and crie'd unto Pharaoh] They did not rail upon him to his
face, as the Janissaries did in an uproar upon Bajazet the second their Prince,
saying that they would by and by teach him, as a drunkard, Turk. hist. fol. 444.
a beast and a rascal to use his great place and calling with more sobriety
and discretion. Neither did they go behind his back, and call him, as Sanders
did Q. Elisabeth, his natural Sovereign, Lupam Anglicanam, the English wolf,
or as Rhiston calls her, leaenam, omnes Athalias, Maachas, Rivetti Jesuita
vapulans. page. 263.
Jezabeles, Herodiades etc. superantem, a lioness wors then any Athaliah,
Maacha, Jezabel. A foul-mouthed Jesuit made this false Anagram of her,
Elisabeth, Jezabel. It Is omitted; Fuller's holy State. fol. 317.
the presage of the gallows, whereon this Anagrammatist was afterward justly
executed. Aretine, by a longer custom of libelous and contumelious speaking
against Princes, had got such a habit, that at last he came to diminish and
disesteem God himself.

Verse. 16. But the fault is in thine own people] Fffugiunt corvi, vexat censura
columbas. As a man is friended, so is his matter ended. And where the hedge is
low, a man may lightly make large leaps. Or as the French man says, Qui son
chien vult tuer, la rage luy met sus, He that has a mind to kill a dog,
give's out that he is mad. It was fault enough in God's Israel, that they
would not be miserable.

Verse. 17. Ye are idle] See the Note on verse. 4, and 8.

Verse. 18. Yet shall ye deliver the tale of bricks] Or be miserably beaten,
if but one be missing. The Spaniards (besides other intolerable burdens and
bondages that they lay upon the poor Indians) suppose they show the wretches
great favor, when they do not, Sir Fran. Drake World encompas. page 53.
for their pleasure, whip them with cords, and day by day drop their naked
bodies with burning bacon. Regiment without Righteousness turn's into tyranny.

Verse. 19. In an evil case] For their evil courses. Ezekiel. 23.8. 20.5, 7, 8.
Ios. 24.14. It is written as a heavy curs of God. Levit. 26.17. If ye still
trespass against me, I will set Princes over you that shall hate you:
Mischeivous, odious Princes, odious to God, malignant to the people.

Verse. 20. And they met Moses] How ready are we to mistake the grounds of our
afflictions, and to cast them upon falls causes? 1 King. 17.18.
The Sareptan told the Prophet that he had killed her son.

Verse. 21. The Lord look upon you] Thus we have seen dogs in a chafe bark at
their best friends.

Verse. 22. And Moses returned unto the Lord] He turned aside, as it were to
speak with a friend, and to disburthen himself into God's bosom. This is the
Saints privilege. See the Note on Mat^h. 11.25.

Verse 23. Neither have thou delivered] Here Moses himself was too
short-spirited. He considered not, belike, that God's promises do many times
bear a long date, neither is it fit to set him a time, or to awaken him whom
our soul loves; until he pleas. Do but wait, says the Lord. Habac. 2.3. You
shall be delivered, you shall be delivered, you shall be delivered, you
shall, you shall. So much that text in effect sounds and assures.

CHAP VI. Verse. 1. Then the Lord said unto Moses.
PArdoning the faults of his prayer, God grant's him a gracious answer, so he
dealt with David. Psalm. 31.22. For I said in my have I am cut off from before
thine eyes: Nevertheless thou heardest the voice of my supplication when I
cried unto thee.

Verse. 2. Scalig. de Subti^t.
I am Jehovah] (...) Scaliger's word) that do Peress (Gregorie's word) that
have being of my self, give being to all things elf, and in special to my
promises, to perform with my hand wh^t I have spoken with my mouth, 1 King.
8.15.
only God exspect's that men put his promises in suit by their prayers, as
here, and burden him with them, as that Martyr said.

Verse. 3. By the name of God Almightie] See the Note on Genesis 17.1. The sens is
this, says Cameron, Quantum illis sufficiebat tantum indulsit, Camer. de
Eccles.
non indulsit quod erat summum. He gave them enough, but not the main. But by
my name Jehovah.] That is, by the import of this his name, the full performance
of his promises. God was known to the Patriarchs by this name Jehovah quoad
esse Dei, but not quoad esse rei.

Verse. 4. To give them the land of Canaan] And a better thing with it, the
Kingdom of Heaven. Heb. 11.10.16.

Verse. 5. I have heard the groanings] He hears the young ravens that cry
unto him but by implication only, Psalm. 147.9. (...)
and with a hoars voice unfit to move pity: (whence also they have their name
in the Hebrew) how much more his own covenanters?

Verse. 6. And I will bring you out] A great deliverance; but nothing to that
which Christ has wrought for us from the tyranny of sin and terror of hell.

Verse. 7. And I will be to you a God] This is the top of any man's happine^s,
to have God for his God. What can such a man want? Psalm. 23.1. As he in
Plutarch said of the Egyptians, that though they had no music nor vines
amongst them, Plut. (...).
yet they had Gods.

Verse. 8. And I will bring you] See verse. 4.

Verse. 9. But they hearkened not] The ear, which taste's words as the mouth does
meat, was so filled with choler, that they could relish no comfort. It is ill
sowing in a storm, giving physic in a feaver-fit. The easiest medicines, or
waters are troublesome to sore cies: So here. Quicquid recipitur, recipitur ad
modum recipientis.

Verse. 11. Go in speak unto Pharaoh] Whether he will hear. or whether he will
forbear. Ezekiel. 2.5.
Speak when God bid's us, though it may seem to little purpose: We have lost
many a wors labor. The man of God must be patient (tolerant) to all yea to
those that oppose, proving if at any time God will give them repentance. 2 Timothy 2.25. (...).
etc.

Verse. 12. Of uncircumcised lips] Or of an heavy speech, word bound,
Thick-lipped: A thin lip is a sign of eloquence. Job. 12.20. Pitho sits in such
lips.

Verse. 13. And the Lord spoke unto Moses] Notwithstanding his former
tergiversation, and the peoples peevishness. Men's wickedness cannot interrupt
the course of God's goodness.

Verse. 14. These be the heads] This is a digression to show the descent of
Moses and Aaron. Digressions in divine discourses are not always and
absolutely unlawful. God's Spirit sometimes draws aside the doctrine, to
satisfy some soul which the Preacher know's not: and sparingly used it
quickens attention.

Verse. 15. The son of a Canaanitess] whom it was not lawful for him to marry;
but he was a head long and headstrong, bold and fierce fellow. Genesis 34.25.
and 49.7. Bound by Joseph Genesis 42.24. As one that had been most forward to sell
him to the Midianitish Merchants. Simeon also is left out in Moses his
blessing. Deuteronomy. 33.

Verse. 16. Of the sons of Levi] Upon this family he insist's, and therefore
hasten's to it. Speak ever to the purpose.

Verse. 20. Jochebed, his father's sister] See Chap. 2.1.

Verse. 21. Thuc. hist. ^ib. 124.
Korah] That ringleader of Rebels. Number. 16.1.

Verse 23. Elishaba] Or Elisabeth, a prince's sister Number. 2.3. Our English
Elisabeth, was by a French Duchess said to be the most glorious and most
happy woman that ever swayed Scepter.

Verse. 30. Of uncircumcised] See the Note on verse 12.

CHAP. VII. Ver. 1. And the Lord said unto Moses]
IN answer to his last exception, which yet he had answered before. chap. 4.
ver. 16. God bear's with our infirmities. A God to Pharaoh] Armed with mine
authority, a Vice-God. Shall be thy Prophet] i. e. Thy spokesman, and
interpreter.

Verse. 2. Thou shall speak] Gods word must be spoken however it be taken.

Verse. 3. And I will harden] See the Note on chap. 4.21. The Dutch have a
proverb, Quem Deus excaecaturus est, huic primum oculos claudit. When God will
blind a man, he first closes up his eyes.

Verse. 4. And Pharaoh shall not hearken] This judgment God lays upon many of
our hearers at this day, of whom, after much pains taking, we may well
complain as the herdsman did in the Poet.

Heu mihi! quam pingui macer est mibi ^^urus in aruo.

Verse. 5. And the Egyptians shall know] To their cost, when the Lord's hand
that is lifted up in threatening, shall fall down in punishing. Lord (says the
Prophet) when thy hand is lifted up they will not see, but they shall see, etc.
Isai. 26.11. God will unseal their heavy eyes with scorching plagues, and rous
them with horror enough.

Verse 6. Did as the Lord commanded them] Mallem obedi^e, quam miracula facere,
faith Luther. Their obedience yielded them more comfort, then their working of
wonders.

Verse 7. Fourscore years old] And so might say to his countrie-men and others,
as old Augustus did to his mutinous soldiers, Audite senem inuenes, quem
invenem senes audierunt.

Verse 9. Show a miracle for you] A persuading wonder, an admirable work, above
the power of nature, as being a kind of creation, and, such as requires
omnipotency. But Pharaoh's heart was such a nether millstone, as neither
miracle, nor ministry, nor misery, nor mercy could possibly mollify. At the
burning of Bainham the Martyr, when his arms and legs were half consumed, he
cried out to the standers by and said, O ye Papists, behold you look for
miracles, here now you may see a miracle: Act. and Mon. ^^l 9 40.
for in this sire I feel no more pain, then if I were in a bed of down, or of
roses. Thus he: sed surdis fabulam.

Verse 10. And it became a serpent] Or, a dragon, in token of desolation, if
they disobeied; and that their country should become a d^n of dragons. Isai.
13.22.

Verse 11. The wise men, and the sorcerers] Magic is either pure and natural,
or impure and diabolical; which implies a compact with the devil, either overt
or covert. The chief of these juglers here were Jannes and Jambres. 2 Timothy 3.8.
Whose names are also mentioned in the Talmud.

Verse 12. And they became serpents] Not really such, but in appearance only.
The devils miracles are mere impostures, phantasms, delusions. And this was the
first plague that God inflicted upon Pharaoh. Swallowed up their rods] That is
their dragons. so has Christ (who is life essential) swallowed up death in
victory. 1 Cor. 15.55.

Verse 13. And he hardened Pharaoh's heart] Not by bare prescience, or
permission only, but by withdrawing his grace, directing the Tyrant's actions
to his own glory, irritating his corruptions by oracles and miracles, and
delivering him up to Satan to be ^urther hardened.

Verse 14. Pharaoh's heart is hardened] Heb. heavy, clogged with corruption,
and held down by the devil: as on the contrary, Jehosaphat's heart was light
and lift up in the ways of the Lord. 2 Chronicles. 17.6. So were Doctor Taylor's,
and George Roper's the Martyrs: Act and Mon. 1386. and 1629.
the former fetched a frisk, the later a great leap, when they came to the
stake.

Verse 15. In the morning] It was in the night then that God appeared to Moses.
But afterward mouth to mouth apparently, by special privilege. Number. 12.6, 8.
Exodus 33.11. As a man speaks with his friend.

Verse 16. Hitherto thou would not hear] Indeed he could not hear; as little
as those Jews could believ Christ's miracles. Joh. 12.37. Therefore they could
not believ (says the Text) because that Isaiah had said, he has blinded their
eyes, and hardened their hearts, etc.

Verse 17. In this thou shall know] q. d. I shall really answer thee to that
stomachfull question of thine. cap. 5.2. See the Note there.

Verse 18. Shall loath to drink of the river] Nilus. God will confute them in
their confidences. Ezekiel. 29.3, 9 Isa. 19.5, 6.
The Egyptians use to brag of their river, and in mockery to tell the
Grecians, that if God should forget to rain, they might chance to perish for
it: The rain they thought, was of God, but not the River: He therefore
threateneth to dry it up, and here to bereav them of all comfortable use of it.

Verse 19. Upon their ponds] Fish Ponds are in Hebrew called Berechoth,
Bl^ssings. But how soon can God cursour blessings. Mal. 2.2. And destroy us,
after that he has don us good. Josh. 24.20.

Verse 20. Were turned into blood] To show them (as in a mirror) their
blood-guiltiness: These bloody and deceitful men had blood to drink, for they
were worthy. Revel. 16.6. See the Note there.

Verse 21. And the Fish] That was their common food. Number. 11.5. The flesh of
many beasts they (through superstition) would not eat of, as One well notes
from Exodus 8.26.

Verse 22. Did so with their inchantments] With their secret slights and
juglings, they seemed to do so. (See verse 12.) for Pharaoh's further hardening.

Ver. 23. Neither did he set his heart] But to his iron sinews he added
brows of brass. Isai. 48.4. To his natural and hereditarie hardness,
adventitious and habitual.

Verse 24. Dug round about] If by drawing the waters they might purify them,
but they looked not to the maker thereof, they returned not to him that smote
them. Isa. 22.11. and 9.13.

Ver. 25. And seven days were fulfilled] So long, the plague continued that
they might be sensible of it: and not do as the dog, who getting out of the
water, shakes his ears and there is an end. Surely if these Egyptians had
believed the prediction of this plague, they would have don as Pliny says
Camels do. Plin. lib. 8. cap. 18.
Implentur cameli, cum bibendi est occasio and in praeteritum and in fu^urum,
they would have drunk for hereafter also.

CHAP. VIII. Ver. 1. That they may serve mee]
EVentus plagarum est alius per accidens, Alsted.
ut Simulata emendatio Pharaonis; alius per se, ut Dimissio populi.

Ver. 8. Behold I will smite] God usually (not always) warn's before he
wound's, ideoque minatur, ut non puniat, and therefore threateneth that he may
not punish his creature.

Ver. 3. And the river shall bring forth frogs] In stead of fishes. Thus the
first and this second plague are about the water, the third and fourth about
the earth, the five next about the air, and the last about man.

Ver. 4. And the frogs shall com up] Neither walls nor weapons could keep of the
frogs from Pharaoh and his people. A muribus in Rheno confectus peri^t. Anno.
923.
As neither could Hatto Archbishop of Ments be possibly rid of that army of
mice, that God sent out against him for his cruelty to some of his poor
subjects, till they had devoured him. Aristoph. in Ranis.


Ver. 6. And the frogs came up] with their hateful hearing of Breker, and ex
coax, coax.

Ver. 7. And the Magicians did so] See the note on chap. 11.22.

Ver. 8. Entreat the Lord] In extremity an hypocrite will cry for help, as a
pig under the knife, as a prisoner at the bar, as a drowning man will catch at
that twig, which erst standing on the bank he despised; Joab in distress run's
to the horns of the altar; Lord, in trouble have they visited thee, they powered
forth a charm when thy chastening was upon them, says the Prophet of those
hypocrites, that yet brought forth no better then wind. Isai. 26.16, 18. But
will the hypocrite pray always as etc? Job. 27.10. Did they at all fast unto
me, even to me? Zech. 7.5. I will let the people] For the present it may be,
he purposed so to do. Good thoughts make but a thorough-fare of carnal hearts:
they cannot settle there. Thy goodness is as the morning dew etc.

Ver. 9. Glory over mee] Or jear me, Hos. 6.4.
and reject me, as thou have don heretofore: but when thou have so don, thou
must be beholden to me for my prayers, or thou art like to lie under the
plague, for ought that thy wisards can do to reliev and releas thee. In the
river onely] For a Memento; Horat.
that thou flinch not, nor forget thy promise. Quo teneam vultus etc.

Ver. 10. To morrow] Cras vox corvina. To day if ye will hear his voice. Now
is the day of grace, etc. procrastination is perilous. Annibal when he could
have taken Rome, would not: when he would, could not: Plutarch.
So (...) said that fool. Let serious matters alone till to morrow: but he was
slain that night. Nemo tam divos habuit faventes,
Crastinum ut possit sibi polliceri.


Ver. 12. And Moses cried unto the Lord] Not for Pharaoh's conversion; for he
knew he was past cure) but for his d^liverance from the present plague, that
the power of God might be the more manifested, and the tyrants conscience the
more convinced.

Ver. 13. According to the word] Iste vir potuit apud Deum quod voluit. Moses
might do what he would with God, as One said of Luther.

Ver. 14. And the land stank] As once this land also did by those unclean frogs
that came out of the Pope's mouth. Revel. 16.13. But England is now no more a
babe (said K. Henry 8th. Act and Mon. fol. 990.
in his protestation against the Pope:) there is no man here but now he know's
that they do foolishly that give gold for lead, etc. Surely except God take
away our right wits, not only the Pope's authority shall be driven out for
ever, but his name also shall shortly be forgotten in England, etc. Thus he,
and much more to like purpose. God has promised to take away the unclean
spirit out of the land. Zach. 13.2. Fiat, Fiat. Surely the society of ungodly
men (whether Papists or Atheists) is unsavourie and tedious, like the slime and
filth that is congealed, when frogs and toads and other vermin join together.

Ver. 15. But when Pharaoh saw, etc.] Heb: A breathing or respiration: so
fulfilling that of the Prophet Esai. 26 10. In like sort William Rufus, being
dangerously sick at Gloucester in the 6th year of his reign, vowed upon his
recoverie, to see all vacancies in the Church furnished: which he did,
Daniel's hist. fol. 58. Sciaputo il Morbo f^audato (...) Sa^o.
but with so great a do, as showed that having escaped the danger h^e would
gladly have deceived the Saint; like the man in Erasmus his Naufragium, who in
a storm promised the Virgin a picture of wax as big as S^ Christopher: but when
he came to shore would not give a tallow candle. Thus in the sweating-sickness
ministers were sent for and large promises made of amendment: but no sooner
were they recovered, but they returned to their old courses, as Mr. Bradford
complains: Whence Pliny (in one of his Epistles to one, who desired rules
from him how to order his life aright) I will says he, give you one rule,
that shall be in stead of a thousand, ut tales esse perseveremus sani, quales
nos futuros esse profitemur infirmi. That we go on to be such when well, as
we promised to be when sick. Men roar when upon the rack: but once got off,
they think they may do as they list.

Verse. 16. Stretch out thy rod] Here Is no warning given, which shows great
wrath. Impenitencie make's God weary of repenting. Jer. 15.6. Absolute in his
threatenings (if any) resolute in his executions as. Deuteronomy. 29 19.20.

Verse. 17. All the dust of the land became lice] Or gnats. Quid ciniphe vilius
(says Philo?) what so base and vile a creature as a lows, a gnat? and yet by
this poor vermin God so plagued all Egypt, that fainting under it, they were
forced to cry out, This is the very finger of God.

Verse. 18. But they could not] Though they endevourd it, as did the Juggler of
Antwerp, who being required by the English Merchants there to play his feats
and show his cunning; after much sweating and toil, Acts and Mon. fol. 985.
when he saw that nothing could go forward, but that all his enchantments were
void, he was compelled openly to confess that there was some man there at
supper which disturbed and let all his doings. This was Mr. Tindal the
Martyr; who hearing of this juggler, had desired certain of the Merchants that
he might be present to see him play, etc.

Verse. 19. This is the finger of God] An act of Omnipotency, as Luke 11.20.
Psalm. 8.3. The heavens are the work of God's fingers. Deus disponit membra
pulicis and culicis, says Augustine. [And he hearkened not to them] Neither to
Moses, nor to his own Magicians being a kin to the Catadupes that dwell at the
fall of his river Nilus, and are deaf.

Ver. 20. Rise up early in the morning] Sanctificat, sanat, ditat quoque
surgere mane. Early rising is good for health, wealth and Godliness. David
prevented the dawning of the morning, etc. Psalm. 119.147. Christ rose up a
great while before day. Mark 1.35. See the note there.

Verse. 21. Shall be full of swarms of flies] Of all the ten plagues this was
the most troublesome: for that they never suffered men to rest: so worldly
cares; noc^e ac die non dabunt requiem, as those Tyrants, Jer. 16.

Verse. 22. And I will sever] Heb Marvelously separate, by setting upon them my
signum salutare, Ezekiel. 9. so that the worst that are shall return and discern
betwixt the righteous and the wicked, Mal. 3.18. See Exodus 33.16. Docuit
Aristoteles Providentiam Dei ad coe^um Lunae usque protendi, non ultra.
[In the midst of the earth] Not in heaven only, whereunto Aristotle and other
Atheists would confine his Providence. Lysippus made Alexander's picture with
this posie; Iuppiter asserui terram mihi, tu assere coelum.

Verse. 23. And I will put a division] Heb. a redemption; so Luke 1.68.
Aristotle reports, that when from the hill Aetna, there ran down a torrent of
fire that consumed all the houses thereabouts; in the midst of those fearful
flames, (...), Arist. de Mundo cap. 6.
the river of fire parted it self, and made a kind of lane for those who
ventured to rescue their aged parents. This extorted from him an acknowledgment
of God's good providence for the godly here on earth.

Verse. 24. A grievous swarm of flies] i.e. Numerous and pernicious; yet not so
bad as those many noisome thoughts that swarm daily in men's hearts. There is
that Leviathan; there are also creeping things innumerable. And these many
times mar and flie-blow our prayers, so as that they stink in the nostrils of
God.

Verse. 25. Sacrifice to your God in the land] Persecutors, when they cannot
conquer, would compound.

Verse. 26. Will they not stone us?] Superstition is cruel; witness the Popish
Inquisition to Lithgow, who in ten hours received 70. several torments: And
the Massacre of Paris, wherein they poisoned the Queen of Navarre; murdered the
most part of the pearless Nobility in France, their wives and children, with a
great sort of the common people, an hundred thousand in one year in diverse
parts of the Realm, some say three hundred thousand. So in Ireland, what havoc
have those breathing-Divels made of the innocent English etc? And what
threatenings and slaughter do our desperate Malignants now breathe out against
us.

Verse. 27. As he shall command us] Manner as well as matter, circumstance as
well as substance is to be heeded in God's service; else there may be malum
opus in bona materia, (as one says) an evil work in a good matter.

Verse. 28. Only ye shall not go very far] So loath was he to loos his hold;
^useb.
so is the Devil. The Pope made large offers to Queen Elisabeth, as also to our
King, when in Spain. [Intreat for mee] So Simon Magus in a fright begg's
Peter's prayers; so Maximinus the persecuting Emperor sent to the Church for
Prayers, when God had laid upon him a grievous diseas. So Ezra 6.10. pray for
the King's life, and for his Sons.

Verse. 29. Deal deceitfully any more] Some are so slipperie, there is no
believing of them. Egesippus says of Pilate, that he was vir nequam, and
parvi faciens mendacium, a naughty man, and one that made no conscience of a
lie. No more did Pharaoh.

Verse. 30. Entreated the Lord] See the Note on Verse. 12.

Verse. 31. There remained not one] Prayer make's clean work; it can do wonders
in heaven and earth. Say thou with David, Cleans thou me from secret faults,
Psalm. 19.12.
those that are of daily and hourlie incursion. Prayer will scour the coast,
clear the conscience of dead works. Acts 8.22.

Verse. 32. And Pharaoh hardened] All blows and pressures were so far from
mollifying him, that he hardened and emmarbled more and more.

CHAP. IX. Ver. 1. Let my People go]
THe very same message to a word, as before often. Austin perswade's God's
Messengers so long to insist upon the same point, De D^ctrina Christian^.
beating and repeating of it in the same words, till they perceiv by the
gesture and countenance of the hearers that they understand and embrace it.
Chrysostom at Antioch preached many Sermons against swearing; and told the
people (that seemed to be weary of that subject) that till they left their
swearing, he would never leav preaching against that sin; (...), said Socrates.

Verse. 3. Is upon thy Cattle] Both those ad esum, and those ad usum. Men sin,
these suffer, and therefore groan. Romans 8.

Ver. 4. And there shall nothing die] It is fair weather often with the Saints,
when it is foulest with the wicked. God hides his in the hollow of his hand.
Psalm. 91. till the indignation be overpast. Isa. 26.20. He giv's the like
charge of them as David did of Absalom. 2 Samuel 18.5.


Ver. 6. And all the cattel] That is, a great sort of them, Non univers^liter
sod commaniter.
not all. chap. 9.19.25. And this was the fifth of those ten plagues, a number
of perfection; to note that God therein did most perfectly administer and
execute his judgments.

Ver. 7. And the heart of Pharaoh was hardened] like a Smith's anvil, he grew
harder for hammerine. There was little need to say to Pharaoh as the Smith did
to the Lantgrave of Thuring, Pet. Nicol. Gelstronp.
Durescite, durescite, O infe^^x Lantgravi He hardened fast enough.

Ver. 8. Sprinkle's it toward the heaven] in token that this plague should in a
special manner be inflicted from heaven: The Philistims by their golden emrods
acknowledged, that the emrods in their flesh were from God. Hippocrates called
the pestilence (...) the divine diseas, as we call the spots thereof God's
marks. The Falling sickness was anciently called morbus sacer, as an immediate
hand of God. Life of K Edward 6. by Sir John Heywood, page 127.
And what can we conceiv less of the Sweating sickness with which no stranger
in England was touched: and yet the English were chased therewith, not only in
England, but in other countries abroad: which made them like tyrants both
feared and avoided wherever they came.

Ver. 9. A boil breaking forth] this Moses threatens to all disobedient
persons. Deuteronomy. 28.27. Job's boils were rather probational then penal. So were
Munster's ulcers (medicinal they were howsoever) which he showed to his friend
and said, He sunt gemmae and pretiosa ornamenta Dei, quibus Deus amicos suos
ornat, ut eos ad se attrahat. These be those gems and jewels wherewith God
adorneth his best friends, that he may bring them nearer to himself.

Ver. 11. For the boil was upon the Magicians] who were convicted, but not
converted. Exodus, 8.9. They stood still to withstand Moses, as Balaam against
the light of his own conscience, was resolved to curs howsoever; and therefore
went not aside as at other times to speak with God, but set his face toward the
wilderness; Like a headstrong horse that get's the Bit in his teeth and run's
away with his Rider.

Ver. 12. And the Lord hardned] See ver. 7. and chap. 4.21. etc.

Ver. 13. Let my people go] See ver. 1.

Ver. 14. All my plagues upon thine hart] Hart-plagues are the worst plagues of
all. A hard Heart is in some respects wors then Hell: since one of the greatest
sins is greater in evil then any of the greatest punishments.

Ver. 15. For now I will stretch out] His former preservation was but a
reservation: and he has hitherto escaped with his life; not for any love
that God bare to him, but to show his power on him. Wicked men may have common
mercies and deliverances, but the Lord loves the righteous. Psalm. 146.8.

Ver. 16. Have I raised thee up] Heb. I have constituted and set thee up as a
But-mark, that I may let fly at thee and follow thee close with plague upon
plague, till I have beaten the very breath out of thy body. See Prove. 16.4.
Romans 9.17.

Ver. 17. As yet exaltest thou thy self] q. d. No amendment yet? A sore sign of
a vessel of wrath fitted to destruction. It is ill with the body when physic
will either not enter, or not stay with us.

Ver. 18. Such as has not been in Egypt] Dio makes mention of a shower of
blood and of water, Dio in Aug.
that fell in Egypt a little before it was subjected by Augustus, in quae loca
ne stilla quidem aquae ante ceciderat says he, where never any drop of water
(much less of blood) ever fell before.

Ver. 19. Jam. 2.13.
Send therefore now] Here mercy rejoiceth against judgment, Solinus.
if by any means he might be wrought upon. Sed Rhinoceros interimi potest,
capi non potest. It was past time of day to do Pharaoh good.

Ver. 20. He that feared the Lord] As few will do till they feel his hand.
Bradford.
But they that tremble not in hearing, shall be crush't to pieces in feeling
said that Martyr.

Ver. 21. And he that regards not] This was (doubtless) the greater number,
Qualis Rex, talis grex. This was a just presage and desert of ruin, not to be
warned.

Ver. 22. Stretch forth thy hand] i. e. Thy rod in thine hand. ver. 23.

Ver. 23. And the fire ran along upon the ground] such hailstones and coals of
fire we also read of Psalm. 18.13, 14, 15. Isa. 30.30, 31. and in the Roman
history, when Marcus Antonius the Philosopher fought with the Quades, (...)
and by the prayers of the thundering legion (as they were afterward called)
of the Christians rain was obtained to the refreshing of the Roman army,
ingens grando compluraque fulmin^ in hosts ceciderunt: Itaque Dio in vita M.
Ant. Phil.
licebat videre in eodem loco aquam ignemque simul de coelo cadere, atque obcam
causam, Romanos valere ac bibere. Quados exuri and penitus interire. i. e. A
huge hail and many light-bolts fell upon the enemy: Fire and water fell at
once from heaven, the Romans drank of the water and were relieved, the Quades
were burned by the fire, and perished.

Ver. 25. And break every tree of the field! Here was strages and clades
horrenda, yet Pharaoh's heart is not broken, Aug.
but remain's obdurate. Perdidistis fructum afflictionis, was an heavy charge.
Ducklings stoop and dive at any little stone thrown by a man at them; yet
shrink not at the heavens great thunder.

Ver. 26. Only in the land of Goshen] See the note on chap. 8. ver. 23. Dio
reports further of the fire forementioned, ver. 23. That that fire from heaven
either fell not at all upon the Romans; or, if it did, it was presently
quenched: neither did the waters help the Quades, Dio ubi supra
but inflamed them as if it had been oil, so that they called for water to cool
them, when the rain fell upon them; and wounded their own bodies to quench the
fire with their blood.

Ver. 27. The Lord is righteous] See the note on chap. 5. ver. 2.

Ver. 28. I will let you go] But though he spoke thus fair, Prove. 26.25.
believ him not: for there are seven abominations in his heart: No sooner was
Pharaoh off the rack, but he bite's in his confession, and retract's his
promise.

Ver. 29. I will spread abroad mine hands] viz In prayer; holding up and out
the palms of the han^, as those do that exspect to receiv an alms, in a
having manner: So did Solomon. 2 Chronicles. 6.13. See Psalm. 143.6. Ezr. 9.9. [That
the earth is the Lords] See the note on ver. 14.

Ver. 30. That ye will not yet fear] Howb^it I will pray for you, and you
shall feel the fruit of it. Thus God is good to the just and unjust. Matt. 5.

Ver. 34. But sinned yet more] As iron is very soft and malleable, while in
the fire: but soon after return's to its former hardness. So here.

CHAP. X. Ver. 1. For I have hardened his Heart]
AS he that bring's in a light, blinde's an Owl; or as he that powr's on
water kindle's the Lime whereupon it is powered: so the Lord by publishing his
commands and by doing his miracles hardened the heart of Pharaoh; who, for his
wilful rebellion was justly forsaken of God, and delivered up to his own heart,
which is somewhat wors them to be delivered up to the devil.

Ver. 2. And that thou may tell] The memory of God's (magnalia) great works
must be transmitted to posterity: Vt nati natorum and qui nascentur ab illis,
that after-Ages may hear and fear this great God. See 1 Samuel 4. ver 8.

Ver. 3. How long will thou refuse] God think's long of the time that men
misspend and waste in wicked courses Jer. 4.14. and 13.27. It is a savorie
saying of Bernard, Totum vitae meae tempus perdidi, quia perdite vixi: the time
of my looseness I have utterly lost.

Ver. 4. Else if thou refuse] Men should look up with David, and see the
punishing Angel over their heads with a drawn sword, and submit. As if not
Balaam's A^s shall condemn them for their desperate Lewdness: for he fell down
before the Angel. Si qu^ties peccent homiues, etc.
[I will bring the locusts] God has treasuries of plagues for the obstinate,
neither c^n he be (as the Poet feared of his Jupiter) possibly exhausted.

Ver. 5. And they shall cover] For they go forth by heaps. Pro. 30.27. and huge
multiudes. Jud 6.5. [And shall eat every tree] See Joel 1.7. Plin. lib. 11.
cap. 29.

Ver. 6. And he turned himself] No man may turn himself to go out of the great
Turk's presence, Turk. Hist.
but must go backward till he be out of the room. Dissension talling out
between Queen Elizabeth and the Earl of Essex about a fit man for Government of
Ireland, he uncivilly turned his back, as it were in contempt with a scornful
look: Camden's Elis. fol. 494.
She, waxing impatient, gave him a cuff on the ear; bidding him com again when
she sent for him, etc. But Moses may not be imagined to have so turned
himself.

Ver. 7. And Pharaob's servants said unto him] They were convinced and
mollified, though he was not. Whom He will God hardens. Rom 9.18. [How long
shall this man be a snare unto us?] He was not the snare, but their own sin.
Pre. 29.6. Howbeit he must bear the blame. As if some sond people should accuse
the Herald or the Trumpet as the cause of their war: oras if some ignorant
peasant, when he see's his fowls bathing in his Pond, should cry out of them
as the causses of foul weather.

Ver. 8. And Moses and Aaron were brought, etc.] Something the tyrant would seem
to yield to his Counselors, and not to deal by them as the Persian Monarchs,
who were wont to advise with their Peers: but if any of them delivered that
which was contrary to the King's mind, flagris caedebantur, Keckerman.
they were whipped: which is a punishment also usually inflicted at this day
by the great Turk, even upon the greatest Bassa's of the Court, Tu^k. Hist.
upon the least displeasure.

Ver. 9. For we must hold a Feast] See the Note on Exodus 5. ver. 1.

Ver. 10. Let the Lord be so with you] In cursing them, he unwittingly
blessed them. Exodus 12.30, 31. and 13.21, 22. See Psalm. 109.28. Cursing men are
Cursed men. But God's people fare the better for being cursed. Let them curs
but do thou bless, is not more a Prayer then a Prophecy.

Ver. 12. Even all that the hail has left] How easily can God straiten, yea,
starv us all, if he but send forth his forraging Armies. Joel 1.6.

Ver. 13. An East-winde] The proper and ordinary office whereof is to purge
the air.

Ver. 14. And the locusts went up] As a formidable army: see a graphical
description of a like plague threatened. Joel 2.4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11.

Ver. 16. I have sinned against the Lord]. A fair confession, but forced and
extorted. Thus the toad, if beaten on the belly, will vomit up his venom, and
the malefactor on the rack will utter all. But as water heated, if taken off
the sire, Aristot. Meteor. 1.12.
will soon return to its natural coldness, yea become colder after heating then
before; so hypocrites heats are not kindly from the Spirit, but violent from
the outward fire of God's judgments: therefore when that is out, these are gone.

Ver. 17. Now therefore forgive] Moses must forgive his sin: God is not in all
his thoughts. David crie's peccavi Pharnob perii: David, Against Thee, Thee
only have I sinned: Pharaoh crie's to Moses to pardon his sin. Man may forgive
the trespass, but God only the transgression.

Ver. 18. And he went out] The wisdom from above is gencle, easy to be
entreated, ready to every good work. The Devils are called Shegnirim, rough
and rugged.

Ver. 19. A mighty strong West-winde] Rupertus call's the winds mundi scopas,
the beesoms wherewith God sweep's his great house of this world: Like as his
spiritual house (the hearts of his people) he sweep's off all foul lusts
(those hellish locusts) with that rushing mighty wind spoken of. Act. 2.2.

Ver. 20. But the Lord hardned] See the Note on ver. 1.

Ver. 21. Stretch out thy band] Here was no warning. See Exodus 8.16. as good,
the more unexspected, is the more welcome; so evil the more sudden, the more
terrible.

Ver. 23. They saw not one another] That they might know the worth of light, by
the want of it. One being asked whither light was pleasant? (...).
answered, That Is a blind man's question. Little do we prize this excellent
creature.

Ver. 24. Called unto Moses] viz. when the darkness was over: though some think
that, even during the darkness, Pharaoh (such was his madness) raged against
God, and menaced Moses.

Ver. 25. Thou must give us also sacrifices] God gave Noah of every clean
beast seven (for sacrifice likely) but of every unclean two only. Genesis 7.2.

Ver. 26. Not an boof] God's Law must be kept as the apple of our cie. Prove.
7.2. A dispensatorie conscience is an evil conscience. Repentance make's clean
work: as the Flood drowned all, even Noab's friends also.

Ver. 28. Get thee from mee] Evermore when God's messengers are abandoned,
destruction is at next door by. I know that the Lord has a purpose to destrole
thee. See 2 Chronicles. 36.16.

Ver. 29. Thou have spoken well] q.d. When I see thee next, do thy pleasure by
me. This was an act of faith in him, whereby he feared not the wrath of the
King. (...)
Heb. 11.27. So when Valens the Arrian Emperor threatened Basil with bonds and
banishment, Pueris illa terriculamenta proponat, said he, Let them threaten
boys with those fray-bugs. The Emperor may take away my life, but not my
faith; my head, but not my crown.

CHAP. XI. Ver. 1. One plague more upon Pharaoh]
WHo, after the hardness of his impenitent heart treasured up to himself wrath.
Romans 2.5. God strike's still upon the thick bosses of his b^ckler. Job. 15.26.
When men are no whit better by afflictions, and wors with admonitions, God
finde's it time to strike home.

Ver. 2. Borrow of his neighbor] This was an extraordinary command, and may
not be made a president but in the same case, and upon the same warrant. The
Lawgiver only can dispens with his own Law. Ordinarily it is the wicked that
borrows, and paieth not again. Psalm. 37.21.

Ver. 3. Was very great in the Land of Egypt] Great he was both in gift and
authority; so that for his sake the Israelites might have what they would of
the Egyptians: It was not here as once at Rome, Calamitas nostra Magnus est:
Sic Mimus olim de Pompeio, plaudente populo Romano tam eleganti soloecismo.

Ver. 4. And Moses said] s^il. before he went out of Pharaoh's presence: for
afterward he saw his face no more. chap. 10. ver. 29.

Ver. 5. That sits upon his throne] As co-partner in the Kingdom. Our Henry
the second crowned his eldest son Henry, while he was yet alive. But this
young King, through discontent, fell into a fever, whereof he died before his
father; who cast him away first by his indulgence, and after by his rigor, not
suffering him to be what himself had made him. [That it behind the Mil] The
hand-mil, which they drove before them. Judge. 16.21. Isa. 47.2. Mat. 24.41.

Ver. 6. Agreat crie] Because in every house there shall be a dead corpse, and so
a Conclamatum est. They had made Israel cry: and God usually retaliate's spoil
to spoil. Exek. 39.10. number to number. Isa. 65.11, 12. choice to choice. Isa.
66.3, 4. cry to cry. Jam. 5.1, 4. etc.

Ver. 7. Shall not a dog move his tongue] And yet how many dead dogs do now
adays bark and snarl at the Israel of God? Canina sacundia.
which, nevertheless, is not without God. 2 Samuel 16.9, 10. who will one day
make iniquity to stop her mouth. Job 5.16. Why should this dead dog curs? said
Abishal.

Ver. 8. In a great anger] Heb. In heat of anger* wherewith in the cause of God
he was blessedly blown up. Meekness here had been but mopishness.

Ver. 9. That my wonders] See the note on Romans 9.17.

Ver. 10. Did all these wonders] But all was wors then spilt upon him: he was
even set in sin, and resolved never to remove; God had a hand in it.

CHAP. XII. Ver. 1. And the Lord spake]
BEfore the slaughter of the firstborn, yea before that plague was threatened.
See Mr Torshel his design for harmonizing the BIBLE.

Ver. 2. This moneth] Called Abib. Exodus 13.4. with us called March or April;
when the day lengthning, and the Sun asseending, each thing begin's to revive:
To show, says one, that by the true passover Christ JESUS, not only is our
time and all other things sanctified, but also that we should in recent
remembrance of that benefit of our Redemption, all our days and years be
thankful to our gracious Redeemer, and that by his death, true life and
reviving unto mankind. [It shall be the first moneth] viz. in respect of
sacred, not civil affairs, as Junius here prooveth out of Josephus. Antiq. lib.
1. cap. 4.
The Jubi^^es began in September. Lev. 25.8. Exodus 23.16, 9, 10. The Creation
of the world began then, as some will have it: but Luther and others think it
was in the Spring rather.

Ver. 3. In the tenth daie] The Paschal-Lamb was taken up the tenth day, but
not sacrificed till the fourteenth, that they might so kill the passover as
first to sanctisie themselves and prepare their brethren. Hospin. de crig. ^est.
cap. 5.
2 Chronicles. 35.6. For which cause also it was a received tradition among the the
Jews, that during those four days the Lamb was tied to their bed posts.

Ver. 4. Shall make your count] seil. of Communicants; that the whole may be
eaten up, and every one have enough. Spiritual blessings may be divided in
solidum, one may have as much as another, and all alike. The Gentiles also are
called to fruition and feeding on the Lamb.

Ver. 5. Without blemish] Christ that immaculate Lamb of God was hereby
typified. 1 Pet. 1.19. See the Note there. [From the sheep, or from the goats]
A lamb, to show Christ's innocence, meekness, patience, profitableness. Or a
kid, to show that he was a sinner: 1. By Imputation, for God made our sins to
meet upon him. Isa. 53.6. 2. By Reputation, for he made his grave with the
wicked, ver. 9.

Ver. 6. Until the fourteenth daie] See the note on ver. 3. [In the evening]
Christ came in the evening of the world. Heb. 1.2. in the last hour. 1 Job. 5.
when all lay buried in darkness; in the even-tide of our sin and death.

Ver. 7. And strike it on the two side-posts] Not on the threshold. We may not
tread under foot the Son of God, or count the blood of the Covenant an unholy
thing. Heb. 10.29. but get our hearts sprinkled therewith by the hysop-bunch of
Faith from an evil conscience, that we may serve the living God. Heb. 9.14.

Ver. 8. In that night] By candlelight: so must we feed upon Christ, lumine
supernaturali: Isa. 53.
by his knowledge does God's righteous servant justify many. [Rost with fire]
Not raw: we may not grossly conceiv of Christ, nor rashly receiv him. Not
boiled, bur roast: to show that Christ was roasted in the fire of his father's
wrath: and sicut tostis cibariis non adhibentur alia, ut in ^lixis fieri
consuevit: it a solum Christum debemus apprehendere fide, Alsted.
says an Interpreter. [And unleavened bread] See the Note on 1. Cor. 5.7, 8. [
And with bitter herbs] To teach, that looking upon Christ whom they have
pierced men must be in bitterness. Zach. 12.10. and feel what an evil and
bitter thing sin is. Jer. 2.19. being ready to suffer hardship with Christ,
though he should feed us to the full with bitter herbs, and make us drunk with
wormwood. Lam. 3.15.

Ver. 9. His head with his legs] To let us see our need of whole Christ, and
our most perfect comunion with Him.

Ver. 10. And ye shall let nothing of it remain] We may not presume to sin in
hope of pardon. Christ will not stand us for a sinning-stock.

Ver. 11. With your loins girt] As pressed and intent to the service: so we
should be at all times, but especially when to depart out of the F^ypt of this
life, and to take heaven by force. Then, if ever, we should hoc agere, gird up
the loins of our minds, etc. 1 Pet. 1. [And ye shall ^at it in hast] As not
doubting of deliverance, and waiting a call out of life. [It is the Lord's
passover] A sacramental expression, like that of our Savior, This is my body.
Mat. 26.26. see the Note there. The sacraments of the old Testament were both
saeraments and types: but those of the New, are sacraments only.

Ver. 12. And will smite all the first-born] This crosses not that in Ezekiel.
18. The son shall not bear the iniquity of his father: for God never punishes
the innocent, because all are guilty before Him. These Egyptians had slain
Israel God's firstborn. And it is the observation of Theodoret, that when God
smote Pharaoh's firstborn, he drew blood of the arm for the cure of the head:
which because it mended not thereupon, came also to confusion. [and upon all the
Gods of Egypt] As he did here upon the Popish Idols in the beginning of the
Reformation, by detecting their vanity and laying their honor in the dust.

Ver. 13. I will pass over you] Or, over-skip you. So he deals often by his,
who should therefore keep a passover for our safety.

Ver. 14. By an Ordinance for ever] Till Christ our passover should be
sacrificed for us; and then the Christian passover was to succed.

Ver. 15. Ye shall put away leaven] All unsoundness in point of Faith, and
insinceritie in point of Practice. See the Note on 1 Cor. 5.7.

Ver. 16. An boli^ convocation] This same word (in the Hebrew) signifies the
holy Scriptures; Nehem. 8 9.
to teach us, says one, that the Scriptures ought to be read in the
Congregation, and holy Assemblies.

Ver. 17. In this self-same daie] Heb. In the body or strength of this day:
so the mid-daie is called. Art thou delivered, helped? write up the time and
place.

Ver. 18. Until the ane and twentieth dai^] As Austin said of the feast of
Pentecost, might these of the Passover, may we of the Powder plot; Gaudet
produci haec solemnitas. It were well i^ this holie-daie were a double-daie.

Ver. 19. No leaven found] See the Note on ver. 15. [Shal be cut off] For a
small fault, as it may seem to some: but the less the matter, the greater is the
contempt in denying to do it. Keep therefore God's commandment as the sight of
thine eye. Look to those minntula Legi^, that ye may live.

Ver. 20. Ye shall eat nothing leavened] Watch carefully against corruption in
life and doctrine: be punctual in your preparation to, and participation of
the Christian passover.

Ver. 21. All the elders of Israel] The masters of Families; who in this
Familie-service were to kill and eat, and set before the rest of the household,
as priests at home; and to show them the meaning of that mystery.

Ver. 22. A bunch of hysop] An herb of a purging property. See 1 Cor. 6.11.
[The blood that is in the bason] The remembrance of Christ's bloody passion
must be kept fresh in our hearts. [Strike the lintel] Profess Christ
crucified, T^m recent mil^i nunc Christus ac si hac bora ^^diss^t sanguinem.
Luth.
honor him by a holy conversation, mind him in your outgoings and in comings
[None of you shall go out] Be not of those that withdraw to perdition, but of
them that believ to the salvation of the soul. Heb. 10.39. Mingle no more with
the Egyptians.

Ver. 23. Will not suffer the destroier] Angels delight to be executioners of
God's judgments, and Saviors of his people.

Ver. 24. For ever] See the Note on ver. 15.

Ver. 25. Ye shall keep this service] yet with some variation of circumstance.

Ver. 26. When your children] Children are to be carefully catechized and
informed. Ephesians. 6.4. See the note there. Luther scorned not to profess himself
discipulum Catechismi, a Catechism Scholar.

Ver. 27. Bowed the head] In token of submission to the command and thank
fullness for such a salvation.

Ver. 28. Went away and did etc.] They that will not timously obeie God's sweet
precepts, shall one day have no other command to obeie but that bitter, Ite
maledicti, Go ye cursed, etc.

Ver. 29. From the firstborn of Pharaoh] See ver. 12.

Ver. 30. For there was not an hous] Neither is there an house amongst us
(hardly) where not one, but many are dead in trespasses and sins. Our land
even stink's again with such, as Egypt did with the frogs.

Ver. 31. And be called for Moses] That is, he sent them to be packing. See
chap. 10.29.

Ver. 32. Bless me also] So Maximinus the Persecutor being sorely diseased,
sent to beg the prayers of the Church. In their month you shall find these
wild asses. Jer. 2.24.

Ver. 33. We be all dead men] Quis autem vult mori? prorsus nemo. (...).
Aristot.
Every thing make's much of life, from the highest Angel to the lowest worm.

Ver. 35. And they borrowed] For their use at that solemn feast they were to
keep in the wilderness: Pons aureus fugient^ hostiextr^e^du^.
The Egyptians denied them nothing; as willing to be rid of them upon any
terms.

Ver. 36. Spoiled the Egyptians] See the note on chap. 8.2.

Ver. 37. About 600000] So that promise to Abraham was fulfilled Genesis 15.14.
and that to Jacob. Genesis 46.3.

Ver. 38. And a mixed multitude] Of strangers, that took hold of the skirts of
these Jews and said, We will go with you. Zac^. 8.23. but afterward turned
tippet. Number. 11.4. lusted greatly and greedily; and made Israel to sin. Coals
touched, will either burn or sullie us.

Ver. 39. And they baked unleavened cakes] A memorial of which sweet mercy
they kept on foot by that yearly feast of unleavened cakes. Deuteronomy. 16.3.

Ver. 40. Was four bundred and thirty years] scil. from the time that Abrabam
began to sojourn in the Land of Canaan, and to pass into Egypt. Genesis 12.10. See
Gal. 3.17. with the Note there.

Ver. 41. Even the self-same daie] God (says one) had wellnigh forfeited his
bond; but e're the Sun went down he paid the debt. His promises are good
sure-hold. At midnight the firstborn were slain, because then exactly the four
hundred and thirty years were exspired.

Ver 42. This is That night] That, with an accent. God, expect's our returns
should be answerable to our receipts. God's blessings are binders: and of all
things he can least abide to be forgotten.

Ver. 43. There shall no stranger, etc.] Strangers are excluded; to show, that
the faithful only have fellowship with Christ; contra quam Lutherani
ineptiunt, says one.

Ver. 44. When thou have circumeised him] And so admitted him into the
fellowship of the faithful. A man must live before he can be nourished, bred,
before he can be fed.

Ver. 45. A forreigner] Unless a Proselyte.

Ver. 46. In one bous] To teach them unity; which indeed is not any where
found, but in the Church. Came. 6.9. My Dove is but one, etc.

Ver. 47. Shall keep it] or perish for their neglect. Aut faciendum aut
patiendum: either men must do it, or die for it.

CHAP. XIII. Ver. 2. It is mine]
BY right of Redemption also. He that is saved is not his own, but his that
saved him. Servati sumus ut serviamus. Luke 1.74.

Ver. 3. Remember] Heb. To remember indefinitely, q. d. Remember perpetually,
and commemorate.

Ver. 3. In the month Abib] The flowrie-moneth, as Macarius call's it. See the
Note on chap. 12.2.

Ver. 5. Aland flowing with milk and honie] Where fullness may breed forget
fullness saturitie, security.

Ver. 6. Seven daies] Figuring our whole life.

Ver. 7. See the Note on chap. 12.19.20.

Ver. 8. And thou shall shew] See the Note on chap. 12.26.

Ver. 9. And for a memorial] See the Note on Mat. 23.5.

Ver. 12. The males shall be the Lords] This God did, that with the firstborn
son (commonly best beloved) he might draw all the love to himself.

Ver. 13. And every firstling of an Ass] This God would not have paid him in
kind, eo quod Asinus tardum and pigrum animal, Tusc. Quaest. lib. quinto.
as Bellarmine give's the reason The zealous God hate's dullness. Tardis
mentibus virtus non facile committitur.

Ver. 14. That thou shall say unto him] Plantas tenellas frequentius adaquare
proderit: Primas. Greg. Mag.
young plants must be often watered.

Ver. 17. That God led them not] He carefully chose their way out of Egypt;
not the nearer, but the safer. He tempt's not above what we are able: but so
order's the matter, that evils are not ready for us. till we for them.

Ver. 18. God led the people about] Philo writes that it was not much above
three d^ies journey from Egypt to Canaan the next way: Sed Dei volu tas est
summa necessitas. Tertul.


Ver. 20. From Su^^ot^] their first Rendevouz chap. 12.37.

Ver. 21. And the ^^ord] See Psalm. 105.39. Isa. 4.5, 6. God prot ct's, direct's
and every way suit's the necessities of his people.

CHAP. XIV. Ver. 1. And the Lord spake]
IT was of God then, Necesse est adesse divinum ubi bumonum cessat auxilium.
Philo Jud.
then that the people fell into such straits: that where humane help failed,
divine might com in.

Ver. 2. That they turn] i.e. return. In passing the red Sea, the Israelites
made a semicircle. Confer Exodus 13.20. with Number. 33.6. God must be followed,
though he lead us through a maze or Labyrinth.

Ver. 3. They are intangled] Perplexed, intricated, they know not what to do,
or which way to turn. Enemies watch opportunities, but often miss of their
meaning.

Ver. 4. And I will be honored] By subduing this sturdie Rebel, and bringing
his violent dealing upon his own pate. Psalm. 7.16. 1 King. 13.
When the Prophet cried to Jeroboam's altar, it clave presently asunder. Jer.
23.29.
But the mighty hammer of God's word, with ten miracles, gave ten mighty
strokes at Pharaoh's heart, and yet could find no entrance. God will therefore
now take another course with him.

Ver. 5. That the people fled] i. e. Ran quite away, without any resolution
ever to return. This troubled the tyrant: Crowns have their cares. Little David
like's his hook the better ever since he saw the Court.

Ver. 6. Made ready his charet] To meet his destruction.

Ver. 7. Veget. lib. 1. ^ap. 24.
600 chosen charets] They fought of old out of charrets armed with sithes and
hooks; which at first were a terror, and after a scorn.

Ver. 8. With an high hand] Bravely, boldly, in battle-raie, (not as
run-awaies) in all comely equipage.

Ver. 9. But the Egyptians pursued]. And God made fair way before them, till
they came into the red sea.

Ver. 10. For they were sore affraid] Because sorely distressed: they saw no
way to escape, unless they could have gone up to heaven: which because they
could not, heaven came down to them (though unworthie) that God might get him a
name. Isa. 63.12, 14. The Israelites herein were far more happy then those
ancient Britains, who being greatly distressed by their Northern Enemies in
the time of Valentinian the third, implo^ed the aid of Aetius the Roman Prefect
of Gaul, using these words: To Aetius thrice consul the sigh's of the Britains:
Daniels Chronicle.
and after thus they complain. The barbarous enemy beat's us to the sea; the
sea beats us back to the enemy: between these two kinds of deaths, we are
either murdered or drowned. But their implorations prevailed not: Neither
found they any other remedy then what the Prince of Orange showed to his
soldiers at the battle of Newport; Hist. of Netherl.
when they had the sea on one side, and the Spaniards on the other: If, says
He, you will live, you must either eat up these Spaniards, or drink up this
Sea.

Ver. 11. Because there were no graves] Thus they rebelled at the sea, at the
red sea, yet he saved them for his names sake. Psalm 106.7.8.

Ver. 12. Is not this the word] Invalidum omne natura querulum. Weak spirits
are ever quarrelling and contending. Seneca.


Ver. 13. Stand still and see the salvation] Thus God heard their cry at the
red-sea] Neh. 9.9. Though it were not the cry of faith, but of fright and
perturbation. So he heard the voice of the lad. Genesis 21.17.

Ver. 14. Ye shall hold your peace] i. e. Ye shall neither say, nor do.

Ver. 15. Wherefore criest thou unto me?] sc. with inward groanings, without
any audible voice Moses egit vocis silentium, ut cord clamaret. And God was
readier to answer, then he to ask. [Speak unto the children of Israel] q. d.
August.
There Is something more to be don then to pray. Ora and labora. We must not
only crave God's help, but be forward in the course, whereby to make way for
God's help. [That they gforward] Though upon a manifest danger. This is an act
of strong faith, pure obedience.

Ver. 16. But lift thou up thy rod] This rod God make's use of, for the greater
manifestation of his own power, and the gracing of his servant Moses.

Ver. 18. When I have gotten me honor] Made me a name as at this day. Neh.
9.10. For this he was famous in far countries. Jethro (the first proselyte to
the Jewish Church) was hereby converted, say the Rabbines. 1 Samuel 4.8.
And the Philistimes cry Woe unto us, these are the Gods that smote the
Egyptians with all the plagues in the Wilderness.

Ver. 19. And the Angel of God] Christ the Angel of God's presence. See chap.
13.21. and 23.22. [Went behind them] So the glory of the Lord was their
rereward. Isai. 58.8. He will be to his both Van and Rere* Isai. 52.12.

Ver. 20. A cloud and darkness to them] See the Note on Heb. 12.2.

Ver. 21. Func; Chron.
And Moses stretched out his hand] Of that Pseudo-Moses that coze^ed many
credulous Jews of Creet into the mid^st of the sea, Anno. 434. See Funccius at
that year. [And the waters were divided] So was that torrent of fire (if
Aristotle may be believed) that ran from Aetna, De mundo. cap. 6.
consuming the country, and yet parted it self; making a kind of a lane for
those that ventured to rescue their aged parents.

Ver. 22. Were a wall unto them] Every main affliction is our red sea (says
One) which, while it threat's to swallow, preserv's us.

Ver. 24. In the morning watch] God watches upon the evil to bring it upon his
enemies, then when he may do them a greatest mischief. Dan. 9.14. He picketh
his times for vengeance Isai. 33.10. [The Lord looked upon the host] Hoe set
his eyes upon them (as Paul did upon Elymas the sorcerer) with highest offense,
and utmost indignation. After which lightening fallows that terrible
thunderclap, wherewith he troubled them and took off their wheels. See Psalm.
77.18, 19. and 18.15.

Ver. 25. For the Lord fights for them] Our late great successes have
extorted the like acknowledgments from some of Satan's sworn swordmen: as at the
dissolution of the seige at Plimmouth.

Ver. 26. That the waters may com again.] By wind that God sent. Exodus 15.10,
The winds blow, the waters flow. Psalm. 147.18.

Ver. 27. Returned to his strength] For by being divided, it had been
weakened. si collidimur, frangimur. The daughter of dissension is dissolution.

Ver. 28. There remained not one of them] No more does there of our subdued
iniquities. Mic. 7.19. Peccata non redeunt. We shall see them no more, any
otherwise then these Israelites did their enemies, dead upon the shore.

CHAP. XV. Ver. 1. Then sang Moses]
PResently upon the deliverance, whiles their hearts were hot, and the mercy
fresh. No part of the thank-offering might be kept unspent till the third day.
Benesits soon grow stale, and putresie, as fish.

Ver. 2. I will prepare him an habitation] Or I will adorn him, I will give him
ornaments and trimmings. Such God account's our poor praises.

Ver. 3. The Lord is a man of war] Yea he alone is a whole Army of men, Van
and Rere both. Isai. 52.12. He send's the sword. Ezekiel. 14.17. Muster's the
men. Isai. 13.4. Order's the ammunition* Jer. 50.25. Give's the victory;
Whence he is here styled by the Chaldee. The Lord and Victor of wars.

Ver. 4. In the red sea] So called happily from that red man Esau or Edom, who
usurped the dominion of that sea, now called Sinus Arabicus.

Ver. 5. As a stone] So shall Rome. Rev. 15.5.

Ver. 6. Has dashed in pieces] It is a fearful thing to fall into the
punishing hands of the living God. Heb. 10.31. For who knows the power of his
anger? Psalm. 90.11.

Ver. 7. That rose up against thee] Because against thine. There is a league
offensive, and defensive, betwixt God and his people.

Ver. 8. And with the blast] In celebrating God's favors, we must be punctual
and particular.

Ver. 9. The enemy said I will] They made account all was their own, but were
soon confuted, as were likewise Sisera, and Sennacherib. Where the beginning of
a business is con^idence, the end is consusion.

Ver. 10. Thou did blow, etc.] Here it was that the Arm of the Lord put on
strength to cut Rahab, and wound the dragon. Isai. 51.9.

Ver. 11. Who is like thee] One of the most stately descriptions of God that is
found in holy-writ. God is to be magnified: We must make room for him.

Ver. 12. The earth swallowed them] That is the sea, which compasses the earth
about as a girdle: God having set the solid earth upon the liquid waters. See
Jon. 2.6. Psalm. 24.2.

Ver. 13. Unto thy holy habitation] Canaan where God chose to dwell. This He
is said already to have don, because he would certainly do it. God's promises
are his performances, and every former mercy a pledge of a future.

Ver. 14. Sorrow shall take hold] So it did. 1 Samuel 4.8. [Then the Dukes of
Edom] See Deuteronomy. 2.4.

Ver. 15. The mighty men] See it fulfilled. Number. 22.3. [shall melt] So they
did. Josh. 2.9, 10, 11.

Ver. 16. Till thy people pass over] Over Jordan (as now they have don over the
red sea,) into Canaan.

Ver. 17. Of thine inheritance] provided and purchased by thee for thy
firstborn, Israel.

Ver. 18. The Lord shall reign] Gaudeo quod Christus Dominus est: alioqui totus
desperassem, write's Miconius to Calvin, upon the view of the Churches enemies.
The Lord Christ reigns. Or else I had been out of all hope of better.

Ver. 19. For the horse of Pharaob] A good soul is altogether unsatisfiable in
sanctifying God's name, and setting forth his goodness. Should I do nothing else
all the days of my life (said that Martyr) yea as long as the days of heaven
shall last, Act. and Mon.
but kneel on my knees and repete David's Psalms, yet should I fall infinitely
short of what I ow to God.

Ver. 20. And Miriam] Souls have no sexes: And if souls follow the temperament
of their bodies (as Philosophy says they do) women's bodies consist of rater
rooms, of a more exact composition then men's do.

Ver. 21. Sing ye to the Lord] This seems to have been the burden of the
song: as Psalm. 136.1.

Ver. 22. And found no water] Thirst and bitterness was their first handsel in
their voyage.

Ver. 23. They could not drink] Water they now had, but what the better? God
can give us blessings, but with such a tang, that we shall have no great joie
of them.

Ver. 24. Seneca.
Murmured against Moses] He must bear the blame of all. Public persons are
sure to have an ill life of it. Qui vitaverit culpam, non effugit infamiam.

Ver. 25. Showed him a tree] A type of Christ's sweet cross, and easy yoke,
that sweetneth and facilitateth all our light afflictions.

Ver. 26. And said if thou, etc.] This God premiseth as a preface to the law,
to be shortly after given in Sinai. [I am the Lord that heals thee] Both on
the inside, by forgiving all thine iniquities, and on the outside, by healing
all thy diseases. Psalm. 103. I am Jehovah the Physician. And omnipotenti medico
nullus insanabilis occurrit morbus. Isidor.
To an Almighty Physician no diseas is uncurable.

Ver. 27. And they came to Elim] The Heathens slandered the Jews, Corn. Tacit.
Annal. l. 12.
that they found these fountains by the means of certain asses that guided
them: Whence they are called Asinarij by Molon and Appion of Alexandria; who
affirmed that for this cause the Jews worshipped the golden head of an ass, etc.

CHAP. XVI. Ver. 1. Unto the wilderness of Sin]
SO called because it bordered upon the city of Sin, whereof see Ezekiel.
30.15.16. With Ezekiel. 20.35, 36. Or of the many brambles that grew therein.

Ver. 2. And the whole Congregation] The most part of the people. Diaconos
paucitas honorabiles fecit, says Hierom: sic and veros Israelitas.

Ver. 3. To kill this whole Assemblie] Thus discontent will say any thing:
neither cares it how true the charge be, but how stinging and stabbing.

Ver. 4. I will rain bread from heaven] Not hell from heaven, as once he did
upon Sodom. If thine enemy hunger, feed him, as God here does.

Ver. 5. On the sixth day they shall prepare] The Jews preparation to the
Sabbath began at three a clock in the afternoon. Buxtorf. Synagog.
The best and wealthiest of them, even those that had many servants, did with
their own hands further the preparation: So that sometimes the masters themselves
would chop herbs, sweep the house, cleav wood, kindle the fire, etc.

Ver. 6. That the Lord] And not we without his authority: so that in murmuring
against us, ye have set your mouths against heaven. Caveant (...) Grudg not,
behold the Judge stands before the door.

Ver. 7. Jam 5.9.
Ye shall see the glory of the Lord] Shining in that wonderful work of his,
the bread from heaven. Confer Number. ^4.21. I^b. 11.40.

Ver. 8. In the evening flesh to eat etc] Never was Prince so served in his
greatest pomp, as these rebellious Israelites. How good shall we find him
then to those that pleat him?

Ver. 9. For he has heard your murmurings] Now then what will you do, since
God rises up. And since he vi^^teth, what will ye answer? I^b. 31.14.

Ver. 10. Toward the wilderness] Where the cloud was in the forefront of their
armies.

Ver. 11. And the Lord spake] i. e. He ^ad before spoken.

Ver. 12. And in the morning] They have their flesh at Even, and bread in the
morning. God will be waited on, and give the consummation of his blessings at
his leisure. The cloud emptie's not it self at a sudden burst, but dissolve's
upon the earth, drop after drop.

Ver. 13. The dew lay round] i. e. The Manna that came down in the dew, as
Christ the bread of life does in the Ministry of the word. See Deuteronomy. 32.2.

Ver. 14. The dew that laie] And covered the Manna: whence that promi^e of
hidden Manna. Revel. 2.17.

Ver. 15. Lib: 26. cap. 14.
It is Manna] i. e. What shall I call? Herba Anonymus non inveniendo^nomen,
invenit, says Pliny: so Manna. Others interpret Manna, a portion, an
admirable gift, or meat prepared.

Ver. 16. Every man according to his eating] Thus they were inured in diem
vivere, as Quintilian says the birds do, to de* pend upon God for their daily
bread.

Ver. 17. Some more, some less] ecundum proportionem arithmeticam, sed non
secundum proportionem ceome^^icam. as a man had more or less mouths in his
family to ^eed.

Ver. 18. He that gathered much] See the Note on 2 Cor. 8.15.

Ver. 19. Let no man leav of it, etc.] It was to be gathered in the morning,
and not kept till the morrow. I made baste and delaied not, says David. Psalm.
119 60.

Ver. 20. Left of it until, etc.] Eit^er through distru^, or curiosity.

Verse. 21. It melted] Or putrefied, faded, disolved. Some Papists derive their
Mass from this root: and well it may be; nam per eam omnis pietas liquefacta
est and dissoluta, says Rivet: for it is the utter bane of all good, as being
a mass or heap of abominations.

Verse. 22. And told Moses] As fearing that the people had not don so well, as
indeed they did: or as desirous of further direction.

Verse. 23. Lay up for you etc.] This is no plea for the Popish keeping of
their breaden God in a pyx, for here was a command so to do, lest the Sabbath
should be profaned: but for the other, there is none.

Verse. 24. Till the morning] The Sabbath-morning wherein it putrified not, but
continued sound and savorie by the special hand of God; that they might keep
the Sabbath; as it appears here they did, before the Law given at Sinai.
Papists press the sanctification of the Sabbath as a mere humane institution in
religious worship. Our Anti-sabbatarian Prelates took this text for an
Anticipation only, and made little account of the fourth commandment, which
Spalato had taught them was don away, etc.

Ver. 25. Eat that to daie] So shall those that labor in the Lord rest, and
feast in heaven. Thus the Rabbines moralize it.

Ver. 27. And it came to pass] See the Note on ver. 20. Some unrulie beasts
(masterless monsters) will be breaking over the hedge: but the Law will hamper
them.

Ver. 28. How long refuse yee] The rulers are shent for the peoples unruliness.
[To keep my commandments] For in breaking that one of the Sabbath, they had
broken all: the whole Law is but one copulative. See Jam. 2.10.

Ver. 29. Has given you the Sabbath] And a great gift it was. Nehe. 9.14. Were
it not for the weekly sabbath we should all run wild. [Abide ye every man
in his place] Sabbath coming from Shabath to ceas or rest, has some affinity
with Jashabh to sit still, and with Shabath to worship and give prais, to show,
that this rest must be sanctified: for else it is but Asinorum sabbatum, as One
says, the Sabbath of the Ox and Ass. for these also must rest.

Ver. 30. So the people rested] According to their custom, though probably
intermitted for a season in Egypt, dureing their hard servitude. D. prideaux.
Sed rationem reddat qui potest (says a learned Doctor) quare, ante legem
promulgatam, in die septimo cessavit Manna, nisi quia, ad exemplum Domini, ab
ipsius mundi primordio invaluisset sabbati observatio. This ceasing of Manna on
the seventh day shows that the Sabbath was kept from the beginning.

Ver. 31. And the taste of it] It had not all manner of good tastes, according
to every man's appetite; as Wisd. 16.20, 21. It is said, but as Number. 11.8. Else
why should the people lust and murmur, as there they did. ver. 4, 5.

Ver. 32. Fill an omer] Monuments and memorials of God's great mercies are to
be set up, lest (as it fare's with children) Eaten bread be soon forgotten.
Strabo Geog.


Ver. 33. Take a pot] A golden pot. Heb. 9.4. Strabo writes, that the
Metapontini (after a plentiful harvest which had much enriched them) dedicated
to Apollo at Delphos (...) an harvest of gold.

Ver. 34. To be kept] For the use of succeeding ages, in the most holy
places: so Christ, glorified in his humanity, abide's for ever. Heb 7.

Ver. 35. Until they came] So till we com to heaven, shall we have need of
Ordinances.

Ver. 36. Of an Ephah] Or of a bushel: a plentiful allowance: see the Note on
Ioh. 2.7.

CHAP. XVII. Ver. 1. After their journies] i. e.
AFter they had firs;t been at Dophcah, and at Alush. Number. 33.12, 13, 14.
[There was no water] Bread they had from heaven, but wanted water. Our
condition here is a condition of singular indigencie: we are ever wanting
somewhat, or other.

Ver. 2. The people did chide with Moses] As they did before for bread. And as
thirst is the more eager appetite, so they are more eager and earnest for
water, then they were for bread, [Wherefore do ye tempt the Lord] viz Whether
he be amongst you, and be able by miracle to reliev you.

Ver. 3. Murmured against Moses] Magistrates have many times a weary life,
with the mutinous multitude. Seneca observes of Egypt (it proved true of this
people newly com out of Egypt) that it was loquax and ingeniosa in contumeliam
proefectorum provincia: in qua, qui vitaverit culpam, non effugit infamiam.
That it was (...) province apt to prate against their Governors, and to cast a
slur upon them, though never so well deserving.

Ver. 4. Ready to stone mee] Well might he ask with our Savior, For which of
my good works do ye stone me? John 10.32.
But the belly has no cars.

Ver. 5. Take with thee of the Elders] As witnesses of this great work of God;
which the people for their unbelief might not behold. God put's up their
rebellion, and sat is^^e's their thirst: but yet intimates his just
displeasure, by denying them this privilege of seeing the rock smitten.

Ver. 6. Upon the rock] If God had not stood upon the rock, in vain had Moses
struck it. Means must be used, but God only depended upon for success. It is
he alone that set's the rock abroach. [Thou shall smite the rock] Here in a
type of Christ, stricken, smitten of God and afflicted. Isa. 53.4. 1 Cor. 10.4.
[And there shall com water out of it] Not sire, (that had not been so
miraculous,) but water. This cleaving the hard rock. Psalm 78.15. This turning
of the slint into a fountain. Psalm 114.8. was a work of Omnipotency, and is
therefore much celebrated. Deuteronomy. 8.15. Psalm 105.41 Nehem. 9 15. Dioscorides
tell's us of the stone Galactites, qued suceum emittat lacieum, that it yield's
a kind of moisture like milk which, if it be true, is very strange. [That
the people may d^ink] And so be cooled and comforted in their weariness and
wanderings. Ho, every one that thirsts, etc. Isa 55.1.

Ver. 7. Is the Lord amongst us?] As if that could not be, and they athirst?
But he is most present, when he afflict's: He know's our souls in adversity.

Ver. 8. Then came Amalek] Not having the fear of God before his eles. Deuteronomy.
25.18. but carried on by the ancient enmity: for Amalek was Esau's grandchilde.

Ver. 9. I will stand on the top] Where the people might see him with that
Ensign in his hand, and be encouraged, Xerxes used to pitch his tent on high,
and stand looking on his army, when in fight, for their encouragement.

Ver. 10. Aaron and Hur] This Hur, says Josephus, was husband to Miriam, and
Moses his Deputy. Exodus 24.14. [Went up to the top of a hill] To pray
together. Psalm 76.2.3. In the Congregation where the Saints are praying, there
the arrow, shield, and spear are broken. 2 Samuel 18.3. From thence shall thou
help us; (said the people to David) that is, thy prayers shall prevail with God
for our assistance. Non tam praeliando quam precando. The King of Sweden as soon
as he set foot in Germany fell down to prayer, and he proved very
victorious.

Ver. 11. When Moses held up his hands] The push of Moses's prayers did more
then the pikes of all Israel besides. Moses orat and vincit, Bucholcer. Chronol.
cessat and vincitur, says one. Great is the power of prayers. Henricus
Anceps, the Emperor of Germany, slew and put to flight a huge army of the
Hungarians, his soldiers all crying out with a loud voice, Idem ibid.
Kyrie eleison, Kyrie eleison, i, e. Lord have mercy upon us, Lord have mercy
upon us. This was don before the city of Mersburg.

Ver. 12. But Moses's hands were heavie] It is a prais proper to God, that his
hand is stretched out still: As for men, even the best, though the spirit in
them be willing, yet the flesh is weak, and will not suffer any long
intention. [And Aaron and Hur staid up his hands] Neither did they only raise
up their hands, but their minds with his. There are that here observe, that
upon the fourtieth day after their coming out of Egypt, Moses, Aaron, and Hur
went up into the Mount, where Moses's hands are thus supported, while Amalek is
discomfited; and that Moses the Prophet, Hur the Prince, and Aaron the Priest,
all put together, were a type of Christ; who on the fourtieth day after his
Resurrection asscended into the Mount of Heaven; where, as our Prophet, Priest,
and Prince, he hold's up the hands of his Intercession for his Church
Militant, whiles she fight's with spiritual Amalek, Sin, Satan, Antichrist,
World, Flesh, etc.

Ver. 13. And Joshua discomfited] How should he do otherwise, when he fought
with such weapons? Prayers are the bombardae, and instrumenta bellica
Christianorum, says Luther: The great guns, and warlike weapons of the Saints.
The Romans in a great distress were driven to take the weapons out of the
Temples of their gods, and overcame. The Parliament soldiers at
Edg-hill-battle falling on with courage, and crying out, Now for the fruit of
prayer, Now for the fruit of prayer; prevailed mightily, slaying near ten to
one, etc.

Ver. 14. In a book] Or, in the book that thou art now in writing: viz. the
Pentateuch, the most ancient book that is extant. [I will utterly put out etc.]
The portion of wicked men is to be forgotten in the city where they had so
don, Eccles. 8.10. their memory die's with them: or, if it be preserved, it
stink's in keeping, and remain's as a curs and perpetual disgrace.

Ver. 15. And Moses built an Altar] As a lasting monument of God's great Mercy
in that first victory. The Romans had a custom, that the Conqueror in his
triumphant chariot rode to the Capitol, and offered a white ox to Jupiter. Live
lib 6. Decad 3.


Ver. 16. Because the Lord, etc.] Heb. The hand upon the throne of the Lord.
God's hand is laid upon his own throne, as swearing to root out Amalek. Or
Amalek's hand is lifted up against God's throne, that is the Church (called
God's throne of glory. Jer. 4.21. and crown of glory. Isa. 62.3.) therefore
he will have perpetual war with him. Tua caussa erit mea caussa, said the
Emperor Charles the Fifth to Julius Pflugius, who, being his Agent, had
received wrong by the Duke of Saxony; so says God to all that belong to him.

CHAP. XVIII. Ver. 1. Heard of all]
ANd thereby was converted, (say the Rabbis) being the first Proselyte to
the Jewish Church that we read of in in Scripture.

Ver. 2. After he had sent her back] Because she was troublesome with her
peevishness, and a hinderance to the good work in hand. Chap. 4.25, 26. Sylla
felix fuisset ni uxorem duxisset; Adrianus ni imperitasset. Moses, both.

Ver. 3. In a strange land] See the Note on Chap. 2.22.

Ver. 4. Eliezer] Or Lazarus. We should write God's mercies upon the names of
our children, or some other ways perpetuate the memory of them.

Ver. 5. At the Mount of God] Horeb, whither they were removed from Rephidim,
though the remove be not mentioned.

Ver. 6. And he said] That is, sent him word: so God's messages to us are to
be received as his own immediate words. He that hears you, hears me.

Ver. 7. And did obeisance] Sr. Thomas More Lord Chancellor, would in
Westminster Hall beg his Father's blessing on his knees.

Ver. 8. All that the Lord bath don] It is not enough to relate God's mercies
to us in the lump, and by whole sale; but we must instance the particulars
both to God and men. [That had com upon them] Heb. Had found them; yet not
without a providence. Job 5.6. God cut's us out our several conditions: it is
his hand that finde's us when we suffer ought.

Ver. 9. And Jethro rejoiced] So must all Sion's sons, Isa. 66.10.

Ver. 10. And Jethro said etc.] Cheerfulness make's thankfulness. Luke 1.46.
Jam. 5.13.

Ver. 11. Now I know] See the Note on Ver. 1. So the people knew that Jehovah
was God. 1 King. 18.37. See 2 Cro. 33.13. [Hee was above them] God sit's in the
heavens. Psalm. 2.4. where he see's that their day is coming. Psalm 37.16. and
mean while scorneth these scorners. Prove. 3. Fright's them, as he did those
Syrians. 2 King. 7.6. Over-aw's them, as he did Laban. Divert's them, as he
did Saul, Senacherib, etc. or otherwise defeat's them, as he did Benhadad,
disclosing their counsels, blasting their designs, etc.

Ver. 12. Before God] i.e. as in his presence, with reverence and godly fear.
To feed without fear is a foul fault. Jude 12. See my Commonplace of
Abstinence.

Ver. 13. And the people stood by Moses] Being happily (as the French are said
to be) very litigious, and thereunto abuting Moses's lenity: whereas had
they been soundly whipped (as among Mahumetans they are, that go to law for
light ^^att^rs) there would have been but few and short suits amongst them.
Sure it is, that if men's hearts were not bigger then their suits, there would
not be half so many.

Ver. 14. What is this thing] A man by good counsel may become an Angel; nay, a
God to another. Alexander being requested by some Ambassadors to show them his
treasures, showed them his faithful Counselors.

Ver. 15. To enquire of God] For a divine sentence is in the mouth of the Judge:
therefore also the place of Judicature is called the holy place. Eccles. 8.10.
Let those that go to law inquire of God, and rest in his will.

Ver. 16. When they have a matter] In our ordinary suits there is, for the
most part more malice then matter. The late Judge Dier, if there came any such
trilling controversies to be tried before him, would usually say, That either
the parties are wilful, or their neighbors without charity, because their suits
were not quietly compromised.

Ver. 17. Is not good] We commonly say, He that receiv's a courtesy, sell's
his liberty. But so did not Jethro.

Ver. 18. Thou will surely wear away] Heb. Fading, thou will fade, as a leaf
that wants moisture. Melanchthon was wont to say, that none labored so hard
as Traveling women, Magistrates, and Ministers. Politici and Ecclesiastici
labores maximi sunt, says Luther. Atterunt enim corpus, and tanquam ex imis
medullis exhauriunt succum.

Ver. 19. I will give thee counsel] A Midianite counsel's Moses: God hereby
teaches him humility.

Ver. 21. Out of all the people] Magistrates must be drained from the dregs,
sifted from the bran of the ordinary sort of people. [ Able men] Able and
active, strong and stouthearted, wealthy also, and well underlaied. See
Jethro's Justice of Peace in a Sermon by Mr. Sam. Ward.

Ver. 22. So shall it be easier, etc.] How thankless is their labor that do
wilfully over-spend themselves in their ordinary vocations?

Ver. 23. To their place] To the promised land, Or to their own homes, well
apaid, and with good content.

Ver. 24. So Moses hearkned] Of a meek man it is said that a child shall lead
him Isa 11.6. how much more so grave a counselor as Jethro? Dio. in Augusto.
Augustus (...) was over-joyed with the plain dealings of his friends and
counselors: as of Mecoenas.

Ver. 25. And Moses chose] Not without the peoples consent. Deuteronomy. 1.13, 14.

Ver. 27. Into his own land] An honest man's heart is where his calling is:
such a one when he is abroad is like a fish in the air; whereinto if it leap
for recreation or necessity, yet it soon return's to his own element.

CHAP. XIX. Ver. 1. Into the wilderness of Sinai]
A Place where were many bushes and briars. Here they received ^he Law, which
like briars and brambles pricketh and pierces the consciences of evil livers.
And this sell out 430. years after the Promise made to Abraham; not to disanul
the Promise. Gal. 3.17. but to advance it: and, that guilt being discovered,
and every mouth stopped. Romans 3.19. we might acknowledge the riches of free
Grace and Mercy.

Ver. 2. For they were departed] See the Note on Chap. 18.5.

Ver. 3. And Moses went up] See the note on Chap. 3.6.

Ver. 4. On Eagles wings] The Eagle beat's her young ones out of their sluggish
nest, that they may learn to fly: there was somewhat to do to bring Israel out
of Egypt. Munster. in Schol. in Deuteronomy. 32.11. ex R. Solomon.
The Eagle carrie's her young upon her wings (and not between her talons as
other birds do) openly, safely, speedily: So did God his Israel, being choice
and charie of them all the way; securing them also from their enemies, who
could do them as little hurt, as any can do the Eagle's young, which cannot
be shot but through the body of the old one. Some by Eagles here understand
Moses and Aaron, who are so called (say they) propter acumen intelligentiae
and altitudinem vitae, for the sharpness of their understanding, and the
loftiness of their lives. See the Note on Deuteronomy. 32.11.

Ver. 5. If ye will obeie my voice indeed] As I am good to you indeed, and not
in pretens or profession only. Nathanael was an Israelite indeed. John 1.47.
And Caleb fulfilled after God (or fully followed him) so did not Solomon. 1
King. 11.6.

Ver. 6. A kingdom of Priests] A holy state, such as shall be all satiated
with fatness. Jer 31.14. See the Notes on 1 Pet. 2.9. and Rev. 1.6.

Ver. 7. Laid before their faces] Or plainly proposed the mind of God: (...).
so did Paul. Acts 17.3. So must Ministers.

Ver. 8. All that the Lord has spoken] Sed, quid dignum tanto feret hic
promissor bia^u? How easily over-ween we our own abilities? Pollicitis dives
quilibet esse potest. Words are good cheap.

Ver. 9. And believ thee] Without suspicion of an imposture; such as was that
of Mahomet.

Ver. 10. Sanctify them to day, and to morrow] Men must com before God with
the best preparation they can get. He will be sanctified in all them that
draw nigh unto him. This the blind Heathens saw, and therefore said, Plutarch.
(...), worship not God by the by, but with all possible preparation. Hence
they had their coena pura before their solemn sacrifices. Bucholcer.
Numa nihil rerum sacrarum cives voluit neglectim agere. Hinc solenne illud,
Hoc agite. The Ministers likewise in the Primitive Church prepared the people's
minds by saying, Sursum corda, Lift up your hearts; Cyprian. de Oratione.
Chrysostom. Basil.
and the Deacons used to call upon the people in these words, Oremus,
attendamus: Let us pray, let us attend.

Ver. 11. Against the third daie] That is, three days hence, on the day of
Pentecost.

Ver. 12. That ye go not up into the Mount] God love's at once familiarity
and fear (says a learned Divine) familiarity with him in our conversation, D.
Hall.
and fear of him in his commands. He love's to be acquainted with men in the
walks of their obedience, yet he take's state upon him in his ordinances and
will be trembled at in his Word and Judgments.

Ver. 13. They shall com up to the Mount] i. e. To the bottom of the Mount, to
the foot thereof. Verse 17. See the Note on Heb. 12.20.

Ver. 14. And washed their clothes] In token of washing their hearts, and
cleansing themselves from all filthiness of flesh and spirit. The Gentiles also
washed, Plaut. in Alul. Act. 3. scen. 6. Tertul. cap. 11. de Orat.
that they might go to sacrifice: and the Primitive Christians before Prayer.

Ver. 15. Be ready against the third daie] If the word of a Command exspected
such readiness, what shall the word of Promiss? etc. [Com not at your wives]
For the Legal uncleanness that was in it. Lev. 15.18. 1 Samuel 21.4. figuring the
filth of original sin.

Ver. 16. There were thunders and lightnings] The Law was delivered in this
terrible manner; partly to procure reverence to the Doctrine of it, and partly
to set forth the Nature and Office of it; which is to terrify and
thunder-strike offenders.

Ver. 17. To meet with God] Who came with ten thousands of his Saints, as Moses
(that climbed up that hill, Deuteronomy. 33.2.
and alone saw it) saie's. And if he thus gave the Law, how shall he require
it at the last day?

Ver. 18. The Lord descended upon it in fire] This fire wherein the Law was
given, is still in it, and will never out. Deuteronomy. 33.2.

Ver. 19. Moses spake] Yet not without horror. Heb. 12.21.

Ver. 20. And Moses went up] As a Mediator between God and his people. Gal.
3.19. with Acts 7.38. A Mediator Moses was, not of Redemption (as Christ that
Mediator of the new Covenant and surety of a better Testament. Heb. 7.22. and
9.15.) but of receiving the Law, and delivering it to the people, for which end
here he went up.

Ver. 21. And many of them perish] As the men of Bethshemesh did for prying
into the Ark. 1 Samuel 6.19. Arcana Dei, sunt Arca Dei: Calvin.
God's secrets are his Ark. Eorum quae scire nec datur, nec fas est, docta est
ignorantia; scientiae appetentia, insaniae species. Not to know what is not fit
to know, is a learned ignorance: to desire to know in that case is a kind of
madness. He that curiously searches into God's Majesty, shall be oppressed
of his glory.

Ver. 22. And let the Priests] The firstborn of the family, which before the
Levitical Law, had the Priesthood. [Sanctifie themselvs] With a singular care,
above that of the rest of the people. Much is required of Ministers.

Ver. 23. The people cannot com up] i. e. Siquid ego aut capio, aut sapio, they
cannot: that which I know not teach thou me.

Ver. 24. Away, get thee down] Abundans cautela non nocet. It is fit that men
should know and keep their distance. [Thou and Aaron with thee] These only
(who were types of Christ's Princely and Priestly office) might com up unto the
Lord.

CHAP. XX. Ver. 1. God spoke all, etc.]
ALL the Ten are of divine authority. Papists disanulling the second, that yet
they may retein the number of ten words (so loath are Heretics to have their
ass^^ cars seon) they divide the last, which yet is called the Commandment,
not the Commandments. Romans 7.7. Vasques not able to answer our Argument,
says, That the second Commandment belonged to the Jews only.

Ver. 2. Which have brought thee] God's blessings are binders; and every
deliverance a tie to obedience.

Ver. 3. Thou shall have] This Thou reaches every man. Xenophon says of
Cyrus, that when he gave any thing in command, he never said, Let some one do
this; but, Do thou this. Hoc tu facias. Xenophon. Cyropaed.
[No other Gods before mee] But know and serve me alone with a perfect heart,
and with a willing mind. 1 Chronicles. 28.9. Hoc primo praecepto reliquorum omnium
observantia praecipitur, says Luther. In this first Commandment the keeping
of all the other nine is commanded.

Ver. 4. Thou shall not make unto thee] i. e. For religious use; for civil they
may be made. Mat. 22.20. Howbeit the Turks will not endure any Image, no not
upon their coins, because of this second Commandment. The Papists by their
sacrilegeous practices have taken away this Commandment out of their vulgar
Catechism. This is a great stumbling block to the Jews, and a let to their
conversion: for ever since their return from Babylon, they do infinitely abhor
Idolatry. And for their coming to Christian Sermons, they say, That as long
as they shall see the Preacher direct his speech and prayer to that little
wooden Crucifix, that stand's on the Pulpit by him, Specul. Europ.
to call it his Lord and Savior, to kneel to it, to embrace it, to kiss it, to
weep upon it (as is the fashion of Italy) this is preaching sufficient for
them, and perswade's them more with the very sight of it, to hate Christian
Religion, then any reason that the world can allege to love it.

Ver. 5. Thou shall not bow down] Images came first from Babylon. For Ninus
having made an Image of his father Belus, all that came to see it were pardoned
for their former offenses: whence in time that Image came to be worshipped,
through the instigation of the Devil, who is, says Synesius, (...), one that
rejoiceth in Images. [Am a jealous God] Be the gods of the Heathens
good-fellows, says one: the true God is a jealous God and will not share his
glory with another, nor be served by any but in his own way. They that
wit-wanton it with God, may look to speed wors then that Citizen in K. Edward
the Fourth's days did; who was executed in Cheapside as a traitor, Speed's
Chron
for saying he would make his son heir of the crown; though he only meant
his own house, having a crown for the sign. [Visiting the iniquitie] This second
Commandment is the first with punishment: because men do commonly punish such
as worship God in spirit and truth. As therefore one fire, so one fear should
drive out another; the fear of God, the fear of men.

Ver. 6. Unto thousands] Of succeeding generations. Personal goodness is
profitable to posterity. And this promiss though made to all, yet is more
specially annexed to this second Commandment; to teach (says one) that
parents should chiefly labor to plant piety in their families, as they would
have God's blessing intailed upon their issue.

Ver. 7. The Name of the Lord] That holy and reverend Name. Psalm. 111.9. that
Nomen Majestativum, as Tertullian calls it, dreadful among the Heathen. Mal.
1.14. The very Turks at this day chastise the Christians that live amongst
them for their oaths and blasphemies, darted up against God and Christ. The
Jews also are much offended thereat, and it should be no small grief to us to
hear it. When one of Darius his Eunuchs saw Alexander the Great setting his
feet upon a low table that had been highly esteemed by his master, he wept.
Diod. Sic. lib. 17.
Being asked the reason by Alexander, he said, It was to see the thing that
his master so highly esteemed, to be now contemned, and made his footstool.

Ver. 8. Remember the Sabbath daie] He says not, The seventh day from the
Creation, but the day of religious rest; such as is now our Christian Sabbath,
called a Sabbath-daie by our Savior. Mat. 24.20. who is Lord of this Sabbath;
called therefore the Lord's-daie, Rev. 1. 1 Cor. 10.
as one of our Sacraments is called the Lord's Supper, and the table of the
Lord, because instituted by him. Pope Sylvester presumed to alter the Christian
Sabbath; Hospin. de fest Christ.
decreeing that Thursdaie should be kept through the whole year; because on
that day Christ asscended, and on that instituted the blessed Sacrament of his
body and blood. And generally Papists press the sanctification of the Sabbath
as a mere humane institution in religious worship; an ordinance of the Church;
and do in their celebration more solemnly observe the Festivals of the Saints,
then the Lord's Sabbaths, making it as Bacchus's Orgies, etc. that, according
to what their practice is, it may more fitly be styled, Dies daemoniacus quam
Dominicus. The divel's-daie then God's. [To sanctify it] Let every one of us
keep the Sabbath spiritually, (says Ignatius) (...), Epist. 3.2d Magnesian.
rejoicing in the meditation of Christ's Law, more then in the rest of our
bodies. The ox and ass must rest, we must consecrate a rest: ^s God on the
seventh day rested not from his works of preservation. John 5.17.

Ver. 9. Six days shall thou labor] God has reserved but one day in seven,
(as he reserved the Tree of knowledge of Good and Evil. Genesis 2.) yet wretched
men must needs clip the Lord's coin. In many places God's Sabbaths are made
the voider and dunghill for all refuse businesses. The Sabbath of the Lord, the
sanctified day of his rest (says one) is shamelesly troubled and disquieted.
B. King on Jon. Lect. 7.
The world is now grown perfectly profane (says another) and can play on the
Lord's-daie without book.

Ver. 10. But the seventh daie] Or, a seventh day. Not only Hebrews, but also
Greeks and Barbarians, did rest from work on the seventh day: witness
Josephus, Clemens Alexand. and Eusehius. That which they tell us of the river
Sabbatius it is resting, and not running on that day, I look upon as fabulous.
[Thou shall not do any work] Only works of Piety, of Charity, and of
Necessity may be don on the Sabbath day. He that but gathered sticks was
paid home with stones. The first blow given the Germane Churches was upon the
Sabbath day, Dike of Cons. page 276.
which they carelessly observed. Prague was lost upon that day. [ Thou and thy
son, etc.] Every mother's child. The baser sort of people in Swethland do
always break the Sabbath, David's desire by. R. Abbot.
saying, That it is for Gentlemen to keep that day. [Thy manservant] There is
an old law of the Saxon King Ina, If a villain work on Sundaie by his Lord's
command, he shall be free. Sr. H Spelman in Council.


Ver. 11. For in six daies] God took six days to make the world in, to the
end, that we might be in a muse when we think of it; and think on his works
in that order that he made them. [And rested the seventh daie] Not as tired
out, (for he made all without either tool or toil; his Fiat only did the
deed) but to give us example, as John 13.15. [ Wherefore the Lord blessed,
etc.] How God esteems the strict observation of the Sabbath day, may appear
by the exact deliverie of it. For he has fenced it about, like Mount Sinai,
with marks and bounds, that profaneness might not approach it. 1. By his
watchword, Remember. 2. By his bounty, Six days, etc. 3. By his
sovereigntie, It is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God. 4. By the latitude, Thou
and thy son, etc. 5. By his own example, And rested the seventh day. 6. By his
benediction, as here, He blessed it, and ordained it to be a means of much
blessing to those that observe it. Add hereunto, that God has placed this
Command in the midst of the Decalogue, betwixt the two tables; as much
conducing to the keeping of both. It stand's like the sensus communis between
the inward and outward senses, Bo^in. Theat. Naturae.
being serviceable to both. [And hallowed it] Diem septimam opifex, ut mundi
natalem, sibi sacravit.

Ver. 12. Honor thy father, etc.] Philo well observes, that this fifth
Commandment (which therefore he makes a branch of the first Table, and so
divide's the Tables equally) is a mixed Commandment; (...).
and differ's somewhat from the rest of those in the second Table. They consider
man as our neighbor, in nature like us: this, as God's Deputy by him set over
us, and in his name, and by his authority performing offices about us. [That
thy days may be long] A good child lengthneth his father's days; therefore
God promises to lengthen his. Ill children, as they bring their parents graie
hairs with sorrow to the grave; so they are many times cut off in the midst of
their days, as Abimelech was: God rendering upon him the evil that he did to
his father. Judge. 13.5. Besides the pnnishment they have in their posterity
(to whom they have been peremptores potius quam parents.) Bern.
One complained that never father had so undutiful a child as he had: yes,
said his son, (with less grace then truth) my grandfather had.

Ver. 13. Thou shall not kill] A crying sin. Genesis 4. For the which God make's
inquisition. Psalm 9.12. and strangely bring's it to light. It was a saying of
King James, that if God did leav him to kill a man, he would think God did not
love him.

Ver. 14. Thou shall not commit adulterie] Adultery only is named; because
bestialitie, Sodomie, and other uncleanness (though more heinous) yet they do
not directly fight against the purity of posterity, and humane society,
which the Law mainly respect's.

Ver. 15. Thou shall not steal] i.e. Not rob or wrong another, (...). Naz.
either by force or fraud. 1 These. 4.6. See the Note there. Basil charge the
Devil as a thief of the truth, in that he had decked his crows with her
feathers. And it was of the Devil surely that She had learned her answer, who
being charged by her mistress for stealing her linnens, Light for smoke. p. 85.
and other things which she found in her trunk, said, that she stole them
not: and when she was asked, how came they to be laid and locked up there?
Did not you do this? No (said she) it was not I, but sin that dwells in me.

Ver. 16. Thou shall not bear] Neither bear it, nor hear it; raise, nor receiv
wrong reports of another. Deuteronomy. 19.16. Make a lie, nor love it when it is made.
Rev. 22.15. The truth must be spoken, and that in love. Doeg had a falls
tongue, though he spoke nothing but truth against David. Psalm. 120.3.

Ver. 17. Thou shall not covet] See the Note on Romans 7.7. and on Heb. 13.5.
[Thy neighbor's hous] House is here first set, as that which hold's and
harbor's all the rest.

To these ten words written by God himself in the day of the Assembly,
Divines have reduced those other Laws, Moral, Judicial, and Cerimonial, written
by Moses. 34.27, 28. Deuteronomy. 10.4. And herein Alstedius (that excellent
Methodist) has in his Harmonia Musica (as in all those brief but pithie Notes
upon the Pentateuch) don the Church of Christ singular good service; whom
therefore (for a Preface to that which fallows in the opening of this and the
three next Books, and for the use of mine English Reader) I have abbridged,
translated, and the same here inserted.

SECT. I. Of reducing all the Moral Laws to the Decalogue.
TO the first Commandment belong laws that concern Faith, Hope, and Love to
God.

First, Faith: as, that there is but one God, and three Persons Jehovah Elohim;
that he will send them a Prophet greater then Meses. Deuteronomy. 18. that he is to
be honored with our confidence, patience, and inward worship.

Next, Hope: of Favor, Grace, and Glory.

Thirdly, Love to God with the whole heart; filial fear, humble prayer, holy
vows, constant care to avoid idolizing the creature, seeking to the Devil,
tempting of God, listening to Seducers, etc.

To the second Commandment belong laws made against gross Idolatry,
will worship, etc. and for right worship.

To the third pertein laws for Prayer, Thanksgiving, Oaths, Lots, Blasphemies,
worthy walking, etc.

To the fourth; all laws of sanctifying the Sabbath.

To the fifth; of honoring and reverencing Parents, Princes, Elders, etc. and
of punishing rebellious children.

To the sixth may be reduced all laws concerning Murder, Revenge, Rancor,
Smiting, Fighting, cursing the Deaf, laying a block before the blind, etc.

To the seventh, all that is said against Fornication, Adultery, Sodomie,
Incest, wearing the Apparel of the other Sex.

To the eighth; Laws against Robbery, Rapine, Usurie, Sacrilege, deteining
Wages or Pledges, removing Landmarks, accepting of Persons, taking of Gifts,
falls Weights, etc.

To the ninth belong laws against Backbiting, Tale-bearing, Fals-witnessing,
judging, not admonishing, etc.

To the tenth no laws are referred: because it is wholly spiritual, and has no
visible violations.

SECT. II. Of reducing Judicial Laws to the Decalogue.
TO the first Commandment: It was death 1. to deny obedience to the Priest,
who was a type of Christ. 2. To persuade Apostacy from the true God. 3. To
seek to witches and wizzards.

It was likewise unlawful to make a covenant with the Canaanites, whom God had
cursed: to make mixtures of diverse kinds of creatures, etc. whereby they are
taught sincerity in Religion and conversation.

To the second Commandment: God commanded to abolish Images, Pictures,
Idolatrous temples, Altars, Groves, etc. and forbad them, upon pain of death,
to bow to Sun, Moon, or any other strange gods; because Moses his polity
could not consist of true worshippers, and professed Idolaters.

To the third Commandment: there were two kinds of blasphemy or cursing of
God; (whether it were mediate or immediate, direct or indirect) One proceeding
of insirmitie and impatience, the other of malice and obstinacy. This later
was to be punished with stoning: that former with some corporal punishment; as,
beating, boring the tongue, etc.

To the fourth Commandment: The wilful profanation of the Sabbath was punished
with death. Tithes, Offerings, Firstfruits, Firstlings, and the like, were
commanded by God, as part of the Priest's maintenance, due to them by the very
law of Nature. And the same custom is at this day commendably kept up, there
not being a more equal and easy way of mainteining the Ministers of the
Church, and so of upholding the Church's Ministry.

To the fifth Commandment: Wrong don to a Parent (whether by striking or
cursing) is parricide, and to be punished with death: so is wrong offered to
the chief Magistrate; this is treason. Parents had power to command and correct
their children, yea, in some cases, to sell them to their brethren the
Israelites, and to sue out a Writ of Execution against them, if uncounsellable
and incorrigible.

The Privilege of Primogeniture made for the honor of the family, and
prefigured hrist.

The chief Magistrate is both ordained and ordered by God. Deuteronomy. 17. Inferior
Magistrates must neither be strangers, nor eunuchs, nor bastards, nor
Ammonites, nor Moabites. Deuteronomy. 23. But they must be men of courage, fearing
God, etc.

To the sixth Commandment: Four sorts of capital punishments were in use among
God's people: viz. stoning, burning, beheading, and strangling. Execution was
don either by the whole people, or else some deputed thereunto.

Manslaughter was committed either by man or beast. If by a man, either it was
voluntary; and that was punished with death: or involuntarie; and in that
case, they had their cities of Refuge: these prefigured Christ, our sole
Sanctuary of safety. But if by a beast, the beast was stoned, as also the
master of the beast, if don by his default.

Blows that caussed loss of limbs, were punished with the like loss; or if not,
with a reasonable recompens.

Violence offered to a woman quick with child, so as she lost her fruit, was
death: but if she were not quick, it was only a monie-mulct.

God straightly charged them to abstein from the use of beast's blood; that they
might learn to abstein much more from sheddid man's blood.

Lepers were to live apart, lest the sound should be infected: and to intimate
the contagiousness of sin.

A Jewish servant, if he should not go free at the year of Jubilee, was to be
bored in the ear with an awl, and to live and die with his master.

Hereto also pertein their laws for War: as, that new-married men, timorous
persons, and plough-men should be excused; that a soldier should be twenty
years of age at least; that the General should desire passage through his
brother's country; that he should send forth spies; offer peace; lead on his
soldiers; use stratagems; spare fruit trees, equally divide the spoil; reserv
a part thereof for God; see that the Camp be kept clean from sin, etc.

To the seventh Commandment: Adultery was death: and, in the High-priest's
daughter, Fornication was burning; because he was a special type of Christ, and
therefore his family should be without blame or blemish.

Sodomie and bestialitie were likewise death: so was the deflouring of an
espoused virgin, and a rape.

The Priest might not marry any, but a virgin.

The price of an harlot might not be brought into the Sanctuary. Polygamie
and Divorce were permitted only, and not commanded.

Marrying with the brother's widow was peculiar to the old Testament.

They were to marry within their own tribes; because our Lord was to spring of
the Tribe of Judah.

He that defiled a virgin, was both to marry her, and to endow her, so that
he had her parents consent thereunto.

The prohibited degrees both of Consanguinitie and Affinity are Moral, Lev.
18. and 20.
and grounded upon very good reason.

To the eighth Commandment: Man-stealing, Sacrilege, and compound theft, were
punished with death.

Usurie is condemned by the Law of God.

The Law for things borrowed, deposited, entrusted, lent, or found, is grounded
upon this Rule. He that marreth another man's goods, robs him.

God would not have any poor (that is, sturdie beggars) amongst his people.

To the ninth Commandment: Hereunto belong the laws for Ecclesiastical and
Civil judgments.

SECT. III. Of the signification of the Cerimonial Laws; and first for holy
Places.
THese Laws concern either holy Places, Times, Things, or Persons.

The general law for holy Places was; That in that place only that God should
choose, holy Services should be performed. And this signified, 1. that through
Christ alone we must go to God in every divine duty. 2. That the time shall
com, when we shall injoie the immediate presence of God in heaven.

The special Law was, as touching the Tabernacle, a lively type of Christ, and
of the Church, and of each Christian.

Now in the Tabernacle are considerable, 1. The causses, and 2. the parts
thereof. The causses that concurred to the making of it up, are,

1. The Matter; which was various, voluntary, and sufficient: This figured
that Free-will-offering, wherewith every man ought to honor God, by trading
with his talent, and by doing what he is able for the maintenance of the
Ministry, andrelief of the needy.

2. The Form: and so the Tabernacle was to be made according to the pattern
received in the Mount. To teach us, that God will be served according to his
own prescript only, and not after man's inventions.

3. The Efficient, was every skilful workman, and by name Bezaleel and
Aholiab. These later figured out the Churches Chieftains, and Master Builders;
as those former, all gifted Ministers.

These were the causses of the Tabernacle: the parts thereof (as well
containing as contained) follow. These all were so framed, as that they might
easily be set up or taken down, and so transported from place to place:
whereby was signified, that while we are in this tabernacle of the body
(which shall be taken down by death, and set up again by the resurrection) we
are absent from the Lord: and that the whole Church not only is a stranger
upon earth, but also moves from one place to another, as God disposes it.

The Covering of the Tabernacle set forth; that the Church and her members do
ever sit safe under God's protection.

The Court made up of diverse pillars, signified, that the Church, in regard of
the Ministry therein, is the pillar of Truth; and that the offices and
abilities of the several members ought to be as props to the whole body.

The holy Instruments and implements served to set forth all the precious
gifts and ordinances of the Church; such as are the Word, Sacraments, Faith,
Holiness, etc.

The Taches, whereby the Curtains were knit together, signified, that the
several members of the Church Militant and Triumphant are but one Tabernacle.

The Covering of the Tabernacle was twofold; Inward, and Outward; whereby was
signified the internal and external estate of the Church.

The glorious gate signified the hearts of God's people made glorious by faith,
whereby we entertein Christ.

The Tabernacle fitly knit together by it is joints, and rightly erected,
signified the Church of Christ fitly compacted by that which every joint
supplieth, and making increas with the increas of God. Ephesians. 4.16. Col. 2.19.

The Veil signified the flesh of Christ, whereby his Deity was covered, and a
way paved for us to heaven.

The Veil was filled with Cherubims: to show how serviceable the Angels are to
Christ and his people.

The Holy of Holies shadowed out the third heaven, into the which Christ only
entered, and we by him.

The Ark of the Covenant covered with gold, figured Christ, in whom the
Godhead dwells bodily; and in whom are hid all the treasures of wisdom, etc.

The Testimony laid up in the Ark, signified Christ, the end of the Law; which
also has it is testimony from him.

The golden Censer signified, that all our services must be perfumed, and
perfected by Christ, before they can be accepted.

The golden pot of Manna in the side of the Ark was a sacrament of that eternal
life, that is laid up for us in Christ. Col. 3.3.

Aaron's rod blossoming was a sign of God's fatherly affection, whereby it
com's to pass, that we bloom and flourish under the cross.

The Sanctuary, or Tabernacle of the Congregation was the way into the Holy
of Holies; and signified the Church-Militant, through which we enter into
heaven.

The brazen Altar for Burnt-offerings shadowed out the humanity of Christ,
which is sanctified by his De^tie, and supported under all his sufferings for
us.

The Altar of Incens signified, that Christ appears for us before his Father,
and makes all our services accepted by the sacrifice of himself, once offered
for sin.

The Table furnished with so many loavs, as there were Tribes in Israel,
signified, that God keep's a constant table in his Church for all believers.

The golden Candlestick with his seven lamps figured the glorious light of the
Gospel, whereby God has shined in our hearts, to give the light of the
knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ. 2 Cor. 4.6.

The Laver wherein the Priests washed themselves before they ministered in the
Tabernacle, signified, that we cannot draw nigh to God in his services,
without due preparation.

The outer Court signified the visible Church, wherein hypocrites also partake
of external privileges.

Lo, these are the things typed out by the Tabernacle: and and they cannot be
better understood then by God's own interpretation of them, when he says.
Exodus 25. Let them make me a Sanctuary that I may dwell in the midst of
them. For in those words (as learned Junius observes) is contained an
explication of all the abovesaid Ceremonies.

SECT. IIII. Treating of Holy Times.
COncerning holy Times, the Law is either general or special.

The general Law is, partly, concerning the most strict rest from all servile
works; and partly concerning the Sacrifices which were on those holy days to
be offered. The former figured that Rest, whereunto God in his due time will
bring us.

The later served not only to exercise the Jews (prone to excess) with the
hard yoke of great expens; but also, by the great charge they were at, to
shadow out the great worth of Christ, far beyond all worldly treasures.

The special Law concerned, 1. holy Days. 2. Holy Years. Holie-daies were
either quotidian, or solemn. And these later were partly the New Mons, partly
the Sabbath, and partly the Feasts; which Feasts were either more solemn; as
the Passover, Pentecost, and Feast of Tabernacles; or less solemn; as the Feast
of Trumpets, and the Feast of Atonement.

Holy years, were 1. the Sabbatical or seventh year. Or, 2. the Jubilee or
fiftieth year.

The explication of all these is, as follows.

1. The continual Sacrifice was offered twice every day; that the people
might, every morning and evening, be admonished of their sin-guiltiness: and
withal, might be exercised in the remembrance and belief of the continual
sacrifice of Christ for their sin. It signified also our daily service, or
continual sacrifice of Prais and Holiness, offered up to God in the name of
Christ.

2. The New-moon-sacrifice served to set forth, that all our time, and actions
don therein, are sanctified unto us by Christ.

3. The Sabbath was a memorial of the Creation: it was also a type partly of
Christ's resting in the grave, and partly of our rest in Christ; the beginning
whereof we have here, the perfection of it in heaven. And whereas special
order was taken, that no fire should be kindled on that day; it was to
signify that Christ his rest, and ours in him, was, and should be free from
the fire of affliction.

4. The holy Feasts were (in general) appointed for these ends and uses. 1. To
distinguish the people of God from other nations. 2. To keep afoot the
remembrance of benefits already received. 3. To be a type and sigure of
b^nefits yet further to be conferred upon them by Christ. 4. To unite God's
people in holy worships. 5. To preserv purity in holy worships prescribed by
God.

5. The Passover of those that were clean, celebrated in the beginning of the
year, figured out the time, manner, and fruit of Christ's Passion. The Passover
kept by those that had been unclean, signified, that Christ profits not
sinners as long as they persist in their uncleanness: and so it figured out the
time of repentance.

6. At the Feast of Pentecost, there was a day of waving and of offering the
First Fruits. The former signified, that the handful of our fruits, that is,
our faith and good works are not accepted of God, unless they be waved by
Christ, our High Priest. The later, that God's blessings are to be joyfully
and thankfully received, and remembered.

7. The Feast of Tabernacles, besides that it brought to mind the Israelites
wandering in the wilderness, it did notably set forth the Church's pilgrimage
in this present world; which yet is so to be thought on, as that, with
greatest spiritual joie, we remember and celebrate our Redemption by Christ's
death.

8. The Feast of Trumpets signified that continual cause of cheerfulness and
thankfulness, that the Saints should have by Christ's death.

9. The Feast of Atonement signified, that the sins of God's people in their
holie-meetings, and daily services, should be expiated by Christ. Moreover,
Atonement was also made for the most holy Place, and for the Sanctuary. That
signified, that the visible heaven also was defiled by our sin, and need be
purged by Christ's blood. This, that the Catholic Church is by the same blood
of Christ made alone acceptable to God. By the application that was made for
several persons, was set forth the applicatorie force of faith. Furthermore,
that application and expiation was made by a live and a slain goat. Upon the
live goat (called the scapegoat) were put the offenses of the Children of
Israel; and the goat thus Cerimonially laden, was let go into the wilderness:
the other goat was set apart for a whole-burnt-offering. The former Cerimonie
signified, that the Son of God came down from heaven into the wilderness of
this world, that he might take away the sins of the world: The later shadowed
out the blood of Christ, which alone cleanses us from all sin.

10. The seventh-year-Sabbath had both an Ecclesiastical and a Civil use. For
1. it did set forth and commend to the people the spiritual Sabbath, which
begineth in the expiation wrought by Christ. 2. It distinguished this Nation
from others. 3. It exercised the people in confidence of God's Providence. 4.
It much conduced to the fruitfulness of the fields, which, if exhausted with
continual tillage, would have grown barren, and so an evil report would have
passed of the holy Land.

11. The years of Jubilee had their Ecclesiastical, Political, and
Chronological use. For 1. they signified the Jubilee of Grace and Glory; both
which Christ does both proclaim, and confer upon his people. 2. They were a
great help to the poor. 3. They preserved the distinction of Tribes. 4. They
served to distinguish the times thence forth, from the division of the Land, in
the year of the World 2050 to the destruction of Jerusalem. 5. They figured the
Rest that the Land should have by the just judgments of God, for the sins of
the people.

SECT. V. Treating of Holy Things.
Holy Things, were either Common, as Oil; or Proper; and these again were
either Principal, or less Principal. The Principal things were Sacrifices; the
requisites whereof were three: viz. fire, salt, and fat: the kinds of
Sacrifices were six; viz. 1. A whole-burnt-offering. 2. An Oblation or
Meat Offering. 3. A Peace Offering. 4. A Sacrifice for sin of Ignorance, or
Error. 5. A Sacrifice for wilful wickedness. 6. A Sacrifice of Consecration.
The less principal things perteined either to all in general, as First Fruits,
tenths, vows, etc, Or to the Priest peculiarly; as, Incens, Holie-water,
Trumpets.

The application of these is thus.

1. Oil is said to be a most holy thing, because use was made of it in the
consecration of the Tabernacles, Priests, and People. It sigured out the oil of
Gladness, that is, the gifts of the Holy Ghost, which Christ received without
measure; and after that, by him, all the parts of the Church, both Pastors and
all Christians; for all and only such are anointed with the Oil of Gladness.
Now this Oil was so made up of most precious things, and the confection thereof
by none to be imitated, as might best set forth, that reprobates are not
consecrated with the anointing of God's children.

2. The sire that came down from heaven, and was to be continually kept alive
signified four things. 1. The fire of God's wrath kindled and kept in by our
sins. 2. The fire of God's favor, whereby our sins are consumed in Christ. 3.
The fire of the Holy Spirit's operation upon all believers; but especially
upon the Apostles and their successors. 4. Lastly, the fire of tribulation,
which causseth us to asspire toward heaven.

3. The Salt of the Covenant was a symbol of incorruption; that is, of
perpetual continuance in the Covenant of God: And so it signified, that every
faithful Christian is so confirmed in the Covenant of God by Faith, that, by
the salt of affliction, he is preserved against temptations and assaults of
all sorts.

4. The Fat of the Sacrifices was holy to God alone: and hereby was signified,
that we ought to consecrate our choicest things to God; that so we may obtein
the fatness and sweetness both of Grace and Glory laid up for us in Christ.

5. A Rite common to all Sacrifices offered up of living creatures, was, the
sprinkling of the blood by the Priest upon the Altar. Hereby was signified the
blood of Christ, who, is both our Priest, Altar, and Sacrifice. Those great
drops of his blood, I say, are hereby signified, wherewith believer's hearts
(which also are so many altars) are sprinkled.

6. The whole-burnt-Sacrifice was an Offering whereby the Sacrificer testified
that he gave himself up wholly to Christ; and that he believed, that Christ
was his with all his benefits; as also, that he was all of a light flame with
the fire of Charity.

7. In the Meat Offering, it was not lawful to offer leaven, or any thing that
leaveneth, as honey: whereby was signified, that corruption both in Doctrine,
Life, and Discipline, is to he put far away, if we would offer up our selves
to God.

8. In Peace Offerings, leavened bread also was made use of: that together with
our cheerful praising of God, we may remember our afflictions, the property
whereof is to leaven the heart. Psalm 73.21.

9. The Waving of some part of the Sacrifice in Meat Offerings and
Peace Offerings, signified, the continual motion of our lips in Prayers and
Praises.

10. The Sacrifice for Errors and infirmities signified, that all our sins are
mortal, and cannot be pardoned, but through Christ alone.

11. The Sacrifice of Consecration showed the difference between the Levitical
Priests and Christ: viz. that they had need to offer for their own sins; but
he, for the sins of his people only.

And these are the Cerimonial Sacrifices: all which signified the sacrifice of
Christ, and the sacrifices of Christians; (such as are all their Moral works
proceeding from Faith: viz. a contrite Spirit, Alms, Prayer, etc.) And lastly,
that offering up of the Gentiles mentioned by the Apostle. Romans 15.16.

Furthermore, in all Sacrifices, clean things only were to be offered:
whereby was signified the purity of Christ and of all his members. Like as the
offering of Doves signified, that dove-like simplicity of Christ and his
people: which simplicity proceeds from the Holy Ghost, who is also
represented by the Dove.

12. First Fruits were holy to God: and thereby, all a man's substance also
was made holy. This signified 1. that the holiness of Christ was the holiness
of the whole Chruch. 2. That the children of believing parents are holy.

13. Tithes, by Divine Cerimonial right, belonged to the Priests for their
maintenance: but by Moral right they were holy to God; who by this means
required to be acknowledged the owner and giver of all good things. In the New
Testament, Tithes, though they be not of necessity, yet are they of perpetual
equity, as to the maintenance of the Ministry.

14. The tenth of the Tithes (which the Levites out of their Tithes offered to
the High Priest) signified the Prerogative of Christ; in whom we are all
tithed.

15. The Cerimonial Vow, and the Redemption thereof, was part of the Worship of
God: yet without opinion of Satisfaction and Merit: this then make's nothing at
all for those that now adays impose upon the people laws of Vows, and
Redemption of Vows, with an opinion of Necessity* Satisfaction, and Merit.
Vows are a service pleasing to God, so they be made and used freely; as,
exercises of Piety, and as helps thereunto. The same may be said of things
devoted.

16. Novals, were the fruits of trees, which for the three first years being
accounted as uncircumcised, were in the fourth year offered up to the Lord: to
teach us, that all our food is uncircumcised unto us by reason of sin, but is
circumcised by Faith in Christ; being received with Praying, and Thanksgiving.

17. The holy Perfume figured the grace of the Holy Ghost, wherewith the
services of the Saints are sanctified.

17. The holy water of Atonement was a figure of that blessed fountain of
Christ^s blood, ever running for the washing away of the filth of sin.

19. The burning of the Sacrifices, signified Christ burnt in the fire of his
Father's wrath for our sins: but the burning of the garbage and excrements,
shadowed out the crucifying of the old man. Lastly, those things that were not
to be burnt, noted the victory of Christ, and of our faith.

20. The two Trumpets of silver were used by the Priest for causses
Ecclesiastical and Civil. As to the former, they blew to call an Assembly, and
to rejoice spiritually; and this they did without an alarm. As to the later,
they sounded to go forward, or to go forth to battle; and this was don with an
alarm. By all which was signified, the glorious instancie and efficacy of
God's faithful Ministers in reproving of sin, in preaching the glad tiding of
salvation, and in stirring men up to the spiritual warfare.

SECT. VI. Of Holy Persons.
Holy Persons are considered either in general or more particular.

That which is to be taken notice of in the general, is, that God would not
approve of any work but what was don by a sacred person. To teach us, that
good works pleas not God, unless the man that does them be first justified.

More particularly; Holy Persons were either those that served at the Altar,
or other holy Ones: Those that served at the Altar, were the High Priest, the
rest of the Priests, and the Levites. Those other holy Ones were the
Nazarites, and clean persons. ^et us view them severally.

1. The office of the Priest was to offer Sacrifice, and to pray for the
people: hereby was signified the Merit and Intercession of Jesus Christ.

2. The Consecration of the Priests, and their freedom from all bodily blemish,
signified the holiness of Christ, both habitual and actual.

3. The holy Garments, and their stately braverie signified the beauty and
braverie of Christ and his Church. Psalm 45.

4. The Anointing of the High Priest signified the anointing and appointing
of Christ to his office of Mediator.

5. The holy Abstinence of the Priests signified the actual holiness of Christ.

6. The High Priest was a lively type of Jesus Christ, as the Apostle
excellently set's forth in his Epistle to the Hebrews. The other Priests
represented our dignity in Christ, and our duty toward him. 1 Pet. 2. Apoc.
1.5, 6. The High Priest shadowed out both the Person and the Office of Christ.
His Person, as he was a man like unto other men, and yet superior to them in
Office and Ornaments: which Ornaments did thus represent the threefold Office
of Christ. The bells and pomegranates hanging at the hem of his garment
signified the Prophetical Office of Christ. The Plate of Gold, whereupon was
engraven HOLINESS TO THE LORD, signified his Priestlie Office. The Bonnet,
Mytre, upon the High-priest's head, typified his Kingly Office. Other
ornaments common to the High Priest, with the rest of the Priests, signified,
partly the gifts of Grace, and partly the Christian Armor, which the Apostle
describes. Ephesians. 6. as consisting in the girdle of truth, the breast plate of
righteousness, etc.

7. Those twelv precious stones in the Breast Plate, were a type of the old and
new Church; that consisting of twelv Tribes, and this collected by twelv
Apostles. Those two precious stones in the shoulder-piece, figured likewise
those two Churches, as they have the two Testaments. Those two precious stones
in the Breast Plate of Judgment, the Vrim and Thummim were a type of Christ,
who is our only Light and Perfection.

8. There was but One High Priest: there is but One Mediator betwixt God and
man, the Man Christ Jesus.

9. The Priests only did partake of the Sacrifices; so Christians only have
communion with Christ.

10. Aaron bore the Names of the Children of Israel before the Lord: So does
Christ his Church, and all the members thereof; for whom he continually
appears in heaven.

11. The binding of woven work strengthened the robe that it might not rent:
This signified the righteousness and strength of Christ for the salvation of
his people, and subversion of his enemies.

12. When Aaron entered into the holy Places, his bells gave a sound: Hereby
was signified Christ's Intercession for us, the Spirits making request in us,
and the duty and property of all faithful Pastors.

13. The High Priest might not marry any but a virgin, from among his own
people: This figured, that the Church was to be presented unto Christ as a
pure virgin.

14. The High Priest was forbidden to lament or to rent his garments: So
Christ, after his Resurrection obtained Glory and Joie, without any mixture
of grief or ignominy.

15. The Priests and Levites that served at the Tabernacle, figured the
Ecclesiastical Hierarchy; as it admit's of diverse Orders and Degrees.

16. The Nazarite's Vow was, to separate himself unto the Lord by a special
holiness: Hereby was signified the purity of Christ, and withal his country
of Nazareth, by an allusion of name.

17. Those that were Legally unclean (either by meats, or carcasses of men, or
leprosy) were first separated, and then cleansed. In like sort, all our sins
of what size soever, do separate us from God, and some of them from his Church
also; being all expiated in, and by Christ alone.

17. The uncleanness of childe-bearing-women, set forth the filth of natural
corruption.

19. The casting of Lepers out of the Camp, was a figure of Excommunication.

20. The house and all the goods of Lepers were unclean, and therefore either
burned or destroyed: To teach us to abolish all instruments of Idolatry.

21. Lepers, after they were cleansed, showed themselves to the Priest, who was
to pronounce them clean: This was a type of Church-Absolution.

22. The Leper being cleansed was to offer two little Birds; whereof the one
was killed, the other was let go free. Hereby was figured the death of Christ,
and the power of his Godhead, in his Resurrection and Asscension.

23. Unclean meats were a part of the Jewish Pedagogie; and signified, that
there is a mixture of clean and unclean persons in the Church. It further
figured that distinction of Jews from Gentiles; which distinction is now taken
away by Christ. Acts 10.

And hitherto Alstedius. Now let us proceed and go on where we left, in
explaining the Text.

Ver. 18. They removed, etc.] viz. From the hill-foot where they stood and
trembled. Deuteronomy. 4.11. They feared and fled. Man is (...), a creature that would
fain live.

Ver. 19. Aristot.
Speak thou with us] See here what a mercy it is to have the mind of God made
known by men like our selves; that may say unto unto us as Elihu did to Job,
Behold, I am according to thy wish: I also am cut out of the claie: Behold, my
terror shall not make thee afraid, neither shall my hand be beavie upon thee.
Job 33.6, 7.

Ver. 20. Fear not] And yet fear. Fear not this glorious appearance so much:
but let it bring your cogitations to his future fearful appearance.

Ver. 21. stood afar off] Yea, God (tendering their infirmity) gave them leav
to go home to their tents. Deuteronomy. 5.30, 31.

Ver. 22. From heaven] For wheresoever God is, heaven is: as where the King is,
there is the Court.

Ver. 23. Ye shall not make with me gods] Say we of such petty Deities, as
that Heathen did, Contemno minutulos istos deos, modo Jovem (Jehovam) mihi
propitium habeam. I slight them all.

Ver. 24. An Altar of earth] In opposition to the costly shrines and services
of those dunghill Deities. God care's not for outward pomp: Popery is all for
it, and scoff's at our simplicity. The God of the Protestants (says a
blasphemous Popeling) is the most uncivil and unmanner'd God, Jo^^ H^nt in his
Appeal to K. James cap. 6
of all those that have born the names of Gods upon earth; yea, wors then Pan
the God of the Clowns; which can endure no ceremonies, nor good manners at all.

Ver. 25. Thou have polluted] Not polished it. So in preaching. 1 Cor. 2.4, 5.
Epistolae ornamentum est ornamentis carere: Politian.
Plainnness commend's an Epistle. Nimio mundo students, Col. rus.
ab immundo propius absunt. Some mar all by over-doing.

Ver. 26. That thy Nakedness] We blush, when taken naked; Nos, pudore pulso,
stamus coleis a^ertis, ad publicos conc^bitus.
as if the the blood would run forth to cover us; what beasts then were those
Priests of Priapus, and those base Bacchanalists, that ran down naked?

CHAP. XXI. Ver. 1. Now these are the judgments] i. e.
THe Judicial Laws, fitly annexed to the Decalogue, whereof the Civil
Magistrate is the Lord Keeper. It was written upon the sword of Charles the
Great, December praeceptorum custos Carolus.

Ver. 2. In the seventh year] No longer might they serve, because they were God's
servants. Lev. 25.25. whose privilege see Isa. 65.13, 14. Christ's freemen. 1
Cor. 2.27.


Ver. 3. If he com in by himself] without a second-self, a yoke fellow,
standing on even-ground with himself, though drawing on the left side.

Ver. 4. Have given him a wife] viz. One of his Heathen handmaids, whom to
part with was no great punishment, because an unlawful couple.

Ver. 5. I love my master] A little better then he in Plautus that said, Ego
non servio libenter; herus meus me non habet libenter, tamen utitur me ut
lippis oculis.

Ver. 6. And she shall serve him] Being (...), as Aristotle has it, the
master's instrument, underling, and wholly his. He does his own and not his
master's will, that does no more then himself will: this is a holiedaie servant
as they say.

Ver. 7. She shall not go out] But upon better terms. He that was to come in
the shape of a servant, ^^il. 2.
see what care he take's of poor servant's welfare. Lawyers seldom speak but
for great men, or when they may have great gifts. Christ is not of that humor.

Ver. 8. He has dealt deceitfully with her] By not answering her expectation.
This God tolerated for the hardness of their hearts, but approved not.

Ver. 9. After the manner of daughters] Not put her off (as they say they do
their daughters in Hungary) without a portion, only with a new coat at their
wedding: much less, set her to sale as the Thracians did their young brides;
Quae non moribus nubebant sed praemiis. Solin. cap. 15.


Ver. 10. Her duty of marriage] See 1 Cor. 7. with the Note there.

Ver. 11. And if he do not any of these three] Picus est imago ingrati
mariti, Me anththon.
quia sub autumnum ejicit conjugem ne cogatur per hyemem nutrire: postea sub
vernum tempus eam ad se blande revocat, ac in consortium recipit.

Ver. 12. Shall be surely put to death] See the Note on Genesis 9.6.

Ver. 13. But God deliver him] Who is the Lord of our lives, and to whom we
have frequently forfeited them; so that it is his mercy that we are not
consumed. Lam. 3. That we are not cut off from the land of the living.

Ver. 14. Thou shall take him, etc. A man that does violence to the blood of
any person shall flee to the pit, let none stay him. Pro. 28.17. Where the
word Adam rendered Man has in the original a little d: to show that a
murderer is not worthy to be called a man; he is to be drawn from the
Altar to the slaughter.

Ver. 15. He that smiteth] By the law of God, of Nature, and of Nations, such
a man should die. And herein, I think our laws are defective: albeit, I am not
of Carolostadius his mind, who (if Melanchthon misreport him not) held, that
these Judicial Laws set down by Moses should be still of force (and these
only) in Christian Commonwealths, and all other Civil and Municipal Laws
abolished.

Ver. 16. He that steals a man] A kin to these are they that steal other
men's books, and father them; setting them out in their own names. Diagoras was
so served by a Plagiarie, which when he saw, and that the thief was not
presently struck with a thunderbolt, he out of stomach turned Atheist. Thus
of late Fabricius stole Tremelius his Syriack Translation. Villavincentius
stole Hyperius his Treatis De ratione studii Theologici. And Possevinus stole
Dr. James his Cyprianus redivivus.

Ver. 17. And he that curseth] See the Note on Verse 15. and on Mat. 15.4.

Ver. 18. If men strive together] This is counted manhood, when indeed it is
dog-hood rather: Heathens condemned it, Immane verbum est ultio. Seneca Qui
ulciscitu^, excusatius peccat. Sen.
and yet Navarrus a Popish Calvist, Caedem recte admitti putat, ut alapa
vitetur, and ad honorem recuperandum.

Ver. 20. He shall be surely punished] At the discretion of the Magistrate,
who is the revenger to execute wrath upon him that does evil. Romans 13.4.

Ver. 21. For he is his monie] And therefore he has power over his flesh.
Col. 3.22. Yet hide not thine eyes from thine own flesh, says the Prophet.
Isa. 58.7.


Ver. 22. And no mischief follow] i. e. No life be lost. There is a time then,
when the embryo is not alive; therefore the soul is not begotten, but infused
after a time by God. Infundendo creatur, and creando infunditur, says Aug. who
at first doubted, till overcom by Hierom's arguments. Augustine.


Ver. 24. Eye for eie] How the Pharisees had wrested that Text, See the Note on
Mat. 5.39. This kind of law (in use among Heathens also) Aristotle call's
(...), and was given against private revenge.

Ver. 28. Then the ox shall be surely stoned] God requiring man's blood even
of beasts. Genesis 9.5. See the Note there.

Ver. 29. He has killed a man, etc.] Since the fall, all creatures are armed
against us; as that sword which Hector gave Ajax; which so long as he used
against men (his enemies) served for help and defense: but after he began to
abuse it to the hurt of hurtless beasts, it turned into his own bowels.

Ver. 32. Thirty shekels] This same was that goodly price, that our Lord
Christ was valued at by the vile Jews. Zach. 11.12, 13. Mat. 26.15.

Ver. 33. And an ox or an ass] We can hardly open the deep pit of God's
bottomless, boundless mercy, but some silly beast will be falling thereinto;
stumbling at the Word, being disobedient, whereunto also they were appointed.
1 Pet. 2.8.

Ver. 36. Ox for ox] These where those right judgments, true laws, good
statutes, etc. Neh. 9.13.

CHAP. XXII. Ver. 1. When a man shall steal, etc.]
THe Persians at this day punish theft and manslaughter so severely, The
Preachers Travels by Cartwright.
that in an age a man shall hardly hear either of the one or the other. The
Turk's justice will rather cut off two innocent men, then let on thief escape.

Ver. 2. If a thief be found] So if an adulteress be taken, as she was. John
8.4. (...), in the very theft.

Ver. 3. If the sun be risen] Chaldee has it, If the eye of witnesses: if he
can raise the town, and call in aid.

Ver. 4. He shall restore double] In Solomon's time it was sevenfold. Prove.
6.31.

Ver. 5. To be eaten] By unadvised turning in of his cattle, through mistake
or neglect.

Ver. 6. Or the field] The stubble.

Ver. 7. Or stuff] Heb. Vessels, instruments, ornaments, apparel, furniture,
weapons, etc.

Ver. 8. To see whether] sc. by putting him to his oath Ver. 11. Some think that
a private oath may be in such a case as this lawfully taken for the
satisfaction of another, if he will not otherwise be satisfied.

Ver. 9. Before the Judges] Heb. the Gods: So Judges are called, if good
especially. Psalm. 82.6. And the seat of Judicature is called the holy place.
Eccles. 8.10.

Ver. 10. Or any beast to keep] As Jacob kept Laban's cattle. Genesis 31.39.

Ver. 11. An oath of the Lord] Who is called in, as a witness and as an
avenger: how hateful then is that Popish proverb and practice, Mercatorum est,
non regum, stare juramentis?

Ver. 13. Let him bring it] A leg, or a limb of it, as Amos 3.12.

Ver. 14. And if a man borrow] God has so ordered humane condition that one
man must be beholden to another.

Ver. 15. It came for his hire] q. d. He shall pay the hire only and no
more, though the owner be not by, when it miscarrieth.

Ver. 16. Entice a maid] Heb. Over-perswade with her, by fair words, which make
fools fain.

Ver. 17. He shall paie] No mulct is laid upon her, because she had nothing of
her own; and she had lost her honor, in losing her virginity. 1 These. 4.4.
See the Note there.

Ver. 18. A witch] An enchantress, sorceress, whose help was sometimes sought,
in enticing young maids to folly. The man-witch also is here meant, Vatab.
but the woman-witch mentioned; both because women are more inclinable to that
sin; and also because the weaker sex is not to be spared for this fault. Junius.


Ver. 19. Be put to death] Heb. Put him to die. Gr. kill him with death, as
God threatens to do Jezabel's children. Rev. 2.23.

Ver. 20. He shall be utterly destroied] As an execrable and accursed
creature.

Ver. 21. Thou shall not vex a stranger] The right of strangers is so holy
(says one) that there was never nation so barbarous that would violate the
same. When Stephen Gardner had in his power the renowned Divine Peter Martyr,
Acts and Mon fol. 1783.
then teaching at Oxford, he would not keep him to punish him; but when he
should go his way, gave him wherewith to bear his charges.

Ver. 22. Or fatherless childe] With God the fatherless finds mercy. Hos.
14.3. Widows and orphans are God's clients taken into his protection.

Ver. 23. And they cry at all unto mee] A vine, whose root is uncovered,
thrive's not: so a widow, whose covering of eyes is taken away, Mercer. in
Proverb.
joie's not. In Hebrew she is called Almanach of Alam to be dumb; because she
has none to speak for her. But if she call and cry to God, he will speak
for her in the hearts of her oppressors.

Ver. 24. Your wives shall be widdows] God delight's to punish cruelty in
kind, as he did in Agag. 1 Samuel 15.33.

Ver. 25. Thou shall not be to him as an usurer] Heb. as an exacting creditor,
Qui nullum diem gratis occidere creditori permittit. The usurer's money is to
necessity, like cold water to a hot ague, that for a time refreshes, but
prolongeth the diseas. [Laie upon him usurie] Heb. Biting usurie. Usurers are
men-eaters. Psalm 14.4. Like pickrels in a pond, or sharks in the sea that
devour the lesser fishes. These ostriches can digest any metal, especially
money. Arist. Ethic. lib. 4. cap. 1.
Aristotle in one page condemns the usurer and the dicer; and yet some
Christians blush at neither.

Ver. 28. Thou shall not revile the Gods] Blaspheme dignities. This is
blasphemy in the second Table. Jude 8.


Ver. 29. Thou shall not delaie] True obedience is prompt and present, ready
and speedy, without demur and consults, Zech. 5.9. wings and wind in their
wings. [On the eighth daie] When a Sabbath had once gone over it, say the
Hebrews.

Ver. 30. Holy men] Heb. Men of holiness, which should run through our whole
lives, as the woof does through the web.

CHAP. XXIII. Ver. 1. Thou shall not rais]
NEither raise nor receiv it; neither be the talebearer, nor tale-hearer: the
one carrie's the devil in his tongue, the other in his ear. Not only those
that make a lie, but those that love it when it is made to their hands, are
shut out of heaven. Rev. 22.15. Solomon make's it an ill sign of a graceless
man, to be apt to beleev scandalous reports of godly persons. Prove. 17.4.

Ver. 2. Thou shall not follow a multitude] The way to hell is broad and
well-beaten. Per viam publicam ne ingredere, was one of Pythagoras his
precepts: Do not as the most do, lest thou be undon for ever. Argumentum
turpissimum est turba, says Seneca. To live according to the course of the
world is to be acted by the devil. Ephesians. 2.2.

Ver. 3. Neither shall thou countenance] Spare not the great for their might,
nor the mean for their misery.

Ver. 4. Ox, or his ass going astraie] How much more his soul? See the Notes on
Jam. 5.20. Jude 22, 23.

Ver. 5. Thou shall surely help with him] So the Spirit help's with us; or
list's over against us. Romans 8.26. (...).
He look's ut acti agamus.

Ver. 6. The judgment of the poor] I have seen (says one) the King of Persia
many times to alight from his horse, The Preachers Travels by J. Cartwright.
only to do justice to a poor body. Causses are to be heard and not persons:
the Athenian Judges passed sentence in the dark.

Ver. 7. Keep thee from a falls matter] Stand aloof of, keep at a distance. See
Isa. 33.15. A public man should be above all price or sale: and every man
should carefully keep himself from the occasions of sin. A good man dare not
com near the train, though he be far off the blow.

Ver. 8. And thou shall take no gift] Rain is good, and ground is good; yet Ex
eorum conjunctione fit lutum, says Stapleton: So giving is kind, and taking
is courteous, yet the mixing of them make's the smooth paths of Justice foul
and uneven.

Ver. 9. Thou shall not oppress, etc.] See the Note on Exodus 22.21.

Ver. 10. Thou shall sow thy land] Here the wise man's counsel would be
remembered, Laudato ingentia rura, exiguum colito. To be called a good
husbandman, was of old an high prais.

Ver. 11. But the seventh year] That they might learn to live by faith, and be
at good leisure to wait upon God. Deuteronomy. 31.10, 11, 12. Let every of us keep a
spiritual Sabbath, says Ignatius, (...), Ep. 3. ad Magnes.
Better apaid of the meditation of the Law, then of the relaxation and rest
from labor.

Ver. 12. Six daies] See the Note on Chap. 20.8.

Ver. 13. Be circumspect] Or wary, keep you close to the rule, and up to your
principles. See the Note on Ephesians. 5.15. [Of the names of other Gods] sc.
Without dislike. The Primitive Christians would not call their days of the
week, Dies Martis, Mercurii, etc. as Mercurius Trismegistus had named them; but
the first, second, third, etc. day of the week, Deastrorum nomina ne nota
quidem esse voluerunt inter Christi cultores, says one. They desired that
Christians should spit out of their mouths those dunghill-deities with utmost
contempt, as David did. Psalm 16.4.

Ver. 15. Thou shall keep the feast] Let us also keep the feast, or Holie-daie.
1 Cor. 5.8. See the Note there.

Ver. 16. And the feast of harvest] Pentecost, when their wheat-harvest came
in. [In the end of the year] See the reason of this law. Deuteronomy. 11.12. It was a
land which the Lord cared for: the eyes of the Lord were always upon it from
the beginning of the year, even unto the end of the year.

Ver. 17. All thy males] The female are not required to appear, because they
were weak, and not so fit for travel: they were also the hous-keepers, and
sanctified in their husbands. Howbeit many of them came up to these feasts, as
Hannah. 1 Samuel 2.19. And the virgin Marie. Luke 2.41. And this was well
accepted as a Free-will-offering.

Ver. 18. Of my sacrifice] Especially of the Passover. See Exodus 34.25. Lev.
2.1, 2, 3.

Ver. 19. The first of the first-fruits] The best of the best is not to be
held too good for God. His soul has desired the first ripe fruits. Jer. 2.2.
[Thou shall not sees a kid] Hereby seems to be forbidden either cruelty,
or curiosity to pleas the palate. See my Commonplace of Abstinence.

Ver. 20. Behold, I send an Angel] i. e. Christ. Immediately after God had
given the Law (by the rule and threats whereof God the Father in his government
was to proceed, Mr. Th. Goodwin.
says a Divine) and after they had transgressed it. Exodus 33.2, 3, 4. he
could not go along with them, for he should destroy them: but his Angel, that
is, his Son, he would send with them; who also would destroy them, if they
turned not, nor repented according to the rules of his Law, the Gospel.

Ver. 21. My name is in him] i. e. He is of the same nature with my self. See
Phil. 2.6. Heb. 1.3. with the Notes there.

Ver. 22. An enemy to thine enemies] There is a Covenant offensive and
defensive betwixt God and his people. Tua caussa erit mea caussa, said that
Emperor to his wronged friend: So says God to his.

Ver. 23. For mine Angel] Heb. Malachi, which is by transposition of letters
Michael, as some Rabbis have observed.

Ver. 24. Thou shall utterly overthrow them] As Hen. 8. began here to do in
demolishing the Monasteries, and saying, Corvorum nidos esse penitus
disturbandos ne iterum ad habitandum convolent. This Sanders relates and
exagitateth. Schism. Angl. lib. 1.


Ver. 25. Bless thy bread] God's blessing is the staff of bread and strength of
water. See the Note on Mat. 4.4.

Ver. 26. The number of thy daies] Thou shall die; as Abraham did, with a good
hoar head: be satur dierum as Job, fall as a full-ripe-apple into the hands of
God the gatherer.

Ver. 27. My fear before thee] Strike a panick fear into the hearts of thine
enemies, so that they shall flee at the nois of a driven leaf, they shall be
made a cord suo fugitivi, as Tertullian has it.

Ver. 28. Hornets before thee] Understand it either literally as Josh. 24.12.
or figuratively, of the stinging terrors of their self-condemning consciences.

Ver. 29. In one year] God's time is best: and to prescribe to him is to set
the sun by our dial. His help seems long, because we are short. Wait upon him,
who wait's to show us mercy. Isa 30.18.

Ver. 30. By little and little] God crumble's his mercies to us; we have his
blessing by retail. So the cloud emptie's not it self at a sudden burst, but
dissolv's upon the earth drop after drop.

Ver. 31. The sea of the Philistims] i. e. the Mediterranean.

Ver. 32. No covenant with them] because devoted to destruction; and they will
be drawing thee to Idolarrie, as it also fell out, Judge. 1. and 2.

CHAP. XXIIII. Ver. 1. Worship ye afar off]
THus under the Law, but now by grace we draw nigh with boldness, and have
access with confidence by the faith of Christ. Ephesians. 3.12. See the Note there.

Ver. 2. But they shall not com nigh] But half-waie only. Verse 19. See the
Note on Chap. 19.12.

Ver. 3. And told the people] So he became a Mediator. Gal. 3.19. Non
redemptionis sed relationis. [Will we do] God's people are willing. Psalm
110.3. But weak through the flesh. Romans 8.3. See the Note on Heb. 13.18.

Ver. 4. An Altar] Representing God on the one party, as the twelv pillars did
the people on the other party. So here was a formal covenant.

Ver. 5. Young men] The firstborn of the families. Exodus 19.12.

Ver. 6. Half of the blood] Having mingled it first with water. Heb. 9.19. See
1 John 5.6. with the Note.

Ver. 7. Will we do, and be obedient] Christ will enjoie his spouses love, by
a willing contract, not by a ravishment.

Ver. 8. On the people] The representative people, the elders: or, as others
will, the twelv pillars. See Verse 4.

Ver. 9. And seventie of the elders] See Verse 2.

Ver. 10. And they saw God] A glimps of his glory. See the Note on 1 Timothy 6.16.

Ver. 11. He laid not his hand] i. e. They came off without hurt, which is
reckoned as a great mercy: since no man (ordinarily) can see God and live:
besides the infinite distance that is betwixt God, and the greatest Nobles. [
And did eat and drink] i. e. They were much acheared and made merry in the
Lord. Others sens it thus: Though they had seen God, yet they turned again to
temporal pleasures; they soon after ate and drunk at that idolatrous feast of
the golden calf, and rose up to play. It is set as an aggravation of Solomon's
sin that he departed from God that appeared to unto him twice. 1 King. 11.9.

Ver. 12. Tables of stone] To show 1. the stonie-hardness of the people's
hearts. 2. The lastingness of the Law.

Ver. 13. And Moses went up] Joshua staid the while in some convenient place.

Ver. 14. And Hur] See the Note on Chap. 17.10.

Ver. 16. Six daies] The people had but three days of preparation to receiv
the Law; Moses has six. Singular holiness is required of Ministers: the
measures of the Sanctuary were double to the ordinary; as the shekel, cubit,
etc. Ministers had need wish, as Elisha did, a doubled and trebled spirit, that
they may save themselves, and those that hear them.

Ver. 17. Was like devouring fire] So it is still. Heb. 12.29. which so
terrisieth the sinners in Sion, that they run away with these words in their
mouths, Who among us shall dwell with the devouring fire? Who amongst us shall
dwell with everlasting burnings? Isa. 33.14.

Ver. 18. Forty daies] All which time he neither ate nor drank. Deuteronomy. 9.9.
and so better merited the surname of Nesteutes the Faster, then that proud
Prelate John Bishop of Constantinople.

CHAP. XXV. Ver. 2. That gives it willingly]
VIrtus nolentium nulla est; God strain's upon no man. If ye consent and
obeie, etc. If there be a willing mind, God accepts, etc. 2 Cor. 8.11, 12.

Si desint vires, tamen est laudanda voluntas: Ovid.

Hac ego contentos auguror esse Deos.
Ver. 3. Gold, and silver, and brass] No mention of iron: Confer 1 King. 6.7.
and 8.51.

Ver. 4. And blue, and purple, and scarlet] i. e. Wool died with these colors.
Heb. 9.19. To teach the Church, that both themselves and their actions should
be washed and died in the blood of Christ.

Ver. 5. Shittim wood] A kind of cedar, that rotteth not. Gal. lib. 1. Antidit.


Ver. 6. Spices] As cinnamom, which in Galen's time was very rare, and hard to
be found but in Prince's storehouses.

Ver. 8. That I may dwell amongst them] But will God in very deed dwell with
men upon earth? 2 Chronicles. 6.18.
What can he do more to make them happy? As he in Plutarch said of the
Scythians, that although they had no music nor vines amongst them, yet (as a
better thing) they had Gods: and as the Philosopher having little else in his
house, yet could say of it, (...), Here be Gods: so may every good man boast
of his house, and of his heart, Heb. 3.6.2 Cor. 6.16. Genesis 28.17.
This is the habitation of the most High. As for the public assembly of
Saints, This is the house of God, this is the gate of Heaven.

Ver. 10. An Ark] Chest, or Cabinet, wherein to keep the two Tables of the Law;
signifying thereby that Christ is the end of the Law, covering the imperfection
of our works.

Ver. 11. A crown of gold] To set forth the Majesty of Christ's kingdom, or
the eternity of his Deity; which, as a crown, or circle, had neither beginning
nor end.

Ver. 14. That the Ark may be born with them] The Ark was transportative, till
settled in Solomon's Temple: so till we com to heaven shall we be in a
continual motion:

Ver. 15. The staves shall be, etc.] That they might not touch it, for
reverence sake, it being a visible sign of God himself amongst them.

Ver. 16. The Testimonie] Those tables of the Testimony. Exodus 31.18. That
testified what God required of them; and would be a testimony against them,
if disobedient. Deuteronomy. 31.26.

Ver. 17. A Mercie-seat] Heb. A Covering, or coffering up of men's sins, the
appeasing of an angry God. (Confer Genesis 38.20.) By Christ who is our
propitiation or Mercie-seat. Rom 3.25.1 John 2.2. [ Two cubits and a half,
etc.] Just so big every way as the Ark. Verse 10. Get into Covenant with God
(says one) for as the Mercie-seat was no larger then the Ark, so neither is
the grace of God then the Covenant. And as the Ark and Mercie-seat were not
asunder; so God is near to all that call upon him in truth.

Ver. 18. And thou shall make two Cherubims] Golden winged images, made by
God's special appointment, and set out of sight: Hence then is no warrant for
the use of images in Churches. These here were to represent the holy Angels
attendent upon God, looking intently into the mystery of Christ, as the
Cherubims did into the Propitiatory. 1 Pet. 1.12. and joined to the society
of Saints.

Ver. 19. Even of the Mercie-seat] Of the matter of it: to show that the very
Angels have their establishment in, and by Christ: and that, if they need
mereie, how much more do we? Angels also are under Christ as a head of
Government, of Influence, of Confirmation, though not of Redemption.

Ver. 20. Toward the Mercie-seat shall the faces, etc.] Angels in the Syriack
are called (...) of the face; because they look ever on the face of God, waiting
his commands.

Ver. 21. Above upon the Ark] The Ark covering the Law within it, the
Mercie-seat upon it, and over them two Cherubims covering one another, did
typifie Christ covering the curses of the Law, in whom is the ground of all
Mercy; which things the Angels desire to pry into, as into the pattern of
God's deep wisdoms.

Ver. 22. From between the two Cherubims] which covered the place from whence
the Lord spoke, to restrain curiosity.

Ver. 23. Of Shittim wood] Which corrupts not. Isa. 41.19. Christ's body
could not putrefie in the grave.

Ver. 24. Pure gold] Pointing to the glory of Christ's Deity, and the
Majesty of his Kingdom.

Ver. 25. A golden crown] To hide the joints, and for ornament. Christ also is
said to have many crowns. Rev. 19.12.

Ver. 30. Shew-bread] See the Note on Mat. 12.4.

Ver. 31. And thou shall make a candlestick] called the candlestick of light.
Exodus 35.14. A Type of Christ, who is (...) light essential, and gives light
to every man that comes into the world. John 1.9. See the Note there.

Ver. 37. Seven lamps] Signifying the manifold graces and diversity of gifts
in the Church. Zech. 4.2.

Ver. 38. And the tongs] All of gold; betokening the purity of Doctrine and
Discipline in the Church.

CHAP. XXVI. Ver. 1. Thou shall make the Tabernacle]
AType of Christ who dwelt among us, full of Graces and Truth. John 1.14.2. Of
the Church built by Christ. 1 Cor. 3.9.3. Of every true Christian. Ephesians. 2.10.

Ver. ^. Shall be coupled together] These curtains were coupled with loops, so
should Christians by love. My dove is but one: the daughters saw her and
blessed her. Cant. 6.9. See Ephesians. 2.21, 22. and 4.16.

Ver. 6. With the taches] So is the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace.
Ephesians. 4.3. [Shall be one Tabernacle] See those many Ones. Ephesians. 4.3, 4, 5.
with the Notes there.

Ver. 7. Of goat's-half] The Tabernacle was goat's hair without, and gold
within. God hid his Son under the Carpenter's son: The King's daughter is all
glorious within. Psalm 45.13. And all her sons are Princes in all lands. Verse
16. Howbeit they must be content to pass to heaven as Christ their Head did,
as concealed men. Therefore the world know's us not, because it knew not him.
John 3.1. Our life is hid with Christ, Col. 3.4. as the life of flowers in
winter is hid in the root.

Ver. 14. A covering for the tent] Shadowing out God's protecting his people.
Isa. 4.6. and 25.4. Psalm 27.5. as these ram's-skins covered the Ark from the
violence of wind and weather.

Ver. 31. With Cherubims] To note the special presence and attendence of the
holy Angels in the assemblies of the Saints. Luke 1.11. John 1.51.

Ver. 36. An hanging for the door] This shadowed him that said of himself, I am
the door. The Cerimonial Law was the Jews Gospel, for it was Christ in figure;
and to him it led them.

CHAP. XXVII. Ver. 1. Five cubits long]
SOlomon's Altar was four times as big as this: to teach, that as our peace and
prosperity is more then others, so should our service in a due proportion.

Ver. 2. Horns of it] To bind the beasts unto that were to be slain in
sacrifice. Psalm 118.27. And to signify the power of Christ's Priesthood.
Hab. 3.4. [Thou shall over-laie it with brass] The brass kept the wood, so did
the Deity of Christ keep his humanity from being consumed by the fire of
God's wrath, wherein it was roasted.

Ver. 3. His shovels and his basins.] These several instruments figured the
Ministry of the word, say some; the sundry callings that Christ has in his
Church, say others, for her edification.

Ver. 4. A. grate] which served for an hearth, and represented Christ, bearing
the fire of his Father's displeasure.

Ver. 7. And the staves shall bee] As ever ready to remove. Here we have no
assured settlement.

Ver. 9. The court of the Tabernacle] This outer court signified the visible
Church; where hypocrites also com to the external worships. Doeg may set his
foot as far as David.

Ver. 10. And the twenty pillars] In allusion whereunto, the Church is called
the pillar and stay of truth. 1 Timothy 3.15.

Ver. 20. Pure oil olive] Signifying the precious gifts and graces of the
Spirit in godly Ministers, whose lips must both preserv knowledge, and present
it to the people.

CHAP. XXVIII. Ver. 1. Take thou unto thee]
CHrist also was taken from amongst men. Heb. 5.1. to mediate and negotiate
man's cause with God: And this honor he assumed not up to himself, but it was
given him from above. Verse. 5.

Ver. 2. For glory and for beautie] Prodit Aaron a capite ad calcem, os
humerosque Deo similis. The High Priest was gloriously apparelled, to strike a
religious reverence into the eyes and hearts of the beholders; and to set forth
the beauty and braverie of Christ and his Church.

Ver. 3. That they may make, etc.] Vides, in Sacerdotibus nil plebeium
reperiri, nil populare, says Ambrose. Nothing in the Priests but what was
above the ordinary. The very workmen are to be filled with the Spirit of
Wisdom, to make their attire.

Ver. 5. And they shall take gold and blue, etc.] That cloak of Alcisthenes the
Sybarite (sold for 1 20. talents) that Parliament-robe of Demetrius King of
Macedonie, Athenaeus.
(which no Prince after him would put on propter invidiosam impendii
magnificentiam, sot it is stately costliness) were but rags to Aaron's raiment.

Ver. 6. The ephod of gold] This the High Priest only might wear, neither
might any imitate it; for that was the fall of Gideon's house. Judge. 8.26, 27.

Ver. 12. And Aaron shall bear their names] To set forth Christ's uncessant
intercession for all God's Israel, even when his back seems turned upon them.

Ver. 14. Fasten the wreathen chains] These chains wherewith the breast plate
and humeral were tied, Moses unvail.
signified (says one) the perfect contexture of all heavenly virtues,
adorning Christ's humanity: as also that true says, whereby we are girt unto
him.

Ver. 15. The breast plate of judgment] So called, because the Priest was to put
it on, when he was to enquire and give sentence as from God. Number. 27.21.

Ver. 17. Four rows of stones] According to the number and order of the twelv
Tribes encamping about God's Tabernacle. In all which rows, Dr. Tailor.
a very Reverend Writer has well observed eight things: 1. The shining of the
stones; pointing to the purity of Christ and his Church. 2. Their price; of
great value and worth: signifying what a price Christ valued his Church at. 3.
Their place or situation; they are set in the pectoral, and Aaron must carry
them on his heart, signifying that Christ has as much care of his Church, as
if it were enclosed in his heart; let us out his blood to make room in his heart
for them. 4. Their number; twelv; noting, that with Christ is plentiful
redemption. 5. Their order; they stood in a comlie quadrangle. Christ has
stablished a comlie order in his Church; and we must keep our ranks. 6. The
figure; the apiece; signifying the stabilitie and firmness of the Church.
Satan and all deceivers shall not pick one stone out of Christ's pectoral.
Their use; that Aaron must bear them on his heart; signifying Christ's ardent
affection to his, and constant intercession for them. 8. The quantity: As all
the names of Israel were gathered into a narrow compass; so Christ shall gather
together into one all the dispersed sons of God, and present them before God as
the most beautiful and precious parts of the world. John 11.52.

Ver. 30. The Vrim and the Thummim] A distinct thing from the stones and
chains; made it was not by the Artificers, but given by God to Moses (as were
the two Tables) and by him put into the breast plate. The very names of Vrim
and Thummim, i. e. Lights and perfections lead us to Christ, in whom is all
fullness. [When he goes in before the Lord] sc. to consult with God, who
answered the Priest by voice. Number. 7.89.

Ver. 31. The robe of the ephod] Which signified the roial robe of Christ's
righteousness, reaching down to the feet, large enough to cover all our
imperfections.

Ver. 32. That it be not rent] To show that there should be no rents or
schisms in the Church. 1 Cor. 1.10, 13.1 Tim. 1.3.

Ver. 34. A golden bell, and a pomegranate] Shadowing out 1. The Prophetical
office of Christ here, and his perpetual intercession in heaven. 2. The duty
of Ministers; which is, Vivere concionibus, concionari moribus: to live
sermons, to be fruitful as well as painful teachers: Not like him of whom it
was said, that when he was out of the pulpit, it was pity he should ever go
into it: and when he was in the pulpit, it was pity he should ever com out
of it.

Ver. 35. And his sound shall be heard] Necesse erat ut Pontifex totus vocalis
ingrederetur sanctuarium, ne forte non audito sonitu, morte lueret silentium. A
dumb dog is a child of death. Isa. 56.10. Ministers must be both able and apt
to teach upon all occasions.

Ver. 36. Holiness to the Lord] Hence it was not lawful for the High Priest
(say the Jews) to put off his bonnet to whomsoever he met, were he never so
great a man; lest the Name and Glory of God (whose person he sustained)
should seem to submit to any man.

Ver. 37. Upon the mitre] Which had an holy crown with it. Chap. 29.6.
signifying the Deity and Dignity of Christ.

Ver. 38. The iniquity of the holy things] Get the people's pardon. This
Christ did indeed for all his. 1 John 2.1, 2.

Ver. 39. Embroider the coat] Rev. 1.13. Christ is clothed with such a robe, as
King and Counselor of his Church.

Ver. 40. Coats] Linen garments for innocence. 2. Girdles for constancy and
stabilitie. 3. Bonnets, for safety from the rage of Satan and his instruments.
4. Breeches, for comlie reverence in God's service.

CHAP. XXVI. Ver. 1. Take one young bullock]
ALL sorts of Sacrifices (Sin Offerings, Burnt-offerings, Peace Offerings) were
to be offered for the Priests, because of the special holiness and honor of
their calling.

Ver. 2. And unleavened bread] See 1 Cor. 5.7, 8. with the Notes there.

Ver. 4. Wash them with water] A type of Christ's Baptism, Matthew. 3.

Ver. 6. The holy crown] See the Note on Chap. 28.37.

Ver. 7. The anointing oil] Typing out that abundance of the holy Spirit
powered upon Christ. Isa. 61.1. and upon Christians. 1 John 2.27. Psalm. 133.2.

Ver. 8. Coats, etc.] See the Note on Chap. 28.40.

Ver. 9. Consecrate] Heb. Fill their hands, se. with sacrifices: they were not
to fill their own hands, as Jeroboam's Priests did. 1 King. 13.31. See Heb. 5.5.

Ver. 10. Shall put their hands] As transferring the guilt of their sins upon
Christ. Isa. 53.6.

Ver. 11. By the door] Pointing to Christ, the door into heaven. Heb. 10.20.

Ver. 12. The blood of the bullock] For without blood, there was no remission
of sin. [Beside the bottom of the Altar] To signify the plenteous Redemption
wrought by Christ.

Ver. 13. All the fat that covereth] God must have the very best of the best;
since Christ offered himself, and the best parts he had.

Ver. 14. Without the camp] See the Note on Heb. 13.12. and on Heb. 7.27, 28.

Ver. 15. Thou shall also take] After the Sin-offering, other offerings: till
sin be expiated, no service is accepted.

Ver. 16. Sprinkle it] See 1 Pet. 1.2.

Ver. 17. Wash the inwards of him] This signified that entire holiness, that
through sanctification. 1 These. 5.23.

Ver. 18. The whole ram] Romans 1.1. with the Note.

Ver. 19. Put their hands] Both their hands between the horns of the ram.

Ver. 20. Upon the tip of the right ear] To set forth the holy obedience
required of them in all their senses, actions and motions. John 13.5, 6, 9.

Ver. 21. Of the blood, and of the anointing oil] Signifying Christ's Merit
and Spirit.

Ver. 22. A ram of the consecration] A Thank-offering to God for advancing
Aaron to the Priesthood. See the like in S. Paul. 1 Timothy 1.12.

Ver. 23. Unleavened bread] See 1 Cor. 5, 7, 8. with the Notes there.

Ver. 24. And shall wave them] As acknowledging God's Omnipresence: and that
many should com from East, West, North, and South, to partake of the Merits
and Benefits of Christ, our true sacrifice.

Ver. 25. It is an offering made by fire] Christ in like sort having offered
himself for a Burnt-offering, for a sweet savor before the Lord, asscended up
into heaven, and gave gifts unto men.

Ver. 26. It shall be thy part] Because he did for this time extraordinarily
execute the Priest's office.

Ver. 27. The breast of the Wave-offering and shoulder] To teach the Priests to
serve the Lord with all their hearts, and with all their strength.

Ver. 28. A Heav-offering] Signifying the heaving of Christ upon the Cross, and
the heaving up of our hearts to God for so great benefits.

Ver. 29. Shall be his sons after him] His garments remained for ever, so does
the robe of Christ's righteousness. Isa. 61.10.

Ver. 30. And that son] There were garments but for one: there is but one
Mediator, the Man Christ Jesus.

Ver. 31. And thou shall take the ram] i. e. The remnant of him.

Ver. 33. And they shall eat those things] Apply Christ's death by faith to
their own souls. John 6.51.

Ver. 34. Thou shall burn the remainder] The Thank-offering was not to be kept
till the morrow, to teach us to be prompt and present in praising God, and
applying Christ.

Ver. 35. Seven daies] To teach the Priest's to consecrate their whole lives to
God's service.

Ver. 36. Cleans the Altar] Which as well as the creatures, may be defiled by
man's sin. Lev. 16.16.

Ver. 37. Whatsoever touches the Altar] See Matthew. 23.19. with the Note there.

Ver. 38. Day by day continually] When this daily sacrifice was intermitted
(as in the days of Antiochus that little Antichrist) they counted it an
abomination of desolation.

Ver. 39. Thou shall offer in the morning] These two lambs were types of the
Lamb of God, taking away the sins of the world, with a commemoration of whose
benefits the day was begun and ended. Wherefore, also from David's days, and
forwards, they sang the 22 Psalm at the Morning Sacrifice, and the 136 Psalm at
the Evening.

Ver. 45. And I will dwell] See the Note on 2 Cor. 6.16.

CHAP. XXX. Ver. I. An Altar to burn incens in]
SHadowing Christ, as perfuming and presenting the Prayers of Saints. Rev. 8.3.
and 5.8. and obteining answer thereto from the four horns of the golden Altar.
Rev. 9.13.

Ver. 2. A cubit shall be the length] That in Ezekiel, Chap. 41.22. is much
larger, as setting forth the service of God under the Gospel.

Ver. 3. Overlaie it with pure gold] Shadowing Christ's Deity, yielding glory
to his humanity. [A crown of gold round about] To show, that Devotion is a
rich roial virtue, best beseeming the best Princes.

Ver. 6. Where I will meet with thee] To give oracles and answers of Mercy.
God still meets him that rejoiceth and works righteousness. Isa. 64.5.

Ver. 7. Shall burn thereon sweet incens] Facium and vespae favos. The Heathens
had the like custom; Verbenasque adole pingues, Virgil.
and mascula thura.

Ver. 8. And when Aaron lights the lamps] To show, that our prayers must be
made according to the light and direction of God's Word, lest we ask we know
not what, and worship we know not how.

Ver. 10. An atonement upon the horns of it] Pardon must be sought for the
defects found in prayers; as Nehemiah craved mercy for his Reformations.

Ver. 12. That there be no plague] David in numbering the people, neglected
this duty: thence the plague.

Ver. 13. half a shekel] Toward the making of the Tabernacle; and as an
amercing himself for his sin, that subjected him to utter destruction. Verse 15.

Ver. 15. The rich shall not give more] They are both of a price, because in
spirituals they are equal. 2 Pet. 1.1.

Ver. 16. That it may be a memorial] A perpetual poll-monie, in token of
homage and subjection to the Almighty.

Ver. 18. Between the Tabernacle and the Altar] The laver and Altar situated in
the same court, signified the same; as the water and blood issuing out of
Christ's side; viz. the necessary concurrence of Justification and
Sanctification in all that shall be saved.

Ver. 19. For Aaron and his sons] Here they were to wash, before they prayed
for the people. Heb. 10.22.
We must first make our own peace with God before we take upon us to
intercede for others. So did David. Psalm 25.22. and Psalm 51.18, 19. So we
are advised to do. Lam. 3.39, 40.

Ver. 21. That they die not] Com not to an untimelie end, as they did. Lev.
10.1, 2.

Ver. 26. And thou shall anoint the Tabernacle] So to consecrate the same to
God's service, and to set forth how joifully and gladly men should serve the
Lord.

Ver. 29. Whatsoever touches them] So are all those anointed holy, that by a
lively faith touch the Lord Christ.

Ver. 30. Aaron and his sons] Those only that succeeded him in the office of
High Priest. Lev. 4.3, 5, 16. and 16.32.

Ver. 32. Upon man's flesh] A Latin Postiller hence infer's, in an
hyperbolical sens, that Priests are Angels, not having humane flesh.

Ver. 33. Whosoever compoundeth any thing like it] Holy things must not be
profaned on pain of death. No people so abuse Scripture to common and ordinary
use as the Jews do.

CHAP. XXXI. Ver. 3. And I have filled him]
GOd gift's whomsoever he call's to any emploiment.

Ver. 4. To devise cunning works] All skill in lawful callings, whether manual
or mental, is of God. Isa. 28.26.

Ver. 5. And in cutting of stones] Moses might well doubt where he should
find fit workmen among those brick-makers for Egypt.

Ver. 6. I have given with him] Two is better then one; four eyes see more then
two: God usually therefore coupleth his agents. See the Note on Mat. 10.2, 3.
Luke 10.1.

Ver. 13. Verily my sabbaths ye shall keep] q. d. Though this Sanctuarie-work
is to be don, yet it shall be no Sabbath's-daies work. The good women in the
Gospel forbear on the Sabbath to anoint the dead body of our Savior, resting
according to the Commandment. [For it is a sign] And withal an effectual means
to conveigh holiness into the heart.

Ver. 14. For it is holy unto you] Hence the Hebrews gather (but falsely) that
only Israel was charged with the Sabbath-daie, and not the nations of the
world. But the Sabbath was kept before Israel was born.

Ver. 15. Whosoever does any work] A certain Indian that had been taught by
the English, coming by, and seeing one of the English profaning the Lord's
day, by felling of a tree, said to him, New-England's first fruits.
Do ye not know that this is the Lord's day in Massaqusets (one of the English
Plantations) much machet man, that is, very wicked man, why break you God's
day?

Ver. 18. Written with the finger of God] Of the Decalogue, above all other
holy Writ, God seems to say as Paul, Philem. 19. Behold, I have written it
with mine own hand: i. e. by mine own power and operation.

CHAP. XXXII. Ver. 1. Up, Make us Gods]
A Aron might make a Calf, but the people made it a God, by adoring it. Qui
fingit sacros auro vel marmore vultus Martial.

Non facit ille Deos; qui rogat, iste facit.


Ver. 2. Break off your golden ear-rings] Hereby he hoped to break their
design: but all in vain: for they were mad upon their Idols. Jer. 59.38.

Ver. 3. Brake off the golden ear-rings] which they had got of the Egyptians.
Exodus 12.35. To make use of Heathen Autors for ostentation, is to make a Calf
of the treasure gotten out of Egypt.

Ver. 4. A molten Calf] In imitation of the Egyptian Idol Apis, a Pied-bullock.
A man may pass through Ethiopia unchanged; but he cannot dwell there, and not
be discolored.

Ver. 5. A feast to Jehovah] Whom these Idolaters pretended to worship in the
golden Calf, as did also Jehu. 2 King. 10.16, 29. 2 Chronicles. 11.15. and as the
Papists at this day: but with what face can some of their Rabbis excuse this
people from Idolatry?

Ver. 6. Rose up to plaie] To dance about the Calf. Now, if they were so
cheared and strengthened by those baneful bits, those murdering morsels; should
not we much more by God's spiritual provisions, to dance as David did, to do
his work with all our might?

Ver. 7. For thy people which thou broughtest] God will own them no longer;
they are now dis-covenanted. The Saints by gross sins may lose their jus
aptitudinale, non jus haereditarium, their fitness for God's Kingdom; they may
sin away all their comfortables.

Ver. 8. They have turned aside quickly] Moses's back was but newly turned, as
it were. I marvel that you are so soon removed, etc. Gal. 1.6. See the Note
there. When we have spent all our wind on our people, their hearts will be
still apt to be carried away with every wind of doctrine.

Ver. 9. A stiff-necked people] And so they are still to this very day.
Hierom complain's that in his time they thrice a day cursed Christ in their
Synagogue, Hieron. in Isa. lib. 12. cap 49. tom. 5. and lib. 14 cap. 42.
and closed up their prayers with Maledic Domine Nazaraeis. They are thought to
advise most of that mischief, which the Turk put's in execution against
Christians. They counterfeit Christianity in Portugal even to the degree of
Priesthood, and think they may do it, either for the avoiding of danger, or
increasing their substance. There are very few of them that turn Christians in
good earnest: Adeo in cordibus eorum radices fixit pertinacitas, River. Jesuita
Vapul. 322.
So stubborn they are to this day, and stiff-necked, their necks are wholly
possessed with an iron sinew.

Ver. 10 Let me alone] God is fain to bespeak his own freedom: As if Moses his
devotion were stronger then God's indignation. Great is the power of Prayer;
able, after a sort, to transfuse a dead Palsy into the hand of Omnipotency.

Ver. 11. Lord, why does thy wrath] God offered Moses a great fortune. Ver. 10.
He tendering God's glory refused, and make's request for the people. It is
the ingenuitie of Saints to study God's ends more then their own, and drown
all self-respects in his glory.

Ver. 12. Repent of this evil] God's repenting is mutatio rei, non Dei;
effect^s, non affectus; facti, non consilii; not a charge of his will, but of
his work.

Ver. 13. Remember Abraham] Here Moses neither invocateth the Patriarchs, nor
allegeth their merits, but mind's God of his promise to them, and presses the
performance. In the want of other Rhethorick, let Christians in their prayers
urge this with repetition, Lord thou have promised, thou have promised. Put the
promises into suit, and you may have any thing. God cannot deny himself.

Ver. 14. And the Lord repented] See ver. 12. Moses here had a hard pull, but
he carried it.

Ver. 15. Written on both their sides] See the like in other mystical books.
Ezekiel. 2.10. Rev. 5.1.

Ver. 16. The work of God] The greater was the peoples loss, brought upon them
by their sin.

Ver. 17. And when Ioshua] who had waited in some part of the Mount, the return
of his Master.

Ver. 19. And Moses's anger waxed hot] Meekness in this case had been no better
then mopishness. How blessedly blown up was Moses here. [Hee saw the Calf, and
the dancing] One Calf about another. It was a custom among Papists, that men
should run to the Image of St Vitus, Joh. Manli. loc. com. 187.
and there they should dance all day, usque ad animae deliquium, till they
fainted and fell into a swoun.

Ver. 20. And he took the Calf] We may all wish still as Ferus did, that we
had some Moses to take away the evils of our times: Nam non unum tantum vitulum,
sed multoshabemus, We have not one, but many such Calvs.

Ver. 21. What did this people unto thee] The people sinned by precipitancie;
Aaron by popularitie.

Ver. 22. That they are set on mischief] The whole world is so. 1 Ioh. 2.16.
and 5.19. Quomodo Plautus, In fermento tota jacet uxor.

Ver. 23. We wot not what, etc.] See the danger of nonresidencie.

Ver. 24. There came out this Calf] A very poor excuse. Something he would
have said if he had known what. Here he hid his sin as Adam. Job 31.33.
being too much his child.

Ver. 25. Aaron bad made them naked] As Aaron's ingraving instrument write's
down his sin: so the Confession of other more ingenious Jews proclaim's the
Israelites, saying that No punishment befalls thee, O Israel, Mos. Gerund.
in which there is not an ounce of this Calf.

Ver. 26. Let him com] This word through haste and earnestness Moses omitteth.
The Chaldee and Greek versions supply it.

Ver. 27. Slaie ever^e man his brother] Not all that they met with, (for so
they might have slain the innocent) but all that were chief in the
transgression. In the war against the Waldenses in France, the Pope's great
Army took one populous City and put to the sword sixty thousand, among whom
were many of their own Catholics. For Arnoldus the Cistercian Abbat (being
the Pope's Legate in this great war) commanded the soldiers saying, Caedite
eos: novit enim Dominus qui sunt ejus: Caesar. Heisterbuchensis hist. lib. 5.
cap. 2^.
Kill them one with another: for the Lord knows who are his. This was fine
Popish Justice.

Ner. 28. About three thousand] Chieftains and ringleaders.

Ver. 29. Consecrate your selvs] Regain that blessing which your father Levi
lost. Genesis 49.5, 7.

Ver. 30. And now I will go up unto the Lord] As angry as he was, he could
pray for them: As when our children, through their own fault have got some
sickness, for all our angry speeches we go to the Physician for them.

Ver. 31. Made them gods of gold] Sin must not be confessed in the lump only,
and by whole sale, but we must instance the particulars.

Ver. 32. Blot me I pray thee] God never revealed his love to Moses more,
then when he thus earnestly prayed for God's people. Joab never pleased David
better, then when he made intercession for Absalom.

Ver. 33. Blot out] Cut him out of the roll of the living.

Ver. 34. I will visit] I will pay them home for the new and the old.

Ver. 35. They made] See the Note on Verse 1.

CHAP. XXXIII. Ver. 1. Which thou have brought]
SEE the Note on Chap. 32.7.

Ver. 3. I will not go up] sc. By those visible signs of my gracious presence,
Hos. 9.11.
as heretofore.

Ver. 4. They mourned] As good cause they had: for woe be unto thee when I
depart from thee.

Ver. 5. And consume thee] God's threatenings are cordial, but conditional.
Minatur Deus ut non puniat. Fury is not in me, Isa. 27.4. He punishes not
till there be no other remedy. 2 Chronicles. 36.16. as the be stin'gs not till
provoked.

Ver. 6. Stripped themselvs] As in a day of restraint.

Ver. 7. Afar off from the camp] In token of God's deep displeasure, and
departure from them.

Ver. 8. And looked after Moses] To see what success, what accepta^^^: as David
looked up after his prayer, to see how it sped. Psalm. 5.3.

Ver. 10. Rose up and worshipped] Though obnoxious; they would not despair of
mercy. See 1 Samuel 12.20, 21, 22.

Ver. 12. See, thou say unto mee] See (says one) how Moses here encroacheth
upon God. Mr. Bu^r.
God had don much for him, he must have more. Verse 13. Show me now thy way,
etc. This God grant's him. Verse 14. This serv's not the turn, he must have
more yet. Verse 16. Well, he has it. Verse 17. Is he said? No, he must yet
have more. Verse 18. I beseech thee show me thy glory. It Is don. Verse 19. Is
he satisfied yet? No. Chap. 34.9. God must pardon the sin of his people too;
and take them and him for his inheritance: This fruit of his favor he must
needs be entreated to add to the rest, etc.

Ver. 13. That I may know thee] Moses knew more of God then any man; he was
but newly com down from the Mount, and at the Tabernacle door God spoke with
Moses face to face, as a man speaks unto his friend. Verse 11. The more a man
know's of God, the more desirous he is to know him.

Ver. 14. I will give thee rest] Full content of mind in the sens of my
presence, and light of my countenance.

Ver. 15. If thy presence go not with mee] What is it to have the air without
light? What was all Mordecai's honor to him, when the King frowned upon him?

Ver. 16. So shall we be separated] Heb. Marvellously separated. The
separation of the Saints is a wonderful separation. See Deuteronomy. 4.7. Isa. 20.6.
where Judea is for this cause called an Isle.

Ver. 17. I know thee by name] As Princes do their favorites, who easily forget
others, as Saul did David. 1 Samuel 17.55.


Ver. 18. Show me thy glorie] None ever knew God's glory; our cockle-shell
can never comprehend this sea, yet it may be apprehended that it is
incomprehensible.

Ver. 19. I will make all my goodness] My glorious goodness. Thus Moses may
have what he will of God. The King is not he that can do any thing against
you, said Zedekiah to his Courtiers. Jer. 38.5.

Ver. 20. Thou can not see my face] Otherwise then in his words and works.
Romans 1.20. As we cannot see the Sun in rota, in the circle, but in the beams.
Rab. Maimon.
Some have been Mercabah velo harocheb (as the Hebrew's speak) the charret in
which God rode, but not the rider in it: they saw some created Image, Glory,
whereby he testified his more immediate presence, but not himself. [No man
shall see me and live] But be oppressed and swallowed up with Majesty: as the
sight of the eye is dazzled with the sun; or a crystal-glass broken with the
fire.

CHAP. XXXIV. Ver. 1. Which thou brakest]
NOt without a tincture of passionate infirmity, Dr. Hall.
as some conceiv. He that was the meekest upon earth (says one) in a sudden
indignation abandon's that which he would in cold blood have held faster then
his life. But Austin crie's out, O ira Prophetica, and animus non perturbatus,
sed illuminatus!

Ver. 2. In the morning] A sign of mercy. Psalm 90.14. and 30.6. and 5.4.

Ver. 3. Neither let any man be seen] See the Note on Exodus 19.12.

Ver. 4. And he hewed two Tables] Moses hewed them. The first Tables were
hewn out of the Saphir of the Throne of God's Glory, say the Jewish Doctors.

Ver. 6. The Lord, the Lord God, etc] These glorious titles and attributes are
those back-parts of God. Chap. 33.23. None can see more then these and live:
and we need see no more then these, that we may live. [Long-suffering] Heb.
Wide of nostrils; not apt to snuff at small matters, but bearing with men's
evil manners. This Averroes the Atheist made use of as an argument against the
Providence of God, and to prove that he medleth with nothing below the Moon,
because of his slowness to anger. [In goodness and truth] God's goodness, though
great, yet here and elsewhere it go's bounded with his truth.

Ver. 7. Forgiving iniquity, transgression, and sin] i. e. All sorts of sins.
It Is natural to him, as here. None like him for this. Micah 7.18. It is the
comfort of Saints, that they have to do with a forgiving God. Neh. 9.31. that
can multiply pardons, Nun rabbathi Masor.
as they multiply sins. Isa. 55.7. [Keeping mercy for thousands] The Hebrew
word here rendered Keeping, is written with a greaten letter then ordinary, to
note the extraordinary greatness of God's promise to his people and their
posterity* Psalm 25.10. [Clear the guiltie] This last letter in God's Name
must still be remembered.

Ver. 8. And Moses made haste] It was time for him. The more any man see's of
God, the lower he falls in his own eyes: as he that has looked intently
upon the sun, see's little when he look's down again.

Ver. 9. Let my Lord, I pray thee] See the Note on Cha. 33 12.

Ver. 10. Behold, I make a covenant] i. e. I re-establish it with this
backsliding people. God receives returning sinners with much sweetness: He
reteineth not his anger for ever, because mercy pleases him. His mercy (to
us) is greater then his justice, though in themselves they are equal, yea, the
same. [I will do marvels] See this fulfilled and recorded. Josh. 10.12, 13.

Ver. 11. Observe thou] This is the condition of the covenant on man's part to
be performed. With others God make's a single covenant only, that they shall
observe that which he command's them: but with his Elect he make's a double
covenant; to perform both parts to work all their works in them, and for them,
to put his fear into their hearts, and to cause them to keep his Commandments.

Ver. 12. With the inhabitants] They were devoted to destruction, as having
filled the land from one end to another with their uncleanness. Ezra 9.11.

Ver. 13. Break their images] The Popish Historians have blurred and blasted
those zealous Emperors, Zeno and others, that were Iconomachi and Iconoclastai,
as Sacrilegious. Berne was the first Town that after the Reformation was purged
of Images; which Augustine says cannot be placed in Churches Sine
praesentissimo idololatriae periculo: Aug. in Psalm. 114.
without extreme danger of Idolatry. Ephiphanius says, It is utterly unlawful
and abominable, to set up Images in the Churches of Christians. Irenaeus
reproves the Gnostics, for that they carried about the picture of Christ in
Pilate's time, after his own proportion: using also, for declaration of their
affection toward it, to set garlands upon the head of it.

Ver. 14. No other God] In the Hebrew word Acher rendered Other, there is a
great R. to show the greatness of the sin of serving any other God.

Ver. 15. And one call thee] Any one of the Idolatrous root, if he do but
hold up his finger to thee, thou will easily follow him. Cereus in vitium
flecii. Horat.


Ver. 16. And they make thy sons] Satan still work's upon Adam by Eve. Omnes
haereses ex gyneciis. It is the guis of Heretics to abuse the help of women to
spread their poisonful opinions. Satan per costam, tanquam per scalam ad cor
asscendit. Greg.
Satan climbe's up by the rib to the heart.

Ver. 17. No molten gods] As the golden calf was. Goodly gods that are molten:
Olim truncus eram. Horat.


Ver. 18. In the month Abi^] So called from the new fruits, or ears of corn,
then first appearing. See Exodus 12.1. and 13.4. God here repeteth diverse Laws;
It was a token of reconciliation to the people after their Apostacy, in that
he treat's with them again (after their repentance) about his solemn worships.
So, for a testimony of his reconciliation to Peter after his foul fall, he
set's him a work in the Ministry. John 21.15. So he commends his
Spons^a^resh, after her drowsy decaies, every whit as amiable as she was
before he^ fall. Cant. 6.5. with Chap. 5.10, 11, etc.

Ver. 21. In earing-time and harvest] Though most busy times, you may not make
bold with God.

Ver. 24. Neither shall any man desire] A wonderful providence, since Judea was
compassed about with such warlike adversaries; that they should not watch and
catch at such opportunities. Pompey besieging Jerusalem, made his strongest
batteries on the Sabbath-daie (whereon he knew the superstitious Jews would
not make their defense) and took it. Dio. Cass.


Ver. 27. I have made a covenant] We also have the Covenant, the Seals,
Ministers, etc. But, alas! are not these blessings amongst us as the Ark was
amongst the Philistims, rather as prisoners then as privileges? rather in
testimonium and ruinam quam in salutem? Rather for our ruin, then reformation.

Ver. 28. Forty days and forty nights] Moses, Elias, and Christ, (those
three great Fathers) met glorious in Mount Tahor. Abstinence merit's not; but
prepare's the best for good duties. [Hee wrote] That is, Weems Exer.
God wrote, as some will have it.

Ver. 29. The skin of his face shone] God hereby assuring the people, that he
had inwardly enlightened him for their better instruction.

Ver. 30. And they were afraid] This was another manner of Brightness and
Majesty then that which sat in the eyes of Augustus and of Tamerlan; whose
eyes so shone, as that a man could hardly endure to behold them without closing
of his own: and many in talking with them, and often beholding of them became
dumb: which caussed them oft-times with a comlie modesty to abstein from
looking too earnestly upon such as spoke unto them, Turk. hist^ fol. 236.
or discoursed with them.

Ver. 33. He put a veil on his face] And had more glory by his veil, then by
his face. How far are those spirits from this Christian modesty, which care
only to be seen, and wish only to dazzle others eyes with admiration, not
caring for unknown riches? This veil signified the Laws obscurity, and our
infidelity.

Ver. 34. But when Moses went in] Hypocrites on the contrary show their best
to men, their worst to God; God see's both their veil; and their face; and I
know not whether he hate's more their veil of dissimulation, or face of
wickedness.

CHAP. XXXV. Ver. 1. And said unto them, These, etc.]
HE often go's over the same things, as the knife does the whetstone. Good
things must be repeted, sicut in acuendo. It Is Moses his own metaphor. Deuteronomy.
6.7.

Ver. Six days shall work be don] This duty is so often inculcated, to show
the necessity, excellency, difficulty of well doing it.

Ver. Ye shall kindle no fire] sc. For the furtherance of the work of the
Tabernacle: or at least, that is not of absolute necessity. It might also
signify, that in the kingdom of heaven we shall be set free from all the
fire and scorching heat of affliction.

Ver. 22. And brought bracelets] Glad they had any thing of price to dedicate
to God, and to seal up their thankfulness for this re-admittance into his love
and favor. See the Note on Matthew. 9.10. Nazianzen put this price upon his
Athenian learning (wherein he was very famous) that he had something of
value, to part with for Christ.

Ver. 32. And to devise curious works] This also comes forth from the Lord of
Hosts, Lib. 23.
who is wonderful in counsel, and excellent in working. Isa. 28.29. Pliny
make's mention of some famous Painters, whose rare pieces were Oppidorum opibus
venditae: Sold for so many Towns-wealth. A certain artificer set a watch-clock
upon a ring that Charles the Fifth wore upon his finger. Sphinx philos. page 90.
King Ferdinand sent to Solomon the Turk, for a present, a wonderful globe of
silver, of most rare and curious device; daily expressing the hourly passing of
the Time, the motions of the Planets, Turk. Hist. fol. 713.
the change and full of the Moon; lively exepressing the wonderful conversions
of the Celestial frame. To which, I may well add that admirable invention of
Printing, a special blessing of God to mankind.

CHAP. XXXVI, XXXVII, etc. Ver. 2. And Moses called Bezaleel]
GOd qualified them, M^ses called them. Ministers also must have an outward
calling too. See Acts 13.1, 2, 3.
Heb. 5.4. and be sent ere they preach. Romans 10.15. And whereas 1 Cor. 14.31.
It is said, Ye may all prophecy, the meaning is, All ye that are Prophets,
may. But are all Prophets? 1 Cor. 12.29.

Ver. 7. And too much] Thus in outward ordinances of service, and for the
making of a worldly sanctuary. Heb. 9.1. they could do and over-do. So John
6.28. They said unto him, What shall we do that we may work the works of God?
Men would fain have heaven as a purchase. I would swim through a sea of
brimstone (said one) that I might com to heaven at last. But what said our
Savior to those questionists. John 6? This is the work of God that ye believ
on him whom he has sent. And what said Luther, Walk in the Heaven of the
Promiss, but in the Earth of the Law; that in respect of Believing, this of
Working? Many poor souls can think of nothing but working themselves to life.
Do we must all righteousness, but rest in none but Christ's.

Ver. 8. And every wise-hearted man] Let no man look upon this and the
following Chapter, as an idle repetition; nor say as one said once, Did we
not know that all Scripture was divinely inspired, we should be ready to
sa^e, Quandoque bonus dormitat Homerus. But know that here is see forth a
Table, Index, or Inventorie, of what Moses and the workmen did in obedience to
God's command, for every particular about the Sanctuary. This Inventorie was
taken by Ithamar, at the commandment of Moses, Et sic in archivum Ecclesiae
relatum, and so laid up in the charter-hous of the Church, for the use of
posterity.

See the Notes on Exodus 26. and consider that saying of an ancient. Prosper.
Epist. ad Augustine.
Necessarium and utile est etiam quae scripta sunt scribere, ne leve
existimetur quod non frequenter arguitur.

CHAP. XL. Ver. 36. The Children of Israel went]
THe Jews conceiv that this Cloud that led Israel through the wilderness,
levelled mountains, raised valleys, and laid all aflat: that it burnt up
bushes, and smoothed rocks, and made all plain, etc. See Luke 3.5, Isa. 4.5.

A COMMENTARY OR EXPOSITION UPON THE Third BOOK of Moses, called LEVITICUS.
CHAP. I. Verse. 1 And the Lord called]
A Continuation of the former History, from the rearing of the Tabernacle, to
the numbering of the people; being the history of one month only.

Ver. 2. Bring an offering] Whereby they were led to Christ; as the Apostle
shows in that excellent Epistle to the Hebrews; which is a just Commentary
upon this Book.

Ver 3. Burnt sacrifice] A whole-burnt-off^ring. Heb 10.6. purporting whole
Christ, uffering for us Isa. 53 12 and our sacrificing our whole selves to him,
^s a reasonable service. Romans 12.1

Ver. 4. And he shall put his hand] As acknowledging his own guilt, and
transferring the same upon Christ, resting upon him with full assurance of
faith, handfasting us unto him.

Ver. 5. And be shall kill the bullock] The Priest shall kill it: for it was
death for any man to offer his own sacrifice; so it is still for any to com
to God, otherwise then in, and by Christ.

Ver. 6. And he shall flaie the burnt-offering] To show the grievousness of
our Savior's sufferings; the cruel usage of his suffering Saints. Micah 3.3.
Heb. 11.35. and the duty of all that have benefit by him, to flea off the old
man with his deceitful lusts. Ephesians. 4.22. dealing thereby as the Turk dealt by
him that betrayed the Rhodes. L^unclav.
He presented unto him his promised wife and portion: but withal told him,
that he would not have a Christian to be his son-in-law: and therefore
caussed his Baptized skin (as he called it) to be flaied off, and him to be
cast into a bed strawed with salt, that he might get a new skin. See Mark 9.49.

Ver. 7. Fire upon the Altar] That sire from heaven. Lev. 9.24. (which the
Heathens apishly imitated in their Vestal fire.) Typing either the scorching
wrath of God seizing upon Christ, or the ardent love of Christ to his, and
their zeal for him.

Ver. 8. In order upon the wood] Showing, that Ministers must rightly divide,
and dispose the Word of God. 2 Timothy 2.15. and evidently set forth Christ
crucified. Gal. 3.1.

Ver. 9. Shall he wash] Shadowing Christ's perfect purity. Heb. 7. and our
entire sanctification. Ezekiel. 26.35. Heb. 10.22. [Of a sweet savor unto the
Lord] The burning and broiling of the beasts could yield no sweet savor; but
thereto was added wine, oil, and incens, by God's appointment, and then there
was a savor of rest in it. Our prayers, as from us, would never pleas; but as
indicted by the Spirit, and presented by Christ, they are highly accepted in
heaven.

Ver. 10. A male without blemish] But cursed be that cosener that has in his
flock a male, and sacrifices unto God a corrupt thing. Mal. 1.14.

Ver. 11. On the side of the Altar, northward] Not Eastward as the Heathen
sacrifices: or to note the obscurity of the Legal Cetimonies.

Ver. 12. In order] See the Note on Verse 8.

Ver. 13. He shall wash] See the Note on Verse 9.

Ver. 14. Turtle doves, or young pigeons] Old turtles and young pigeons are the
best: God must have the very best of the best, as being best-worthie.

Ver. 15. Wring off his head] Or, pinch it with his nail, that the blood might
go out, without separating it from the rest of the body. This figured the
death of Christ, without either breaking a bone, or dividing the Godhead from
the manhood. As also the skill that should be in Ministers, to cut or divide
aright the word of truth.

Ver. 16. His crop with his feathers] Or the maw with the filth thereof (that
is, the guts which receiv the filth sent unto them from the maw) was plucked
out, and the blood strained at the side of the Altar: this signified those
clods of blood wrung from our Savior, before his oblation upon the Cross.

Ver. 17. And he shall cleav it] That the inward part might be laid on the
fire. See Psalm. 51.18, 19. Mark 12.33.

CHAP. II. Ver. 1. Of fine flour]
NO quantity is here prescribed, because it was a Free-will-offering: only it
must be fine, no bran in it: to show the purity of Christ's sacrifice. Heb.
7.26. and of our services through him. Mal. 3.11. By means of the oil of his
Spirit, and incens of his Intercession.

Ver. 2. Shall burn the memorial of it] Whereby God was inminded (as it were)
of the party offering, and acknowledging all his store to be from God.

Ver. 3. Shall be Aaron's and his sons] As meat for them: hence it was called
a Meat Offering; and sent them to Christ, the meat that endures unto life
everlasting. John 6.27.

Ver. 4. Unleavened cake, mingled with oil] Sincerity is the mother of
serenitie; Truth, of tranquillity.

Ver. 5. Baken in a pan] Afterward parted in pieces, and oil powered upon it:
signified the graces of God's Spirit wherewith Christ was fully anointed
within and without. Psalm 45.8. and wherewith we should be tempered and
anointed. 1 John 2.27. 2 Cor. 1.21.

Ver. 6. And pour oil thereon] Jacob was the first we read of that consecrated
his offerings with oil. Genesis 28.18. Probably he had it from his predecessors.

Ver. 7. Baken in the frying-pan] So, My heart is frying of a good matter,
says David. Psalm 45.1.

Ver. 8. He shall bring it unto the Altar] God would have all their offerings
brought to one Altar; both to figure out the one only all-sufficient-sacrifice
of Christ, and to teach all the faithful to consent in one and the same truth
of the Gospel.

Ver. 9. Amemorial thereof] Signifying the perpetual benefit of Christ's death
to all believers.

Ver. 10. Shall be Aaron's and his son's] Ministers maintenence.

Ver. 11. Nor any honie] Which has a leavening virtue in it. Sweet sins are
to be abandoned: there will be bitterness in the end. Prove. 26.26, 27.

Ver. 12. Ye shall offer them] i. e. With the first fruits ye shall offer
both leven. Lev. 23.17. and honey. 2 Chronicles. 31.5. Both which are sometimes taken
in the better part. Mat. 13.33. Cant. 4.11.

Ver. 13. Shall thou season with salt] Called here the salt of Gods's covenant;
as signifying the covenant of God, made with us in Christ, who seasoneth us,
and make's all our services savorie. See the Note on Mark 9.49, 50.

Ver. 14. Green ears of corn] To signify that God should be served with the
first fruits of our age, the primrose of our childe-hood.

CHAP. III. Ver. 1. Whether it be male or female]
IN Christ, there is neither male nor female, but all one. Gal. 3, 28. Souls
have no sexes. In Thank-offerings, the female also might pass: to teach, that
God look's not so much to the worth of the gift, as the honesty of the heart
that offer's it. Leavened bread also in this case was accepted. Lev. 7.13.

Ver. 2. Upon the Altar round about] This signified that plenteous redemption
by the blood of sprinkling.

Ver. 3. The fat that covers the inwards] Hearty thanks must be given to
God; such as comes not from the roof of the mouth, but the root of the heart.
An aerie, God be thanked, profits not. Sing with grace in your hearts, is
the best tune to any Psalm. The voice which is made in the mouth is nothing so
sweet as that which com's from the depth of the breast.

Ver. 4. With the kidnies] Those seats of Lusts. Earth lie members must be
mortified by the thankful.

Ver. 5. Upon the burnt-sacrifice] Which was first offered; to teach us, that
sin must be pardoned ere our Thank-offerings can be accepted. It is therefore
(ordinarily) best to begin our prayers with confession of sin, and petitions
for pardon through Christ.

Ver. 8. Lay his hand] See the Note on Chap. 1. v. 4.

Ver. 9. The whole ^ump.] Which in those countrie-sheep is very large yet not
so large as those in America, The world encompassed.
mentioned by Sr. Francis Drake, as big as kine, and supplying the room of
horses for burden, or travel.

Ver. 11. It is the food] That whereupon God himself seems to feed. Psalm
50.13.

Ver. 12. That ye neither eat fat, nor blood] Neither be carnal nor cruel,
but let your souls delight in the fatness and sweetness of God's ordinances.

CHAP. IIII. Ver. 2. Shall sin through ignorance]
OR infirmity; being suddenly surprised, preoccupated Gal. 6.1. See the Note
there, and on Heb 5.2.

Ver. 3. A young bullock] The same sacrifice that should be offered for the
sin of the whole people. Verse 14. To note the hainousness of the Priest's sin
above others. The sins of Teachers, are the Teachers of sins.

Ver. 4. Shall lay his hand] Confessing his sin. Lev. 5.5. and professing his
faith in Christ the true sin-offering. 2 Cor. 5.21.

Ver. 5. Shall take of the bullocks blood] See Heb. 5.2, 3. and 7.26, 27, 28.
with the Notes there.

Ver. 6. Seven times before the Lord] Because in this case, there was need of
much and great purgation.

Ver. 7. Upon the borns of the Altar] To signify (says one) that the
preaching of the Gospel concerning the blood of Christ, should be published
and proclaimed to the four corners of the earth. To show (says another) that
by faith in the blood of Christ, our prayers are acceptable unto God, and our
infirmities pardoned and purged.

Ver. 8. All the fat] Because (among other things) it signified hard-heartedness
and insensibleness of sin and danger. Psalm. 119.70. Dionysius the Heracleot
felt not needles thrust into his fat belly, says the history.

Ver. 9. With the kidnies] See Chap 3.4.

Ver. 11. And the skin, etc.] See the Note on Chap. 1.9.

Ver. 12. Shall he carry forth] Heb. 13.11, 12. See the Notes.

Ver. 13. And of the whole congregation] Particular congregations then may err
for a season; though not finally, fundamentally, if they be the congregation
of Saints. Psalm. 89.5. and not of Hypocrites. Job 15.34. the Church malignant.
[And they have don somwhat] Either by transgression or disobedience. Hell. 2.2.
on ^^ion or commission.

Ver. 14. When the sin is known] Sin may sleep a long time like a sleeping
d^bt, not called for of many years: but Nullum tempus occurrit Regi, God may
send out a summons for sleepers, and punish our by-gon or secret sins.

Ver. 15. And the Elders] These as the representative congregation, took upon
them the guilt of their common errors, as those did. 2 Chronicles. 29 23.

Ver. 16. And the Priest that is annointed] i. e. The High Priest a type of
Christ, who was anointed, not with material oil, as they, but with the Spirit,
that oil of gladness both above, and for his fellow-brethren. Psalm. 45. Heb. 1.
See 1 John 2.27. and 2 Cor. 1.21, 22. Howbeit his oil shine's brightest, and
swim's a-loft above all others.

Ver. 17. Seven times A number of perfection; to note the most absolute
sufficiency of Christ's death to purge and reconcile us to God; (...).
and that he is able to save such to the uttermost that com unto God by him.
Heb. 7.25.

Ver. 18. Upon the borns] See the Note on Verse 7. [At the bottom of the Altar]
To set forth the plenty and sufficiency of Grace and Merit in Christ's death,
for many more then are actually saved by it.

Ver. 19. And he shall take all his fat] Christ offered himself and the best
parts (...) had; suffering in soul and body.

Ver. 20. As he did with the bullock] For even ignorance and infirmities are
deadly sins, direct fruits of the flesh. John 3.6. and such as for which
Christ laid down his life, (...).
even for the notknowings of the people. Heb. 9.7.

Ver 21. Without the camp] Pointing to Christ, who carried our sins out of
God's light. See Heb. 13.12. with the Note.

Ver. 22. When a ruler has sinned] Great men's sins do more hurt, 1. By
imitation, for Vita principis censura est, imo Cynosura, according to these
glasses most men dress themselves. 2. imputation; for plectuntur Achivi, the
poor people pay for it; as they did for David's, whether ignorance or
infirmity, in omitting that duty enjoined Exodus 30.12, 13, 14, 15. thence the
plague. 2 Samuel 24.

Ver. 23. Com to his knowledg] As David's did. 2 Samuel 24. who saw such volumes
of infirmities, and so many Errata's in all that he did, that he once cried
out, Who knows the errors of his life? Oh cleans me from secret sins. Psalm.
19.12. This he knew was the import of all these Levitical cleansings.

Ver. 24. Lay his hand] See the Note on Verse 4.

Ver. 25. At the bottom] See Verse 18.

Ver. 26. All his fat] See Verse 19. The fat was burnt (says one) because (among
other things) it signified duricordium, hardheartedness. Psalm. 119.70.

Ver. 27. And if a soul sin] As there is none that lives and sins not. 2
King. 8.46. Triste mortalitatis privilegium est licere aliquando peccare.
Ephor. Augusta nimis res est, and nulli mortalium concessa nuspiam errare.
Amana.


Ver. 28. Com to his knowledg] By the check of his own conscience, awakened by
the word or rod of God.

Ver. 29. And slaie the Sin-offering] That is, the Priest shall: for no man
might offer his own sacrifice upon pain of death; as is before noted.

Ver. 31. For a sweet savor] See the Note on Chap. 1. verse 9. The death of
Christ is ever in the fight of his heaven he father: and hence it was, that
those typical sacrifices, and all our performances are ^^ill accepted.

CHAP. V. Ver. 1. He shall bear his iniquitie] i. e.
He shall suffer for his sinful silence; because he could, but would not help
the truth in necessiti^, but stand as it he were gagged by Satan, possessed with
a dumb devil.

Ver. 2. And if it be hidden from him] Debt is debt whether a man know of it,
or not.

Ver. 3 Then he shall be guiltie] Guilty he was before ver. 2. but now he
shall see him ^o, and be ready to say as Prove 5 14. I was almost in all
evil, in the midst of the congregation and the assembly By the law is the
knowledge of sin. Rom 3.20.

Ver. 4. And it be hid from him] As is usual with your common swearers, who
will swear that they swear not. If men had such distemper of body, as their
excrements came from them when they knew not of it, it would trouble them; but
they swear, and let go much filth, and it is hid from them.

To do evil] As David did to slaie Nabal 1 Samuel 25.22.

Or to do good] As the same David did to do good to Mephibosheth and yet he
was not ^o good as his oath.

Ver. 5. He shall confess] Homo agnoscit, Deus ignoscit. Man confesses, and
God pardons. In the courts of men it is the safest plea to say, Non feci
(quoth Quintilian) I am not guilty: not so here; but ego feci, miserere, I did
it, have mercy upon me.

Per miserere mei tollitur ira Dei.

Ver. 6. For his sin which he has sinned] Bending his thoughts upon that
particular sin, it is charged upon I^rael, Ezekiel. 16.22. that they remembered not
that they lay in their blood

Ver. 7. Two turtle Doves] See the Note on Chap. 114.

Ver. 8. For the sin-offering first] For till un be expi^ted, no sacrifice or
service can be accepted. Therefore Isa. 1. Wash you, ^^ans you, and then com
and let us reason.

Ver. 9. Upon the side of the Altar] The North-side, and not upon the East: 1.
that Israel might not symbolize with the Heathens, who worshipped toward the
East: 2. to signify that they had no more under the Law then dark shadows of
good things to com. Heb. 10.1. until the time of reformation. Heb. 9.10.

Ver. 10. According to the manner.] That is, the forms and rites prescribed. So
Amos 8.14. The manner of Beersheba, i.e. the forms and rites of worshipping in
Beersheba, as the Caldee paraphraseth it.

Ver. 11. But if he be not able] So low does the most High stoop to man's
meanness, that he will accept of a very small present from him that would
bring a better, if it were in the power of his hand. Lycurgus enjoined his
Lacedaemonians to offer small sacrifices, For God (said he) respects more the
internal devotion, then the external oblation.

Ver. 12. Even a memorial] This is spoken after the manner of men who have need
of remembrancers. God sometimes seems to lose his mercy, and then we must
find it for him, as they Isa. 63.15. sometimes to forget, sleep, delaie, etc.
and then we must in-minde, awaken, quicken him. Isa. 62.7.

Ver. 13. And it shall be forgiven him] See a like promiss made to our
Ministry. Jam. 5.15.

Ver. 15. In the bolie things of the Lord] Things consecrate to him, by robbing
and wronging of God and his Priests; be it but through ignorance or error.
Sacrum qui clepserit, rapseritve, parricida este.
For to do such a thing presumptuously was death. Numb. 15.30. and by the laws
of the twelv Tables in Rome, such were to be punished as parricides.

Ver. 16. And he shall make amends] No remission without restitution. God
abhors holocaustum ex rapina. Latimer's Sex.
And if ye make no restitution, ye shall cough in hell, said father Latimer.

Ver. 17. Though he wist not] Ignorance, though invincible and unavoidable,
well may excuse a tanto, but not a toto. Luke 12.48.

CHAP. VI. Ver. 2. Against the Lord]
AS David in defiling his neighbors wise, and afterward killing him, is said
to have despised the commandment of the Lord, and to have don evil in his
sight. 2 Samuel 12.9. which also he penitently acknowledges. Psalm. 51.4. Sin is
properly against none but God, Godw. Heb. Antiq. p. 98.
being a transgression of his law. Hence the manslaier was confined to the
City of refuge as to a prison, during the life of the High Priest; as being
(says one) the chief God on earth. That was a true position of the Pelagians,
Omne peccatum est contemptus Dei, that every sin is a contempt of God. Prove.
18.3.

In fellowship] Heb. Job 8.20. Dextram conjungere dextra. Quid non mortalia
pectora cogit. Auri sacra fames? (...).
Heb. In putting of the hand. It is said in Job, that God will not take a
wicked man by the hand, i. e. he will have no fellowship with him.

Ver. 3. And lies concerning it, and swears falsty] Thorough inordinate love
of money, that root of all evil; but such money shall perish with them. Zech.
5.2.

Ver. 4. And is guiltie] Found guilty by a self-condemning conscience; which
now like Samson's wife conceal's not the riddle, but tel's all, as she said of
our Savior. John 4.

Ver. 5. In the day of his trespass offering] Before he compass God's altar.
Mat. 5.23. with the Note there.

Ver. 6. With thy estimation] i. e. as thou shall rate it. Moses did the
Priests office for present. He was likewise a Prophet. Deuteronomy. 18.15. and King
in Ieshurun. Deuteronomy. 33.5. and so became a type of Christ that true Trismegist,
the Priest, Prophet and Prince. Dan. 9.25.

Ver. 7. Shall make an attonement] Thorough the sacrifice of Christ. Heb. 10.1,
4, 10, 14.

Ver. 9. All night until the morning] God must be thought upon in the night
season. Psalm. 4.4. David willingly brake his sleep to do it. Psalm. 119.62. The
day is thine, the night also is thine, says he. Psalm. 74.16.

Ver. 10. Besides the altar] On the East Side, furthest from the Sanctuary.
Levit. 1.16. in reverence of the divine majesty.

Ver. 11. In a clean place] Because they came from the Lord's holy house. See
the contrary commanded concerning the stones and dust of a leprous house.
Levit. 14.40.

Ver. 12. It shall not be put out] No more should our faith, love, zeal, (that
flame of God as Solomon cal's it. Cant. 8.6.) that should never go out; the
waters should not quench it, nor the ashes cover it. Cant. 8.10. 2 Timothy 1.6.

Ver. 13. The fire shall ever be burning] The Gentiles (by an apish imitation
hereof) had their vestal fire, salted meal, and many other sacred rites. Basil
charge the devil as a thief of the truth, in that he had decked his crows
with her feathers.

Ver. 14. The law of the meat-offering] Besides what is set down: chap. 2.1, 2.
Thus one text explain's another; as the diamond is brightened with its own dust.

Ver. 15. Even the memorial] See the Note on Levit. 2.2.

Ver. 16. Shall Aaron and his sons eat] See 1 Cor. 9.13, 14. with the Note
there.

Ver. 17. It shall not be baken with leaven] Which is, 1. souring; 2.
swelling; 3. spreading; 4. impuring.

Ver. 18. Shall be holie] God will be sanctified in all that draw near unto
him -- procul binc procul este profani.

Ver. 20. When he is anointed] i. e. When any high priest: for he only was
anointed. Exodus 29.7. on the head at least.

Ver. 21. In a pan] Figuring out the sufferings of Christ, who was so parched
with the fire of afflictions for our sins.

Ver. 23. It shall not be eaten] To teach the high priest to look ^or
salvation out of himself.

Ver. 25. In the place] i. e. at the North-side of the altar. And why, see the
Note on Chap. 5.9.

Ver. 26. Shall eat it] Except in that case. verse 30.

Ver. 27. Shall be holie] This taught an holy use of the mystery of our
redemption: for the sin-offering in special sort figured Christ.

Ver. 28. But the earthen vessel] So contagious a thing is sin, that it
defiles the very visible heaven and earth: which therefore must be likewise
purged by the last fire, as the earthen pot which held the sin-offering was
broken, and the brazen scoured and rinsed in water.

Ver. 30. And no sin-offering] Here the ordinary gloss make's this
observation, Remissionem dare, Dei solius est, qui per ignem significatur: That
to pardon sin belong's to God alone, who is a consuming fire. The Rhemists tell
us of a man that could remove mountains: Rhem. Annot. in Jo^. 20. Sect. 3.
which they may as soon persuade us, as that their Priests have as full power to
pardon sins, as Christ had. One of their Priests meeting with a man troubled in
mind, told him that their religion afforded more comfort to the conscience
then ours; and that because it had, and exercised a power to pardon sin; M. Ley
his patte^n of piety. p. 145.
which our Ministers neither did, nor durst assume to themselves.

CHAP. VII. Ver. 1. Of the trespass-offering] Heb.
A Sham, Piaculum, quo peccatum expiabatur. How it differed from the
sin-offering is hard to determine.

Ver. 2. In the place] See the Note on Chap. 1.11.

Ver. 3. That covers the inwards*] My son give me thy heart. See Psalm. 51.6.
Jer. 4 14.

Ver. 4. And the two kidneys] See the Note on Lev. 3.4.

Ver. 7. As the sin-offering is] They were distinct then. See verse 1.

Ver. 8. The Priest shall have to himself] It is a sign of gasping devotion,
when men are so streight-handed to their Ministers, who should have part of
all. Gal. 6.6.

Ver 9. And all the meat-offering] Which seems to be so called, partly because
it went as meat unto the Priest (the laborer is surely worthy of his meat.
Mat. 10.10.) but principally as leading to Christ, whose flesh is meat indeed.
John 6.

Ver. 10. Have one as much as another] In their father's house was bread enough.
Put me, I pray thee into one of the Priests offices, that I may cat a piece
of bread. 1 Samuel 2.36. This the Tirshata would not suffer those turn-coats to
do. Ezra 2.63. But how hard put too^t was that poor Priest, that answered young
Pareus, Vita Parei per Philipp: filtum, primo oper: tom^ praefixa.
asking him an alms (according to the custom of those times) Nos pauperi
fratres, nos nihil habemus, an piscimus, an caro, an panis, an misericordia
babemus?

Ver. 11. Sacrifice of peace-offering] Or, Paie-offering. See Psalm. 116.14. I
will pay, or, I will perfect. Fitly: for a vow, till paid is an imperfect
thing.

Ver. 12. Vnlevened cakes] There must be sincerity in all our services: for
else God will not once look at them.

Ver. 13. Levened bread] Lo, levened bread will pass in a peace offering: God
for Christ's sake reject's not the services of his Saints, though tainted with
corruption. August.
Peccata nobis non nocent, si non placent. Wine is not thrown away for the
dregs, nor gold for the dirt, that cleav's unto it.

Ver. 14. For an heav-offering] So called, because it was heaved and lifted up
before the Lord, in token that they received all from him, and did acknowledge
all to be due to him.

Ver. 15. Eaten the same daie] Thanks must be returned whiles mercies are
fresh; lest, as fish, they putrefie with keeping. Eaten bread is soon
forgotten. Hezekiah wrote his song the third day after his recoverie.
Jehosuphat gave thanks, first upon the ground where he had the victory,
calling it Berachah; and three days after again at Jerusalem, 2 Chronicles. 20. See
David's Now, Now, Now, I will pay my vows. Psalm 116.14, 15.

Ver. 17. On the third daie] Foreshadowing the resurrection of Christ on the
third day, whereby all legal Ceremonies were abolish^d, and had no use in the
Church, but by accident; as he who builds a vault, lets the centrels
stand till he put in the kei^-stone, and then pulls them away.

Ver. 18. It shall be an abomination] Kept beyond the time; and so uneatable,
unsacrificeable, profane, stinking.

Ver. 19. Shall not be eaten] Because not fit to represent Christ.

Ver. 20. Having his uncleanness upon him] To the unclean all things are
unclean. etc. Tit. 1.15. See the Note.

Ver. 21. Cut off from his people] Confer 1 Cor. 11.27, 28, 29.

Ver. 22. And the Lord spa^e unto Moses] This is ost repeted to draw attention
and get authority. See 1 These. 2.13.

Ver. 23. No manner fat] See the Note on Levit 3.12.

Ver. 24. Used in any other use] Though not in Sacrifice. Mudwals may be made
up of any refuse matter: not so, the walls of a Church or Palace.

Ver. 25. Shall be cut off] i. e. Shall be liable to God's judgments.

Ver. 26. Ye shall eat no manner of blood]. This signified. 1. That we should
learn to honor holy things, and not to make a mock of them by employing them
to common use. 2. That we should be most careful not to shed man's blood, for
the satisfying of our lust. See Levit. 17.11, 12. with Genesis 9.4, 5. and Deuteronomy.
12.13.

Ver. 29. Unto the Lord] Not kill it in the Camp, though there they might eat
it.

Ver. 30. His own hands] Teaching them that they must live by their own faith.
Hab. 2.5.

May be waved] Or, Shaken to and fro; which signified the shaking of our lips,
in giving thanks to God. Hos. 14.2. Heb. 13.15, 16. which yet must be fetched
lower then the lips, even from the bottom of the heart; the deeper the sweeter.
The voice that is made in the mouth is nothing so sweet, as that which com's
from the depth of the breast.

Ver. 31, 32. The breast shall be Aarons, and the right shoulder] To note, that
men must give their breasts and shoulders, affections and actions, even their
whole selves; first to the Lord, and then to us Ministers by the will of God, as
those famous Macedonians did. 2 Cor. 8.5. that so they may be sani in doctrina
and sancti in vita, sound in doctrine, and holy in life.

Ver. 34. For the wave breast, and the right shoulder] This might further
signify (says one) that Christ Jesus heaved up for us both breast and
shoulder, that is, wisdom and strength to all his elect Priesthood, whose
portion he is. 1 Cor. 1 30. Or it might note (says another) that Ministers
should both take care (figured by the breast) and pains (signified by the
shoulder.) And therefore the high priest did to that end wear the names of the
Tribes upon his shoulders, and upon his breast.

Ver. 35. This is the portion of the anointing] That is, of the anointed
Priests; and that because they were anointed to the office. Here Origin
(according to his manner) turn's all into allegories and mysteries, and tel's
us of a threefold sens of Scripture, 1. Literal. 2. Moral. 3. Mystical;
comparing them to the gridiron, drying pan, and oven, used in dressing the
meat offering, Allegorias spumam scriprurae vocat. Luth. in Genesis 3. p. 67.
verse 9. of this Chapter. But this itch of all allegorizing dark and difficult
texts has no small danger in it. And I may doubt of Origin, as one does of
Hierom, Vtrum plus boni peritia ling^arum, qua excelluit, an mali suis
allegoriis, in quibus dominatus fuit, Ecclesiae Dei attulerit; Amama Ant^batb.
whether he did more hurt or good to the Church.

CHAP. VIII. Ver. 1. And the Lord spake]
SEE the Note on Lev. 7.22. And for the rest of the Chapter, read the Notes on
Exodus 28. and 29. and 30.

Ver. 3. And gather thou all the congregation] Ministers are to be ordained in
the public Assembly. Acts 14.22. that the people may show their approbation,
profess their purpose of obedience, and pray for God's Spirit to be poured
upon them.

Ver. 7. And Moses brought Aaron] They did not intrude themselves. See the Note
on Heb. 5.4.

Ver. 8. He put in the breast plate the Vrim, etc.] Hence (it may be) God
appointed the breast plate to be made double, that the Urim and Thummim might
be put within, and lie hid on every side. This Urim and Thummim signified
(says one) that in Christ are hidden all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge.
Col. 2.3. and that he has all secret things most perfectly known and numbered
out before him, which he reveals continually to his Church and chosen, as
need requires, by such means as himself has sanctified. Psalm. 25.14, John
14.21, 26. and 17.14, 17, 26.

CHAP. IX. Ver. 1. On the eighth daie]
THe very next day after the Priest's consecration, that no time might be
lost. I made haste and delaied not, etc. Psalm 119.16. Then said I, lo I com:
in the volume of the book it is written of me, etc. Psalm. 40.7. Live, live,
live, (says one) quickly, much, long: let no water go by, no day be lost,
etc. Preach, preach, be instant, quick at work, etc.

Praecipitat tempus, mors atra impendet agenti. Ver. 2. Take thee alyoung calf]
In remembrance, and sor the remission of Aaron's sin about the golden calf; as
some Hebrews are of opinion.

Ver. 3. Take ye a kid of the goats for a Sin-offering] Quia gravis odor
peccati, The smell of sin is grievous; it offends all God's senses, yea, his
very soul. Isa. 1.12, 13. etc.

Ver. 4. For to day the Lord will appear unto you] And he may not sinde you
emptie-handed, unprepared. See the Notes on Fxod. 19.10.

Ver. 6. And the glory of the Lord shall appear unto you] so shall it one day
to us: yea, we shall be like him, and appear with him in glory; and must
therefore purify our selves, as God is pure. 1 John 3.2, 3.

Ver. 7. Make atonement for thy self] See Heb. 5.3. and 7.27, 28. with the
Notes there.

Ver. 8. Went unto the Altar] i. e. The brazen Altar; for he had not yet
access to the Altar of Incens. We must stay our corruptions, before we
present our supplications; wash our hearts from wickedness, and then compass
God's Altar.

Ver. 22. Lift up his hands] He put the blessing upon them. A type of Christ.
Luke 24.50. with Acts 3.26. Ephesians. 1.3.

Ver. 24. They shouted, and fell on their faces] The consideration of God's
gracious acceptance of us in Christ, should make us to lift many an humble,
joiful, and thankful heart to God.

CHAP. X. Ver. 1. And Nadab and Abihu]
THese jollie young Priests, over-joied happily of their new emploiment, and
over-warmed with wine (as some gather out of Verse 9.) over-shoot themselves the
very day of their service. Verse 19. and are suddenly surprised by a doleful
death. So was that inconsiderate Priest o^ Naples, Anno Dom. 1457. of whom
Wolphius report's, Wolph. Mcmorab. Lect. C^^^. 15.
that when the hill Vesuvius had sent huge flames, and don great spoil; he, to
make proof of his piety, read a Mass, and would need's go up the hill to find
out the cause of such a calamity. But for a reward of his foolhardiness, he
perished in the flames, and was never heard of any more.

Ver. 2. And there went out fire] By fire they sinned; and by fire they
perished. Per quod quis peccat, per idem punitur and ipse: Nestorii lingua
vermibus exesa est. Evag. lib, 1.
So Archbishop Arundel's tongue rotted in his head. The Archbishop of Tours in
France made suit for the erection of a Court called Chamber Ardent, wherein to
condemn the Protestants to the fire. He was afterward stricken with a diseas
called the fire of God, Act. and Mon. fol. 1911.
which began at his feet and so asscended upward, that he caussed one member
after another to be cut off, and so he died miserably.

Ver. 3. This is that the Lord spake] Where? and when? Lev. 8.35. Exodus 19.22.
Or perhaps no where written, but at some other time spoken by God. Moses might
but set down the short Notes of his discourses, as the Prophets used to do. [I
will be sanctified] Either actively or passively, Aut a nobis, aut in nos,
either in us or upon us; sure it is, that he will be no loser by us.
Sanctified he will be, either in the sincerity of men's conversation, or else
in the severitie of their condemnation. Singular things are exspected of all
that draw nigh to God in any duty, but especially in the office of the
Ministry. Those that stand in the presence of Princes must be exact in their
carriages. God appointed both the weights and measures of the Sanctuary to be
twice as large as those of the Commonwealth; to show, that he exspect's much
more of those that serve him there, then he does of others. The souls of
Priests must be purer then the sunbeams says Chrysostom. D. Hakw. on Psalm
101.
[And Aaron held his peace] He bridled his passions, and submitted to the
divine Justice. The like did David. Psalm 39.9. which words were taken up by
Du-plessis in the loss of his only son.

Ver. 5. In their coats] These were not burnt, as neither were their bodies:
the fire, Tostat.
being of a celestial and subtle nature, might pierce their inward parts, not
touching their outward: as the lightning kill's by piercing, not by burning.

Ver. 6. And Moses said unto Aaron] Philo reports, that the High Priest of
the Jews, to keep always his soul pure, never saw any mournful object.
Tiberius, counterfeiting grief at the funeral of Drusus, had a veil laid
betwixt the dead and him, that he might not see the body, because he was (as
the rest of the Emperors also were) Pontifex Maximus, or the High Priest; and
therefore a sacred person. Mourning in Aaron might have seemed murmuring: he
is therefore forbidden it, and accordingly he forbear's. Manlii Loc. com. p.
215.
So did Luther when he buried his daughter, he was not seen to shed a tear.
No more did reverend Mr. William Whatelie late Pastor of Banburie, when after
he had preached his own childe's Funeral upon this Text, The will of the Lord
be don: he and his wise laid the child in the grave with their own hands.
[Bewail the burning] It Is fit enough (ordinarily) that the body, when sown in
corruption, be watered by the tears of those that plant it in the earth.

Ver. 7. For the anointing oil of the Lord is upon you] This is every true
Christian's case, who should therefore carry himself accordingly. There is a
(...), a seemlie carriage belong's to every calling. You have an unction, etc.
1 John 2.

Ver. 9. Do not drink wine, nor strong drink] As some are of opinion Nadab and
Abihu had don; Ex malis moribus honae leges.
which miscarriage of theirs occasioned this precept. The perpetual equity
whereof is, that Ministers be no wine-blbbers or Alestakes. 1 Timothy 3.3. Why
should it be said as of old, They have erred because of wine, and have gone out
of the way because of strong drink, even the Priest and the Prophet? Isa. 28.7.
Drunkenness is a crime in all, but it is a kind of Sacrilege in Ministers. And
if other drunkards deserv double punishments for their misdemeanors, (as
Aristotle judges) first for their drunkenness, (...). Arist. Ethic. lib. 3. c.
5
and then for the sin committed in, and by their drunkenness; what do drunken
Priests? Isa. 56.12.

Ver. 10. And that ye may put difference] Drunkenness take's away the heart.
Hos. 4.11. besot's and infatuate's; rob's a man of himself, and laie's a beast
in his room.

Ver. 11. And that ye may teach] The Priest's lips should both preserv
knowledge and present it to the people; even all the counsel of God. Mal. 2.7.
Acts 20.27. To give the knowledge of salvation by the remission of sins. Luke
1.77.

Ver. 12. Take the Meat-offering] q. d. Think not that God has cashiered you,
because he has corrected you; neither refuse your meat out of a sullen
sowrness; but fall to your Meat Offering, and take better heed another time.
Only, eat before the Lord. Deuteronomy. 12.18.

Ver. 16. And behold it was burnt] Passion for their dead friends had so
transported the Priests, that they knew not well what they did. We use to
say, Res est ingeniosa dolor; but then it must not be excessive as here, and
as 2 Samuel 18.33.

Ver. 17. To bear the iniquitie] This the sinner does subjectively, the Priest
typically, the Lord Christ really.

Ver. 19. Should it have been accepted] God love's a cheerful server. Deuteronomy.
12.7. and 26.14. Mourners bread is polluted bread. Hos. 9.4. And Mal. 2.13.
those unkind husbands are blamed for caussing their wives, when they should
have been cheerful in God's service, to cover the Lords altar with tears, with
weeping and with crying out, so that he regarded not the offering any more.
This Aaron knew, and allegeth for himself.

CHAP. XI. Ver. 1. Unto Moses and to Aaron]
MAgistrate and Minister must jointly see that God's laws be duly executed.
Queen Elisabeth once in her progress visiting the County of Suffolk, all the
Justices of Peace in that County met her Majesty; having every one his
Minister next to his body; which the Queen took special notice of, and
thereupon uttered this speech, that she had often demanded of her Privy
Council, why her County of Suffolk was better governed then any other
County? and could never understand the reason thereof; but now she her self
perceived the reason. It must needs be so, said she, where Moses and Aaron,
the Word and the Sword go together.

Ver. 2. These are the beasts which ye shall eat] These, and these only; 1.
That ye may be at mine appointment for your very meat, as who am chief Lord
of all. 2. That there may be a difference betwlxt you and all other people. 3.
That ye may be taught to study purity, and know that the very creatures
are defiled by man's sin: 4. That ye may have these things as a shadow of
things to com. Col. 2.16, 17.

Ver. 3. Whatsoever parts the hoof, and cheweth the cud] To teach them to
think upon God's commandments to do them. Psalm. 103.18. cleansing themselves
from all filthiness of flesh and spirit. 2 Cor. 7.1.

Ver. 4. The camel] The foolish Jews when they saw Mahomet arising in such
power, D. Hall's Peacemaker.
were straight ready to cry him up for their Messiah. But when they saw him
eat of a Camel (says mine Author) they were as blank as when they saw the hoped
issue of their late Jewish Virgin, turned to a daughter.

Ver. 5. And the conie] Which has his name in Hebrew from hiding himself in
holes. A weak, but a wise creature. Pro. 30.26. And wisdom is better then
strength. Eccles. 9.15. The Hare that trust's to the swiftness of her legs, is
at length taken and torn in pieces. When the Conie that fleets to the rocks
does easily avoid the dogs that pursue her. See Isa. 40.30, 31.

Ver. 6. Because he cheweth the cud, but divides not] Meditation must end in
practice: as lessons of music must be practiced, and a copy not read only,
but written after.

Ver. 7. And the Swine] Anima sui data pro sale, ne carnes putrescant, said
Cleanthes. The Swine has his soul for salt only, so has the drunkard.

Ver. 8. Of their flesh, ye shall not eat] Not above the quantity of an
Olive, say the Jew-Doctors, who will need's be mending magnificat, adding to
the Law.

Ver. 9. Whatsoever has fins and scales] The fins of the fish are for steering
of their motion, the scales for smoothness of passage, Sermon. 1. in die 8. And.
for safeguard, for ornament. Those only are clean in the sight of God, Qui
squamas and loricam habent patientiae, and pinnulas hilaritatis, says Bernard.

Ver. 10. Of all that move in the waters] And yet swim also in the aer. Like to
these is the temporary believer: for that seeming to mount up in spiritual
joies, yet he withal swimmeth, yea batheth himself in the waters of sensual
delights.

Ver. 11. They shall be even an abomination] To teach us, that nothing is
lawful, no not for our common use, unless it be sanctified by the word of God
and prayer. 1 Timothy 4.5. Acts 10.35.

Ver. 13. The Eagle] Which yet is counted and called the king of birds, and
delight's in high flying. That which is highly esteemed amongst men is
abomination before God. Lu. 16.15.

Ver. 14. And the vulture and the kite] That feed upon carrion and dead
carcasses, and are emblems of greedy gripers and oppressors.

Ver. 15. Every raven] Unnatural to his young, whom God himself hears and
feeds. Psalm. 147.9. though they cry with a harsh note, and cry to God by
implication; and though the raven be an inauspicate bird, and a sign both of
man's punishment and God's curs. Isa. 34.11.

Ver. 16. And the owl, and the night-raven] Night-birds that hate the light, or
fly against it, as bats do, are an abomination. Deeds of darkness are out of
date, now in the days of the Gospel especially. Romans 13.12, 13.

Ver. 17. And the cormorant] An unsatisfiable bird, that fitly resembles the
devil, who daily devour's souls, and yet enlarges his desires as hell.

Ver. 18. And the Swan] Whose white feathers, but black skin under them, might
serve to set forth the hatefulness of hypocrisy.

Ver. 19. And the Stork] Which build's high. Psalm. 104.17. but feed's low on
fishes, frogs and snakes; and so might be the rather rejected, as unfit for
food.

And the lapwing] Which is worthily made an hieroglyphick of infelicitie;
because it has as a coronet upon the head, and yet feed's upon the worst of
excrements. It is pity that the Saints that are brought up in scarlet should
embrace the dunghill. Lam. 4.5. that any one that is washed in Christ's blood,
should bedabble his robe in the stinking puddle of the world.

And the Bat] Cast away either thy wings or thy teeth (says one to a neuter)
and loathing this Bat-like nature, D. Hall epist. to W. L.
be what thou art, either a bird or a beast.

Ver. 20. All fowls that creep] So all mongrels in religion, that (like the
planet Mercury) can be good in conjunction with good, and bad with bad; that
have religionem Ephemeram, Hilar.
fidem menstruam.

Ver. 22. The Locust, etc.] All creeping fowls that go upon all four might not
be eaten, except Arbe, Soleam, Chargol and Chargab, names to us unknown.

Ver. 24. Whosoever touches the carcass] This and the like signified, that
all, even the least sins are to be purged through Christ, and carefully cast
away.

Ver. 28. Shall wash his clothes] As having committed a greater sin, then he
that to ucheth a carcass only. All sin defiles not alike.

Ver. 29. And the Tortois] Which has it is name in Hebrew of a Coach or Wagon:
The thick shell wherewith it is covered, is said to be so hard, that a laden
Wagon may go over it, and not break it. And such is a hard heart, that cannot
repent, or relent never so little.

Ver. 30. The Chamaeleon] A very fearful creature, and therefore easily
turning himself into sundry colors. Carnal fear put's men upon unwarrancable
shifts. See Zeph. 3.13.

Ver. 31. Touch them when they be dead] There is no kind of living creature
that is defiled whiles it is alive, or that defiles whiles it is alive, save
man only, says Maimonie.

Ver. 36. Nevertheless a fountain] Because it would cleans it self, and work out
the uncleanness. So will Faith.

Ver. 37. It shall be clean] Because of necessity.

Ver. 39. Of which ye may] Confer Psalm 49.12. pecoribus morticinis. Tremel.

Ver. 40. Shall wash his clothes] To teach them to hate, even the garment
spotted by the flesh. Jude 23. all provocations and instruments of sin.

Ver. 44. Ye shall be holy, for I am holie] Great men look to be served
like themselves: so the great God.

Ver. 45. That brings you up] This is often inculcated. God's blessings are
binders; and every new deliverance cal's for new obedience.

Ver. 47. To make a difference] Ministers also in their discourses should put a
difference, and take out the precious from the vile. Jer. 15.19. as did
Zuinglius; who when he inveighed most vehemently against sin, would usually
com in with this claus, Probe vir, haec nihil ad te. This is not intended to
thee, thou godly man.

CHAP. XII. Ver. 2. If a woman have conceived seed]
OR yielded seed, Amam. Antibarbar. 575.
as Genesis 1.11. Vrgendum hoc adversus Anabaptistas; qui, ut suos de humanae
Christi naturae origin errores stabiliunt, foeminas semen habere praefracte
negant.

Then she shall be unclean] This signified that corruption of man's nature,
wherein he is conceived. Augustine.
Psalm. 51.5. (being condemned as soon as conceived, Damnatus antequam natus) and
the remedy we have in Christ.

Ver. 3. And in the eighth daie] See the Note on Genesis 17.13, 14.

Ver. 4. She shall touch no hallowed thing] Preparation must go before
participation of holy ordinances. Hag. 2.13.

Ver. 5. But if she bear a maid-childe] To intimate, it may be, the woman's
being first in the transgression. 1 Timothy 2.14.

Verse 6. And when the days of her purifying] The Virgin Marie also observed
this Law. Luke 2.21. not in conscience of any particular sin, which in the
conception of our Savior, she was free from; nor in show, to satisfy the
law; much less upon hypocrisy; but in conscience of her natural corruption;
which by this oblation, according to the Law, she did confess holily and
religiously before God and his Congregation, as one well observes.

Ver. 7. And make an attonement] Whereby her faith was confirmed, that by
Christ her sin was remitted, and the curs removed. 1 Timothy 2.15.

Ver. 8. And if she be not able] As the blessed Virgin was not. Luke 2.22,
24. who now can despise any one for want, when the mother of our Lord was not
rich enough to bring a Lamb for her purification? We may be as happy in
russet, as in tissue.

CHAP. XIII. Ver. 1. And the Lord spake]
SEE the Note on Levit. 7.22.

Ver. 2. Like the plague of leprosie] Leprosy is both an effect and type of
sin; which is such a sickness of the soul, as those are of the body, which
Physicians say are Corruption totius substantia, universal diseases, tending to
the issues of death. It drie's up and draw's out the very vital blood and life
of the soul.

Ver. 3. The plague in the skin of the flesh] That is, the white, bright spot,
verse 2. Confer Exodus 4.6. Numb. 12.10.

Is turned white] This might note such as have continued long, and are aged in
any wickedness.

Be deeper then the skin of his flesh] Compare Numb. 12.12. 2 Kings 5.14. Such
are they, whose wickedness is not only acted by their hands, but seated in
their hearts, and sunk into their spirits: like the spots of the leopard, which
no art can cure, no water wash off, because they are not in the skin, but in the
flesh and bones, in the sinews and most inner parts. Ingrained diseases are not
easily stirred, much less destroyed.

Ver. 4. Shall shut him up] For further trial of truth, that daughter of time.
We may not precipitate a censure, but be slow to speak, slow to wrath. The
leper must be shut up from week to week, till the thing were certain: So till
men's perverseness be made manifest. 2 Timothy 3.9. we must suspend our censures.
Many are like candles whose tallow is mixed with brine; no sooner lighted, but
they spit up and down the room.

Ver. 5. Spread not in the skin] So if men mend by admonition, and take up in
time; if they refuse not to be reformed, hate not to be healed, as Babylon.
Jer. 51.9. as Ephraim. Hos. 7.1. When I would have healed Ephraim, then the
iniquity of Ephraim was discovered, or brake out as a leprosy in his
forehead. See Ezekiel 24.13.

Ver. 6. It is but a scab] Such as may be the spot of God's children. Deuteronomy.
32.5. Sin make's wicked men the object of Gods hatred, the Saints of his pity;
as we hate poison in a toad, but we pity it in a man.

And he shall wash his clothes] The best cannot wash in innocence, he must
therefore wash in tears. Isa. 1.16. God also will set in and wash such with the
blood of his son.

Ver. 7. But if the scab spread] So if sin be gaining and growing still upon
the sinner, even after admonition; or is scattered and spread to the infecting
of others, it is a very ill sign.

Ver. 9. He shall be brought unto the Priest] Who was to discern it by the
law of leprosy: Romans 3.20. and 7.7.
so must we find out our sins by the moral law. Romans 3. The works of the
flesh are manifest. Gal. 5. Neither need we half so much caution or curiosity
to be persuaded of our spiritual leprosy, which is too too apparent: only
those many ceremonies (as one well notes) may put us in mind how much more
exquisite our diligence ought to be in finding and ferreting out our special
sins.

Ver. 10. And there be quick raw flesh] It is one of the most remarkable
things in all this law (says a learned Divine) that quick or sound flesh in
the sore should be judged leprosy, and the man unclean: whereas if the
leprosy covered all his flesh, he was pronounced clean, verse 13. Hereby, 1.
May be meant such as justify themselves and their wickedness, as Jonas did his
anger; whereas he was judged himself, is like him who had the leprosy all
over, and might be declared clean. Or, 2. Such who sin against the light of
knowledge, and the quickening, yea rawness of a galled conscience.

Ver. 12. And if a leprosie] So called, because so counted at first: but it
prove's no more then a kind of scurf or scab.

Ver. 13. He shall pronounce him clean] i. e. not infectiously or incurably
unclean.

Ver. 14. But when raw flesh] Because it showed that there were still corrupt
and poisoned humors in the body, not easy to be expelled till death.

Ver. 15. It is a leprosie] Properly so called, a fretting soreness or
scabbedness. The Greeks call it Elephas or Elephantiasis, when the skin grow's
hard as the Elephant's skin. This the Israelites brought (likely) out of
Egypt; for it was bred only about Nilus, and is therefore called the botch of
Egypt. Deuteronomy. 28.27.

Ver. 16. Turn again] Viz. to be white like the rest of the body: so if a
sinner stop or step back, etc.

Ver. 18. Was a bile and is healed] Seemed to be healed, as apostates to have
escaped the pollutions of the world through the knowledge of Christ. 2 Pet.
2.20. and to have known the way of righteousness, verse 21. and yet the later
end is wors with them then the beginning. They become altogether filthy. Psalm
53.3. Forsakers of the Covenant, yea, wicked doers against the Covenant. Dan.
11.30, 32. These sin not common sins, as Core and his company died not common
deaths.

Ver. 22. And if it spread much abroad] So, if sin reign there is no pardon:
rebel it may, reign it must not.

Ver. 23. But if the bright spot staie] Sin, if it reign not is not imputed;
for we are not under the law, but under grace. Romans 6.12, 14.

Ver. 25. A leprosy broken out of the burning] Seldom do passions burn, but
there is a leprosy breaking out of that burning; such as causseth the climate
where such lepers live to be like the torrid Zone, too hot for any to live
near them.

Ver. 30. A yellow thin hair] Which is a true sign of a skall.

Ver. 34. He shall wash his clothes] See the Note on ver. 6.

Ver. 35. After his cleansing] See the Note on ver. 18.

Ver. 37. Black hair] A sign of soundness. Quod sanitas in corpore, id
sanctitas in cord, says Bernard.

Ver 39. A freckled spot] Or white-morphew. This made not a man unclean: no
more do mere infirmities make God abhor us.

Ver. 44. His plague is in his head] Such a leper is every ignorant man; how
much more the man that is an heretic? whom therefore after the first and
second admonition we must reject. Titus 3.10. yea from such stand off. 1 Timothy
6.5. Keep aloof as from lepers, Purchase Pilgr.
their very breath is infectious; and like the dogs of Congo, they bite,
though they bark not.

Ver. 45. His clothes shall be rent] To show his sorrow for sin, the cause of
his calamity.

And his head bare] That men might not mistake him; and further to show his
humility, whereof this also was a cerimonie.

A covering upon his upper lip] His Moucbaches, that by his breath he might
not insect others: and to show that God will not hear a good motion from an ill
mouth.

Unclean, unclean] Say we the same in our humblest acknowledgments; but
withal add that of the leper in the Gospel, Yet Lord, if thou will, thou can
make me clean.

Ver. 46. Without the Camp] And that utterly, if incurable, as Vzzias. A
livelie type of Excommunication, which the Apostle describes. 2 Cor. 5.11, 12.
and our Savior. Mat. 18.17.

Ver. 47. The garment also] A plague not any where else read or heard of:
being nothing like clothes now-adaies infected with the plague, but far more
strange and dangerous, whether it did spread or fret inward, the garment was to
be burnt with fire. This signified that all instruments of idolatry, or of
any other sin are to be destroyed, and made away. As the Law commands, The
graven images of their gods shall ye burn with fire. Deuteronomy. 7.25, 26. And Jude
alludeth to it, when he bids us save some with fear, pulling them out of the
fire, bating even the garment spotted by the flesh. Jude 23. See Isa. 30.22.
Acts 19.19. Justiciaries also shall one day find, that though to the
worldward they wash themselves with snow-water, and make their hands never so
clean, yet God will plunge them in the ditch, and their own clothes shall make
them to be abhorred. Job 9.30, 31.

CHAP. XIIII. Ver. 1. And the Lord spoke unto Moses]
ANd to Aaron also though not here mentioned, as he is, verse 33.

Ver. 2. He shall be brought unto the Priest] To teach us to go to Jesus
Christ the High Priest of our profession, who heals all our diseases. Psalm
103.3. He cured the leprosy (to others altogether incurable) by a touch of his
hand only. Mark 1.41. Yea he sent his word and healed them. Psalm 107.20. and
so he does the souls of sinners that com unto him.

Ver. 3. If the plague of leprosy be healed] As it was in Simon the leper
that entertained Christ. Jealousy, Frenzy and Heresy are counted incurable
diseases: not so leprosy; though the most carried it to their death, as
Gehazi, Azariah, etc.

Ver. 4. Command to take] That the leper might show his thankfulness to Jehovah
his Physician, as he is called. Exodus 15.26. See Mat. 8.4. Men pray and pay
Physicians of their bodies, who yet do but officiose occidere many times. And
shall God have nothing? Must he ask as once, Where are the other nine? Shall
we not turn again with Naaman now cleansed, and offer our service, renounce
our idols, dedicate all we are and have to the God of Israel?

Two birds] Or sparrows, whereof two were sold for a farthing: to show how
lightly set by Christ is in the world, whose blood nevertheless is more worth
then a thousand worlds.

Ver. 5. Over running water] Heb. Living water. Life consist's in motion, in
action: hence waters that spring and run are, for their continual motion,
called living waters. O Lord, says Hezekiah, By these things men live, and in
all these things is the life of my spirit. Isa. 38.16.

Ver. 6. That was killed over the running water] Pointing at Christ, who came
not by water only, but by water and blood. 1 John 5.6. See the Note there, and
on 1 Cor. 6.11.

Ver. 7. And he shall sprinkle] This led them to that blood of sprinkling.
Heb. 12.23. applied unto them by that hysopbunch of faith, whereby the heart is
purified.

And shall let the living bird loos] This figured (sale some) that neither
Christ's deity without the shedding of his blood, nor Christ's blood (but for
the quickening life of the Godhead, personally dwelling in him) could have been
available for the purging of sin. Both which himself declares. John 6.53, with
63. And hither belongs 2 Cor. 5.19. Acts 20.28. Moreover it figured, that
Christ by his death conquered him that had the power of death. Heb. 2.15.
whilst he fled as a bird to the everlasting mountains, from the jaws of death
to the joies of heaven. Heb. 7.26.

Ver. 8. Shall wash his clothes and shave] This the leper was to do the first
day of his cleansing; 1 Timothy 6.18.
to teach men to be thorough in the practice of mortification, at the first
conversion: laying a good foundation for the time to com, that they may lay
hold on eternal life.

And shall tarry abroad] Men must not be too hasty at first to catch at
comfort; but let humiliation have her perfect work, and our sorrows be suitable
to our sins.

Ver. 9. Ezra 10.13.
Even all his hair he shall shave off] To show that repentance and
mortification is not the work of a day (as he said in another case) but of a
man's whole life. There must be a daily shaving and paring of lusts and
superfluities; which are to the soul as excrements are to the body. Yea, the
more a sinner is exercised in mortification, the more he searches out his
corruptions. Now he shaveth off the hair not of his head only, but of his
beard and eie-brows.

Ver. 10. He shall take two hee-lambs] That by these sacrifices he might be
taught to seek for the cleansing of his soul, together with the healing of his
body; that there might be men's sana in corpore sano, a cure don on both
inside and outside too.

Ver. 11. At the door of the tabernacle] There God is to be found, viz. in the
public assemblies, and that we are indeed (says one) when we are at the
door of the Tabernacle.

Ver. 12. And wave them] This may note, 1. Christ's extreme sufferings. 2. The
waving of Christ in the preaching of the Gospel. 3. The motion of the sinner's
lips in confession and supplication.

Ver. 13. It is most holie] The way of holiness, in and by Christ is an
absolute way, as ever was devised.

Ver. 14. Upon the tip of the right ear] To signify that all Christ's
sanctified ones have a hearing ear, an active hand, a nimble foot, to walk in
the way that is called holy.

Ver. 15. Some of the log] Christ's comforts must be warily propounded to men,
and with good discretion.

Ver. 16. Seven times] This might note the perfection of the joies God has for
his, and our imperfection in believing it, in that it was so many times
sprinkled.

Ver. 17. Upon the tip of the right ear] To assure him of comfort, in hearing,
doing, persevering.

Ver. 18. Upon the head] Everlasting joie shall be upon the heads of Christ's
ransomed ones. Isa. 35. ult.

Ver. 19. And afterward the burnt-offering] We must be reconciled by Christ
(our sin-offering) before the sacrificing of our selves (which is our reasonable
service) can be accepted.

Ver. 20. And the meat-offering] The meat offering annexed to the
burnt-offering shows (says one) either that Christians grow marvellously in
this life, Bifield on 1 Pet. 1.22.
after they have full assurance of pardon of sin: or else that Christ will be
their eternal food in heaven.

Ver. 21. And if he be poor] Here Is a proviso for poor people: God make's no
difference, but accept's of a little where much is not to be had.

Ver. 32. Whose hand is not able to get] This is often urged, to show, that the
best can be got must not be thought too good for God: and that if through
carelessness or niggardice men do not their utmost, that is a just exception.

Ver. 34. Plague of leprosy in a hous] Such is the contagion of sin, that it
will infect the very house we dwell in, the garments we wear, even all the
creatures we use, so as all things are to us impure. Titus 1.13. even the house
of God also. Levit. 16.16. and his holy ordinances. The Canaanites had defiled
the land from one end to another with their uncleanness. Ezra 9.11. and so
infected the air. This Law taught men; 1. Upon all occasions to show their
utter detestation of sin, but especially of idolatry. 2. To take heed of
despising admonition, lest they be utterly ruined, and that without remedy.
Prove. 29.1.

CHAP. XXV. Ver. 2. Arunning issue]
AN involuntarie flux of seed, such as David imprecateth upon Joab, 2 Samuel 3.29.

Ver. 3. It is his uncleanness] Hereby they were taught the turpitude of sin,
of original sin especially, that peccatum peccans, as the Schools call it; that
sinful sin, as S. Paul. Romans 7.13. for so filthy it is, that he can call it
no wors then by it is own name, as wanting a fitter Epithet.

Ver. 4. Every bed] Sin is more catching then any plague, and more defiling
then any jakes. Mark 7.23. Paul found it as noisome to his soul, as a dead
body to his sens. Romans 7.24. or as the sanies of a plague sore to a rich robe.
Job abhor's himself for it in dust and ashes. Chap. 40.4. And Isaiah look's
upon himself as an undon man, by reason of it, Chap. 6.5.

Ver. 8. Spit upon him] Noting the pollution that com's to men's souls by those
that spit heresies, and belch out blasphemies.

Ver. 13. Bathe his flesh] This taught them to run to that open fountain, that
Kings-bath. Zech. 13.1. with Ezekiel 36.29.

Ver. 15. And the Priest shall offer them] This Priest, and these sacrifices
led them to Christ who bore our sicknesses, and expiated our sins. See thou
then the bloody issue of thy corruptions alwaie running, and gushing out at
thine eyes, ears, month, flesh? the issue of blood and water opened in Christ's
side run's alwaie for washing it away.

Ver. 16. Seminifluus.
Go out from him] By nocturnal pollutions, filthy dreams, etc.

Ver. 18. With seed of copulation] Though lawful in it self, as being the
ordinance of God. Genesis 2.24. Sin is like copres, which will turn wine, or milk
into ink; or leaven which turn's a very pas^eover into pollution.

Ver. 24. And if any man lie with her] Unawares, or scecretly. For to do it
presumptuously, and upon public notice, it was death. Levit. 20.18. Ezekiel.
22.10. And God often punishes such unclean copulations now-a-daies, with
monstrous, deformed, or diseased births.

Ver. 25. Have an issue] As she had. Mark. 5.25.

Ver. 31. That they die not] Which is wors then to die in a ditch.

CHAP. XVI. Ver. 1. After the death]
THat others might be warned. Lege historiam, ne fias historia, says one.

When they offered before the Lord] A little strange sire might seem a small
matter in the eyes of indifferency: and yet it was such a sin, as made all
Israel guilty, as appears by the sacrifices offered for that sin, set down in
this Chapter.

Ver. 2. That he com not at all times] Whenever he pleases, but when I
appoint him, i.e. once a year only. Exodus 30.10. and then also with reverence
and godly fear. God, as he lov's to be acquainted with men in the walks of
their obedience, so he tak's ^^ate upon him in his ordinances, and will be
trembled at in his judgments.

Ver. 3. For a sin-offering] viz. For himself, and his family, ver. 6. and 11.
See the Note on Chap. 14.3.

Ver. 4. Therefore shall he wash] As we must be always holy, so then most,
when we present our selves to the holy eyes of our Creator. We wash our hands
every day: but when we are to sit with some great person, we scour them with
bals. See verse 24.

Ver. 5. Two kids of the goats] Both of them types of Christ: who though he
died not for wicked goats, yet he seemed rejected of God, and was reckoned
among malefactors, Isa. 53.

Ver.6. And for his hous] Whereof a Minister must be mainly careful. 1 Timothy
3.4. lest (as Augustus doing justice on others) he be hit in the teeth with
his own disordered family. Aaron had lately smarted in his two eldest.

Ver. 8. Shall cast lots] To show that nothing was don for us by Christ, but
what God's hand and his counsel had determined, Acts 4.28. 1 Pet. 1.20. See the
Note. [For the escape goat] Which being a piacular or purging oblation, carried
the peoples curs with it: as did likewise those Obominales among the Grecians;
who, from this custom of the Hebrews, borrowed their yearlie expiation of their
cities: the manner whereof (somewhat like unto this) See in the Note on 1 Cor.
4.13.

Ver. 9. The goat] A type of Christ's mortal humanity (say some) as the
scapegoat of his immortal deity: Or the one of his death, the other of his
resurrection. Others are of opinion that hereby was signified, that the Deity
of Christ dwelling in light inaccessible, gave to his humanity sufficient
strength for the enduring of those things, which no other creature could have
com near, for the full expiating of our sins. So he tells the Jews first,
and (after) his disciples, Where I shall be, you cannot com. Ver. 22.

Ver. 11. An atonement for himself] That having first made his own peace, he
may be in case to atone for the people. This was David's method. Psalm. 25. and
51.

Ver. 12. And bring it within the veil] So to prepare the way into the holy
place. This incens smal-beaten might figure Christ in his Agony, praying more
earnestly, before he entered with his own blood into the most holy place of
heaven.

Ver. 13. May cover the mercie-seat] And so be as a skreen betwixt the Priest
and those everlasting burnings: or as a cloud to darken the glory of their
shining, for the high-priest's safety.

Ver. 14. Upon the mercie-seat eastward] This and the following verses signify
(says one) that even heaven it self is defiled unto us by our sins; until it
be made clean by the blood and obedience of Christ; who is entered thither, not
by the blood of goats and calvs, but by his own blood, and thereby has
purified the heavenly things themselves. (...).
Heb. 9.12, 23.

Ver. 16. In the midst of their uncleanness] Which did cleav to the Tabernacle,
as the sins of spiritual Babylon are said to be glewed to heaven. Revel. 18.5.

Ver. 17. And there shall be no man] Christ will have no partner, and he
need's no co-adjutor. Heb. 7.25. Isa. 63.3.

Ver. 18. And he shall go unto the Altar] This signified (says one) that
every Church-assemblie is acceptable to God, only through the blood of
Christ, by the remission of all their sins.

Ver. 21. All their transgressions, in all their sins] i.e. In their several
circumstances and aggravations: laying open how many transgressions were
wrapped up in their several sins. This was to bring out their sins (as they
took the vessels of the temple. Ezra 8.34.) by number and by weight.

Ver. 22. Shall let go the goat] The Hebrews say, that he was to throw it
down the rock, and so it died. The Grecians had a like custom in their solemn
expiations of their cities. They tumbled the persons devoted from some rock,
into the sea; Suidas. Aemulus Dei diabolus.
sacrificing them to Neptune, saying, Be thou a propitiation for us.

Ver. 24. He shall wash his flesh] See what this taught them and us. Heb.
10.22. That Epistle to the Hebrews is an excellent Commentary upon this book
of Leviticus.

Ver. 26. Shall wash his clothes] To show, 1. That it was for our sins that
Christ suffered. 2. That all that partake of his benefits must wash their
hearts from wickedness. Jer. 4.14. 2 Cor. 5.15. and 7.1.

Ver. 29. Ye shall afflict your souls] With voluntary sorrows for your sins,
as David did. Psalm. 35.13. and Daniel. Cha. 10.3, 12. and so dispose your selves
to obtein pardon and reconciliation. The Lord's Supper is with us a day of
atonement; at which time both the Scapegoat was let go, and affliction of
soul was called for. This Passover must be eaten with sour herbs.

Ver. 31. It shall be a Sabbath of rest] An exact and caresull rest, such as
is described. Isa. 58.13. which place of the Prophet some understand of this
day of atonement, and yearlie fast, spoken of in the beginning of that Chapter.

Ver. 33. For the holy Sanctuarie] For all the sins of your holy services; it
being the manner that either make's, or mar's an action.

Ver 34. For all their sins once a year] For whereas in their private
sacrifices they durst not confess their capital sins for fear of death, due to
them by the Law. God graciously provided and instituted this yearlie Sacrifice
of atonement for the sins of the whole people, without particular
acknowledgment of any.

CHAP. XVII. Ver. 2. This is the thing which the Lord]
WHo must be readily obeyed without tergiversation, or sciscitation.

Ver. 3. What man soever] Whether Israelite or proselyte. Verse 8. unless by
special dispensation from the Lawgiver, as 1 Samuel 7.9. and 11.15. 2 Samuel
24.18. 1 Kings 18.22. and then they were to offer upon altars of earth, or
rough stone, that might be soon and easily thrown down. Exodus 20.24, 25.

Ver. 4. And brings it not unto the door] To teach, that in the Church alone,
and by Christ alone, that is, by faith in him, acceptable service can be
performed to God. Christ is the door of the sheep. John 10.7, 9. by whom we
com to the Father. Job. 14.6. and may every where list up pure hands, without
wrath, without doubting.

Ver. 5. Synesius says the devil is, (...), an Idol-lover.
Unto the Priest] No man might offer his own sacrifice, though never so good,
but must bring it to the Priest; and the Priest was to offer as well the poor
man's lamb, as the rich man's ox.

Ver 7. Unto divels] As they had don in Egypt. Ezekiel. 23.8. Deuteronomy 32.17. And as
both Pagans and Papagans do. 1 Cor. 10.20. Revel. 9.20. The word here rendered
devils, signifies rough ones, Satyrs. Isa. 34.14. Satan is a rough, rugged,
harsh spirit: and such also are his imps, as Esau, Ismael, etc.

Ver. 9. Shall be cut off] i.e. Destroyed, not excommunicated only, as some do
sens it.

Ver. 10. That eats any manner of blood] See the Note on Genesis 9.4.

Ver. 11. And I have given it you] I have set it apart for a sacred use:
therefore you may not make food of that which is a figure of Christ.

Ver. 13. Which hunteth] Though he be as hungry as a hunter. See 1 Samuel
14.32, 33, 34.

CHAP. XVIII. Ver. 1. And the Lord spake]
SEE the Note on Levit. 7.22.

Ver. 2. I am the Lord your God] Your Maker and Master.

Ver. 3. After the doings of the Land of Aegypt] Where, and in Canaan these
heinous sins are counted peccadillo's; as at this day also they are in Spain,
Italy, Turkey, where their Catamites are their serious loves, Sodomie is
hardly held a vice, bestialitie was boasted of by Mahomet their prophet.

In their ordinances] The Egyptians made it lawful (so did the Persians) for
brother and sister to couple together in marriage. Of this and the like
ordinances it might be rightly said, as once it was of the cerimonial Law,
that they were statutes that were not good, and judgments whereby they should
not live. Ezekiel. 20.25.

Ver. 4. To walk therein] Not to halt therein, nor to take a turn or two, or
for awhile, as Samson went with his parents, till he met with an honie-comb;
but indesinenter ambulabo, Psalm. 1 16.9. 1 Cor. 9.24.
as David says, Walk, and not be weary; Run, and not faint, as those Isa.
40. ult. So run, that ye may obtein, says the Apostle.

Ver. 5. He shall live in them] As the flame live's in the oil, as the
creature by his food, so the spiritual life is maintained by an evangelical
keeping of God's commandments. As on the contrary, every motion of the soul
out of this way, tend's to death; being as the motion of the fish out of his
element.

Ver. 6. None of you shall approach] viz. To couple carnally with them. Ezekiel.
18.6. Isa. 8.3. Yea though it be under a pretext of marriage: for by marriage
they seem to justify their incest, which make's it the wors, says Tostatus;
whose reason here I better like then that of Cardinal Campeius, though it sound
somewhat like. If comparison should be made (said this carnal Cardinal) much
greater offens it is, a Priest to have a wife, then to have and keep at home
many harlots. For they that keep harlots (said he) as it is naught that they
do, Act. and Mon. fol. 790.
so do they acknowledge their sin: the other persuade themselves to do well, and
so persist without repentance or conscience of their fact.

Ver. 7. She is thy mother] And so it is against nature to lie carnally with
her. Aristotle tel's of a Camel that killed his keeper for caussing him to
cover his dam, and of an horse that cast himself down headlong after he had
don the like. Hist. animal. l. 9 cap 47.


Ver. 8. It is thy father's nakedness] For the wife has not power over her own
body, but the husband: and when her chastity is assaulted, she should say
(says Chrysostom) Non est corpus meum, sed mariti, My body is not mine, but
my husband's.

Ver. 9. Or born abroad] i.e. base-born, which our English laws call natural
children, The Hebrews call them brambles, and Mamzerim, spots abroad, and
Shatukim, such as must say nothing when others are praising their parents. The
Greeks call bastards, (...), because they are their father's reproach, and are
subject to contempt and contumelies of others.

Ver. 10. For their's is thine own nakedness] Children are but the father
multiplied; the father of another edition.

Ver. 14. Of thy father's brother] The nakedness of whose wife is called his
nakedness, because man and wife are one flesh. Mat. 19.6. See the Note there.

Ver. 17. It is wiokedness] Wickedness with a witness, and yet avowed for
lawful by some odious upstart Sectaries, Hist. Davidis Georg p.28, 29. Little
nonsuch, p. 5, 6, 7.
who teach, that those marriages are most laudable that are betwixt persons
nearest in blood, brother and sister, father and daughter, mother and son, etc.
This they shame not to set forth in print.

Ver. 18. A wife to her sister] i. e. Any two women togethen: Compare Ezekiel
1.9. Here Polygamie is flatly forbidden. In which sin many of the Patriarchs
lived and died; not through any impiety, the Lord testifying that their
hearts were upright, but merely through the mistaking of this text (as it may
seem) taking the word [sister] for one so by blood, which was spoken of a
sister by nation, as those clauses, to vex her, and during her life, do evince.

Ver. 19. Unto a woman] See the Note on Chap. 15.24.

Ver. 20. To defile thy self] As David, how did he moil himself with
Bathsheba, and chased away that pure spirit. Psalm. 51.10, 11, 12. Casta Deus
men's est.

Ver. 21. Pass thorough the fire] Either to be burned to death in honor of
that abominable idol; or to be consecrated thereto, by passing between two
fires, which scorched them. See the Note on Mat. 5.22. [Neither shall thou
profane the name] i. e. Cause it to be profaned and blasphemed by others, as
Pro. 30. 9. and 1 Timothy 1.20. with the Note there.

Ver. 22. Thou shall not lie with mankinde] The Sodomites sin. Genesis 19.5. See
the Note there. This, say the Hebrews, was Ismael's sporting with Isaac: and
this, say others, was the sin of Joseph's brethren, the evil report whereof
he brought to his father. A sad report it was surely to our king Henry the
first, that was brought him concerning his eldest son William, who crossing the
seas from France to England, was with many other Gallants cast away by
shipwreck, being Sodomitica labe infecti fere omnes, says Guliel. Parisiensis,
almost all of them infected with this abomination of going after strange flesh.
Jude 7, 8.

Ver. 23. (...). 2. mag. mor. cap. 5.
Neither shall thou lie with any beast] See what a foul sink of sin man's
nature is; who would think that any such surpassing wickedness (so Aristotle
cal's bestialitie) should ever enter into man's heart? but there (as in the
sea) is that Leviathan the devil, and there are creeping things (abominable and
uglie lusts) innumerable.

Ver. 24. The nations are defiled] And yet are not the Scriptures defiled, by
providing against such filthinesses, no more then the Sunbeams are by shining
upon a stinking lake.

Ver. 25. And the land is defiled] From one end thereof to the other. Ezr.
9.11. as the face of the old world was grown so foul, that God was fain to wash
it with a flood.

Ver. 25. Ye shall therefore keep] Unless ye be ambitious of a like
destruction. Luke 13.3.

Ver. 28. That the land spue not you out] It is wisely said by Herodotus, That
the destruction of Troie is a fit example of the rule, that great sins bring
great plagues.

CHAP. XIX. Ver. 2. Ye shall be holie]
RItually and really. See the Notes on Levit. 11.44. Mat. 5. ult. 1 Pet. 1.16.
1 John 3.3.

Ver. 3. Ye shall fear every man his mother] The mother is set first, because
usually most slighted. The days of mourning for my father are at hand, then
will I slaie my brother Jacob, said that profane losel. Genesis 27.41. As for his
mother he make's no reckoning of her, he cared not to griev her. [And keep my
Sabbaths] To the which the honoring of good governors (who are to see the
Sabbath sanctified by all under their roof) does very much conduce.

Ver. 4. Turn ye not unto idols] Heb. Elilim deunculi, deastri, Pettie-gods,
dunghill-deities, of all which we should say, as he did once, Contemno
minutulos istos Deos, modo Jovem (Jehovam) mihi propitium habeam, I care for
the favor of no god, but of the great God of Gods.

Ver. 5. At your own will] Or, For your favorable acceptance, that God may
graciously accept you.

Ver. 6. It shall be eaten the same daie] See the Note on Chap. 7.15, 17, 18,
19.

Ver. 9. And when ye reap] See what provision the Lord makes for his poor,
commanding that the fuller cups of the richer sort may overflow into their
empty dishes: besides that (...) (as Hierom cal's it) that poor man's tith
appointed. Deuteronomy. 15.11. James the sift of Scotland was for his charity called,
The poor man's King; much more may God.

Ver. 11. Ye shall not steal] See the Notes on Ephesians. 4.28. and 25. and on
Exodus 20.15. Levit. 6.3.

Ver. 12. Neither shall thou profane the name] By presuming rashly and lightly
to blurt out this reverend name in an oath, or otherwise. The Grecians (as
Suidas observ's) when they would swear by their Jupiter, out of the mere dread
and reverence of his name forbear to mention him, breaking off their oath with
a (...), as those that only dare to ow the rest to their thoughts. And Clinias
the Pythagorean, out of this regard, would rather undergo a mulct of three
talents then swear.

Ver. 13. The wages of him that is hired] This is a crying sin. Iam. 5.3.
condemned by the very light of nature. Lib. 10. de legibus.
Plato would have him double paid, that is not paid in due time.

Ver. 14. Thou shall not curs the deaf] So by analogy, the absent that cannot
speak for themselves, or the dead. Of all fowl we most hate and detest the
Crows; and of all beasts the Jackals (a kind of foxes in Barbary) because the
one dig's up the graves and devour's the flesh, the other pick's out the eyes
of the dead. [But shall fear thy God] Who both hear's and see's all thy
miscarriages, and will reckon with thee for all. Deo obscura clarent, muta
respondent, silentium confitetur, says an Ancient. Night will convert it self
into noon before God, and silence prove a speaking evidence.

Ver. 15. Thou shall not respect] Spare not the great for their might, nor the
mean for their misery. Causses must be heard, and not persons.

Ver. 16. Up and down as a tale-bearer] Heb. As a pedlar that first fil's his
pack with reports and rumors, and then go's pedling up and down, dropping a
tale here, and another there, to the taking away of the good name, and sometimes
of the life of another. Hence it fallows here, Neither shall thou stand
against the life of thy brother. And agreeable hereunto is that of Ezekiel
22.9. In thee are men that carry tales to shed blood. Such a wretched pedlar
was Doeg: and such is that backbiter spoken of. Psalm. 15.3. The word there used
does in the Hebrew properly signify such an one as footeth and trotteth it up
and down, prying, and spying, and carrying tales and rumors. 2 Samuel 19.21.

Ver. 17. Thou shall not hate thy brother] Most unkindenesses that fall out
among friends grow upon mistakes and misunderstandings. Now, a friendly
reasoning the case, or, if need be, a godly reproof cure's both the reprover,
and the reproved; whereas the neglect of this duty breed's dwelling
suspicions: suspicions breed a very habit of mis-interpretation: this breed's
a lothness to com to the light to show the reasons of our dislike: this
lothness beget's a very separation in heart, which at length turn's to down
right hatred in heart. All which might have been better prevented by a
seasonable venting our minds in a reproof or admonition. [Thou shall in any
wise rebuke thy neighbour] Neither is this any argument of hatred, but an
office of love. Friends (as Bees) are killed with the honey of flattery, but
quickened with the vinegar of reproof. The Eagle though she loves her young
ones dearly, yet she pricketh and beats them out of the nest. Exigne
gehennali. Hier.
[And shall not suffer sin upon him] But save him with fear, pulling him out of
the fire. Jude 23. Out of the fire of hell, as Hierom interpret's it, which sin
suffered will bring him unto. Others read it thus, Lest thou suffer for his
sin; which, by not opposing, thou make to become thine own. To withstand evil
in thy brother, is the best way to do him good, and thy self too. Others
render it thus, Thou shall not lift up his sin over him, as an ensign, by
blabbing or blazing it abroad, to his just grief and disgrace; but clap a
plaster of reproof upon the sore, and then (as Surgeons use to do) cover it
with thy hand, that the world may be never the wiser.

Ver. 18. Nor bear any grudg] Heb. Nor keep. There is nothing that a man is
more ready to keep then his wrath. Therefore the Hebrews both here and Jer.
3.5. Psalm. 103.9. put servare for servare iram; but we must neither revenge
nor remember; we must not throw away the dagger, and keep the sheath, but
both forgive and forget. [But shall love thy neighbour] See the Notes on Mat.
22.37-40. and on Romans 13.9.

Ver. 19. Ye shall keep my statutes] Even these next following, though they
may seem to be but minutula legis, not worth keeping. [Thou shall not let thy
cattle] The Doctors of Doway, upon this Text, Here all participation (say
they) with heretics and schismatics is forbidden. Philip of Spain said, he
had rather have no subjects, Act. and mon. fol. 1189.
then subjects of a diverse religion. Our King Edward the sixth told the Popish
rebels of Devonshire, who fought for liberty of Conscience (as they call it)
that rather then he would yield to them, he would spend his own royal person,
his Crown, Treasure, Realm, and whole estate; whereof we assure you, said he,
of our high honor. But now (alas) what secret and subtle projects and
practices are there amongst us of this Nation to bring in an universal,
boundless, lawless, abominable and intolerable Toleration, which (as the
London-Ministers affirm in their Testimony to the Truth of Jesus Christ, now
newly published to the singular prais of their exemplarie and seasonable zeal
for God) will prove an hideous and complexive evil of most dangerous and
mischievous consequence, if ever (which God forbid) it shall be consented to
by Authority. England shall be swallowed up with Sects, Schisms, Divisions,
Disorders, Contentions and Confusions, and become an odious sink and common
receptacle of all the prodigious errors, lies, heresies, blasphemies,
libertinism and prophanenesses in the world: so that Rome it self shall not be
a more odious puddle and cage of all abomination and uncleanness. The godly
shall sit down and lament us. The wicked shall rise up and insult over us. All
the Nations about us shall be amazed at us. All the reformed Churches shall
be ashamed to own us. Thus, and much more to this purpose write those worthy
Zealots, The London Ministers Testimony, etc. attested.
whose Testimonial to the Truth coming by a providence to my hand, even whilst
I was writing upon this Chapter, I could not but here set my seal to it, and
here insert this part of it, the whole being such as deserv's to be written
in letters of gold upon a table of marble, for the use of all posterity.

Ver. 20. She shall be scourged] Thus still (says a grave Interpreter) the
Lord debaseth bond-servants, to teach his children to hate the bondage of sin.

Ver. 22. Shall be forgiven] sc. By faith in Christ, whom these sacrifices did
shadow and set forth.

Ver. 23. Three years shall it be as uncircumcised] And so to be cast away,
as the foreskin of the flesh was. The fourth year it was to be separate, to
be offered to the Lord in sign of Thanksgiving: And then the fifth year to be
eaten. This was to show, that the very fruits of the earth are, after a sort,
polluted by man's sin, till purged by a new kind of blessing. 1 Timothy 4.5.
Hereby also God would separate his own people from other Nations: and show that
they might with a better conscience feed upon the fruits of the earth, then
others could. There are that set this mystical sens upon the Text. Christ for
three years space planted the Gospel in Judaea; but the foreskins were cast
away for that time, that is, the Gospel was not preached yet to the
uncircumcised Gentiles. In the fourth year these fruits were consecrated to
God; that is, Christ in the fourth year of his Ministry died for the sins of
the world, rose again, asscended, and sent down the holy Ghost, whereby the
Apostles and others were sanctified, being, as it were, the first fruits of
the promised Land. In the fist year, the fruits of the Gospel planted by Christ
began to be common, preached to the Gentiles, believed in the world. 1 Timothy
3.16.

Ver. 26. Neither shall you use enchantment] Or, observe fortune's conjecture by
signs of good or evil luck, as some render it.

Ver. 27. Ye shall not round] Because the Arabians their neighbors did so,
Herod. in Tbal.
and they should not be conformed to idolaters. Oleaster a Popish Interpreter
understands such a shaving here, as their Priests use to bear. But shaving is
so bald a Cerimonie, that some Priests in France are ashamed of the mark, and
few of them have it that can handsomely avoid it.

Ver. 28. Ye shall not make any cuttings] Another Heathenish custom, Consol.
ad Apol.
of such as mourned without hope. Plutarch tel's os some Barbarians that did
tear their hair, rent their flesh, slit their ears and nose for the dead. Jer.
16 6.

Ver. 29. Do not prostitute thy daughter] As some of the Heathens did in honor
of their gods. As the Papists do at this day, Martin. Vival. in Candelabro
cap. de confessione.
in their Stews and Brothel-houses. Their Casuists complain of some harlots
there so boldly lascivious, as to solicit others, so as to prostitute
themselves to all comers; yea in some Spanish Stews, to an unnatural filthiness.
But what a shameful thing is that which Espencaeus a Papist report's with
detestation, that in Rome a Jewish maid might not be admitted into the Stews
of whoredom, unless she would be first baptized. Espene.' de continent. lib.
3. cap. 4.
Dici nequit, says he, quam incredibili Christianorum tum pudore, tum etiam
eorum qui vere tales sunt, cordolio, ut Judae filiae scortari non liceat, Dei
filiae liceat. What a shameful and sad thing is this that a Jewess, unless
she turn Christian, etc.

Ver. 30. Ye shall keep my Sabbaths] Twice in this Chapter is this commanded,
that it may be the better remembered: and that men may know that it is not
enough to rest on that day, but that rest must be sanctified by a reverent
resorting to the Sanctuary, and not profaned by running into whore-houses and
tipling-houses, as in Germany; where Alsted complain's and saie's, that if the
Sabbath-daie should be named according to many men's observing of it, Alsted.
En^yc.
Daemoniacus potius quam Dominicus vocaretur. [And reverence my Sanctuarie] Com
we must into the places of God's worship, with an inward aw and fear of his
presence, and not as into a dancing-school, Hom. 36. 2d 1 Cor. 4.
as some do. How fearful is this place, says Jacob? It is the place of Angels
and Archangels, the kingdom of God, it is heaven it self, says Chrysostom.
Away then with all careless negligence and carnal security.

Ver. 31. I am the Lord your God] What need you then run to the devil for
direction? Is it because there is no God in Israel? Every one that consult's
with Satan, worship's him, though he bow not: neither does that evil spirit
desire any other reverence, then to be sought unto.

Ver. 32. Thou shall rise up] Cognata sunt (...), old age and honor are near a
kin in the Greek tongue, ut (...). See Prove. 20.29. Lam. 5.12.

Ver. 33. And if a stranger] See the Note on Exodus 22 21.

Ver. 37. And do them] For they are verba vivenda, non legenda. Words not so
much to be read as lived.

CHAP. XX. Ver. 2. That gives any of his seed to Moloch]
SEE the Note on Chap. 18.21. Lactantius report's out of Pescennius Festus,
that the Carthaginians being overcom by Agathocles King of Sicilie, and
fearing lest their slackness in the service of Saturn (who is thought to be
the same with Moloch) was the cause, offered unto him for a sacrifice no fewer
then four hundred young Gentlemen at once.

Ver. 3. To defile my Sanctuarie] Great sins do greatly pollute. See Lev. 18.21.

Ver. 5. I will set my face against that man] See the reason. Ezekiel. 16.20, 21.
Is this of thy whoredom^ a small matter, that thou have slain my children, and
delivered them to pass thorough the fire for them? This was an enraging sin;
such as God is absolute in threatening, and will be as resolute in punishing.

Ver. 6. I will cut him off] Nemo cum serpente securus ludit, Chrysolog. Sermon.
155.
nemo cum diabolo jocatur impune.

Ver. 7. For I am the Lord your God] And God that is holy should be
sanctified in righteousness. Isa. 5.16.

Ver. 8. I am the Lord that sanctify you] Vt acti agatis, that ye may trade
with your talents, sanctify the Lord God in your hearts and lives, and walk up
to your principles.

Ver. 9. For every one that curseth] See the Note on Mat. 15.4. and on Exodus
21.17.

Ver. 10. Shall surely be put to death] Adultery was death long before this
Law. Genesis 26.11. and 38.24. So it was afterward among the Greeks, Romans, and
many other Nations. Jer. 29.22, 23.

Ver. 15. Ye shall slaie the beast] Though innocent: this shows the
hainousness of the sin. See Chap. 18.9.

Ver. 17. And see her nakedness] In the Pope's war against the Albigenses
(those ancient French Protestants) when the Bishops had taken a great Town
yielded to them, they commanded the inhabitants both men and women to depart
stark naked, Jesuita vapulans. p. 331.
Partibus illis, quae honest nominari non possunt, sanctorum illorum
cruciatorum oculis expositis, says Rivet, not suffering them to hide from the
impure eyes of those Pope holy fathers, those parts that nature would have
covered. David that had faulted in looking lustfully on bathing Bathshedba,
praie's hard, after he had smarted for it, Turn away mine eyes from beholding
vanity, Ovid.
etc. (...) Cur aliquid vidi, cur noxia lumina feci? (...) See Hab. 2.15. Of
looking com's lusting, especially when they do (...) (which is the Apostle's
word. 2 Cor. 4.14.) so look, as the archer at the mark.

Ver. 21. They shall be childeless] Either barren or bereft; for this is a
sin, says Job, that root's out all a man's increas. Chap. 31.12. Hence that of
Hosea, They shall commit whoredom, velo iipparedu, they shall not increas.
Pered is a mule, which is a beast very libidinous, but begetting nothing.
Solomon had many concubines, yet but one son and two daughters. So had our
Henry 8. He had uncovered his brother's nakedness, and was well-nigh
childless by her. Afterward he married many wives, and was blame-worthie for
women, but left no more children then Solomon did. More happy he was in them
then Solomon; for he had Rehoboam a man neither wise nor fortunate, as they
call it: his daughters but obscure, and both of them subjects. But Henry had a
Peerless Prince to his son ( viz. Edward 6.) and his two daughters were both
Sovereigns of an imperial Crown.

Ver. 24. Separated you] With a wonderful separation, such as was that of
light from darkness at the Creation.

Ver. 25. Between clean beasts] How much more then shall you abstein from those
unlawful copulations, whereby men put off all manhood, degenerate into dogs?
Romans 1.27. Deuteronomy. 23.18. 2 Samuel 3.8.

Ver. 27. That has a familiar spirit] As Paracelsus had one confined to the
pummel of his sword, or else Erastus belie's him.

CHAP. XXI. Ver. 1. There shall none be defiled for the dead]
THis holy abstinence of the Priests in matter of mourning, marriage, etc.
figured the transscendent holiness of Christ: The devils could call him that
holy One of God. Mark 1.24. It taught also both Ministers and people (who are
a Kingdom of Priests) 1. Well to govern their passions, and to be paterns of
patience. 2. Ever to keep such a Sabbath of Spirit, that by no dead works, or
persons dead in trespasses and sins, they be hindered in the discharge of the
duties of either calling.

Ver. 2. And for his brother] The high priest might not for any of these, ver.
10, 11. nor might Eleazar and Ithamar for their dead brethren Nadab and Abihu.
Levit. 10.6. because in that case, mourning might have seemed murmuring.

Ver. 3. And for his sister] What? and not for his wife? Yes surely (though
she be not mentioned) because she is nearer then either daughter or sister.
See Ezekiel. 24.16. he was a Priest; but that was an exempt case, an exception
from what was ordinarily don.

Ver. 4. Being a chief man] A vir gregis, all whose actions were exemplarie,
and have not an impulsive only, but a compulsive power and property. Gal.
2.14. Why compellest thou the Gentiles? His example was a compulsion.

Ver. 5. They shall not make baldness, etc.] So Chap. 19.27. Howbeit in
humiliation for sin the Lord God of hosts called them all, both Priests and
people, to weeping and mourning. Jeel 2.17. yea to baldness and sackcloth. Isa.
22.12. Here we cannot easily over-do.

Ver. 6. They shall be holie] Heb. Holiness, i.e. all holy, even as holiness
it self, merely spiritual. [Not profane the Name of their God] Not do any
thing unworthie the majesty of the Ministry: but suffer the dead to bury
their dead. Mat. 8.22.

Ver. 7. They shall not take a wife] Lest his function be disgraced. That
which Hosea was commanded to do against this prohibition. Chap. 1.2. was but
visional. [Or prophane] defloured, ravished. [Put away from her husband] Because
of evil report.

Ver. 8. Thou shall sanctify him] i. e. Thou Moses shall command him to be
sanctified, as Exodus 19.10.

Ver. 9. She shall be burnt with fire] A peculiar plague, to show the
hatefulness of the sin.

Ver. 10. Shall not uncover his head] So neither does the Mufti among the
Turks, nor the Pope of Rome uncover to any man: but this is their pride and
stateliness.

Ver. 11. Nor defi^e himself] But appear impassionate, as it were, and more
than a man.

Ver. 12. For the crown of the anointing] Noting thereby, that Christ now risen
is crowned with glory and honor. Heb. 2.7. Zach. 6.12. and so shall we with
him. Heb. 2.9, 10.1 Cor. 15.47, 48, 49.

Ver. 13. In her virginitie] Such is Christ's wife. 2 Cor. 11.2. Revel. 14.4.
Mat. 25. not giving her love, or his worship to any other.

Ver. 14. Of his own people] A Jewess of any Tribe. Ezekiel. 44.22. 2 Chronicles.
22.11.

Ver. 15. Profane his seed] Disable them for the Priesthood by marrying such a
wife as was forbidden him.

Ver. 17. That has any blemish] Christ was without blemish, so should all the
Saints be, but especially Ministers, of whom it should be said as of Absalom,
that from top to toe there was no blemish in him. 2 Samuel 14.25.

Ver. 18. He shall not approach] Lest his Ministry be slighted for his
personal defects and deformities: how much more for his ignorance, envy,
indirect aims, uneven walking, injudiciousness, unheavenlie mindedness, etc.
purported by these bodily imperfections?

Ver. 22. He shall eat the bread] So might not the unclean Priests. Levit.
22.3. Our involuntarie weaknesses shall not debar us from benefit by Christ.

CHAP. XXII. Ver. 2. That they separate]
THough Priests, yet they may not hold themselves privileged above others to
commit sin, but are the rather obliged to duty. Why should any Chrysostom
have cause to say? Non arbitror inter sacerdotes multos esse qui salvi fiant; I
do not think that many of our Ministers can be saved: it is well if any? Or
any Campian to exclaim? Ministris eorum nihil vilius.

Ver. 6. Unless he wash his flesh with water] Whereby he was led to the laver
of Christ's blood, which is opposed to legal washings. Heb. 9.9. Run we to
that open fountain. Zach. 13.1. and be every day washing and cleansing our
selves therein from all filthiness of flesh and spirit. Every Jew had his
water-pots for daily purification. John 2.6. We have a far better Bath.

Ver. 7. Because it is his food] Animantis cujusque vita in fuga est, and must
be preserved by food.

Ver. 9. And die therefore] It is no dallying with God. Either do it we must,
or die for it.

Ver. 10. There shall no stranger] The equity of all this was, that Ministers
should have a comfortable subsistence for them and theirs: and that the things
that are appointed to that purpose should not be converted to other uses. 1
Cor. 9.13. It is certainly a sad complaint that Luther make's. Nisi superesset
spolium Aegypti quod rapuimus Papae, Luther. in Genesis 47.
omnibus Ministris verbi fame pereundum esset, etc. Were it not for such spoils
of Egypt as we have won from the Pope, God's Ministers might starve and
perish. And if ever it com to that, that they must be maintained by the
people's benevolence, a miserable maintenance they are like to have of it. That
little that we have now diripitur a Magistratu is got from us by the great
Ones, who rob our Churches and Schools, as if they meant to make an end of us
with hard hunger. Thus he. See Hag. 2.14. All the water in Jordan, and the
Ceremonies in Leviticus, cannot cleans a man so long as the polluted thing
remain's in his hand.

Ver. 16. Or suffer them] From my other men's sins, Good Lord deliver me, said
One: Have we not enough of our own to answer for? See 1 Timothy 5.22. which the
Note. That cannot be wholesome meat, that is sauced with the blood of souls, and
spiced with the wrath of God.

Ver. 20. It shall not be acceptable] Nay, it shall be abominable. Mal. 1.7.
God require's the best of the best, fine flour without bran. Levit. 2.1, etc.
and curses that cousener, that having a sound or a fat male in his flock,
brings to him a corrupt carrion, or a lean starvling for Sacrifice. Verse 14.

Ver. 23. That may thou offer] Though it have some kind of defect, yet (in
free will offerings) it might pass. This was to signify, that our imperfect
obedience after that we are once in Christ, is accepted by Christ, who is
without all blame and blemish.

Ver. 24. Neither shall you make any offering] No not a freewill offering.
Religion love's to lie clean. God will take up with a poor, but it must be a
pure sacrifice.

Ver. 25. Their corruption is in them] As not having their hearts purified by
faith; and therefore not in case to pleas God.

Ver. 27. It shall be seven daies] As not being man's meat, till then: but
legally impure, and in their blood, as were likewise infants.

Ver. 28. Ye shall not kill it and her young] Because it bear's a show of
cruelty, and of adding affliction to the afflicted. See Gen 32.11. Hos. 10.14.

Ver. 29. Offer it at your own will] God strain's upon no man. Virtus nolentium
nullaest.

Ver. 30. On the same daie] See the Note on Chap. 7.15.

Ver. 31. I am the Lord] Your rightful Lord, and my reward is with me, to
give unto every man according to his works.

Ver. 32. My holy name*] Holy, and therefore reverend. Psalm. 111.9. Holiness
has honor.

CHAP. XXIII. Ver. 1. And the Lord spake]
SEE the Note on chap. 7.22.

Ver. 2. To be holy convocations] Not bare rests: (...). 2. de legib.
as Plato said, that the Gods, pitying men's labor, appointed their festivals
to be a remission of their labor. See the Notes on Exodus 20.8, 9, 10, 11.

Ver. 3. Ye shall do no work therein] Save only works of piety, charity and
necessity. These are allowed by our Savior. Mark 2.29. and 3.4. and 3.27. The
Jews superstitiously hold, that it is not lawful for a blind man to lean upon
a staff on a Sabbath-daie, as the lame may: That if a Flea bite a man on that
day, he may take it, but not kill it: that if a thorn prick him in the foot
on that day, he may not pull it out: That a Tailor may not carry a needle,
much less a sword; that a man may not spet, or be taken out of a jakes,
Ranulph. lib. 7 c. 37.
as that Jew of Tewksburie, who said, Sabbata sancto colo, de stercore surgere
nolo. Whereunto the Earl of Gloucester replied, Sabbata nostra quidem (Solomon)
celebrabis ibidem.

Sir, reverence of the Sabbath keep's me here: And you Sir, reverence shall
our Sabbath there. In all your dwellings] Where you are to sanctify this rest,
and to repair to your Synagogues. Act. 15.21.

Ver. 5. In the fourteenth daie] See the Notes on Exodus 12.18.

Ver. 11. And he shall wave the sheaf] This signified that they and theirs
were accepted of God through Christ. [On the morrow after the Sabbath] Here the
Lord's day was prefigured (says one) therefore prescribed, and instituted of
God. This shake-daie-sheaf was a pregnant type of Christ's rising again, the
first fruits from the dead. It was fulfilled in Christ's resurrection, the day
after the Sabbath: And because this Sabbath bath was chiefly meant of the
Passover (which was an high Sabbath) it was a double Sabbath, wherein Christ
rested in the grave. The very next morning was Christ waved before the Lord;
when, in the earthquake, he rose from the dead (the first fruits of them that
sleep) and there-hence entered the everlasting gates as a King of glory. Psalm.
24.7. which Psalm is in the Greek called, A Psalm of David of the first day of
the week.

Ver. 15. Seven Sabbaths] That is seven weeks; The Sabbath is queen of all the
days of the week; and therefore carrie's the name of the whole week.

Ver. 17. Out of your habitations] That is, out of the new corn (growing of the
same land which God gave them to inherit) not ^orrein. [The first fruits] viz.
of their wheatharvest, as the shake-sheaf, verse 10. was of their
barlie-harvest. Thus were they to express their thankfulness to God for those
precious fruits of the earth. Jam. 5.7.

Ver. 22. And when ye reap] See Chap. 19.9. In these we entertain Christum
convivam, Christ a guest, says Hierom.

Ver. 24. Of blowing of trumpets] This feast signified the spiritual joie and
gladness of the Saints, that are redeemed by Christ, all their life long. Isa.
33.10.

Ver. 27. Also on the tenth daie] See the Note on Chap. 16.31. Thus they were
kept in sorrow five days, before they might keep their feast of joie. verse 34.

Ver. 34. The feast of tabernacles] It signified (the Prophet Zachary being
interpreter, Chap. 14.16, 17, 18, 19.) that the remembrance of our redemption
by Christ should be perpetuated with all spiritual gladness.

Ver. 42. Ye shall dwell in booths] The siege of Jerusalem by the Romans
lasted six months. It began at the Passover, and ended at this feast of
Tabernacles: Ita festum illud fuit finis istius politiae.

CHAP. XXIIII. Ver. 2. Beaten for the light]
MInisters must beat their brains, and bend their utmost endeavors to give
light to them that sit in darkness, and in the shadow of death, and to guide
their feet into the way of peace: as that burning and shining light, the
Baptist did. Luke 1.79.

Ver. 3. From the evening unto the morning] In the morning it went out. 1 Samuel
3.3.

Ver. 4. Upon the pure candle-stick] Pure, because daily purified by the
Priests: so must our consciences be from dead works by daily repentance.

Ver. 5. Twelv Cakes] See the Note on Mat. 12.4.

Ver. 6. Six on a row] One by another, not one upon another, as they are
commonly painted.

Ver. 8. Every Sabbath] So must the bread of life be every Sabbath at least
set before the Saints.

Ver. 10. Whose father was an Aegyptian] His mother taught him to speak, his
father to blaspheme. [Strove together] In the heat of contention, what will not
men say or do? -- qui non moderabitur irae
Indictum velit esse, dolor quod suaserit, and men's.


Ver. 11. Blasphemed the name, etc.] Heb. bored it thorough, gored it, pierced
it, as did those Syrians, Isa. 36.6. Turk. Hist. 423.
slain by the fall of the wall of Ap^ek, Rabshakeh that dead dog, Julian the
Apostate, Chosroes the Persian, the raging Turk at the siege of Seodra, that
foul-mouthed Papist that durst say, The God of the Protestants is wors then
Pan god of clowns, which can endure no ceremonies nor good manners at all. To
these add Paul Best, Sheldon's Mark of the beast. Ep. ded.
who has lately published blasphemous verses against the Trinity. See the
London Minister's Testimonial to the Truth of Jesus Christ.

Ver. 14. And let all that heard him] The Jews at this day abhor the
blasphemies of Christians, so openly and ordinarily darted up with hellish
mouths against God. The Turks punish their prisoners sorely, when as, Spec.
Europ.
through impatience or desperateness, they break out into them.

Ver. 16. And he that blasphemeth] Swearers and blasphemers toss God's name to
and fro with such impiety and profaneness, as if their speech could have no
grace, but in his disgrace: as if Augustus Caesar were dealing with some god
Neptune; or the three sons trying their archerie at their father's heart,
Lonicer. theat. hist.
to see who can shoot nighest. [Shall be surely put to death] Though he be
never so much provoked by others, as this blasphemer was; that shall no whit
excuse him.

Ver. 17. And be that kills any man] Though in hot blood; Scripture make's
no difference between murder and manslaughter. See the Note on Genesis 9.6.

Ver. 19. As he has don] God love's to retaliate; it is his usual manner of
proceeding in punishing.

CHAP. XXV. Ver. 2. Then shall the Land keep a Sabbath]
BY their weeklie Sabbath they professed that themselves belonged to God (though
Seneca jeer them for it, as those that cast away the seventh part of their
time) by this seventh year Sabbath, they professed, That their Land belonged to
God, and that they were only his hindes, his tenants, and tith-men. Hence it
is called, the Lord's land. Hos. 9.3. and Immanuels. Isa. 8.8.

Ver. 4. A Sabbath of rest unto the Land] This and the Jubilee year shadowed
our eternal rest. Col. 2.16, 17. Heb. 4.9. 1. Every seventh-daie they rested
from their labors. 2. Every seventh year the ground rested. Every seventh
seventh (as some reckon it) was the Jubilean Sabbath: at which time all debts
were remitted, prisoners released, morgages restored to the right inheritors.
The great and eternal Sabbath comprehend's all these. How then should we
breath after it, and even go forth to meet it (as the Jews do their weeklie
Sabbath) beginning it an hour sooner then the Law required; and this they called
their Sabbatulum, or little Sabbath?

Ver. 6. Shall be meat for you] Thus God taught and inured them to depend upon
his providence, and to feed on faith, as some read that text. Psalm. 37.3. For
though the owner of the field might gather, even on that year, for the
maintenence of himself and family, yet he was neither to sow his field,
thereby to greaten his harvest, nor to hedge his field, or lock up his vineyard,
etc.

Ver. 9. In the day of attonement] Here began the Jubilee: this feast was
founded in a fast. They that sow in tears shall reap in joie: neither is there
any such comfort as theirs, that have soundly soaked themselves in godly
sorrow.

Ver. 10. And proclaim libertie] See this expounded by the Prophet Isaiah. Cap.
61.1, 2, with Luke 4.21. A most joifull Jubilee indeed. In the year of Christ,
1617, the Pope proclaimed a Jubilee for the peace of Italy and Austria. The
Protestants also of Germany did the like, in honor of God, and for joie of the
Reformation begun by Luther in Germany, a just hundred of years before.

Ver. 12. Out of the field] See the Note on ver. 6.

Ver. 14. Ye shall not oppress] But proceed by that golden rule, What ever ye
would that men should do to you, even so do ye to them.

Ver. 17. But thou shall fear thy God] And so depart from this evil also. Genesis
42.18. Joseph said to his brethren (who feared he would roll himself upon
them) This do and live, for I fear God. q. d. I dare do you no hurt, though ye
be fallen into my danger. So his grandfather Isaac, seeing that he had don
unwilling justice, durst not revers the blessing, though he had some mind to
it, for God had overawed him. Genesis 27.33. And ought ye not to have walked in
the fear of the Lord, said good Nehemiah to those mercieless griping Usurers?
Cha. 5.9.

Ver. 20. And if ye shall saie] A clear answer to a carnal objection. Usually
God conceal's the objection in Scripture, and meet's it with an answer, which
is an act of grace.

Ver. 21. Command my blessing] Now if God send his Mandamus, who shall against
and it?

Ver. 23. The Land is mine] See Verse 2.

Ver. 25. And if any of his kin] Christ is our near kinsman, and so by
propinquitie (as a man) had the right of redemption. Ruth 2.20. and 3.9, 11, 13.

Ver. 34. May not be sold] This Law lasted but during the paedagogie: for
Joses a Levite sold his land, and brought the money, and laid it at the
Apostle's feet. Act. 4.36, 37.

Ver. 35. That he may live with thee] i. e. Live in good fashion; for a
necessitous life is a lifeless life. Thus shall ye say to him that lives. 1 Samuel 25.6. So Joh. 4.50. thy daughter lives.

Ver. 36. Take thou no usurie] God dispenses with no usurie, but condemn's
both Neshec the biting, and Tarbith the toothless. In Rome at this day, all
usurers are excommunicated monthly. The Jews indeed are permitted to strain up
their usurie to eighteen in the hundred upon the Christian (for among themselves
they no where use it) which causseth many of the unconscionable Christians to
use these Jews under hand in improving their unlawful rents to the utmost
proportion.

Ver. 43. Rule over him with rigor] As the Egyptians did over the Israelites.
Exodus 1.13. Thy servant is made of the same earth with thee, and has right to
the same heaven with thee. See Gal. 3.28. The servant paid the half shekel as
well as the master. Stand not therefore on terms of inequality: but know that
your selves also have a master in heaven. Do therefore to them that which is
right and equal. Col. 4.

CHAP. XXVI. Ver. 1. Ye shall make you no idols]
SEE the Notes on Exodus 20.4, 5. God knew the people's proneness to idolatry.

Ver. 2. Ye shall keep] See the Note on Chap. 19.30.

Ver. 4. Rain in due season] The best Almanac we should rely upon for
seasonable weather, is our obedience to God, love to our neighbor, care of our
selves.

Ver. 5. Dwell in your land safely] Confidently, fiducially, as boldly relying
upon God's protection.

Ver. 6. Neither shall the sword] To devour and desolate it, to eat flesh and
drink blood, without measure or satietie. A fire it is that feed's upon the
people. Isa. 9.19. a hungry Wolf that snatcheth on both hands. Ver. 20.

Ver. 7. And ye shall chase your enemies] If forreiners invade you, you shall
be able to quel and quiet them quickly.

Ver. 8. And five of you] God strengthen's or weaken's the arm of either
party. 2 Chronicles. 7.6.
Ezekiel. 30.24. strike's a Panick terror often, as into those Aramites that heard
an hurrie-nois in the aer (made by the Angels likely) and fled.

Ver. 9. And establish my Covenant with you] This is more then all the rest. So
Genesis 17.30, 21. I have blessed Ismael; twelv princes shall he leget, but my
Covenant will I establish with Isaac.

Ver. 11. I will set my tabernacle] The Philosopher could comfort himself, that
though he had little else to trust to, yet (...), here are the gods with me,
meaning his housholdgods. And he in Plutarch said of the Scythians, That
though they had no music, nor vines amongst them, yet they had gods. Aug.
How much more may the Saints glory in God's presence? Habent omnia qui habent
habentem omnia.

Ver. 12. And I will walk] See the Note on 2 Cor. 6.16.

Ver. 13. Which brought you forth] This they often hear of, not by way of
exprobration. Jam. 1.5. but to incite them to thankful obedience Deuteronomy. 8 11.
Josh. 24. Servati sumus, ut serviamus.

Ver. 14. But if ye will not hearken] Here we may observe twice so many
threatenings as promises; which serv's to set forth the baseness of our
natures, that will do more for fear then love.

Ver. 16. I will even appoint] Put them in commission, send them with such
authority as shall be irresistible. [Terror, Sennert. de febrib. l. 4. c. 15.
Coepit Anno 1486. Life of K. Ed. 6. by Sir John Heyw.
consumption, and the burning ague] i. e. terrible sicknesses of all sorts,
such as was the sweating sickness, called, Sudor Anglicus, quia Anglis
perpetuum malum. It reigned here some forty years together, and slew so many,
that strangers wondered how this Island could be so populous to bear and bury
such incredible multitudes. No stranger in England was touched with this
diseas, and yet the English were chased therewith, not only in England, but in
other countries abroad: which made them like tyrants, both feared and avoided,
wherever they came.

Ver. 17. They that hate you] A heavy curs to any people, to have mischievous
malicious Princes set over them: odious to God, malignant to the people. Cic.
3. Tusc. quae.


Ver. 18. Seven times more] God will have the better of us, and good reason:
for is it fit that he should cast down the bucklers first? Illud quidem sic
habeto, said the Orator, nisi sanatus animus sit, quod sine Philosophia fieri
non potest, finem miseriarum nullum fore. Be sure of this; if thy mind mend
not, there will be no end of thy misery.

Ver. 19. Your heaven as iron] Hard hearts make hard times. En quia jam nobis
sint ferrea pectora, reddit
Coelum etiam nobis durius aere Deus.
Et quia jam nummos gignant pro foenore nnmmi:
Ante serax tellus desinit esse ferax.


Ver. 20. Bill. Anthol. l^b. 2.
Your land shall not yield] See this fulfilled. Jer. 14.1, 2, etc. and Joel
1.12. Jer. 8 13. And yet their country was called, Sumen totius orbis,
Cornelius Tacitus yield's it to be a fruitful country. So did Rabshakeh long
before. 2 King. 18.32.

Ver. 21. Contrary unto mee] Or, Carelessly before me, as our ungirt
Christians. Profligate Professors do. [Seven times more plagues] God cannot be
exhausted, neither need we fear as he did of his Jupiter, Si quoties peccent
homines sua fulmina mittat
Jupiter, exiguo tempore inermis erit.


Ver. 22. I will also send wild beasts] As he did, Number. 21.6. 2 King. 17.25.
2 King. 2.24. See Isa. 13.21. Jer. 5.6.

Ver. 23. Ye will not be reformed] Or, Chastised. God will master us, but the
wicked refuse to receiv corrections: like naughty boys they prove more
stubborn or more stupid: they stout it out, and will not stoop. When God's hand
is lifted up, they will not see; bu they shall see, and be ashamed, etc. Isa.
26.11.

Ver. 24. Then will. I walk contrarie] God will be as froward as they for the
hearts of them. Ps. 18.20. He will wrie with them; neither may they look to
get any thing of him by wriggling and wrestling.

Ver. 25. I will bring a sword] God make's peace and create's evil. i. e. war,
called evil, per Antonomasiam. Whencesoever the sword com's, it is bathed in
heaven. Isa 34.5. [The quarrel of my Covenant] For breach whereof Jerusalem is
long since laid waste, those seven golden Candlesticks are broken in pieces,
Bohemia lie's still a bleeding, which was the seat of the first open and
autoriz^d Reformation. And what may we think will become of us all, who like
men have transgressed the Covenant. Hos. 6.7. or as Junius read's it, not
tanquam homines, but tanquam hominis, etc. We have made no more of breaking
Covenant (alas! our National League and solemn Covenant!) then if therein we
had had to do with dust and ashes like our selves, and not with the great God;
who is therefore whetting his sword, and furbishing it for slaughter, Quod Deus
avertat.

Ver. 26. And not be satisfied] As sick of a bulimie, or doglike appetite,
common in times of famine, such as was that of Samaria, Saguntum, Jerusalem,
Sancerra, etc.

Ver. 28. Seven times more for your sins] God will not ceas pursuing till
Sheba's head be thrown over the wall. Three times in this Chapter God raises
his note of threatening, and he raises it by sevens, and those are discords in
music. Such sayings will be heavy songs, and their execution heavy pangs to
the wicked.

Ver. 29. And ye shall eat] As they did 2 King. 6.29. Lam. 4.19. Pone pretium
humanae carni, was once heard openly proclaimed at Rome, in the reign of
Honorius the Emperor. A hard case indeed. Here in England, in Edward 2. his
time, Alsted. Chron.
Anno 1316. there was so terribe a famine, that horses, dogs, yea men and
children were stolen for food, and the thieves newly brought into the Gaol were
torn in pieces, Speed's Hist.
and eaten presently half alive, by such as had been longer there.

Ver. 30. Upon the carcasses] Or, Stumps and shivers of your idols overturned.
Jer. 16.18. Ezekiel. 4.37. Thus in Ket's conspiracy those rebels of Norfolk, Act.
and Mon. fol. 1190.
that brought with them into the field the Pix under his Canopie in a cart, not
without masses, crosses, banners, candlesticks, etc. All which trumperie,
together with their breaden god was tumbled in the dirt, amidst the carcasses
of their late idolatrous worshippers.

Ver. 39, 40, etc.] A special text touching the rejection and conversion of the
Jews.

CHAP. XXVII. Ver. 1. And the Lord spake]
THis is often premised and prefaced for autoritie's sake, and that we may learn
to resolv all divine doctrines into Deus dixit.

Ver. 2. When a man shall make a singular vow] Votum eximium as Vatablus
render's it, a personal, particular, voluntary vow; which, drawn by some
peculiar reason, a man promises to God of his own accord; It is a binding of
ones self to God by an holy and religious promise, to do or not to do something
lawful, possible, useful for our increas in godliness: As here of persons,
afterward of things: all which might be redeemed (under such exception as the
Law provideth) by the estimation of the Priest for certain shekels of silver,
after the shekel of the Sanctuary: this was double to the ordinary shekel.
The alm and intent of these personal vows was (say some) that the price of
their redemtion might be employed either for the maintenence of the Priests.
Numb. 18.14. or for the repair of the Sanctuary. 2 King. 12.4, 5. Neither by
such vows do we cast any new snares upon our selves, but rather a new tie to
the payment of an old debt.

Ver. 3. Fifty shekels of silver] This was the greatest rate, because people
are then in their prime; and yet no very great one, lest they should think
much to vow, or perform to the Lord their God.

Ver. 4. And if it be a female] She is set at a lower valuation then the
male; because less able for any laborious or rational imploiment.

Ver. 5. From five years old] Childhood and youth is vanity. (...).
There is a bundle of folly in a child's heart. Prove. 22.15. The same Greek
word signifies a fool, and a child. And Eccles. 11.10. the Hebrew word used
to signify youth, signifies blackness or darkness, Niceph.
to note, that youth is a dark and dangerous age. Few Macariusses to be found,
who, for his gravitie in youth, was sir-named (...), the old young man.

Ver. 8. But if he be poorer] Indulged he shall be, but not exempted. Vows
(in things lawful and possible) must be performed, as we can at least. If
rashly made, that rashness must be repented of, but the vow, if otherwise
lawful, must be kept, without delaie or diminution, to the utmost of our
power. Men may not play with vows, as Monkies with their collars, which they
can slip at pleasure. Eccles. 5.3, 4. Ps. 76.11. To vow is voluntary, to pay
is necessary. And yet what more common in the world then ship-mens vows?
Erasm. Collo.
As he in Erasmus, who in a storm promised his Saint a picture of wax as big
as S. Christopher, but when he came to shore, would not give a tallow candle.

Ver. 10. Then it, and the exchange thereof] For a punishment of his
instabilitie and lightness.

Ver. 28. Notwithstanding no devoted] Hitherto of things consecrate, now of
things exsecrate (whereof see a command. Deuteronomy. 13.15, 17. an example. Numb.
21.2.) These could not be sold, nor redeemed, but must remain with the Priest:
if it were a beast, then to be put to death.

Ver. 30. And all the tithe] See here in this Chapter what a liberal
maintenence God allowed the Priests: 1. Diverse votive oblations, or their
redemptions. 2. All the firstborn, or their redemtions. 3. Every devoted
thing, unless devoted to some particular use. 4. All the tithes of what kind
soever. Besides first fruits, oblations, portions of sacrifices, etc. And I see
not (says a reverend man) but that tithes at least, M. Wilkinson his Debt-book.
or some better thing should be due to the Ministers of the Gospel by divine
ordinance: and that those that take them from us should give us a better thing,
as those here that had a mind to redeem their tithe, were bound by the Law to
add to the price every fifth penny above the true value.

FINIS.
A COMMENTARY or EXPOSITION UPON The Fourth Book of MOSES CALLED NVMBERS.
CHAP. I. Verse. 1. In the Wilderness of Sinai]
HERE God held his people, well-nigh a twelve-moneth. Here they received the
Law, both Moral and Ceremonial: the Moral, drove them to the Ceremonial,
which was then Christ in figure; as it does now drive us to Christ, in truth.
The Ceremonial Law, says one, was their Gospel. We must also pass by Sinai,
to Sion; unless we like rather to be carnally secured, then soundly comforted.
See the notes on Exodus 19.1.

Verse. 2. Take ye the summe] Hence this Book is named (in the Greek,) Numbers.

Verse. 3. All that are able] The people perceiving, how many hundred thousand
strong they were, might go on, with more courage against their enemies. It is
an ancient custom in Scotland, in cases of importance, to command the
fire-cross to be carried; Sr. Jo. Heywood in the life of King Edw. 6.
that is, two firebrarnds to be set in fashion of a cross, and pitched upon the
point of a spear, and proclamation is thereupon made; that all men, above
sixteen years of age, and under sixty, shall come into the field, to advance
against the common enemy.

Verse. 4. A man of every tribe] These were men of renown. Verse. 16. To do
worthily in Ephrata, is the way to be famous in Bethlebem, Ruth 4.11. It is
said of a great Statesman, in Queen Elizabeth's days, Camdens Elisab.
that he was in the number of those few, that both lived and dyed with glory.

Verse. 16. Princes of the tribes] These were those officers over them in Egypt,
(says an Hebrew Dectour,) that had been beaten for them, Exad. 5.14. Now they
are raised to great preferment. Sic per augusta ad angustum, per spinas ad
rosas, per motum ad quietem, per crucem^ad caelum contendimus.

Verse. 17. Which are expressed by their names] And they are all excellent good
names, and very significant; hereby is testified to posterity, that they forgot
not the Name of their God, when they were in the iron furnace; but could say,
as Psalm. 44.17. All this is come upon us, yet have we not forgotten thee:
Though thou have sore broken us, in the place of dragons, etc.

Verse 19. So he numbered them] See the note on Exodus 30.12. At every general
muster, they paid poll-money; See ib. verse. 16. Such a taxation was first
granted, in this kingdom, to Edward the third; Danicls hist.
but in the next reign, proved of ill consequence; the exactours receiving from
the people no less sums of curses, then of coin; whereupon, also, followed
the first and greatest popular insurrection, that ever was seen in this
kingdom.

Verse. 47. Were not numbred] Because, by special privilege, enempted from
secular and military employments, that they may wholly devote themselves to the
service of the Sanctuary. Peter, in like sort, must put up his sword; and
Timothy not entangle himself with the affairs of this life, that he may please
him who has chosen him to be a soldier, of another nature, 2 Timothy 2.4. But
Timothe^s Herulus that warlike Bishop of Alexandria, Theophilus Alexandriae
Episcopus primus inter Christiani nominis episcopos, arma tractavit. Socrat.
Anno Dom. 467, was a gallant fellow in his generation. And some of Peter's
pretended successors were, viri biliosi et bellicosi; cast the keys into
Tiber, and took up Saints Paul's sword, and the Imperial habit. So have diverse
of their dear sons done; as Philip, Bishop of Beau-vi^^ in France; who, being
taken in battle, by Richard the first, in a skirmish, had his armor he was
taken in, sent to the Pope, with these words engraven thereon; Vide utru^ filii
tui tunica sit, vel non; See whether this be thy sons coat or not.

Verse. 53. Shall pitch round about] As the living creatures; (the Ministers)
are between the 24 elders, the congregation of the faithful, and the throne,
Rev. 4.

CHAP. II.
Verse. 1. ANd the Lord spake] He being the Lord of these Hoasts of Israel,
Exodus 12.41. gives order for the marshalling of them, in such good array, and
allcomely equipage, as made them as a city, that is compact together; both
beautiful as the Moon, and terrible, as an army with banners, Psalm. 122.3.
Cant. 6.10. This Balaam beheld with admiration, Number. 24.5, 6.

Verse. 2. Far off about the Tabernacle] About it: The Emperors tent, is among
his Soldiers. Xerxes pitched his tent, not only among, but above his
soldiers, that he might look on them, when in fight, for their encouragement.
So the Lord; who as he is round about his people, Psalm. 125.2. so they are
round about the Lord, Psalm. 76.12. A people near unto him, Psalm. 148.14. Yet
not so near, but they must know, and keep their just distance; as here, they
pitched far off, about the Tabernacle; a mile off, as is gathered from Josh.
3.4. God, though he loves to be acquainted with men, in the walks of their
obedience, yet he takes State upon him in his ordinances, and will be trembled
at, in our addresses to his Majesty.

Verse. 3. And on the East-side] Judah encamped foremost. It was fit the Lion
should lead the way. Better an army of Hearts, with a Lion to lead them on,
etc. This order in their march, showed the principality that should continue in
this tribe, till Shiloh came. Judah herein also was a type of Christ, who is
the Captain of the Lords Hoasts, Josh. 5.14. and of our salvation. Heb. 2.10.
and goes before his heavenly armies, Rev. 12.7.

Verse. 10. And on the South-side] The order proceed^th, from East to South, and
so to the West, and North; according to the course of the Sun, and climates of
the world, says one. I may add, according to the course and progress of the
Gospel: which went out of Judea, (lying East) into Greece, which lies South,
And from thence passed to the Western parts, the Latin Church, and so to us of
the North. And because.

Vespera nunc venit, nobiscum Christ maneto:
Extingui lucem nec patiare tuam.
CHAP. III.
OF Aaron and Moses] Of Aaron by nature, of Moses by education, and
instruction. See 1 Cor. 4.15. Gal. 4.19. with the Notes there. So the Jesuits
call themselves Padres, and require of their Novices blind obedience, which is
more then ever Moses did.

Verse. 3. Which were anointed] And so should have walked, as became Gods
anointed; leaving a sweet smell behind them every where: but they went out in a
stench, they fell, as if they had not been anointed with oil, 2 Samuel 1 21.

Verse. 4. And Nadab and Abihu] Such a cross had David, in his two eldest, Amnon
and Absalon. See the Notes on Levit. 10.1, 2.

Verse. 9. They are wholly given unto him] Heb. they are given, they are given.
So the Ministers of the Gospel, are called gifts, Ephesians. 4.8, 11. honouraries,
such as Christ bestowed upon his Church, at the day of his Coronation, and
solemn inauguration into his throne, at his wonderful Ascension.

Verse. 10. And the stranger] Though a Levite, yet if not of Aarons seed, Number.
18.3. Heb. 5.4. Let this be thought upon by our over-bold intruders into the
work of the Ministry.

Verse. 13. Because all the first-born] So they were from the beginning: but
here is noted a continuance of this ordinance; when it is said, that he
sanctified the firstborn to himself, what time he smote every firstborn in
Egypt. Now, the first born are said to be Gods, by a singular right, Exodus
13.2. and so they were types, 1. Of Christ, Romans 8.29. to whom therefore we
must give the honor, of his first-birth-right; all our sheaves must veyle and
bow to his sheafe. 2. Of Christians; those firstborn, whose names are written
in Heaven, Heb. 12.23. who are dear to God, as his first born, Exodus 4.22. and
so higher then the Kings of the earth, Psalm. 89.27. for they are Kings and
Priests unto God, Rev. 1.6. to serve him day and night in his temple, Rev. 7.15.

CHAP. IIII.
Verse. 2. OF the sons of Kohath] Kohath, was not Levies first born, but
Gershom: and yet he has the pre-eminence, and chief charge; as of the Arc,
Table, Candlestick Altars, etc. Number. 3.31.

Verse. 3. To do the work] The work of the Ministry, is, not an idle man's
occupation, but a laboring even to lassitude; compared therefore to
harvest-work, and to that of cleaving wood, digging in mine-pits, rowing with
oars, etc. All the comfort is, that God that helped the Levites, to bear the
Arc of the Covenant, 1 Chronicles 15.26. will not be wanting to his weak, but
willing servants, that labor in the word and doctrine, 1 Timothy 5.17.

Verse. 5. And when the Camp sets forward] Which was not, till the cloud was
taken up from off the Tabernacle, by the Lord. Number. 10.11, 12: who went before
them. Semper memento illud Pythagoricum, (...). Let God lead us, and we cannot
miscarry. Boethius.


Verse. 8. And cover the same] It is well observed, that only the Ark
(representing Christ,) and the Table with shewbread, (representing the Church)
had three coverings; all the other holy things had but two, for a covert from
storm and from rain. Thus, Esaias. 4.5, 6.
upon all the glory shall be a defense.

Verse. 13. The ashes from the Alta^] The fire from Heaven, was also carefully
kept alive, Lev. 6.12. though nothing be here said of it.

Verse. 15. Lest they dye] As Vzzah did, 1 Chronicles. 13.10. [The burden of the sons
of Kohath] Who as they had the honos, so the onus, See verse. 1.

Fructus honos oneris, fructus honoris onus. Verse. 16. And to the office of
Eleaz^r] Called therefore Prince of the Princes of the Levites. Number. 3.32.

Verse. 18. Cut ye not off] i.e. Cause them not, by your default, to be cut off.
Heed must be taken, that we neither give offense carelessly, nor take offense
causelessly.

Verse. 20. But they shall not go in to see] The men of ' Bethshem^sh paid for
their peeping, 1 Samuel 6.9. Search not into Gods secrets: hic oportet, non
rimari, Dent. 29.29. Remember that saying of Xenocrates the Philosopher; Nihil
interesse, pedesue quisquam, Plutarch. de curiosit.
an oculos in aliena domo ponat, It is as great unmannerliness, to pry into
another man's house, as to press into it.

Verse. 30. From thirty yeares] The Greek has it, from 25 years: for then they
began to be learners, and probationers; and at 30, they set upon the service:
See Number. 8.24. In their old age, they had leave to retire.

Verse. 32. By name ye shall reckon] That all might be ready and forth coming,
when the Sanctuary was set up again. Christ knows and calls all his by
name, Joh. 10.3. not the meanest of them is missing, Ioh. 17.12.

Verse. 44. Trhee thousand, and two hundred] By this diversity of number among
the Levites families, God shows his wisdom, says an Interpreter; in
fitting men for the work, whereunto he has appointed them, whether it
requires multitude or gifts. For to one is given by the Spirit, the Word of
wisdom; to another the word of knowledge, by the same Spirit, etc. dividing to
every man severally as he will. 1 Cor. 12.8, 12. It is reported, that in
Luthers house was found written: Res et verba Philippus, res sine verbis
Lutherus, verba sine re Erasmus. Melancthon has both matter and words; Luther
has matter, but wants words; Erasmus has words, but wants matter. Every one
has his own share: all are not alike gifted.

Verse. 48. Eight thousand, etc. What a poor few were these to the other tribes?
Gods portion is ever the least.

CHAP. V.
Verse. 2. PVt out of the Camp] To show, that sin unrepented of, throws us out
of the communion of Faith, and Saints; shuts us out of the congregation of God,
in earth and heaven. No fellowship, place, or reward with them. See Rev. 21.27.
with the note there.

Verse. 3. Without the Camp shall ye put them] Evil doers are to be suspended,
excommunicated, 1 Cor. 5.13. which text shows plainly, the truth of this
ceremony.

Verse. 6. Any sin that men do commit] For what man is he, that lives and
sins not? (...).
I am a man, a sinner, says Peter, Luke 5.8. not more a man, then a sinner.
Our lives are fuller of sin, then the firmament of stars, or the furnace of
sparks: we can as little cease to sin, as the heart to pant, pulse to beat,
etc. The devil when he speaks lies, speaks of his own, Ioh. 8.44. so when we
do evil, we work of our own, we walk as men, 1 Cor. 3.3. Sins are here called
humane fins, as the Greek has it.

Verse. 7. Then they shall confess their sin] So they were bound to do, all
their sins, Prove. 28.13. Job 33.27, 28. Confessio peccati est medicina peccati,
says Nazanzen. A sin acknowledged is halfeamended. (...) And he shall
recompense his trespass] Restitution must be made of goods unjustly detained;
or else you shall cough in hell, said Mr. Latimer. Our King Henry the seventh,
in his last will and testament, after the disposition of his soul and body;
Speeds hist. sol. 995.
he Devised, and willed restitution should be made, of all such moneys, as had
unjustly been levied by his officers. So did Selymus the great Turk, give order
at his death, Turk. hist. 767.
for the restoring and recompencing of the great treasure he had taken from the
Persian merchants.

Verse. 8. Unto the Lord, even to the Priest] The Priest is the Lords receiver.
So Heb. 7.6, 7, 8, 9. Tithes are due to the Ministers of Christ that lives,
because due to him; Sac^rdos est vica^^us et quasi haeres D^^.
and they are in his stead, 2 Cor. 5.20.

Verse. 9. And every offering] So liberally does the Lord provide for his
Priests. See the Note on Levit. 27.30. And is not the right of livelihood, as
equal and due to the Ministers of the Gospel, whose Ministry is far more
glorious? 2 Cor. 3.8, 9. even greater then that of John Baptist, Mat. 11.11.

Verse. 12. If a man's wife go aside] Adalterum, vel ad alterius torum, vnde
dicitur adulterium. If as a wanton, she want one, when she has her own. But
what wittals are the Lituanians, who give way to their wives, to have their
stallions, (if Maginus belie them not,) and call such connubii adjutores;
prizing them, far above all their acquaintances.

Verse. 13. And it be hid from the eyes] As Prove. 30.20. Such a privy whore was
Livia, the wife of Augustus Caesar; who, (though otherwise very observant of
her husband,) yet lived in adultery with Eudemus her Physician: qui specie
artis frequens secretis, says Tacitus; who, under a show of curing her, Pliny.
corrupted her. So do the Jesuits many dames at this day; being, as one says
of them, Conn^bisanctifugae, clammeretricitegae The Friars are said to send
men, whose wives are barren, in pilgrimage; to Saint Joyce, the patroness of
fruitfulness, and mean while, to lie with their wives.

Verse. 14. And the spirit of jealousy come upon him] In the bathes at upper-
Baden, in Helvetia, cernunt viri vxores tractari, cernunt cum alienis loqui, et
quidem solam cum solo, says Munster, and yet are not jealous. But the Italians
are so jealous, that how many husbands, so many jaylours. And the Turks as far
exceed the Italians herein, Blunts voyage into Levant.
as the Italians do us. Therefore their women go muffled, all but the eyes: nor
are they suffered to go to Church, or so much as look out at their own windows.
In Barbary, it is death for any ^an to see one of the Xeriffes concubines: and
for them too, if when they see a man, though but through a casement, they do
not suddenly screek out.

Verse. 15. Barly-meal] Barley, not wheat. She has done the act of a beast, and
her oblation is the meat of a beast, as Sal. Jarchi here notes.

Verse. 16. Set her before the Lord] Whose the judgment was; that, if guilty,
she might be scared, from submitting her self to this trial; since God knows
all our thefts.

Verse. 17. Holy-water] i.e. Water taken out of the holy laver: Annal. ad annum.
44.
no warrant for popish lustrall water, and sprinkling of Sepulchers: for the
ground whereof, Cardinal Baronius fairly referrs us to Iuvenals sixth Satyr.

Verse. 18. Uncover the Woman's head] Because she stood, now, upon her
justification, and thereupon laid aside, for present, this sign of subjection
to the man, 1 Cor. 11.7. (...) [The offering of memoriall] Brought by her
husband, verse. 15. who was now sick, of one of those three diseases, that they
say are hardly cured; jealousy, frenzy, and heresy.

Verse. 21. Thy thigh to rot, and belly to swell] God takes notice of the
offending member; as he did in those blasphemers, who gnawed their tongues,
Rev^l. 9. Absoloms hair, Jeroboams hand, the adulterers loins, Prove. 5.11.
Zimri and Cozli, thrust through the belly, Number. 25.8. Charles the 2. King of
Navarr: Ioane Queen of Naples, etc. Suffered as they sinned.

Verse. 22. Amen, Amen] Twice; to show the fervency of her zeal, the innocence
of her cause, the uprightness of her conscience, and the p^rity of her heart.

Verse. 23. Shall write these curses in a book] To show, that the word written,
should cause the water thus to work, according to the cleanness, or uncleanness
of the party. See 2 Cor. 2.16. with the note there.

CHAP. VI.
Verse. 1. ANd the Lord spake] Est Venus in vinis: therefore after the law, for
the privy harlot; here is a law given, for abstinence from wine, and strong
drink; which some have called lac Veneris, Rev. 17.4. The whore comm^th forth
with a cup, as with a fit instrument.

Verse. 2. To vow a vow] A voluntary vow, a religious promise made in prayer:
hence (...) a prayer. [To separate themselves unto the Lord] As mirrours of
singular sobriety and sanctimony, Lam. 4.7. (especially required in such, as
are separated unto the Gospel of God, Romans 1.1.) and as types of Christ, that
great Votary, true Nazarite, holy, harmless, undefiled, and separate from sins,
Heb. 7.26. that holy thing, Mat. 1.20. that holy of holies, or most holy, Dan.
9.24.

Verse. 3. He shall separate himself from wine] Lest he should drink and forget
the law, Prove, 31.5. which he was to study diligently: but laden bellies, make
leaden wits; intemperance takes away the heart, Hos. 4.11 overchargeth it, Luke
21.34. [Moist grapes or dryed] Dried as raisins, currants, (or grapes of
Corinth, whence they come, and are called.)

Verse. 4. From the kernels, even to the husk] Nothing that that might occasion,
or tempt him to break his vow. All shadows and shows of evil, must be
shunned: quicquid fuerit male coloratum, as Bernard has it; whatsoever looks
but ill-favored, 1 Thessalonians. 5.22. Jude 23. He that would not eat the meat, must
not meddle with the broth. He that would not toll the bell, must not tuggle
with the rope. He that would shun the blow, must keep aloof from the train.

Verse. 5. There shall no rasor] In opposition to Heathens; Votaries, who
nourished their hayr, to offer to their gods. The popish Priests also, cut and
shave their hayr, that they may still look neat, and effeminate; which God
allowed not in his Nazarites, Amos 2.11.

Verse. 6. At no dead body] Christ was never defiled, by any person dead in sin,
nor by any dead work: no more must we.

Verse. 7. He shall not make himself unclean] In all changes, he must be
unchangeable: so was Christ, so must we.

Verse. 9. And if any man dye] A figure of the involuntary and unavoidable
infirmity of the Saints, which must be bewailed, as direct fruits of the flesh;
and for which there is, through Christ, a pardon of course.

Verse. 12. And he shall consecrate] He shall begin the world a new: so must we;
after some foul fall especially: repent and do thy first works. Revel. 2.5. as
the Shulamite did, Cant. 5.2. etc.

Verse. 14. And he shall offer his offering] Though he had fulfilled his vow in
the best manner, yet he must come with his sinoffering, etc. leading him to
Christ, for pardon of failings in the manner; and with his thank-offering, for
what he had been enabled to do, before he could be released of his
Nazarite-ship.

Verse. 18. And put it in the fire] To teach us, that the Lord so loves his
children, that he esteems the least hair of their head, as a precious gift.

Verse. 19. The sodden shoulder] i.e. The left shoulder; for the right was due
unto him raw, Lev. 7.32. This taught the Nazarite special thankfulness:
dignity requires duty.

Verse. 20. The Nazarite may drink wine] The Popish Votaries will needs fetch
color and approbation for their superstitious vows, from this order of
Nazarites. But the abolishing of this ordinance is declared, Act. 21.25. and
they are so far from the abstinence of Nazarites, that they eat of the best,
and drink of the sweetest: the most generous wine in Lovain and Paris, is known
by the name of vinum theologicum: the Divines (those S^rbonists) do so whiffe
it off.

Verse. 21. Besides that, that his hand] i.e. Beside his voluntary devotion,
according to his ability. This he may do, but that he must do, be he poor, or
rich.

Verse. 23. Ye shall bless the children of Israel] Praying for them with hands
first stretched out to Heaven, Levit. 9.22.
and then laid upon the people; so putting the blessing of God upon them. So
Christ did upon his Apostles, which was his last action upon earth, Luke 24.50.
And so must all Pastors do, that would do good on it, pray down a blessing on
their people.

Verse. 24. The Lord bless thee] Here some observe the mystery of the holy
Trinity. See it explained, 2 Cor. 13.14.

CHAP. VII.
Veas. 2. The Princes of Israel offered] So they did at the making of the
Tabernacle, and at the building of the Temple, Exodus 35.27. 1 Chronicles. 29.6, 7,
8. which was but to give God of his own; as David acknowledges with all
thankfulness, Verse. 14. (...). Of thine own we offer unto thee, said Justnian,
Cedrenus.
when he had offered up, in the Temple of Sophia, at Constantinople, a
communion table that had in it, (says the Author,) all the riches of land and
sea.

Verse. 8. And four wagons, and eight oxen] Double the number of what the
Gersonites had, because their carriage was heavier; God proportions the burden
to the back: none of his shall be oppressed, though pressed out of measure,
above strength, 2 Cor. 1.8. as Joseph was, whom the archers hated, and shot at:
But his how abode in strength, and the arms of his hands were made strong, by
the hands of the mighty God of Jacob, ever reserved for a dead lift, Genesis
49.23, 24. Mat. 8.17. See the note there.

Verse. 9. Bear upon their shoulders] Therefore, when David carted the Ark. (as
the Philistims had done before,) God was angry, and made a breach upon Vzza,
because they sough him not in due order 1 Cor. 15.13.

Verse. 11. For the dedicating of the Altar] No warrant, at all, for Popish
dedications of Altars, Churches, religious houses built for superstitious uses,
as appears in stories: Act. and Mon.
as pro remissione and redemptione peccatorum; pro remedio et liberatione
animae; pro amore caelestis patriae; pro salute regnorum, in honorem gloriosae
virginis, etc.

Verse. 12. For the tribe of Judah] Vt ubique superemineat praerogativa Christi
a juda oriundi.

Verse. 17. And for peace-offerings] Sacrifices of all sorts they brought,
whereby, having made their peace, they kept a feast with joy, before the Lord,
for his mercy to them through the merits of his son.

Verse. 18. On the second day] Their offerings are severally and largely
described; to show how highly accepted in Heaven.

Verse. 19. And when Moses was gone in, etc.] Scipio Africanus was wont, before
day, to go into the Capitol; in cellam jovis, and there to stay a great while,
quasi consultans de Rep. cum Jove, as if he had advised with his god about the
public businesses. Gell. lib. 7. c. 1.


CHAP. VIII.
Verse. 3. HE lighted the lamps] This Candlestick, on the Southside of the
Tabernable, over against the Table, figured the Law of God shining in his
Church, Prove. 6.23. 2 Pet. 1.19. and the lighting of one lamp from another,
showed the opening of one text by another. The Rabbines have a saying, Nulla
est objectio in lege quae non habet solutionem in latere; i. e. there is not
any doubt in the law, but may be resolved in the context.

Verse. 4. Beaten work] To show, that Ministers must beat their brains, (...).
to beat out the sense of the Scriptures, as the fowl beats the shell, to get
out the fish, with great vehemence.

Verse. 7. sprinkle water of purifying, etc.] This taught, that none were meet
for the holy Ministry, but by the free favor of Christ, and by the
sanctification of his Spirit, 2 Cor. 2.16. Gal. 1.15. Ministers are fullones
animarum, their office is to whiten others; themselves therefore should be as
those Nazarites, Lam. 4. whither then snow. [Shave all their flesh] As the
Lepers did; Levites are by nature, no better then Lepers: Ministers, men
subject to like passions as others, and liable to more temptations.

Verse. 9. The whole assembly] By their Representatives the Elders, or the
firstborn; figuring the Church of Christ, those firstborn which are written in
heaven, Heb. 12.23.

Verse. 10. shall put their lands] Imposition of hands, is an ancient rite at
the Ordination of Ministers.

Verse. 11. And Aaron shall offer the Levites] Heb: wave the Levites, with might
figure ministers miseryes, and afflictions, by Satan's sifting them, Jer. 15.10.
and wicked men's turmoyling them; as Jeremy that man of contentions.

Verse. 12. The one for a sin-offering] The sin-offering for actual sin; the
burnt-offering for Original.

Verse. 19. As a gift to Aaron] -- Clarissima semper Munera sunt, Ephesians. 4.11.
Author quae pretiosa facit; Ministers also are given, as an honourary to the
Church.

Verse. 24. From twenty five years] See the Note on Chap. 4.30.

CHAP. IX.
Verse. 2. KEep the Passeover] This Passover; for they kept no more but this,
till they came into the land of Canaan, ( Josh. 5.10. with Exodus 12.25.) because
of their often and uncertain removes. The feast of Tabernacles, likewise, was
for many ages omitted; or at least, not in due manner observed; as by dwelling
in boothes, reading the book of the law, etc. Neh. 8.16, 17, 18. which a man
would wonder at; but Vexatio dat intellectum: those Jews were newly returned
from captivity.

Verse. 3. According to all the rites] It was a true saying of Socrates in
Xenophon, Deum eo cultus genere coli velle, quem ipse instituerit, that God
must be worshipped in his own way only. Whereunto agrees that of Cicero, Deum
non superstitione coli velle, sed pietate.

Verse. 5. And they kept the Passeover] See the Notes on Exodus 12.

Verse. 6. They could not keep the Passeover] Because they were to be unclean
seven days, Numb. 19.11. Demosth.
Now among the very Heathen, the Sacrificers were to purify themselves some
days before; they had their coena pura the night before, etc. and having
expiated the company they cried, (...); who is here? to which they made reply,
(...), Atistoph.
Many and good are here.

Verse. 7. And those men said unto him] Moses, they knew, was a meet man to
resolve this Case of Conscience. He was a Messenger, an Interpreter, one among
a thousand, to show unto man his uprightness, Job 33.23. a Merchant to sell oil
and balm from Gilead, to cure consciences, Matthew. 25.9. Others may write Cases,
that is covers of conscience; but resolve none. Conscience is a Diamond, and
will be wrought on by nothing but dust of diamond, such as contrition has
ground it to.

Verse. 8. Stand still, and I will hear Moses was but the echo of Gods voice;
John Baptist the voice of one crying in the Wilderness. St. Paul received of
the Lord, what he delivered to the Church, 1 Cor. 11.23. and took care, that
the faith of his heaters might not be in the wisdom of man, but in the power
of God, 1 Cor. 2.4, 5. Unwarranted doctrines come not cum gratia and privilegio.

Verse. 10. Or be in a journey afar off] This rendered a man unfit to partake;
because either his head would be so taken up about his business then, or his
mind so set upon home, that he would have little leisure or liberty to prepare
for the Passover.

Verse. 11. With unleavened bread] Teaching them to purge out the old leven,
that fusty, swelling, sowring, spreading corruption of nature and practice.
[And bitter herbs] Directing them to true humiliation and bitterness, for sin;
without which, there can be no sweetness in the blood of Christ.

Verse. 12. They shall leave none] The Lord in his infinite wisdom, would
hereby prevent all occasions of idolatry; which is easily admitted in the
reservations of holy things; as in Popery, at this day.

Verse. 17. And when the cloud] This visible sign they had, of Gods presence,
for their motion or station by night or by day, through all their pilgrimage.
In all thy ways acknowledge God, and he shall direct thy paths, Prove. 3.6.
When thou sit in darkness, the Lord shall give thee light, Mic. 7.8.

Verse. 19. Kept the charge of the Lord] Or, his watch, viz. to be ready at any
hour to remove; so must we always watch and be in readiness; as not knowing
whether at Even, or at midnight, or cock-crowing, or in the dawning, Christ
will come, Mar. 13.35.

Verse. 23. At the Commandment of the Lord] This signified, that the Saints are
to rest, or go on, at the voice of Christ, Joh. 10.3, 4. and that whatsoever
they do in word or deed, to do all in the name of the Lord Jesus, Colos. 3.17.
to seek and find all their perfection and defense in him alone.

CHAP. X.
Verse. 2. TWo trumpets of silver Signifying, the voice of the Law and Gospel,
in the mouths of Gods Ministers, Esai. 58.1. Ad ravim usque vocem intendit,
nec vinci se a strepitu ullo passu^ est. Melch. Adam. 114.
who must lift up the voice like a trumpet, with fervor, zeal, and courage; 1.
To gather the people, and assemble the Elders, Joel 2.16. 2. To put them upon
their marchings and motions toward the heavenly Canaan; and here, to blow an
alarm, -- sic clames ut Stentora vincere possis, (as that famous Farellus did,
when the Friars, to drown his voice in the Pulpit, rang their greatest Bells;
but he out-noysed them,) 3. To get them upon their battlements, and there-hence
to blow an alarm likewise, upon the approach of spiritual enemies; Suetonius ea
liberate scripfit Imperatorum vitas qua ipsi vixerunt.
taking the same liberty, to cry down sin, that men take to commit it; and to
descry the Devils stratagems, that are so destructive to men's souls. They must
cast away the inverse trumpets of Furius Fulvius, which sounded a retreat, when
they should have sounded an alarm: they must faithfully show Gods people their
transgressions, and the house of Jacob their sins, Esaias 58.1. yea all their
transgressions in all their sins, Levit. 16.21. Lastly, as the Priests were to
sound the silver trumpets at their solemn feasts, for a monument of spiritual
gladness before the Lord; Psalm. 81.4.
so must Ministers of the Gospel, publish the glad tidings of the Gospel; Speak
to the heart of Jerusalem, and cry unto her, that her warfare is accomplished,
her sin is pardoned, Esaias. 40.2. make the people hear the joyful sound, that
they may walk in the sense of Gods presence, and in the light of his
countenance; yea, rejoice in his Name all the day-long, Psalm. 89.15, 16.

Verse. 7. But when the congregation] Cenalis Bishop of Auranches was hard
driven, when, to prove the church of Rome, a true church he makes no mention at
all of Ministers, or ordinances, but alleges that the Catholics had bells,
to assemble them together, whereas the Lutherans met, by the clap of
harquebuzes and pistolets: And so he goes on, to triumph in a long Antithesis.
The bells, says he, do sound, the harquebuzes crack: The bells, give a sweet
and melodious tune, but the harquebuzes, a foul and terrible noise. Bells open
heaven, the other hell. Act. and Mon. fol. 838.
Bells chase away clouds and thunder, the other gender clouds, and counterfeit
thunder, etc. O the profound arguments of these doting Doctors! [But you shall
not sound an alarm] Or, a broken sound; but a continued equal sound, as
fittest for their quiet assembling, to the service of God, and hearing of the
law. The sound of Gods word, must not be broken or quavering; (Pompall,
Tertullian calls it) but downright and simple. Non oratorum filii sumus, sed
piscatorum: Nazianz. ad Libanium.
nec verborum (...), sed Spiritus (...), etc. 1 Cor. 2.1, 4.

Verse. 8. Shall blow with the trumpets] A trumpeter (as one observes,) winds
his trumpet with his mouth, and holds it up with his hand: so should a
Minister, both preach and practice; vivere concionibus, concionari moribus.

Verse. 9. Ye shall be remembered before the Lord] Who will arise, as it were
awakened, by this sound of the trumpet. See 2 Chronicles. 13.12. with Isa. 51.9.
That is, by the prayer of faith; such as were the prayers of the Ministers of
Angrogne in France, wherewith their enemies cried out, they were so bewitched,
that they could not fight. It was the custom of these poor persecuted
Protestants, Act. and Mon. fol. 883.
so soon as they saw the enemy approach, to cry all together, for aid and
succor, to the Lord; and when the combat was ended, constantly to give him
thanks, for the good success he had sent them. So at the siege of Mountabone,
the people of God, using daily humiliation, as their service would permit, did
sing a psalm after it, immediately before their sallying forth: with this
practice, the enemy coming acquainted, ever upon the singing of the Psalm,
(after which, they expected a sally;) they would so quake and tremble, saying,
they come, they come, as though the wrath of God had been breaking out upon
them.

Verse. 10. For a memoriall] Or a sacred sign, to mind and assure them, that
God will hear their suits, and accept of their services thus performed with joy
of faith.

Verse. 12. Out of the wilderness of Sinai] Where they had dwelt long enough,
Deuteronomy. 1.6, 7, 8. It being a place of bondage, by reason of the law there given,
Gal 4.24, 25. The law is a yoke of bondage, as Jerome calls it; and they who
look for righteousness from thence, are like oxen, who toil and draw, and when
they have done their labor, are fatted for slaughter.

Verse. 25. The rereward of all the Camp] Called the gathering Host, Josh. 6.9.
Because to their charge was committed the care of gathering together the lame,
faint, and feeble, and to look that nothing was lost, or left behind. And to
this David seems to allude, Psalm. 27.10. Confer Isai. 58.8. and 52.12.

Verse. 29. And Moses said] Or, Moses had said, viz. Exodus, 18.1, 2. [For the
Lord has spoken good] And Gods promises he knew to be good sure-hold. Seneca.


Verse. 30. To mine own land] Patriam quisque amat, non quia pulchram sed quia
suam. Ovid.
Nescio qua natale solum dulcedine cunctos du^ it, et immemores non sinit esse
sui.

Verse. 31. Instead of eyes] To descry unto us the commodities, and
discommodities of the country, which is well known to thee. Herein thou may
be of singular use unto us, though we have God, going visibly before us.
Gaudentius, Casaubon.
The Jews had a kind of officers, at their feasts, called (...), the eyes of
the feast, and praefecti morum.

Verse. 33. Three days journey] Three days together without resting: this made
them murmr, Chap. 11.1. non quia dura, sed quia molles patimur. Sen.
[Went before them] And, as the Jews conceive, for the facilitating of their
march, the cloud levelled mountains, raised valleys, and laid all of a flat;
that is, burnt up bushes, smoothed rocks, and made all plain, etc.

Verse. 35. Rise up Lord] Commanders must pray, as well as lead on their forces;
as did Charles the great, and that late brave King of Sweden, more addict to
prayer, then to fight.

CHAP. XI.
Verse. 1. ANd when the people complained] Or, were as it were complainers: they
did inwardly and secretly repine and mutter, at their three days march,
without intermission; like those horses that digest their choler, by biting
the bridle. [Consumed them that were in the uttermost parts] There, it seems,
the sin began amongst those that were faint and weary with travel, as Deuteronomy.
25.18.

Verse. 2. And the people cried to Moses] That Lord Chancellor of Heaven, (as
one calls him,) that could rule with God, and overruled. Of Moses it might be
said, as once of Luther. Iste vir potuit apud deum quod voluit, he might have
whatsoever he would of God.

Verse. 3. The name of the place Taberah] So to perpetuate the memory of the
peoples sin, and Gods judgment. Alterius perditio, tua sit cautio.

Verse. 4. And the mix^ multitude] See the Note on Exodus 12.38. Observe the
danger of ill company. Fish retains their sweetness in the salt sea. The river
Dee in Merioneth-shire, running through Pimble-meere, remains entire, and
mingles not her streams, with the waters of the lake. The rivers of Peru,
after they have run some miles into the sea, retain their sweetness, as writers
report. But to converse with the ungodly, and not to learn their manners, is
mavelous, rare, and difficult, A man may pass through Ethiopia unchanged; but
he cannot dwell there, and not be discolored.

Verse. 5. We remember the fish] They forgot their servitude. Discontent is ever
harping upon wants, and enjoyes nothing; no more then Haman did his honor, or
Al^ab his kingdom, when he longed for a sallet, out of Naboths garden.

Verse. 6. There is nothing at all besides] The wheat of heaven was held a light
meat, because lightly come by; Cito parta vilescunt. How are many queasie
stomachs even nauseated with the bread of life! it makes not to their dainty
palates 3* plain preaching is dis-rellished.

Verse. 7. And the Manna] See the Note on Exodus 16.14, 31. There was therefore
no such cause, they should so loath it.

Was as Coriander seed] Small, but full of sweetness and nourishment. Deuteronomy.
34.7.
This might be some cause of Moses his undecayedness [As the color of
Bdellium] A kind of transparent and precious gum.

Verse. 8. And the people went about] Or, went to and fro, as men ought still to
increase knowledge, Dan. 12.4. laboring for the meat that endures to eternal
life, Joh. 6.27. God might have saved them this labor, by rayning Manna into
their mouths; but he would not, for the trial of their diligence; and that
they might not think that worth nothing, that cost them nothing [And ground it
in mills] So was Jesus Christ ground and pounded with passion, baked and dried
up in the oven of his fathers displeasure, before he became fit food, and a
Savior to his Church. [As the taste of fresh oyle] Or wafers baked with honey,
Exodus 16.31. The sweet promises of grace, are sweeter then honey, Psalm. 19.10.
No fresh and sweet oil can so cherish the face, as they do the heart of a
believer.

Verse. 9. And when the dew fell] As Manna fell in the dew, so does the Spirit
descend, in and by the word preached, Gal. 3.2. [In the night] Figuring that
hidden Manna, laid up and prepared for the Saints, Revel. 2.17.

Verse. 10. Weep throughout their families] Generally and openly they mutinied
and murmured; though so lately they had smarted at Taberah. And this they did,
not once or twice, but ten times over: whereby it appears, that God chose this
unthankful people, not for their merits; sedex mera et mira misericordia, he
chose them for his love, and loved them for his choice.

Verse. 11. Wherefore have thou afflicted thy servant] Antoninus the Emperor,
said often, Imperium Oceanum esse malorum, that to be a governor of others, is
to be plunged into an Ocean of miseries. Pope Adrian caused to be engraven upon
his own tomb, Foelix si non imperitasset. Melancthon said, the three sorest
labors of all, were, Docentis, imperantis, parturientis, the labors of
Ministers, Magistrates, and of traveling women.

Verse. 12. As a nursing father bears, etc.] Lovingly, mildly, gently. A
Magistrate should carry himself as a Pater patriae. Cambdens Elisab.
Queen Elizabeth would many times say, That she could believe nothing of her
people, that parents would not believe of their children.

Verse. 13. Whence should I have flesh] Lust is unsatisfiable; to go about it,
is to go about an endless piece of work; it is to cast oil into the fire to
quench it.

Verse. 14. It is too heavy for me] Crowns have their cares; seats are uneasy,
many a cumber attends honor. Beatus ille qui procul negotiis. Horat.


Verse. 15. And if thou deal thus with me] Here the word, Thou, spoken to God,
is of the feminine gender, At, for Atta, ex magna perturbatione, says a
Rabbine. Moses was so exceedingly moved with anger and grief; these passions
did so overcarry him, that he could not complere vocem, utter his whole speech;
as he that groaneth, or gapeth, in the beginning of his sentence, cannot make
up his breath, to speak what he intended.

Verse. 16. Gather unto me seventy men] Here, say some, began the Sanhedrim,
that is, the great Counsel of the Jews, consisting of seventy Seniours, and one
President. It continued till the time of Herod the Great, who took it away, and
changed the form of it.

Verse. 17. And I will take of the spirit] i. e. I will bestow the same Spirit
upon them, as upon thee; and this shall be nothing at all to thy loss, or
disadvantage. Habet Hispania montem ex sale magnum, de quo quantum demas,
tantum accrescit.

shall bear the burden of the people] Who are in nothing more a burden then in
this, that with them (...); Thucyd.
Praesens imperium semper grave; they are ever grumbling at the present
government, though never so gentle. Alleva jugum, Ease the yoke that thy father
put upon us, 1 King. 12.4.
said they to Rehoboam; forgetting the golden age they had lived in, under his
father Solomon.

Verse. 18. Sanctify your selves] Ironice dictum, or sanctify, that is,
prepare your selves for the day of slaughter, as Jer. 12.3.

For you have wept in the ears] Tears (of what sort soever) have a voice in
them, Psalm. 39.12. as blood has, Genesis 4.

For it was well with us in Egypt] Such is the murmuring of those malcontents,
that say, It was a merry world before there was so much preaching and teaching.
In terris manducant quod apud inferos digerant. Aug.
[And ye shall eat] Flesh with a vengeance; which ye shall eat on earth, but
digest in hell.

Verse. 20. But even a whole moneth] Deus saepe dat iratus quod negat propitius.
Patientia Dei quo diuturnior, eo minacior. Poena venit gravior quo magis sera
venit: Gods forbearance is no quittance: fatted beasts are but fitted for the
slaughter; wicked men are killed with kindnesses, Ease slays the foolish,
Prove. 1.32.

Verse. 21. Six hundred thousand foot-men] In the conquest of Canaan, there is
no mention of horsemen. The adversaries, both Egyptians and Canaanites, had
horses and chariots, not so this people of Israel. See Psalm. 33.17.

Verse. 22. Or shall all the fish of the Sea] Moses forgot (belike) the fowls of
the air; but God sent them such a drift of quails, as Moses dreamed not of: he
fed them with meat of Kings, bread of Angels.

Verse. 23. And the Lord said unto Moses] God bears with Moses here; which
afterward he did not, Number. 20.12. because then he showed his distrust before
the people. God will not pass by the scandalous practices of his own people,
without a sensible check.

Verse. 24. And set them round about the Tabernacle] That the fear of the Lord
might be upon them, etc. 2 Chronicles. 19.6, 7. and that they might carry themselves
worthy of God, who had set them in place of Judicature. To the company of the
Areopagites, (Judges in Athens) none were admitted, but wise, wealthy, and
noble men; famous for good life and innocence. Nay, men, (...).
whose behavior was intolerable; after they were chosen into the College of
the Areopagites, abhorring and blushing at their former disposition, changed
their natures, and embraced virtue.

Verse. 25. Took of the spirit] See the Note on verse. 17.

They prophesied] Nec praedicendo, nec praedicando, but by uttering grave and
wise sentences, Apophthegmes, or counsels (as Moses did) concerning the public
affairs of Israel: by political and prudential speaking of things appertaining
to government.

Verse. 26. But there remained two of the men] Being stayed by some lawful
occasion, as 1 Samuel 20.26. Jer. 36.5. or happily, out of sense of their own
insufficiency; as 1 Samuel 10.22. Howsoever, hereby it appeared to all the
people, that these seventy Seniours were set apart by God for the service.

Verse. 27. And there ran a young man] Three manner of persons, said Mr.
Latimer, can make no credible information: 1. Adversaries and enemies. 2.
Ignorant persons, and without judgment. 3. Whisperers, and blowers in men's
ears, that will utter in hugger-mugger, more then they dare avow openly.

Verse. 18. My Lord Moses forbid] Thus, the spirit that is in us lusts to
envy, Jam. 4.5. Nero omnium erat aemulus, qui quoquo modo animum vulgi
moverint. Nero envyed every man that excelled.

Verse. 29. That all the Lords people] This is not meant of a salvificall
teaching others, but a political discoursing unto others. See the Note on ver.
25.

Verse. 32. And they spread them] They fed without fear, Jude 12. though
foretold, they should pay dear for these murdering morsels, ver. 20. that
which they eat being saweed, and that which they drank, being spiced with the
bitter wrath of God, Job 20.23.

Verse. 34. They buried the people] Who by a hasty testament, bequeathed this
new name to the place they lay buried in.

CHAP. XII.
Verse. 1. ANd Miriam and Aaron spake] She is set first, because chief in the
transgression: Her discontent might arise from this, that being a Prophetess,
she was not one of those seventy that were chosen to be helps in government,
Chap. 11. According to her name, Miriam would be exalted: Ambition rides
without reins.

Because of the Ethiopian woman] Zipporah the Midianitesse, (see Habac. 3.7.)
to whom he had been married many years before; but they were resolved to pick a
hole in Moses's coat. An ungodly man diggeth up evil, Prove. 16.27. but for
Moses to be thus used by his own brother and sister, was some trial of his
patience. To be derided by Egyptians, is threatened as a misery, Hos. 7.16. but
to be reproached by professors, is very grievous. Zedekiah feared more to be
mocked by the Jews, then by the Chaldees, Jer. 38.19. [For he had married an
Ethiopian] That was an old fault, if any; and should have been buried in
oblivion. Luther married a wife unseasonably, when all Germany was now
embroyled, and embrewed in the blood of the Bores; and when all Saxony was in
heaviness for the death of their good Prince Elector Frederick. This, his best
friends disliked and bewailed. Mel. Epist. ad Camerar.
As for Melancthon, Quoniam vero, inquit, ipsum Lutherum qu^dammodo tristiorem
esse cerno, and perturbatum ob vitae mutationem, omni studio and benevolentia
consolari eum conor; Because I see him somewhat cast down, says He, at the
late change of his condition, I strive all I can to comfort him.

Verse. 2. Has the Lord spoken only by Moses?] Every man would be something at
home; and many care not to raise themselves upon other men's ruins. Self-love
teaches such to turn the glass, to see themselves bigger, others lesser then
they are. That man has true light, that can be content to be a candle before
the Sun of others.

And the Lord heard it] Without any delation of Moses. But while Moses is dumb,
God speaks; while he is deaf, God hears and stirs. The more silent the
patient is, the more shrill his wrong will be.

Verse. 3. Now the man Moses was very meek] So free from passions, (if Josephus
may be believed) that he knew no such thing in his own soul; he only knew the
names of such things, and saw them in others, rather then in himself. Of Beza
it is said, quod sine fell vixerit, that he was without gall or guile; and he
lived to a great age as Moses did, and as Mr. Dod did; their meekness preserved
them. [Above all the men] And yet Moses could be angry enough when there was
cause, Exodus 11.8. and 16.20. Levit. 1^.16. Numb. 16.15, etc. Yea, how
blessedly blown up was he, with a zeal for God, Exodus 32.19. and what a stomach
shows he in that case? Nazianzen says of Athanasius, that he was Magnes and
Adamas, a Lodestone in his sweet gentle drawing nature, and yet an Adamant in
his resolute stout carriage against those that were evil.

Verse. 4. And the Lord spoke suddenly] God takes his part ever, that fights not
for himself. Christ that said, I seek not mine own glory, adds, But there is
one that seeks is, and judges. Here he appears as a swift witness, Mal. 3.5,
etc. a sharp revenger of his servants injuries. The rule is, Injuria illata
legato redundat in legantem; Wrong done to a messenger, reflects on him that
sent him.

Verse. 7. My servant Moses is not so] God had never so much magnified Moses to
them, but for their envy. We cannot devise to pleasure Gods servants so much,
as by despiting them. Quisquis volens detrahit famae meae, nolens addit mercedi
meae, says Augustine, He that willingly detracteth from mine honor, does,
though against his will, add to my reward.

Verse. 8. And the similitude] See the Note on Exodus 33.20.

Verse. 9. And he departed] Yea woe also to them, when I depart from them, Hos.
9.12. then all evils come in as by a sluice; the final absence of God, is hell
it self.

Verse. 10. Miriam became leprous] How escaped Aaron? (...), Hom. 3. ad Coloss.
for the dignity of the Priesthoost he was spared, says Chrysostom. Rather, he
met God by repentance, and so disarmed his indignation, and redeemed his own
sorrow.

CHAP. XIII.
Verse. 1. ANd the Lord spake] Yielding to the peoples importunity, and winking
at their infidelity; for he had before spyed out the land for them, Ezekiel. 20.6.
and searched it out, Deuteronomy. 1.33. but that satisfied them not; seeing was (with
them) believing. See Deuteronomy. 1.22.

Verse. 2. Every one a ruler amongst them] That might be (as Vriah and
Zachariah, Isai. 8.2.) Faithful witnesses, for, lying lips become not a
Prince, Prove. 17.7.

Verse. 3. By the commandment of the Lord] That is, by his permission; See the
Note on verse. 1. Gods command was, that they should forthwith (without any
further search,) go up and possess the land, Deuteronomy. 1.21. Now wicked men are
esteemed unjust, because they act against Gods command, though according to his
decree; like as believers are esteemed just, not because they obey Gods decree,
but his command.

Verse. 6. Caleb] A hearty man, according to his name; as Bishop Hooper Martyr,
was called hearty Hooper; and as one of our Richards, was called Coeur Delion.

Verse. 16. And Moses called Oshea the son of Nun, Jehoshua] His name was now
changed, from, save us O God, to, God shall save us: Under the law which brings
us, as it were, into a wilderness, we may desire, wish and pray, that there
were a Savior: but under the Gospel, we are sure of salvation, and that our
Iehoshuah has bound himself, to fulfill all righteousness for us.

Verse. 17. Go up into the mountain] This was the great mountain of Seir, which
incloseth Palestine on that side.

Verse. 22. Was built seven years before Zoan] And so was one of the ancientest
cities of the world, seeing it did contend, with the Ancientest and chiefest
city of Egypt, Isai. 19.11. Hebron signifies an association: there lay buried,
those three reverend couples, Abraham and Sarah, Isaac and Rebecca, Jacob and
Leah, Genesis 39.41. Here David began his reign over Israel, 2 Samuel 2.1. and
hither came Mary, to visit Elizabeth, Luke 1.39.

Verse. 23. And they bare it between two] Christum utrique portamus, (ut botrum
Israelitae) tum illi qui adventum Christi antecesserunt, tum nos, etc. So
Christ is born between the believers of both Testaments.

Verse. 27. In vita. Camilli.
And this is the fruit of it] Plutarch tells of the Gauls, that after they had
once a taste of the sweet wine of the grapes that grew in Italy, they enquired
in what country such sweet wine was: And after they had understood where such
grapes grew, they would never be at rest, till they had got that country.
Sextus Rufus, writing of Cyprus, says, Cyprus famosa divitiis, paupertatem
populi Rom: ut occuparetur, solicitavit. Cyprus by her wealth, tempted the
Romans to sieze it into their hands. The pearls usually cast out with the
flood, In vita Caesar.
and gathered with the ebb, drew Caesar's affection, for the conquest of
Britain, as Suetonius says: God has given us here, a grape of the heavenly
Canaan, to edge our desires.

Verse. 28. Nevertheless the people be strong] Thus many amongst us, wish very
well to Heaven, speak glorious things of it, and could gladly go to it; but
there is a lion in the way: they complain, with these Malcontents, of the
strength of the Anakims, and the impossibility of the conquest. It is a hard
thing, doubtless, to watch continually against a Spiritual enemy, to keep up
the banks against the sea of lusts, and passions; to bear daily crosses without
stooping, to carry the cup of prosperity, without spilling; to climb the hill
of good duties, without fainting; to go against the crowd, without sweating; to
bear the reproach of Christ, without buckling, etc. But hard though it be,
should we be discouraged? The sweetness of the honey makes the bears break in
upon the hives, contemning the stings. The Merchant refuses no adventure, for
hope of gain: the hunter shrinketh at no weather, for love of game: the
soldier declineth no danger, for desire of spoil. The sweetness of Gods face,
though to be seen only in the dark glass of the ceremonies, cheared up those
good souls, in their hard and tedious travel to Zion, Psalm. 84.6. etc.

CHAP. XIIII.
Verse. 3. Were it not better for us to return into Egypt] How could that be
better? It is our wisest way, to crush the very first insurrections of unruly
passions; (do not great storms rise out of little gusts?) to smoother the
smoke thereof, which else will fume up into the head, and gather into so thick
a cloud, as we shall soon lose the sight of our selves, and what is best to be
done.

Verse. 4. Let us make a Captain] Thus they proceed from bad to worse. Passions,
like heavy bodies down steep hills, once in motion move themselves, and know no
ground but the bottom. Whether this people did make them such a Captain, for
such a purpose, is uncertain; but howsoever, their very intention of doing it,
is charged upon them, as if they had done it, Neh. 9.16, 17.

Verse. 9. They are bread for us] q.d. We shall make but a breakfast of them. So
that valiant Prince of Orange, told his soldiers at the battle of Newport,
(when they had the sea on the one side, and the Spaniards on the other;) that
they must either eat up those Spaniards, or drink up that sea.

Verse. 10. But all the congregation bad stone them] This is merces mundi. this
is the fruit of Ochloeratie, that rule of rascality, as one calls it.

Verse. 11. Ere they believe me] Unbelief is the root of rebellion and
Apostasy, Heb. 3.12.

Verse. 12. And I will make of thee, a greater nation] Here God offered Moses, a
private fortune, which he prudently refuses; because God should be a loser by
it. And surely (says a Divine.) as God was displeased with Balaam for going,
though he bad him go: so the Lord would not have taken it so kindly of Moses,
if he had taken him upon the offer he made in a time of his heat, against his
people.

Verse. 13. Then the Egyptiuns shall hear it] And they will soon make comedyes,
out of the Churches tragedies.

Verse. 14. And they will tell it] The proverb is, Oculus and fama non patiuntur
jocos. A man's eye and his good name, can bear no j^sts. And he was no fool that
said, negligere quid de se quisque dicat, Cicero.
non solum arrogantis est, sed et dissoluti. He shall pass for a proud fool,
that makes no matter, what men say of him. God is most tender of his glory; and
we must take heed, how we cast any slur upon it, for we quarter arms, as it
were, with God.

Verse. 15. Kill all this people as one man] As he can quickly do, with a turn
of his hand, with a nod of his head, Psalm. 80.16. with a breath of his
nostrils, Job 4.9. he can as soon do it, as bid it be done, whether it be done
against a nation, or against a man only, Job 34.29.

Verse. 17. Let the power of my Lord be great] In multiplying pardons, Isai.
55.8. in passing by the many and bony, or mighty sins of this people; Amos
5.12. Fortia peccata Heb. bony sins.
such sins as none else, could or would pardon: for who is a God like unto
thee, that pardons such iniquity, etc? Mic. 7.18. Hebricians have observed,
that in the word jigdall here used; in the original, text there is a great
Iod, (which in numbering is ten,) to show, that if the people should murmr,
ten times more, against God then they had done, yet out of tender respect to
his own great name, (which would otherwise be basely blasphemed, he should
pardon and spare them.

Verse 18. And by no means clearing the guilty] This last letter in Gods
dreadful Name, ought much to be marked. God may pardon men's sins, and yet lay
it on upon the skin, to humble themselves, and to warn others. Thou forgavest
them; though thou tookest vengeance of their inventions, Psalm. 99.8.

Verse. 20. I have pardoned them] viz. So as not utterly and at once, to extirpe
them. I will be as a moth unto them, and not as a devouring lion, Hos. 5.12, 14.

Verse. 21. But as truly as I live] This is an oath; as appears by comparing
herewith, Psalm. 95.11. To blame therefore are they, that use it so often. [All
the earth shall be filled] I will make me a great name abroad; and even of
those maidservants, (the heathens) which thou have spoken of, shall I be had
in honor, as he said in another case, 2 Samuel 6.22.

Verse. 24. Veni, Vidi, Viti.
Because he had another Spirit] Let us go up and possess it, says he, Chap.
13, 30. As if it were no more, then to go and see, and conquer. A free spirit
is i^kindled with that, which quenches others: as when a bowl runs down-hill,
Implevit post me.
every rub, quickens it; whereas if up-hill, it would slug it.] And has
followed me fully] Heb. has fulfilled after me. A Metaphor from a ship under
sail, carried strongly with the wind, as fearing neither rocks nor sands. [And
his seed] Personal goodness, is profitable to posterity. Who would not serve
such a Lord?

Verse. 25. Now the Amalekites] There was but a mountain betwixt: so they were
hard by the promised land, and yet could not enter, because of unbelief. Thou
art not far from Gods Kingdom; the greater is thine unhappiness, that fallest
from so high hopes. [By the way of the red sea] Since you have such a mind to
it, you shall have enough of it. The backslider in heart, shall be filled with
his own ways, Prove. 14.14.

Verse. 28. So will I do to you] God took them at their words* so he may well do
our desperate swearers; since the mercy they desire God to show, is to damn
them.

Verse. 29. Your carcasses shall fall] Cadaver a cadendo, (...). Who knows
whether God purpose not, to wear out this generation, that has been defiled
with the superstitions of the land we live in; that we may not see the good
that he will bring upon this Church.

Verse. 34. My breach of promise] i e. Ye shall find to your cost, what it is
to charge me with breach of promise, through unbelief.

Verse. 39. Mourned greatly] God gave them somewhat to cry for.

Verse. 40. We have sinned] Here was confession of sin, without confusion of
sin. So was that of Saul, 1 Samuel 15.30.

Verse. 45. And smote them] To be out of Gods precincts, is to be out of his
protection.

CHAP. XXV.
Verse. 2. When ye be come into the land] God, (who in the midst of judgment
remembers mercy, and suffers not his whole wrath to arise;) seals up his
love again, to these late revolters: And although he led them in and out,
backward and forward, in that terrible wilderness, as if he had been treading a
maze; yet he here gives them new directions what to do, when they (that is,
their children,) came into the land of Canaan. Yea he further tells them, that
he will smell a sweet savor of the herd, and of the flock; and is pleased to
enlargeand explain some laws formerly delivered, in token of is reconciliation
to them. So he renewed his favor to his relapsed spouse, now returning unto
him, Cant. 5.3. with Chap. 6.4, 5, etc. and to his disciples, (that had basely
forsaken him) by giving them a new commission to execute the ministerial
function, Ioh. 20.21.

Verse. 4. Bring a meat-offering] As an Appendix to the other sacrifices.

Verse. 5. For a drink-offering] These drink offerings of wine signified that
the Saints must be most ready and cheerful to offer themselves up to God in
Martyrdom (as a drink offering,) for the testimony of their faith, and for the
service and Ministry of the Church, as Paul, Phil. 2.17. 2 Timothy 4.6. And many
Martyrs, who went as willingly to dye, as to dine. One of them called is his
wedding day, and invited his friends thereunto: Others, filled with the Holy
Ghost, so rejoiced, that they were misjudged by their adversaries, to be drunk
with wine, Act. and Mon. fol. 1653.
wherein is excess; as Morgan falsely objected to Mr. Philpot, in a conference.

Verse. 20. Ye shall offer up a cake] As an homage-penny, as acknowledging God,
the chief Lord of all; and as craving his leave to partake of his creatures.

Verse. 22. And if ye have erred, and not observed] Not serving of God, not
sacrificing is a sin, Mal. ^.18. Eccles. 9.2. Not robbing only, but the not
relieving of the poor, was the rich man's ruin, Luke 16. Omission of diet
breeds diseases, so does omission of duty: and makes work for hell, or for the
Physician of our souls.

Verse. 24. By ignorance] Or infirmity, incogitancy, inadvertency; for such
there is a pardon, of course, ready sealed by God in Christ: else we might dye
in our sins, while the pardon is providing.

Verse. 30. But the soul that does ought presumptuously] When the heart at any
time deliberates, (says a learned Divine;) and yet that word is not
sufficient, to express it; D. Preston of Gods Alsuff.
but when the heart works according to its own proper inclination; and then
wilfully disobeyes the Lord, in any commandment; certainly then it casts God
away. And this is that great offense, Psalm. 19.11. [The same reproacheth the
Lord] As if he wanted, either wisdom to observe, or power to punish, such as
take themselves to be out of the reach of his rod, See Ezekiel. 20.27.

Verse. 31. That gathered sticks upon the Sabbath day] This he did with an high
hand (as verse. 30) in contempt of God and his Law. Mr. Abbots his sermons.
The baser sort of people in Swethland do always break the sabbath, saying,
that it is only for gentlemen to keep that day: How much better that poor Indian
in New England, who coming by, and seeing one of the English profaning of the
Lords day, by felling of a tree, said unto him, New-Engl. first-fruites. page 4.
do you not know, that this is the Lords day? Much machet man, i.e. Very wicked
man, what, break you Gods day? The best and wealthieft of the Jews, (to
prevent servile work on the Sabbath day,) with their own hands chop the herbs,
sweep the house, Buxtorf. Synagog.
cleave wood, kindle fire, etc. on the day before.

Verse. 38. That they may make them fringes] See the Note on Mat. 23.5.
[Aribband of blue] This sky-colourd ribband band taught them, that though their
commoration was on earth, their conversation should be in Heaven, Philip. 3.20.

CHAP. XVI.
Verse. 1. THe son of Izhar] And so cousen german to Moses and Aaron; for Izhar
was brother to Amram their father, Exodus 6.18. [Sons of Reuben] Who being next
neighbors to Korah in the Camp, were the sooner corrupted by him.

Vvaque corrupta livorem ducit ab ^^a. Juven.
Verse. 2. Princes of the Assembly] A very dangerous conspiracy: For as in a
beast, the body follows the head; so in that bellua multorum capitum, the
multitude. Great men are the looking-glasses of the Country; according to
which, most men dress themselves: their sins do as seldom go unattended, as
their persons: Height of place ever adds two wings to sin, Example, and
Scandal, whereby it soars higher, and flies much further.

Verse. 3. Against Moses, and against Aaron] They were against both Magistracy
and Ministry, (as our late Levellers,) and would have brought in Anarchy, that
every man might offer his own sacrific^^ and do that which is good in his own
eyes: Regnum Cyclopicum.

Verse. 4. He fell upon his face] As a suppliant to them, not to proceed in
their rebellion; or rather to God, not to proceed against them for their sin.

Verse. 5. And he spoke unto Korah] By the instinct of the Spirit, who had given
into his heart a present answer to his prayer, and furnished him with this
answer.

Verse. 7. Ye take too much upon you] He retorts that upon them, that they had
falsely charged upon him and Aa^on: So does Elias upon Ahab, 1 King. 18.17.18.
So do we worthily upon Popery, the charge of novelty: When a Papist tauntingly
demanded of a Protestant, Where was your Religion before Luther? he was
answered, In the Bible, where yours never was.

Verse. 8. ye sons of Levi] He took these to task apart; as hoping, happily, to
withdraw them from their purpose, and to hide pride from them, Job 33.17. but
they proved uncounsellable, incorrigible.

Verse. 9. Seems it but a small thing] Whiles these ambitious Levites would be
looking up to the Priests, Moses sends down their eyes to the people. The way
not to repine at those above us, is to look at those below us.

Verse. 10. And seek ye the Priesthood also] Ambition is restless and
unsatisfiable; for, like the Crocodile, it grows as long as it lives.

Verse. 11. And what is Aaron] q. d. Is it not God, whom ye wound through
Aaron's sides? Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? Act. 9.

Verse. 12. We will not come up] Sturdy rebels, ripe for destruction. See Prove.
29.1. with the Note there. One perhaps had knocked off, and is therefore no more
mentioned. Satius est recurrere, quam male currere, as that Emperor said,
Better stop, or step back, then run on to utter ruin.

Verse. 13. That flows with milk and honey] So they falsely, and maliciously
speak of the land of Egypt, in derision of the land of Canaan, whereunto that
praise properly belonged. Those that were born in hell, know no other heaven.

Altogether a Prince over us] So their quarrel was against Moses his
principality, though they pretended the Priesthood only at first. If the
Ministry once be taken away, let the Magist^ate see to himself; he is next.

Verse. 14. We will not come up] Sc. to the place of judgment; so they add
rebellion to sin, and justify their treasonful practices; as did Ravilliac,
Faux, Saunders, others.

Verse. 15. And Moses was very wroth] Or, very sore grieved. He might have said,
as One once did, Felix essem si non imperitassem; Happy had I been, if I had
never been in place of authority. Egypt is said, by Seneca, to have been loquax
and ingeniosa in contumeliam praefectorum provincia, in qua qui vitaverit
culpam non effugit infamiam, a Province apt to find fault with, and to speak
hardly of their Rulers, though never so innocent. These rebels had, happily,
learned those Egyptian manners, by living so long amongst them. [I have not
taken one ass from them] Moses was not of them, that follow the administration
of justice as a trade only, with an unquenchable and unconscionable desire of
gain. This is but robbery with authority, and justifies the common resemblance
of the Courts of justice to the Bush: whereto while the sheep flies for
defense, in weather, he is sure to lose part of his fleece.

Verse. 16. Thy company] Or, thy congregation, thy faction, or Church-Malignant,
as Psalm. 26.5. Act. 19.32, 40.

Verse. 17. And take every man his censer] Which they had ready provided, when
first they combined to thrust themselves into the Priests office.

Verse. 18. And stood in the door] Such an impudency had sin oaded in their
faces, that they stood stouting it out before the Lord; and made open
profession of their wickedness: there was no need to dig, to find it out, Jer.
2.34. for they set it, as it were, upon the cliff of the rock, Ezekiel. 24.7.

Verse. 19. All the Congregation] Not his own company only* for the whole
multitude was too ready to favor his attempt, as he persuaded them God also
would: his design being to introduce an equal popularity, an ochlocratie, that
Rule of rascality, as One calls it.

Verse. 21. Separate your selves] Good men are taken away from the evil to
come. When God pulls away the pillars, what will become of the building? Lot
was no sooner taken out of Sodom, but Sodom was taken out of the world.

Verse. 22. The God of the Spirits] The Former and Father of Spirits, Zech.
12.1. Heb. 12.9. that gives to all (...), life and breath, Act. 17.25. in
whose hand is the soul of all living, and the spirit of all flesh, Job 12.10.

Verse. 24. Get you up from about] Save your selves from this untoward
generation, Act. 2.40. force your selves from them, stave them off, (...).
as the word signifies, 2 Thessalonians. 3.6. and we charge you in the name of our Lord
Jesus Christ, to do so; ut scias quam aegre divellimur, says One.

Verse. 26. Lest ye be consumed] See verse. 24. and the Note on Revel. 18.4.
Hamath fares the worse, for lying so near Damascus, Zech. 9.2. St. John sprang
out of the Bath, where he found Cerinthus the heretic.

Verse. 27. Came out and stood] As out-facing Moses, and scorning the judgment
threatened. Deus quem destruit dementat; Hardened sinners make no more of Gods
dreadful threatenings, then Behemoth does of iron weapons, which he esteems as
strawes.

Verse. 28. Hereby ye shall know] Thus he engages the truth and honor of his
office upon a miracle. But now he that expects a miracle, is himself a miracle,
says Augustine. Let Papists brag of their lying wonders, 2 Thessalonians. 2.9. We
dislike not altogether that observation of Gretser the Jesuit, Tam sterilis
and deserta est Lutherana and Calviniana secta, ut diabolus ne dignetur quidem
per eam aliquid fallacium and umbratilium prodigiorum aggredi, saltem
frequenter and palam. So dull and dry is the Lutheran and Calvinian Sect, that
the devil daynes not to work any, or not many miracles, amongst them, as he
does among the Catholics.

Verse. 29. The common death of all men] Ne quisquam sua mor^e defunctus est,
said Suetonius of Caesar's murderers; So may we say of our powder-plotters,
your sin will find you out.

Verse. 30. Quick unto the pit] Not into hell, as the Papists conclude from this
text; for how could their houses and goods go down to hell, verse. 32? and who
would not hope that some of them were innocent, some penitent? The punishment
they suffered in being buried alive, was very miserable; and so accounted by
the Heathens, who served their vestall virgins in this sort, that had been
defloured.

Verse. 31. As he bad made an end of speaking] Dictum factum, So it is still,
Joh. 20.23. Vengeance is every whit as ready in Gods hands, as in his Ministers
mouths, 2 Cor. 10.6.

Verse. 32. And the earth opened her mouth, and swallowed them up] So it did a
great part of Antioch, by a horrible earthquake, Anno, 527. for their horrible
heresies and blasphemies there broached, by the Bishops, and defended by the
people. So lately, Pleurs in Italy.

Verse. 33. And they perished from among] So the powderplotters here; and before
them the Northern rebels. That rebellion, says One, like the bubbles which
children blow up into the air, was no sooner blown up, then blown out, and fell
into the eyes of those, which with blasts of ambition and superstition, held it
up.

Verse. 34. Lest the earth swallow us up also] Let the destruction of others, be
a terror to us; that we may wash our feet in the blood of the wicked, Psalm.
52.6. But he that is swallowed up with earth, (as K^rah) his ears stopped, his
heart stuffed with earth, shall have earth enough when he dies, but of heaven
little enough.

Verse. 35. And there came out a fire] By fire they sinned, and by a fire they
suffer:

Per quod quis peccat, per idem punitur and ipse. Verse. 37. For they are
hallowed] And therefore may not be turned to any other use.

Verse. 38. These sinners against their own souls] So are all such, as spend the
span of this transitory life, after the ways of their own hearts, and thereby
perish for ever. Sin is the souls poison; yet how heartily do men feed upon it,
as Tartarians do upon dead horses; as the maid, in Pliny, did upon Spiders; as
the Turkish gally-slaves do upon Opiuns, an ounce whereof they will eat at
once, as if it were bread.

Verse. 40. To be a memorial] God cannot abide to be forgotten; and they are
worthily made examples, that will not take them; as that second Captain, 2
King. 1.

Verse. 41. But on the morrow] That after conviction, they should so soon again
rebel, and run away with the bit in their mouths, was prodigious contumacy.

Verse. 42. And behold the cloud] Deus (...), God, as out of an Engine, appears
for his distressed servants.

Verse. 46. For there is wrath] Moses is quick-sighted, and spies it at first
setting out. By how much more faithful and familiar men are with God, so much
earlier do they discern his wrath.

Verse. 47. The plague] Which ran as a fire in a cornfield.

Verse. 48. And he stood between] A clear type of Christ.

CHAP. XVII.
Verse. 2. TAke of every one of them a r^d] Or, staff; the ensign of their
honor, Number. 21.18. and of their civil authority, Psalm. 110.2. Jer. 48.16, 17.
a sufficient witness against them, that the Priesthood belonged not to them.
Vzziah smarted for invading it. George Prince of Anhalt, was a singular
example, M^l^h, Adam.
qui primus and unus ex omni Principum Germanorum numer^, subdi^^s suos ipse
and viva voce and scriptis editis de via salutis erudiret, who was the first,
and the only German Prince, that both by preaching and writing, taught his
Subjects.

Verse. 5. And I will make to cease] But then he must do more then work
miracles. For such is the habitual hardness of men's hearts, as neither
Minister, nor misery, nor miracle, nor mercy, can possibly mollify. Nothing
can do it, but an extraordinary touch from the hand of heaven.

Verse. 8. And bloomed blossomes] 1. For a testimony of Aarons calling from God,
to the honor of the Priesthood. 2. For a type of Christ the branch, growing
out of the stem of Jesse, Esai. 11.1. 3. For a figure of the Ministry of the
Gospel, which although to profane persons, it seem a dry, barren, and vanishing
voice, yet it bloometh and flourishes in the hearts of Gods Elect. And surely,
fruitfulness is the best argument of our election, and that we are called of
God. For not only all the plants of his setting, but the very boughs cut off
from the body of them, will flourish. 4. For a lively representation of a
glorious resurrection. At the French massacre, Aug. 25.1572. in the Churchyard
of St. Innocent at Paris, a certain bush suddenly bloomed about the middle time
of that bloody day, at an unusual time of the year: The Papists boasted,
Epitome hist. Gallicae. p. 149.
that God by that miracle, showed his good liking of that massacre they had
made. But the Protestants took it for a confirmation of their religion, and a
testimony of their innocence.

CHAP. XVIII.
Verse. 1. SHall bear the iniquity] i.e. the punishment of whatsoever iniquity
is done in the Sanctuary: Sin and punishment come under one name, as being tied
together with chains of adamant: where the one dines, the other will sup; where
the one is in the saddle, the other will be upon the crupper. Nemo crimen gerit
in pectore qui non idem Nemesin in tergo; Sin does as naturally draw and suck
judgments to it, as the loadstone does iron, or Turpentine fire.

The iniquity of your Priesthood] Priests then are not Angels, free from sin,
as that Popish Postiller dreamed and drew from Exodus 30.31, 32. Cajetan
confesses of the Popish Prelates, that whereas by their places, they should
have been the salt of the earth, Comment. in Matthew.
they had lost their favor, and were good for little else, but looking after
the rites and revenues of the Church. John Hus complains of the Priests of his
age, Bellum Hussiticum, page 9.
that Multa quae i^i ordinem dicunt, omntum rerum in Christianismo confusionem
pariunt, Many things that they call order, bring all into confu^on. Non
arbitror inter Sacerdotes multos esse qui salvi fiant, Hom. 3. in Act.
I believe few of our Priests will be saved, says Chrysostom, of those of his
time. And from the Prophets of Jerusalem, is profaneness gone forth into all
the land, says Jeremy, Chap 23.15.

Verse. 3. And you also dye For your other-mens sins which you have not
prevented, or prohibited. Qui non, cum potest prohibet. jubet.

Verse. 7. As a service of gift] So our Savior counts and calls his work a
gift, Ioh. 17.4. I have finished the work which thou gave me to do. Any
employment for, and about God, is a special favor, a high honor.

Verse. 9. Which they shall render unto me] As a recompense for some trespass
against me, Numb. 5.8. Levit. 6.6.

Verse. 10. In the most holy place] i.e. In the Priests Court.

Verse. 12. All the best of the oyl] Heb. the fat. God can afford the Ministers
the best of the best; though the most nowadayes, think the worst too good for
them

Which they shall offer] Not appointing them how much, but leaving that to the
peoples liberality. And what that was, let Philo the Jew speak, who well knew
the customs of his own nation, and tells us, that all things due to the
Priests, were paid very freely, Philo lib. de sacerdot. honor.
and most cheerfully. At haec gens debitam pecuniam lubens gaudensque depromit,
says He; This people willingly, and with rejoicing, draw out their money for
the Priests, not as if they gave, but received rather, adding happy ominations
and gratulations.

Verse. 13. And whatsoever is first. ripe] See what an honorable maintenance,
and liberal entertainment God himself assigns to the Levitical Priesthood;
and shall the Ministers of the Gospel be held to hard allowance? Gal. 6.6. 1
Cor. 9.7, 9. Ad tenuitatem beneficiorum necessario sequitur ignorantia
Sacerdotum. Panormit.


Verse. 14. Every thing devoted] Unless devoted to some particular use, Levit.
27.28, 29.

Verse. 18. And the flesh of them shall be thine] And besides these here
touched, they had other revenues of no small value, as their cities, Suburbs,
glebe, Number. 35. etc. that they might be encouraged in the law of the Lord, 2
Chr. 31.9.

Verse. 19. It is a covenant of salt] So 2 Chronicles. 13.5. that is, inviolable, i^
corruptible, non computrescens vetustate, says Flacius, Pierius also tells us,
that amity and friendship was symbolized by salt, corpora enim solidiora facit,
and diutissime conservat, for it is consolidating and conserving property.

Verse. 21. For their service which they serve] No man did so much as shut the
doors of Gods Sanctuary, or kindle a fire on his altar, for naught, Mal. 1.10.

Verse. 22. Neither must the children] But only Gods Kinsmen, (the I riests and
Levites) as they are called, Levit. 10.3. according to some translations, or
his nigh-Ones.

Verse. 31. For it is your reward] Or, wages, which you dearly carn, and may
justly call for. So Luke 10.7.

CHAP. XIX.
Verse. 2. THis is the ordinance of the law, which] An ordinance, a law, a
commanded law: All this, to show the peremptoriness of the Lord in this point;
that unless we lay hold upon the blood of Christ prefigured by this red heifer,
we cannot escape the damnation of hell. [That they bring thee] At a common
charge; because for a common good. All the Congregation must get them a bloody
Savior.

A red heifer] Typing out Christum cruentatum, Christ covered with his own
blood: See Esaias 63.1, 2. white and ruddy, Cant. 5.
as the Church says of him; Tam recens mihi Christus crucifixus, ac si jam
fudisset sanguinem: Luther.
The pressure of his sufferings made him sweat great drops, or rather clods of
blood, in a cold night; besides what afterward issued from his many wounds in
his head and body. [Never came yoke] Christ never bore the yoke either of sin
or servitude. He laid down his life of himself, Joh. 10.17, 18. See Heb. 9.13,
14. he was not subject to any command of man, Luke 2.44. Ioh. 2.4.

Verse. 3. To Eleazar the Priest] To assure him of the succession of the
Priesthood. Besides, it was fitter he should be defiled, then his Father, verse.
7. Hereby, also, might, happily, be foretold, that the Priests should kill
Christ: but they were but our workmen; we should look upon him whom we have
pierced, and mourn over him, Zech, 12.10. that the fountain opened for sin, and
for separation from uncleanness, (see ver. 9. of this chapter,) may be free to
us, the Kings-Bath of Christ's blood, Zech. 13.1.

without the Camp] Signifying, that Christ should be taken from all earthly
comforts, and crucified without the gate, Heb. 13.12. [Before his face] So was
Christ, before Gods face; yea his Father laid upon him with his own hand; and
let loose all the powers of darkness at him.

Verse. 4. Shall take of the blood with his finger] Not with his whole hand.
Christ's blood must be touched, or applied, with great discretion and
reverence; our practice also must be dyed in Christ's blood,

Verse. 5. Shall he burn] To set forth Christ's ardent love, and bitter
sufferings. Love it self is a passion; and delights to express it self, by
suffering for the party beloved.

Verse. 6. Cedar-wood, and hyssop, and scarlet] Hereby was signified, that
Christ howsoever in respect of our sins he was burnt up with the fire of his
Fathers wrath; yet by the everlasting Spirit, whereby he offered up himself,
without spot, to God; and by the gift and graces of it, he was a full sacrifice
of a sweetsmelling favor to God, to purge offenses, Heb. 9.14. Psalm. 51.9.

Verse. 7. The Priest shall wash his clothes] To show the contagion and
pollution of sin, 2 Cor. 7.1. and imperfection of the legal Priesthood.
[unclean until the Evening] So verse. 8. and 10. We had need take time till the
Evening, to humble our souls, and bewail our unworthiness of the blood of
Christ.

Verse. 9. And a man that is clean] Hereby is meant, the Gentile purified by
faith, (as One well observes,) the gathering of the ashes, is the applying of
the merits of Christ, and laying hold of the mysteries of his Kingdom. The
laying up of the ashes imports, that the Christian accounts Christ's merits his
chief treasure. The clean place, is the clean heart: Without the Camp, notes,
that the Gentiles were strangers from the Commonwealth of Israel, etc. These
ashes kept for the Congregation, show the fullness of Christ's merits for all his
people; when he says, it is to make a water of separation, it notes, that our
sins separate betwixt us and our God. But now in Christ Jesus, we who sometimes
were far off, are made nigh by his blood, Ephesians. 2.13.

Verse. 10. Shall wash his clothes] To note, that even the nearer a Christian
comes to the merits of Christ, the more he is affected with the sense of his
own uncleanness; yea he retains it till Bven, that is, till death.

Verse. 11. He that toucheth] To teach them to observe Gods cu^se in death, and
to avoid the society of sinful men.

Verse. 17. And running water] Signifying the ashes of Christ's merit, and the
water of his Spirit. See 1 Cor. 6.11. Ioh. 7.38, 39.

Verse. 18. Shall take hyssop] No benefit by Christ, without mortification of
sin.

CHAP. XX.
Verse. 1. I In the first moneth] To wit, of their fortieth year, after they
came out of Egypt. For from this Chapter, to the end of Deuteronomy, are
described the passages of the last year, only of their journeying in the
wilderness: little being regarded, of the thirty eight years, since the Spies
report. [And Miriam dyed there] A good woman, and of great use to the people in
their travells, Mic. 6.4. But once she raised a great storm, against her
brothers wife, Chap. 12.1. about precedence, probably: as did likewise in this
kingdom, Anne Stanhop Duchess of Sommerset, against Katherine Parre, Life of
Edw. 6. page 81. Camb. Elis. fol. 356.
Queen Dowager, wife to her husbands brother, the Lord Admiral, in the days
of King Edward the sixth. This Anne dyed Anno Dom. 1587, being 99 years of
age. Miriam could be no less, likely, then 130; taking her to be the same, that
was set to watch what would become of Moses, when he was laid out in an Ark of
bulrushes, Exodus 2.4.

Ver 3. And the people chod] Wanting both water and patience, they broke the
peace with their Superiors. See the Note on Chap. 15. verse. 15.

Verse. 4. And why have ye brought up] See how this new generation does
patrissare: this is but the old coccysmus of those ancient Malcontents, Exodus
17.2. So much the worse in these, because they made no better use of Gods
dealing with their fathers, Dan. 5.22.

Verse. 5. Neither is there any water to drink] Thirst, a most eager appetite,
eneagreth their affections, and makes them thus hot with Moses.

Verse. 8. Take the rod] God puts up their rebellion, and satisfies their thirst
by a miracle. [Speak unto the rock] He is not bidden now to smite it; as once,
Exodus 17.6. which because he did unbidden, God was deeply displeased, as some
are of opinion.

Verse. 9. And Moses took the rod] The same rod, that once smote the river, to
destroy the Egyptians. The same word, is a savor of life to believers, 2 Cor.
2.16.
and of death to unbelievers.

Verse. 10. Hear now ye rebels] They could hardly hear; for the belly has no
ears; and their tongues scarce knew, to utter any language, but that of
Sampson; Give me water, or I dye, Jud. 15.18. But why did Mosos speak to them,
when he should have spoken to the rock only? verse. 8. This was ill; but worse
to speak so unadvisedly: He struck at the rock, and, as ready almost to split
against it, he makes two arguments against it. 1. Hear now ye rebels. q.d. Will
the Lord ever give water to such rebels? 2. Shall we give you water out of the
rock? will that ever be done? To fetch fire out of a flinty rock, is far more
likely; but to distill water out of it, how can that be done? Lo Moses is
staggered, Bucolc.
and now at a stand. Ade^ nihil est in nobis magnum, quod non queat minui; the
strongest faith, much assailed, may flag, and hang the wing. The best carry
their treasure, but in earthen vessels; which dashing against the rock of
unbelief, miseras rimas ducunt, etc. leake pitifully.

Verse. 11. He smote the rock twice] In a great heat, and pang of passion.
Horat.
-- qui non moderabitur irae, Infectum velit esse dolor quod suaserit, et men's.
Sometimes both grace and wit, are asleep in the holiest and wariest breasts.
The best may be mis-carried by their passions, to their cost.

And the water came out abundantly] This cleaving of the hard rock, was a work
of Omnipotency, Psalm. 78.15. The works of God are, Luther.
in contrariis mediis. This rock was Christ, 1 Cor. 10.4. fitly compared to a
rock. 1. For despicable appearance, Isai. 53.2, 3. 2. Next, for exaltation, and
advancement. 3. For firmness and stability, Mat. 16.18. 4. For scandal, and
offense to the wicked, Rou^. 9.32. 5. For weight and danger, Mat. 21.44. [And
their beasts also] The wicked, in like sort, coming to the Lords Supper, do
receive there panem Domini, not panem Dominum.

Verse. 12. Because ye believed me not] Ye could not conceive, and were not very
willing, that I should show such favor to so undeserving a people: so
measuring my thoughts, by your thoughts, and my ways, by your ways, Isai.
55.8. casting me into a dishonorable mould, as it were; and this publicly,
before all the people. [Therefore ye shall not bring] So God was unto them, a
God that forgiveth, and takes vengeance of their practices, as the Psalmist
says, Psalm. 99.8. Repentance may come too late, in regard of temporal
chastisement, as here it did, Deuteronomy. 3.24, 25.

Verse. 13. And he was sanctified in them] By overcomming their evil with good;
striking the rock for them, when he might justly have stricken them, with utter
destruction. Man's badness interrupteth not the course of Gods goodness; his
unbelief makes not the faith of God without effect, Romans 3.3.

Verse. 14. Thus says thy brother] A brother is born for adversity, Prove.
17.17. and good blood will not belly it self. But a brother offended is harder
to be won, then a strong city: and their contentions, are like the bars of a
castle, Prove. 18.19.

Verse. 16. Sent an Angell] This was Christ: or, (as some would have it) Moses:
like as Phineas is thought, to be that Angel at Bochim, ^udg. 2.1.

Verse. 17. We will not pass] So should a Christian bespeak the world: Let us
pass through thy country; we will neither touch nor taste of thy cates, but go
by the Kings highway; that good old way, that God has scored out unto us;
until we arrive at the key of Canaan, at the Kingdom of Heaven.

Verse. 18. Thou shall not pass] As fearing what so great an army once got in
might do; they are not usually so easily removed. It was therefore great
injustice in Pope Julius, to excommunicate and depose John, King of Navarre, as
an heretic, and public enemy to the Sea Apostolic, because being himself a
Peer of the Realm of France, and having a great part of his patrimony in that
country, he would not suffer the Spaniard (the Popes Champion,) to lead an
army through his country, Guicciard. lib. 2.
against the French, (his Leige-Lord) and deliver to him three of the strongest
castles, he had in his kingdom.

CHAP. XXI.
Verse. 1. ANd took some of them prisoners] (...). sore affliction, worse then
any of those outward crosses that Job suffered, whose captivity therefore, (as
that which comprehended all the rest;) God is said to have turned, Chap. 42.10.
Barbarossa the Turkish General, returned from Tunes, Turk. hist. fol. 750.
toward Constantinople, with such a multitude of poor Christian captives, shut
up so close under hatches, among the excrements of nature, that all the way as
he went, almost every hour, some of them were cast dead overboard. The late
Duke D'Alva, Grimst. hist. of Netherl.
Governor of Flanders, roasted some of his prisoners to death, starved others,
and that even after quarter; saying, though he promised to give them their
lives, he did not promise to find them meat. In our late troubles, it was a
like difficult thing, to find among our enemies, a wicked man in their
prisons, or a godly man out of them: where some were little better used, then
those that are taken by the American Canibals, and are eaten up alive, and by
degrees, to the unutterable aggravation of their horror and torment.

Verse. 2. And Israel vowed a vow] This is the way to prevail with God, as Jacob
found it, Genesis 28.36. Who is therefore called, the father of vows. Concerning
vows, See the Note on that text, Genesis 28.20.

Verse 3. Delivered up the Canaanites] This King Arab, heartened with his former
success, might (as Guicciardine says of Charles the eight of France, Guicciard.
in his expedition against Naples;) come into the field like thunder and
lightning, but go out like a snuff: more then a man at first, less then a
woman at last.

Verse. 4. Discouraged because of the way] So are many in their voyage toward
Heaven, which is an afflicted way, Mat. 7.14. strawed with crosses, Act. 14.22.
Indeed, if men could go to heaven in a fether-bed, or pass e coeno in coelum* a
deliciis ad delicias, (...).
feed on manchet, tread on roses, fly to heaven with pleasant wings, none
should be so forward as they. But to go through fire and through water, Psalm.
66.12. to run with p^tience, the race that is set before them, Heb. 12.1 and
through many tribulations, to enter into Heaven, this they like not. Theotimus
in Ambrose, would rather lose his sight, then his sin: Vale lumen amicum, said
he, when forbidden wine, as naught for his eyes. Beetles love dunghills better
then ointments; and swine love mud, better then a garden: so do swinish
Epicures prefer earth to heaven, etc.

Verse. 5. This light bread] See the Note on Chap. 11.6.

Verse. 6. Fiery Serpents] Heb. Seraphin, from their burning heat, whereby these
ungrateful Israelites, that causelessly cried out of thirst, had somewhat given
them to cry for. Their tongues so full of deadly poison, and set on fire from
hell, are now parched and scorched with venomous heat and torments, the likest
hell of any other. These serpents are here called Seraphims: that old serpent
the devil, can transform himself into an Angel of light.

Verse. 7. Pray unto the Lord] Prayer is the best lever at a dead lift.

Verse. 8. Make thee a fiery serpent] i.e. The similitude of such a one; an
unlikely means to effect such a cure. Yea some write, that it is deadly for
those that are stung with a serpent, to look upon brass. Certain it is, that
this cure was not wrought by any thing in the nature of the brazen serpent, but
by the institution and ordination of God, to be also a type of Christ; a noble
and notable figure of Christ lifted up on the cross, Ioh. 3.16. or rather in
his ordinances, Gal. 3.1. They that looked upon their sores, and not upon the
sign, dyed for it: As those that looked on the sign, though but with one eye,
though but with a squint eye, or but with half an eye, they were healed
presently: So they, that fix their eyes upon their sins only, and not upon
their Savior, despair and dye; but those that look to Christ, being faithful
in weakness, though weak in faith, are sure to be saved: It is, but, look up
and live. Only look up, (as they did that were wounded,) weepingly, wishly,
pitifully, cravingly: See and sigh, look upon him whom you have pierced; let
your sins be, as so many Hazaels, to you; and your hearts, as so many
Hadadrimmons, Zech. 12.10, 11.

Verse. 14. In the book of the wars of the Lord] This book here cited by Moses,
is now either lost, or at least latent. It was not any part of the Canon, (for
God has provided, that not one hair of that sacred head is diminished;) but as
the Chronicles of England, or some famous Poem.

Verse. 16 And I will give them water] Now that they murmured not, they might
have any thing, Psalm. 34.10. Only we must be content to wait Gods time; (Is it
fit to send for the Prince by a post?) or to want that particular mercy, if God
see it meet; being content that God be glorified, though we be not gratified.
Surely if God saw us thus studying his share more then our own, we might have
what we would, and God even think himself beholding to us; as one phraseth it.

Verse. 17. Then Israel sang this song] A sign of that Christian joy, Isai.
12.3, 4.

Verse. 18. The Prince dug the well] Called there-hence Beer-elim, Plin.
i.e. the Well of the mighty ones, Isai. 15.8. Nunquam vilior erat annona
Romae, quam cum terram colerent iidem qui remp. regerent: quasi ganderet terra
laureato vomere scilicet, et aratore triumphali. [With their staves] Those
Ensigns of their honor, they made to be instruments of the common good. See
the Epist. dedicat. set before my Notes upon John.

Verse. 22. Let me pass] See the Note on Chap. 20.17.

Verse. 23. And Sihon would not] He durst not trust them: Deuteronomy. 2.30.
Men muse as they use: God had also hardened his heart, that he might come
forth, to fetch his own destruction. Judgment need not go to find wicked men
out, they run to meet their bane.

Verse. 27. Wherefore they that speak in proverbs] Or by-words, by way of
derision, as Deuteronomy. 28.17. Habac. 2.6. ballad-makers, Poetasters, that penned
popular songs, such as this was.

Verse. 30. We have shot at them] Great swelling words of vanity, uttered by the
conquering Amorites: How much better our Henry the fifth, who after his victory
at Agincourt, gave straight order, Dan. hist. page 101.
that no ballad or song should be made or sung, more then of thanksgiving to
God, for his happy victory: and that nothing that might tend to ostentation, or
boasting of the valiant, or cowardly act of any, should be set forth.

CHAP. XXII.
Verse. 1. IN the Plains of Moab] Once of Moab, then of the Amorites, now of
the Israelites.] Lands and Lordships often change masters; adeo nihil certi est
in rebus humanis, etc. In the greatness of the Turkish Empire is at this day
swallowed up the name and Empire of the Saracens, the most glorious Empire of
the Greeks, the renowned Kingdoms of Macedonia, Peloponnesus, Epirus, Bulgaria,
Servia, Bosnia, Armenia, Cyprus, Syria, Egypt, Judaea, Tunes, Argeirs, Media,
Turk hist. Preface.
Mesopotamia, with a great part of Hungary, as also of the Persian Kingdom; and
(besides all those famous Churches spoken of in Scripture) so much in
Christendom, as far exceeds that which is thereof at this day left; yet, no
doubt, Time shall triumph over this so great a Monarchy, when it shall but then
live by fame, as others now do. It labors with nothing more already, then
with the weightinesse of it self.

Verse. 3. And Moab was distressed] Or, was irked, fretted, vexed: And yet Moab
was allied to Israel, eased by them of a troublesome incroaching neighbor
Sihon, and assured by them, that they would not meddle, or molest them. But
being of a different religion, they were carried with Satanical malice against
Gods people, and sought their ruin. This is the guise of graceless and absurd
men, acted and agitated by the Devil.

Verse. 4. Unto the Elders of Midian] Their neighbors and confederates. These
are called the Dukes of Sihon, as having been subdued by his tyranny, whereof
Israel had now freed them, and meant them no hurt, Number. 31.8. with Josh. 13.21.

And Balac the son of Zippor] A politic and potent Prince, Mic. 6.5. not more
valiant, then vigilant, ingeniose nequam, wittily wicked.

Verse. 5. Balaam the son of Beor] The Devils Spel-man, as one calls him, a
sooth-sayer, or sorcerer, called a Prophet, 2 Pet. 2.16. as false-prophets are
called Diviners, Jer. 27.9.

Verse. 6. Peradventure I shall prevail] Hence he is said to have warred against
Israel, Josh. 24.9. He did not, because he durst not. Sed fieri dicitur, quod
tentatur, aut intenditur, says Ribera, on Amos 9.5.

Verse. 7. With the rewards of divination] Which Jude calls, Jude 11. 2 Pet.
2.15.
the wages of wickedness. The Athenians complained* that Philip, by his gold,
had corrupted the Oracle of Apollo, which now did (...).

Verse. 8. As the Lord shall speak unto me] Good words and wishes, may be found
in hells-mouth; as wholesome sugar may be found in a poisoned cane; and a stone
of great virtue in the head of a toad. The French have a berry, which they
name, We de Spine, The grape of a thorn.

Verse. 9. And God came to Balaam] So he came to Abimelech, to Laban, etc. he
never concredited his word to these, as he did to the holy Prophets, of whom it
is said, The Word of the Lord came to them.

Verse. 13. For the Lord refuseth] Like a mercenary, and one that had a
moneths-mind to the money, he hides from them that part of the answer, that
might have kept them off from coming again to him, viz. Thou shall not curse
the people, for they are blessed; Auri sacra fames, etc.

Verse. 15. And Balac sent yet again] So unweariable are wicked men, in pursuing
and practicing their evil designs. This is check to our dullness for the good of
our souls: Oh how soon said and sated are we! Felix trembles, and yet at the
same instant, covets and expects a bribe from Paul, who had some occasion to
expect repentance of Felix.

Verse. 17. For I will promote thee] Thus Satan tempted our Savior, Matthew. 4.8,
9. and the Pope Luther, offering him a Cardinalship, to hold his tongue; and
proposing unto him the example of Aeneas Sylvius, who casting away his
opinions, became Pope; and of Bessarion of Nice, who of a poor Calover of
Trapezond, Hist. of Coun. of Trent. 73.
became a great renowned Cardinal, and wanted not much of being Pope. But
Luther answered the messenger, Contemptus est a me Romanus and favor and furor;
I care not for the Popes proffers of any preferment. And when one counseled to
try him with money, another more wise answered, Hem, Germana illa bestia non
curat aurum, That Dutch-beast cares not for gold. But Balaam was not a man of
Luthers make.

Verse. 18. I cannot go beyond] Intus Nero, foris Cato: loquitur hic ut Piso,
vivit ut Gallonius: Audi, nemo melius; specta, nemo pejus. A preacher (as
Quintillian says of an Orator) should be Vir bonus dicendi peritus. A
well-spoken and well-deeded person.

Verse 19. Tarry also now this night, etc.] Very loath he was, to forgo so fat a
morsel. His mouth even watered, his fingers itcht to be dealing with Balac. He
therefore detains the messenger, and will try again what may be done for them.

Verse. 20. Rise up and go] God answers him according to the idols of his heart;
bids him go, (since he was set upon it) but at his utmost peril: lik as Solomon
bids the young man follow the ways of his own heart; Eccles. 11.9.
but then follows that stinging But.

Verse. 21. And sadled his asse] Which never runs fast enough after preferment,
till horse and man and all to the Devil.

Verse. 22. And Gods anger] Deus saepe dat iratus quod negat propitius. (...)
[And his two servants were with him] This false Prophet rides not without two
men. Gods Levite had one man, Judge. 19.11. O let not Ministers of the Gospel be
slaves to others, servants to themselves!

Verse. 23. And the ass saw the Angel] Which Balaam saw not; his eyes were put
out with the dust of covetousness, or dazeled at least with the glittering of
the promised promotions.

Verse. 24. But the Angel] If an Angel stand in the way of a sorcerer's sin, how
much more ready are all those heavenly Spirits to stop the miscarriages of Gods
dear children! Surely, as our good endeavors are often hindered by Satan; so are
our evil, by good Angels: else were not our protection equal to our danger, and
we could neither stand nor rise.

Verse. 27. She fell down under Balaam] And so condemned her masters madness, 2
Pet. 2.16. Polybius in his history says, Whereas Man is held the wisest of all
sublunary creatures, to me he seems the most foolish of all other. For
whereas other creatures, when they have once smarted, will come no more there:
(as the Fox returns not rashly to the snare, the Woolf to the pit-fal, the dog
to the cudgel, the horse to the hole where he has been stalked, etc.) solus
homo ab aevo ad aevum peccat, fere in iisdem; Man only falls into the same
offense and mischief from day to day, and will not be warned, till he be
utterly ruined, as it befell Balaam.

Verse. 28. And the Lord opened the mouth of the asse] Fear not therefore thine
own inability and rudeness to reply in a good cause. There is no mouth, into
which God cannot put words; and how often does he choose the weak to confound the
wise? (...) [And she said unto Balaam] The Angel (some think) did speak in the
Ass, as the Devil had done to Eve in the garden.

Verse. 29. I would there were a sword] Pity, but a madman should have a sword;
how much fitter for him were that rod that Solomon speaks of, Prove. 26.3.

Vrs. 32. Because thy way is perverse] Thou art resolved to curse howsoever,
and not to lose so fair a preferment; which he must needs buy at a dear rate,
that pays his honesty for it. Better a great deal lie in the dust, then rise
by such ill principles. I shall shut up with that excellent prayer of
Zuinglius: Deum Opt. Max. precor, ut vias nostras dirigat: ac sicubi simus
Bileami in morem, veritati pertinaciter obluc^at^ri, a^gelum suum opponat,
Zuing. epist. lib. tertio.
qui machae, (...) suoe minis (...) asinum (insci^am^t audaciam dico nostram)
sic ad ma^criam assligat, ut fraclum pedem, hoc est, impurum illicitumque
carnis sensum, auferamus* ne ultra blasphememus nomen Domini Dei nostri.

CHAP. XXIII.
Verse. 1. BVild me here seven altars] Here in Baals high places, Chap. 22.41. A
sinful mixture; such as was that of those Mongrels, 2 King. 17.28, 29. and
their natural Nephews, the Samaritans, Ioh. 4. Ambodexters in their religion,
which being grosser at first, was afterward refined by Manasseh a Iew-Priest,
(such another as Balaam,) that in Alexanders time, made a defection to them,
and brought many Jews with him. Of Constantinus Copronymus it is said, (how
truly I know not,) that he was neither Jew, Heathen, nor Christian, sed
colluviem quandam impietatis, but a hodg-podg of wickedness. And of Redwald
King of the East Saxons (the first that was baptized) Camden reports, that he
had in the same Church, one Altar for Christian Religion, and another for
sacrificing to devils: And a loaf of the same leaven, was that resolute
Rufus, that painted God on the one side of his shield, and the devil on the
other, with this desperate inscription; In ^trumque paratus; Ready for either,
catch as catch may.

Verse. 2. And Balak did] Ready to conform to any religion, so he might obtain
his purposes. So did Henry the fourth of France; but it was his ruin: whiles
he sought the love of all parties, aeque malo ac bono reconciliabilis, (as one
says of him,) he lost all: Whiles he stood to the true religion, he was Bonus
Orbi, (as one wittily anagrammatized his name Borbonius,) but when he fell from
it, Orbus boni. And surely, he was not like to stand long to the truth, who at
his best had told Beza, Pelagose non ita commissurus esset, quin quando
liberct, pedem refer posset.
that he would launch no further into the sea, then he might be sure to return
safe to the haven: some countenance he would show to religion, but yet so, as
he would be sure to save himself. God abhors these lukewarm Neuter-passives,
that are inter coelum terramque penduli, that halt between two, that commit
Idolatry, between the porch and the altar, with those five and twenty
miscreants, Ezekiel. 8.16.

Verse. 4. I have prepared seven Altars] He boasts of his devotions, and so
thinks to demerit Gods favor: So those hypocrites in Esaias, Chap. 58.3. Non sic
deos coluimus, ut ille nos vinceret; we have not so served the gods, as that
the enemy should have the better of us, said the Emperor Antoninus, the
Philosopher.

Verse. 5. And the Lord put a word in Balaams mouth] The words thus put into his
mouth, do but pass from him, they are not polluted by him, because they are not
his: as the Trunk through which a man speaks, is not more eloquent, for the
speech uttered through it: Balaam did not eat Gods word, as Jeremy did, Chap.
15.16. nor believe what he had spoken, as David, and after him Saint Paul did,
Psalm. 116.10. 2 Cor. 4.13. No more did Plato, Seneca, and other Heathens, in
their divine sentences,

Verse. 7. And he took up his parable] Or, pithy and powerful speech, uttered
in numerous and sententious terms; and taken among the Heathen, for
prophecyes, or oracles: poemata pro vaticiniis, etc. Poets were taken for
Prophets, Tit. 1.2. and Poems, for prophecyes. Hence their (...), wherein,
opening a book of Homer, Hesiod, etc. they took upon them, by the first verse
they lighted upon, to divine. Tragedians also, for their p^rables, or
Master-sentences, were highly esteemed of old; insomuch as, after the discomfit
of the Athenians in Sicily, they were releeved, who could repeat somewhat of
Euripides.

Out of Aram] Aram Naharim, or Mesopotamia; so called, because it is situate
betwixt those two rivers of paradise, Tigris and Euphrates: This was Abraham's
country; where, whiles he was it it, he served strange gods, Josh. 24.2.

Verse. 8. How shall I curse] He had a good mind to it; but did not, because he
durst not: God stood over him with a whip, as it were; the Angel, with a sword
in his hand, could not be forgotten by him. Virtus nolentium nulla est.

Verse. 9. From the top of the rocks I see him] And have no power to hurt him.
She heard me without daunting; I departed not without terror, Camb. Elis.
when I opened the conspiracy against her life; howbeit, clothed with the best
art I could, said Parry the traitor, concerning Queen Elizabeth: Achilles was
said to be Styge armatus, but Israel was deo armatus, and therefore extra
ja^tum.

Lo the people shall dwell alone] That they might have no meddling with the
heathen. God would not have them lie near the seacoasts, (for the Philistims
lay between them and the sea,) le^t they should by commerce wax prouder, as
Tyrus did, Ezekiel 27.28. and learn foreign fashions. See Esther. 3.8. Hence
Iudae^, (though part of the continent,) is called an Island, Isai. 20.6.

Verse. 10. Let me dye the death] But he was so far from living the life of the
righteous, that he gave pestilent counsel against the lives of Gods Israel:
and though here in a fit of companction, Chap. 31.8.
he seem a friend; yet he was afterward slain, by the sword of Israel, whose
happiness he admireth, and desires to share in. Bern.
Carnales non curant quaerere, quem tamen desiderant invenire, cupieuses
consequi, sed non et sequi. Carnal men care not to seek that which they would
gladly find, etc. some faint desires, and short-winded wishes, may be
sometimes found in them; but the mischief is, they would break Gods chain,
sunder happiness from holiness, salvation from sanctisication, the end from the
means; they would dance with the devil all day, and then sup with Christ at
night: live all their lives-long in Dalilah's lap, and then go to Abraham's
bosom, when they dye. The Papists have a saying, that a man would desire to
live in Italy (a place of great pleasure,) but to dye in Spain; because there
the Catholic religion (as they call it,) is so sincerely professed. And a
heathen being asked, whether he would rather be Socrates, a painful
Philosopher, or, Croesus, a wealthy king? answered, that for this life he would
be Croesus, but for the life to come, Socrates. Thus all men wish well to
Heavens happiness: but bad men find no more comfort of it, then a man does of
the Sun, when it shines not in his own Horizon. Balaam might here be compared
to a stranger, that traveling a far country, sees the state and magnificence
of the court, and is admitted into the presence chamber, which greatly does
affect him, though himself have no part or interest in the King. See the Note
on Chap. 24.5.

Verse. 11. What have thou done unto me?] Hereby it appears, that Balac in
serving of God, by building Altars, and offering sacrifices, did but serve
himself upon God; as Ephraim bore fruit to himself, Hos. 10.1. and did ye fast
to me, even to me? Zech. 7.5.

Verse. 12. Must I not take heed to speak] See how these hypocrites mock one
with another. Potest Augur Augurem videre, Cic. de Divinat. lib. 2.
and non ridere? said Cato.

V. 13. From Whence thou may see them] And overlook them, as they say,
witches do. (...): quasi (...): Nescio quis teneros, etc. In Hebrew the same
word signifies, both an eye and a fountain; to show, that from the eye, as a
fountain, flows both both sin and misery.

Verse. 16. Put a Word] See the Note on verse. 5.

Verse. 18. Rise up Balac] The greatest potentate, must reverently attend to the
word of God. Ehud, (though a fat unweldy man,) stood up to hear a message from
God, Iud. 3.20. Eusebius. Act. and Mon.
So did Constantine the great, and our Edward the sixth hear sermons standing,
and usually uncovered.

Verse. 19. That he should repent] When at any time God is said to repent, it is
Mutatio rei, non dei, effectus non affectus, facti non consilii, it is not a
change of his will, but of his work.

Verse. 20. Behold, I have, etc.] A bad man, may bless by command from God, and
he say Amen to it. The precious stone Lyncurie, may issue out of the body of
the Lynx, an unclean and spotted beast.

Verse. 21. He has not beheld iniquity] Of this place of Scripture, we may say
as we did of another: This verse had been easy, had not Commentatours made it
so knotty. The sense I like best is, that at this time, when Balac hired
Balaam, there was no peecatum flagrans, no foul sin of that people, flaming in
the eyes of God, or stinking in his nostrils; and therefore there could be no
enchantment against them, verse. 23. Whence that devilish counsel of his to
Balak, to set fair women a fore them, to entice them to adultery and Idolatry,
and so to put them under Gods displeasure. But what strange inferences are
those from this text, that God sees no sin in his elect; that the very being of
their sins, is abolished out of his sight; that God is never displeased with
his people, though they fall into adultery, or the like sin, no not with a
fatherly displeasure? etc.

CHAP. XXIIII.
Verse. 1. HE went not as at other times] As being resolved to curse howsoever,
and without Gods leave; yea al despito di Dio (as that mouth of blasphemy Pope
Juli^s the third, Act. and Mon. fol. 1417.
once said in another case) to take his own course, whatever came of it.

He set his face] As fully bent to do it, and nothing should hinder him; (...).
So our Savior Christ steadfastly set his face to go to Jerusalem, Luke 9.51.
He steeled his forehead against all oppositions.

Verse. 2. And the spirit of God came upon him] A common spirit, Mat. 7.
a spirit of Prophecy: have not we Prophesied in thy name; said those
cast-awayes. In impiis quandoque sunt dona Dei, sine Deo. Psalm. 68.18.
God gives gifts to men, yea to the rebellious, for the use of his Church. A
blind man may bear a torch in his hand, whereby others may receive benefit,
though himself receive none, so here.

Verse. 3. Whose eyes are open] And therefore can speak it of a certainty: for
what is more sure then sight? q.d. Israel shall be blessed, and I will stand to
it. He is blessed, yea and he shall be blessed, Genesis 28.33.

Verse. 4. Falling into a trance] As was usual with the Prophets, Genesis 15. Dan.
8.17, etc. 2 Pet. 1.21. See the Note there; they were carried out of, and
beyond themselves. And still Amor Dei est ecstaticus, neque juris Se sinit esse
sui. --

Verse. 5. How goodly are thy tents] It fares with an hypocrite, as with a
surveyor of lands, that takes an exact compass of other men's grounds, of which
he shall never enjoy a foot. See Chap. 23.10.

Verse. 6. As the trees of lign-aloes] An odoriferous sweet smelling tree,
growing in Arabia, which is said to be a country so sweet, that swine cannot
live in it.

Verse. 7. His seed shall be in many waters] He shall sow in locis irriguis, (as
men are bid to cast their bread, their alms upon the Waters, upon the poor,
as) upon a well-watered soil* ( Eccles. 11.1.) such as is the land of Egypt,
watered by (...); which makes the ground so fruitful, that they do but throw in
the seed, and have four rich harvests in less the^ (...), B^unt's voyage into
Le^^^t.
says One that had been there. [ He shall (...) King of the Amalekites, who
was then (...) of those parts; and did, happily, think as (...) that proud Prince
of Tire, Ezekiel. 28. or, as the great (...) of ^^taia; of whom it is reported,
that every day, after health (...), he causes the trumpets to be sounded; by
that sign giving leave to other Princes of the earth, to go to dinner.

Verse. 8. God brought him forth out of Egypt] This he tells Balac, in answer to
that complaint of his, Chap. 22.5. Behold, there is a people come out of Egypt,
q.d. Come they (...), but not of themselves, but by God; who said, Out of (...)
have I called my son.

Verse. 9. He lay down as a Lion] See the Note on Genesis 49.9.

And cursed is he] Here the sorcerer pronounces a curse upon himself; for he
desired to curse Israel, and therefore in Gods account he did it.

Qui, quia non licuit, non facit, ille facit. Ovid.
Verse. 10. And he smote his hands together] So does God at the covetous person,
such as Balaam was, Ezekiel. 22.13. Behold, I have smitten my hands at thy
dishonest gain, which thou have made, etc.

Verse. 13. I cannot go beyond] Here was colored covetousness, or a cloak of
covetousness, 1 Thessalonians. 2.5. See the Note there. God lets out the tedder to
wicked men for a time, and then calls them back with shame enough to their
task; lets them have the ball on the foot, till they come almost to the goal,
and then defeats them of their great hopes; as he did this sinful couple. Balac
had not his will, nor Balaam his wages; God fooled them both; pulling the
morsel out of their mouths, that they had well-nigh dev^ured.

Verse. 14. I will advertise thee] viz. what to do, as he did, Number. 31.16.
Parasites propound to Princes, suavia poti^s quam sana consilia, pleasing but
pestilent counsel, and so do officiously mischieve them; as the dragon is said
to bite the Elephants ear, and there-hence to suck his blood; that being the
only place, that he cannot reach with his trunk to defend.

Verse. 16. And knew the knowledge of the most High] The eye may be clear, while
the hand is palsied. Balaam's great knowledge was but intuitiva, standing in
speculation; it was not directiva vitae: he knew but by hearsay, as a blind
man knows colors; his light served but to light him into utter da^kness.
Neronis Quantus artifex pereo quadrabit in te peritum, and periturum.

Verse. 17. I shall see him] So shall every eye, and those also that pierced
him, Rev. 1.17. but not as Abraham saw him, and rejoiced; nor as Job, Chap.
19.25, 27. The pure in heart, only, shall see him to their comfort; as pure
glass or Crystal lets in the light of the Sun. Some wicked have greater common
gifts then the godly; as many metals are brighter and more orient then the
heavens; yet as those metals are not so fit, either to receive, or convey the
light of the Sun; so neither are the wicked so fit, either to take, or give
toothers, the knowledge of salvationby the remission of their sins.

A star out of Jacob] Jesus Christ the true Morning-Starr, Revel. 22.16. Joh.
1.9. that those Wisemen, Matthew. 2. had heard of, (probably) either from the
Chaldaean Sibyll, or from the Jews in the Babylonish captivity; or from this
Prophecy of Balaam: for he was an East-country-man, and utters here a very
clear and comfortable Prophecy of the Messiah, by whom himself received no
benefit. Cant. 4.12.
Thus the Church (Christ's garden enclosed) may be watered through a wooden
gutter, the Sun give comfortable light thorough a sluttish window; the field
may be well sowed with a dirty hand; the bell call us to the Church, though it
never enter it self, but by the sound; the Well may yield excellent water,
though it have much mnd, etc.

And destroy all the children of Seth] Heb. unwall; that is, conquer and
subdue. Christ, by those rams-horns, by the foolishness of preaching, pulls
down strong holds, 2 Cor. 10.4, 5.

Verse. 18. And Edom shall be a possession] This was, literally, fulfilled in
David, 1 Chronicles. 18.13. Psalm. 60.8. but spiritually, and especially in Christ,
Esaias 63.1, 2, etc. who shall shortly subdue the Romish Edomite, 2 Thessalonians. 2.8.

Verse. 19. And shall destroy him] David in the history, 1 King. 11.15, 16.
Christ in the mystery, Obad. 18. even all the Antichristian rout and rabble,
Revel. 19.21.

Verse. 20. First of the Nations] Or, principal; see verse. 7.

Verse. 21. The Kenites] i. e. The Midianites, Judge. 1.16. and 4.11. mingled
among the Amalekites, 1 Samuel 15.6, for whom they are, and fare the worse; as
Hamath did for Damascus, Zech. 9.2.

Verse. 22. Until Ashur] Who, together with the Jews, carried captive all the
neighbor Nations, Ier. 25.9.

Verse. 23. Who shall live when, etc.] The Assyrian (that rod of Gods wrath,
that overflowing scourge,) shall take all before him, shall bereave millions of
their lives; as Caesar is said to have done: and of Mahomet the first, Emperor
of the Turks, Turk, hist.
it is storied, that he had been, in his time, the death of 800000 men.

Verse. 24. From the coast of Chittim] From Greoce and Italy. Those four great
Monarchs had their times and their turns; their ruins as well as their rise.

Verse. 25. Returned to his place] Homewards he went; but staid amongst the
Midianites, and soon after came back to them, to receive money of them, says
Chazkuni; when he heard say of the plague, which had been in Israel, by his
counsel: But as Shimei sought his servants, and lost his life; so Balaam, etc.

CHAP. XXV.
Verse. 1. TO commit whoredom] By the wicked counsel of Balaam, who knew well,
that no one means has more enriched hell, then beautiful faces; and therefore
taught Balac to lay this stumbling block before the children of Israel; and is
therein held, by some, to have sinned against the Holy Ghost. Howsoever, he
goes out in a stench, as it is usually said of his Master, the Devil.

Verse. 2. Unto the sacrifices of their gods] Unto their idolfeasts; for S^ne
Cerere and Libero friget Venus; Gluttony is the gallery that leachery walks
thorough. [And bowed down to their gods] Nemo repent sit turpissimus, by
degrees, they were drawn to open idolatry. If a man's foot slip into hell-mouth,
it is a miracle if he stop ere he come to the bottom. Principiis obsta dally
not with the Devil; sin is very insinuative; and the old Serpent, if he once
get in his head, will quickly wind in his whole body.

Verse. 3. joined himself to Baal-Peor] Separated himself to that shame, Hos.
9.10. that abominable and shameless service of Priapus, (as Hierome and Isidore
understand it) as Maachah the mother of Asa, seems to have done, 1 King. 15.
and other filthy persons, whose fashion was, as soon as their sacrifice was
ended, to step aside into the grove of their god, and there, like bruit beasts,
promiscuously to satisfy their lusts, etc. Vah scelus infandum!

Verse. 4. Take all the heads] The chieftains; their greatness might not bear
them out. Potentes potenter torquebuntur. Hell is paved, said One of old, with
the bald-pates of shavelings, and with the crests of great Commanders; who had
ever opposed with crest and breast whatsoever stood in the way of their sins
and lusts.

Verse. 5. Unto the Judges of Israel] Those of them that had not defiled
themselves; else with what face could they punish others? or look upon those,
that before their faces had been hanged up against the Sun, whose destruction
was for ever to be remembered, Mic. 6.5.

Verse. 6. In the sight of Moses] This man's face was hatched over with detestable
impudence; he thought, it may be, that being so great a man, Plin. lib. 7.
none durst meddle with him. Pliny reports of Proculus Caesar, that by him,
viginti virgins intra dies quindecim foetum conceperunt. Lewis the 11. of
France, inviting our Edward 4. to the French Court, Recte erit cognate, says
He, Comineus, l. 6.
jucundi vivemus and suaviter, teque oblectabis cum lectissimis foeminis, etc.
(He should have added, But know, that for all these things, thou must come to
Judgment: that would have, happily, Eccles. 11.
allayed his lust, cooled his courage. And not have come in with his) Adhibebo
tibi Cardinalem Borbonium; is, quicquid peccaris, pro ea quam habet potestate,
facile expiabit, Thou shall take thy full pleasure, and then my Cardinal shall
give thee full pardon.

Verse. 7. He rose up] An heroical act, by an extraordinary motion; as was also
that of Ehud: and therefore is not to be made a rule of practice; as Burchet
conceited; when by this example, he held himself warranted, to kill a great
personage in this Kingdom, whom he took to be a vicious man, and Gods enemy.

Verse. 8. And thrust both of them thorow] So they dyed in the flagrancy of
their lust: as did likewise One of the Popes, taken in the act, and slain
together with his harlot, by the husband of the adulteress. Mention is likewise
made, by William Malmsbury, of one Walter Bishop of Hereford, Anno 1060. his
offering to force his Sempster. She resisted what she might, Godw. Catal.
but finding him too strong for her, thrust her sheers into his belly, and gave
him his deaths-wound.

Verse. 9. Twenty and four thousand] Twenty and three thousand, says S. Paul, 1
Cor. 10.8. insisting only in the special punishment of the people, who were
provoked to sin by that other thousand, their Princes, as ver. 4. And all to
show, Jun. Parallel.
quam frigida and jejuna sit eorum defensio, etc. says Junius, how poorly they
plead for themselves, that think to excuse their sins, by alleging the
examples of their superiors.

Verse. 13. Because he was zealous for his God] Enraged (as a jealous man) with
a holy hatred of sin, and inflamed with love to God, quem aliter amare non
didicerat, as Chrysostom speaks of Basil. Non amat, qui non Zelat, says
Augustine, Contra Adamant. c. 13.
He is no friend to God, that is not zealous for him. To one that desired to
know what kind of man Basil was, there was presented in a dream, (says the
history) a pillar of fire, with this Motto, Talis est Basilius, Basil is such a
one; all on a light fire for God.

Verse. 14. A Prince of a chief house] Whom yet Phineas spared not; as neither
did John Baptist spare Herod; nor Nathan, David; nor Bishop Lambert, King
Pippin, Epitome hist. Gall. page 30.
whom he freely reproved to his face for his adultery, Anno 798. though he were
afterward therefore slain by the harlots brother. Odo Severus the 22.
Archbishop of Canterbury, Anno 934. dealt like plainly with King Edwin,
excommunicated his Concubines, and caused one of them, on whom the King doted
unreasonable, Godw. Catal. ^
to be fetched out of the court by violence, burnt her in the forehead with a
hot iron, and banished her into Ireland.

Verse. 17. Vex the Midianites] As more malicious and mischievous then the
Moabites; as appears, 1. By their detaining of 'Balaam, when the Moabites
dismissed him in great displeasure. 2. By the wickedness of their women, who by
Cozbi, may seem to have been meretrices meretricissimae, Lib. 2. tum.
such as afterward was Julia. Messalina, and that Romish Lucretia, Concubine
to Pope Alexander 6. of whom Pontanus, Hoc tumulo dormit Lucretia nomine, sedre
Thais Alexandri filia, sponsa, nurus,


Verse. 18. For they vex you with their wiles] Not with their wars; they out-wit
you, overreach you by counterfeit courtesy, cutthroat kindness; they have
deceived you into those sistersins, fornication and idolatry, which God has so
severely punished.

CHAP. XXVI.
Verse. 2. FRom twenty] See the note on Chap. 1.3.

Verse. 9. Which were famous] But for no goodness. Tubulus (who was the Roman
Praetor, a little before Tullies time) was homo tam projecte improbus, Lips.
Antiq. lection.
ut ejus nomen non hominis sed vitii esse videretur, so wicked a wretch, that
he seemed to be wickedness it self. Portius Latro calls Catiline, sacrarium
libidinum, portentum scelerum, gurgitem and sentinam flagitiorum, etc. a sink
of sinfulness. And Josephus says of Antipater, that his life was no better
then a mystery of iniquity. These men were famous, or rather infamous, for
their slagitious practices, notoriously naught, signally sinful.

Verse. 10. And they became a sign] An example of that Rule, that Great sins
bring great plagues; as Herodotus has it, speaking of the destruction of Troy,
Aliorum perditio, tua sit cautio, Enjoy other men's madness. Discite justitiam
moniti, etc. Let all that behold me, beware; this was written upon the statue
of Sennacherib, as says Herodotus.

Verse. 11. The children of Korah dyed not] As being either innocent or
penitent; for, Aut poenitendum, aut pereundum, Luke 13.3.

Verse. 44. The family of the Jesuites] Serrarius will needs derive the name
(Jesuits) from the 24. verse of this chapter, (it is wonder how he missed of
this plainer text) Jesuits quasi Jashubites: Like as Erasmus found Friars in
St. Paul's time, inter falsos fratres, amongst the false brethren. In
Salamanca, a Friar would prove, that the name of the Virgin Mary was spoken of,
Stella, de modo concionandi, cap. 6.
Genesis 1. God called the gathering together of the waters, Maria. Doctor Poynes
writes, that it was foretold in the Old Testament, that the Protestants were a
malignant Church, alleging, 2 Chr. 24.19. Mittebatque prophet as ut
reverterentur ad Dominum, quos protestants illi audire nolebant. Preface to
his Book of the Sacrament.
We may with far more show of reason, fetch the name of Protestants (retained
also by their Doway translation) from that text, then they can from this, the
name of Jesuits, alias Jebusites.

CHAP. XXVII.
Verse. 3. But dyed in his own sin] i. e. By a natural and an ordinary death,
not by a special plague, as that Arch-rebel Korah. Death is the just hire of
the least sin, Romans 6. ult. But some evildoers, God does not only put to
death, but also hangs them up in gibbets, as it were, for public notice and
admonition.

Verse. 4. Give unto us therefore a possession] This plea for a part in a land
not yet conquered, is a proof of their faith, and could not but encourage
others. Such a masculine faith, was that of Mrs. Anne Askew, Martyr, who thus
subscribed her confession, Written by me Anne Askew, Act. and Mon. fol. 1128.
that neither wishes for death, nor fears his might; and as merry as one
that is bound for heaven. I will not bid you good night, (said Hellen Stirk,
Scotchwoman, to her husband, at the place where they both suffered Martyrdom,)
for we shall suddenly meet in the heavenly Canaan. And was it not by the force
of her faith, Ib. 1154.
(that substance of things hoped for, the evidence of things not seen, Heb.
11.1.) that Crispina gaudebat, cum tenebatur, cum audiebatur, Aug. in Psalm. 137.
cum damnabatur, cum ducebatur.

Verse. 7. And thou shall cause the inheritance] Let the French defend their
Salique law as they can. It was a witty Essay of him, who styled women, the
second Edition of the Epitome of the whole world; witness Artemisia, Zenobia,
Blandina, the Lady Jane Gray, (whose excellent beauty, adorned with all variety
of virtues, as a clear sky with stars, as a Princely Diadem with jewels, gave
her the style of Eruditionis, pietatis, and modestiae delicium,) and Queen
Elizabeth, in whom, besides her sex, there was nothing woman-like, or weak: as
if (what Philosophy says) the souls of those noble creatures, had followed the
temperament of their bodies; which consist of a frame of rarer rooms, of a more
exact composition then man's does; and (if place be any privilege,) we find
theirs built in Paradise, when man's was made out of it. Besides, in Christ
Jesus there is neither male nor female, but all are one, (souls having no
sexes;) and whosoever are Christ's, are Abraham's seed, and heirs according to
the promise, Gal. 3.28, 29.

Verse. 11. A statute of judgment] A standing law, a standard for all cases of
like kind, in that policy at least; for we cannot consent to Carolostadius,
who contended, in foro jus ex Mose dicendum esse, that all other national and
municipal laws were to be abolished; and that all courts were now to pass
sentence according to Moses's laws. Hic non intellexit vim and naturam
Christianae libertatis; This man knew not the extent of Christian liberty,
says Melancthon.

Verse. 12. See the land] It was somewhat, to see; but oh how fain would he have
entered the Land, and could not! we shall have in heaven, not only vision, but
fruition; we have it already in Capite-tenure, in Christ our head and husband;
who will not be long without us: it being part of his heaven, that we shall be
where he is, Ioh. 17.24. and enjoy God, which is heaven it self: whence in
Scripture, God is called Heaven; I have sinned against heaven. Malim praesente
Deo esse in inferno, quam abseute Deo, in Coelo. Luth. in Genesis 30.
And I had rather be in Hell, and have God present; then in Heaven, and God
absent, says Luther.

Verse. 13. Gathered to thy people] To that great Panegyris, the general
Assembly and Church of the firstborn in heaven, Heb. 12.23. to that glorious
Amphitheatre, where the Saints shall see and say, (...), etc. as Chrysostom
has it; Look, yonder is Peter, and that is Paul, etc. we shall sit down with
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob; have communion with them, not only as godly men, but
as Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob.

Verse. 14. For ye rebelled] Sin may rebel in the Saints, but not reign; neither
is it they that rebel, but sin that dwells in them; dwells, but not
domineereth.

Verse. 16. The God of the spirits of all flesh] Thou, Lord, that know the
hearts of all men, Act. 1.24. See the Note there. Artificers know well the
nature and properties of their own work. Deus intimior nobis intimo nostro.

CHAP. XXVIII.
Verse. 2. MY offering] He is owner of all; and of his own we give him, (...),
said that great Emperor. [And my bread] Called their bread for their souls,
that is, the bread for their natural sustenance, common bread; when not rightly
offered. So Ier. 7.21. God, in scorn, calls their sacrifice, flesh, ordinary
flesh, such as is sold in the shambles. So at the Lords Supper, impenitent
communicants receive no more then the bare elements; panem Domini; Aug.
but not panem Dominum. [In their due season] Which for 38. years they had
intermitted. Get a settlement, or Sabbath of spirit; or else God shall be but
ill (if at all) served.

Verse. 3. This is the offering] See the Note on Exodus 29.38, 39.

Verse. 9. And on the Sabbath day] Every day should be a Sabbath to the Saints,
in regard of ceasing to do evil, learning to do well: but on the
Seventh-day Sabbath our devotion should be doubled. 'Debet totus dies festivus
a Christiano expendi in operibus sanctis, said Robert Grosthead Bishop of
Lincoln, In decalog. praecep. 30.
long since. The whole Sabbath should be spent in Gods service, Psalm. 92.
titled a Psalm for the Sabbath, mentions morning and evening performances,
verse. 2. Variety of duties, may very well take up the whole day with delight.
Besides, God gives us fix whole days. Now to sell by one measure, and buy by
another, is the way to a curse.

Verse. 11. And in the beginning of your moneths] Thus they had their daily,
weekly, monthly, yearly addresses unto God, that they might ever be in
communion with him, and conformity unto him, by this continual intercourse: On
the New Mons they rested, Amos 8.5. feasted, 1 Samuel 20.5. heard the Word, etc.
2 King. 4.29.

Verse. 17, 18, 19, etc.] See the Notes on Exodus 12.18. and on Levit. 23.7, etc.

CHAP. XXIX.
Verse. 1. ANd in the seventh moneth] This Sabbath-moneth (as it were) had as
many feasts in it, as were celebrated in all the year besides. So that, as the
Sabbath is the Queen of days, so was this of months. [It is a day of blowing]
See the Note on Levit. 23.24.

Verse. 7. And ye shall have] See Levit. 16.19. with the Notes.

Verse. 12. And on the fifteenth] See Levit. 23.34, 35, etc. with the Notes.
There the feasts were prescribed, and here the sacrifices belonging to them are
described.

Verse. 17. And on the second day ye shall offer twelve, etc.] In every of these
seven-dayes-sacrifices, one bullock is abated: Hereby the Holy Ghost might
teach them their duty, to grow in grace, and increase in sanctification: that
their sins decreasing, the number of their sacrifices (whereby atonement was
made for their sins) should also decrease daily. Or it might signify a
diminishing and wearing away of the legal offerings, etc. as One well
observes; Hac caeremonia significabat Deus gratiam suam de die in diem
crescere, it a nempe ut minuatur vetus homo, and novus augeatur, etc. (says
Alsted) till the very ruins of Satan's castles be (as most of our old Castles
are) almost brought to ruin.

Verse. 18. After the manner] That is, in manner and form aforesaid. The Manner
is that that makes or marrs the action; as a good suite may be marred in the
making, so a good duty: there may be malum opus in bona materia. Jehu's zeal
was rewarded as an act of justice, quoad substantiam operis; and punished as an
act of policy, quoad modum agendi, for the perverse end. Yea David, for failing
in a ceremony only, though with an honest heart, suffered a breach instead of a
blessing, 1 Chronicles. 15.17. Idolaters also went on in their own manner, Amos
8.14. as their idol-Priests prescribed, The manner of Beersheba lives; that
is, the form of rites of the worshipping in Beersheba, as the Chaldee
paraphraseth.

CHAP. XXX.
Verse. 1. ANd Moses spoke unto the heads] Because they were in place of
judicature; and had power, either to bind^ men to their vows, or set them at
liberty.

Verse. 2. If a man vow a vow unto the Lord] God is the proper object of a vow,
Psalm. 76.11. Papists vow to saints, Relation of West. relig. sect. 4.
both themselves (as to Francis, Austin, Dominick, etc.) and other things, as
pilgrimages, oblations, etc. Our Lady (as they call her) of Loretto, has her
Churches so stuffed with vowed presents and memories, as they are fain to hang
their cloisters and churchyards with them. This is sacriledg, yea it is
idolatry.

To hind his soul with a bond] Which none ought to do, but such as. 1. Are
free, or have the consent of their governors. 2. Such as have knowledge and
judgment, to discern of a vow, or oath, Eccles. 5.3, 5. 3. Are conscientious,
as Jacob, Hannah, etc. Not such votaries as Herod, Mat. 14.7. those Assassines,
Act. 23.14. those Idolaters, Ier. 44.27. [He shall not break his word] If he
do, he will make a great breach in his conscience, and crack his comfort
exceedingly: better not vow, then not pay, Eccles. 5.4. It is a sin, as bad or
worse then perjury: and God takes it heavily at men's hands, Ier. 34.10, 11.

Verse. 4. And her father shall hold his peace] Qui tacet, consentire videtur; a
rule in civil law, silence is a kind of consent.

Then all her vows shall stand] Provided, that she vow. 1. Such things as are
lawful, and warrantable by the word; for to vow to do evil, is an utter
abomination, as Act. 23.14. Deuteronomy. 23.18. 2. Such things as are possible, and in
her power, either naturally, or by the assistance of Gods grace, promised to
her: Such is not the popish vowing of virginity, since, omnes non capiant hoc,
all men cannot contain. Their vows of continency, breed all manner of
incontinency in their Clergy.

Verse. 5. But if her father disallow her] Those that vow Monastical obedience,
renounce all duty to their parents, and service to their country. Parents are
our (...), as a heathen said, our household gods, as it were; and have power to
disannull, or ratify the vows of their children: but the ^apists are true
heirs to the Pharisees, who taught not to honor father or mother, Mat. 15.6.
and so do make the Commandment of God, of none effect, by their tradition.
Full well have they done it, Mark 7.9. But what cannot they do? The Pope, says
Cardinal Bellarmine; Lib. 4. de Pontif. Romans
potest de injustitia facere justitiam, ex nihilo aliquid, ex virtute vitium:
he can make righteousness of unrighteousness, Sleidan. Com.
something of nothing, vice of virtue; And it seems so indeed by his practice.
For when the Cardinals meet to choose a Pope, they make a vow, whosoever is
chosen, he shall swear to such articles as they make. And Sleidan says, the
Pope is no sooner chosen, but he breaks them all; and checks their insolences,
as if they went about to limit his power, to whom all power is given, both in
heaven and earth.

Verse. 6. And if she had at all an husband] Hannah's vow, 1 Samuel 1.11. was
made, either by the consent of her husband, or else by peculiar instinct from
God.

Verse. 13. To afflict her soul* This is one instance of what she may vow. She
may curb wanton flesh, from the use of things lawful in themselves, but
hurtful to her; and that by a vow, as did the Rechabites, Ier. 35.8, 9.10.
which the devil seeing, will despair; for vows are as exorcismes, to allay
our rebellious spirits, and as cords to hamper our treacherous hearts, when
they would slip the collar, and detrect the yoke. In short, a man may lawfully
vow a thing that is either a part of Gods worship, (as to fast once a month
before the Sacrament, to pray so many times a day, etc.) or a furtherance
thereof; as to found a lecture, build a college, school, almes-house, give so
much weekly to the poor, etc.

CHAP. XXXI.
Verse. 2. Avenge the children of Israel] This is called the vengeance of
Jehovah, verse. 3. The righteous Judge will not fail to avenge our unrighteous
vexations, if we commit our selves to him in well-doing. 1 Pet. 4.19.


Verse. 3. Arm some of your selves unto the war] Lactantius being (according to
his name,) a mild and milken man, abhorred bloodshed, thought it not lawful
for a just man to be a warrior; Instit. lib. 6. cap. 20.
whose justice was his warfare. But this was his error: Patres legendi sunt
cum venia; God bids here: Arm your selves, etc. Indeed it is utterly unlawful
for men, wilfully to thrust themselves into unnecessary wars: and it is
reported, in the life of Saint Angustine, that he would never pray for such.
But when God sounds the alarm, as here, Cursed is he, that does this work of
the Lord negligently: Cursed is he, that keeps back his sword from blood,
Ier. 48.10.

Verse. 5. Twelve thousand] This was no great army; but they were Deo armati,
with whom there is no restraint, to save by many, or by few, 1 Samuel 14.6. How
wondrously did God work, by that handful of Hussites in Bohemia, when all
Germany was up in arms against them, by the Popes instigation! And may it not
be said of that small remnant, that now fights the Lords battles in Ireland?
The Lord has done great things for them, whereof we are glad. Have they not
been helped, with a little help indeed? the more is our shame, Dan. 11.34.
that send them no more.

Verse. 6. Them and Phinehas] Not without Joshua the General, (though not here
mentioned) the mighty conqueror of all Isreal's enemies, that rose up and
resisted them: famours is he for his faithfulness and fortitude; in
cognoscendis rebus bellicis perspicax, in agendo solers: noverat optime
insidias facere, proelium committere, victoria uti, Dio in Domitiano.
etc. as Dio says of Decebalus king of the Daci, in Domitians days. i.e.
Well-skilled in warlike businesses, and diligent in dispatching them; He knew
well how to lay an ambush, worst an enemy, use a victory, etc.

Verse. 8. And Zur] The father of Cozbi, that noble harlot. Dignitas in indigno
est ornamentum in luto. S^des prima, et vita ima, is but golden rubbish,
eminent infamy, noble dishonor.

Balaam also the son of Beor] See the Note on Chap. 24.25. O that God would
cause the false ^rophets, and the unclean spirit (for whom they act, and by
whom they are acted,) to pass out of our land, according to his promise, Zeph.
13.2.

Verse. 9. Took all the women] The Jews are a nation, Blunt voyage.
to this day, noted for effeminate; and yet they hold, that women are of a
lower creation, made for the propagation and pleasure of man; Diruendi sunt
etiam ipsi cinoni arum, (...) ne redeant, said Zisca Lavat. in Deuter.
and therefore they suffer them not to enter their Synagogues, but appoint them
a gallery without.

Verse. 10. And they burnt all their ci^yes] For the same reason, perhaps, that
our Henry the eight demolished so many Monasteries, saying, C^rvorum nidos esse
penitus disturbandos, ne iterum ad cohabitandum convolent, that the crows-nests
were to be utterly destroyed, Sander. Schism. Arglie. lib. 1. See Judge. 6.1.
lest they should make further use of them again another time. Or rather, lest
sloth or covetousness shouid draw any of the Israelites, to hide themselves in
these nests, and neglect the promised land.

Verse. 13. Went forth to meet them] As Melchisedee went forth to meet Abraham,
returning with victory, Genesis 14. as Archb. Hubert met our Richard the first,
returning from the holy land (as they called it;) both of them first falling to
the earth, rose again, Speed hist. fol. 540.
ran into each others arms; comforting themselves with mutual embraces, and
weeping with joy.

Verse. 14. And Moses was wroth] For all the joy, he could not but be zealous
for the Lord of Hosts, when he saw the train. Zeal is the cream of all the
affections.

Verse. 15. Have ye saved all the women alive?] By whom ye have so lately
sinned, and so lately suffered? Keep thee far from an evil matter, Exodus 23.7.
Circa serpentis antrum positus, non eris diu illaesus, says Isidor. We should
take heed, how we play about the hole of the asp, or near the den of the
cockatrice, Isai. 11.8. Sin and temptation come both under our name, in the
Lords prayer. To pray, lead us not into temptation, and yet to run upon the
occasion of sin, is, to thrust a finger into the fire, and then pray, not be
burnt. These Israelites should have said to those Midianitish huswives, as
those in Esaias did to their Idols, Get you hence, Avaunt; they should have here
been as cautelous, as they were in other cases. For being forbidden to make
Covenants with the Gentiles, they also abstained from drinking with them;
because that was a ceremony, used in striking of covenants; and so it might
have drawn them on thereunto. Our dallying with the occasions of sin, does
usually tempt the devil to tempt us.

Verse. 18. That have not known a man] As far as they could conjecture by their
age. But the way of a man with a maid, is one of Solomon's secrets, Prove. 30.19.
Of Rebecca it is noted, that she went for a maid, and she was so, Genesis 24.16.
But Quartilla the strumpet in Petronius, Petron. Satyr.
was not ashamed to say, junonem meam iratam habeam, si unquam me meminerim
virginem fuisse. That she could not remember, that ever she was a maid. And
what a base slander was that, Rivetti Iesuita vap ulans.
cast upon our religion by an impudent Jesuit, Sylvester petrasancta; Puellas
plerunque corruptas nuptui dari in reformato Evangelio; that few maids amongst
us, come clear to marriage.

Verse. 19. Whosoever has killed any person] War, though never so just, is the
slaughterhouse of mankind, and the hell of this world. Homer brings in Mars
the god of battle, as most hated of Jupiter; bellum per antiphrasin, quia
minime bellum. For every battle of the Warrior is with confused noise, and
garments rolled in blood, Isai. 9.5. What a strange man then was Pyrrhus King
of the Epirotes; of whom Justin reports, that he took more pleasure in
fighting, then in reigning? And what a hard heart had Hannibal, who when he saw
a pit full of man's blood, which he had spilt, cried out, O formosum
spectaculum! O brave sight! So, O rem regiam, said Valesus, ( i.e. O Kingly
act!) when he had slain three hundred persons. And what a strange hell-hag was
that Queen, who when she saw some of her Protestant Subjects lying dead, and
stripped upon the earth, cried out, The goodliest tapestry that ever she
beheld? God, that he might teach his people not to have feet swift to shed
blood, tells them here of a ceremonial uncleanness, contracted by killing,
though an enemy, devoted by him to destruction.

Verse. 23. And all that abides not the fire] We must deal with every man
(says One from this text) according to his temper; indulge them what lawfully
you may. Quod tamen accipiendum est cum grano salis.

Verse. 49. And there lacks not one man of us] A wonderful work of God; a
whole Nation cut off with no loss at all. This was the Lords own doing, and it
is mavelous in our eyes. Surely, if the Grecians so thankfully acknowledged
to their Jupiter, that overthrow they gave to the Persians, by Themistocles,
and called him (...), their Deliverer; how much more might these Israelites
celebrate the unparalled goodness of their gracious God, in this so unbloody
a victory?

Verse. 53. For the men of war had taken spoil] And kept what they caught, to
themselves. The Turks, when they had taken Constantinople, wondered at the
wealth thereof, (which the Citizens would not be drawn to part with for their
own preservation,) and were so enriched therewith, that it is a proverb amongst
them at this day, if any grow suddenly rich, to say, Turk. hist. 347.
He has been at the sacking of Constantinople.

CHAP. XXXII.
Verse. 1. A Place for cattle] Fat, and fit for the purpose; like those pastures
in Ireland, so fertile and abounding with sweet grass, that the people are
forced to drive their cattle to some other more barren grounds, at some time of
the day, lest they should surfeit. See Mic. 7.14. Ier. 50.19.

Verse. 5. Let this land be given unto thy servants] An unsavory and
unseasonable motion this might seem at first; and did, even to Moses himself;
as appears in the next verse. And surely, it is probable, that they were too
much set upon that portion of earth, as Lot was upon the Plain of Sodom, Genesis
13.10. and was therefore, soon after, carried captive by the four Kings; as
these in the text are noted to be the first that were carried captives out of
their land, 1 Chronicles. 5.25, 26. Strong affections cause strong afflictions: when
God sees people set upon it, to have this or that, have it they may, but with
an afterclap, that shall disweeten it. How was David crossed in his Absalom,
Absalom in his Kingdom, Amnon in his Tamar, etc. 1 Samuel 1.5? He loved her, and
the Lord made her barren.

Verse. 11. They have not] See the Note on Chap. 14.24.

Verse. 14. An increase of sinful men] A race of rebels; neither good egg, nor
bird; sin runs in a blood, many times; ye seed of serpents, ye generation of
vipers, ye fill up the measure of your fathers sins, Dio in vita Neron.
Matthew. 23.32. Domitius, the father of Nero, foretold the wickedness of his
son; for it cannot be, said he, that of me and my wife Agrippina, any good man
should be born. When One complained, that never father had so undutiful a
child; yes, said his son, (with less grace then truth) My grandfather had.

Verse. 16. We will build sheep-folds] This was their intent at first, though
Moses mistook them. There may be gross mistakes (and thereupon grievous
unkindnesses) betwixt dearest friends. Cyrill, and John, Bishop of Antioch,
objected heresy one to another, and proceeded as far as excommunication,
postea comperti idem sentire; so did Cyrill and Theodoret.

Verse. 23. Be sure your sin will find you out] The guilt will haunt you at
heels, as a bloodhound; and the punishment will overtake you, as it did that
Popish Priest in Lancashire, who being followed by one that found his glove,
with a desire to restore it him, but pursued inwardly with a guilty conscience,
leaps over a hedge, plunges into a Marle-pit behind it, unseen, and unthought
of, wherein he was drowned. Or as it did that other Priest, who having escaped
the fall of Blackfriars, Anno 1623. (where two of his fellow-shavelings, with
about a hundred more, Jac. Rev. de vit. Pontific. 312.
perished,) and taking water, with purpose to sail into Flanders, was east
away, with some others, under London-Bridg, the boat being over-turned.

Verse. 38. Their names being changed] Out of detestation of those idols, Baal,
Nebo, etc. (See Exodus 23.13. Psalm. 16.4.) Isai. 46.1. Absit ut de ore
Christiano sonet Jupiter omnipotens, and Mehercule, and Mecastor, and coetera,
magis portenta quam numina, says Hierom. Heathenish gods should not be so far
honored, as to be heard of out of Christian mouths; nor Popish Idols neither.
I my self, says Latimer, Sermon. in 3. Sund. in Advent.
have used in mine earnest matters, to say, yea by the Rood, by the Mass, by
St. Mary, which indeed is naught. Some simple folk say, they may swear by the
mass, because there is now no such thing; and by our Lady, because she is gone
out of the Country.

CHAP. XXXIII.
Verse. 2. ANd Moses wrote] Moses was primus in historia, as Martial says of
Salust.

Verse. 4. For the Egyptians buried] As iron is very soft, and malleable, whiles
in the fire; but soon after, returns to its former hardness: so was it with
these Egyptians. Affliction meekneth men: hence affliction and meekness grow
upon the same Hebrew root.

Verse. 29. From Mithcah] Which signifies sweetness.

And pitched in Chasmonah] Which signifies swiftness. We must also, when we
have tasted of Gods sweetness, use all possible swiftness in the ways of
holiness: as Jacob, when he had seen visions of God at Bethel, he lift up his
feet, Genesis 29.1.
and went on his way lustily, like a generous horse after a bait; or a giant
after his wine; the joy of the Lord is your strength, Neh. 8.

Verse. 38. And dyed there in the fourtieth year] Nec te tua plurima Penthe^
Labentem texit pietas. -- The righteous dye as well as the wicked; yea the
righteous often before the wicked: (...), God sends his servants to bed, when
they have done their work; as here he did Aaron: and as within these few days,
he has done, (to mine unspeakable loss and grief,) my dearest brother, and
most faithful friend, Mr. Thomas Jackson, that able and active instrument of
Gods glory, (while he lived) in the work of the Ministry at Gloucester; the sad
report of whose death, received whilst I was writing these things, made the
pen (almost) fall out of my singers; not for my own sake so much, as for my
Country, whereof he was, I may truly say, Paulin. Nolan. in vita Ambros.
the Bul-wark and the Beauty; as Ambrose is said to have been the walls of
Italy: (...), said Theodosius. Ambrose, whiles alive, was the only Minister,
(to speak of) that I knew in the whole Country: And dilexi virum, qui cum
corpore solveretur, magis de Ecclesiarum statu, juam de suis periculis
angebatur, said the same Emperor, of the same Ambrose; I could not but love
the man, for that when he dyed, his care was more for the Churches welfare,
then for his own. I can safely say the same of the man in speech, (without
offense to any be it spoken;) and I greatly fear, lest as the death of Ambrose
fore-ran the ruin of Italy; so that it bodes no good to us, that God pulls
such props and pillars out of our building. But this by way of digression, to
satisfy my great grief for so dear a friend deceased, as David did his, for
his brother Jonathan; and made him an Epitaph, 2 Samuel 1.17.

Verse. 52. Destroy all the pictures] Those Balaam's blocks, those excellent
instruments of idolatry; such as was the rood of Hailes, and Cockra^ rood;
which if it would not serve to make a god, yet with a pair of horns clapped on
his head, might make an excellent Devil; Act. and Mon. 1340.
as the Mayor of Doncaster persuaded the men of Cockram, who came to him, to
complain of the Joyner that made it, and refused to pay him his money for the
making of it.

Verse. 55. Shall be pricks in your eyes] The eye is the tenderest part, and
soon vexed with the least mote that falls into it. These Jebusites preserved,
should be notorious mischi^fs to them; as the Jesuits, at this day, are to
those Christian States that ha^bour them. Shall we suffer those vipers to lodge
in our bosoms, till they eat out our hearts? Sic notus Ulysses? Jesuits, like
bells, will never be well tuned, till well hanged. Among much change of houses
in foreign parts, they have two, famous for the accordance of their names; the
one called the Bow at Nola, the other, the Arrow (la Flesc^e, given them by
Henry 4, whom afterward they villanously stabbed to death,) in France. Their
Apostate Ferrier played upon them, in this distich: Arcum Nola dedit, dedit
illis alma sagittam
Gallia; quis funem, quem meruere, dabit!
Nola the bow, and France the shaft did bring;
But who shall help them to a hempen-string?


CHAP. XXXIV.
Verse. 2. THis is the land that shall fall] It is God that assigns us our
quarters, and cuts us out our several conditions; appointing the bounds of our
habitation, Act. 17. This should make us rest contented with our lot, and
(having God our portion) say howsoever, as David did, The lines are fallen to
me in a fair place, Psalm. 16.6. It is that our Father sees fit for us.

Verse. 3. Then your South-quarter shall be] Judaea was not above 200 miles
long, and 50 miles broad; not near the half of England, by much, but far more
fertile, (called therefore Sumen totius orbis:) and yet England is, for good
cause, counted the Western granary, the garden of God, whose valleys are like
Eden, whose hills are as Lebanon, whose springs are as Pisgah, Speeds hist.
whose rivers are as Jordan, whose walls is the Ocean, whose defense is the
Lord Jehovah.

Verse. 6. The great Sea] Commonly called the Mediterranean Sea; betwixt which
and the Jews, lay the Philistims; as now betwixt the Church and the Turk, lies
the Pope and his followers; Italy being the mark that the Turk shoots at, Lo,
a sweet providence of God.

Verse. 8. Unto the entrance of Hamath] Called Hamath the Great, Amos 6.8.
affecting, happily, to be held the greatest Village, as the Hague in Holland
does, and remains therefore unwalled.

Verse. 12. It shall be at the salt-Sea] That is, the Lake of Sodom, called
also, Asphaltites, and the dead Sea. Josephus says, that an ox having all his
legs bound, will not sink into the water of this sea, it is so thick.

Verse. 17. Eleazar the Priest] Pointing to the high Priest of the new Covenant,
by whom we have entrance into the promised inheritance, whither he is gone
before, to prepare a place for us, and has told us, that in his Fathers house
are many mansions, room enough.

CHAP. XXXV.
Verse. 2. SVburbs] These were for pasture, pleasure, and other
Country-Commodities, not for tillage; for the Levites were to have no such
employment, Number. 18.20, 24.

Verse. 6. That he may flee thither] All sins then are not equal, as the Stoics
held; neither are all to be alike punished, as by Draco's laws they were, in a
manner. Those laws were said to be written, not with black, but with blood;
because they punished every peccadillo almost with death, as idleness, stealing
of potherbs, etc. Aristotle gives them this small commendation, that they are
not worth remembrance; but only for their great severity.

Verse. 7. Shall be forty and eight cities] Thus the Levites were dispersed
throughout the land, for instruction of the people; so ought Ministers of the
Gospel, who are fi^ly called the salt of the earth, that being sprinkled up and
down, may keep the rest (as flesh) from rotting and putrisying.

Verse. 8. From them that have many ye shall give] By the equity of this
proportion, the richer are bound to give more to the Ministers maintenance,
then the poorer. Let this be noted by those that refuse to give any thing to
their Ministers, because they have not those things, the tithes whereof the law
requires for this purpose. See Gal: 6.6. with the Note there.

Verse. 15. Shall be a refuge] Christ is our Asylum, to whom running for refuge,
when pursued by the guilt of an evil conscience, we are safe; None can take us
out of his hands; If we be in Christ the Rock, temptations, and oppositions as
waves dash upon us, but break themselves.

Verse. 16. So that he dye] Though he had no intent to kill, yet because he
should have looked better to it, he is a murderer, he smote him purposely and
presumptuously, and the man dies of it. King James was wont to say, that if God
did leave him to kill a man, (though besides his intention,) he should think
God did not love him.

Verse. 18. The murderer shall surely be put to death] This is jus gentium. The
Turks justice, in this case, will rather cut off two innocent men, then let one
offender escape. Cartwr. travels.
The Persians punish theft and manslaughter so severely, that in an age, a man
shall hardly hear either of the one, or the other. A severity fit for Italy,
where they blaspheme, oftener then swear; Spec. Europ. Purchase.
and murder, more then revile or slander: (like the dogs of Congo, which, they
say, bite, but bark not;) And no less fit for France; where, Les ombres des
defunde fieurs de Villemor.
within ten years, 6000 gentlemen have been slain; as it appears by the Kings
pardons. Byron, Lord high-Marshal of France, and Governor of Burgundy, slew a
certain Judge, for putting to death a malefactor whom he had commanded to be
spared; Epitome hist. Gall. page 275.
For this he sued for a pardon, and had it: but not long after, he turned
traitor to his Prince that had pardoned him, and was justly executed.

Verse. 21. He shall surely be put to death] And yet the Papists allow wilful
murderers, also, to take sanctuary; who should, as Joab was, be taken from the
altar to the slaughter. Their hatred to Protestants is so deadly, that they
hold us unworthy to live on Gods ground; fit for nothing but fire and faggot;
yea they send us to hell without bail or main-prize, as worse then Turks or
Jews. They tell the people, that Geneva is a professed Sanctuary of all
roguery; that in England, the people are grown barbarous, and eat young
children, that they are as black as Devils, etc.

Verse. 23. Or with any stone] As at the funeral solemnities of Q. Anne, a
scholar was slain by the fall of a letter of stone, thrust down from the
battlements of the Earl of Northamptons house, by one that was a spectatour.

Verse. 25. Unto the death of the high Priest] Because he was, amongst men, the
chief god on earth, and so the offense did most directly strike against him. Or
rather, because the high Priest was a type of Christ: and so this release was a
shadow of our freedom and redemption by the death of Christ.

CHAP. XXXVI.
Verse. 1. ANd spoke before Moses] Who was their common Oracle to enquire of, in
all doubtful cases. Like as at Rome, C. Scipio Nasica, (whom the Senate, by way
of honor, called Optimus,) had a house in the high street assigned him, at the
public charge, quo facilius consuli posset? that any man might go to him for
counsel. And surely, as the Roman General never miscarried, so long as he
followed the advice of Polybius, his historian; so neither did, or could, this
people do amiss, if ruled by Moses, who was the mouth of God, verse. 5.

Verse. 6. To whom they think best] See Genesis 24.57, 58. with the Note there.

Verse. 7. Shall keep himself to the inheritance] This was an excellent law to
cut off quarrels, strifes, and law-suites, and to frustrates those qui
latrocinia intra moenia exercent, as Columella said of the Lawyers of his time.

Verse. 11. For Mahlah, Tirzah, and Hoglah, etc.] The names of these virgins,
(as one Interpreter elsewhere observes) seem to be not without mystery. M.
Ainsworth.
For, Zelophehad, by interpretation, signifies, the shadow of fear, or of
dread: his first daughter, Machlah, Infirmity; the second, Noah, Wandering; the
third, Hoglah, Turning about for joy, or Dancing; the fourth Milcah, a Queen;
the fifth, Tirzah, Well pleasing, or Acceptable. By these names, we may observe
the degrees of our reviving by grace in Christ; for we all are born, as of the
shadow of fear, being brought forth in sin; and for fear of death, were all our
lifetime subject to bondage, Heb, 2.15. This begets infirmity, or sickness,
grief of heart for our estate. After which, Wandering abroad for help and
comfort, we find it in Christ, by whom our sorrow is turned into joy. He
communicates to us of his royalty, making us Kings and Priests unto God his
Father; and we shall be presented unto him glorious, and without blemish,
Ephesians. 5.27. So the Church is beautiful as Tirz^h, Cant. 6.3.

Deo soli Gloria.

A COMMENTARY or EXPOSITION UPON The Fifth Book of MOSES, CALLED DEUTERONOMY.
CHAP. I. Verse. 1. These be the words which Moses spoke.
ANd surely he spoke thick, if he spoke (as some cast it up) this whole Book in
less then ten days space. Certain it is, that he spoke here (as ever) most
divinely, and like himself, or rather beyond himself; the end of a thing being
better (if better may be) then the beginning thereof, Eccles. 7.8. as good wine
is best at last; and as the Sun shines most amiably when it is going down. This
book of the law it was, that the King was to write out with his own hand, Deuteronomy.
17.18, 19. that it might serve as his Manual, and attend him in his running
library. This was that happy book that good Josiah lighting upon, (after it had
long layn hid in the Temple) melted at the menaces thereof, and obtained of
God, to dye in peace, though he were slain in battle. This only book was that
silver brook, that pretiously-purling current, out of which the Lord Christ,
our Champion, chose all those three smooth stones, wherewith he prostrated the
Goliath of hell, in that sharp encounter, Mat. 47, 10. And surely, if Tully
could call Aristotle's Politics, (for the elegancy of the style, and for the
excellency of the matter) aureum flumen orationis: And if the same Author durst
say. that the law of the twelve tables did exceed all the libraries of
Philosophers, both in weight and worth: how much rather is all this true of
this second edition of Gods law, with an addition?

Verse. 2. There are eleven d^yes journey] So many days march for a foot army.
Triduo confici potuit.
But Philo the Jew says, a horseman might dispatch it in three days.

Verse. 3. In the eleventh moneth] And in the twelfth month of this same year,
he dyed; so that this was his swan-like song: Sic ubi fata vocant, etc.

Verse. 4. After he had slain Sihon] If Sampson had not turned aside to see the
Lion, that not long before he had slain, he had not found the honey in the
carkase, Judge. 14.8. So if we recognize not our dangers, deliverances, and
achievements, we shall neither taste how sweet the Lord is, nor return him his
due praises. To true thankfulness is required; 1 Recognition. 2. Estimation. 3.
Retribution. See them all, Psalm. 116.3, 7, 12.

Verse. 5. Began Moses to declare] And he was not long about it. See the Note on
verse. 1. A ready heart makes riddance of Gods works; for being oyled with the
Spirit, it becomes lithe and nimble, quick of dispatch.

Verse. 6. Long enough] The law is not for men to continue under, but for a
time, till they be fitted for Christ, Gal. 3.16, 17, 18. Humbled they must be,
and hammered for a season; sense of misery, goes before sense of mercy.

Verse. 8. Go in and possess it] God was ready, but they were not ripe for such
a mercy. So 2 Chronicles. 20.33. the high places were not taken away; for the people
had not yet prepared their hearts for such a reformation: the work was
insnarled and retarded by their unfitness. See Isai. 59.2.

Verse. 9. I am not able] Politici and Ecclesiastici labores maximi sunt, says
Luther. None have so hard a tug of it, as Magistrates and Ministers. (...),
said Augustus to his Livia. Had we not businesses, and cares, and fears, Dio
Cass.
above any private person, we should be equal to the gods.

Verse. 11. The Lord God of your fathers] Such holy ejaculation, such sallies of
soul, and egression of affection to God and his people, are frequently found in
heavenly-minded men.

Verse. 12. Bear your cumbrance] A Princes temples, are not so compassed with a
crown, as his mind besieged with cares: nor is he so lifted up with the
Splendor of his train, as cast down, with the multitude of his fears. See the
Note on verse. 9. Saint Paul also had the cumber of the churches, (...).
2 Cor. 11.28. All care numbered and mustered together, and that with anxiety;
with the same solicitude, that a man has about his own most important
business.

Verse. 15. And officers among your tribes] That might put the laws in
execution; which is the same to the law, that the clapper is to the bell. There
were in good Iosiah's days, horrible abominations. And why? by the slackness
of underofficers, Zeph. 3.3.

Verse. 16. Hear the causes, etc] Hear them out. Vlpian. in orat. Demost. dc
fall. legate.
In the Forum of Rome, the accuser had six hours allotted him to accuse; the
accused had nine hours to make his answer. [And judge righteously] So upright
was the sentence of the Areopagites in Athens, that none could ever say, he was
unjustly condemned: (...).
nay both parties, as well those that are cast, as they that cast, are alike
contented.

Verse. 17. Ye shall not respect persons] God will surely reprove you, says
Job, if you secretly accept persons, Chap. 13.10. Aequum me utrique parti tam
in disceptandis controversiis, quam in tuenda disciplina praebebo, said
Justinian; I will hear causes without prejudicate impiety, judiciously examine
them without sinister obliquity; and sincerely judge them, without unjust
partiality. It was the oath of the heathen Judges, as the Orator relates,
Audiam accusatorem and reum sine affectibus and personarum respectione: I will
hear the plaintiff and defendant, with an equal mind, without affection, and
respect of persons. And agreeable hereunto, is the oath taken by our
Circuit-Judg, as it is recorded in the statute of the 18 of Edward the third.

You shall not be afraid] For, facile a justitia deviat, qui in causis non deum
sed homines pertimescit, says Chrysostom: A fainthearted judge, does easily
pervert justice. A man of courage he must be, a Cuer-de-lion, another Cato, a
quo nemo unquam rem injustam petere audebat, of whom no man ever durst desire
any thing unjust. This, Solomon symbolized by the steps of his throne, adorned
with lions; the Athenian Judges, by sitting in Mars-street. [For the judgment
is Gods] whose person ye bear, and in whose seat ye sit; and should therefore
sit in as great, though not so slavish a fear of offending, as Olanes in the
history, sat upon the flaid skin of his father Silannes, nailed by Cambises on
the tribunal: or as a Russian Judge, that fears the boiling caldron; or the
Turkish Senate, when they think the great Turk to stand behind the arras, at
the dangerous door. Cave, spectat Cato; take heed, Cato sees you, was an
ancient watchword among the Romans, and a great retentive from evil: how much
more, amongst us, should, Cave, spectat Dominus; Take heed; the Lord looks on.

Verse. 19. That great and terrible wilderness] Abounding with want of all
necessaries, Jer. 2.6 and surrounded with many, mighty, and malicious enemies.
Such is this present evil world, to those that are bound for the Heavenly
Canaan. Many miseries and molestations, Heyl. Geog. page 802.
both satanicall and secular, they are sure to meet with; this world being a
place of that nature, that (as it is reported of the straits of Magellan,)
which way soever a man bend his course (if homeward,) he is sure to have the
wind against him.

Verse. 21. Behold the Lord] See the Note on verse. 8.

Verse. 22. We will send men before us] Thus empty man will be wiser then God, (
Job 11.12.) though Man be born like a wild asse-colt. It was unbelief, that
prompted them to this practice: for they could not enter, because of unbelief.
Carnal policy serves the worldling (as the Ostrich wings,) to make him outrun
others upon earth; but helps him never a whit toward Heaven.

Verse. 23. Pleased we well] Seeing you were set upon it, and it would be no
better.

Verse. 25. And brought us word again] Joshua and Caleb did: for the rest are
not here reckoned of; God counts of men, by the goodness that is in them.

Verse. 27. Because the Lord hated us] A gross mistake: Why should it then so
greatly grieve us, that our good intentions, are so much misconstrued* That is
here complained of, as an argument of Gods hatred, that he intended for an
instance of his love. Deuteronomy. 4.37. and 7.8. In quo dilexistinos, Mal. 1.2.
wherein have thou loved us? said those Malcontents in Malachy, that cast the
helve after the hatchet, (as the proverb is:) and like children, because they
might not have what they would, grew sullen, and would have nothing.

Verse. 31. As a man does bear his son] Charily and tenderly, as his own bowels:
not hating them, as they desperately belyed the Lord, verse. 27. For if a man
find his enemy, will he let him go well away? 1 Samuel 24.19. Will he
accommodate him, as God did these murmurers? Never was any Prince served in
such state, as they were.

Verse. 32. Ye did not believe] Sic surdo plerunque fabulam: there was none
within to make answer. Who has believed our report, etc? We cannot get men to
credit us.

Verse. 37. The Lord was angry with me] The Saints afflictions, proceed often from
love displeased, from love offended. Fury is not in God, Isai. 27.

Verse. 41. We have sinned, we will go up] Temporaries are set upon sin, in the
very confession thereof. Unless to the confession of sin, we add confusion of
sin, we do nothing, Prove. 28.13. Yet, honor me before the people, said Saul:
Give me a bribe, said trembling Felix.

CHAP. II.
Verse. 1. THen we turned] viz. When we had bought our wit, and had paid for our
learning, by our late discomfiture.

Verse 3. Turn you North-ward] Thus God word was their directour unto all
places, and in all actions: In which respect, these historics of holy Scripture
excel all humane histories in the world; as is well observed. That which they
tell us of their Dea vibilia, guiding passengers, etc. is a mere fiction.

Verse. 4. Which dwell in Seir] To distinguish them from the Amalekites, Esaus
seed too, but devoted to destruction.

And they shall be afraid of you] Though worse afraid then hurt. Hic rogo, non
furor est, ne moriare, mori? We read of some Jews, that at the sack of
Jerusalem killed themselves, lest they should be taken by the enemy.

Verse. 5. Because I have given mount Seir] Thus the Most High, divided to the
nations their inheritance, Deuteronomy. 32.8. And a man must needs have some right to
his inheritance, to his portion, Psalm. 17.14. What Ananias had, Act. 5. was his
own, whilst he had it, as Peter tells him; yet Satan had filled his heart. It
is therefore a rigor, to say, the wicked are usurpers of what they have, and
shall be called to account for it. When the King gives a traitor his life, he
gives him meat and drink, that may maintain his life. That Duke D' Alva, is
worthily taxed for a tyrant, that starved his prisoners, even after quarter;
saying, though he promised to give them their lives, he did not promise to
find them meat. Grimston hist. of Netherlands.
Wicked men have both a civil title to that they have, and a title before God;
who will call them to account indeed at last day, not for possessing what they
had, but for abusing that possession.

Verse. 6. Buy meat of them for money] Money answers all things, says
Solomon, Eccles. 10.19. Money is the monarch of the world, says another, and
hears most mastery. But that covetous Chaliph of Babylon, taken by Haalon
brother to Mango the great Cham of Tartary, Turk. hist. fol. 113.
and commanded to eat his fill, of that great wealth that he had heaped up
together, found ere he dyed, that one mouthfull of meat was more worth then a
whole housefull of money.

Verse. 7. For the Lord thy God has blessed thee] viz. With money, to fetch
thee in other commodities: It is the blessing of God (when all is done,) that
makes rich: without this, men do but labor in the fire, labor all night and
take nothing, trouble themselves to no purpose: all their endeavors, are but
Arena sine calce, sand without lime, they will not hold together; but, like
untempered mortar, fall asunder: there being a curse upon unlawful practices,
though men be never so industrious; as you may see in Ieho^achi^, Ier. 22.

Verse. 9. Because I have given Ar] The royal city, set upon an hill. Number.
21.15, 28. God (as liberal Lord,) gives not some small cottage or annuity, for
life, to his elder servants, great men use to do,) but bountifully provides for
them and theirs, to many generations. Who would not serve thee then, O King of
nations?

Verse. 10. Many and tall are the Anakims] And if God cast out those Emims, or
terrible-ones, before the Moabites, will he not much more cast out these
Anakims before the Israelites? Nihil unquam ei negasse credendum est, Hieronym:
quem ad vituli hortatur esum.

Verse. 12. As Israel did unto the land] This and some other parcels, scattered
here and there, seem to have been added to Moses his words, (whether by Joshua,
or Ezra, or some other Prophet, it much matters not,) after the conquest of the
land of Canaan.

Verse. 19. Because I have given it] See the Note on verse, 5.

Verse. 20. Zamzummims] 1. Big and boisterous, bearing down all before them;
presumptuous wicked ones they were, and yet they called themselves Rephaims,
that is, Physicians, or preservers; such indeed rulers ought to be, Isai. 3.7.
The Greeks therefore call a King, (...) ab (...) medela, Cornel. a Lapid. in
Isai. 3.7.
because he is to be ligator vulnerum, chirurgus, and Reip. medicus, the
commonwealths Surgeon and Physician. But such were not these Zamzummims, more
then in name: (...), etc. As he said of his bow; thy name is life, but thy use
is present death.

Verse. 23. And the Avims which dwelt in Hazeroth] These are ancient things, as
it is said in another case, 1 Chronicles. 4.22. such, as whereof there is no record
but this, extant in the world. Well might that Egyptian Priest say to Solon
that wise man of Greece: You Greeks are very babyes; (...), Diod. Sic.
neither is there an ancient writer amongst you.

Verse. 26. With words of peace] So the Romans by their heralds, sent to those
that opposed or wronged them, caduceu^ and hastam, a proffer of peace first:
For if we Princes (said our Henry the seventh,) should take every occasion
that is offered, the world should never be quiet, but wearied with continual
wars. Cuncta prius tentanda, etc. -- truncatur et artus, ut liceat reliquis
securum vivere membris.

Verse. 30. Had hardened his Spirit] Deus quem destruit, dementat, God makes
fools of those, whom he intends to destroy.

Verse. 37. Only unto the land] This kindness these Ammonites in after-ages
very evil requited, Am. 1.13. Ier. 49.1. dealing by them, as that monster
Michael Balbus, dealt by the Emperor Leo Armenius, whom he slew the same night
that this Prince had pardoned and released him.

CHAP. III.
Verse. 1. THen we turned^ How pleasant must the continuation of this holy
history needs be to every good heart, out of the mouth of Mosus? Methinks I see
the peoples ears linked to his tongue, with golden chains; as the Heathens
fable of their Hercules. And surely, if King Alphousus, and some others, of
whom the Physicians despaired, did recover health beyond all expectation, Joh.
Bodin. de utilitat. histor. (...).
only by reading Livy, Curtius, Aventinus, etc. What may we think may be done
by these Wholesome words, these healing histories, if rightly regarded?

Verse. 2. Fear him not* Though of a formidable stature, verse. 11. The Lion is
not so fierce as he is painted, says the Spanish proverb. God will crack the
hairy scalp of his enemies, Psalm. 68.

Verse. 6. The men, women, and children,] The Hebrew word, (...); here rendered
Men, written with tsere, signifies, Dead men: Psalm. 39.5.
Surely, every man in his best estate, or when best underlaid, is altogether
vanity, Selah.

Verse. 11. Remained] Sc. in Bashan; The Jews fable, that he escaped in the
flood, by riding astride on the Ark.
and he seems to have been of the remnant of those Rephaims, whom Chedorlaomer
and his company smote in Ashteroth, Genesis 14.5. with Josh. 13.12.

Is it not in Rabbah] Kept for a monument of so mighty and massy a man.

Verse. 13. Land of Giants] Such as are said to be in another land, in another
life. For he knows not that the Giants are there, and that her guests are in
the depths of hell, Prove. 29.18.

Verse. 16. Unto the river Jabbok.] Famous for Jacob's wrestling with God, near
unto it, Genesis 32.22.

Verse. 21. So shall the Lord] God has, and therefore God will, is a strong
Medium of hope, if not a demonstration of Scripture-Logick.

Verse. 26. Speak no more] Christians must be sober in prayer, 1 Pet. 4.7.

CHAP. IV.
Verse. 1. THe statutes and the judgments] By statutes, we may understand the
moral law; by Judgments, the judicial; which was fitted to the Jews: Like as
Solon being asked whether he had given the best laws to the Athenians?
answered, The best that they could suffer. As for the ceremonial law, it is
called, Statutes that were not good, Mr. Weemse.
because they commanded neither virtue nor vice, in themselves; as One gives
the reason.

Verse. 2. Ye shall not add] The Jews have added their Deuteroseis, the Turks
their Alfurta; the Papists, (...), Our wise men teach traditions. Sec 1 Cor.
1.20.
their unwritten verities, which they equalize (at least) to the holy
Scriptures; and so argue them of insufficiency and imperfection.

Verse. 3. Destroyed them] Hanging them up in gibbets, as it were, before your
eyes, to warn you.

Verse. 4. Are alive] Your innocence prevailed for your safety; as it usually
does in a common defection.

Verse. 6. For this is your wisdome] Omnis sapientia hominis in hoc uno est,
(says Lactantius) ut Deum cognoscat and colat: Lactan. Inst. lib. 3. cap. 30.
hoc nostrum dogma haec sententia est: To know and do the Will of God, this is
the whole of man's wisdom. The heart of the wise man is at his right hand,
Eccles. 10.2. as teaching it to put things in practice, and to prove by
experience, what that good, and holy, and acceptable will of God is, Romans 12.2.

A wise and understanding people] The Spaniards are said to seem wise, and are
fools; the French to seem fools, and are wise: the Portugals neither to be
wise, nor so much as to seem so; the Italians both to seem wise, and to be so.
But may not that of the Prophet be fitly applied to them all, Behold, they have
rejected the Word of the Lord, and what wisdom is in them? Jer. 8.9.

Verse. 7. Who has God so nigh unto them] Yea, this was it that made them so
great a nation, who otherwise were but Methemispar, few in number. This made
Moses so passionately cry one, Happy are thou, O Israel! who is like unto thee,
O people saved by the Lord! etc. Deuteronomy. 33.29.

Verse. 8. So righteous] See the Note on Chap. 1. verse. 1.

Verse. 9, Only take heed] Cavebis autem, si pavebis.

Lest thou forget] Eaten bread is soon forgotten.

Teach them thy sons] A special help against forgetfulness; yea this is the
best art of memory. Of all things, God cannot abide to be forgotten.

Verse. 10. Specially the day] An high favor, and most honorably mentioned,
Neh. 9.13.

Verse. 12. Ye saw no similitude] Numa, the Roman Lawgiver, would not permit
any image, whether painted, or carved, to be placed in their Temples, eo quod
nefas duceret praestantiora deterioribus adsimulare, because he held it
unlawful to set forth a better thing by a worse. etc. Hence it was, that the
Roman Temples had no pictures in them, for 170 years after the building of
that city. Irenaeus reproves the heretics, called Gnostici, for that they
carried about the Image of Christ, made in Pilates time, after his own
proportion; for, to whom will ye liken God? or what likeness will ye compare
unto him? Esai. 40.18.

Verse. 14. Statutes and Judgments] See verse. 1.

Verse. 15. Take ye therefore good heed] These many cautions note our proneness
to this evil, above others; this appears somewhat in children so delighted
with pictures, and in that idolomania of these Jews; of the Eastern Churches,
and of the Synagogue of Rome.

Verse. 16. The likeness of male or female] As the blind Ethnicks did; Servius.
concluding their petitions with that general, Dii, Deaeque omnes.

Verse. 17. The likeness of any beast] Which was a piece of the Egyptian
madness. Israel, by being there, had learned to set up one calf; Jeroboam, two.

Verse. 18. The likeness of any fish] As was Dagon the God of the Philistims,
whence he had his name.

Verse. 19. All the host of heaven] Called the Queen of heaven, Ier. 7. (...)
[should be driven] Or, drawn by the enticement of the Devil, who is (...),
(says Synesius) a great Image-monger; or by the seduction of others, or of
thine own evil heart; for Nemo sibi de suo palpet: quisque sibi Satan est,
says a Father. (...) [ which the Lord thy God has divided] And shall we fight
against God (as Jehn did against Jehoram) with his own servants, nay with those
things which he has given us for common servants to us all?

Verse. 20. But the Lord] Deliverance commands obedience: Servati sumus ut
serviamus.

Verse. 21. And swear that I should not] So that you have a privilege above me;
only beware how you provoke him (as I did) through unbelief.

Verse. 22. But I must dye] This was a sore affliction to this good man, and is
therefore so often mentioned. Plut.
Cato Major also dyed three years before the destruction of Carthage, which he
had so vehemently urged, and would so gladly have outlived.

Verse. 24. For the Lord thy God] And should therefore be served truly, that
there be no halting; and totally, that there be no halving, Heb. 12.28, 29.

Verse. 25. And shall have remained long] So that thou think there is no
removing thee, thou art so rooted and rivetted. Nicephorus Phocas having built
a mighty wall, heard from heaven, Though thou build as high as heaven, (...),
Sin is within, all will be lost.

Verse. 28. And there ye shall serve gods] As ye have made a match with
mischief, so ye shall have enough of it. Ephraim is joined to Idols, etc. See
Act. 7.42.

Verse. 29. But if from thence] Sweet and sour, make the best sauce. Promises
and menaces mixed, soonest operate upon the heart. The Sun of righteousness
loves not to set in a cloud; nor the God of consolation, to leave his children
comfortless.

Verse. 30. Even in the latter dayes] This is, by some, understood of the
Messiah his days, which are the latter times of the world; as Hos. 3.5. 1 Cor.
10.11. and they believe, that here is pointed at, the great and last conversion
of the Jews.

Verse. 32. For ask now of the dayes] Historiae sunt fidae monitrices; great
good use is to be made of history; this holy history especially, whereof every
word is pure, precious, and profitable.

Verse. 37. Therefore he chose] He chose for his love, and then loved for his
choice: After Gods example, deligas quem diligas.

Verse. 39. Empedocles.
That the Lord he is God in heaven] A Philosopher could say, that God is a
Circle, whose Center is every where, whose circumference is no where; ubi est
Deus? quid dixi miser? sed ubi non est? Where is God? or rather, where is not
God? He is higher then heaven, lower then hell, broader then the sea, longer
then the earth. Nusquam est and ubique est, quia nec abest ulli, Bernard.
nec ullo capitur loco. He is no where, and yet every where; far from no place,
and yet no contained in any place.

Verse. 40. That thou may prolong thy dayes] Hence some Lutherans have
gathered, that God has not determined the set period of man's days; Heming.
and alii.
but that it is in men's power to lengthen, or shorten them. But this is against
Job, 7.1. and 14.14. Eccles. 2.3. Isa. 38.5, 15. Stat sua cuique dies. Our
hairs are numbered, much more our days.

Verse. 42. That the slayer] See the Note on Numb. 35.9, 10, etc.

Verse. 44. And this is the law] That is, this that follows in the next
chapter, whereunto these verses serve for a preface.

CHAP. V.
Verse. 1. ANd keep, and do them] The difference between Divinity and other
Sciences, is, that it is not enough to learn, but we must keep and do it; as
lessons of Music must be practiced; and a copy not read only, but acted. Man
goes forth to his work, and to his labor, until the evening, Psalm. 104.23.
He must arise from the bed of sin, and go forth out of himself, as out of his
house, to his work, and to his labor; working out his salvation with fear and
trembling, until the evening, till the Sun of his life be set.

Verse. 2. God made a Covenant with us] We also have the Covenant, the seals,
Ministers, etc. But (alas) are not these blessings, amongst us, as the Ark was
among the Philistims, rather as prisoners, then as privileges, rather in
testimonium and ruinam, quam salutem?

Verse. 3. With our fathers] i. e. With our fathers only. Or; if it be
understood of all the foregoing Patriarchs, then it is to be expounded by Gal.
3.17.

Verse. 4. Face to face] i. e. Openly, and immediately, by himself, and not by a
messenger, or mediator. Prosper's conceit was, that the Israelites were called
Judaei, because they received jus Dei.

Verse. 5. I stood between the Lord] Sc. after the decalogue delivered by God
himself out of the fire. For of that, he might say, as once Joseph did to his
brethren; Behold, your eyes see that it is my mouth that speaks unto you,
Genesis 45.12. And as Paul did to Philemon, verse. 19. I Paul, etc. so, I the Lord
have written it with mine hand, I will require it.

Verse. 6. I am the Lord, etc.] See the Notes on Exodus 20. It is well observed
by a Reverend Writer, Mr. Ley his Pattern of Piety.
that the two tables of the Law are in their object, answerable to the two
natures of Christ. For God is the object of the one; man of the other: And as
they meet together in the person of Christ, so must they be united in the
affections of a Christian.

Verse. 12. Keep the Sabbath-day] In this repetition of the law, some things are
transposed, and some words changed: Happly, to confute that superstitious
opinion of the Jews, who were ready to dream of miraculous mysteries in every
letter.

Verse. 15. And remember that thou] It being a figure of our redemption by
Christ; and so a fit subject for Sabbath-meditations.

Verse. 18. Neither shall thou commit] Or, And thou shall not commit, etc. and
so in the following laws; to teach us, that the law is but one copulative, as
the Schools speak. Lex tota est un^ copulatioa.
For the sanction indeed, it is disjunctive; but for the injunction, it is
copulative. The sanction is, either do this, or dye: but the injunction is not,
either do this or that, but do this and that too. See Mat. 23.2.3. Ezekiel. 18.10,
11, 13. Iam. 2.10. Do every thing, as well as any thing: to leave one sin and
not another, is (with Benhadad) to recover of one disease, and to dye of
another.

Verse. 22. These words the Lord spake] If humane laws are (...), the invention
of the gods, as Demosthenes calls them, how much rather this perfect law of
God, that needs no alteration or addition?

Verse. 23. Even all the heads of your tribes] These are called all Israel,
verse. 1. as being their representatives.

Verse. 25. Why should we dye?] But why should they fear to dye, since they had
seen that day, that God does talk with man, and he lives? It is answered, that
they looked upon their present safety, as a wonder; but feared what would
follow, upon such an interview, if continued. And indeed it is still the work
of the law, to scare men and to drive them to seek for a Mediator.

Verse. 27. We will hear it and do it] This is well said, if as well done. Many
can think of nothing, but working themselves to life; spinning a thread of
their own, to climb up to heaven by. But that will never be.

CHAP. VI.
Verse. 1. NOw these are the Commandements] Moses having repeated the Decalogue,
begins here to explain it: and first, the first of the ten, in this present
Chapter: that first Commandment being such, Primo praec^pto reliquerum omnium
ob ervantia praecipitur. Luth.
as that therein the keeping of all the other nine is enjoined, as Luther
rightly observes.

Verse. 2. That thou might fear the Lord] Fear God, and keep his
Commandments, Eccles. 12.13. fear the Lord and depart from evil, Prove. 16.6.
this is the beginning, Prove. 1.7. and end of all, Eccles. 12.13. This is the
whole of man, or as some read it, Hoc est enim totus Homo. (...)
This is the whole man. ib. It is a problem in Aristotle; why men are credited,
more then any other creatures? The answer is, man alone reverenceth God. Deum
siquis parum metuit, valde contemnit: hujus qui non memor at beneficentiam,
auget injuriam: Fulgentius.
Not to fear God, is to slight him; as not to praise him, is to wrong him,
says an Ancient.

Verse. 3. That it may be well with thee] Respect may be had to the recompense
of reward: (...)
We may make it our scope, our aim, 2 Cor. 4.18. though not our highest aim;
Moses cast an eye, when he was on his journey, Heb. 11.26. he stole a look from
glory; and got fresh encouragement.

Verse. 4. (...)
The Lord our God is one Lord] One in Three, and Three in One. Here are three
words, answering the three persons: And the middle word, Our God, deciphering
fitly the second, who assumed our nature, as Galatinus well observes. Others
take notice, that the last letter of this first word Hear, is extraordinarily
great in the Hebrew; as calling for utmost heed and attention: And so is the
last letter in the word rendered, One. See the Note on Exodus 34.14. This last
letter Daleth, which usually stands for four, signifies (say the Hebrews,)
that this one God, shall be worshipped in the four corners of the earth.

Verse. 5. And thou shall love] See the Note on Mat. 22.37. This shows the
impossibility of keeping the law perfectly: Ita ut frustra sint sophistae, etc.
The true Christian counts all that he can do for God, but a little of that much
he owes him, and that he could gladly beteem him. But what a wretched Monk was
that, that dyed with these words in his mouth; Read mihi aeternam vitam quam
debes; Lord, pay me heaven, for thou owe it?

Verse. 6. Shall be in thy hears] A bible, men should get stamped in their
heads, and another in their hearts, as David had, Psalm. 119.11. Knowledge, that
swims in the head only, and sinks not down into the heart, does no more good,
then rain in the middle region does; or then the Unicorns horn, in the
Unicornes head.

Verse. 7. And thou shall teach them diligently] Heb. Thou shall whet or sharpen
them, as one would sharpen a stake, Sha^an acuer^ and S^anah repetere, affine^
sunt.
when he drives it into the ground: Or, as one would set an edge upon a knife,
by often going over the whetstone. A learned Hebrician observes a near affinity
between the word here used, and another word that signifies to repeat, and
inculcate the same thing. Innuit studium et diligentiam, qua pueris praecepta
dei inculcari debent, says Vatablus. Children should be taught the principles,
that they understand not: First, that they might have occasion much to think of
the things that are so much and commonly urged. Secondly, that if any extremity
should come, they might have certain seeds of comfort and direction, to guide
and support them. 3. That their condemnation might be more just, if having
these so much in their mouths, they should not get something of them into
their hearts.

Verse. 8. And thou shall bind them] See the Note on Mat. 23.5.

Verse. 9. And on thy gates] In a foolish imitation whereof, the English
Jesuits beyond sea have written on their Church and Colledge-doores, in great
golden letters, Jesu, Jesu converte Angliam, Fiat, Fiat. Habent et vespae favos.

Verse. 11. When thou shall have eaten and be full] Saturity often breeds
security, fullness forgetfulness. The best, when full fed, are apt to wax
wanton, and will be dipping their fingers sometimes in the devils sauce:
Platina.
ipsis opibus lascivire caepit Ecclesia. The Moon never suffers eclipse, but at
the full, and that by the earths interposition. The young mulets, when they
have sucked, turn up their heels, and kick at the damme.

Verse. 12. Lest thou forget the Lord] Should we with the sed hawk, forget our
master? Or, being full with Gods benefits, like the Moon, be then most removed
from the Sun, from whom she has all her light? See Prove. 30.8, 9.

Verse. 13. And shall swear by his name] An oath rightly taken, is a piece of
our holy service to God; and may well be reckoned amongst our prayers and other
pious performances.

Verse. 14. Thou shall not go] See the Note on Exodus 34.14.

Verse. 15. A jealous God amongst you] Let the gods of the heathens be
good-fellowes; our God will endure no corrivals. He is both a jealous God, and
is ever amongst us; so that our faults, our furta's, cannot be hid from his
eyes. Now he that dares sin, though he know God looks on, is more impudent in
sinning, then was Absalom, when he spread a tent upon the top of the house, and
went in to his fathers concubines, in the sight of all Israel, and of the Sun,

Verse. 15. Ye shall not tempt the Lord* By prescribing to God, and limiting the
holy one of Israel; as these men did at Massah, Psalm. 78.41. See the Notes on
Mat. 4.7. and on Act. 5.9. and on Exodus 17.2.

Verse. 17. You shall diligently keep] So Psalm. 119.4. Howbeit, the most that
David could do toward it, was to wish well to it, verse. 5.

Verse. 20. What mean the testimonies] Here we have a brief Catechism; which
is a course and practice of singular profit. Luther scorned not to profess
himself Discipulum Catechismi: and the Jesuits, by the example of our
Churches, do Catechize their novices.

CHAP. VII.
Verse. 1. ANd has cast out many nations] God did all, Psalm. 78.55. He cast out
the heathen before them, and divided them an inheritance by line, etc. Hence
Josephus calls the Commonwealth of Israel, (...). Sic, Polydor. Virgil.
Regnum Angliae, Regnum Dei.

Verse. 2. Nor show mercy unto them] Their iniquity was now full, Genesis 15.16.
they filled the land with filthiness, from corner to corner, Ezra 9.11. they
were ripe for the sickle, ready for the vintage of Gods wrath; which now came
upon them to the utmost.

Verse. 3. Neither shall thou make marriages with them] As neither with any
other that were idolaters, Ezra 9.1, 2.

Verse. 4. For they will turn away thy son] As the outlandish women did Solomon,
1 King. 11.2, 4. What Is the reason the Pope will not dispense in Spain or
Italy, if a Papist marry a Protestant, yet here they will, but in hope to draw
more to them? The Tyrant Mezentius tied the living bodies of his captives to
the dead; but the dead did not revive by the living; Corpora corporibus
jungebat mortua vivis. Virgil.
the living rather putrified, by the dead.

Verse. 5. And break down their images] Cromwell did notable service here in
Henry 8. time, by discovering the knavery of Popish Priests, and pulling down
those mawmets and monuments of idolatry, the Rood of grace, the blood of Hales,
etc. And in Edw. 6. his days; the same day the Popish pictures were publicly
burnt at Paul's Cross, Act. and Mon.
the great victory was gotten by the English at Muscle-borough field in
Scotland.

Verse. 6. For thou art an holy people] Viz. with a federal holiness; which yet,
without an inherent holiness in the heart and life, will profit a man no more
then it did Dives in the flames, that Abraham called him Son; or Judas, that
Christ called him Friend. An empty title yields but an empty comfort at last.

Verse. 8. But because he loved you] Lo, he loved you, because he loved you.
This may seem, idem per idem, a woman's reason. But it excellently shows the
ground of Gods love, to be wholly in himself.

Verse. 9. The faithful God] The God of Amen, Psalm. 31.6. Amen, the faithful and
true Witness, Rev. 3.14. that will not suffer his faithfulness to fail, nor
alter the thing that is gone out of his lips, Psalm. 89.33. all his precepts,
predictions, promises, menaces, being the issue of a most faithful and
righteous Will, void of the least insincerity or falsehood. Thou spakest also
with thy mouth, and have fulfilled it with thy hand, as it is this day says
Solomon, in his prayer, 1 King. 8.24. Neither could ever any day or age produce
one instance to the contrary. The promises are ancient, Tit. 1.1, 2. and yet
they never failed: nor the menaces, Zeph. 3.5.

Verse. 10. He will not be slack] slow he may be, but sure he will be, Val. Man.
supplicii tarditatem gravitate compensat, The higher he holds his hand, the
heavier he will strike. Aries quo altius erigitur, hoc figit fortius. Arcus quo
retrahitur longius, hoc jaculatur ulterius. Aqua quae aegre calefit, agree denuo
frigescit, etc.

Verse. 13. And he will love thee] So he did before, verse. 8. but so he will
continue to do. See a like expression, 1. Joh. 5.13. These things write I unto
you that believe on the name of the Son of God, that ye may believe on the name
of the Son of God.

Verse. 14. Thou shall be blessed] There is a (...), in Godliness, 1 Timothy 6.6.
See the Note there.

Verse. Martial.
15. And the Lord] Health is a sweet mercy; Non est vivere, sed valere, vita, A
sickly life, is a lifeless life. A healthy body is the reward of piety, Prove.
3.8.

Verse. 20. Send the hornet] See the Note on Exodus 23.28.

Verse. 21. For the Lord thy God is amongst you] And how many do you reckon him
for? as Antigonus said once to his soldiers, when they feared their enemies,
as more in number.

Verse. Aurum Tolosanum.
25. Left thou be snared] Lest it prove as the gold of Toulouse, baneful to all
that fingered it; or the sepulcher of Semiramis, which they that rifled,
expecting to find treasure, met with a deadly poison.

CHAP. VIII.
Verse. 1. ALL the Commandements] All, is but a little word, but of large
extent. There are magnalia legis, and minutula legis; Look to both, the greater
and the lesser things of the law, Matthew. 23.23.

Verse 2. To know what was] i.e. To discover and make known to thy self and
others. When fire is put to green wood, Tentatut sciat, i. c. ut scire nos
faciat. Aug.
there comes out abundance of watery stuff, that before appeared not. When the
pond is empty, the mud, filth, and toades, come to light. The snow-drift covers
many a muckhill; so does prosperity, many a rotten heart. It is easy to wade
in a warm bath; and every bird can sing in a Sun-shine-day, etc. Hard weather
tryes what health; afflictions try what sap we have, what solidity. Withered
leaves soon fall off in windy weather. Rotten boughs quickly break with heavy
weights, etc.

Verse. 3. And he humbled thee] Humbled they were, (many of them) but not
humble: low, but not lowly. Perdiderunt fructum afflictionum, etc. Aug. [That
he might make thee know] We never know so well, how good, sweet, and seasonable
the Lord is, as when under the cross. Vexatio dat intellectum.

That man does not live] See the Note on Matthew. 4.4.

Verse. 4. Thy raiment waxed not old] It was not the worse for wearing, but grew
as their bodies did; as some are of opinion. They needed not to trouble
themselves with those anxious thoughts of Heathens, what they should eat,
drink, or put on. Never was Prince served and supplied in such state, as these
Israelites were.

Verse. 5. That as a man chasteneth his son] This is reckoned here, as an high
favor. So Job accounts it, Chap. 7.17, 18. and Paul describes it, Heb. 12.7,
8. and Jeremy prays for it, Jer. 10.24.

Verse. 6. Therefore thou shall keep] As good children are the better for
beating; and do gather under the wing of a frowning father.

Verse. 7. That spring out of vallies] Quantum miraculi sit in admiranda illa
fontium perennitate, nemo, credo, Philosophorum satis explicare hactenus
potuit. The perennity of springs is a just wonder, and not far from a miracle.

Verse. 8. A land of wheat and barley] Sumen totius orbis. Strabo basely
slandereth this fat and fertile country, as dry and barren; but Rabshakeh, 1
King. 18.32. and Tacitus tell us otherwise. The testimony here given of it, is
above all exception.

Verse. 9. Thou shall not lack any thing in it] Of the Island Cyprus, it is
said, that it sends forth great abundance of commodities to other Countries;
of whom it craveth ho help again. It was anciently called Macaria, Turk. hist.
the Blessed. Marcellinus, to show the fertilty of it, says, that Cyprus
abounds with such plenty of all things, that without the help of any other
foreign Country, it is, of it self, able to build a tall ship, from the keel,
to the top sail, and so put it to Sea, furnished of all things needful. Of
Egypt also it is reported, that it is so fruitful a Country, ut cunctos
mortales pascere, deos ipsos excipere hospitio salva re posse gloriaretur. It
was anciently called publicum orbis horreum, the worlds great barn; as some
foreign Writers have termed our Country, the Court of Queen Ceres, the granary
of the Western world, the Fortunate Island, the Paradise of Pleasure, and
garden of God. The worst is, that as Aristotle was wont to tax his Athenians,
that whereas they were famous for two things, Laert. l. 5. c. 1.
the best land, and the best laws, frumentis uterentur, legibus nequaquam, they
abused their plenty, and lived lawlesly; so it may be said of us, that we live
in Gods good land, but not by Gods good laws.

Verse. 10. Then thou shall blesse] -- rarae fumant foelicibus arae. Solomon's
wealth did him more hurt, then ever his wisdom did him good. But that should
not have been. Solomon's Altar was four times as big as Moses his, Exodus 27.1.
to teach us, that as our peace and prosperity is more then others, so should
our service, in a due proportion.

Verse. 11. Beware that thou forget not the Lord] By casting his words behind
thee, Psalm. 50.17 and not considering the operation of his hands, Isai. 5.12.
fullness breeds this forgetfulness; laden bodies, leaden minds.

Verse. 12. And have built goodly houses] Haec su^t quae nos invitos faciunt
mori; These are the things that make us loath to die, said Charles, 5. Emperor,
to the Duke of Venice, who had showed him the stateliness of his Palace, and
Princely furniture.

Verse. 13. When thy silver and thy geld] Which what is it else, but white and
red mould, the guts and garbage of the earth? wonder it is, surely, that
treading upon it, we should so much esteem it. Well; if si^ver and gold be our
happiness, then it is in the earth, and so (which is strange) nearer hell,
(which the Scripture places in the deep) then heaven, which all know to be
aloft; and so nearer the Devil, then God.

Verse. 14. Then thy heart be lifted up] The Devil will easily blow up this blab
in the rich man's heart; whose usual diseases are earthly-mindedness, and
high-mindedness. Prosperity makes men proud, secure, impatient, Ier. 22.21. In
rest, they contract much rust.

Verse. 15. Who led thee through, etc.] Good turns, aggravate unkindnesses; and
our offenses are increased by our obligations.

Verse. 16. Who fed thee] God will give his people, Tertull. de patient.
pluviam ^scatilem, and petram aquatilem, Psalm. 78.20, 24. he will set the
flint abroach, and rain corn from heaven, rather then they shall pine and
perish.

Verse. 17. My power] As that great dragon of Egypt, lying at ease in the swollen
waters of his Nilus, says, Ezekiel. 29.2. Habac. 1.16.
My river is mine own, I have made it for my self.

Verse. 19. ye shall surely perish] Idolatry is a land-desolating sin, Judge. 5.8.

CHAP. IX.
Verse. 1. HEar, O Israel] It was all their business, at present, to hear; and
yet he excites them so to do, by an Oyez, as it were. He knew their dullness,
and the din that corruption makes in the best hearts; how soon sated men are
with divine discourses, and how little heed they give to the most wholesome
exhortations. Let a child be never so busy about his lesson, if but a bird
fly by, he must needs look where he lights; so, etc.

Verse. 2. The children of Anak] Hence seems to come the Greek word, (...), for
a King; for these great men were looked upon, as so many little Kings. See the
Note on Genesis 6 4.

Verse. 3. As a consuming fire] The force whereof is violent, and irresistible:
Who is able to stand before this holy Lord God? Woe unto us; who shall deliver
us, etc? said those crest-faln Philistims, at the sight of the Ark, 1 Samuel 4.8.
So, The sinners in Zion are afraid, fearfulness has surprised the hypocrites;
Who among us (say they) shall dwell with this devouring fire? (meaning God) who
amongst us shall dwell with everlasting burnings? Esaias 33.14.

Verse. 4. For my righteousnesse] We are all apt to weave a web of righteousness
of our own, to spin a thread of our own, to climb up to heaven by; to set a
price upon our selves above the market, to think great thoughts of our selves,
and to seek great things for our selves. Coelum gratis non accipiam, says One
Merit-monger, I will not have heaven for nothing; and Read mihi aeternam vitam
quam debes, says Another; Give me heaven, for thou owe it me. How
blasphemous is that direction of the Papists to dying men, Conjunge, Domine,
obsequium meum, cum omnibus quae Christus passus est pro me; Join, Lord, my
righteousness with Christ's righteousness? How much better was it with those
ancient Papists here in England; to whom, upon their deathbeds, the ordinary
instruction appointed to be given was, that they should look to come to glory,
not by their own merits, but alone by the virtue and merit of the passion of
our Lord Jesus Christ: D. Vshier sermon. on Ephesians. 4.13.
that they should place their whole confidence in his death only, and in no
other thing, etc. Those Justiciaries, that seek to be saved by their works,
Luther fitly calls the devils Martys; they suffer much, and take much pains to
go to hell; and by their much boasting, haec ego feci, haec ego feci, they
become no better then Faeces, says he wittily. It is a good observation of a
reverend Divine, Mr. Cotton on Cantic. p. 217.
that the Church in the Canticles is no where described, by the beauty of her
hands or fingers: Christ concealeth the mention of her hands, that is of her
works. 1. Because he had rather his Church should abound in good works in
silence, then boast of them (especially when they are wanting,) as Rome does.
2. Because it is he alone, that works all our works for us, Isai. 26.12. Hos.
14.8.

Verse. 6. Understand therefore] We are wondrous apt to wind our selves into the
fooles-paradice of a sublime dotage, upon our own worth and righteousness;
otherwise, what need* so many words here, to one and the same purpose. The
Scripture does not use to kill flies with beetles, to cleave straws with wedges
of iron, to spend many words where is no need.

Verse. 7. Ye have been rebellious against the Lord] Nothing is so hard, as to
be humbled; for man is a proud cross creature, that would be something at home,
whatever he is abroad; and comes not down, without a great deal of difficulty.
Hence it is, that Moses so sets it on here, and with one knock after another,
drives this nail home to the head, that he might cripple their iron sinews,
bring their stiff necks to the yoke of Gods obedience, and make them know that
he was Jehovah, when he had wrought with them for his Name sake; not according
to their wicked ways, nor according to their corrupt doings, Ezekiel. 20.43, 44,
and 36.31, 32.

Verse. 8. The Lord was angry] God is said to be angry, when he does as an angry
man uses to do; viz. 1. Chide. 2. Smite: revenge being the next effect of
anger.

Verse. 9. When I was gone up into the Mount] Sins are much aggravated by the
circumstances: and every sin should swell as a toad in our eyes; we should
bring them out, as they took the vessels of the Temple, Ezra 8.34. by number,
and by weight. See Lev. 16.21. all their transgressions in all their sins.

Verse. 10. See the Note on Exodus 31.18.

Verse. 12. Arise] From off thy knees, the petitioners posture: Saint James,
they say, had knees as hard as cammels knees, with continual kneeling: Eusebius.
Hieron. Act. and Mon. fol. 1579.
and Hilarion was found dead in his Oratory, with knees bent, eyes and hands
lift up. Father Latimer, during his imprisonment, was so constant and instant
in prayer, that oft-times he was not able to arise without help.

Verse. 14. Let me alone] See the Note on Exodus 32.10.

Verse. 15. So I returned] Yet not till he had first prayed, and prevailed,
Exodus 32.1, 14.

Verse. 16. Ye had turned aside quickly] Levitate prorsus desultoria: Apostates
have religionem ephemeram; being constant in nothing, but in their inconstancy.

Verse. 17. And cast them] See the Note on Exodus 32.19.

Verse. 19. For I was afraid] Moses was more troubled for the people, then the
people were for themselves: so was Dauiel for Nebuchadnezzar, Chap. 4.19. and
Nahum for the Caldeans, Chap. 3.16.

Verse. 22. And at Taberah] Catalogues should be kept of our sins, and often
perused; yea though they be pardoned; that we may renew our repentance, and
keep our souls humble, supple, and soluble.

Verse. 24. You have been rebellious] Here he repeats the former charge, verse.
7. which now he had sufficiently proved against them: We must object no more
against any man, then we are able to make good. If Erasmus had lived to these
days, Erasmus. epist. ad Bilib^ld.
very shame would have crammed those words of his, down his throat; Vbicunqu
eregnat Lutherus, ibi literarum est interitus: duo tantum quaerunt, censum, and
vxorem; Wheresoever Luthers doctrine takes place, learning is little set by:
all the care is for a wife, and for wealth. Os durum.

Verse. 25. Thus I fell down] The three former verses, come in by a parenthesis.
Here he returns again to the history of his interceding for them, the second
time.

Verse. 26. I prayed] And he had a hard tug of it: but prayer is the best lever
at a dead lift.

CHAP. X.
Verse. 1. LIke unto the first] Which Moses had broken: to show, how we in our
nature, had broken the law, and could not be saved by the keeping of it. This,
Christ our true Moses, repaires again: writing the law, not in tables of stone,
but in the heart of unbelievers; and enabling them, in some good measure to
keep it, Job. 1.17. walking (as Luther phraseth it,) in the heaven of the
promise, but in the earth of the law; that, in respect of believing, this of
obeying.

Verse. 2. Which thou breakest] See the Note on Exodus 34.1.

Verse. 3. And I made an Ark] In its use, far beyond that Persian casket
imbroydered with gold and pearl; which Alexander reserved for Homers I^^ads.

Verse. 4. Out of the midst of the fire] The law was given in fire; it is a law
of fire, Deuteronomy. 33.2. given by God, who is a consuming fire, Heb. 12.29. and
has a tribunal of fire, Ezekiel. 1.27. and shall plead with transgressors in
flames of fire, Isai. 66.15, 16. the trial of our works shall be by fire, 1
Cor. 3, 13. Let us therefore have grace, whereby we may serve God acceptably,
with reverence and godly fear. It is the Apostles use, Heb. 12.28.

Verse. 5. And put the tables in the Ark] Which was thenceforth called, the Ark
of the Testimony.

Verse. 6. And the children of Israel] Here are some seeming contradictions,
betwixt this place, and that, Number. 33.31, 32. But, though they seem to be, as
the accusers of Christ, never a one speaking like the other; yet if we well
observe the text, and consult with interpreters, we shall find them like
Nathan and Bathsheba, both speaking the same things.

Verse. 7. A land of rivers of water] A rare thing in a dry desert. Lysimachus
sold his crown for a less matter.

Verse. 8. At that time] viz. Whiles they were yet at mount Sinai; for the two
former verses are inserted by a parenthesis.

The Lord separated the tribe of Levi] This setting up of the Ministry amongst
them, is reckoned as a sign of Gods singular love to them. And so it is to us,
no doubt, albeit a late pamphleter, makes that sacred and tremend function of
the Ministry, The Compass. Samaritan.
to be as mere an imposture, as very a mystery of iniquity, as arrant a juggle,
as the papacy it self. Now the Lord rebuke thee Satan. [To stand before the
Lord] As also the Angels do, Luke 1.19.

Verse. 12. What does the Lord thy God require of thee] Beneficium postulat
officium: Mercy calls for duty.

But to fear the Lord] This is the totum hominis, Eccles. 12.13. the bonum
hominis, Mic. 6.8. the unum necessarium, Luke 10.42. the primum quarendum, Mat.
6.33.

Verse. 14. Behold the heaven and the heaven of heavens] Not the air and sky
only, the visible heaven, but the third heaven, whereof no natural knowledge
can be had, nor any help by humane arts, Geometry, Optics, etc. For it is
neither aspectable, nor moveable. [The earth also] So that there was no
necessity of pitching upon thee, for his peculiar; fith he had choice enough
before him.

Verse. 15. To love them] Because he loved them, as Chap. 7.7, 8. See the Note
there.

Verse. 16. Circumcise therefore] Deus jubendo juvat. Set about this work in
Gods strength, and pray, that the heaven may answer the earth, Hos. 2.21. For
it is a work that must be done without hands, Col. 2.11. Beg of God to thrust
his holy hand into our bosom, Aug. in Exodus quaest. 55.
and to pull off that filthy foreskin; urge him with his promise, Deuteronomy. 30.6.
doubt not of his power, lex jubet, gratia juvat, etc.

Verse. 17. Is God of Gods] And will be served like himself.

Verse. 19. Love ye therefore the stranger] And so show your selves the friends
of God. Cicero.
For idem velle and idem nolle, ea demum vera amicitia est. Friends are
like-minded.

Verse. 21. He is thy praise] Thy praised one, Psalm. 18.3. or, thy praiseworthy
one. He is also thy chief glory, and praise amongst all nations; who shall
admire thy happiness in such a God!

CHAP. XI.
Verse. 1. THerefore thou shall love the Lord] Cos amoris amor. Ama amorem
illius, says Bernard: Not to love them that so loved us, is to be worse then a
Publicane; more hardhearted then a Jew. Matthew. 5.46. That the three children
burnt not in the furnace, Dan. 3.25.
was a miracle; so it is that men so favored, love not God.

Verse. 2. And which have not seen] Segnius irritant animos demissa per aures,
Horat.
Quam quae sunt oculis commissa fidelibus: He speaks unto them, as to
eyewitnesses; and those that have such evidence and self-experience, are
usually more affected, then those that have things by hearsay only. Mine eye
affects my heart, Lam, 3.51.

Verse. 4. Has destroyed them unto this day] i. e. Has so destroyed and
dismayed them, that to this day we hear no more of them: As the Romans so
quailed and quelled King Aitalus, that he made a law, that none of his
successors should make war with that State for ever.

Verse. 5. And what he did unto you] A Diary should be diligently kept of what
God does for us, Psalm. 102.18. for the help of our slippery memories, and the
firing up of our dull hearts to a contention in godliness.

Verse. 9. And that ye may prolong] See the Note on Chap. 4.40.

Verse. 10. And wateredst it with thy foot] Fetching and carrying water, called
therefore the water of their feet, as our life is called, the life of our
hands, Esaias 57.10. because maintained with the labor of our hands.

Verse. 11. And drinks water of the rain of heaven] God crowning the year with
his goodness, and his paths dropping fatness, Psalm. ^5.10 11, 12. In the
Hebrew it is, thy chariot-wheel-tracks; for the clouds are Gods chariots, Psalm.
104.3. in which water is bound, Job 26.8. How they are upheld, and why they
fall here and now, we know not, and wonder. The Egyptians used, in a profane
mockery, to tell other nations, that if God should forget to rain, they might
chance to starve for it; they thought the rain was of God, but not their river
Nilus. See Ezekiel. 29.3, 9. Isai. 19.5, 6.

Verse. 12. Which the Lord thy God cares for] Deus sic curat universa, quasi
singula; sic singula, quasi sola. Aug.


From the beginning of the year] How easy were it for God to starve us all, by
denying us a harvest or two!

Verse. 13. And it shall come to pass This passage of Scripture following, the
Jews read daily in their families, as Maimonides reports.

Verse. 14. That I will give you the rain] Rain, God gives to all by a
providence, Act. 14.17. Job 38.26. but to his Israel, by virtue of a promise;
whereby the might live, not as by bread only, but as by every word that
proceeded out of the mouth of God.

Verse. 16. That your heart be not deceived] Having first deceived it self; for
the heart is deceitful above all things, Jer. 17.9.
etc. and may say to many, as the heart of Apollonius, the Tyrant, seemed to
say to him; who dreamed one night, that he was fleaed by the Scythians, and
boiled in a Caldron, and that his heart spoke to him out of the kettle, and
said, (...), Plut.
It is I that have drawn thee to all this. Those in hell cry so.

Verse. 17. And he shut up the heaven] The keys of heaven, of the heart, of the
womb, and of the grave, God keeps and carries under his own girdle, as we may
say.

Verse. 18. In your heart] Yea upon your heart, Esaias 47.7. and 57.11. so as they
may sink thereinto, Luke 9.44. as the best balm cast into water, sinks to the
bottom.

Verse. 19. Teach them your children] See the Note on Chap. 6.7.

Verse. 21. As the days of heaven] i. e. As long as the world stands. Hence,
happily, we may conceive hope of the repentance of the Jews, and their
re-establishment in this promised land.

Verse. 26. A blessing and a curse] With the way to either; that if ye miscarry,
ye may have none to blame but your selves. For often it falls out, that whereas
the foolishness of man perverteth his way, his heart fretteth against the Lord,
Prove. 19.3.

Verse. 29. Put the blessing upon Mount Gerizim] That is, pronounce it there.
See Josh. 8.33. Hence the Samaritans built their Temple on this mount, as a
blessed place, and there worshipped they knew not what, Joh. 4.20, 22. calling
themselves, Those that belong to the blessed Mount.

CHAP. XII.
Verse. 1. THese are the Statutes] Here Moses begins to comment upon the second
Commandment of the law. See the Note on Chap. 6.1.

Verse. 2. Ye shall utterly destroy] This clause of this law is judicial,
peculiar only to the Jews, says a grave Interpreter; as being chiefly
intended to prevent their worshipping God in any other place, then that one
that he had appointed, to which we in the days of the Gospel are not tied.
See Verse. 5, 6. It was a temporary Ordinance, says another, and a part of
Moses polity, now abrogate.

Verse. 3, And you shall hew downe] As was here done notably in King Edward the
sixths days, notwithstanding the withstandings of the rude rabble, Life of
Edw. 6. by Sir Joh. Heyw.
which more regarded commotioners then Commissioners, and were more guided by
rage then by right, etc. So that as one Master Body, a Commissioner, was
pulling down images in Cornwall, he was suddenly stabbed into the body, by a
Priest, with a knife.

Verse. 4. Ye shall not do so] As wicked Ahaz did, 2 Chronicles. 27.24. by the advice
and help of Vriah, that turn-coat, 2 King. 16. who had once passed for a
faithful witness, Isai. 7.2. but afterward proved a factour for the Devil.

Verse. 5. And thither shall thou come] In token of an holy communion with God.

Verse. 6, Heave-offerings of your hand] For none might appear empty-handed
before the Lord.

Verse. 7. And there ye shall eat before the Lord] Lo this ye shall have of
Gods hand, as a recompense of all your charge and pains; ye shall feast before
him with joy. This made those good souls go bodily on from strength to
strength; though they took many a weary step, yet their comfort was, that they
should every one of them in Zion appear before the Lord, Psalm. 84.7. This was
the sweetmeats of that feast; other dainty dishes there might be, but this was
the banquet.

Verse. 9. For ye are not as yet come to the rest] No more are any of us indeed,
till we come to that rest which remains for the people of God, Heb. 4.3, 8,
9, 10. The Ark was transportative, till settled in Solomon's temple; so till we
come to heaven, are we in continual unrest.

Verse. 10. So that ye dwell in safety] Having peace both external and internl,
of country and of conscience. Regionis and Religionis.


Verse. 12. And ye shall rejoyce] No one duty is more pressed in both the
Testaments, then this of rejoicing in the Lord always, but specially in his
immediate services. And the contrary is complained of, Mal. 2.13. and sorely
threatened, Deuteronomy. 28.47.

Verse. 14. But in the place] This taught them unity and uniformity in divine
worship; as also that there was but one only way to obtain pardon of their sin,
and acceptance of their services, viz. by Jesus Christ, of whom their
Tabernacle and Temple was a type.

Verse. 15. According to the blessing] God allows his not only a sufficiency,
but an honest affluency, so they keep within the bounds of their ability.

Verse. 16. Only ye shall not eat] See the Note on Genesis 9.4.

Verse. 19. That thou forsake not the Levite] But look to his livelihood; since,
Panormitar^.
Ad tenuitatem beneficiorum necessario sequitur ignorantia sacerdotum; small
allowances make either ignorant or negligent Ministers.

Verse. 20. Thou may eat flesh] Only it is noted as a fault, to feed without
fear, Jude 12. And flesh-mongers are taxed by Solomon. Nos etiam animas
incarnavimus, says an Ancient, complaining of the surquedry of his times.

Verse. 22. Even as the roe-buck] i. e. as common and profane meats; for these
creatures were rejected for sacrifice.

Verse. 25. Thou shall not eat it] Who can ever think any commandment of God to
be light or little, when this of not eating the blood, is charged with so much
strictness? The Minutula of the law, as well as the Magnalia, must be carefully
heeded and practiced.

Verse. 26. Go unto the place] Far off though it be, yet go thou must thither
with thy sacrifices; though at home thou may kill and eat for thine own
repast and refreshing.

Verse. 28. And with thy children after thee] Whose comfort they that seek not,
Bern. Epist. 111.
are peremptores potius quam parents, rather parricides, then parents.

Verse. 32. Thou shall not add thereto] To add any thing to the Word of God,
says Theodoret, is bold madness; but to open those things by the Word, that in
the Word are more darkly delivered, is both lawful, and laudable.

CHAP. XIII.
Verse. 1. IF there arise among you a Prophet] A public Deceiver, that shall
boldly obtrude upon you his erroneous opinions for divine oracles; seeking to
drag disciples after him, Act. 20.20. Such as of late times were Servetus,
Socinus, Arminius, Vorstius, Pelargus the first Anabaptist, Islelius Agricola,
the first Antinomian: H. N. that is, Henry Nicolai of Leiden, the first
Familist. Howbeit, Gerson tells us of a woman, one Maria de Valentiana, that
had, lately, before his relation, written a book with incredible subtilty,
concerning the prerogative and eminence of divine love; to the which, whatever
soul had attained, is (according to her) let loose from all the law of Gods
Commandments.

Verse. 2. And the sign or the wonder come to passe] For so it may fall out by
Divine permission, for the patefaction and pudefaction of hypocrites; Exodus
7.22.
as when Jannes and Jambres turned water into blood, or at least, seemed to do
so.

Verse. 3. Thou shall not hearken] Heretics have their pithanology, their good
words and fair speeches, wherein they can vent a spittle of diseased opinions,
and whereby they deceive the hearts of the simple, Romans 16.18. It is not safe
therefore to hear them, or hold discourse with such; lest they insinuate and
infect us, as the Montanists did Tertullian; as the Valentinians did diverse
well-affected Christians; as Acacius the heretic, did Anastasius, 2 Bishop of
Rome, Anno 497. who sought to rectify him. It is reported of Placilla, the
good Empress, that when Theodosius Seniour desired to confer with Eunomius,
Sozomen. l. 7. cap. 7.
she dissuaded her husband very earnestly; lest, being perverted by his
speeches, he might fall into heresy. Keep thee far from an evil matter, says
Solomon. Mark those that make divisions, and avoid them, Romans 16.18.
says Paul. And again, There are many unruly and vain talkers and deceivers --
whose mouths must be stopped, etc. Tit. 1.11.

Verse. 4. Ye shall walk after the Lord] A special Antidote against Apostasy
from the truth, 2 Pet. 3.17, 18. whereas those that have put away a good
conscience, do, as concerning faith, 1 Timothy 1.19.
easily make shipwreck.

Verse. 5. Shall be put to death] This power is still in the Christian
magistrate, to inflict capital punishment on gross heretics; such as was
Servetus at Geneva, and Campian here; who spiderlike, was swept down by the
hand of justice, and drew his last thread in the triangle of Tiburn, Speeds
hist. of Engl. 1176.
as the Historian wittily phraseth it. Quid Imperatori cum Ecclesia? was a
question moved by the old Donatists. Libertas prophetandi, is much challenged
by the Arminians, and other Sectaries. But if in matter of religion, every man
should think what he lists, and utter what he thinks, and defend what he
utters, and publish what he defends, and gather disciples to what he
publishes, this liberty, or licentiousness rather, would soon be the bane of
any Church.

Verse. 6. Thy friend, which is as thine own soul] Amicitia fit tantum inter
binos qui sunt very, and bonos qui sunt pauci.

Entice thee secretly, saying] Christ found the Devil in Peter, persuading him
to spare himself. Cassianus reports of a young man, that had given himself up
to a Christian life; and his parents misliking that way, wrote letters to him,
to dissuade him; which when he knew, he would not once open them, but threw
them in the fire. Mention is also made in Ecclesiastical history, of one
Phileas, a Nobleman, and constant Martyr, who going to execution, seemed as
one deaf at the persuasions, and blind at the tears of his dearest friends: As
the waters use to break themselves on a rock, so was he inflexible.

Verse. 9. Kill him] i. e. Deliver him up to the Magistrate, to be killed; for
he bears not the sword in vain, like S. Paul in a glass-window, or George on a
sign-post.

Verse. 10. To thrust thee away] By force, not of arms, but of arguments,
Tertull.
as the Valentinians, qui prius persuadebant quam docebant. Thus Jeroboam is
said to have driven Israel from following the Lord, 2 King. 17.21.

Verse. 12. If thou shall hear say] Rumors are not always to be credited, nor
always to be contemned.

Verse. 13. Childron of Belial] Renegadoes are the worst of men. 1 John 2.19.
Rabshakeh is held such a one; so Bertius, Tilenus, Staphylus, etc.

CHAP. XIV.
Verse. 1. YE are the children of the Lord] Ye should therefore do nothing
unworthy of such a Father. Antigonus being invited to a place, where a notable
harlot was to be present, asked counsel of Menedemus, what he should do? He bad
him only remember, Plut.
that he was a Kings son, and do accordingly. [ye shall not cut] See the Note
on Levit. 19.28.

Verse. 2. For thou art] See the Note on Chap. 7.6.

And the Lord has chosen thee] Hence all thy holiness. The maids were first
purified, before Ahasuerosh chose one; but here it is otherwise, Ephesians. 5.25,
26.

Verse. 3. Thou shall not eat any abominable] See the Notes on Levit. 11. This
law taught them to abstain from communion with wicked men, in whom are found
the malignities and evil properties of all other creatures, Act. 10.13, 17, 20,
28. They feed hard on sin, the Devils excrement; as the Tartarians eat the
carrion, carkases of horses, camels, asses, cats, dogs, yea when they stink,
and are full of magots, and hold them as dainty, as we do venison.

Verse. 5. The Heart, and the roe-buck] These were dainties fit for a King, 1
King. 4.23. Rice and mutton is the cheer wherewith the great Turk entertaineth
foreign Ambassadors; and that so plainly and sparingly dressed, as if they
would give check to our gourmandize and excess.

Verse. 6. That parts the hoof] See the Note on Levit. 11.3.

Verse. 21. Thou shall not seethe] See the Note on Exodus 23.19.

Verse. 22. Thou shall truly tithe] He seems to mean that second tithe,
wherewith they were to feast before the Lord; and not the tithe given to the
Levites, Number. 18.24.

Verse. 23. That thou may learn] A man cannot converse with God, but he shall
learn something. Semper a te doctior redeo, said He to his friend. Moses came
from the Mount with his face shining. Confer Eccles. 81.

Verse. 29. That the Lord thy God, etc.] Not getting, but giving, is the way to
thrive in the world.

CHAP. XXV.
Verse. 1. AT the end of every] This Sabbatical year signified the year of
grace, the Kingdom of Christ, wherein all Israelites indeed, are discharged of
their debts, Matthew. 6.12. See the Note there.

Verse. 2. He shall not exact it] For that seventh year at least; because there
was neither sowing, nor reaping, that year: how then could the poor pay their
debts? We must all put on bowels of mercy, forbearing one another, and
forgiving one another, etc. Col. 3.12, 13.

Verse. 3. Of a forraigner] To show, that none that are alienated from the life
of God, (or a godly life) have remission of sin by Christ: He sanctifies all
whom he justifies, Compare Romans 11.26. with Isai. 59.20.

Verse. 4. Save when there shall be no poor] Here (as in sundry other places of
the new Translation) the margin is better then the text; as giving a good
reason of the former law; To the end, that there be no poor amongst you, that
is, extreme poor by your exactions. Of a cruel creditour it is said, Psalm.
10.9. that he lies in wait to catch the poor; he does catch the poor, when he
draws him into his net, that is, into bonds, debts, morgages, as Chrysostom
expounds it.

Verse. 7. Thou shall not harden thy heart] But draw out thy soul to the hungry,
Esaias 58. Many have iron-bowels, and withered hands. See my commonplace of
Alms.

Verse. 8. Thou shall surely lend him] See the Note on Matthew. 5.42.

Verse. 9. And he cry unto the Lord] Who is the poor man's King, as James the
fifth, of Scotland, was termed, for his charity.

Verse. 10. Thine heart shall not be grieved] See the Note on 2 Cor. 9.7.

The Lord thy God shall bless thee] See Prove. 19.17. and Alms, ubi supra.

Verse. 11. For the poor] See the Note on Matthew. 26.11. Aged and impotent poor,
whose misery moves compassion, without an Orator, called here our poor, as
well as our brethren.

Verse. 12. In the seventh year] Viz. Since he was sold unto thee.

Verse. 16. Then thou shall take an awle] Vt si non horreret servitudinem,
horreret saltem ignominiam publicam: If we can bear reproach for Christ, its an
argument we mean to stick to him, as this bored servant, to his master.

CHAP. XVI.
Verse. 1. ANd keep the Passeover] Every man that sees another stricken, and
himself spared, is still to keep a Passover for himself.

Verse. 3. Even the bread of affliction] Or, of poverty; as who should say, poor
folks bread, ill-leavened, ill-prepared.

Verse. 4. And the^e shall be] See the Notes on Exodus 12.

Verse. 10. With a tribute of a free will offering] Over and besides the
sacrifice appointed for the feast day, Numb. 18.27, 31. and the two loaves with
their sacrifices commanded, Levit. 23.17, 20. so good-cheap is Gods service to
us, over what it was to them.

Verse. 12. And thou shall remember] It is very good to look back, and recognize
our former worse condition. Agathocles, King of Sicily, being a potters son,
would be served only in earthen vessels. Willigis, Archbishop of Ments, a
Wheel-wrights son, hanged wheels, and the tools wherewith they were made, round
about his bedchamber, and had these words written upon the walls, in very fair
Characters, Willigis, Willigis, recole unde veneris, Remember whence thou
came.

Verse. 13. Thou shall observe] See the Notes on Exodus 23.16.

Verse. 15. Thou shall surely rejoyce] See the Notes on Chap. 12.12.

Verse. 18. With just judgment] Heb. with judgment of justice. Vt fiat justitia,
ruat coelum. Let heaven and earth be blended together, rather then Magistrates
be drawn to deal basely. It is reported by a late traveller, that in Zant, over
the place of judgment, these two Latin verses are written on the wall, in
letters of gold, Hic locus odit, amat, punit, conservat, honorat,
Nequitiam, pacem, crimina, jura, bonos.


Verse. 19. Neither take a gift] Rain is good, and ground is good; yet, ex eorum
conjunctione fit lutum, by the mixture of those two, is made dirt; so giving is
kind, and taking is courteous; yet the mixing of them, makes the smooth paths
of justice, foul, and uneven.

Verse. 20. That which is altogether just] Heb. justice, justice; that is, let
pure justice, without mud, run down; let all self-ish affections be strained
out.

CHAP. XVII.
Verse. 1. THou shall not sacrifice] See the Note on Levit. 22.20.

Verse. 2. That has wrought wickednesse] Idolatry is wickedness with a witness.
Such was the venom of the Israelitish Idolatry, that the brazen Serpent stung
worse then the fiery. Oh that the Lord as he has revealed that Wirked one, so
that he would at length, consume him with the spirit of his mouth, 2 Thessalonians. 2.8.
and dung his Vineyard with the dead carcass of that wild boar of the forest!
He can as easily blast an oak, as trample a mushrome. Fiat, fiat.

Verse. 4. And it be told thee] See the Note on Chap, 13.12.

And enquired diligently] Men must be swift to hear, slow to speak that is, to
censure, or pass sentence. Amongst the Athenians, an indictment of any crime,
was but (...); the evidence and conviction, made it, (...), the sentence (...).
Athanasius pass^th for a sacrilegious person, a profane wretch, a bloody
persecutour, a blasphemer of God, etc. and was so condemned, before he was
heard, by fourscore Bishops, in that Pseudosynodus Sa^dicensis. Sunt quidem in
Ecclesia Catholica plurimi mali; sed ex haere^icis* nullus est bonus, says
Bellarmine; There be many bad men Papists, but not one good to be found among
Protestants. Reas. 8. page 41.
The Catholics follow the Bible, (says Hill, in his quartern of Reasons,) but
the Protestants force the bible to follow them; yea their condemnation is so
expressly set down in their own Bibles, says another Popeling, and is so clear
to all the world, Gagge of the new Gosp. pref. to Read.
that nothing more needs hereto, then that they know to read, and have their
eyes in their heads, at the opening of their Bible. By the shooting of which
bolt, you may easily guess at the archer.

Verse. 7. Thou shall put the evil] Both person and thing, 1 Cor. 5.13.

Verse. 8. Too hard for thee in judgment] i.e. For thee, O Judge, who art
thereupon to consult with the Priests; and by them to be informed of the true
sense and meaning of Gods law. For apices juris non sunt jus. And the Rabbines
have a saying, Nulla est objectio in Lege, quae non habet solutionem in latere.
Now the Priests lips should preserve knowledge, and the Law should be sought at
his mouth; the High Priest also, in some cases, was to enquire, and answer
after the judgment of Vrim, before the Lord, Number. 27.21. This the Pope cannot
do; and therefore cannot claim the final determination of all causes and
controversies; though his Parasites tell him. Oraclis vocis mundi moderaris
habenas:
Et merito in terris diceris esse deus.


Verse. 9. And unto the judg] i.e. The council of judges, the Synedrion, 2 Chronicles. 19.8. consisting partly of Priests, and partly of civil Magistrates!
Amongst the Turks, at this day, their Judges are ever Ecclesiastical persons;
whereby both orders joined, Blounts voyage. 89.
give reputation one to another, and maintenance; for these places of
judicature, are the only preferment of the Priesthood.

Verse. 10. According to all that they inform thee] viz. Agreeable to the
sentence of the law, verse. 11. The Jews from this text, foolishly seek footing
for their traditions, which they so much magnify, Mat. 15.1, 2.

Verse. 14. And shall say, I will set a King] A King then they might choose, so
they did it orderly. Zuinglius in ea fuit sententia, regna omnia esse electiva,
nulla proprie successiva and haereditaria. In quo non negamus eum errasse in
facto, ut loquuntur. Rivet. Iesuita vap. Psalm. 2.6.


Verse. 15. Whom the Lord shall chuse] As he did Saul, but especially David, and
his progeny, types of Christ.

Verse. 16. He shall not multiply horses] Lest he be held as our Henry the third
was, Regni dilapidator, the royal spend-thrift.

Verse. 17. Silver and gold] Lest his exactours receive from his subjects, no
less sums of curses then of coin; and lest he gather money, the sinews of
war; but lose his peoples affection, the joints of peace; as our King John did.

Verse. 18. He shall write him a copy] The Jews say, that if printing had been
found out then; yet was the King bound to write two copies of the law with his
own hand: one to keep in the treasury, and another to carry about him. This
Book of God was David's delight, Psalm. 119.70. Alphonsus King of Aragon is
reported to have read over the Bible fourteen times, with Lyra's notes upon it.
Charles the Wise of France, not only caused the Bible to be translated into
French, (as our King Alured, translated the Psalter himself into his Saxon
tongue,) but was also very studious in the holy Scripture. And that peereless
princess Q. Elizabeth, as she passed in triumphall state through the streets
of London, after her Coronation, when the Bible was presented to her, at the
little Conduit in Cheape-side, Speeds hist.
she received the same with both her hands, and kissing it, laid it to her
breasts, saying; that the same had ever been her chiefest delight, and should
be the rule, whereby she meant to frame her government.

Verse. 19. And it shall be with him] As his Vade-mecum, his Manual, his
running library, the man of his counsel. Luther said, he would not live in
paradise without the Bible; as with it, Tom. 4. Oper. Latin. p. 424.
he could easily live in hell it self.

V. 20. That his heart be not lifted up] That his good and his blood rise not
together, as that Kings of Tire did, Ezekiel. 28.2. and that Lucifer, son of the
morning, Isai. 14.12, 13. See my common place of Arrogance: Of Caligula it is
said, that there never was a better servant, or a worse Lord: Vespasian is said
to be the only man that became better by the Empire. The most of the Emperors
grew so insolent, that they got nothing by their preferment; nisi ut citius
interficerentur, but to be sooner slain.

CHAP. XVIII.
Verse. 1. ANd his inheritance] i.e. Whatsoever, by the Law, belonged to the
Lord, as decimae deo sacrae, etc.

V. 4. Plin. hist.
The first fruit also] Pliny lib. 18. tells us, that among the Romans, also, no
man might taste of his own corn, wine, or other fruits; priusquam Sacerdotes
primitias libassent, till the Priests had offered the first-fruites, and made
their use of them.

Verse. 6. With all the desire of his minde] To do God better service. A good
heart, holds the best he can do, but a little of that much that he could gladly
beteem the Lord, and is still devising what to do more, Psalm. 116.12.

Verse. 8. Besides that] He shall not maintain himself of his own private stock,
but live of the Holy things of the Temple.

Verse. 10. That makes his son] See the Note on Levit. 18.21.

Verse. 11. Or a Necromancer] Bellarmine, and other Papists, play the
Necromancers, when they would prove a purgatory, from the apparitions of
spirits, that tell of themselves, or others, there tormented.

Verse. 13. Thou shall be perfect] See the Note on Mat. 5.48.

Verse. 14. Has not suffered thee so to do] He ^hath showed thee a more
excellent way, and kept thee from these devoratory evils, as Tertullian
calls them; so ordering the matter, that that evil one touches them not
with any deadly touch, I Ioh. 5.18. For either he suffers not his to be tempted
above strength, 1 Cor. 10.13. Or else, he withholds the occasion, when
temptation has prevailed to procure consent and purpose, etc.

Verse. 15. Like unto me] Both in the participation of nature, and of office: a
true man, and a true Mediator; Similes, they are, but not pares: Christ being
worthy of more glory then Moses, and why; See Heb. 3.3. etc. Heb. 7.22. and
9.15.

Verse. 18. And he shall speak unto them] Christ is that palmoni hammedabbar,
Dan. 10. that excellent speaker, that spoke with authority, and so as never man
spoke; being mighty in word and deed. See my true treas. p. 1.

Verse. 22. Thou shall not be afraid] Though he spoke great swelling words of
vanity, Camd. Elis. fol. 403.
2 Pet. 2.18. milstones and thunderbolts, as Hacket here did.

CHAP. XIX.
Verse. 3. THou shall prepare thee a way] A direct, plain, fair highway: Such
a way must Ministers prepare, and pave for their people to Christ (the true
Asylum,) by giving them the knowledge of salvation, by the remission of their
sins, Luke 1, 76, 77.

Verse. 4. Whom he hated not in time past] There is a passion of hatred. This is
a kind of averseness and rising of the heart against a man, when one sees him;
so that he cannot away with him, nor speak to him, nor look courteously or
peaceably upon him; and by his good will, he would have nothing to do with him.
Secondly, there is a habit of hatred; when the heart is so settled in this
alienation and estrangement, that it grows to wish, and desire, and seek his
hurt. Both these must be mortified.

Verse. 5. And live] So he keep within ^his city of refuge, till the death of
the high priest. See the Note on Number. 35.25.

Verse. 6. Whiles his heart is hot] As Nebuchadnezzars oven, viz. with anger and
grief, and such like passions; which like heavy bodies down steep hills, once
in motion, move themselves, and know no ground but the bottom.

Verse 8. And give thee all the land] From Nilus to Euphrates, Genesis 15.18. which
by reason of their sins he never did. Pray we with Jabez, 1 Chronicles. 4.10. Oh
that thou would bless me indeed, and enlarge my coast, (my heart!) and that
thine hand might be with me, etc. When thou shall have enlarged mine heart,
says David, then will I run the way of thy commandments, Psalm. 119.32.

Verse. 11. But if any man hate his neighbour] As Cain did Abel, as Esau Jacob,
as Absalom Amnon; as Dr. Story did Queen Elizabeth, whom he cursed daily in his
grace at board: Anno 1567. Camd. Elisab.
as Tirone did the English; therefore strangling some of his own men, for no
other reason, but because they fed on english bread; howbeit he never spoke of
the Queen, but with honor: yea the profane wretch, Speed.
styled himself Cousin to God, Enemy to all the world, and Friend to the Queen
of England.

Verse. 12. And fetch him thence] From the altar to the halter, from the palace
to the gallows, Prove. 28.17.

Verse. 14. Thy neighbors landmark, which they of old, etc.] Erasmus met with
an adversary so silly, as to object unto him this text, Erasm. in Appologiis,
page 637.
against the new Translation of the new Testament. Quasi per terminos, voces
intellexisset Spiritus S. atque hujus legis violatae illi postulari possent,
qui mutant rerum vocabula. Whereas by terms orland-marks, here are clearly
meant bounds, borders, limits, whereby every man's inheritance was fevered.

Verse. 15. One witness shall not rise up] Yet if this One be a faithful
witness, Arist. Rhetor. lib. 2.
(...), says Aristotle; one faithful witness, in some case, may suffice; in
private offenses, howsoever: And that our Savior speaks of such, Mat. 18.19.
Basil and others are of opinion. If thy brother (a Jew,) shall trespass against
thee being a Jew, right thy self by degrees. First, deal with him fraternally,
tell him his fault, betwixt thee and him alone, verse. 15. Secondly, deal with
him legally, take with thee one or two more, verse. 16. Thirdly, deal with him
jewishly; tell the Church, verse. 17. complain to the Sanhed^in. Mr. Lights.
harmony. page 143.
Fourthly, if he shall neglect to hear them, deal with him Heathenishly, i.e.
Let him be unto thee, as a Heathen, and a Publican; make benefit of Roman
Sovereignty, let Caesar's justice end the difference between you.

Verse. 20. Shall hear and fear] Others woes should be our warnings, others
sufferings our sermons, yea standing sermons, 1 Cor. 10.5. to 12. Gods house of
correction, is the school of instruction.

Verse. 21. Eye for eye, tooth for tooth] See the Note on Mat. 5.38.

CHAP. XX.
Verse. 1. When thou go out to battle] It is not unlawful therefore to go to
war, (as Lactantius held, and some others;) whether it be pro religione, vel
pro region^: Only because it is easier to stir strife, then to stop and stint
it; ( non enim in ejusdem potestate est initium belli, Salust. in Jugurth.
^jusque finis,) war is not rashly to be undertaken; lest it befall men, as in
the battle between the dragon and the elephant. The dragon sucketh out the
blood of the elephant, Pli^. lib. 8. cap. 12. Possid. in ivt. Aug.
and the weight of the falling elephant oppresses the dragon, and so both
perish. Saint Augustine would never pray for such, as had wilfully and
voluntarily thrust themselves into unnecessary wars.

For the Lord thy God is with thee] And how many reckonest thou him for? as
Antigonus said, to his discouraged soldiers: The Lord is a Man of war, Exodus
15.3. Or, as the Chaldee there expresses it; A victour of wars, 2 Chronicles.
32.8. Si deus pro nobis, etc. Romans 8.31.

Verse. 2. That the Priest shall approach] For some Priests ordinarily went
along with the army; not to be Tuba rebellionis, as the Papists said of
Zuinglius; nor evangelium flammeum praedicare, as they said of Beza; as a
common firebrand, or fomenter of discord: but to blow the holy trumpets, that
the people might be remembered before the Lord, and saved from their enemies,
Number. 10.8, 9. 2 Chronicles. 13.12. And to say unto them, as 2 Chronicles. 19. Deal
courageously, and the Lord shall be with the good. The valor of the Gauls,
was admired by the Romans. It proceeded from that instruction of the Druides
their Priests, concerning the immortality of the soul, etc.

Verse. 4. For the Lord your God is (...)] Quid metuit homo in sinu dei positus,
Deo armatus? Creatures of an inferior nature, will be courageous in the
presence of their masters: And shall not men, when they have God with them?
Xerxes was wont to pitch his tent on high, and stand looking on his army when
in fight; to encourage them, So God.

Verse. 5. And has not dedicated it] By prayers, hymns, and other holy
solemnities, then usual, Neh. 12.27. Psalm. 30. title; that the house of David
might be as God, as the Angel of the Lord before them, Zach. 12.8.

Verse. 6. That has planted a vineyard^ This privilege might encourage men to
build and plant; which is good and profitable for the commonwealth, as the
Apostle speaks in a like case, Tit. 3.8.

Verse. 7. That has betrothed a wife] A commendable custom, even among
Heathens also: Placuit, despondi; nuptiis hic dictus est dies, said he in
Terence.

Verse. 8. That is fearful and faint-hearted] This cowardly passion dis-pirits
a man, expectorates his manliness, and exposes him to the cruel mercy of an
enemy. Better be temerarious, then timorous: Ye fugitives of Ephraim, is no
small brand of dishonor, Judge. 12.4. besides that, melting and trying judgments
follow such at heels, as account one pair of heels, worth two pair of hands,
Ier. 9.3, 7. The French fled so fast before the English, Paul. I^vius.
at the battle of Terrim, that it was called the battle of Spur^es. [Lest his
brethrens hearts] Cowardice is catching, and shows that men, like stags, have
great horns, but want hearts.

Verse. 9. Captains of the armies, to lead the people] As Hanniball did, Deead.
3. lib. 1.
of whom Livy reports, that princeps proelium inibat, vltimus, conserto
proelio, excedebat; he was first in the battle, and last out: And the same is
storied of Albert, Marquess of Brandenburg: Buchole.
In congressibus prior pugnam iniit, victor a proelio excessit vltimus.

Verse. 10. Then proclaim peace unto it] Heb. Shall call unto it for peace:
This has been the practice of most nations. The Romans sent their caduceum et
hastam: the Herald was commanded, Gel. lib. 16. cap. 4.
to throw his weapons on the enemies ground, with this speech: Ego, populusque
Romans ho^inibus Hermundulis bellum dico facioque: I and the people of Rome, bid
battle to the Hermunduli. Alexander the great, when he besieged any city,
would send his Herald into it, with a burning torch in his hand, to proclaim,
that if any man would repair and submit himself unto him, while that torch
continued burning, he should be safe: otherwise, Turk. hist.
they should expect nothing, but fire and sword. Tamerlain, when he came
against any place, first, he hanged out a white flag of grace, then a red, and
lastly, a black flag; to show, that now there was no hope of mercy for them:
(...); God loves to give warning, says Herodotus, a heathen. And the Turks are
of opinion, ^b. 344.
that God would not prosper them, in their assaults, except they first make to
their enemies some offer of peace, how unreasonable soever, it forces not. So
they did, at the last fatal siege of Constantinople.

Verse. 11. And open unto thee] As Tournay in France did, to our Henry the
eight, with ten thousand pound sterling, for the Citizens redemption; yet was
it never till then counted so invincible, that this sentence was engraven over
one of the gates; Iannes ton me a perdu ton pucellage, Speeds hist. of Engl.
1001.
thou have never lost thy maidenhead.

Verse. 13. Thou shall smite every male thereof] Let them pay for their
pervicacy. So Caesar answered the Adviatici, Si priusqu^m aries murum
attigisset se de dissent. Caes. 2. Gallic. Connestab. 6.
that he would have spared their city, if they had yielded, before he had
assaulted. And so the Duke D' Alva, much blamed Prosper Columnus, for receiving
a castle upon condition, after he had beaten it with the cannon. Howbeit, in
the L. Protectours expedition into Scotland, in the reign of Edward the 6. one
castle, when they understood they were not able to hold out: and that their
obstinacy had excluded all hope of pardon, they made petition, that they might
not presently be slain, but have some time to recommend their souls to God, and
afterward be hanged. Life of Edw. 6. by Sr. Jo. Heywood.
This respite being first obtained, their pardon did the more easily ensue,

Verse. 17. The Hivites and the I^busites] The Gergashites are not reckoned
among the rest, as neither are they, I^sh. 9.1. happy, because they accepted of
conditions of peace.

Verse. 19. Thou shall not cut them down] Fruit Trees might not be destroyed:
does God take care for trees? It was to teach us, that if we bring forth fruit
fit for Gods taste and relish, sanctifying God and Christ in our hearts, we
shall not be destroyed. Oaks bring forth apples, such as they are, and acorns,
but not fit for meat.

CHAP. XXI.
Verse. 1. IN the field] Or elsewhere; the field is instanced, because in places
more frequented, murders are not so easily concealed, or so commonly committed.

Verse. 2. Then thy Elders] Some of the Sanhedrin.

Verse. 3. Shall take an heifer] Signifying Christ, who is the propitiation for
his peoples sins, 1 John 2.2.

Verse. 4. Which is neither eared nor sown] That is, that afterward should
neither be tilled nor sown, for horror and hatred of the innocent blood there
spilled. So the mountains of Gilboah, 2 ^am.1.

Verse. 5. And by their word] i. e. According to that exposition that they shall
give of Gods Word, and not by any absolute or arbitrary power of their own.

Verse. 6. Shall wash their hands] An old ceremony, used in this case, by the
Gentiles also, as the Scholiast upon Sophocles, shows. See the Note on Matthew.
27.24.

Verse. 27. And they shall answer] To the Priests examining them, and, in Gods
name, making inquisition for blood.

Verse. 8. And the blood shall be forgiven] The fault of not well watching and
guarding the place where the murder was committed. Our King Alfred was the
first that divided this Kingdom into Shires: He ordained also, that his
Subjects should be divided into tens or tithings; every of which, severally,
should give bond for the good abearing of each other. By this course men were
not only careful of their own actions, but each had an eye to all the nine, for
which he stood bound, as the nine had over him. Insomuch, that a poor girl
might travel safely with a bag of gold in her hand, and none durst meddle with
her. The ancientest of these men, were called the Tithingmen.

Verse. 11. And have a desire unto her] This was permitted them, as divorce was,
ob duricordiam. But that is a base passage in the Turks Alchoran, that God did
not give men such appetites, to have them frustrate, but enjoyed; as made for
the gust of man, not for his torment, wherein his Creator delights not; and
therefore they hold it lawful, for a man to marry as many wives, as he is able
to maintain.

Verse. 12. And she shall shave her head] In token, that she must renounce her
heathenism, and lead a new and holy life. And if she thus consented to marry,
she saved her life by it; so do those their souls, that consent to Christ;
casting away their transgressions, and paring off their superfluities, by the
constant practice of mortification.

Verse. 13. A full moneth] Worldly sorrow, like a land-flood, is for the
present, impetuous and violent, but time wears it out; Not so, godly sorrow.

Verse. 14. Because thou have humbled her] This expression shows, that God
approved not of his fact, which yet he tolerated.

Verse. 15. And another hated] i. e. Less loved; as Genesis 29.31. See the Note
there.

Verse. 17. A double portion] According to this phrase, Elisha, 2 King. 2.9.
does not desire a greater measure of the spirit, then rested upon his master;
but only to excel the other children of the Prophets, by a right of
primogeniture.

Verse. 20. He is a glutton] The same word is used for a vile person, Jer. 15
19. And indeed, belly-gods, Philip. 3.19. are dungy-gods, Hab. 2.18 with Ezekiel.
4.17, 18. A scavenger, whose office is to empty, is to be preferred before him
that lives but to fill privies.

Verse. 21. Shall hear and fear] See the Note on Chap. 19.20.

Verse. 23. For he that is hanged] See the Note on Gal. 3.13.

CHAP. XXII.
Verse. 1. THou shall not see thy brothers] No not thine enemies, Exodus 23.4.
for, have we not all one father? Mal. 2.10. See the Note on Matthew. 5.44.

Verse. 5. The woman shall not wear] Because it is against both natural and
civil honesty.

Neither shall a man put on] That is, (say Stage Players, and those that plead
for them,) a man shall not wear women's apparel ordinarily and daily, so as
women use to do. But the word is, Put on, and so they do; The same word is used
of David's putting on Saul's armor, which yet he put off again presently. So
full (says One hereupon) are our hearts of distinctions and shifts, odia
restringere, ampliare favores, to restrain hatreds, (as they call them) that
is, the Commandments that make against them.

Verse. 7. And that thou may prolong, etc.] They were commanded to spare the
damme, because she represented the parents, in bringing up of her young ones:
and if their days should be for that prolonged, much more for this. The
Hebrews reckon this commandment, for the least of all in Moses law; and yet
such a promise is annexed thereunto.

Verse. 9. And the fruit of thy vineyard be defiled] Heb. be sanctified, per
antiphrasin; as Auri sacra fames; and Anthony's fire is, ignis sacer. So a
whore is called in Hebrew, Kedesha, of Kadash, i. e. Holiness, Deuteronomy. 23.17. by
a contrary meaning, as most unholy, and unchaste.

Verse. 10. Thou shall not plough] These laws were made, to set forth how God
abhors all mixtures in religion; and how carefully men should keep their
minds from being corrupted from the simplicity that is in Christ. 2 Cor. 11.3.


Verse. 12. Wherewith thou coverest thy self] Ne in motu ^liquid indecerum
appareat; Lust and malice are sharp-sighted, 2 Samuel 11.2. 2 Samuel 6.20.

Verse. 14. I found her not a maid] Silvester Petra-sancta Jesuita calumniatur
puellas plerunque corruptas nuptui dari in Reformato Evangelio: Jesuita
Vapulans. page 146.
Quod de Evangelio Romano (ait Rivettus noster) potius dici posset; postquam
puellae dementarunt a vobis seducta, and sub vestibus cordulis nodosis spurcis
vestris manibus fuerunt ligatae. Papists falsely affirm, that few maids amongst
us come clear to marriage: cujus contrarium verum est.

Verse. 15. Then shall the father of the damosel] Whose house, hereby, was
dishonested, and by whom his daughters honor was to be defended; especially,
since childrens miscarriages reflect upon the parents; and the daughters sin,
is the fathers shame.

Verse. 16. And he hates her] Which is a monster in nature Ephesians. 5.28, 29,

Verse. 17. These are the tokens] Which in those countries seldom or never
failed.

Verse. 19. He has brought up an evil name] Which is a kind of murder, Ezekiel.
22.9. God shall clear the innocence of his slandered servants, Psalm. 37.6.
Isai. 54.17. As the eclipsed Moon, by keeping her motion, wades out of the
shadow, and recovers her splendor; so shall it be with such.

Verse. 20. And the tokens] Nor any natural impediment can be proved; as the
Hebrews explain it.

Verse. 22. With a woman married] Adultery was punished with death; because
society, and the purity of posterity could not otherwise continue amongst men.

Verse. 24. Humbled his neighbors wife] So called, because betrothed, quia
nuptias facit consensus, non concubitus, as the Lawyers determine it.

Verse. 25. And the man force her, and lie with her] It was a speech of Charles
5. Emperor, If that impure fellow, Farnesins, (who being the Popes General,
had forced many fair Ladies,) were here present, I would kill him with mine own
hand. Nec vocem iracundiorem unquam ex Carolo auditam ferunt. Parei hist. prof.
medulla.
Never was he heard to speak so angerly. The Lacedaemonian Common wealth was
utterly ruined by a rape committed on the two daughters of Scedasus at Leuctra.

Verse. 29. She shall be his wife] Howbeit, he must be humbled before the Lord,
for entering into his ordinance thorough the Devils portal.

CHAP. XXIII.
Verse. 1. OR has his privy member cut off] As it is a barbarous custom at
this day among the Turks, to deprive diverse Christian children of their
privities; supplying the uses of nature with a silver quill. Turk. hist.
This was first brought in amongst them by Selymus the second, out of
jealousy, lest his Eunuchs were not so chaste as they should have been, in
keeping their Ladies beds. Such are usually effeminate, and unfit to bear
office. (...) [Shall not enter into the Congregation] i. e. Shall not go in and
out before the people as a public Officer. Since such should be drained from
the dregs, and sifted from the brannes of the vulgar; they should be eminent
and eximious persons, higher then the rest, as Saul, by head and shoulders.

Verse. 2. A bastard shall not enter] Utpote qui na^i sunt ex prostibulo, pla^e
iucerto patre, sed certissima infamia. 1 Samuel 20.30.
Lest the reproach of his birth render him contemptible, or less courageous:
lest some son of Belial set upon him, as Saul did upon his son Jonathan, and
say, Thou son of the perverse rebellious woman; (so, of the base and beastly
woman) do not I know that thou have done this to the confusion of thy mothers
nakedness? The mutinous Janissaries called their Emperor Bajazet the second,
drunkard, beast, rascal, bastard, Bengi, that is, Batchelour, Turk, hist.
or Scholar; and told him moreover, that they would teach him to use his great
place and calling, with more sobriety and discretion. The English slighted and
scorned their William the Conqueror, because a bastard. In spite also to whom,
and disgrace to his mother Arlet, they called all whores, Harlets. The Jews at
this day, amongst other opprobrious words, wherewith they spitefully load us,
they call all Christians, Mamzer Goi, that is, Heathen bastards: Our Savior,
upon better grounds, called them long since, a bastardly brood, Matthew. 12.39.
And their own Prophet Esaias did the same thing long before, Chap. 57. verse. 3,
4, and that, for their profane scoffing at the truth, and the Professors
thereof. Yet who so forward as they, to say, We are not born of fornication, no
bastards? Joh. 8.41.

Verse. 3. For ever] i. e. This law is perpetual, and indispensable; so highly
displeasing are many mere omissions of duty. Omission of diet breeds diseases,
brings death: so here.

Verse. 4. Because they met you not] As God takes notice of the least courtesy
showed to his people, even to a cup of cold water, to requite it; so he does of
the least discourtesie, even to a frown or a frump, ( Genesis 4.6. See the Note
there) to revenge it. (...) [ And because they bired, etc.] See the Note on
Number. 22.3, 6.

Verse. 5. Nevertheless the Lord, etc.]* q.d. No thank to the wicked Moabites,
that Balaam blasted thee not; as neither to Balaam, whose tongue was merely
overruled by the Almighty, and made to bless those whom he would gladly have
cursed. And thus still the Lord orders the worlds disorders; turning dross into
gold, by a stupendous Alchymy, and directing men's evil actions to a good end.
Hence it is that they fulfill (though they intend no such thing, but the
satisfying of their own lusts, Esaias 10.5, 6, 7.) neither more nor less, then
what the hand and counsel of God has determined, Act. 4.28. and ^3.27.
Howbeit, the hands that nailed Christ to the Cross, were wicked hands, Act.
2.23. And Jud^s the traitor, received strangling and shedding of bowels, as a
reward of his iniquity, for being guide to them that took Jesus, Act. 1.16, 17,
18. It was not without God, that the Kingdom was rent from Rehoboam, 2 King.
12. and yet he flatly renounceth it, (as well he might, all the evil that was
in it) Hosea. 8.4.

Verse. 6. Thou shall not seek their peace] Or, enter into confederacy with
them; which when David did, 2 Samuel 10.1, 2. he was basely abused in his
Ambassadors. Hannibals hatred to the Romans, Cambd. Elisab.
is well known. Tirone, 1 567. so boiled in hatred against the English, that he
named a Castle that he built, Feoghnegal, that is, the hatred of the English.
Among those wild Irish, the Fathers are said to inflict an heavy curse on all
their posterity, if ever they should sow corn, build houses, or learn the
English tongue.

Verse. 7. For he is thy brother] And therefore to be born with, though unkind
and injurious. Howbeit, fratrum concordia rara est: A brother offended, is
harder to be won, says the Wiseman, then a strong city; and their contentions
are like the bars of a Castle, Prove. 18.19. The dissension between England and
Scotland, Daniels hist. 192.
consumed more Christian blood, wrought more spoil and destruction, and
continued longer, then ever quarrel we read of, did, between any two people of
the world. The God of Peace prevent the like bloody dissentions again, now
mightily endeavored by the Boutefeaus of both nations. Si collidimur,
frangimur, If we clash, we perish: dissension is the mother of dissolution, of
desolation. [Thou shall not abhor an Egyptian] But learn of him to return one
good turn for another. Egyptii dicuntur, praeter alias nationes, erga been
meritos de se grati; Existimant enim magnum vitae subsidum esse, Diod. Sic.
lib. 2.
gratia retributionem, says Diodorus: The Egyptians are said to be, above all
others, a thankful people; and to look upon thankfulness, as a main support of
man's life.

Because thou wast a stranger in his land] Where, though thou mettest with much
hardship, yet thou had kind entertainment at first, and after that, a
subsistence, such as it was. Our Henry 6. is said to have been of that happy
memory, that he never forgot any thing but injuries. Elisha, by a noble
revenge, bad set bread and water before the Syrians that came to surprise him.

Verse. 8. In their third generation] The Edomites for their consanguinity, (it
is some privilege to be allied to the Saints, Colos. 4.
to be Barnabas his sisters son,) the Egyptians for their hospitality to Gods
firstborn Israel. God is not unrighteous, etc. Heb. 6.10. See the Note there.

Verse. 9. Then keep thee from every wicked thing] Walk accurately, as carrying
thy life in thy hand; for the sword devoureth one, as well as another, 2 Samuel
11.25. it spares neither lord nor losel, as they say. Every soldier,
therefore, should be a Saint, ready pressed to meet the Lord; who has said, I
will be sanctified in all them that draw near unto me, Levit. 10.3.

Verse. 10. Then shall he go abroad] Go voluntarily, though he be not excluded,
as lepers, and the like, were. Arcta minus obedientia est, ad legem solummode
justum esse, says One; God likes a free will offering.

Verse. 11. He shall wash himself with water] See Levit. 15. with the Notes. The
Turks, at this day, pertinaciously and superstitiously retain this ceremony.
Before prayers, they wash both face and hands; sometimes the head, and other
parts: Yea some report of them, that every time they make water, or other
unclean exercise of nature, Blunts voyage.
they wash, little regarding who stands by: If a dog do but chance to touch
their hands, they wash presently, etc.

Verse. 12. And shall turn back and cover] How much more curious should they be
of soul-defilements? Sin is the souls excrement, and defiles a man worse then
any jakes, Matthew. 7.15, 20, 23.

Verse. 13. Thy God walks in the midst of thy Camp] Where he is both Van and
Rear, Isai. 52.12.

And to give up thine enemies] Hence the Philistims were so frighted at the
sight of the Ark. Let us flee from the face of Israel, for the Lord fights
for them, said those Egyptians, Exodus 14.25. And the same, said a great
Commander for the King, at the dissolution of the siege at Plymouth, 1645.

That he see no unclean thing] Hereby God taught his people holy conversation,
that they should keep themselves from their iniquity, as David did, Psalm.
18.23. that is, from such sins, as either by their constitution, calling,
company, or custom, they are most prone to.

Verse. 15. The servant that is escaped] A heathen servant, that flies for
religion, and desires to join himself to the Lord, to serve him, and to love
the name of the Lord, to be his servant; such must have no cause given them to
say, The Lord has utterly separated me from his people, Isai. 56.2, 6.

Verse. 17. There shall be no whore] And what a stinking shame is that, that
stews and brothel-houses are licensed by the Pope, who reaps no small profit by
them? The Papists themselves write, with detestation, that at Rome, a Jewish
maid might not be admitted into the stews of whoredom, unless she would be
first baptized; Espeacaeus decontin. l. 3. c. 4.
ut Judae filiae scortari non liceat, Dei filiae liceat: Imo Israelis filiae
meretricari non aliter art possit quam facta per baptismum sanctum Christi
soror and filia.

Nor a Sodomite of the sons of Israel] See the Note on Genesis 19.5. Pythagoras
his precept, (...), was intended against this kind of horrid and unnatural
uncleanness; (...), signifying somewhat else besides beans: But what a beast
was Pope Sixtus Quintus, qui lupanar utriusque Veneris Roma condidit, as
Agrippa reports?

Verse. 18. Nor the price of a dog] Plutarch tells us, that it was not permitted
to a dog, (...). Plut. (...).
to enter into the chief tower or Temple, at Athens, for his heat in Venery,
and ill savor. The Hebrews understand this text literally, according to Esaias
66 3. Others metaphorically, as Rev. 22.15. either of imp^dent Cynicks, (such
as Antisthenes) that shame not to commit uncleanness in the sight of others;
these are worse then Absalom, 2 Samuel 16.22. Or else of Sodomites, buggerers,
Meritorii, as they call them, men that have put off all manhood, and are become
dogs, worse then dogs. Am I a dogs head? said Abner to Ishbosheth, 2 Samuel 3.8.
that is, shamelesly libidinous.

Verse. 19. Thou shall not lend upon usury] Heb. upon biting usury. It must
needs bite at length, that licks so clean. Amaleck, the licking people, I mean,
the nation of Usurers, and their factours, as Cormorants, fall upon the poor
borrower, and with open mouth devour him. (...). Foenus a multiplici foetu, ut
(...). In the year, 1235. Speed.
there were spread thorough England, certain Roman Usurers, called Caursini,
quasi capientes Vrsi, devouring bears, says Matthew Paris. These bite to
purpose: Others are more cunning, and close in their conveyance; like Serpents,
they can sting without hissing; like our-dogs, suck your blood only with
licking, and in the end, kill you, and cut your throats without biting. For as
much as all Usury, being forbidden by the law of God, is a sin, and detestable,
etc. says the statute, 13. Elisab. Chap. 8. And, Verily, so many as increase
themselves by usury, etc. they have their goods of the 'Devils gift. Homil. of
the Church of England, Vol. 2. Hom. 17. page 2. Aristotle, by the dim light of
nature, Arist. Eth. l. 4. cap. 1.
saw the evil of it; condemning in one page, the Usurer and the Dicer. And
Agis, General of the Athenians, so hated Usury, that he made a bonefire of all
the Usurers bills and bonds, Plut. in Solone.
in the market place; and then said, that he never saw a finer fire then that,
in all his life.

Verse. 20. Unto a stranger thou mayst] And they do it to purpose, at this day,
in foreign parts where they live; straining up their Usury to eighteen in the
hundred, upon the Christian. This is their chief trade; and this is yielded, by
some, as a reason why the Jews do so stink; quod plerique omnes mensarii sint,
faeneratoriam exercentes, et ita nullis exercitati laboribus, i.e. Because most
of them are usurers, lead sedentary lives, and use no bodily exercise. It was
the saying of a merry fellow, that in Christendom, there were neither scholars
enough, gentlemen enough, nor Jews enough. Heyl. Geog.
If the first, so many would not be ^uralists; If the second, so many Pesants
would not be reckoned among the Gentry; If the third, not so many Usurers.

Verse. 21. Thou shall not slack to pray] Come off with it roundly and readily,
as those, Zech. 5.9. that had wings, and wind in their wings. Habent aulae suum
cito, cite. God loves a cheerful giver.

Verse. 22. It shall be no sin in thee] i.e. No such great sin, as Ioh. 9.41.
lib. 2. de Monach. cap. 16. Alphons. de castro.
So Job. 15.22, 24. Jam. 4.17. See Eccles. 5.5. Vovere nusquam est pr^ceptum,
says Bellarmine: We are no where in Scripture commanded to vow. And, Fateor
quod deus non praecipit, sed tantum consulit nobis ut aliquid illi voveamus,
says another Popish writer. I confess, God no where commands, but only
counsels us to make vows: But what will they say to Psalm. 76.11. Vow, and
perform to the Lord your God, bring presents, etc? And are not the nine lepers
condemned by Christ, for their negligence and unthankfulness, Luke 17.17, 18.

Verse. 24. When thou come, etc.] As a passenger, Mat. 12.1, 2. (how much more
as a labourer, 1 Cor. 9.7.) thou may take what thou will for necessity, but
not for superfluity.

Verse. 25. But thou shall not move (...) sickle] Here God reserveth the right
and property of the owner, which no man might invade or infringe.

CHAP. XXIV.
Verse. 1. BEcause he has found some uncleanness] He is displeased with some
defect, which he has found either in her body, or behavior: as our Henry the
eight pretended at least, to do in his Anne of Cleeve, sister to William Duke
of Cleeve, whose other sister Frederike Duke of Saxony (Luthers Patron and
protector) had espoused. This Lady, being s^nt into England (against
Fredericks liking,) and married to King Henry, seemed nothing pleasing in his
eye, and was therefore (sed quo jure?) soon after divorced. This, Steven
Gardener, thought a fit subject for him to work upon, Speeds hist. fol. 1042.
against the Lord Cromwell, who had made the match, and now opposed the
divorce, and was therefore put to death; which he suffered right christianly,
and cheerfully.

Let him write her a bill of divorcement Heb. he shall write her a bill of
divorcement. God permits, he commands not the Jews thus to do; as they
mistook the matter, Math. 19.7. and were better informed by our Savior, verse.
8. See the Notes there.

Verse. 3. And if the latter husband ha^^ her] As many Nabals now-a-dayes do:
Job was not more weary of his boyls, then they are of their bed-fellows;
cursing their wedding day as much, as he did his birthday; and thirsting after
a divorte, as he did after death: Which because it cannot be had, their lives
prove like the sojourning of Israel in Marah; where almost nothing could be
heard, but mourning, conjuring, and complaining.

Verse. 4. After that she is defiled] Or, caused to be defiled, to wit, by her
husband, who put her away first, he being her only lawful husband, Marth. 5.32.

Verse. 5. Shall cheer up his wife] For the better knitting of their affections;
which if well done at first, will continue the more firm ever after; as a
broken bone well set, or as two boards well glewed together, will sooner break
in a new place, then there.

Verse. 6. A man's life] That is, his livelihood. A poor man in his house, is
like a ^^ail in his shell; crush that, and you kill him. See Luke 8.43. Mark
12.44. all her life, that is, (...).
all her living.

Verse. 7. And makes merchandise of him] What then shall be done to those
seducers, that creeping, or shooting themselves into houses, lend taptive silly
women, 2 Timothy 3.6. and simple men, Romans 16.18. take them prisoners, and then
make prize of them? 2 Pet. 2.3. Of which sort of soul-merchants, there are now
adays found not a few. See Rev. 18.13.

Verse. 8, The Levites shall teach you] Not the history only, but the mystery
too. See the Notes on Levit. 13.

Verse. 9. Did unto Miriam] When he spate in her face, and spared her not,
though a Prophetess, and a Conductress of Gods people to Canaan, Mic. 6.4. God
will not pass by the sins of his Saints, (if scandalous especially,) without a
sensible check.

Verse. 10. To fetch his pledg] To see, quam sit curta supellex and to pick and
choose what pledge thou please.

Verse. 12. Thou shall not sleep with his pledg] As those cruel crafties did,
Amos 2.8. that sold the righteous for silver, and the poor for a pair of
shoes, verse. 6.

Verse. 13. May bless thee] Saying, as St. Paul brings in the relieved poor
Christian, 2 Cor. 9.15. Thanks be unto God, for his unspeakable gift. God will
surely bless thee for such a blessing.

And it shall be righteousness unto thee] God will reckon it for a good work;
and graciously reward it: he will turn paymaster to thee; thy righteousness
(and thy riches too) shall endure for ever, Psalm. 11 2.3.

CHAP. XXV.
Verse. 1. IF there be a controversie] Among the Mahometans there are very few
law-suites; and the reason is given, quod temere litigantes public flagellis
ceduntur, because they that sue others without just cause, Caesar. Com.
are whipped publicly. Once it was counted ominous, to commence actions, and
follow suites. Of our common-barretters, we may well say, as the Historian does
of Mathematicians, Tac. lib. 1. c. 7.
Genus hominum quod in rep: nostra and vetabitur semper and retinebitur.

Verse. 2. To be beaten before his face] The Turks, when cruelly lashed, are
compelled to return to the Judge that commanded it, to kiss his hand, to give
him thanks, and to pay the officer that whipped them.

Verse. 3. Should seem vile unto thee] There is an honor due to all men, 1 Pet.
2.17. and though we must hate the sin, yet not the sinner.

Verse. 4. That treads out the Corn] Which was the manner of that country:
Whereunto, also, the Prophet alludeth, Hos. 10.11. Ephraim is a heifer, that
loves to tread out the corn, (because, while it treads, it feeds on the corn)
but not to plow, because no refreshing, till the work was done.

Verse. 5. Her husbands brother] This was a special exception from that general
law, Levit. 18.16. but yet gave no liberty under this pretext, to have more
wives then one at once. See the Note on Matthew. 22.23.

Verse. 6. The first-born] Provided, that he be a son; as appears by the reason
here given, that his name be not put out of Israel. It signified the
birthright of Christ, that should never dye. He shall see his seed, he shall
prolong his days, Isai. 53.10. Filiabitur nomine ejus, Psalm. 72.17. The name
of Christ shall endure for ever; it shall be begotten, as one generation is
begotten of another, there shall be a succession of Christ's name.

Verse. 9. And loose his shooe] To show, that he was worthy to go barefoot, and
had no right (howsoever,) to tread upon that ground, as any part of his estate.
See Ruth 4.7. The Turks have a ceremony somewhat like this: The woman may sue a
divorce, when her husband would abuse her against nature; Blunts voy.
which she does, by taking off his or her shoe before the judge, and holding
it, the sole upward, but speaking nothing, for the uncleanness of the fact.
[And spit in his face] As unworthy to show his face amongst his brethren. See
Number. 12.14. Isai. 50.6. [That will not build up his brothers house] See the
Note on Exodus 1.21.

Verse. 12. Cut off her hand] The instrument of her sin: thus Cranmer thrust his
hand (wherewith he had subscribed a recantation,) first into the fire, crying
out, thou unworthy right hand. An act of Parliament was here made, in the reign
of Philip and Mary; that the authors and sowers of seditious writings, should
lose their right hands: By virtue whereof John Stubbes and William Page, had
their right hands cut off, with a cleaver driven through the wrist, with the
force of a beetle, in the days of Queen Elizabeth, for a book written against
the marriage with the Duke of Anjou, entitled the Gulf, Camb. Elisab. fol. 239.
wherein England will be swallowed up, by the French marriage, etc. which most
men presaged, would (if it had gone one,) have been the ruin of religion.

Verse. 13. Diverse weights, a great and a small] As they have that weigh not out
a whole seventh day to God, who has given men six whole days to labor in:
these sell by one measure, and buy by another. It was an error doubtless, for
want of due light and better information, in that pious Prince Edward the
sixth, Life of Edw. 6. by Sr. I. H. page 147.
to give order to his Council, that upon Sundays, they should intend public
affairs of the realm, dispatch answers to letters, and make full dispatches of
all things, concluded in the week before: provided, that they be present at
common prayer.

Verse. 18. How he met thee by the way] Not with bread and water, but with fire
and sword. See Exodus 17.8.

And he feared not God] Who had so powerfully brought his Israel out of Egypt.
See Job 6.14. Genesis 20.11. with the note there.

Verse. 19. Thou shall not forget it] Neither did they: Saul should have utterly
destroyed them, 1 Samuel 15. But wherein he failed, God stirred up the Simeonites
in Hezekiah's days, to smite the rest of the Amalekites that were escaped, 1 Chronicles. 4.42, 43. It is ill angring the ancient of days. His wrath lasts longer
then hot coals of juniper, Psalm. 120.4. his judgments are severe and durable:
As we use to say of winter, they never rot in the sky; but shall fall, if
late, yet surely, yet seasonably. Gods forbearance is no quittance.

CHAP. XXVI.
Verse. 2. THat thou shall take of the first, etc.] In token of homage, or as a
chief rent due to God the true proprietary, of whom they held all.

Verse. 5. A Syrian ready to perish] Jacob, whose original was from Haran in
Syria, Genesis 11.31. and whose abode had been with Laban the Syrian, in much
poverty, affliction, and misery, Hos. 12.12. [And became there a nation]
Consider we likewise what we were by nature, and should have been; what we are
by grace, and shall be: and then take we up that most modest speech of that
noble Athenian Captain Iphicrates, in the midst of all his glory, (...); from
how great baseness and misery, Aristot. Rhetoric. l. 5. c. 9.
to what great blessedness and glory, are we advanced; being raised up
together, and made to sit together in heavenly places in Christ Jesus? Ephesians.
2.6. See verse. 11.12, 13. with the notes. What was there in us (said Tamerlian
to Bajazet the great Turk, Leionclav. Annal. Turc.
now his prisoner;) that God should set us over two great Empires, of Turks and
Tartars, to command many more worthy then our selves; you being blind of one
eye, and I lame of a leg, etc? Peter Martyr told Queen Elizabeth in an epistle,
that Princes must be double thankful to God. 1. As men. 2. As eminent men,
exalted above others: so must all Gods servants; who being his firstborn, are
in that respect, higher then the Kings of the earth, Psalm. 89.27. and being the
first fruits of his revenue, are therefore holiness to the Lord, Ier. 2.3.

Verse. 12. The stranger, the fatherless] Thus God does not only plead the poor
man's cause, Chap. 15.10, 11. but he allots a portion, of the third-yeares tyth,
not only to the Levite, (who is never excluded,) but to the stranger,
fatherless, and widow; as Hierom observes, and calls it (...); the poor
man's tyth.

Verse. 13. I have not transgressed] This is spoken, not by way of Pharisaicall
boasting, or opinion of merit, but public testification of entire obedience.

Verse. 14. I have not eaten thereof in my mourning] All Gods worships, were to
be celebrated with joy, Deuteronomy. 12.7. Sacrifices offered with mourning, were
abominated, Hos. 9.4. yea accursed, Deuteronomy. 28.47. None might come to the court
of Persia, in mourning weeds, Esth. 4.2. [For any unclean use] Or common
profane use. Common and unclean, is one and the same, in sundry languages: to
teach us, that it is hard to deal in common businesses, and not defile our
selves; and that those that come to holy things, with common affections and
carriages, profane them. [Nor given ought thereof for the dead] To bury them,
or buy provision for the funeral feast, Ier. 16.7. Ezekiel. 24.7. Hos. 9.4. [Ye
have done according, etc.] It is a witty expression of Luther. By men's boasting
of what they have done, says he, Haec ego feci, haec ego feci; they become
nothing else but Faeces, dregs. But so did not these. See the note on verse. 13.

Verse. 17. Thou have avouched] This we do, when with highest estimation, most
vigorous affections, and utmost endeavors we bestow our selves upon God;
giving up our names and hearts, to the profession of truth. And this our
choosing God for our God, Psalm. 73 25. is a sign, he first chose us, 1 Ioh.
4.19. Mary answers not Rabboni, till Christ said Mary to her. It is he that
brings us into the bonds of the Covenant, Ezekiel. 20.37. He first cries out, who
is on my side? Who? and then gives us to answer, as Esaias 44.6. One says, I am
the Lords; another calls himself by the name of Jacob, another subscribes, etc.

Verse. 19. And to make thee high] Assyria is the work of Gods hand, but Israel
is his inheritance, Isa. 19.25. and 43.3.

CHAP. XXVII.
Verse. 2. ANd plaster them with plaister] That they might have it in white and
black.

Verse. 4. In mount Ebal] Where the curse was denounced, verse. 13. to signify,
that those that sought salvation in the law, must needs be left under the
curse. The law is a yoke of bondage, as Hierom calls it: and they who look for
righteousness from thence, are like oxen, who toil and draw; and when they
have done their labor, are fatted for slaughter.

Verse. 5. Thou shall build an altar] For burnt offerings, etc. Verse. 6.7. God
teaches them thereby, that righteousness (impossible to the law,) was to be
sought in Christ, figured by that altar, and those sacrifices. Thus the moral
law, drove the Jews to the ceremonial, (which was their Gospel;) as it does
now drive us to Christ, who is indeed the end of the law for righteousness, to
every one that believes, Romans 10.4.

Verse. 8. All the words of this law very plainly] Therefore, it could not be
all Deuteronomy; much less all Moses books, as some have thought; for what
stones could suffiee for such a work? Unless they could write as close, (but
how then could it be very plainly?) as he did, who set forth the whole history
of our Saviors passion very lively, In canicular. colloq.
(both things, and acts, and persons,) on the nails of his own hands, as
Maiolus reports.

Verse. 15. Cursed be he, etc.] The blessings are not mentioned by Moses, that
we might learn to look for them, by the Messiah only, Act. 3.26.

Verse. 16. That sets light] That vilipendeth, undervalueth, not only that
curses, as, Exodus 21.17.

Verse. 24. That smiteth] Either with violent hand, or virulent tongue, Ier.
28.18.

Verse. 26. Cursed] Aut faciendum, ant patiendum. Men must either have the
direction of the law, or the correction.

CHAP. XXVIII.
Verse. 1. IF thou shall hearken diligently] Heb. If hearkening thou shall
hearken; If when Gods speaks once, thou shall hear it twice; as David did,
Psalm. 62.11. by a blessed rebound of meditation and practice. [Will set thee on
high] Thou shall ride upon the high places of the earth, Isai 58.14. There thou
shall have thy commoration, but in heaven thy conversation, Philip. 3.20. being
an high and holy people, Deuteronomy. 26.19. high in worth, and humble in heart, (...)
Nazian.
as one says of Athanasius.

Verse. 2. And overtake thee] Unexpectedly befall thee. Surely, goodness and
mercy shall follow thee, Psalm. 23.6. as the evening Sunbeams follow the
passenger, as the rock-water followed the Israelites in the wilderness, and
overtook them at their stations, 1 Cor. 10.4. O continue, or, draw out to the
length thy loving kindness, unto them that know thee, Psalm. 36.11, There will
be a continued Series, a connection between them, to all such.

Verse. 3. Blessed shall thou be] What blessedness is, See the Note on Mat. 5.3.

Verse. 4. The fruit of thy body] Which is thy chief possession; Dulcis
acerbitas amarissima voluptas. Tertull.
but without my blessing, will be bitter sweets. Blessed is the man, that has
his quiver full of such, as are as the arrows of a strong man; Psalm. 128 4.
the knottiness of whose nature is refined and reformed, and made smooth by
grace. Arrows be not arrows by growth, but by art: what can better preserve
Jacob from confusion, or his face from waxing pale, then, when he shall see his
children, the work of Gods hands, framed and fitted by the word in
regeneration, and the duties of new obedience. This will make him to sanctify
God, even to sanctify the Holy One, and with singular encouragement from the
God of Israel. Isai. 29.22, 23.

Verse. 7. The Lord shall cause thine enemies] Mr. Fox observes, that in King
Edward the sixth's time, the English put to flight their enemies, in
Muscleborough field, the self-same day, and hour, wherein the reformation
enjoined by Parliament, Act. and Mon^
was put in execution at London, by burning of Idolatrous images. Such a
dependence has our success, upon our obedience.

And flee before thee seven wayes] In the forementioned fight, many so
strained themselves in their race, that they fell down breathless and dead;
whereby they seemed in running from their deaths, to run through it: 2000 lying
all day as dead, got away in the night. The Irish were so galled, or scared
with the English ordnance, Life of Edw. 6 by Sr. Io. H.
that they had neither good hearts to go forward, nor good liking to stand
still, nor good assurance to run away, says the Historian.

Verse. 8. The Lord shall command the blessing] Now if he send his Mandamus, who
shall withstand it?

Verse. 10. And they shall be afraid of thee] Natural conscience cannot but do
homage to the image of God, stamped upon the natures, and works of the godly.
When they see in them, that which is above the ordinary nature of men, or their
expectation, they are afraid of the Name of God, whereby they are called; their
very hearts ache, and quake within them; as is to be seen in Nebuchadnezzar,
Darius, Herod, Dioclesian, who was so amazed at the singular piety, and
invincible patience of the primitive Christians, that he laid down the Empire
in a humor, Bucholcer.
quod christi nomen se deleturum, uti cupiverat, desperasset; because, that
when he sought to root out religion, he saw he could do no good on it.

Verse. 12. And thou shall lend] This was our condition, in the happy days of
that incomparable Elizabeth, not to be passed over slightly, without one sigh
breathed forth, now after 40 years, in her sacred memory. What a deal, both of
men and moneys, did she lend the French, the Hollanders, etc?

Verse. 13. And the Lord shall make thee] See a parallel place, Hos. 13.1. When
Ephraim spoke, there was trembling; he exalted himself in Israel; but when he
offended in Baal, he dyed. Before, none durst budg against the name of Ephraim;
but after he offended in Baal, every paltry adversary trampled upon him, as a
dead man. So they did, likewise, upon Henry 4. of France, ever victorious, till
he changed his religion; till then, Bonus orbi; but after that, Orbus boni, as
One wittily anagrammatized his name, Borbonius.

Verse. 15. All these ourses shall come] Far more curses are mentioned, then
blessings. Such is the baseness of our natures, that we are sooner terrified
with menaces, then moved with mercies. See we may here, how the curse of God
haunts the wicked (as it were a fury) in all his ways. In the City it attends
him, in the Country it hovers over him: Coming in, it accompanies him; going
forth, it follows him; and in travel, it is his Commorade. If it distaste not
his dough, or empty his basket, ye^ will it fill his store with strife, or
mingle the wrath of God with his sweetest morsels. It is a moth in his
wardrobe, murrain among his cattle, mildew in his field, rot among his sheep,
and oft-times makes the fruit of his loins his greatest beart-break; so that he
is ready to wish with Augustus, Vtinam aut coelebs vixissem, aut orbus
periissem; O that I had either never married, or d^ed childless*

Verse. 21. The Lord shall make the pestilence] Which Hipocrates calls, (...),
as the falling sickness is called Morbus sacer, as more immediately sent of God.

Verse. 22. The Lord shall smite thee, etc.] See the Note on Levit. 26.16.

Verse. 24. Powder and dust] Which the wind, and other things, raise in times of
drought.

Verse. 27. With the botch of Egypt] i. e. with the leprosy, called
Elephantiasis, when the skin grows hard as the Elephants skin. This, says One,
was bred only about Nilus the river of Egypt.

Verse. 28. With madness and blindness] Spiritual especially; such as befell the
Jews of old, Romans 11.18. 2 Cor. 3.14. the chief Priests and Scribes especially,
who being questioned by Herod, about the King of the Jews, Matthew. 2.4, 5. could
answer directly out of the Scriptures, and give such signs of the Messiah, as
did evidently agree to Jesus Christ. And yet, because they discerned not their
day of grace, but winked hard with their eyes, and shut the windows, lest the
light should come in, they were, by a special judgment, so besotted and
infatuated, that when God shows them the man, to whom their own signs agree,
they cannot allow of him, nor will yield to be saved by him, upon any terms.
How shamefully they were deluded by Barchocab, is notoriously known: And after
this, when they saw Mahomet arising in such power, they were straight ready to
cry him up for their Messiah. But when they saw him eat of a camel, they were
as blanck, as when they saw the hoped issue of their late Jewish virgin turned
to a daughter. They are generally light, aerial, and fanatical brains, apt to
work themselves into the fools Paradise of a sublime dotage. Howbeit, God, we
trust, will, at length, cure them of this spiritual ophthalmy and frenzy.
Their dispersion for this 1600 years is such, as that one of their own Rabbines
concludes from thence, that their Messiah must needs be come, and they must
needs suffer so much, for killing him. Oh that the salvation of Israel were
once come out of Sion! When the Lord brings back the captivity of his people,
then shall Jacob rejoice, and Israel be glad, Psalm. 14.7.

Verse. 29. And thou shall be only oppressed] As the Thebanes, ever till then
victorious, were, after the death of Epaminondas, famous only for their
overthrows: As Rome, since Antichristian, was never besieged by an enemy, but
it was taken and plundered: as the Jews, since Christ's death, never attempted
any thing, but miscarried. An evil, an only evil, etc. Ezekiel. 7.5.

Verse. 30. Thou shall build an house, etc.] A great aggravation of a man's
misery it is, to fall from high hopes, to fail of large expectations, as Haman
did, and Absalom, and Alexander the Great, and Tamerlan; who preparing to
perfect his conquest of the Greek Empire; and having given a good beginning
thereunto, in the midst of his high hopes, and greatest power, died of an ague,
Turk. hist.
Jan. 27. 1462. Many men spend their strength, and waste their wits, in getting
these outward things, and in learning how to put them to their delightfullest
use: and then (when to possess them, might seem a happiness,) either they die,
or are otherwise deprived of all the sweet they have labored for.

Verse. 32. And thine eyes shall look] A sad sight, to see our children
butchered before our eyes, as Mauricius the Emperor did; or otherwise misused
by a merciless enemy. Doves sometimes sit in their dove-cotes, and see their
nests destroyed, their young ones taken away, and killed before their eyes;
neither do they ever offer to rescue or revenge, as all other creatures either
do, or desire to do. [ And fail with looking] As Sisera's mothers did, Judge.
5.28.

Verse. 33. The fruit of thy land, etc.] So Ezekiel. 25.4. They shall eat thy
fruit, and they shall drink thy milk. See Ier. 5.17. and 1.7.

Verse. 34, 35. So that thou shall be mad, etc.] As Bajazet was in his iron
cage; as Pope Boniface 8. was, when shut up in St. Angelo, by Sara Columnus his
mortal enemy; Turk. hist. Ibid. 126.
renting himself with his teeth, and devouring his own fingers. Philip the
Spanish King, is said to have born patiently, the defeat given to h^s
invincible Armado, in the year 88; but ten years after, Cambd. Elisab.
he dyed of a very loathsome and incureable disease; a sore botch that seized
upon him from the sole of his foot, unto the top of his head; as is to be seen
set down by Carol. Scribanius, Instit. Princip. cap. 20.

Verse. 47. For the abundance of all things] Aristotle was wont to tax his
Athenians, quod cum duas res invenissent, Laert. l. 5. c. 1.
frumenta ac leges, frumentis uterentur, legibus nequaquam; imo moribus suis
quam legibus uti mallent, as Valerius Maximus adds. Sure it is, that as these
Jews of old, so we, to this day, are much to be blamed, for that we live in
Gods good land, but not by Gods good laws.

Verse. 53. And thou shall eat] See the Note on Levit. 26.29.

Verse. 56. The tender and delicate] These threatenings were tanquam in speculo
conspicuae, literally and punctually fulfilled upon the Jews, at the last
destruction of Jerusalem; at which time, wrath came upon them to the utmost, 2 Thessalonians. 2.

Verse. 58. This glorious and fearful Name] That Nomen majestativum, as Bernard
calls it. The wiser sort of Heathens acknowledged, augustius esse de Deo
sentiendum, Hinc Pythagericum illud, (...).
quam ut nomen and imaginem ejus passim ac temere usurpemus, that higher
thoughts must be taken of God, then lightly and profanely to make use of his
name; which no man may presume in a sudden unmannerliness to blurt out. When
they would swear by their Jupiter, they would break off their oath with a
(...), Suidas.
as those that only durst to owe the rest to their thoughts.

Verse. 63. So the Lord will rejoice over you] See here the venomous nature of
sin, so far forth offensive to Almighty God, as to cause him, (who otherwise
afflicts not willingly, Lam. 3.33. but delights in mercy, Mic. 7.18.) to
rejoice in the ruin of his creatures, as here, to laugh at their destruction,
and mock when their fear comes, Prove. 1.26. to take as much pleasure therein,
as a man would do in a cup of generous wine, Rev. 16.19. and to be as much
eased thereby, as one over-gorged would be, in ridding his stomach of that that
oppressed it, Rev. 3.16.

Verse. 65. A trembling heart] Juvenal, by a jeer, calls them Judaeos trementes,
trembling Jews, Sat. 6. It seems they had Cains curse upon them.

Verse. 66. And thy life shall hang in doubt] Semper and indesinenter desperabis
de vita; thou shall live in continual expectation of death; as Tiberius caused
such to do, as he most hated, for a singular punishment.

Verse. 68. And the Lord shall bring thee into Egypt] This is the last and
greatest curse here threatened. Oh pray, pray, said that Dutch Divine, upon his
deathbed, Pontifex enim Romanus, and concilium Tridentiaum mira moliuntur, for
the Pope and his Council, are seeking to bring us all back into spiritual
Egypt. Ah ne diem illum posteri
Vivant mei, quo pristinum
Vertantur in lutum aurea
Qua nos bearunt soecula!
What long has been the opinion and fear of some, not unconsiderable Divines,
Mr. Baylie his Anabaptis. unsealed, etc. pref.
that Antichrist, before his abolition, shall once again overflow the whole
face of the West, and suppress the whole Protestant Churches; I pray God to
avert.

CHAP. XXVI.
Verse. 1. BEside the covenant] Which yet was also a covenant of grace, and the
same with this in substance; only that at Horeb was made and delivered in a
more legal manner: this in a more Evangelical, as appears in the following
Chapter.

Verse. 4. Yet the Lord has not given you] Nor is he bound to do; but on whom
he will, he shows mercy, and whom he will, he hardens; i.e. he softneth
not. Till when, a man stands in the midst of means, as a stake in the midst of
streams, unmovable; yea the more God forbids a sin, the more he bids for it,
Romans 7.8. See the Notes on Matthew. 13.11, 13, 14.

Verse. 5. Your clothes] See the Note on Chap. 8.4.

Verse. 6. ye have not eaten bread] Viz. ordinarily, (see Deuteronomy. 2.6.) but Manna;
and beneficium postulat officium.

Verse. 11. From the hewer of thy wood] The meanest amongst you, such as
afterward were the Gibeonites; who also, by faith, became Covenanters, and are
called Nethinims in Ezra and Nehemiah. They were made drawers of water to the
Temple, as a kind of punishment; God made it a mercy; for the nearer they were
to the Church, the nearer they became to God.

Verse. 16. How we have dwelt] And how hard is it to pass through Ethiopia, (how
much more to dwell there?) and not to be discolored? Sin is catching; and by
the senses (those cinque ports of the soul) that old serpent often winds himself
into the heart. Ye have seen their abominations; (oh that you would say, Satis
est vidisse, etc.) Now therefore, lest there should be, etc. verse. 18.

Verse. 17. A root that bears gall] An evil heart of unbelief, Heb. 3.12. a
deceitful and deceived heart, Ier. 17.9. Isai. 44.20 that is ever either
weaving spiders webbes. ( i e. loving vanity, seeking after leasing, Psalm 4.2.)
or, hatching cockatrice eggs, that is, acting mischief, Esaias, 59.5. (...).
As in that first Chaos were the seeds of all creatures; so in man's heart,
(here therefore fitly called a root of rottenness) of all sins. Holy Bradford
would never look upon any ones lewd life with one eye, but presently reflect
upon himself with the other, and say, In this my vile heart remains that sin,
which, without Gods special grace, I should have committed as well as he.

Verse. 19. When be hears the words] But fears them no more, then Behemoth
does the iron weapons, which are esteemed by him as straws. The presumptuous
sinner (says one,) makes God a God of cloutes: one that howsoever he speaks
heavy words, will not do as he says. Words are but wind, say they in Jeremy,
Chap. 5.13. God forbid, say they in the Gospel, Luke 20.16. These things are
but spoken in terrorem, thinks the practical Athiest; bug-beare words devised
on purpose to affright silly people, etc. Ahab. (after he was threatened with
utter rooting out,) begat fifty sons, as it were to cross God, and to try it
out with him. So Thrasonicall Lamech brags, and goes on to out-dare God
himself; If Cain be avenged, etc. Genesis 4.23. The old Italians were wont in time
of thunder, to shoot off their greatest ordnance, and to ring their greatest
bells, to drown the noise of the heavens: like unto these, are many frontless
and flagitious persons. But shall they escape by iniquity? in thine anger, (it
is not more a prayer, then a prophecy;) cast down the people, O God, Psalm. 56.7.

To add drunkenness to thirst] To add rebellion to sin, Job 34.37. To drink
iniquity, like water. Verse. 7. His sin and his repentance run in a circle; as
drankenness and thirst do. He sins, and cries God mercy, and says he will sin
no more, and yet does it again the next day; till his heart be so heardened by
the deceitfulness of sin, that at length he loses all passive power, of
recovering himself out of the snare of the devil, by whom he is taken alive,
at his pleasure, 2 Timothy 2.26.

Verse. 20. The Lord will not spare him] God cannot satisfy himself, in
threatening this heinous sin; as if the very naming of it had enraged his
jealousy. Yea when he threatens it, he uses here no qualifications, (as he
does in other cases) but is absolute in threatening, to show, that he will be
resolute in punishing. See the like, Esaias 22.12, 13, 14. Ezekiel. 24 1^. It is
better, therefore, to have a sore, then a seared conscience; as a burning
fever is more hopeful then a lethargy.

Verse. 22. When they see the plagues] A presumptuous offender is a traitor to
the State; and one sinner destroys much good, Eccles. 9.18.

Verse. 23. And bears not any grasse] As they say, no ground does, where the
great Turk has once set his foot; such waste he makes, and such desolation he
leaves behind him.

Like the overthrow of Sodom and Gomorrah] See the Notes on Genesis 19.24, 25.
(...) [Admah and Zeboim] Which two Cities bordering on Sodom and Gomorrah,
were the worse, and fared the worse for their neighborhood; as Hamath did for
Damascus, Zech. 9.2. God overthrew them, and repented not; Ier. 20.16.

Verse. 26. And whom he had not given unto them] Or, who had not given to them
any portion. For, Can the vanities of the Gentiles give rain? or can the
heavens give showers? Jer. 14.22. As Saul said, 1 Samuel 22.7.
Can the son of Jesse give you vineyards, and olive-yards, etc? so may God say
to Apostates, Can the world do for you, as I can?

Verse. 28. And cast them into another land] Cast them with a violence, with a
vengeance, (in the Hebrew the word [cast] has an extraordinary great letter
(sling them out, 1 Samuel 25.29.
as out of a sling.

Verse. 29. The secret things belong] This is one of those sixteen places, which
in the Hebrew, are marked with a special note of regard. Eorum quaescire nec
datur, nec fas est, docta est ignorantia, scientiae appetentia, insaniae
species, says Calvin, out of Austine.

CHAP. XXX.
Verse. 1. THe blessing and the curse] When thou have made trial of both, and
have bought thy wit: as feeling by woeful experience, what an evil and a bitter
thing sin i^* and how easily thou might have redeemed thine own sorrows, by
better obedience.

Verse. 2. And shall return to the Lord] By sin, we run away from God; by
repentance, we return to him.

Verse. 3. That then the Lord thy God] Conversie Judaeorum magnisice hic
promittitur, says One. Here Is a stately promise of the conversion of the Jews;
concerning which, see the Notes on Romans 11.25, etc.

Verse. 4. If any of thine be driven] The Jews have been for this 1600 years and
upward, a disjected and despised people, hated and cast out, by a common
consent of all nations, for their unexpiable guilt, in murdering the Messiah;
which they now begin to be somewhat sensible of, and will be so more and more.
See the Note on Chap. 28.28.

Verse. 6. And the Lord thy God] See Chap. 10.16.

Verse. 7. Will put all these curses upon thine enemies] God will recompense
tribulation to them that have troubled you, 2 Thessalonians. 1.6. he will spoil the
spoylers, Esaias 33.1. deliver the just out of trouble, and the wicked shall come
in his stead, Prove. 11.8. Isa. 65.13, 14. It seems to the Churches enemies,
an incredible paradox, and a news by far more admirable then acceptable, that
there should be such a transmutation of conditions on both sides, to
contraries; but so it will be, as sure as the coat is on their backs, or the
heart in their bodies. See Lam. 4.21.

Verse. 9. And in the fruit of thy land, for good] God will provide, that thou
shall not be the worse for thine outward abundance; that fullness shall not
breed forgetfulness. It is as hard to bear prosperity, as to drink much wine,
and not be giddy; or as to drink strong waters, and not weaken the brain
thereby. The parable of the Sun and Wind is well known. Some of those, in Queen
Mary's days, who kept their garments close about them, wore them afterward
more loosely, when they came to prosperity, and preferment. It is a mavelous
great mercy to have outward comforts and contentments, for good. Bonus Deus
Constantinum Magnum tantis terrenis implevit muneribus, De civ. dei, lib. 5.
cap. 25.
quanta optare nullus auderet, says Augustine, God of his goodness, heaped all
good things upon Constantine.

Verse. 11. For this commandement] This word of faith, Romans 10.8. that teaches
the righteousness of faith, verse. 6. and speaks on this wise; the doctrine of
salvation by faith, that works by love: this is clearly enough revealed in both
testaments; so that none can reasonably plead ignorance, and think to be
excused by it.

Verse. 12. Who shall go up for us to heaven] And yet to know heavenly things,
is to ascend into heaven, Prove. 30.4.

Verse. 13. Neither is it beyond the sea] Beyong the sea it was to us, till
blessed Luthers books were brought hither, together with Tindals translation,
and other good men's writings. Some Papists jeare us, and say, that Turkies,
hops, and heresy, came into this kingdom in one bottom. Howbeit, long before
this, the Lady Anne, wife to King Richard the second, siller to Wenceslaus King
of Bohemia, by living here, was made acquainted with the Gospel: whence also
many Bohemians coming hither, conveyed Wickliffes books into Bohemia, whereby
a good foundation was laid for the ensuing reformation, Anno 1417, by the help
of another good Queen there, called Sophia. The writings also of John Husse
brought thence, wrought much good in this kingdom, a hundred years before
Luthers time.

Verse. 19. Therefore choose life] Which yet man (of himself,) can as little do,
as a dead carcass can fly aloft. It was therefore an unsound and unsavory
speech of him that said, quod vivamus, dei munus est; quod been vivamus,
nostrum: That we live, it is of God; but that we live well, it is of our
selves. See the contrary, Isai. 26.12. Hos. 14.8. Ioh. 15.5.

CHAP. XXXI.
Verse. 2. I am an hundred and twenty, etc.] And so might well bespeak them, as
Augustus once did his army, and pacified them thereby, when they were in a
mutiny; Sueton.
Audite senem juvenes, quem j^venem senes and erunt.

Verse. 6. He will not fail thee] Five times, in holy Scriptures, is this
precious promise repeated; and Heb. 13.5. made common to all believers, with a
very deep asseveration.

Verse. 9. Unto the Priests] Gods library-keepers, his depositaries. (...) [Vnto
all the elders of Israel] As to the Keepers of both Tables.

Verse. 11. Thou shall read this law] Which was nevertheless read in their
synagogues every Sabbath Day, Act. 15. And by this reading, at the feast of
Tabernacles, every seventh year, the original copy written by Moses; Mr.
Burton against Couzens.
they might perceive that those copyes that they had amongst them, were right
and authentic. It was ill ordered, in our english bibles of the new
translation, that between the Printers haste, and Correctours oversight, such
foul escapes have been lately committed; as Judas printed for Jesus, in the
great Bible, Lightf. Miscel.
The Turkish Alcoran is written, and to be read in Arabic* under pain of death
not to mistake a letter, which is as easily done in this tongue, as in any.

Verse. 17. And many evils and troubles] As it befell Sampson and Saul, when God
was gone: (...), all miseries came trooping and treading one in the heels of
another. So Ezekiel. 9.10, 11. God makes many removes: and as he goes out, some
judgment comes in upon the land.

Verse. 19. Put it in their mouths] That out of their own mouths I may judge
them: things made up in meeter, are better remembered. Before the knowledge of
letters and writing, among the ancients, it was a custom to sing their laws,
lest they might forget them; used in the days of Aristotle, by the Agathyrsi, a
people near to the Scythians.

Verse. 21. For I know their imagination] As a man that knows what roots he
has in his garden; thought here be not a flower appears, yet he can say, when
the spring comes, this and this will come up; because he knows the garden, and
knows what roots are there: So the Lord knows our thoughts afarr off; because
he knows the principles that are within, and knows what they will do, when
occasion serves: he is privy to that root, that bears gall and wormwood,
Chap. 29.18.

Verse. 26. In the side of the Ark] That it might be heard, and regarded, as the
very law of God, though penned by Moses. And indeed the Jews at this day, show
exceeding great respect to the law: No man may touch it, but with the right
hand, and without a kiss of reverence; Schicard.
nor carry it behind him, but lay it next to his heart in his travel: If it
but fall to the ground, they institute a fast for it, Weemse.
etc. The very Turks have so high an esteem of Moses, that if they find any
piece of his writings, (be it but a torn paper) lying on the ground, Pareus
prol. in Genes.
they presently take it up, and kiss it. [That it may be there for a witness]
Hence happily the Ark was called, the Ark of the testimony; the law might be
called the doomes day book such a book there is in our common law, so called,
says Matthew Paris, because it spares no man.

Verse. 29. To provoke him to anger] Which is the greatest folly that can be,
for, are we stronger then he? can we imagine to make our party good with him?
Surely, as Ulysses his companions told him, when he would needs provoke
Polydamus; (...);

May not we much more say so to them, that will needs provoke the Lord? It is
good for men, to meddle with their matches, and not contend with him that is
mightier then they.

CHAP. XXXII.
V. 1. GIve ear O ye heavens] q. d. Such is this peoples stupidity and
obstinacy, that I may as soon gain audience of these inanimate creatures, as of
them. See Isai. 1.2. Josh. 24.27. Ier. 22.29. We may cry, till we are hoarse;
speak, till we spit forth our lungs, and to no more purpose, then Bid did,
when he preached to an heap of stones. Holy Melanchthon, being himself newly
converted, thought it impossible for his hearers, to withstand the evidence of
the Gospel. But after he had been a Preacher a while, it is said he complained,
that old Adam, was too hard for young Melanchthon.

Verse. 2. My doctrine] Heb. My taking, or winning doctrine: according to that*
Prov^. 1.30. He that wins. (Heb. takes) souls, (as fowlers do birds) is
wise. [Shall drop as the rain] Drop, not dash; and as the rain, not as the
storm, or as the spout, as they call it at sea. Evangelizatum non maledictum
missus es, said Oecolampadius, to Facellus, an excellent, but an over earnest
Preacher. And such a one, say some, was Mr. Perkins in his younger time; able
almost to make his hearers hearts fall down, and their hairs to stand upright.
The word Damn, he would pronounce with such an emphasis, as left a doleful
Echo in his auditors ears, a good while after. True it is, that Preachers
should take the same liberty, to cry down sins, that men take to commit them.
Peccata tanta severitate arguebat, (says one of Chrysostom,) acsi ipse etiam
per injuriam laesus esset: But yet moderation must be used, and instruction
dropmeale distilled, that it may soak and sink; and so soften the heart, that
all grace may abound, etc. Such sweet drops were Mr. Bradford, Mr. Dod. Dr.
Sibbes, (...)

Verse. 3. Ascribe ye greatness] i.e. Tremble at his word, and take it to heart.
See 1 Thessalonians. 2.13.

Verse. 4. He is the Rock] A firm and everlasting refuge, a rock of Ages, Isai.
26.4. One age passes away, and another, and a third, etc. but the rock
remains. The name of the Lord is a strong tower, Prove. 18.10. munition of
rocks, Isai. 33.16. Rocks so deep, no pioner can undermine them; so thick, no
Cannon can pierce them; so high, no ladder can scale them.

Verse. 5. Their spot is not the spot] Saints also have their spots, but not
engraven, not Leopards spots, that are not in the skin only, but the flesh and
bones, in the sinews, and the most inner parts; and so cannot be cured by any
art, or, washed away with any water. It is of incogitancy, that the Saints
fall; put them in mind, and they mend all: It is of passion, and passions last
not long. They are preoccupated, taken at unawares, etc. Gal. 6.1. They have
ever God for their chief end, and will not forgo him upon any terms: Only
they err in the way, as thinking they may fulfill such a lust, and keep God
too: but there is no way of wickedness found in them. Though shaken, yet they
are rooted as trees; and, though they wag up and down, yet they remove not, as
a ship at anchour. Sin stings the wicked, as the fiery serpents did the
Israelites: the sins of the saints, are but like the viper on Paul's hand, that
hurt him not. Sin makes wicked men the object of God hatred, the Saints, of his
pity: as we hate poison in a toade, but we pity it in a man; in the one, it is
their nature; in the other, their disease.

Verse. 6. Do ye thus requite the Lord] Good turns aggravate unkindnesses; and
our guilt is increased by our obligations. Solomon's idolatry was far worse then
that of his wives: he had been better bred, and God had appeared to him twice.
It is the ingratitude, that makes the godly man's sin so heinous; which
otherwise, would be far less then other men's: since his temptations are
stronger, and his resistance greater. Hebricians observe, that in Halaihovah,
there is in the text, one (...) greater then ordinary; to show, that the wonder
was the greater, that they should so evil requite such a Lord. Father,
Redeemer, Maker, and Governor, by being so corrupt, perverse, crooked foolish,
and unwise: five opposed to live: (...) being used for the number of five.

Verse. 8. He set the bounds of the people] Of the seventy nations reckoned,
Genesis 10. and the seventy souls of Israel, Genesis 46.27. Deuteronomy. 10.22. The Jews
have a saying, that those seventy souls were as much, as all the seventy
nations of the world; as being the Lords portion, for whom he espied out the
land of Canaan, which is the glory of all lands, Ezekiel. 20.6.

Verse. 9. For the Lords portion] Dear to God, though despised of the world.
They are the Lords inheritance, Isai 19.25. peculiar ones, Exodus 19.5. the
people of his purchase, that comprehended all his gettings, 1 Pet. 2.9. his
glory, Isai. 46.13. his ornament, Ezekiel. 7.20. his throne, Ier. 4.21. his
diadem, Isai. 62.3. heirs of the kingdom, says Saint James, heads destinated
to the diadem, Jam. 2.5.
says Tertullian,

Verse. 10. And in the waste howling wilderness] A figure of the cries of a
thirsty and troubled conscience, and of infernal horrors. See Ezekiel 16.4. etc.
[He instructed him] Both by his word and works, both of mercy and justice: for
Gods rods also are vocal, Mic. 6.9. his house of correction, is his school of
instruction. [He kept him as the apple of his eye] The tenderest piece of the
tenderest part: The crystal humor, as the Philosophers call it. Heb. Ishon,
of Ish; as Pupilla of Pupa; because therein appears the likeness of a little
man: Or, because a man is to be prized above all other creatures; so God
esteems his people, above all the world.

Verse. 11. As an eagle stirs up her nest] So does God stir up his people,
by his word of promise. [Fluttereth over them] By the motions of his Spirit, as
Genesis 1.2 [Spreadeth abroad her wings] Hovereth and covers them with his
protection, Mat. 23.37. [Taketh them] With much tenderness, but nothing
comparable to that of God. [Beareth them on her wings] Aquilae pullos suos in
alis portant, alites reliqui inter pedes, says Munster here, out of Rabbi
Solomon. See the Note on Exodus 19.4.

Verse. 12. And there was no strange god with him] Why then should any share
with him in his service? Be the gods of the heathen good-fellows, says One?
the true God will endure no corrival.

Verse. 13. To suck honey out of the rock] Water, as sweet as honey, in that
necessity; So does every worthy Receiver by faith, at the Sacrament: Whereas,
who so comes thereunto, without faith, is like a man, says Mr. Tindal, that
thinks to quench his thirst, by sucking the Ale-powl.

Verse. 14. With the fat of kidneys of wheat] With the very Best of the Best;
figuring heavenly dainties, that full feast, Isai. 25. Judaea, for its
admirable fertilty, is called Sumen totius orbis: how basely soever Strabo
speaks of it, as of a dry barren Country; wherein he shows less ingenuity, then
railing Rabshakeh did.

Verse. 15. But Jeshurun waxed fat, and kicked] Jeshurun, h^^ est Integellus,
says One, as Shimshon, or Sampson, Solilus, a little Sun, but a type of the
Sun of righteousness, that has health in his wings, that is, in his beams.
Israel should have been Jeshurun, that is, Righteous, or upright before the
Lord, Israelites indeed; but were nothing less. If ever they had been better in
the time of their espousals, when they went after God in the Wilderness, in a
land that was not sown, Jer. 2.2. yet now that they were full fed, they
kicked; as young mulets, when they have sucked, matrem calcibus petunt, kick
the dammes dugs. Fullness breeds forgetfulness; and the best are but too prone
to surfeit of the things of this life; which, by our corruption, oft-times,
prove a snare to our souls. I will lay a stumbling block. Ezekiel. 3.20. Vatablus
his note there, is, Faciam, ut omnia habeant prospera; calamitatibus us eum a
peccato non revocabo; I will prosper him in all things, and not by affliction,
restrain him from sin. The most poisonous flics are bred in the sweetest fruit
trees: how apt are the holiest to be proud and secure: even as worms and waspes
eat the sweetest apples and fruits! Salvian. lib. 1. ad Eccles. Catholic. In
Benedict 4.
Repugnante contra temet ipsam tua foelicitate* says Salvian, to the Church in
his time; thy prosperity is thy bane: And, cum ipsis opibus lasciv^re coepit
Ecclesia, says Platina; The Church began to be rich and wanton at once.
Religio peperit divitias, and silia devoravit matrem: Religion brought forth
riches, and the daughter soon devoured the mother, says Augusti^e. The much
wool on the sheeps back, is oft-times his ruin; he is caught in the thorns,
and famished. The fatter the ox, the sooner to the slaughter. When the
Protestants of France began to grow wanton of their prosperity, and to affect a
vain frothy way of preaching, then came the cruel massacre upon them. The good
Lord keep this Church of England from the like mischief, much threatened by the
Malignant party, who even wish with big-swoln Balaam, I would there were a
sword in mine hand; for now would I kill thee, Number. 22.29. A sword they have
lately gotten again into their hand in Wales, but with evil success, Blessed be
the Lord our strength, which teaches our hands to war, and our fingers to
fight, Psalm. 144.1. Surely, he that, in so ill a cause, kills with the sword,
must be killed with the sword, Rev. 13.10. Those sworn swordmen of Satan, shall
fall by the sword; they shall be a portion for foxes, Psalm. 63.10. They shall
be so, no doubt, if we hinder not our own happiness by an unworthy kicking
against the tenderest bowels of Gods Fatherly compassions, ever earning toward
us. Should we, with the fed hawk, forget our master? Or being full with Gods
benefits, like the full-Moon, then get furthest off from the Sun; and by an
interposition of earthly desires, become dark? The cords of love, are called
the cords of a man, Hos. 11.4. To sin against mercy, is to sin against
humanity; it is bestial, nay it is worse. To render good for evil, is Divine;
to render good for good, is humane; to render evil for evil, is brutish; but
to render evil for good, is devilish, as a Reverend man has well observed.
[Then he forsook God] Here Moses, weary of speaking any longer to a gainsaying
and disobedient people, turns his speech to the heaven and earth, whom he had
called in to bear witness, verse. 1. So, when a certain people of Italy had
commanded the Roman Ambassador, ad quercum dic^r^, se interim alia acturos,
to deliver his Embassage to the great oak; for they had somewhat else to do,
Live.
then to give him audience; he at swered, Et haec sacrata quercus audiat foedus
esse a vob^ violatum, I will, indeed, direct my speech to the Oak, and tell it
in your hearing that you have basely broken covenant, and shall dearly answer
it.

Verse. 16. They provoked him to jealousie] See the Note on Chap. 31.29.

Verse. 17. They sacrificed unto Devils] See the Note on Levit. 17.7. [To new
gods that came newly up] Such as are all Popish He-Saints, and She-Saints;
concerning whom, Bellarmine himself cann^t but yield, that, Bell. de cultu
sanct. cap. 9.
Cumscriberentur Scripturae, nondum coeperat usus vovendi Sanctis, There was no
vowing (or bowing either) to Saints departed, when the Scriptures were written.
And a loaf of the like leaven are those Newlights, and all subtleties, whereby
our Sectaries would distinguish themselves from Brownists. Are they not all, or
most of them, borrowed out of Mr. H. Jacobs books, who was but of yesterday?
The Antinomians usually call upon their hearers to mark; it may be they shall
hear some new truth, that they never heard before: when the thing is either
false, or (if true) no more then ordinarily is taught by others.

Verse. 18. And have forgotten God that formed thee] Or, that brought thee
forth. Here God is compared to a mother, as in the former clause, to a father.
So, Jam. 1.18. Of his own will begat he us, (...), He brought us forth, and did
the office of a mother to us; which does notably set forth his love, and the
work of his grace.

Verse. 19. Of his sons, and of his daughters] Titular at least; wherefore their
sin was the greater. What? Thou, (...).
my son Brutus? This cut Caesar to the heart.

Verse. 20. I will see what their end shall be] This is spoken after the manner
of men; as likewise that, verse. 27. [In whom is no faith] i. e. fidelity; as
Matthew. 23.23. there is no trusting them, or taking their words.

Verse. 21. And I will move them to jealousie] Thus God delights to retaliate
and proportion jealousy to jealousy, provocation to provocation; So,
frowardness to frowardness, Psalm. 18.26. contrariety to contrariety, Levit.
28.18, 21, etc.

With a foolish nation] With the conversion of the Gentiles, Romans 10.19. which
the good Jews could not easily yield to at first, Act. 11.2, 3. And the rest
could never endure to hear of it. See 1 Thessalonians. 2.15, 16. At this day they
solemnly curse the Christians thrice a day in their Synagogues, with a, Maledic
Domine Nazarais. They have a saying in their Tulmud, Optimus qui inter gentes
est dignus cui caput conteretur, tanquam serpenti; The best among the Gentiles
is worthy to have his head broke, as the Serpent had. Yea they think they may
kill any Idolaters: Therefore Tacitus says of them, There was misericordia in
promptu apud suos, sed contra omnes alios hostile odium, mercy enough toward
their own, but against all others they bare a deadly hatred.

Verse. 22. For a fire] See the Note on Chap. 10.4.

Verse. 23. I will spend mine arrowes] Which yet cannot be all spent up, as he
feared of his Jupiter, Si quoties peccent homines, etc.

Verse. 24. Burnt with hunger] Which makes men's visages blacker then a coal,
Lam. 4.8. [with burning heat] i. e. With the burning carbuncle, or plague sore.
See Haba^. 3.5.

Verse. 25. And terror within] Warring times are terrible times. By the civil
dissentions here in King John's time, all the Kingdom became like a general
shambles, or place of infernal terrors and tortures. War, says One, is a
misery which all words (how wide soever) want compass to express. It is says
Another, the slaughterhouse of mankind, and the hell of this present world.
See the Note on Genesis 14 2.

Verse 27. Were it not that I feared] See verse. 20.

Lest their adversaries] This is that (likely) that moves the Lord, hitherto,
to spare England. God has dealt with us, not according to his ordinary rule,
but according to his prerogative. England (if it may be so spoke with
reverence) is a paradox to the Bible. Pererius, the Jesuit, commenting upon
Genesis 15.16. If any marvel, says He, why England continues to flourish,
notwithstanding the cruel persecution (just execution he should have said) of
Catholics there: I answer, Because their sin is not yet full. Sed veniet
tandem iniquitatis complementum, etc. We hope better, though we deserve the
worst that can be* But somewhat God will do for his own great Name; and lest
the enemy exalt himself, Psalm. 140.8. and say, Our hand is high, the Lord has
not done this.

Verse. 28. For they are a nation] See the Note on Chap. 4.6. It was Chrysippus
that offered that strict and tetrical division to the world, Aut mentem, aut
restim comparandum.

Verse. 29. Oh that this people were wise] Sapiens est, cui res sapiunt prout
sunt, says Bernard. [That they would consider their latter end] This is a high
point of heavenly wisdom. Moses himself desires to learn it. Psalm. 90.12.
David also would fain be taught it, Psalm. 39.4. Solomon sets a Better upon it,
Eccles. 7.2. Ierusalems filthiness was in her skirts, because she remembered not
her latter end; therefore also she came down wonderfully, Lam. 1.9, The kite,
by the turning of his tail, directs and winds about all his body. Consideratio
fini^ tanquam caudae, ad vitam optime regendam confert, Mr. Ward's Sermons.
says Berchorius. I meet with a story of one that gave a prodigal a ring, with
a deaths-head, with this condition, that she should one hour daily, for seven
days together, look and think upon it; which bred a strange alteration in his
life; like that of Thesposius in Plutarch; or that more remarkable, of Waldus,
the rich Merchant of Lions, etc.

Verse. 30. How should one chase a thousand] i.e. Howshould one of the enemies
chase a thousand Israelites, (who had a promise of better things, Levit. 26.8.)
but that having first sold themselves for naught, Isai. 52.3. they were now
sold by God; who would own them no longer, Psalm. 31.7, 8.

Verse. 31. For their Rock is not as our Rock] We may well say, who is a God
like unto thee? Mic. 7.18. Contemno minutulos istos deos, modo jovem (Jehovam)
mihi propitiumc habeam; I care not for those dunghill-Deities, so I may have
the true God to favor me. [Even our enemies] Exodus 14.25. Number. 23.8, 12. 1 Samuel 4.8.

Verse. 32. For their vine is of the vine] Vitis non vinifera, sed venenifera.
The vine is the wicked nature, the grapes are the evil works. So Isai. 59.5.
They hatch cockatrice eggs, and weave the spiders web; ( vanity or villainy, is
their whole trade;) he that eats of their eggs, dies, etc. Look how the
bird that sits on the serpents eggs, by breaking and hatching them, brings
forth a perilous brood to her own destruction: so do those that are yet in the
state of Nature; being the heirs of Original, and the fathers of Actual sins;
which when they are finished, bring forth death, Jam. 1.15.

Verse. 33. Their wine] i. e. Their works, yea their best works prove pernicious
to them; not their own table only, but Gods Table becomes a snare to the
unprepared communicant; he sucks there the poison of aspes, etc. Job 20 16. he
eats his bane, and drinks his poison: as Henry 7. Emperor, was poisoned in the
Sacramental bread by a Monk; Pope Victor 2. by his Subdeacon in his challice,
and one of our Bishops of York, by poison put into the wine at the Eucharist.

Verse. 34. Is not this laid up in store] To wit, for just punishment, though
for a while I forbear them. The wicked man is like a thief, which having
stolen a horse, rides away well mounted, till overtaken by hue and cry, he is
apprehended, sentenced, and executed. Your sin will find you out, as a
blood-hound; et patientia Dei erga impios quo diuturnior, Hioron. in Jerem.
eo minacior. Morae dispendium foenoris duplo pensatur; the longer God
forbeareth, the heavier he punishes.

Verse. 35. To me belongs vengeance and recompence] The Hebrew word for
vengeance, (...)
signifies comfort also; for God will be comforted in the execution of his
wrath, Ezekiel. 5.13. See the Note on Chap. 28.63. He show; such severity
sometimes, as if he had blotted that out of his title, Exodus 34.6. and now took
up that Emperors Motto, Fiat justitia, pereat mundus.

Their foot shall slide in due time] They are set in slippery places, Psalm.
73.18. they ever walk as upon a mine of gun powder, ready to be blown up: Nemo
crimen gerit in Pectore, qui non idem Nemesin in tergo. Nemesis dicitur, (...),
quod (...). Gods wrath is such, as none can avert or avoid.

Verse. 36. And repent himself for his servants] Thus God mingleth and allayeth
the rigor of his justice, with the vigor of his mercy.

Verse. 37. And he shall say] i. e. He shall upbraid them with the inability of
their idols to do for them.

Verse. 39. I, even I am he] I, is emphatical and exclusive.

Verse. 41. If I whet my glittering sword] God first whets, before he smites;
and first takes hold on judgment, before his judgments take hold on men. Est
piger ad poenas, ad proemia velox. See the like, Psalm. 7.12. God was but six
days in making the whole world, yet was he seven days in destroying that one
city of Jericho, as Chrysostom observes. Fury is not in me, Esaias 27.4. As a
be stings not, till provoked; so God punishes not, till there be no other
remedy, 2 Chronicles. 36.16.

Verse. 43. Rejoice, O ye Nations] Give God the glory of his just severity,
which is no less commendable in a Judge, then seasonable clemency.

Verse. 47. For it is not a vain thing] Gods favor is no empty favor; it is
not like the Winter-Sun, that casts a goodly countenance when it shines, but
gives little comfort and heat.

CHAP. XXXIII.
Verse. 1. BEfore his death] The words of dying men, are living oracles; they
should therefore be pious and ponderous.

Verse. 2. Went a fiery law for them] This fire, wherein the law was given, and
shall be required, is still in it, and will never out: hence are those terrors
which it slasheth in every conscience that has felt remorse of sin. Every man's
heart is a Sinai, and resembles to him both heaven and hell. The sting of death
is sin, and the strength of sin is the law.

Verse. 3. Yea, he loved the people] With a general love, with a common
Philanthropie. But the love of God in Christ is that we must all labor after;
such a love, as does better for a man, then restore him to sight, or raise him
when bowed down, Psalm. 146.8. [ Are in thy hand] And so in a safe hand, Ioh.
10.29. [And they sat down at thy feet] As attentive, and tractable Disciples.
See Act. 22.3. Luke 10.39 and 2 King. 2.5. Know thou not, that the Lord will
take thy master from thy head? A phrase taken from their manner of sitting, at
the feet of their Teachers.

Verse. 4. Moses commanded us a law] These are the words of those Saints
abovementioned, expressing their good affection to the law, and to Moses, by
whose mediation they received it. [Even the inheritance] For perpetual use to
us and our posterity. Indeed the law lies not upon the righteous, ((...), 1 Timothy 1.9.) nor urges them, as it does upon the wicked. To those, the law is as
chains and shackles; to those, as girdles and garters, which gird up their
loins, and expedite their course the better. It confines them to live in that
element where they would live; as if one should be confined to paradise, where
he would be, though there were no such law.

Verse. 5. And he was King in Jesharu^] An herrick King, reigning by virtue and
justice only, not by force and violence: One that said not, (...), but (...);
This I can do, but This is fit for me to do. [When the heads of the people, and
the tribes] Here was a government made up of King, Lords, and Commons. The best
of governments, doubtless, so that the boam be kept right betwixt Sovereignty
and subjection. The contention (now again flagrant in England) between Prince
and people, about command and obedience, ceased not, till the Magna Charta
(first obtained of King John; after, of his son Henry 3. though observed truly
of neither,) was, in the maturity of a judicial Prince, Edward the first,
freely ratified, after fourscore years.

Verse. 6. Let Reuben live, and not dye] Let him have a nail, and a name in Gods
house, notwithstanding the hainousness of his sin, and the severity of Jacobs
sentence, Genesis 49.4. See the Note there.

Verse. 7. And this is the blessing] Simeon is not mentioned, but employed in
Judah's blessing; in the midst of whose inheritance, lay his portion, Josh.
19.1. Besides, that tribe was exceedingly defiled with fornication, spiritual
and corporal; and by that means much decayed and diminished, Numb, 26.14.
[Hear, Lord, the voice of Judah] Putting thy promises, Genesis 8.9, 10, 11. into
suit by his prayers, and pressing thee for a performance.

Verse. 8. Let thy Thummim and thy Vrim] Sincerity of life, and soundness of
doctrine. See the Note on Exodus 28.30. There is great cause, That Ministers, of
all men, should be much prayed for.

Verse. 9. Who said unto his father] In that heroical fact, Ezod. 32.26, 29. Not
to be wryed or biassed by respect to carnal friends, is a high and hard point
of self-denial. Mark was Barnabas his sisters son; hence he stood so stiff for
him against Paul, his faithful fellow-traveller, Act. 15.37. Colos. 4.10.
Moses to please Zipporah, displeased God, and it went hard with him, Exodus
4.24. Eli was too indulgent to his wicked sons; and so perhaps was Samuel too,
1 Samuel 8.1, 3.

Verse. 10. They shall teach Jacob] Apt and able to teach must all Ministers be,
as Paul, Act. 20. Praedicationis officium suscipit, quisquis ad sacerdotium
accedit, says Gregory: He Is no Minister, that is no teacher. Aidanus the first
Bishop of Durham, Anno Dom. 636. neglected no duty of a good Pastor,
traveling up and down the country, even on foot, Godw. Catalog.
to preach the Gospel; giving whatsoever he could get, unto the poor; and by
the example of his own virtues instructing, as well as by word and doctrine.
Amongst the Greeks, Tragedians and Comedians were said, (...), to labor in
teaching the people: What should Ministers then do?

They shall put incense before thee] i.e. Pray for the people, as well as
preach to them. So Act, 6.4. Austins wish was, that Christ when he came, might
find him, aut precantem aut praedicantem, praying or preaching. Been orasse est
been studuisse, says Luther.

Verse. 11. And of them that hate him] Ministers shall be sure of many enemies:
They hate him, that reproves in the gate. Veritas odium parit; praedicare
nihil aliud est quam derivare in se furorem mundi, said Luther, to preach, is
to get the worlds ill will. Ye are the light, says our Savior, which is
offensive to sore eyes: ye are the salt of the earth, which is bitter to
wounds, and causes pain to exulcerate parts.

Verse. 12. The beloved of the Lord] The Lords corculum, deliciae, darling, as
their father Benjamin was old Jacobs, Genesis 42.4.

And he shall dwell between his shoulders] These shoulders are those two holy
hills, Moriah and Zion; whereon the Temple was built, four hundred and forty
years after this prophecy.

Verse. 13. And of Ioseph] See the Note on Genesis 49.2.

Verse. 14. And for the precious fruits] So Saint James calls them, the
precious fruits of the earth, James 5.7. Diogenes justly taxed the folly of his
countrymen, quod res pretiosas minimo emerent, venderent que vilissimas*
lurimo, because they bought precious things, (as corn) very cheap; but sold
the basest things, (as pictures, statues, etc.) extreme dear; fifty pounds or
more a piece: though the life of man had no need of a statue, but could not
subsist without corn. May not we more justly tax men, for undervaluing the
bread of life, and spending money for that which is not bread? Isai. 55.2.

Verse. 15. And for the chief things] Metalls and Minerals usually dig'd out of
mountains, which are here called ancient and lasting, because they have been
from the beginning, and were not first cast up, (as some have held) by Noah's
flood, Psalm. 90.2.

Verse. 16. And for the good will of him, etc.] See the Note on Exodus 3.2. The
burning bush, (the persecuted Church) was not consumed, because the good will
of God (whereof David speaks, Psalm. 106.4.) was in the bush. So it is still
with his in the fiery trial, in any affliction, Isai. 43.1. [That was
separated from his brethren] To be a choice and chief man amongst them. De
doct. Christ l. 4. c. 6.
Nobilis fuit inter fratres (says Augustine) vel in malis, quae pendit, vel in
bonis quae rependit.

Verse. 17. Advers. Tryph. Tertul. advers. Judaeos, cap. 10. Ambrose de
benedict. Pat.
His horns are like the horns of Vnicorns] Justin Martyr, and some other of
the Ancients, have strangely racked and wrested this text, to wring out of it
the sign of the cross, resembled and represented by the horns of an Unicorn. At
nihil hic de Christo, nihil de cruce. [He shall push the people together] As
General Joshua (of this tribe,) did notably; so that, Phaenicians ran away
into a far country, and renowned his valor by a monument, set up in Africa.
Howbeit, gratius ei fuit nomen pietatis, quam potestatis, as Tertullian says
of Augustus; he is more famous for his piety, then for his prowess.

V. 18. In thy going out] To trade and traffic by sea, Genesis 49 13. Peterent
coelum navibus Belgae, si navibus peti posset, says one. The low country men
are said to grow rich by war; it is sure they do by trade at sea. [And Issachar
in thy tents] i.e. In thy quiet life, Virgil.
and country employments. O fortunatos nimium, etc. Regum aequabat opes animis,
seraque reversus

Nacte domum, dapibus mcrsas onerabat inemptis: says the Poet, of a well
contented countryman.

Verse. 19. They shall call the people to the mount] i.e. To Gods house,
situate on mount Zion. Though they be Littorales, men dwelling by the
seashore, which are noted to be, duri, horridi, immanes, omnium denique
pessimi, the worst kind of people; and though they dwell further from the
Temple, yet are they not farthest from God; but ready with their sacrifice of
righteousness, as those that have sucked of the abundance of the sea, and of
treasures hid in the sand; which though of it self it yield no crop, yet brings
in great revenues, by reason of seatrading.

Verse. 20. He dwells as a Lyon] That should make his party good with the
enemy, upon whom he bordereth, and by whom he is often invaded. See Genesis 49.19.
Judge. 11. and 1 Chronicles. 12.8.

Verse. 21. In a portion of the law-givers] That portion that Moses the
Lawgiver assigned him, on the other side Jordan, Number. 32.33. [He executed the
justice of the Lord] viz. Upon the Canaanites; which is so noble an act, that
even the good Angels refuse not to be executioners of Gods judgments, upon
obstinate Malefactors.

Verse. 22. He shall leap from Bashan] i.e. He shall suddenly set upon his
enemies; as Achitophel counseled Absalom, 2 Samuel 17.1, 2. (and this is called
good counsel, verse. 14.) and as Caesar served Pompey -- Caesar in omnia
praeceps, nil actum credens, Lucan.
dum quid superesset agendum, Fertur atrox --

Verse. 23. Satisfied with favor, and full, etc.] Fullness of blessing is then
only a mercy, when the soul of a man is satisfied with favor: when from a full
table, and a cup running over, a man can comfortably infer, with David: Surely,
goodness and mercy shall follow me all the days of my life, and I shall dwell
in the house of the Lord for ever, Psalm. 23.6. One may have outward things by
Gods providence, and not out of his favor. Esau had the like blessing as
Jacob, but not with a God give thee the dew of heaven, as he, Genesis 27.28. Or,
God may give temporals to wicked men, to furnish their indictment out of them:
as Joseph put his cup into their sack, to pick a quarrel with them, and to lay
theft to them.

Verse. 24. Let Ashur be blessed with children] Let his wife be as the vine, and
his children as olive-plants, Psalm. 128.3.
two of the best fruits; the one for chearing the heart, the other for clearing
the face, Psalm. 104.15. the one for sweetness, the other for fatness, Judge.
9.13. [Let him dip his foot in oyle] Like that of Job, Chap. 29.6. Confer Genesis
49.20. See the Note.

Verse. 25. Thy shooes] Thou shall have store of mines. [And as thy days, shall
thy strength be] i. e. Thou shall (as Eliphaz speaks, Job 5.26.) Come (...)
lusty old age to the grave. This the Greesk call, (...): And the Hebrews made a
feast, when they were past sixty, if any whit healthy.

Verse. 26. Who rides upon the heaven] Having the celestial creatures for his
Cavalry; and the terrestrial for his Infantry: how then can his want help?

Verse. 27. The Eternal God] Heb. The God of Antiquity, that Ancient of days,
that Rock of ages, who is before all things, and by whom all things consist,
Col. 1.17. who is the first, and the last; and besides whom, there is no God,
Esaias 44.6.

And underneath are the everlasting armes] A Saint cannot fall so far, as to
fall beneath the supporting arms of God, Cant. 2.6. his hand is reserved for a
dead lift.

Verse. 28. Israel then shall dwell, etc.] See the Note on Number. 23.9. [The
fountain of Jacob] Or, as some read it, The eye of Jacob. The same word
signifies both an eye, and a fountain. He that, with Mary Magdalen, can make
his eye a fountain to wash Christ's feet in, shall be sure to have that fountain
of Christ's blood opened, to wash his soul in, Zech. 13.1.

Verse. 29. Happy art thou, O Israel] Or, Oh the happinesses of thee, O Israel!
the (...), the heaped up happiness!

Who is like unto thee?] The Saints are the worlds Paragons, yea such, as the
world is not worthy of, Heb. 11. that is, says Chrysostom, Take all the men
of the world, they are not worth one of the people of God, though never so
mean, in regard of outward. [Shall be found liers] Shall feign to be friends,
for fear, and shall yield a forced obedience. See Psalm. 18.45.

CHAP. XXXIV.
Verse. 1. ANd Moses went up] With as good a will to die, as ever he did to
dine; for it was but (as that Martyr said) winking a little, and he was in
heaven immediately.

Verse. 2. Unto the utmost sea] The Mediterranean.

Verse. 3. The City of palm-trees] So called, even by Heathen-Authours also.

Verse. 4. I have caused thee to see it] By an extraordinary power; for in an
ordinary way, Moses could never have taken so large a prospect at once. Faith
puts a man's head into heaven, and gives him a view of far better things;
neither vision only, but fruition also, which Moses had not.

Verse. 5. So Moses the servant of the Lord dyed] It was no more betwixt God and
Moses, but, Go up and dye; he changed indeed his place, but not his company;
death was to him but the daybreak of eternal brightness.

Verse. 6. And he ^uried him] Either the Lord, or Michael, Jude. 9. There lies
the body of Moses, as in a chamber of rest, or bed of down, Isa 57.2. His very
du^ being precious; for Christ is not perfect without it. Ephesians. 1.2^. [But no
man knows of his sepulchre] Though the Devil made much ado about it, Jude.
9. as desirous thereby, to set up himself in the hearts of the living.

Verse. 7. Nor his natural force abated] Hierome reads it, (...) gena, maxilla.
Nor his teeth loosed. And the use of Manna might be some reason; it being an
exquisitely pure kind of food, of an aereal, and not very corruptible substance.

Verse. 8. And the children of Israel wept] And were ready to wish, (likely) as
the Romans did of Augustus, that either he had never been born, or never dyed.

Verse. 9. And Joshua the son of Nun] Sic uno avulso, non deficit alter Aureus.
The Duke of Florence gave for his Ensign, Pintus in Dan. 4.
a great Tree, with many spreading boughs, one of them being cut off, with
this abovesaid Poesy: As one is broke off, another rises up in the room.

Verse. 10. And there arose not] This testimony, and indeed this whole Chapter
is thought to have been added by Joshua, or Eleazar, being Divinely inspired,
for the completing of the history, famous throughout the world; approved and
expounded by all the holy Prophets, and Apostles; who out of this fountain, or
rather, Occan of Divinity, (as Theodoret calls Moses,) Theodoretus Mosem
appellat; (...).
have watered their several gardens: yea in pressing moral duties, what do they
else but explain the Pentetench? What do they but unfold, and draw out that
Arras, which was folded together before?

Soli Deo Gloria.
FINIS.

