To the Supreme Authority the Parliament of the COMMONWEALTH of ENGLAND.
The humble Petition of the Officers of the Army.
Shows,
THat we having had diverse meetings to seek the Lord, and to speak of the
great things God has done for this Commonwealth, it has been set upon our
hearts as our duty to offer such things, on the behalf of this Nation, as in
our judgments and Consciences might tend to the peace and well-being thereof,
And therefore in pursuance of the same, have with one consent thought fit
humbly to present to you the particulars following, which we desire may be
taken into serious Consideration.

I. THat such speedy and effectual means may be used for the propagation of
the Gospel, as shall be found agreeable to the word of God; profane scandalous
and ignorant Ministers may be outed, men approved for godliness and gifts may
be encouraged in preaching the Gospel, and such convenient maintenance provided
for them as the Parliament shall think fit, and that the unequal troublesome
and contentious way of maintaining Ministers by Tithes, may with all convenient
speed be taken away, respect being therein had to other men's rights.

II. That speedy and effectual course may be taken for the regulation of the
Law, both in the matter, form, and administration of it, in all particulars
wherein it is unjust, unreasonable needlessly vexatious, grievous or burdensome
to the people. To which purpose, that the several Results agreed on by the
Committee appointed thereunto, may be speedily, taken into debate and
consideration in Parliament; and what shall be found to make for such
regulation may be speedily enacted; And that the said Committee may be
encouraged to proceed in the said work until the same be perf^cted.

III. That speedy and effectual course may be taken by Act of Parliament or
otherwise, that such as are profane scandalous and disaffected persons in all
places of Authority and public Trust, may from time to time be removed; And
the best provision made by like Act of Parliament for the putting in of such as
are well affected, and not guilty as aforesaid, It being the desire of all good
men that the Magistracy and such as have public Trust, should be men of
truth, fearing God, and hating covetousness.

IV. That forasmuch as there are diverse oppression and abuses in the mannaging
and collecting the Excize, you will authorize and empower a Committee in each
County to hear and redress the same, or to take such other effectual course
therein, as to you shall seem fit.

V. That such as have freely lent upon the public faith, or deeply suffered
for their constant good affections to the public, may be considered, and a
way found out to give them just and competent satisfaction, and first the
poorer sort, who cannot subsist without it; And this to be chiefly regarded
before any more of the public revenue be given to particular persons.

VI. That some effectual Provision may be made for stating the Accounts of the
Arrears of such Officers and Soldiers, as have faithfully served the
Parliament, who were not comprised within the security of the late Kings Lands,
and have not by any Action of theirs justly forfeited the same. And that they
or their Assigns may be satisfied out of the Lands that are or may be
confiscated either in England, Ireland, or Scotland, except such of them as are
maimed, and the Widows and Orphans of such of them as have been slain in the
Service, or are dead, whose Arrears we desire may be satisfied in England,
except they shall desire it in Ireland, or Scotland. And further, That
consideration may be had of making effectual (to the competent and comfortable
relief of Maimed Soldiers, and the Widows and Children of such who have
been slain or dyed in the Service) all such Acts of Parliament as have been
made to that purpose, by a further Act and Acts, as the Parliament shall think
fit; through the want whereof, many have been, and are ready to perish,
especially in the Countries.

VII. That all Articles of War given to the Enemy, may be made good, according
to the intent of them.

VIII. That the whole Revenue and Treasure of the Commonwealth may with all
convenient speed be brought into one Public Treasury, and be received, issued,
and managed (for the Public Service) by a competent number of honest and
able persons, to be appointed and Authorized thereunto (such as may attend the
same) together with such Clerks as the Parliament shall think fit; and that
these may have also power to call to Account all that are Accountable for any
Public moneys received by them. And that for the future all Receipts and
Disbursments out of the Public Revennue or Treasury, may be Published yearly,
or half yearly, for the satisfaction of the Nation.

IX. That in regard of the present great Affairs of Parliament, a Committee of
honest and well-affected persons without the House, may be appointed and
Authorized to consider of the charge and inconveniences to the Commonwealth,
by Monopolies, Pluralities of places of profit, unnecessary places, and large
Sallaries, and to offer the same to the Parliament for redress to be made
therein.

X. That consideration may be had of a through and effectual suppressing of
all Vagabonds and common Beggars, by setting on work the Poor of the Nation,
that are able to work, and providing for such as through age and decripitnesse,
are not able to relieve themselves.

XI. That some effectual Provision may be made for Liberty for such poor men
as have served the Parliament in the late Wars, since the 12. of July, 1642.
Who desiring to Exercise mannuall Occupations, and other means to get
themselves a Livelihood, are denied the same within several Corporations.

XII. That for Public satisfaction of the good People of this Nation, speedy
consideration may be had of such Quallifications for future and successive
Parliaments, as tend to the Election only of such as are pious and faithful to
the interest of the Commonwealth, to sit and serve as Members in the said
Parliament.

At the COUNCIL OF WAR at White Hall, the 12. of August. 1652. Ordered,
THat Commis: Gen: VVhalley, Col: Hacker, Col: Barkstead, Col: Okey, Col: Goffe,
and Lievt. Col. Worsley do present this Petition to the Parliament to morrow,
on the behalf of themselves, and the rest of the Officers of the Army.

RICH: HATTER, Secretary.

The Petitioners being called in, the Parliament read their Petition; and
ordered the Speaker to return their hearty thanks to the Officers of the Army,
for their great care and love to the Public.

LONDON: Printed by M. Simmons for L. Chapman in Popes-head-Alley. 1652.


