SEVEN PARTICULARS, Containing as follows, I. Against Oppressors. II.
Magistrates Work and Honor. III. A Meditation for Magistrates upon Dan. 12.4.
IV. Of Hanging for Theft, filling the Land with Blood. V. To the high and lofty
in the earth, who exalt themselves by descent or blood. VI. Of Ministers
maintenance, two Extremes. VII. Of persecuting for speaking in the Synagogues
(by many called Churches.)


Given forth for public Service by W.T.

He will rid the Land of evildoers, and root out the oppressers out of the
Earth.

If that Nation against whom I have pronounced turn from their evil, I will
repent of the evil that I thought to do unto them, Jer. 18.8.

LONDON, Printed for Giles Calvert, and are to be sold at his Shop at the
Blackspread-Eagle, near the West end of Paul's, 1657.

The Word of the LORD AGAINST OPPRESSORS Old and New.
WOe, woe, woe to the oppressors of the Earth, who grind the faces of the poor,
who rack and stretch out their Rents till the poor with all the sweat of their
brows and hard labor can scarce get Bread to eat, and Raiment to put on, while
they for the satisfying of their gnlf of pride, and delicacies, and gluttony,
and drunkenness, (for their excess is no better) like the grave, still cry give,
give, and there is no end to their covetousness, nor no natural affection to
their oppressed Brother. These are the Pharoah's, the Taskmasters of the
Earth, who cause the peoples hearts to cry and groan under the heavy yoke of
their oppression; and God will in time hear the groanings of the whole
Creation, and then woe, woe, woe to you who have been such oppressors and
hard-hearted Taskmasters, and have been so unfaithful in the use of the
unrighteous Mammon, for God never gave you it to spend upon your lusts, but to
dispose in his great Family as there was need, to the supplying of the wants of
one another, and for the easing and refreshing of those in the Family that
stood in need thereof. And if you pretend you do so, and yet oppress others
that you may do so, this is Robbery for burnt-offerings, which God hates, Isa.
61.8.

But especially, Woe, woe to you who have put on a Cloak of Religion, and are
counted Christians and high professors, and yet exceed the others in
oppression, without any compassion or tenderness, who being ashamed of the Name
of Oppression and Racking, yet love the thing, and therefore practice it under
another Name, calling it Improvement. Woe to you, you Hypocrites, who are
following the steps of oppressors, or rather are got foremost, and yet will
profess Christ. Woe to you, for you blaspheme the Name of Jesus; for your
lives, your practices blaspheme him more then ten thousand words. You Tigers,
Tyrants, and Blood-suckers, Has God put into your hands a measure of the
unrighteous Mammon for this end? Have you Houses and Lands given you that you
should make your little Finger heavier upon those that possess them, then the
Loins of those that were before you? And do you call this Improvement? Are not
you become Brethren of the Drunkards and Whoremongers? Cannot they call their
Drunkenness Good-fellowship? Cannot they call their Lust Love? Cannot the
proud call their Pride Handsomness? and lying Complements, Civility? Is their
practice the better because of these words? Therefore be you of their brethren,
for we deny you to be of the Sons of God, under whose mercy and tenderness the
creature is delivered out of its bondage; Romans 8.19, 21.
you are quite contrary unto them which the Creation groans after; therefore
expect your destruction, for they must take place, and the oppressor must be
rooted out of the Earth; and then when God shall come to visit for oppression,
woe to you who have compassed your selves about with thick Clay, your Gold and
Silver, and rich Apparel, and excess, having the groanings and bitterness of
spirit, Jam. 5.1, 2, 3.
in which it was got for you, stamped upon it, all will be as fire and flame to
your flesh to consume you, and the remembrance thereof will then be dreadful
unto you, and you shall then see, that they who have tilled the ground, and by
industry and labor helped forward the fruitfulness of it, were the improvers,
and you who wrung from them what they had sweat and labored for, were the
Rackers and Oppressors, and the Grinders of the Faces of the poor.

You that have any tenderness left in you, will you enter into the paths of
those whom God has threatened to ease the earth of in his due time, saying,
Psalm. 72.4.
That the Oppressor shall be broken in pieces, and rooted out of the Earth?
Will you partake in the sins of those whom God has cast out before you for
their ungodliness? Know you not that the hand of the Lord can reach you as
well as others? Now when you should do as Nehemiah did, in easing your
brethren, Neh. 5^ are you turned into the Footsteps of the Tyrants of the
Earth, and of unbelievers, who are without Faith in the Providence of God for
them, and therefore by right or wrong pursue and covet after abundance of the
things of this World, as if all happiness were bound up in them; you that have
any Fear of God in you, turn from such practices, and let it appear to all men
that you hate the bread of Oppression, and that you are lovers of mercy, for
that is one of the weighty things which the Lord requires of you, Mic. 6.8.
What does the Lord require of thee O man, but to do justly, to love [mercy]
and to walk humbly with thy God? And without these weighty matters of
Judgment, or Truth, and Equity, and Mercy and Faith, let your profession have
as glorious outside as it will, and though you can speak as Angels, yet you
are no better then the Pharisees were, whited Walls, painted Sepulchers,
beautiful without to the purblind Eye; but within full of stinck, filth,
putrefaction, rottenness, and an ill savor in the Nostrils of the Lord, and
of all his faithful ones, and an occasion of blasphemy to the World.

Against Oppression the second time.
THere is no one sin which the Lord cried more against among the Israelites of
old by his prophets, Isa. 1.16, 17, 23. chapter 3.14, 15. chapter 5.7. chapter 58.6. Ames
3.9, 10. chapter 4.1, 2. Mic. 2.1, 2. Zeph. 3.1, 2. Zach. 6.9, 10.
then their Oppression, and grinding the Faces of the poor; and this sin has
grown high in these our days, every man emulating another, and seeking to
advance his Estate as he sees others do, and so squeezing those under them, to
suck all out that they can get, until their groanings grow great, and their cry
go up: And this their Oppression they cover with a handsome Name, and call it
Improvement of their Estates; yet under this Improvement their little Finger is
become heavier then their predecessors Loins: Be ashamed ye that profess the
Name of God, that ye should enter into the possessions of lewd and ungodly
persons, and yet become greater Oppressors then they, and think to hide all
with the smooth Name of Improving; but know ye, that improving your Estates is
another thing; it is to employ your Estates (rightly got) to the true ends for
which they are committed to you; To be faithful in the unrighteous Mammon, as
Stewards of it, for the good and use of the great Family, (as well as of your
own particular) as there is need: To support the distressed; To ease the heavy
burdens; To be helpful where there is need for it; and so to succor by your
Riches such as are oppressed; to be rich in such works; this is the improvement
of your Estates: Therefore says the Lord by his Servant Paul to Timothy, 1
Epist. chap. 6. ver. 17, 18: Charge them that are rich in this world, That they
be rich in good works, ready to distribute, willing to communicate: And this is
your improving of your Talent of Earthly Riches, and thus all things are made
clean unto you, Luke 11:41: Give Alms of what ye possess, and so all things
are clean to you:

Therefore ye that are rich in this World, do not study how to raise and
increase your Estates by the racking and oppressing of the poor, for this
brings a curse into your House, and the cry of the oppressed goes up against
you, and God hears it; but study how to improve your Estates as the Apostle of
the Lord has given you direction in the forenamed place, 1 Timothy 6. where he
gives charge, That ye be not high-minded; That ye trust not in uncertain
Riches, (or in such things as are not manifest to be Riches, it is uncertain
whether they be Riches, or no, (...), in unmanifest Riches) but in the living
God who gives us richly all things to enjoy. -- To do good, to be rich in good
works, with a ready will, or good will to impart, ready to communicate: Thus for
ye to love mercy and good fruits, this is your improving, v. 19: This is the
way for you (so far as concerns your outward Talent of Riches) to treasure up a
good Foundation for the future; and that you will then find to be improvement,
and Oppression to be a dis-improvement:

The Magistrates, or Judges Work, from whence their Honor arises, is this.
TO judge righteously between party and party; and that he may so do, to
examine and find out the matter, to pierce through, and lay open the false
covers and deceits of the evil doers, and so to be a terror to them, and make
them afraid to bring an evil matter before them.

Here Is the foundation of their Honor; thus Solomon finding out the deceit of
that woman that would have had the child divided, his Honor sprang up in the
hearts of all the people: Thus Daniel also finding out the deceit of the two
false VVitnesses, though Elders, and so delivering the innocent, he was made
honorable in the hearts of the people.

But for a man to leave his business, (which is, to judge righteously between
party and party) to turn aside from that, and to seek his own Honor from a
forced Complement of a Hat, or a Knee, where he by his just and upright
judgment, has laid no foundation for honor in the heart and esteem of
another, this is an earthly, low, dishonorable spirit, seeking honor in a
hypocritical Complement, this is Haman-like, Esth. 3.5. this is that which God
will not honor, but abase; For he that exalts himself, shall be abased, Luke
14.11.

Magiserates Work and Honor in the same way, opened the second time.
THE work of a Judge or Ruler is to hear and decide differences between party
and party; And that he may justly determine, he is to search out the matter.

Now as he applies himself hereunto, he lays the ground of his own Honor; for
it is his honor to search out the matter, Prove. 25.2.

Thus Solomon was greatly honored in the hearts of the people for finding out
the deceit of that Woman that would have had the child divided, 1 King. 3.28.
Thus Daniel was also honored in the hearts of the people for finding out the
deceit of the two Elders, the false Witnesses that sought Susana's life, Hist.
of Susan. ver. last.

Here Is the Honor of Magistrates in their Work, and then it arises truly, and
is given cheerfully from the people.

But he that turns aside his Work of judging righteously, and searching out the
matter between party and party, and first seeks his own honor, that is an
unworthy spirit, there Haman lives, that person is not worthy of honor; and
though he may compel and force men to bow and cap him, and imprison those
Mordecai's that will not do so; yet hereby he cannot beget himself any honor in
the hearts of any. But turning aside from his Work that should make him
honorable, and seeking his own honor, hereby he loses it, and becomes vile,
and unworthy, and ignoble in the hearts of the people that have understanding.
And while he strives with the Mordecai's that cannot bow to such a person, he
lays the Foundation of his own ruin; yea, he shows himself a vile person, out
from the Doctrine and Faith of Christ, Ioh. 5.44. one not to be honored by
them that fear the Lord, Psalm. 15.4. but such a one as God will debase; For so
has the Lord said by the Mouth of his Servants, That he that exalts himself
shall be abased.

The way to honor is humility, but pride that is the way to a fall.

Therefore ye that be Rulers and Magistrates, mind you your Work, seek not your
own Honor, seek to judge righteously between party and party, search out the
deceits, judge justly, and God will raise up honor for you in the hearts of
people; For they give honor to you who have it begot in them for you, by
honorable actions of Truth and Justice. It Is Truth must make you honorable,
and the true Wisdom that is from above, that is without partiality. cleave to
that, it will make you honorable; but if you depart from that and walk in
dishonorable ways, in a selfish hasty, froward, self-willed spirit, swayed by
self ends, respect of persons, passion, hatred against persons, prejudice,
blind-zeal, and such like; Though you may force all slavish spirits to bow
before you, yet in their hearts you are dishonorable, you are only feared by
them; and as soon as they see themselves out of your reach, you are the objects
of their hatred and detestation, and scorn and ignominy; and so you leave a
stink and ill savor behind you, and your Name becomes as rottenness and filth.
And here your forced honor ends, and your ill savor abides.

But they whose honor is laid in humility and honorable actions, they have
honor after they are gone, they leave a good savor behind them, and posterity
honors them.

These are not doubled in vain; let them whom they concern observe them. A
Meditation for Magistrates upon Dan. 12.4. worthy their consideratition, lest
they kick against the pricks.
Dan. 12.4. Many shall run to and fro, and Knowledge shall be increased.
THis the Prophet Daniel was shown in the spirit that such a thing should come
to pass in the last times.

And now that it is come to pass, the contrary spirit that is always cross
and opposite to Gods Work; which spirit rules in children of disobedience, this
says, No, I will not suffer it; if I find them running to and fro, I Will catch
them up; I Will restrain them, I Will whip them, I Will imprison them; I Will scatter
them; I Will send them away for Vagabonds, for Vagrants.

Thus the Spirit that works against God, sets its self to work against his
Instruments, whom he will send to and fro to increase knowledge.

God has said, Many shall run to and fro.

But this false spirit says, No, ^'le restrain them.

For Satan knows that this will weaken and undermine his Kingdom; it falls like
Lightning where the true Knowledge of the Lord comes; therefore he bestirs
himself to suppress those by whom Knowledge is increased, and the mist of
Antichristianism scattered, which has caused a long and a dark Night, and he
sends them away as Vagabonds.

But they are no vagabonds who have a habitation in God, who are lodged in his
bosom, and received into his presence, though they have no certain
dewlling place in the earth, nor where to lie their heads: To account and call
such vagabonds, this reflects upon the Prince of the Host, Christ Jesus, who
had not where to lie his Head. This I say blasphemes the Prince of the Host;
yea, if thou knows what blasphemy is, this is blasphemy against God and his
Tabernacle, it blasphemes and speaks evil of the Captain, Christ Jesus the Son
of God, who was in that condition, Ma^t. 8.20. and said, The servant is not
greater then his Lord, Joh. 15.20. It blasphemes his Tabernacle, the Saints in
many generation, who wandered in Sheeps Skins and Goats-Skins, Heb. 11.13, 13,
15.16, 37, 38,
in Deserts, in Mountains, living in Dens, in Caves, and had no certain
dewlling place, tossed and driven to and fro by the same spirit as now, in
former generations, as men not worthy to live in the World, and yet the World
was not worthy of them, Heb. 11.38.

Thus this envious Spirit blasphemes the Son of God, and his servants who
follow him, who are led by the same spirit that was in him, out of the Worlds
possessions, as he was, Joh. 15.19, 20, 21.

The Vagabond indeed is he that is turned out from the (...) presence of the
Lord, such as Cain, who slew his Brother; and wherefore slew he him? because
his own works were evil, and his Brothers good. He being therefore turned out
from the presence of the Lord for murdering his Brother, became the Vagabond
and Fugitive, Genesis 4.12. And though he built a City to dwell in, yet a
Vagabond; Gen 4.16, 17. It Is not an earthly habitation, a Town, or City, that
makes one no Vagabond. Cain brought Sacrisices, yet a Vagabond; Cain built a
City; yet a Vagabond, and he confessed himself so to be, v. 14: And therefore he
shall rise up in judgment against the men of this generation, who being in his
envious nature, and driven out from the presence of God, which they cannot
enjoy in that nature, yet turn the Name of Vagabond from off themselves, and
cast it upon those who in obedience to the Son of God are found from their
outward Possessions, or without Earthly Possessions, and show their Envy and
Enmity by their cruelty toward such, and so show of what Stock they are,
namely of Cains; and so in his nature being found, they are grafted into the
Vagabond.

Of hanging for Theft, so filling the Land with Blood.
OH England! how is it that after so many Parliaments this most unjust Law is
still put in execution in the midst of thee, to take away the life of man for
Goods? Do thou value the life of a man no more then so; as to cut it off for
the value of a Garment, yea even of a pair of Shoos or Stockins, or a Shirt, or
any other thing above such a piece of money? Oh how will this stink in the
Nostrils of the Ages following, when Equity and Righteousness shall take
place, when Judgment shall be laid to the Line, and Righteousness to the
Plummet, when men shall be so able to discern of things, as to make the
punishment and the crime proportionable!

Now because there is a great guilt lies upon the Nation in this particular,
both Lawmakers, and Law-Upholders, and Law-Executors, being all highly
concerned herein, besides the grief of heart that it is to all just spirited
men, who delight in Equity, I shall therefore hold forth to the Nation what
appears to me in this particular, that they may be sensible of this great evil,
and amend it.

In this most unjust and cruel Law, there are these Evils.

1. To the party wronged, from whom the thing is stolen two great Evils; First,
A binding him by the Law to prosecute the Thief to death, if it be a thing that
will hang him by your Law; so that a merciful man is put upon this strait,
either he muststand in danger of making himself confederate with the Thief, and
so be made a Felon for mercifulness, and for pardoning the wrong done him,
(which action savors most of God) and for this be in danger of that cruel
wicked Law himself, or else he must against his conscience slay and murder
that Mercifulness and Equity that God has begot in his own heart. And thus
this abominable unjust Law, as it sprang up from men of cruelty, so it forces
men to cruelty; cruelty to one another, and cruelty to the Seed of God in their
own hearts; so by its tendency its easily discerned from whence it first came,
except by those whose eye is blinded with covetousness and things of this
World, and so with cruelty would uphold them. Secondly, There Is another evil in
it to the party wronged; He is robbed of that restitution that the Wisdom of
God thought good to allow in cases of Theft; instead of having fourfold, he
gets not fully his own; and if the Wisdom of man should think that fourfold
too much, and would allow him but half so much, yet he gets not that, he only
gets the man's life, which adds nothing to the maintaining of him or his Family;
so that this man, though he be compelled to prosecute the other to death, yet
when he has done that, he himself is not righted for the wrong done. If the
Thief be poor, instead of having him sold, or put to work, to work it out, if
he have not wherewith to pay, his life is cut off, and the wronged man goes
away with nothing at all. So that here is the very end of right Law and
Magistracy cut off, for the end of the Law and Magistracy is not only to
punish, but to relieve the wronged: and so cut off the end of any Law or
Action, and what is it good for? For i^ every thing is so far of worth and
value, as it obtains its end for which it is, and if it miss that, its a vain
thing! So that this Law is in a great measure vain to the relieving of men
wronged by Theft; and yet this is the main end of this Law.

What a sad thing is it that your Law should only mind the killing of the
Thief, and take no care for the person sustaining the loss.

If the Thief be taken, and the thing taken with him, I cannot tell what the
Law does in that case. But if the Thief be taken, and the thing stolen be
embezled and spent, put case it be a yo^e or two of Oxen, or a Horse or two,
upon which the other man's livelihood or maintenance depended; and if the Thief
be able to make restitution out of his Estate, yet the Law takes no care for
this poor man to have him restored out of the Thiefs estate. And if the Thief
be poor, and cannot make restitution out of his estate, then the Thiefs life
and strength is of right the other man's till he be restituted, which the Law
should employ for the other man till he be satisfied: But of this the Law has
taken no care, therefore there has wanted both the principle of Justice and
Mercy in the hearts of those from whence the Law sprang; both which appeared in
the Lord when he gave forth that Law against Theft; and therefore this Law was
not so cruel as to take away the life of the thief for Goods, but gave Goods
for Goods, with great advantage, (which was the Thiefs punishment if he was
rich) or gave the other man the Thiefs Life, and Strength, and Labor to make
him restitution; and this was his punishment if he was poor; and thus his Law
was mixed with mercy and equity. But this Law savours of nothing but Fury and
great Wrath against the Thief, exceeding all bounds of equity, and is void of
Mercy to the poor man sustaining the loss; so that its plain, That this Law
was not made by men that took care for the succouring and relieving of those
that sustained loss by Theft; but it bears the image of great Wrath, void of
compassion either to the wronged or Thief.

And of this Law now are you all Ministers, who serve in the upholding and
executing of it from the highest of you to the lowest; I shall put this
question to your consciences to consider of: Whether do you think in your very
consciences that this law proceeded from the Spirit of the Lord, it wanting the
Image of the Lord, which is Equity and Mercy in this case, or from the spirit
of Satan, which is wrath, cruelty, unmercifulness, injustice? And if it
proceeded from the latter, then whose spirit do you please and serve in the
upholding and continuing of this Law? sure he is pleased with the continuance
of it whose image it bear? Consider I say whose servants you are in such
things. If inferior Magistrates and Officers think to lay all the stresse upon
Superior, yet let them know and consider whom they serve, though it be but at
second hand. One serves the cruel, unequal, unjust, unmerciful spirit of the
Devil in making his Image in a Law; another in upholding; another in executing;
another in assisting, etc. Now which of these is free from serving this Spirit?
Let every man quit himself as he can. I lay this before you that you may ^ll be
senfible of your Work, and not rest till you get this servitude to that Spirit
which is served by this Law, from off your shoulders.

2. But as I have set before you the wrong done to the man that sustains the
loss by theft, so I shall a little also set before you the evil done to the
Thief in taking away his life for Goods: Hereby you cut him off from amendment,
which the Apostle Paul calls unto, Ephesians. 4.28. Let him that stole, steal no
more, but rather let him work with his hands the thing that is good, that he
may have to give to him that needs. He does not say, Let him be cut off, Let
him be put to death; his words carry another image in them then the Law of this
Land does; Let him work, says he; How can he do that, if put to death? Here he
calls them to an amendment of their life, That whereas they have taken from
others, they may henceforth labor to be able to give to others.

Now this Rule of the Scripture, which you say is your Rule, but do lie, is
quite cut off here, and can take no place because off your Law, that cuts men
off from a possibility of observing it; for he that is put to death for
stealing, cannot henceforth labor with his hands to give to him that needs.

Again, in this thing consider the disproportion between the crime and the
punishment; The Thief takes away goods from another, and his life is taken away
from him; is this equality or proportion? life for Goods? If any man be so
blind as to say so, let him make the cause his own, or his nearest Friends.
Suppose thy Son whom thou loves have stolen part of the Goods of another man's,
as Oxen, or Horse, or other Goods, Would thou think it equal that his life
should go for it, or that thy life should go for such a thing if thou had
done it; Surely thou would say, Skin for Skin, and all that a man has will
he give for his life; for verily, there is no proportion between goods and
life; for if a man be stripped of all the goods, they may be restored again, as
Jobs was; but of the life is no restoring. But if any will strive in this case,
and have the World and things thereof so great in their heart and eye, as to
value them with the life of any man, let such mind what truth it self has
spoken and judged of the proportion between life and goods: Is not the life
(says Christ) more then meat, and the body then Raiment? Food and Raiment
(which is all that the things of this World afford) are given to serve the
body, and the life of man, but are far inferior to the man; yea the life of
other creatures is made to serve man in his being, and he is made Lord of them
for his use and service, and they are put in subjection under him, to serve
him, (though most abuse both themselves and the creatures in this privilege)
yet I say, they are as things far inferior to man, (in his being) given unto
man to serve him; and for any so far to value them, as to equallize them to
another man's life, is to contradict the judgment of Christ Jesus, who said, Is
not the life more then food, and the body then raiment, which is all that this
world affords.

So that here is a great evil in this Law as to the Thief, yea the greatest
evil, an implacablenesse which nothing can satisfy but his life, though
sometimes but for a trifle; for no higher can man go in punishing then to take
away the life; to go thus high for a thing so low, is no proportionable
Justice, there is no equity in it.

I would have Magistrates well to consider, whether to go so high beyond the
proportion of the crime, do not lay the guilt of blood upon themselves; for
consider seriously how high the crime reaches, and then proportions the
punishment to that, as namely, Goods for Goods, (as the Lord did proportion it)
and then here is equity, which lies in proportion between the crime and the
punishment. But then the redundency or overplus of the punishment, as life for
goods, where must that lie? Here Is life taken away; here is a punishment far
transcending the offense; at whose door must the overplus lie? Must not all be
concerned that have to do in the taking of that life away.

Consider it well ye Judges, and all other Officers, and ye Parliaments which
approve, or Amend what other Parliaments have done. For all that other
Parliaments have done, have a new strength in you, by permitting their Laws to
stand, or else are regulated by you, and amended: So that every Parliament
receives the guilt of evil Laws fresh upon themselves till they be amended,
because this is their proper Work, To make the Laws wholesome, which if they
fail in, the guilt of the evil Laws renews it self in them; for none else can
amend them, thoughthey may quit themselves from having a hand in the execution
of them.

Consider (I say) all ye that, are concerned, how much blood is spilt yearly in
this Nation upon this account, for which there is no warrantable ground or true
cause to bear it out, but is done by force. Consider where all this blood will
lie, and where it will be charged; for though the Lord give power to
Magistrates, and appoint them for that end to punish offenders, yet he requires
that their Seats be Seats of Judgment and Equity; and they are not to go
beyond the proportion of the crime, for that is not to judge for the Lord, who
is a righteous and equal Judge; but to ferve their own wills, or wrath, and
cruelty, which ought not to take place in the Seat of judgment, or punishing
Offenders. When the Lord had appointed forty stripes to an Offender as a
sufficient punishment, they were not to exceed to fifty, or a hundred or a
thousand; for if they exceeded that number of forty, they then did not serve
the Lord in ministering Justice, but their own wills; what was more then forty,
was done in their own wills, and was cruelty to their Brother, and for that
shall they stand guilty of cruelty before the Lord, much more if they should
take away his life, should not they then stand as murderers before the Lord,
though the man was a Malefactor, or a Thief? for they took away his life
without the Lords Warrant to bear them out; and so taking away his life in
their own wills and unjust Laws, they would make themselves guilty of his
blood. See if this be not the case now.

And consider, that the Lord has care of Thieves as well as of other men: The
Thief is as dear to him as the covetous man, who is an Idolater. And the
long-suffering of the Lord, which waits upon men to lead them to repentance, is
to be held forth to the Thief as well as to the Covetous, and Drunkards, and
Over-reachers, who go beyond, and defrand their Brother.

If any Sons of the Earth, whose hearts are so united to this Worlds Goods,
that their life is bound up in them, shall plead and say, That there were no
living for men if Thieves should be suffered to live; and that they may as well
take away a man's life from him as his goods, and therefore their life ought to
go for it.

I answer; First, That man that says, They may as well take away a man's life
as his goods, he was never yet really and sensibly in that danger of parting
with life, or else with goods; for if he had, he would have understood that
Goods might have been regained, but life never; or if not so much Goods to
spend upon his lusts, yet so much as might serve him to live.

And to him that says, There would be no living for men if Thieves should be
suffered to live; I answer, That Is not so; for there was living in the Common
wealth of Israel, where they were suffered to live: Yea it is very probable
there would be better and more quiet living; for the nearer that the Nation did
come to the Rule of Equity and Righteousness in the execution of Laws upon
offenders, it is likely their Laws would have the better effects, being more
blessed to bring forth their proper ends by the Lord; whereas being cruel and
wicked, and not bearing his image and nature in them, they are under the curse,
and not blessed of the Lord to bring forth the expected issue of a quiet and
peaceable living. Again, let men of reason consider whether it would not more
restrain Thieves if they should be put to work, and kept in Bridewells and
Workhouses, then to be dealt with as they are; for there they would be inured
to work, and some might come to delight in it, and give themselves to it when
they came to be free; and others however whether they would give themselves to
it or no, yet after trial might be kept to it, and so restrained from thieving,
whereas now they are either put to death, or else let loose again to their
Trade of stealing, and so are set at liberty to incite and nourish up others in
their wicked principles, so that out of their Nursery arises still an increase
of Thieves, whereas if they were drained out of the Country (as they were
taken) into Workhouses, their Nourseries would be scattered, and their wicked
principle whereby they animate one another, would be taken away, which is this;
They use to say, A short life, and a sweet; Whereas if their life should be
prolonged, and they kept at labor, then there would be another thing for them
to look upon, not a short life and a sweet, but for a little sweet, a long
servitude and slavery; hard Work and Labor for short pleasure, which would
more awe many that are desperate of their lives, then half an hours hanging, as
they account it.

3. As this Law has great evil in it both to the person sustaining the loss
by theft, and also to the Thief; so likewise to the Wife and Children of the
thief, who it may be have no hand in his Theft, but may be against such wicked
practices. If the Felon have any Estate (which is the Livelihood of his Wife
and Children) this is forfeited from them for his fault, and so they exposed to
penury, and provoked to steal also to sustain their necessities, which is a
great evil, full of unreasonablenesse, and unsatisfactory Wrath for the offense
done, void of mercy and natural compassion. Is it not enough that the Wife has
lost her Husband and the Children their Father, but to increase their misery,
their Livelihood must go also with his life? See how highly they were incensed
for the loss of things of this World who made this Law, that the life of the
Thief, which far exceeded the crime, yet did not quench their anger, and wrath,
and revenge upon them that should meddle with their goods; for so far as the
punishment exceeds the crime, so far is to be put upon man's account, and is the
revengefulness of his own implacable heart, and not Gods Judgment upon the
transgressor; and yet men little mind or consider how they make themselves
Ministers and Servants of this spirit of implacable revenge contained in this
Law, while they are the supporters of it.

These things I lay before you, quit your selves as you can: Blood is spilt in
the Nation, yea much blood, and that yearly, and without a sufficient ground to
bear it forth. Now do you lay the guilt of that blood where you can; For the
guilt must lie somewhere, and man's blood is not of so light an account as to be
spent in vain, and that so plentifully.

Consider ye that are Magistrates, that this is done in this Nation, and
therefore upon this Nation must the blood-guiltinesse fall, and the hands of
some must hereby be full of blood. Therefore cleanse your hands ye sinners, ye
evildoers, who being found out from the counsel of the Lord, walk in the
counsel of the wicked, in the counsel and cruel Laws of the unjust and
unmerciful, and so fill your hands daily and yearly with blood. Repent and
turn from these evils, and walk in the counsel of the Lord, and in the
Judgments of the Lord, and make them your delight, so will you be found
walking in paths of equity and mercy; for the Lord is a God of Judgment, and
Judgment is a just thing, discerning and proportioning punishments to offenses.

To the high and lofty in the earth, in whom there is a spirit that seeks to
be exalted, or exalts it self by blood or descent.
YOU who are exalted in your imaginations, and lifted up above your Fellows,
and above the faithful Witness of God in your own hearts, how do you ever
think to come into the Kingdom of God? for except a man become as a little
child, he cannot see the Kingdom of God. Therefore consider with your selves,
whether you ever had, or yet have any thoughts of entering into the Kingdom; if
you had, or have, then what is the way you propound to your selves? See if it
will not fail you; for he that is the Way, says, Learn of me, for I am meek
and lowly in heart; not only in appearance, but in heart also. And says he,
Except a man be converted, and become as a little child, he cannot see the
Kingdom of God, Matthew. 18.3, 4.

See therefore where you stand, you that are high and lofty, and wanton upon
earth, exalted in your greatness, glorying in your selves that you are higher
th^^ others, or desiring to be higher; you stand in that which is shut out of
the Kingdom of God and of Christ; what then will all your glorying come to,
when your earthly glory has an end? when you shall see such as you looked upon
as Worms, received into glory, and you your selves shut out. Think upon the
example of Dives, that parable is spoken to you that are rich in your own
thoughts.

And consider in time, that the hand of the Lord will be upon every one that is
lifted up, to abase him; read carefully (and with fear) what is written against
you by the Prophet Isaiah, chap. 2. v. 10. to the end, and let your exaltedness
make you afraid, for the words of the Lord shall be fulfilled upon you: Has he
said, That the lofty looks of man shall be humbled, and the haughtiness of men
shall be bowed down, and the Lord alone shall be exalted; And, that the day of
the Lord of Hosts shall be upon every one that is proud and lofty, and upon
every one that is lifted up, and he shall be brought low. Has he said it, and
shall it not come to pass? yea surely, there can be no escaping it.

But some of you will say, Are we not of a better descent, and of more Noble
Blood then others? and are we not to demean our selves, and to have thoughts of
our selves answerable t^ our descent and blood.

I answer, Such thoughts as these have begot you into what you are, and puffed
you up in your minds, yea, some of you are so habituated and naturalized into
this loftiness of mind, that though you become outwardly poorer in the world
then other men, yet your minds are hereupon exalted in you, above them; and yet
that is usually the rise of blood, namely, Riches of this world. But consider
you that stand upon descent and blood, Do you know upon what Foundation the
greatness of your Family was laid? Are you sure it was not upon Tyranny,
Cruelty, Oppression, Covetousness, Fraud and Injury, and so have its
Foundation in that bestial spirit, which because its stronger, pushes aside all
that are weaker? If it had this Original as usually it has, then see to the
Foundation of your glorying.

Again consider, That the Lord has laid aside the glorying of those that had a
more excellent descent then you have, they that could boast of Abraham for
their Father, and of Isaac, and Jacob, and David, and such Worthies, approved
of God in their generations, yet what good will it do them to say, We have
Abraham for our Father? Though Dives can call Abraham Father, yet this will do
him no good, it will not afford him a drop of cold Water.

Consider again you that glory in Blood and Descent, Look upon a Tree, Were it
not a vain thing for one Twig of the same Tree to boast it self against another
because it is not of the same Branch; it may be they are not both of one
branch, but both meet in one bough. So look but a little surther, and you will
see the Beggars and your selves both of one blood, of one descent; For of one
blood has God made all Nations, Act. 17.26. And it is but a little while with
some since we were all in one Ark.

Again, consider, That if a little while ago your Family was exalted, and so
your spirits raised; yet before the glory of the Lord can be revealed in you,
this height of your spirits must be thrown out again; Therefore John came as a
preparer of the way of the Lord, saying, Every Valley shall be exalted, and
every Mountain and Hill must be brought down; and the crooked made strait, and
the rough places plain; and then the glory of the Lord shall be revealed, Isa.
40.3, 4, 5.

What do you think are those Mountains and Hills that are to be cast down, and
those Valleys that are to be born up, that there may be an even way, and
crooked made strait, and rough made plain? John came to prepare such a way for
the Lord, and so to make his paths strait; and yet the great Mountains of
Earth which you see with your bodily eyes remained. Therefore look at your
selves, who are exalted in your minds high above your Brethren, and look at
those you despise as low, and whose spirits you have dejected in the earth by
your loftiness, who have not the spirits of men before you, the distance is
made so great by your exaltednesse, and then you will see something of the
Mountains and Valleys that must be made even by the power of Truth before the
glory of the Lord be revealed; for the Lord will have no such distance among
them that enter into his kingdom, Matthew. 20.25, 26, 27, 28. Hmong the Princes
of the Gentiles this exaltedness is found, and the Lord concludes it there,
shuts them and it up together there, and gives it no admission into his
Kingdom, It shall not be so among you, says he to his Followers, ver. 26.

And look at your high imaginations and greatness of mind, and loftiness of
spirit, as things to be thrown out again, and brought down in you, that those
weak, low, faint thoughts of God, and of holiness, which dare scarce appear or
show themselves in you, may be born up, and desires after the Lord, and after
righteousness, may grow up in you, and the Witness of God against sin may arise
in you, and not be continually stifled and quenched by the high imaginations
and exaltedness of mind, and love of honor from men which rise up over them, to
keep them down; for these cannot rise up in you into victory, so long as you
seek honor of men; so long you cannot become as little children; yea, says
Christ Jesus, How can ye believe who receive honor one of another, and seek
not the honor that comes of God only? Joh. 5.44.

Humbleness of mind, lowliness in heart, esteeming others better then our
selves, love which is not puffed up, which exalts not it self, which teaches to
be meek and lowly in heart; these are badges of Christ's Kingdom, and are of the
Ornaments thereof. But pride, lofty looks, lofty language, and high conceits of
things that profits not, these are badges of Satan's Kingdom and Dominion in the
heart; and therefore where the Kingdom of God comes in power and truth, it
throws down imaginations, and every thing that exalts it self against the
Knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Therefore let go your vain imaginations, you that are lifted up in your minds.
and humble your selves before the Lord, that he may lift you up, and bring you
to true honor, which will not fade away, that you may be grafted into the royal
Race of Kings and Priests, in Christ Jesus; then will your honor be beautiful
and glorious, though outwardly in the world you seem to be covered with
blackness for a time; they that would reign with him, must first suffer with
him. I know there be some among you whose spirits are lower then the spirits of
many of inferior race (according to the worlds account) and this shall turn to
their honor; For he that humbles himself before the Lord, shall be exalted, as
well as he that exalts himself shall be abased, Luke 14.11.

Two Extremes concerning Ministers Maintenance.
ONE is of such as standing in the division of parishes, as Churches, would
have all of the parish compelled to pay (whether tithes or money) to the
Minister of that parish:

Not considering the want of a ground for such a practice, having neither
Precept nor Example in the New Testament either from Christ, or any of his
Ministers, for such a practice. Nor considering the unreasonableness of it,
that they who are not of the Parish (as to their Ministration) but of another
Society, and do maintain one Minister already, should be compelled to maintain
another, and so maintain two. Neither considering the unjustness of the thing,
That they should be compelled to pay to that Ministry which they own not as a
Ministry to them, nor receive of their labors, and yet must pay them wages; is
it not sufficient that they have the wages of those they give their labors to,
who own them? Which of the Apostles or Ministers of Christ ever sought for
Wages of such as owned not their Ministry? Lastly; Not considering, That such
compulsion stands not with the profession of the Gospel of Peace, which lays
down, and teaches to lay down compelling by Law, and that it stands not with
his Office who should be an example to Believers. Now how can he give an
example ^o Believees of suffering; and of not goeing to Law, who goes to Law,
and compells? So here by his practice he overthrows that which he should teach.

The other extreme is of them who would have no maintenance, or supply of the
necessities of Ministers at all. Which they undavisedly would ground upon a
passage that Paul had to the Elders of the Church of Ephesus: Where he says, I
have coveted no man's Silver or Gold or Apparel. These hands have ministered to
my necessities, and to them that were with me. And this he leaves as an example
to the Elders of the Church of Ephesus. Act. 20.33.34.35.

To this I say, Paul might have some particular reason or motion from the Lord
to induce him so to carry to that, and some other Church (as he did to Corinth
likewise, 2 Cor. 11.9.) and so might keep the Gospel of Christ from being at
all chargeable unto them. But to make a general rule of this, would contradict
not only other Scriptures, but even Paul's own practice; and acknowledgements:
Yea and the practice of Christ himself who was ministered unto.

Paul himself confesses that he took wages of some to do others Service. 2.
Cor. 11.7.8.9. And he acknowledged, and vindicated his own power to eat, and to
drink, and to forbear working, as well as the rest of the Apostles, 1. Cor.
9.46. And reasons also strongly for that liberty, Verse 7.8.9.10.11.12.13 14.
Who goes a Warfare at any time at his own charges? Who planteth a Vineyard and
eats not of the fruit thereof? And who feeds a Flock, and eats not of the
milk of the Elock? Say I these things as a man? Or says not the Law the same
also? For it is written in the Law of Moses, Thou shall not muzzle the mouth of
the Ox that treads out the Corn. Does God take care for Oxen? Or says be it
altogether for our sakes? For our sakes no doubt this is written, that he that
ploweth should plow in hope, and he that thresheth in hope, should be partaker
of his hope, if we have sown unto you Spiritual things, is it a great thing if
we shall reap your Carnal things? If others be partakers of this power over
you, are not we rather? Nevertheless we have not used this power: but suffer
all things, lest we should hinder the Gospel of Christ. Do ye not know that
they which minister about holy things, live of the things of the Temple? And
they which wait at the Alter, are partakers with the Alter? Even so has the
Lord ordained, that they which preach the Gospel, should live of the Gospel.
Thus the Apostle pleads for that liberty or power: but yet he would not make
use of it to the Corinthians, nor with the Church of Ephesus. But with some
others he did, as the forequoted place makes manifest, 2. Cor. 11.7.8.9. And
likewise Phil. 4.14.15.16 17.18. Where he takes notice in way of commendation
of the Philippians liberality to him, when none ministered to his necessities
but they only. I shall set down the words as they stand in both places. To the
Corinths he says thus. Have I committed an offense in abasing my self that
you might be exted, because I have preached to you the Gospel of God freely? I
robbed other Churches, taking wages of them to do you service. And when I was
present with you and wanted, I was chargeable to no man: For that which was
lacking to me, the Brethren which came from Macedonia supplied: and in all
things I have kept my self from being burdensome to you, and so will I keep my
self. So that here its plain, that at Corinth, the Brethren from Macedonia
supplied his wants. And to the Philippians he says thus, Chap. 4 Ver. 10. to
19. But I rejoiced in the Lord greatly, that now at the last your care of me
has flourished again, wherein ye were also careful, but yet lacked
opportunity; not that I spoke in respect of want: for I have learned in
whatsoever state I am therewith to be content. I know both how to be abased,
and I know how to abound: every where and in all things I am instructed both to
be full and to be hungry, both to abound and to suffer need. I can do all
things through Christ which strengthens me. Notwithstanding ye have well
done, that ye did communicate with my affliction. Now ye Phillippians know
also, that in the beginning of the Gospel, when I departed from Macedonia, no
Church communicated with me, as concerning giving and receiving, but ye only.
For even in Thessalonia, ye sent once and again unto my necessity; Not because
I desire a gift: But I desire fruit that may abound to your account. But I have
all and abound, I am full, having received of Epaphrodi^us the things from you,
an Odor of a sweet smell, a sacrifice acceptable, well pleasing to God. So
here its plain also that the Philippians did also communicate to his
necessities; and he accepts it with much love, and as a sacrifice accepted to
God, and tells them they had well done in so doing. Therefore this particular
carriage of Paul's to Ephesus in laboring with their hands to supply their own
and others necessity, was but to them, or some others: but he did not always
do so; nor bind all others to do so: seeing he himself practiced the contrary
in other places, and pleads for the justness of such a practice.

This therefore I find according to the Scriptures contrary to both these
aforenamed extremes.

1. That they who minister Spiritual things, they may be ministered unto; and
they may receive of their carnal things to whom they minister Spiritual: For
so God has appointed that they who preach the Gospel 'should live of the
Gospel, 1. Cor. 9.14. And Christ our Lord and Captain and Savior, the only
begotten Son of God our Pattern, he was ministered unto, Luke 8.3. Ioanna the
Wife of Chuza, Herod's Steward, and Susanna, and many others ministered to him of
their substance. And says Christ, such things as they set before ye eat, for
the Laborer is worthy of his hire, Lak. 10.7. go not from house to house.

Again says the Scriptures, to distribute and communicate forget not, for with
such sacrifices, God is well pleased. Is he well pleased with such sacrifices
only to others? How came his Ministers to be excluded?

2. Though they may receive, yet they may not compel, or strive, or contend
for the things of others: no nor covet after them. They have no warrant for
that: If any man do so, he is gone out from the Doctrine of Christ Jesus: from
his example; from his spirit, and run into the way of Balam, and into the
number of the false Prophets, who prepared war for such as put not into their
mouths, against which the true Prophets witnessed, and cried out against them

3. It is agreeable to the Scripture, That he that is taught, communicate to
him that teaches in all good things, Gal. 6.6. if he need, and be willing to
receive.

And where the heart is refreshed, comforted, enlightened, strengthened by the
Word of Truth, and their love constrains or moves to communicate, this is a
Fruit of love, a Fruit of the Spirit a Sacrifice acceptable and well-pleasing
before the Lord. This is to feed and eat of the Fruit of the flock; this is to
live of the Altar, and be partakers with the Altar. This is right
Gospel-Maintenance, Gospel-Wages, Gospel-Hire, where Christ is the Giver. This
has a sweet favor.

But where there is strife and debate about it, there the Devil is at work, and
the Wisdom that is from beneath, there is confusion and evil Work; this gives an
ill favor before the Lord, and before all his Servants, and discovers their
minds to be earthly and sensual, who are here, and not having the Spirit; they
are of the earth, therefore strive they for the earth, and raise contention
about it; if their Kingdom were not of this world, they would not strive for
the things of this World, but look up at the Giver of them, and wait on him
whom they serve, to draw forth the hearts of the people to supply their wants;
they would learn to be contented when their Master gave forth little, and so
learn to suffer with the Gospel, expecting another Kingdom, not of this world;
but in that they strive and contend, and make debate for the earthly Treasure,
they show whence they are, and where their hearts is, and such will daily more
and more be made manifest; of the earth they are, and therefore to the earth
their hearts return.

So then concerning Ministers Maintenance I lay down these Particulars.
I own,
1. THat there is a public Ministry of Christ Jesus, 2 Cor. 6.3, 4. 2. That
this Ministry has power to forbear working, else had Peter and the other
Apostles transgressed; Read 1 Cor. 9.4. to 15. 3. That this Ministry has
liberty to work where they see it convenient, and have liberty in spirit, else
had Paul transgressed, Acts 20.33, 34, 35. 4. That this Ministry has liberty
to eat such things as are set before them, Luke 10.7. 5. That they have power
to receive temporals of those to whom they impart spirituals, 1 Cor. 9.11.
But I deny, (and let others prove it)
1. That they have any power from Christ to take where it is not freely given;
for that is not a fruit of the Gospel, that is not to live on the Gospel, and so
beyond their power. 2. Much less are they to contend or strive for the things
of this world, for that's contrary to the Spirit of the Gospel, which is to
bring forth peace into the earth through suffering wrong; The servant of the
Lord must not strive, but be gentle unto all men, 2 Timothy 2.24. 3. And least of
all are they to go to Law for them; for that is to nourish a spirit that is quite
to the spirit of Christ, and gives an ill example in the world, quite contrary
to the example of Christ and his followers, 1 Cor. 6.7.
This was formerly given in writing to one who occasioned it by Discourse, who
stood in the latter Extreme, and therefore does it abound rather in the
rectifying of that, only the summing up into Particulars in the end, is added.

Of persecuting men for speaking in the Synagogues (by many called Churches.)
HEar ye deaf, and see ye blind, ye that have a hand in this persecution; hear
and consider before ye be made to hear with judgments.

Where will you find any like your selves, that have done so? Under whose
Example can you shelter your selves? Did ever any of the Saints of God do so as
you do? To whom will you turn for your pattern?

Will you make that your pattern where Christ made a Scourge, and whipped the
Buyers and Sellers out of the Temple, then must the persecuted whip out you,
for it is you that are the Buyers and the Sellers, who buy your Authority to
speak, and then sell the Word of God for money (as you account it) Christ whipped
out such, and the Apostles whipped out such out of Fellowship and part in
Ministering of the Word, saying, Thy money perish with thee; Thou who have
thought the gift of God to be sold for money, thou have neither part nor lot in
this business. Now therefore you that stand divining for money, are they that
are to be whipped out, if any be to be whipped out, for you are the Buyers and
Sellers.

If you fly from that Example, I know not where you will find another, either
among Jews or Gentiles; for I never find that either the Jews or Gentiles did
persecute men out of their Synagogues (singly) for speaking, as you do.

Christ Jesus our Lord, though accounted a Deceiver by the chief Priests and
Rulers, and religious devout Pharisees, yet had free liberty to speak in the
Synagogues amongst them, and was never persecuted upon that account; but when
they wonld persecute, or lay wait to entrap him, it was or his Doctrine, to
accuse him of Blasphemy, or some dangerous Doctrine as they accounted it; But
you persecute for speaking, whether the Doctrine be good or bad. Therefore see
how far you are fallen below the Synagogues of the Jews; and how much more
unreasonable you are become then they. They would not persecute but for
Blasphemy (as they thought) or some heinous seducing Doctrine; But you
persecute for speaking only, if a man do but open his mouth in your Synagogues
to speak.

Have patience to look a little upon the moderation of the Jews in their
Synagogues. Lu. 4.15.16. It is said there of Christ, that He taught in their
Synagogues, being glorified of all: And he came to Nazareth, where He had been
brought up with his parents, his Father a Carpenter, and Himself too, as they
sometimes called Him, and there as his custom was, He went into the Synagogue
on the Sabbath, and stood up for to read and preach to them; and there was
delivered to Him the book of the Prophet Jsaias. See here, though he was
brought up among them a Carpenter, and as an ordinary man of an inferior Trade;
yet they were so far from hindering of him from speaking, that they furthered
him, gave him the book to read: But for all that, before he had done, they all
were filled with wrath, and rose up, and thrust him out of the City, and led
him unto the Brow of a Hill (whereon their City was built) that they might cast
him down headlong, Verse. 28.29. See the mad rage and violence of this people
against him, whom a little before they admired for the gracious words which
proceeded out of his mouth, Verse. 22. I lay their example before you that you
may see your selves, this rageing people who would have done thus to him, yet
had more moderation then you; for they did not use violence to him for speaking
in the Synagogue, but furthered him (though a Carpenter) to speak among them:
only were in rage when his Doctrine cut them. But you are in a rage and
persecute if a man do but offer to speak among you: And therefore you are
worse, more vile, more wicked, more unreasonable then these rageing Jews were;
others see this of you clearly, though wrath blind your own eyes that you
cannot see your selves herein; so that it may as truly be said of you, as it
was of the false Prophets: Who is blind as my servant, and deaf as my
messenger: so reputed by themselves, though they ran and God sent them not.

As Christ Jesus (accounted but a Carpenter by them) had this liberty in the
Synagogues of the Jews, to speak and preach among them; so also his Apostles
had the same liberty.

Saul who also was called Paul, preached Christ in the Synagogues, that he is
the Son of God, Act. 9 20. Though they took counsel to kill him, Ver. 23 being
exceedingly mad against him for his Doctrine, yet was he permitted to speak,
and reason and dispute in the Synagogues, and never persecuted singly for
speaking there.

We do not find that he or any of the Apostles were hindered from speaking in
any of the Synagogues where they came; but had free liberty to speak, though
they sought their lives for their Doctrine, being looked upon as Seducers.

Act. 13.5. Barnabas and Saul being sent forth, and come to Salamis, they
preached the word of God in the Synagogues of the Jews.

Verse 14.15. When they were come to Anti^ch in Pisidia; they went into the
Synagogue on the Sabbath day, and sat down.

And after the reading of the Law and the Prophets, the Rulers of the Synagogue
sent unto them, saying, ye men and Brethren, if ye have any word of exhortation
for the people, say on. It seems they offered to speak, and the Rulers of the
Synagogue observing it, sent to them, to say on, if they had any word of
exhortation for the people.

They were not such enemies to the peoples good, as to hinder them of a word of
exhortation, though from strangers coming in into their Synagogue; therefore
they were more honest to the people, then you now are, who will not suffer any
word of exhortation, but hale out to prisons, and stocks.

They durst hear what any one had to say: But your consciences being filled
with guilt, and so with wrath against that which would stir up that guilt in
you, and open the eyes of others to see it, you are more unreasonable and
implacable then any that have gone before you, opening your devouring mouth of
persecution, to swallow up him that shall but offer to speak among you.
Therefore how much more intolerable shall it be for you at the day of
Judgment, then for those unbelieving Jews, who though they persecuted the
Apostles for their Doctrine, yet first heard it what it was, and gave them
liberty to speak among them; but you persecute, and would swallow up before you
hear, the guilt that is in you not being able to abide a word, but if one come
to speak a Word of Exhortation among you, you either send him away to prison
and punishment, or else run away your selves from him: How many of you have
ever sent to strangers coming in among you, and offering to speak, to bid them
go on if they had a Word of Exhortation for the people Therefore see how far
short you are of those Jews.

How strangely are your Spirits framed, and your Congregations framed, and your
Worship framed, that can admit of no such thing among you as the Jews
Synagogues could admit of? Has not the Devil a better Form of Worship for
himself, whereby to keep out light, and uphold his own Kingdom among you, then
he had among the Jews, where light could have entertainment, and truth be
spoken forth? Consider if it be not so, and be ashamed of your cowardlinesse
and wickedness, that dare not suffer a Word of Exhortation to be spoken among
you to the people, for fear their eyes should be opened, to see the wickedness
you live in, and so to see their own danger in being led by such guides.

If your consciences did not condemn you, and rise up against you for being out
of the truth, you would have the boldness to try all things, and to hear a Word
of Exhortation, and to satisfy the minds of your Hearers, who many times would
willingly hear what another had to say to them, and to have their Doctrine
tried by you; but you being afraid of this, and flying, if not persecuting,
hereby show to all men that there is something in your consciences that cannot
abide the Truth.

Again, Act. 14. ver. 1. And it came to pass in Iconium, that they went both
together into the Synagogue of the Jews, and so spoke, that a great multitude
both of the Jews, and also of the Greeks, believed.

Ver. 2. But the unbelieving Jews stirred up the Gentiles, and made their minds
evil affected against the Brethren.

So here again they had no opposition solely for speaking, but were suffered to
speak freely, though the minds of many were bitter against them.

Act. 16.13. At Philippi also there they went where the people used to worship
and pray, and spoke to the women that resorted thither, without opposition.

Act. 17.1, 2. They came to Thessalonica, where was a Synagogue of the Jews,
and Paul (as his manner was) went in unto them, and three Sabbath-dayes
reasoned with them out of the Scriptures.

This was you see without opposition, though afterward for his Doctrine they
sought to kill him, ver. 5.

Then departing thence, they came to Berea, and went into the Synagogue of the
Jews, Act. 17.10, 11. where they preached and opened the things of the Kingdom
of God, and found more noble spirits then in Thessalonica, who received the
word with all readiness of mind, and searched the Scriptures daily whether
those things were so, therefore many of them believed. Here also the
unbelieving Jews stirred up the people against them for the word which they
spoke, but not solely for speaking.

Act. 18.1, 4. Paul coming to Corinth, reasoned with them in the Synagogue
every Sabbath, and persuaded the Jews and the Greeks; and there he continued a
year and six Months, teaching the word of God among them.

Thus you see what Liberty was every where in their Synagogues for speaking to
the people, and never do we find any persecuted solely for speaking as we do
now-a-dayes; therefore these unbelieving Synagogues shall stand an eternal
Witness against you of this generation, who have a hand in persecuting men only
for speaking; and against you who make Laws for persecutors, that they do that
by your Law, which former Ages have thought unreasonable, even to persecute men
only for speaking, whether the thing were good or bad that they spoke.

Shall not all the Synagogues of the Jews every where, in which there was
liberty for a Word of Exhortation, for Reasoning, for Disputing, shall they not
all rise up against you and your Synagogues, in which there is persecution for
the same thing to which they gave liberty?

Shall not Corinth, Berea, Thessalonica, Philippi, Iconium, Salamis, Dam^scus,
and all the Synagogues wherever Christ, or any of his Apostles and Disciples
came, in their own Country, and in other Countries every where; Shall they not
all rise up in the Judgment against this generation, and condemn it? yea
verily, they will rise up in judgment against you and your Synagogues, who
have so framed them, that as much as you can, you may keep out all Knowledge of
God from them, save what the hireling Teachers will afford them, whose eye God
has closed up because of their disobedience, pride, and contention, and wrath,
and covetousness, ^^d earthly-mindedness, and haughtiness, for such are blind,
and cannot see far off, as the Apostle Peter witnesses, 2 Pet. 1. He that
lacks these things, is blind, and cannot see far off, of which things
Patience is one. Now how far are they from this, that either persecute a man
for speaking or else run away from him; therefore their want of patience
declares them plainly to be blind guides; and yet these are defended by Laws of
men, and have their Synagogues impropriated to themselves, and so framed, that
they can admit of no such thing as the Apostles had liberty to do in the
Synagogues of the Jews, either to speak, or reason with them, or dispute; these
men declaring hereby their fear to have their blindness discovered, lest their
people getting Knowledge, and having their eyes opened, should withdraw from
them, and so their gainful Trade should decay.

Obj. It may be some will say, None are hindered but such as come to delude
people.

Ans. The Apostles and Christ Jesus himself were accounted as great deluders in
their time, as any are now, and yet their Synagogues afforded that liberty
every where, that they might speak amongst them.

But secondly, Will you say they are Deluders and therefore will you not suffer
them? This is to judge first, and then to examine the matter; for how know you
that they are deluders whom you have not heard speak, but persecute them, or
run from them hefore they speak, so as you can understand their Doctrine; here
your impatiency and blindness appears.

But thirdly, Are they Seducers and Deluders, who would awaken you out of your
bed of Security, wherein you lie slumbering in unity with the World, and would
stir you up to purity and holiness, without which none can ever see God? They
that would put you upon the trial of your selves, whether the hope of Glory be
found in you or no; namely, whether Christ be found living in you? They who
would show unto you the Way by which they themselves have found Fellowship and
Communion with God, to their comfort and peace? Whereto tends (...) Doctrine,
if it tend not to these ends? and is this delusion?

Consider if that will not delude you in the end, To content your selves with
the Name of Christian, without the true nature of a Christian, to live in the
World at all adventure, not knowing whether Christ be in you of a truth or no,
crucifying the light in you in which God dwells, and wherein you can only
enjoy communion with him, and one with another. See if the delusion do not lie
here; and see if you be not found those that neither enter into the Kingdom of
God your selves, nor suffer others: See if you be not the upholders of the
Works of darkness, (which Christ came to destroy) who dare not suffer the light
to shine among you. Have you not sins among you which you never open to the
people, but keep them in ignorance of, and so in danger of plagues? Is there
not a drunken spirit, which is drunk with the Wine of the whole Earths
Fornication; namely, which runs after a Form, and rests in it, falling short of
the life and power of godliness, besotted with their Form, like drunken men
with strong drink, and so falling asleep therein, and ready to beat and quarrel
with him that shall offer to awake them out of it? Is there not such a spirit?
and are not you their Nurses, lulling them asleep therein, until misery and
destruction come upon you and them? For assuredly, all Nations that drink of
this Wine of Fornication, must also drink of the Wine of the Wrath of that
Fornication.

But lastly, If you will truly judge of delusion, mind where is the
disobedience to the light of Christ that comes into the world to consume the
man of sin; for upon the diso bedient is the strong delusions sent, because
light has shined among us to discover many evils not yet reformed; and men
loved not that light, and that truth; they have not received it in love being
joined to earthly things in their hearts, and loving them better; for this
cause God sends strong delusions, even to keep those men in the world where
their heart chose to be, rather then to follow the light under the Cross; and
talk as much of delusion as you will, here it will be found in the end. 2 Thessalonians. 2.10, 11, 12.

THE END.
ERRATA.
Page 26. lin. 22. for yet, r. ye: page 27. l. 6. for their hands to supply
their own, and others necessity, r. his hands to supply his own; and others
necessity: page 28. l. 5. for their, r. there: and l. 15. for and evil work, r.
and every evil work: page 29. l. 26. for quite to the spirit of Christ, r.
quite contrary to the spirit of Christ. page 34. l. 25. for the r. your.


