OBEDIENCE Perpetually due to KINGS, Because the KINGLY POWER Is Inseparable
from the ONE King's Person.

Delivered in a SERMON to Mr. PETER GVNNING'S Congregation in Exeter Chapel,
near the Savoy, On the appointed Thanksgiving-day, June 28. 1660.

By WILLIAM TOWERS, Bachelor in Divinity, and Curate at Vpton near Northampton.

LONDON, Printed by R. D. for Thomas Rooks, and are to be sold at his Shop at
the sign of the Holy Lamb at the East end of S. Paul's. 1660.

TO THE KING'S MOST EXCELLENT MAJESTY.
Most dreadly loved Sovereign,
I Am still upon the part of a Divine Adventurer, when I thought I should have
been secured at the Insuring Office by the Advantage of Leisure: In this I have
only told the Subjects of their Duty, and had not Time to inform them of the
success and Blessedness of that Loyalty, which would have bribed them into
an obedience to your Sacred Majesty, and a thankfulness (at least a pardon)
for these Allegiant Instructions. I have therefore only told them of the
former, because in the pursuit of Business, and flight of Time, I was so
suddenly engaged upon the Vocal delivery of this, immediately after the forming
of it by a Night-pen, that nothing but the zealous Vocalnesse could have held
my eyes waking; Engaged upon it by the irresistible Importunity of a Second
Hammond, Mr. T. Pierce.
so I call him for his Early and eminently- Learned Love and Truth to God's
King and Church; for both of which, and for one Reason more, he is the Desire
of our eyes, because His Ripeness having, long since, anticipated His Years,
He, in some measure, resembles that King, whom, during all His Exile, he has
so Industriously honored, (so wisely and beneficially to the King's Liege
People, to the very making of them Liege People to the King) as if present
amongst us; since that Heathen Complement, Caesaribus virtus contigit ante
Diem, has been a Christian sober Character more of your Royal Father, and of
his Royal Son, than of all the Princes in Europe before you.

Most Royal Sir, Though most of your Pulpit-Subjects are abler, yet, every one
of them (my very Fathers too) must pardon me, that I am not able to yield to
any, in a zeal and Duty to my King, to the very laying down of my life at His
Feet, and for His Service; no, not to those to whom, under my King, I
vehemently desire to swear a Canonical Obedience; because then I must take two
Oaths more, those of Allegiance and Supremacy.

Adeo and tenuis Animas ferit aemula Virtus.

Your Majesty's most bounden Subject by all the Ties of Religion, William
Towers.

Psalm. 21. v. 1. former part. The King shall joy in thy strength, O Lord.


It Is a Day of joy; of joy in the Lord; in the Lord for the King; we have It
and Them in the Text: It Is an Hebrew Text; and, as in such Books, we must begin
at the end; at O Lord, before we come to The King; it is He that has helped us
to Him: Without God it were above the strength of Man to obtain, the wisdom of
Man to execute an office of such difficulty, such opposition; Nihil
difficilius, quam imp^rare: when Hell and enmity trample down a Throne, it is
hard to get up upon it, quam been Imperare, hard to rule well, though there be
a most towardly, tractable, and loyal people; a persecuted David, (though
strong enough to bend a bow of steel, Psalm. 18.34.) will not yet trust in his
bow, neither shall his Sword save him, Psalm. 44.6. Both his own hands are two
feeble, the Sword in his Right, and the Bow in his Left, too weak; both Gods
hands are not too strong; to them, to both of them he flies; Thou, O God, have
a mighty arm, strong is thy hand, and high is thy right hand, Psalm. 89.13. not
only the Hand and the Arm of God, ( Immortalia mortaliser Lucr. moan notantes,)
but, both my hands (in the Chaldee) shall be ready for his help; such a humane
impassibility to recover, did we lie and groan under, that we are driven to
find out such a Mighty Text, such a powerful two-handed God to save us so
well, and gratefully on David's part (and on ours too) might that very God, who
was his strength, be also his song, Psalm. 118.14. so joyful a song, and so
like the ever-beginning, because endless eternity, that this very day, we do
but continue to begin it.

What shall we do? the place we are in requires Method, that subject we handle
does almost preclude it; and yet, are there not Pulpit as well as
street-Raptures? is there not, sometimes, a commendable Immethodicall style, as
well as, always, a lawful Immethodicall ecstasy? and yet as we have a long
little time (for, pleasant days are short as December, even then whilst they
are long as June) joy'd at all adventure, without the leisure of strict consult
ation, without the discression of confining order (for, there is nothing which
Philosophy treates of more unbounded and irregular, more dilated and
unphilosophicall than excess of joy) rather than quite fail make we some
pretense to the usefulness of division and parts: such a division as this,
such parts as these.

Be the division this, O Lord the King, the first General; shall joy in thy
strength, the second.

Be the parts, these. In the first General, humbly compare we in one word, the
late low state of our King, with that of his Lord.

In a second, consider we that the Kingly Power, is preferrable to every other
species of D^mination.

In a third, that a Kings power is inseparable from his Person.

In a fourth, the reason of the former, because a King is invested with Power
from God.

In a fifth, the use of all, that it is therefore, sin to oppose the Kingly
power; all this hinted to us out of the conjunction of these words, O Lord the
King.

In the second General, take we notice of the miseryes we escape, of the
blessings we obtain by having a King, the King, the true King, Gods King, the
Anointed of the Lord over us, the material cause of our joy and Thanksgiving.

And then, posita causa sequitur effectus, the cause preceding, the effect must
follow, joy in the second.

The King shall joy, etc.

O Lord the King. I have elsewhere told others, that is the Grammar of the text.

A Jove principium, says a Heathen; and (...), a Father; we must begin and end
with God, the text does both; the Lord is (...) and (...), the end in the
position of the words, and the beginning in the construction.

The first part is, that the King has power in all lowlynesse, in that very
lowness of the King conferring his with that of God, O Lord the King.

It Is a question which St. Austin would not determine, L. 12. De Civit. 15.
but doubt of, whether God were Dominus ab aeterno; Tertullian against
Hermogenes affirms, that God did then begin to be a Lord, and to have servants
when his creatures began to be, for says he before the creation it is said, God
said, and God saw, and God created, nor is he styled Lord thoroughout that
whole first chap. of Genesis; but in the second chap. after the creation in
every verse almost he has this addition of title, the Lord God, which opinion
of his, as very probable, the School follows, and concludes true.

I list not doubt with St. Austin, nor affirm with Tertullian nor conclude
with the School. The contrary, to their conclusion may safely be held upon this
ground, because all creatures before they had a being were subject to God's
command as their Lord; even before they were, he bade them be; he spoke, and it
was done, Psalm. 33.9. Romans 4.17.
and he calls those things which be not as though they were.

To determine the question in one word, God is a Lord from everlasting, having
had power to create from, and before all eternity; God has been a Lord in
time, in regard of the actual obedience of his creatures.

The King's late case aright; he had a just power to command us all, even then,
when too many revolted from him; even then when he received no other tribute
but that of prayers; even then when he was a Foreigner amongst subjects none of
his, I have said ye are God's, even in this also, whilst your Subjects are as
it were unmade; Gods without them, and Lords with them, and over them; be this
the Kings comfort, when he reflects upon his past affliction, that God himself
was once, as well as the King, without Subjects, a creatureless God, as God had
then power to make, so the King had then, even then, power to Rule.

Which Kingly power, (how much soever rejected by some, and most cast off by
them that did affect it most) is more desirable than all other kinds of
Governments. It Is so 1. By instinct. 2. By reason. 3. By the word of God. Orat.
5. De Providentia.


By instinct first. Theodoret sends the unskilled Commonwealthsman to ask
better counsel of the Bees, (and since very Bruites, the lowest order of them,
insectiles, Solomon's Ant, and Theodorets Be, may be his good Counselors, let
him for ever cease to quarrel at men, at wise men, as evil Counselors, to
the King,) (...), these sedulous creatures (so small ones that they are scarce
creatures) wisely abhor the Government of many, (...), They have one Ruler over
them: (...), It Is their aim, their delight, (that is the Conscience they have,
that is to them instead of Religion loyally to obey that one. Why love they one,
and loathe many? it is (if we credit those who have diligently observed and
faithfully reported the nature of that dutiful and immitable Subject) because
by obeying the orders that one issues out to them, they live and thrive, gather
honey for themselves and us; and at his death they first honorably interre him,
(their hummings are his bells and their wings his Scutchions, they sadly mourn
over him and then (for want of a Governor to protect them in their stations
and to encourage them in the works of their callings) they allegeantly by
themselves.

Exemplumque hominis quaeque est in immagine parva.

Thus may we flourish under a King, who these twelve years at least have dyed
without him; he, whilst he stays, is the breath of our nostrils, when he was
gone thou tookest away our breath, O Lord, and we perished.

It would be too tedious to show you, out of Authors, some footsteps and
glimpses of Monarchy in every creature under the Sun; yea, in the sun himself,
which one great light was made to Rule the day. Genesis 1.16.

2. By reason next. What the solid Historian has told us, Q. Curt. l. 10.
that Recorders of the accidents of these late times will tell posterity, quod
Imperium sub uno stare potuisset, dum a pluribus sustinetur, ruit, That Empire
which might stand upon its own legs, supported by one Ruler, whilst many
pretend to govern it, falls to ruin. To prevent which ruin 'twas well said by
another Heathen a mere Rationalist. Vnum omnium votum est salus Principis;
Plin. ad Trajan.
all the people have but one wish, the safeguard of the Prince, because in this
one (both wish and Prince) they vote all happiness to themselves; for, though
the Scholar especially, (since a good King and Learning will go up and fall
down together) yet every other man, in his several occupation may inscribe
that Motto over his Stall, his Counting House, his Cottage, his Manor, and
whatever else is his.

Et spes, and ratio studiorum in Caesare tantum.

No hopes for any of us to thrive, unless the King of us all does prosper.

3. And therefore, lastly, 'twas the most politic saying of him in Scripture,
which he ever said, whether is it better that threescore and ten, or that one
reign over you? for the discretion of which he is put upon record by the Holy
Ghost. Judges 9.2. Have the people but a competent measure of honesty, or, as
they have self love enough, but prudence enough in that, it is a question most
easy to be answered, so little need there is of a headpiece, and judgment to
decide it, should that question be asked again, (and not ore gladii, by another
mouth than that devouring one of the sword, a Poets verse would be soon replied
to a chapters verse.

Vnus homo nobis restituit rem; one man, the King, restores our rights unto us,
when many would be our spoilers; and Vnus cunctando,

One man, the General, more by his skillful delay, than by his cruel sword,
does do it, in restoring our King unto us, both of which another many
Scabberderds sword strove to deprive us of. Which rights yet we can never
obtain by the most rightful King, unless we evince the inseperability of his
power from his person; by both of which together he will, by neither of which
alone he can be enabled to help us; the third and most considerable point to
treat of.

3. Without this the name of his murdered Father; of all his Ancestors; of
William the Conqueror; of himself, may as beneficially protect us as the name,
the

Magni nominis umbra of Charles the second. Lucan.


Either power is perpetually in his Person, or the authority of a King is
devolvable upon some other, one or more persons; if upon one, then there may be
a King and no King upon the Throne, as well as upon the Stage; there may be a
King upon earth, which, upon the same spot of earth, has a King above him, and
who would not hiss at the man that should say so? that should, either of these
ways, change England into a Theater, or, by joining the other two Kingdoms
into a like mockage, change all 3 of them into more than an Amphi-theatri; if
upon many, then there may be a Kingdom which is not a Kingdom, but the States;
there may be a reconciliation (though it were once again preached impossible
at another Vxbridge) betwixt those two opposite members, the, (...),
(...).


In a Greek Poet, and the (...), the Bellua multorum capitum, in a Latin,
which yet I am not sagacious enough to apprehend how it will quit it self from
that equal so lecism, of calling the States of Holland one Monarchy, or the
Republic of Venice another Kingdom.

Yet as to the laws of the Land (which I would either wholly decline, or no
otherwise touch upon than to submit unto them; though, perhaps, as they are
founded upon reason, every logical man may, so far be a fundamental Lawyer,
as to have leave to speak) if there may be a case (which I know not of) where
privy Counselors, or any else, in a King's absence have the virtuall Authority
of a King in themselves, I humbly conceive that virtuall Authority, in some
unexpected emergencies, is, therefore, in them; because, upon such occasions,
were the King with them, the law presumes he would say, and do, as they Vote
and Act; which very presumption is taken off (and that legally) and with that,
all the virtuall Authority, if the King declare his descent. In a King's
minority, when a King is not of age to speak as a King (though in his infancy,
he be rockt by, or in his boyage, he stands by) and, in a King's absence, when
a King is so far distant that he cannot communicate his will and pleasure and
commands, in the former case a Kingdom fatally must, in the latter possibly it
may be governed by others.

But, as when the nonage of a King is expired, and a King is legally ripe to
speak for himself, the government of others in the Kings name does expire with
that; so the distance of a King, which impowers others with his rule, does void
the rule of others, when a King is no farther off by that distance, than to be
enabled by pen and Seal and message to communicate his own sense and mind; the
absence, if it be so remote as to impede these communications may be compared
to a nonage; if it be so near, that others may send Petitions and Counsels to
him, and he replies to them, this may be likened to his entrance upon age; as
his presence with them having not been of years.

But, this, if it seems rather spoke like a Minister of State, than of the
Gospel, and may give offense as from one of my Calling, at worst it is but
error amoris, a zeal to the good of my Country under the rule of her King, and
may with any candid breasts, incur no other blame than that mild reprehension
of the 2. Seneca's Peccas honesta mente, in the Tragedian, Erras sed bono
animo, in the Philosopher; so that I may well hope I cannot be so obnoxious for
my indiscretion, as loved by some and cxcus'd by all, for my honor to the King
and good will to the people, so much has the Kingdom smarted under this
falacy, that all my desire is, the King may have more of honor, and the
Kingdom smart no more.

But to proceed like a Preacher, by scripture; and in the mode too, by reason
suitable with that.

Where we often meet with the King, and without the Person, God save the King;
and O King live for ever, yet this is so far from a dark saying, from opening
the mouth in parables as that they that said God save the King, did so plainly
and intelligibly mean Joash the son of Ahaziah, 2 King. 11.21. The Kings son.
v. 12. As that all those that heard them say it, understood that they meant the
son of Ahaziah, the King's son; nor did the Queen any more mean her husband
Belshazar. Dan. 5.10. Then the astonished Lords knew that she meant him v. 9.

And yet in both these cases, lest the mistake of man, for want of of the name
of the person, might mis-judge the King to be torn from the King, that the
Authority was one thing, and the Person another, Joash one thing, and Belshazar
one thing, and the King another thing from them both, how wary is the Holy
Ghost in adjoining the Person to the Authority, in both these prayers, for a
King loved by God, and for a Heathen King too! in the begening of a Kings
reign, God save King Solomon. 1 King. 1.34. And in the continuance of a Kings
reign too! King Darius live for ever. Dan. 6.6.

And what shall I say? or what shall I say first? not only his own Heathen
Lords, but the Prophet of God, Daniel (that he might not be mistaken to have
took others for the King) prays to his very face the same prayer. v. 21. not
only the man of God, but the very Heathen pray for their King, to instruct us
Christians after them, that if we would be godly, if we would not be Infidels
and worse, we must pray for our King, and (what he, who prays not with fained
lips, will do with a zealous heart) do all the good service and honor we can
do for him, will God believe we pray in earnest for the King, when our selves
are backward to do that which we pray God to do, to save him from dangers, to
support him with a Princely livelihood.

But to go on. Jehu is King in one place, 2 Kings 9.13. Dan. 4.31.
and O King Nebuchadnezar in another; and King David in many more: it were
endless to sum up the Person and Authority joined together by God; and what
God has joined let not man put asunder, and King is wherever David is; and
when David is dead, the King is wherever Solomon is; the Kingly power always
in the King's Person.

To signify which inseparability St Paul promiscuously uses these words, the
Power and the Rulers. Rom 13.1. intending the Authority should be understood
when the Person is named, and the man when his Power; the King never dismantled
of his Negality, even when all his other Robes are laid off, and himself laid
down to sleep; yet even then his Personal Authority slumbereth not, as neither
does their damnation (in the Judgment of St. Paul, in the same chap. and in
the Judgment of God upon them) who resist it; will thou then not be afraid of
the Power? Verse 2.
do that which is good, and then shall thou have praise of the same v. 3. For
he (the same, the Power) is the Minister of God v. 4. The Power of the King is,
in Scripture-stile the very same with the King, his Authority and his Person
but one, one and the same, so little can his authority be virtually (or any
otherwise then viciously) be evangelically pretended against the commands of
his Person. Of all which I say not one word (that God, in whose Rule and
Governance are the hearts of Kings, and who is the searcher of all hearts is my
witness) with any the most secret design to exasperate my King (in whom, as
in my God, I most of all love the Prerogative of mercy, the Kinglynesse and
eminency of that over and above all his other works and Titles) against any of
my dear Countrymen, but to undeceive all of these, that (in the words of our
Royal Sovereigne) no such mistakes and misunderstandings (misunderstandings
even of Scripture it self) may, at any time hereafter produce and contribute to
such miserable inconveniences which were not intended heretofore, that there
may not any more be pilaminantia pilis, the very same pila to the very same
pilis, my purpose of inoffensivenesse and charity makes me the less to dread
the preparing of any of them to a litigious way against me, to whom I speak of
peace, and for peace upon whom.

But I must not forget to attempt Scriptural reasons too, for the individuality
of the Rule from the Ruler, of the regal Power from the King.

What else is there that essentiates a King into the very being of a King, but
Power to protect innocence, to c^astise offenses? without which power he is no
longer a King, but reduced into a private Person, so that of necessity a King
must have this power whilst he is a King, that is, so long as he lives.

Besides this. As in hereditary Kingdoms, nothing can possibly pretend to a
regal Power without a King, unless ( perhaps with some Calvinisticall, some
fortasse-colour.) the Inferior Magistrates or (most certainly, with no color
at all, unless a bloody one) the longest and sharpest Sword, to void that best
appearance of Title (so far as it belongs to a Clergy-cognizance, by the word of
God. And miserable were it for us, 1 Cor. 9.16.
if as there is a woe upon us, if we do not Preach the Gospel, a woe from God,
so there shall be a woe from man upon us, if we do preach this part of the
Gospel; if, when God shall say to any of us Churchmen, when I say to the
wicked, thou shall surely dye, (as he has said unto us. Romans 13. The wicked
resister shall dye and dye again, dye the second death, dye and be damned; it is
a fearful saying, but it is God's own) and thou give him not warning to save
his life, he shall dye in his iniquity, but his blood will I require at thy
hands. Ezekiel. 3.18. If God has not enough furnishr us in his word to know what
that wickedness is which kills a wicked man, what that resistance is which
damnes a resister, since, in his word he commands us to warn them of it, and
threatens to require their blood of us, if notwithstanding all this, man shall
forbid us to warn him, and threaten to require our own blood at our hands at
our necks, at least the blood of our livelihood, for having warned him, I must
say it again, we churchmen are in this life, of all men most miserable) I say
to void that fairest color, that best pretense, that likest unlike face to the
Kings, I would argue thus, I would assign the greatest honor imaginable to
the rise and origination of the just Authority of those inferior Magistrates; I
would own their power, transmitted to them, not only from their King, but from
his King too, I would obey, and preach obedience to their lawful commands, not
only in the King's name, but in God's name too; I would give them Scripture for
all I say, that of the Holy Ghost by S. Peter 1.2.13. submit your selves to
every Ordinance of man, (...), for the Lords sake, I would presume every
Christian subordinate Governor would put up his claim so high, and wave any
inferior privilege which man's law can ascribe unto him in compare with so
Heavenly a title, since by the other his authority will only reach to those
two things which came out of the earth, body and estate, thin dust, and thick
clay, but the Soul will escape all his Jurisdicttion; by this, he confines the
mind, he ties, he binds up, he obliges the very Conscience, and is not this a
much nobler Domination over Immortals, than that which (like the brutish
soveraignity of the Lion over beasts, and the Eagle over birds, and the
Dolphin over fishes) is only conversant about a rheumatick body, a heap
crowded together of skin and flesh and blood and bones? When he has thus
viewed how glorious his sway is, and taken pleasure in the Heavenlynesse of his
Title, I would next, request him to search through, to the bottom of that
verse, and to the first half of the next, submit your selves to every
Ordinance of man for the Lord's sake; whether it be to King as Supreme, or
unto Governors as unto them that are sent by him. I would now ask, if it can
be presumed in reason, that any one would send and Authorize another to do
prejudice and unkindness to himself? I would crave leave to ask on, whether
any Governor is, in the Scripture sense, presumed to be sent by the King to
such a purpose, when, the Governor indeed says I, and the King himself says
no? O let us not, nodum in scirpo, enigmatize the simplicity of the Gospel,
make plain and evident Scripture difficult to be understood. I would lastly,
beseech him not to chang that safest Title to his Authority which God gives for
a Humane one, because God's Title places him beneath a King, and considers him
in that Formality, as below him; nor to exceed that Title by a humane one; nor
to be angry at these instructions, drawn out of Holy writ, and set before him,
out of my tender regard to the undamnation, to the safety of his Soul, that he
would not endanger my body, because I take care (what lies in my slender skill
and large affection) not to hazard his Soul, liberare animam, liherare animas,
to free both his Soul and mine; conscionably to free my own soul, and both
Religiously and Respectfully his; that he, and all of them, would be (what they
are) in the highest of their delegated Authority, highly loyal to that
Supremacy which is higher than they: that they would do (what they have
promised) increase the honor and greatness of that Supremacy, moved thereunto,
because (which is the next point) the King is invested with that Supremacy by
God.

The King's Power is from God. All power is so, Romans 13.1, 4. ((...)) all
lawful Power, not all, not any instrusion into the chair of State, Usurpation
of the Princely Throne; he that lays violent hands upon a Scepter, that with a
stiff neck thrusts his proud head undera Diadem, that girds his own side with
his Royal master's Sword, though he has much strength he has no power; or if
a power of force, none at all of Authority) and if all lawful, though
inferior Power is from God, the Regal much more; inferior Power is
subordinate to the King's, it comes from God and from man; Kingly Power is
derived from God only; how will it mis-beseem any people's mouth (when they
have the largest commission in their hand, and the Richest Purple upon their
back, when their Authority is as high and as full as they are capable to hold
it, that if it be Higher it will stretch and disjoint them, if it be fuller it
will swell and burst them) to dare to say, by us Kings reign, to unking the
King even whilst they King him, and to Deify themselves whilst they King and
unking the King, O it is too Heavenly a style to be ever spoke by man, so that
he must let that saying alone for ever.

Therefore has the King his Authority from God, from God only, and not at all
from man, because whoever confers ^uthority must be Superior to him whom he
thus Dignifies: the King as Supreme over all (the collective all too) may
indulge a lawful subordinate power to whom he please. None of the People can
do this back to the King, because the King is Supreme, and to be Supreme, is
to have none above him, none equal to him, none upon earth, none but that God
which gave him all the Authority he has: that the King is Supreme (what ever
the Sword of man writes in letters of blood against it) take his word for it
who made him so, even Gods 1 Pet. 2.13. whatever you can name, the biggest
Authority in the land besides, still the King is (...), Above it, be it what it
will, unless there can be such an Authority over Kings found out, which is an
Authority over Scripture too, and may have leave to blot out the (...) in St.
Peter, to pull that Jewel out of the Kings Crown which sets up the King above
all, the people can neither make nor unmake a King; neither impose upon him
whilst he sits on the Throne, nor depose him from off it; both these are God's
Prerogative; it is he that takes down one, and sets up another: it is he, and
not the People, which sets up a King.

From these and the like frequent claims of God, of his singular Sovereignty
over Princes, that their having of Dominions is as much his Gift as their being
Men, their having flesh and blood is his workmanship; from these it is that the
Greek and Latin Fathers derive from one Fountain the Princes Power and Manhood.

Take that famous passage in Tertullian known by all, and lately cited by an
Honorable because Loyal Member, Inde Imperator est, unde est Homo: and that of
Theodoret, (which deserves to be equally famous, but that it was writ 200 years
after) (...) it is the same rich sense in the like scarcity of words; De Provid.
Orat. 1.
that God, which gave him his being, made a Man of him at his birth, gave him
his Crown, made a King of him at the last King's death; and so much power does
God exert in making Kings the Rulers of the Earth, as he did in creating a
World for Man; God spoke, and it came to pass, the World was made, Genesis 1.
Dixi, I have said it, and ye are Gods, Psalm. 82.

When one Rules whom God judges an unfit King; when many take this power to
themselves; or, when the King whom God has chose is removed out of sight, gone
a far off; in the two former cases, God will prepare him a King; in the last,
God will find him out a King, fetch him home, and set him upon the Throne.

See all these shaddow'd out to us by Scripture!

For the first, when the Tyrant Saul had incurred the displeasure of the
universal King, the Lord said unto Samuel, I have provided me a King, 1 Samuel
16.1. Eliab was set before him, verse. 6. but the Lord refused him, verse. 7.
Abinadab next, neither has the Lord chosen this, ver. 8. Shammah after him;
neither has the Lord chosen this, verse. 9. What if I call these three by three
other names? the rejected Oliver, the pulled down Richard, and the
diasppointed John?

For the second, a kind of Committee, a Juncto of them, at least, seven
together, are set before Samuel; but the Lord has not chosen these, verse. 10.
What if I should resemble on, and tell you, that as the Juncto took upon them
to Govern the Kingdom, so about seven of them undertook ('it was
underhand-dealing all of it) to Rule the Juncto?

David was not there when there were so many Candidates for the Crown; he was
toiling abroad, as misdeem'd fitter for drudgery than the Throne: and therefore
for the last.

Send and fetch him home, says Samuel, for we will not sit down (no ease, no
rest to be hoped for by us) till he come hither, verse. 11. David is fetched
home; and the Lord said, Arise (stand up before the King) anoint him, for this
is he, verse. 12. Est pulchrum monstrari, a Numine Dicior hic est: it is the word
of God (the Lord said) and it is the deed of the Lord to make a King; the Lord
said anoint; a King whilst he lives will wear that Name The Lords Anointed.
God seeks him before he is brought home; I have found David my servant, Psalm.
89.20. God owns him when he is come home, this is he; and after he is
established, 'twas I that took thee from following the Ewes (from being
followed by Wolves) to be Ruler over my People, 2 Samuel 7.8. My People, 'twere
well to mark that, God provides us a King; when we obey him God owns us; when
we revolt from the King, we do so from God too, we cancel our Relation to
Heaven, we make a forfeiture of being the People of God; it is as if God should
say, whilst they are mine they will be true to thee: get thee to thy Throne,
and take this comfort with thee, they will not be Traitors to their King til
they rebel against their God; thy God will suffer with thee; nor can thou be
rejected by them, till they have first cast me off; whoever else of the willing
unfascinated people sought thee, 'twas I that found thee; (...), is the voice
of Joy; if we rejoice now, God himself is our pattern.

We see from whom the King has his power, from GOD; see we next the Devilish
sin of them that oppose it, the Curse of God upon them that set up another, a
false Authority against it.

5. The sin first. The more wicked every man is, could the Heathen say, Eo
difficilius Rectorem patitur, so much the apter to rebel; and this Rebellion is
the height of wickedness, the exceeding sinfulness of sin; it is not an Enemy
alone, but a Son of Wickedness that afflicts a King; he is called by both
names in the same verse, and by the wicked name, as the worst name, last, Psalm.
89.22. He is the Son of wickedness, of all manner of wickedness, of sin in
the Arabic, which includes all; of ungodliness in the Chaldee, of
unrighteousness in the Hebrew, which specifies all: Let such a Complex sin,
such a universal guilt affright the whole Land out of any thoughts of Treason,
but those only which abhor it.

On the other side, it is not only a Well-willer, a Friend, but a Holy man, a
Righteous person, which relieves, succors, obeyes an oppressed injured King;
but his Enemy, that Opposer of Royalty, does not only perpetrate all the
fore-nam'd Accumulative wickedness, but is styled by the Holy Ghost the very
Son of it, as being so egregiously sinful, Vt vel ex ipsa Iniquitate, vel ad
eam natus videatur, that himself may say to Iniquity, Thou art my Father, and
that others may say of him, He was born to sin: If the being unholy will not
correct a Rebel into a Subject, try we if the being unsafe will not do it.

Resisting Traitors shall receive damnation, Romans 13.2. Fly Rebellion
therefore, as thou would escape Hell: Alas! what is hanging and drawing and
quartering! a great torment for a few hours; and yet a Torment only upon the
Body, communicated no further than to the sensitive faculty of the Soul, a
lasting shame too to all posterity: But the dead man will not hear what the
surviving talk of him: Such poor shifts as these do surpised obstinate
Traitors make use of to evade the disgrace, to assuage the pain, and to collude
with both.

But, indeed, if thou would not be tortured and disgraced for ever, and
desparately sensible of it all the while; if thou would not be plunged into
Isaiah's everlasting burnings; if thou would not burn in an immaterial fire,
and a more scorching brimstone than thou yet ever saw; such a subtle and
piercing fire, such a diving and soking brimstone as will wrap themselves round
about thy immaterial Soul, and penetrate quite through the most reserved and
spiritual faculty of it, and set the Soul, and all the powers of it, on fire
for ever; a fire so hot, as that our very Bon-fires, nay, even that which will
one day set the whole World on fire are cold to it, a fire so unquenchable, as
that ten thousand Seas will never be able to put it out; nay, will be both Fuel
and Bellows to kindle it the more; a fire in which thou shall for ever weep,
because of the insufferable smart of it, and every tear of thine shall be a
tear of Oil to increase that fire: If thou would escape all these
intolerable, and many more unspeakable Plagues, learn this short Lesson (so
short and sweet, that it may be quickly learned, and easily said and done) Be
true to thy Prince; else, without deep Repentance, all this damuation thou
shall receive.

I dare not trespass upon more of your patience to attempt one word upon the
second General.

Observe we our Duties in the first General; be we obedient to God in our
Loyalty to the King, that loyal obedience will be the best sacrifice of
Praise, the most acceptable Thanksgiving to God, the occasion of the greatest
joy to man immaginable.

To which GOD let every Man join with me in ascribing all Kingdom, (even this
also) all Power and Glory, all Praise and Thansgivings for the KING and
KINGDOM and for all other his blessings, for ever and ever. Amen.

FINIS.

