A SERMON AGAINST MURDER: By occasion of the ROMANISTS putting the PROTESTANTS
to death in the Dukedom of SAVOY.

BY WILLIAM TOWERS, B.D.

Cyprian. Ep. 6. Martyribus, and Confissoribus. O Beatam Ecclesiam nostram,
quam sic Honor Divinae Dignationis Illuminat! quam Temporibus nostris,
gloriosus Martyrum sanguis illustrat!

LONDON, Printed for Humphrey Mosely, at the Princes Arms in Paul's
Churchyard. 1655.

TO The Persons both of secular Quality, and of solid Piety, in the belief and
Practice of Gods true Religion in his Church truly Reformed, Sir HUMPHREY
TRACY, Baronet. and his excellent Lady.
Right Worshipful,
LEt it, I beseech you, be esteemed no fault, that I do, what God has done,
Join you together; that I do it in this Dedication, I have much of reason for
it; This was the last Sermon preached in your Church, before I finally
understood, that after all the endeavors of you both, and my own frequent
atteudance upon others, I may not obtain Country leave to be a constant
preacher there: and what should I after do, but make my public
acknowledgments to you both, for your hearty and costly endeavors? and let my
hinderers know that though they have prejudic't me, in my best desires, of
serving those whom I much desired to serve, because of their mutual desires
that I should do it, in my great hopes, of making Gods service to prosper under
such Religious Patronage, whose present lives would not only be notes upon my
Sermons, but better Sermons then mine; and notes to me, out of which to make
Sermons; that though I might take it unkindely, that a Protestant of England is
denied (I know not why) by his fellow Protestants, a Son of the Church, by Sons
of the same Church (for sure neither they nor I are Romanists:) yet I do not,
both because they ahve testified to your worship, under their hands, that they
have no exception against me, unless a suspicion that I differ in judgment,
(and yet I know not theirs, nor they mine; or, if I do, have we not leave to
differ? they from me, and I from them:) and because they so kindly deny me, as
if the Emolument were too small for me; and yet is any thing small, which is
most intensely aimed at? qui sic Amas (I am Galled, and pincht, and must wince
and speak) Quomodo Osurus es?

Next to my confessions to both your worships, and Acquittances to them all,
and Gratitude to the great civility of one of them, I have more reasons why I
print on this subject.

First, to desire all, to joy with me, that Authority does (not only do it, but
publish, and profess to do it,) loath murder, and detest Popery; O, may it
ever abound, with more and more Clemency at home and abroad, and shut out
Romanisme by the certain Rule of Orderly reformation!

Secondly, to entreat all my ministerial brethren, to join their forces of
Tongue and pen, and prayer, against the Common enemy to all the Reformed
Churches; that we would not make way for them Dissidiis nostris Vires suas
augendi; that we would be wisely suspecious, that the present many-headed
differences amongst us, are contrived, and raised, and fomented, by the
Adversary of us all, to open many Gates, at which the one Head with three
Crowns upon it, to enter; this Authority has taught us to fear, requiring us
charitably to do for them that suffer, and Magnanimously to suffer with them
when God calls us to it; our own sins, and the old arts and Ambushes, and
frauds of Rome may teach us this fear; if that Authority would give me leave to
beseech, that differences at home, might be reconciled by the Standing Rule (at
least, in this way of necessity and dread) the Church of England would yet
produce abler men against all her enemies, then she (I am almost afraid to call
her whore) who has made us enemies against our selves can produce against us: a
strong and Chosen man, when his augry and merry Passions were over, when he had
somewhat more to do with the Holy Ghost, seemed to remember the end of another
Verse, that of Ovid: -- Virtus, and in host, Probatur, when we acknowledged
oue to be a very learned man, who I am confident, would bend all his force
against Rome (I, and batter her too) did he not believe it conscientiously
necessary, to set himself in the Gap, against some fallings out at home: And
when, with all humble mrdesty, I have beseech Authority, I may take leave to
beseech my own brethren one, in the Faith which was once delivered, sadly to
consider what the meaning of some new lights are; light should be so clear as
to declare it self; but some are still in darkness and Ignorance; they cannot
tell what is the ground; and fountain, and first fire that kindles these
lights; only they are wary enough to suspect, that it is some Purgatoryfire has
done it; may it not be a Notion obtruded from subtle Rome? and unawares
swallowed in the simplicity of some men's hearts? who when they are a while,
injured in the matter of this expression, and believe it to be the word of God
in their Conscience, may at length, be brought to interpret it by Tradition
(that must not appear, too soon, and immaturely, in it is own face) which some
call the unwritten word of God? and yet Scripture, and the word of God are, in
Scripture, which is Gods word synonima, significative of the same thing, and
convertible; and then the unwritten word of some, what is it but a Romish Bull,
the unwritten Scripture?

Thirdly, that my suspecters may know, he whom they lay aside loves the Errors
of Rome as little as they do, (not Popishly affected at all) and would himself
bring straw, if their better abilities were at leisure, to hew out stone, to
make a wall against her.

I must conclude, more particularly to both your worships, with my humble
requests to you, to pardon my misery, that I must not enjoy my own liberty, in
serving you: and with my hearty prayers to God for you, that you may so
exceptablie serve him here, as to Reign with him in Heaven.

Though not at Stanway, Your most Faithful Servant, every where else, WILLIAM
TOWERS.

A Sermon against Murder.
EXODUS 20.13. Thou shall not Kill.


THough I have designed to be brief upon the ten Commandments, not handling
them now, Ex Instituto, as they are set down by Moses, but Raptim, in a more
large acceptance of them, as they are all of them comprehended in those few
words of S. John, the Commandments of God. 1. Epist. 5.2. and therefore,
though for this reason, I ran through the four first Commandments, in one
Sermon, and made the fifth alone the entire Subject of an other, because of the
multiplicity of matter in it; which yet I did not so much as summarily
dispatch, having spoken but half a word of the duty of Disciples to their
Teacher (my own interest compelled me to speak no more) and not half a syllable
of the duty of the younger to the Aged, of the Instructed (any otherway) to the
Cousellour, of the scholar (that peculiar way) to the Master; (want of time
infoc't me not to speak of these at at all) all of these, He that is the
Schoolmaster. He that gives Counsel, and he that is the Aged man, being
comprehended under the notion of Father, and a several respective Honor being
due to the several kinds of Fatherhood in each of these; yet, at this time, I
shall entirely insist upon this one short text, and large Command, Thou shall
not kill; Providence having so ordered it, that this Prophibition is next to be
spoken of, on this very day, on which Authority has appointed those to be
releiv'd by the collection of your liberality, who so miserably suffer by the
barbarous inhumane breach of this sixth Commandment, in all the branches of
it, as it relates to the very act of murder.

All those several branches I shall briefly enquire into, and make them the
Division of my Text, that when you have seen how disobedient and Rebellious to
God it is, to inflict all these degrees of sufferings, how sad, and grievous,
how wretched, and almost insupportable it is for man to endure them all, your
hearts may be the more enlarged to supply their needs, and thereby to defend
and maintain the lives of the survivours.

This also is part of this Command. Every Negative precept of God, has it is
Positive duty incumbent upon man; not only, thou shall not kill, not take away
life, That Is the Negative part of this duty, and it is but part; but also, thou
shall as much as in thee lies, succor and support life; That Is the positive,
and both these are the whole.

So many other Branches there are, which grow out of this root, thou shall not
kill, that I dare not so much as Name them before the Sermon, because I can do
no more then name them in the Sermon; you shall meet with them in their Order;
First and chiefly, of the root that bears them, thou shall not kill, not take
life away.

Thou shall not do it, unworthily, illegally; that interpretation must run
through every part of the Text; Else, there will be no just power left, to take
his life away, who wrongfully takes away another man's; else one Scripture will
thwart another. How many Commands are there, in the Word of God to take life
away, upon special and due occasions! but then they are the Judges, Public
persons, men in Authority, that may, that must do this; and when they do this,
take life away, though they do Kill, yet they do no murder, provided still
that they do it upon just and due occasions; else, murder may, sometimes, and
unadvisedly, be Committed with the very sword of Justice; and when they thus
kill, they do not so much take life away, as preserve life; they kill the
murderer, that neither he, nor others, by his unpunisht example, may murder
more; take away this sword, and there is nothing else left but sword; what
shall we be without his protection, but spelunca latronum and Homicidaram? what
shall we do, and suffer, but Rob, and be Robbed, Kill, and be Killed! The
Officer may do this; but Thou shall not Kill, thou the Private man must not do
it; I will not so much as name (though many good men do it) a se defendendo, to
tolerate this act of private-killing; both, least this excuse may be pretended
where Really it is not, and beeause a better Christian has well taught me that
a good perfect Christian, D. H. H. in his Practic. ^a^.
out of the abundance of Christ Commanded Charity, will rather Die then Kill;
and, therefore, may the Officer do this, without breach of this Command;
because, elsewhere, He is commanded to do it; and, therefore too, must the
unworthily, the illegally be interpreted of the Prohibition in this Text, those
many other plain and evident Texts in Scripture giving light and luster thus
to expound this.

Thou shall not Kill; the inhibition is plain, against the murder of any
private man in any Nation; and it is as plain against one Nation Invading
Another, to kill and Massacre there; for, though it be a Pope, who is Bishop of
Rome, and, perhaps, supreme There in Cathedra non-Catholica, yet Rome is not
Savoy; though it be a Duke, who, perhaps, is Prince and Chief in Savoy, yet
Savoy is not England; and the Pope has no more Power to Massacre There, or the
Duke Here, then a Private man has power to do it, either here, or there; and
that, because, be he Pope, or be he Duke, as great as he is at Home, where he
Raigns, yet out of his Jurisdiction he is but a Private man Abroad: nay, let
me say it, neither Pope, nor Prince, can at all Travel out of their own
Dominions; when they are once past their Bounds, the Pope and the Prince stay
behind, their Pomp and Power are left upon the shore; and only the Man, in
each of them, crosses the Seas; and whenever they shall do so, God in his mercy
preserve us from their malice, that neither they may be so outrageous, to
Massacre any of the people of God in this Land, nor that any the people of God
in this land may ever he so beguiled and besotted with superstition, as to
believe they have any power and Right to do it, to break this Command of God,
Thou, thou that have no title at all to this Nation, Thou shall not Kill here.

Nay, any the greatest Potentates, in any their own Dominions, have not any the
least power, (power I mean of Right, though they have of Force) to take away
the life of any their meanest subject, unless according to the law of that
place; much less upon their own mere Arbitrarinesse, to slay some Thousands
upon the Spot, and to drive out other Thousands upthe Mountains; this is such
a spot, which they will never be able to wipe off from their bloody souls,
whilst they continue either to practice this with their hands, or to believe
in their souls that they may practice this: Against all such Exorbitancies,
and irregular Illegal Cruelties, even of the Greatest, this Text stands in full
force, thou (thou, O mighty man, who boastest thy self in mischief) shall not
Kill; not Thus, not thus unworthily Kill; what ailed ye, ye mighty men, that of
late ye made the poor Protestants to fly? ye inferior Soldiers, that ye
drove them back? ye Great persons, that ye skipped over them like Rams, and ye
little ones, like lambs? Tremble, all of you, at the presence of the Lord, at
the presence of this command of the God of Jacob, Thou shall not kill; above
all, do not break Gods Command for Gods own sake; Tempt us not by any more of
these savagenesses to apply that prophecy of Christ to you, The time Comes,
that whosoever kills you, will think that he does God service, Ioh. 16.2. It Is
necessary that all Christ's prophesies Come to pass, but woe to that man by
whom they thus come; it is a Zeal indeed this, but, like their Ignorant
obedience, a Blind one, First, to put out their own eyes, and then the Eyes of
the Protestants body, his Soul; it is that alone which sees; Aristot.
Oculus non videt, sed videt Anima; open their eyes, O God, that they may no
longer be the mis-guided and dutiful sons of destruction; that they who call
themselves by the name of Jesus, ^^suites.
may learn some of his Meekness, to suffer rather then to put to death; that
they would endeavor to plant Religion only as Christ did, with persuasion, and
not with blood, unless of his own true Disciples, not of those who opposed his
Doctrine, that they would, as Christ ever did, Teach only openly, and not Creep
into houses, leading silly ones Captive (but, alas, then, the dissemination of
their Errors would be prevented) that they would, as Christ did, say plainly,
It is I, and not put off their own name, and put on another, not put off the
Priests Coat, and put on the soldiers, not pretend one false Religion, that
they may introduce another false Religion, and especially, not to sow that
Religion in the foul blood, as they take it to be, of Heretics as they call
them; Still to this purpose, may I not ask of them, Is it enough whereby to
Kill, because he, I know not who, commands them to do it, that has no Scripture
Authority to command it, unless such words as these, of that usurper, whom God
was offended at, Mark, and when I say smite, then Kill; fear not, have not I
commanded you? 2 Samuel 13.28. and is it not enough to refrain them from killing,
by the clear words of that God whom we know, and whom they say, they know? thou
shall not kill. Will they upon this score, take gifts to shed blood, Ezeck.
22.12. smite, and kill, for Pay, and under Command? will there, because of
this, be a Conspiracy amongst their very Prophets, divining lies, unto them?
will they, because of Treasure, and precious things, sharpen their Appetites to
devour souls? and their swords, to make many widows? verse 25.

I am loath to tell them of the Ignorant folly of one of their side, who would
needs find express Text, wherewith to kill any Heretic, and therefore made
use of that of Paul to Titus, chapter 3. v. 10. Him that is an Heretic, de vita,
reject; fuge says another translation, fly from him; but he, poor soul, would
not fly from him, but rather out of his blind Zeal to the Roman Heresy,
First, cut the verb in two pieces, De vita, and then fly upon him, and cut
the very throat of him; it is true, the word of God is a two-edged sword; but
this word of his, thus inexpertly weilded, is too Blunt a weapon, wherewith to
draw blood from any; had he prosper'd in this, what strange shift, by some such
like wild adventure, would he have been put unto, to prove a Protestant to be
an Heretic! and truly, his after-friends, though they have better Latin, have
no better Religion, wherewith to wound us.

By this time it appears, if Great ones, without their own precincts, or
within them, have no privilege, Papal or Dukal, no Prerogative Royal, to set
themselves above the commands of that greater God who is higher then they, much
more does this Text lay an Incruental obligation, a bond of peace upon all
subject people, upon all private persons, in their Towns, and Nations, and
Travels.

To every of you it is said, on a more palpable eviction, thou shall not kill;
and well it is said so; for, God said it, and providentially is it said so;
for, the merciful God said it; said; no more then this, thou shall not kill.

In favor to Meak capacities, (and many such there are amongst Vulgar
Subjects) it is not said, thou shall not kill thy Brother, lest they might be
misperswaded of the lawfulness to kill an Egyptian, qua such; to slay him that
is of a different persuasion, of a Religion thwarting theirs, as not being a
Brother to them in the same Faith of Christ: let Rome be as seduced, as she is
willing to be, I would rather, were it possible, a Papist should take away a
hundred lives from me, all but (what is impossible) the life eternal, then that
I should take away his one life from him, upon that shadow of reason (for, it
is too dark to appear to be reason) because he is a Papist; what if he
misbelieves he may do this to me? shall I, who disprove, and condemn his
misbeleif, misbelieve with him? no; I am sustained against the mischief, by
Thou shall not kill, and against that seduction by Vindictamihi, avenge not
your selves; for it is written, Vengeance is mine, I will repay, says the
Lord, Romans 12.19. And yet, had it been written, in this very Text, thou shall
not kill thy Brother, S. Austin would somewhere, have told thee the due extent
of this command he would have given thee to understand, that not only the
Romanist, but the very Turk is thy Brother (and if so, a Protestant, sure, is
a Brother to the Romanist, and should not be, as some of them would make him,
only a Brother in bloody when he says, that Adam and Eve are the Parents of us
all, and we all, in them, are Brethren.

It is not said, Thou shall not kill thy Neighbor, lest some shallow
conceptions, should thence extort a bloody doctrine, that they might, Deo non
obstante, nay, perhaps further yet, (...), with Gods own leave, slay a
Forrainer; And yet, the same S. Austm, who is sibi constans, will, elsewhere,
tell thee, Homo Homini proximus, that every one man is neighbor to every other
man, and therefore no one man may slay another; nay, the Text of Christ will
tell you as much; which think thou of these three was neighbor to him that
fell among thieves? Luke 10 36. and he, who thus fell, he, to whom one of the
three showed himself a neighbor, and the other two should have done likewise
v. 37. by what other name is he notify'd and Uncharacterized, but by that of man,
(...), a Certain man went, and fell, v. 30. so certain it is, that he who is a
man, is a neighbor (he and she too, for, (...) is of both Genders) and neither
of them may be slain.

Nay, it is not said, thou shall not kill thy enemy (thy enemy) lest some
desperate zelot might thereupon undertake to kill Gods, though he spared his
own enemy; and yet does not David say, Do not I hate them, O Lord, that hate
thee? and am not I grieved with those, that rise up against thee? I hate them
with a perfect hatred, I count them mine enemies. Psa. 139.21.22. the enemies
of God, are to be esteemed the enemies of the Disciples of God too; not only
the Haters of God, but the very lovers of God, shall be found liars, if they
esteem them otherwise; and yet, in neither of these capacities, as haters of
God, or, as enemies of the people of God, do they make a forfeiture of their
lives: would you know then, how you may hate such enemies? David has intimated
to you how; it must be with a perfect hatred; and what that perfect hatred is,
you may learn out of that meekly pious ancient Father, and Martyr, Ignatius ep.
ad Philadelph. By his counsel, if you follow it, the Lord will deliver you from
blood-guiltinesse, or, as it sounds in the Hebrew, and as Doway her self
translates it, from Bloods, With Doway, Ps. 50. v. 16.
from the massacring of many, Psalm. 51.14. (...), you must indeed hate them who
hate God; but then, he will presently bound your hatred, the Remainder of your
wrath he will restrain, he will tie up your hands behind you, (...), you must
not so much as smite an enemy, though of Gods; if you do, you do it with the
fist of wickedness, Is. 58.4. you must not persecute him, so much as out of
his estate, much less may you smite away his very life from him, and persecute
his body out of his skin, or his soul out of his body, (...), enemies you may
still account them, and separate from them, from Communion with their sins, but
not with their persons, not from advising them, if they are of your
Acquaintance and Neighborhood, not from preaching to them, if they are of your
Parish; Inclusively even to this last purpose, does it follow in that grave
Religious Father (if that word be not dislik't by those, who are unwilling to
be Sons) (...), you must Admonish them of their ill manners, and labor to
reduce, (to recall) them to Repentance. And did not this After-runner of
Christ, learn this Demeanor, think you, from Christ's forerunner? John the
Baptist preached Mat, 3.1. the subject of his Sermon was Repentance, v. 2. when
the Pharisees and Sadducees came to him, though he knew them to be what he
called them, a Generation of Vipers, v. 7. yet he did not un-Church them for
all that, he did not Excommunicate them from his Congregation, he renewed his
Sermon and preached even to them also, on the same subject; he said unto them
(and yet, not he, but the holy Ghost in him, an example high enough to follow)
bring forth therefore fruits meet for repentance, v. 8. I will not now ask,
Are those, who are separated from, more Hypocritical then the Pharisees? do not
others more loudly pretend to Holiness then they? are those, who are separated
from, more Heretical then the Sadducees? do not others more boldly deny the
Resurrection then they? this I will not ask; I will but give this reason for my
short digression in these very few words; it is, what I may, if it be possible,
as God shall enable me; (and if he enable me, possible it is: His blessed
spirit can work with five words uttered with understanding and Charity as
powerfully, as with a Folio) it is, that I may, by any means, save some, by
reducing them from the Error of their way.

And is not all this instead of Stabbing him to the heart, a nobler, a
worthier, a more generous, a more Christian carriage toward an enemy? is not
this the Perfection of Hatred? nay, is not this the perfection of that love,
which Christ himself enjoins toward enemies, Love them, Bless them, Do good
to them, Pray for them, Mat. 5.44. such a perfect hatred, such a perfect love,
which will Cast out all fear from the man we thus love, from the enemy we thus
hate?

Hence, it easily appears, that though it had been said, thou shall not kill
thy Brother, thy Neighbor, thy Enemy, no private man of what Nation or
language soever has any excuse whereby to palliate his spleen of killing
another Private man, much less of assassinating a Public person; and that
too, because of the immediate subnexion of this command, to that of Honoring
thy father, (which if it be not the very next here in Exodus, as some contend,
who follow the Greek coppies, which place the Commandment concerning Adultery
betwixt that of Parents, and murder, yet those very Greek coppies, in the book
of Deuteronomy place that Commandment which forbids murder, before that which
forbids Adultery; as also the Hebrew in both those books) and hence, it much
more appears, that this may not be done by any Private man, because the
Prohibition is Absolute, unlimited, nothing else but Thou shall not Kill. We
have seen the extent and latitude of this killing, how universally it is
forbid; see we next the heynousnesse of the guilt, the sinfulness of this sin
of committing murder.

Though it might be enough, to testify the iniquity of it, that, not to do it,
is a moral law, written in the very heart of man, by the finger of God himself;
that it is forbiddn even by Nature, and that, to every one man in the behalf of
every other man; so that, indeed, he who is but Compos mentis, who has reason
enough, not only in Radice, by a candid Interpretation to denominate him, but,
in Fructu, exerted reason, to evidence and demonstrate him to be a man, cannot
choose but know it: yet, to how much higher pitch and degree is this
transgression inhanc't and elevated, in that this command, which was before a
command of God, is once again a command of his, written by himself, in a Table
of Stone!

This indeed is too much the fault of worldly-wise mankind, to measure good or
bad, either by their own wariness or indiscretion, and not to impute it to the
Performance or violation of the command of God, either positive or Negative; he
who kills a man, because he shall not be known to have done it, or because he
knows, that he shall escape when he has done it, breaks the command of God
twice over; First, in killing, to satisfy his own rage, and then in despising
the command of God, because of his present security; this imprints the deepest
stigma, it is a mark with the blackest coal upon the hellish murderer, that he
sets the Command of God at naught.

See we yet more of the sinfulness of this man- slaying, it is abominable
before God, and it is odious to man: Philo does so abhor this sin, that he is
not content to call him that kills, a murtherous, unless he call him a
Sacrilegious person too, because he puts to death that man who is the Image of
God; it is not in this sense said by our Savior, when he asked whose Image the
penny bore, Give unto Caesar the things which are Caesar's, and unto God the
things which are Gods, that thou should therefore send the soul of man, which
is the Image of God, to the God of that soul, the father of spirits, from off
the point of thy sword.

He sins against humane Society, to which we are born ( in Coetum geniti sumus,
says Seneca) which society cannot be upheld, whilst the lives of Innocents
are in danger.

He sins against the law of the land, who slaies though a Nocent person, that
has deserved to dye, because he snatches into his own hand that power which is
the right of the law, and ties it upon the hilt of his sword.

This, at large, may sufficiently implead the murderer of guilt, unless (if
it may not be accounted too curious a search) we raise the guilt higher then
all this, from the practice of those female-murtherers, who destroy the un-born
Infants which are yet in their womb; and thereby, what they can, kill body and
soul too, (I fear, their own) by hindering them from the benefit of baptism,
who themselves will be more ashamed of their spurious child, then their child
shall be Ashamed of the Cross of Christ; Such early murders as these, stories
tells us of, and Chronicles tell us of practices quite out as savage; that,
when a Great-belly'd Martyr has been burnt for an Heretic, and the child at
once leapt out of the mothers belly, and the Adversaries fire, the child was
thrust back with a spiteful spear into the flame that it might dye the second
death, because it was Baptized only with fire: Deus, posthac, meliora.

Here is sin upon sin; and what excuse, what cloak for any of these? what
Apology can any red murderer make for himself? it is not enough, that when he
dies for killing, he shall perhaps, have a red name in the Callender: That,
which a Philosopher of the Garamants said (like a Philosopher) boldly enough to
Alexander when he came to Conquer them, were there truth in it, would never
bear him out, If thou could by thy bloody Victories, enjoy their lives, whom
thou killest, to prolong thy own, as thou do inherit their goods to augment
thy Revenue, it were more tolerable, though not at all, because still wicked;
Vivitur ex Rapto would be a sin, were it to live another man's life, which
himself might live; as well as to live by another man's Acres whilst the owner
starves to death, and no pretense would make this pardonable, unless the
kind-heartednesse of that brother in the Poet, who could no longer live his own
life. Vive meo, frater, tempore, vive tuo. Mart.


We have seen the latitude of the Command, and the Iniquity of the disobedience
to it; see we yet more of the Barbarousnesse of murder, from the miseries
which it inflicts on man.

It seperates two of the dearest friends that ever were, two that part which
the greatest grief, that ever any did; soul and body; friends they are, and
such friends as are never well alone; the very beatified soul whilst it is in
Heaven, is sensible of the Incompleatness of her joy there, till the body
Partakes with it; they were laborers together in the Vineyard of Christ, and
the soul when she is got up to the heaven of Christ, does almost suspect her
self of guilty Injustice, even in that most unsinful place, because she alone
Reapes all the Joy which her body Sowing in tears helped her to climb up unto;
though it was the soul that believed, yet, that un-lipt soul does now of
herself confess, that when she was on earth, she confessed with her mouth unto
Salvation; and in Equity, as well as Compassion, she longs to kiss that mouth,
by a reunion to the body; though it was the soul that loved God and the Saints
of God, yet, the soul worshipped God with the Head, Breast, and Knees bowed down;
with the hands, eyes, and Heart lifted up and the soul minister'd to the Needs
of the Saints with the hands of the body; upon these accounts Theodoret
presumes, the soul in heaven does thus beseech God, (...), (...).
good God hasten a Resurrection to my body, and let us not be separated in the
Crown who were together Militant in the warfar.

The love of these is so inseparable each to other, even when themselves are
separated, each from other, that some will needs fancy this to be the reason,
why the body of the murdered person bleeds afresh when the murderer draws
nigh, because the soul in hate to him, that divorced her, and in love to the
body about which she still hovers, disturbs the body, and stirs the blood to
the betraying of the man.

This, though it be pretended from Natural reason, yet because I find it in
the writings of a learned person of Quality of the Romish persuasion, who is
yet alive (and long may he be so, not to draw any to the Errors of his, with
how pious a mind soever, Erras, sed bono ammo; Erras Honesta Mente. Se^eca.
but himself again to return to the truth of our Church) and because I suspect,
it may be a snary foundation, upon which to erect another snare of Purgatory, I
shall therefore endeavor modestly, to refute this opinion, and to substitute
another to examination in the place thereof, by asking two questions.

The one; Is not the departed soul immediately (for, what can stop the passages
of a spirit, in Heaven, or Hell? or (as some dream) in Purgatory? if in heaven,
it there knows so much of the will of God, that it will not dare to offer a
Reentry into its body, before the general resurrection; if in hell, it is there
so sensible of its already torments, and so jealous of more additional torments
by such a reunion, that it will never be so self-malicious, as to desire so
troublesome an Associate; if in Purgatory, that also (if a place it be) is a
place of Torments; and the force of the reason recurres.

The other; may not the Devil himself, by the appointment of God himself, be
the instrument of Gods justice, though he only designs man's ruin, in causing
the blood to break forth, to the discovery and execution of the murderer? we
know, by Gallows-Confessions, how false the Devil has been in his promises to
witches, and does he not leave them to the Gibbet, and discover other
malefactors, and this very murderer, only with this bad purpose, that they may
all die betimes and have no more space to repent?

This I insist upon because it pretends a general truth, (though it fails in
the particular Application) that the soul loves the body (whether in the body,
or out of it) and this aggravates the crime of the killing man.

The soul and body love more then any; and they are more grieved to part, then
any; the Italian says well, Malvezzi.
There must be a great grief in any death (much more in such a violent
unwilling death) in that a very great sin is the cause of every death; and does
not this make his crime the greater, who with so many, and sharp pangs of
each, divides two such loving friends.

In doing this, he makes them utterly incapable of all the benefits and
pleasures of this world; he robs them of the use of all their estates, they
shall enjoy them no more; he deprives them of the comfort of all their friends,
they shall see them no more; he perhaps surpriseth them out of this world
before they are prepared for the Next; such shall never see God; and what Devil
can do worse to man, then such a cruel Soul-murtherer as this.

The time would fail me, if I should speak any more of this command, in this
extremity of it, as it touches life; or if I should speak any more then one
word of the other Branches and degrees of it.

As murder is forbid, so all that conduces to it is forbid, there is a murder
of the tongue in cursing to death, and of the heart in wishing to death, as
well as of the hand in putting to death; he that hates his brother, is a
murderer, 1 John. 3.15. it is the heart that hates, the tongue that utters, and
the hand that executes that hatred, so that one man may be three murderers at
one time, when he murders him whom he both reviles and despises.

In every command of God, that which makes way to the very last breach of it,
is equally forbid as that last breach it self; Bishop of Peterburgh.
give me leave to confirm this by a religiously subtle observation of a piously
learned Prelate of our Church (who was twice a father to my self, Natural, and
Diocesan) Eve in her state of Innocence when her knowledge was perfect, knew
this full well; she tells Satan, (and she could not tell a lie, before she
fell) God has said ye shall not touch the tree, Genesis 3.3. and yet God only
said Thou shall not eat of it, Genesis 2.17. yet because touching must go before
eating as the Preparation to it, to touch was forbid by God when he forbad to
eat. In this very case, that all the degrees which lead up to such a breach are
forbid, I have the Testimony of Christ himself; He first repeats the command,
thou shall not bill, Matt. 5.21. and then presently expounds it, thou shall not
be Angry, not say Racha, not Fool unto thy Brother v. 22. By this Authority we
must also exclude Surfeiting and Drunkenesse and Effeminacy, which fore-run
Dropsies, and Consumptions, and Deaths, which murder estates, and bodies, and
souls; in a word, every sin is the bane of man's spirit, and the Banisher of
Gods, and we must practice all the contrary virtues, live temperately to our
selves, peaceably and Charitably with all men, defend as occasion serves, the
reputation, livelihood, life of our Neighbor: I preach it now, and we must all
practice it anon, in our several contributions to those poor Protestants, who
so much need to be succored by us, against those who strive one way more to
break this sixth Commandment, by starving them to death.

God by his wisdom teach us, and by his grace help us, to avoid those and all
other sins, to perform these and all other virtues, that we may be blessed here
on Earth, in the Integrity of Conscience, to our satisfaction, and blessed
hereafter in heaven, in the vision of God, to our admiration; and that for his
sake upon whose most precious body the Jews broke this Commandment of God,
even upon God himself; Jesus Christ our ever living Lord, and only Savior. To
whom be glory, etc.

FINIS

