THE CHRISTIANS DAILY PRACTICE; OR, A practical discourse of PRAYER. By Sampson
Tounesend, Minister of Gods Word at Hackford in Whitwell in Norffolke.

Even and morning, and at noon will I pray, and cry aloud, and he shall hear my
voice

Psalm. 55.17. Imprimatur EDM. CALAMY.

LONDON, Printed by E. M. for George Calvert, at the sign of the Half Moon in
St. Paul's Churchyard.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL his very much honored Friend BARNARD CHURCH, Esquire.
Alderman and Magistrate of the Famous City of NORWICH.
Worthy Sir,
WHen I had Preached several Sermons upon the subject of Prayer (I bless God)
they were not without some profit; For I was earnestly desired, by a Religious
Gentleman of my Parish, to give him the Heads thereof in writing; for he told
me he apprehended them a sufficient Rule to direct him in the whole course of
his life, as touching that Duty, and resolved to make use of them for that
purpose. And when in order to the satisfying of his desires, I had drawn out
the Heads of those Sermons, I thought with my self, if they were represented to
public view, they might take the same effect upon some other hearts in the
reading, that they did upon his in Hearing, and (I bless God in some measure)
upon my own in the Preaching. And Gods glory in the good of his Church being
the main end I aimed at in being Ordained unto, and entering upon the work of
the Ministry: hoping this end may be promoted, as by my Preaching, so by my
Writing, I have ventured upon the publication of this Treatise of Prayer; and
although many Learned Pens have published several Treatises on this subject;
and therefore it may be counted a bold presumption in me to express my
weakness in writing. (For both my preaching and writing, may possibly be
esteemed by some as foollishnesse (at least) in comparison of those, whose
Learning, and Eloquence of style is (many times) beyond the reach of ordinary
capacities to understand them:) Yet am I not in the least discouraged
therefrom, seeing it pleases God, by such preaching as the world counts
Foolishness, 1 Cor. 1.21.
to save them that believe. Having upon the former grounds adventured to write:
I have made bold to Dedicate these first fruits of my labors (in this kind) to
your Worship; That hereby I might express my thankfulness for the many
favors I have received from you from time to time. And although you cannot but
discern my weakness in the managing of so excellent a subject, yet such is
your goodness, as you will not slight it, because Prayer is the duty you
deerly love, and daily practice: And you cannot but like any work (though but
meanly managed) that may conduce to the quickening up of those to the Duty that
are not yet brought into love with it. Sir, I doubt not of your love,
notwithstanding this bold adventure; for your Piety, Humility, and holy Zeal
mixed with Christian moderation, is such, as causes you to love and respect
all that love God, and respect his glory. But it is not my design to enter
upon that labyrinth of publishing to the world your Virtues: Only this I may
assert concerning you, (I hope without the least offense, or suspicion of
flattery) That your Christian carriage is such, as it binds all that love
God, and know you, to love and honor you, for the Virtues that shine so in you
before the sons of men, Mat. 5.16.
as that the sons of God are moved (according to divine precept) to glorify
God for you, Heb. 6.12.
and to desire to Imitate you. And it is no wonder that your life is so
exemplary; for he that prays well, cannot choose but live well: He that daily
improves grace, by seeking daily supplies of grace, shall have grace for grace,
John 1.13
or grace upon grace, one grace after another, a daily increase of grace, until
he arrive in glory.

Now I beseech you, let me have a share in your Prayers to God for me: 2 Timothy
2.15.
That I may approve my self to God a workman that needs not to be ashamed,
rightly dividing the word of truth; That I may fulfill my Ministry, Col. 4.17.
that I have received in the Lord: That I may so live and teach, as that I may
both save my self, and them that hear me. 1 Timothy 4.16.
Which is the continual prayer, desire, and endeavor of him, that does not
cease to pray for you, and who is

Your humble servant in the Lord Jesus Christ, Sampson Tounesend.
July 1. 1658.
THE EPISTLE TO THE READER
Reader,
I Have in the following Treatise presented thee with the epitomy of several
Sermons of the duty of Prayer. If thou art one that loves God, thou can not
but love the Duty: If thou love not God, nor the Duty, thy case is sad, and
much to be lamented. For if thou do not call upon God, thou can not live to
the glory of God; but have a certain brand upon thee of one that does no good,
but is wholly given over to all manner of sin. Psalm. 14.1, 2, 3, 4.
And if thou art one that do but seldom perform the Duty, and take no
delight in it; let me tell thee, although thou make a profession of Religion,
yet thy heart is not right with God, thou art an Hypocrite: For so says Job of
such a one, Job 27.10
Will he delight himself in the Almighty, will he always call upon God? No, he
will neither delight in God, nor be constant in calling upon God. Now that thou
may not be profane, and pray not at all; or Hypocritical, and pray but
seldom, and by fits; but that thou may be quickened up, to the faithful and
frequent performance of this so necessary a Duty, I have written this following
Treatise. And for a further light in, and Encouragement to the Duty, I shall in
this Epistle, show you,

1. Several definitions of the Duty, given by several Holy men.

2. I shall show you some Examples of the constant and frequent practice of the
Duty.

Lastly, I shall show you the excellent, and great privileges that belong to
Gods people, that are frequent and constant in this duty of Prayer.

First, for the several Definitions of Prayer: I find many, I shall name some.
It is a Religious calling upon the name of God, by suite or request, in which
we desire all things necessary. B. Usher.
It is a Religious presenting of our wills before God. D. Amos.
It is a lifting up of the mind to God. Musculus.
It is an ardent, and earnest laying open of our heart before God, whereby from
Faith in Christ, we do either request, or entreat for any thing, or do give
thanks for benefits received, whereby is gathered, that the Ten Commandments,
the Angels salutation, and the rehearsing of the Creed, are no Prayers, because
in those nothing is asked of God, Bucanus common places. Leighs body of Divin.
Robinsons Resolves.
though simple people use those as Prayers. It is an humble discourse of the
soul with God. It is a conversing with God, by which Gods love to us, and our
love to God is increased. It is an humble, hearty, and holy request made
according to Gods will, and offered up by Faith to God in the Name of Christ,
Elton on the Lords prayer.
for things needful for the body or soul. It is a putting up of our requests to
God according to his word, Perkins on the Lords prayer.
from a contrite heart, in the Name of Christ, with assurance to be heard. It
is the breathing of the Spirit of God, Gal. 4.6. Romans 8.14 28.
and a proper action of the sons of God. You see what the duty is; It is a
work of Gods Spirit: Therefore beg the Spirit that thou may pray: Ps. 51.12.
Luke 11.13
It is a free Spirit, because it is freely promised to those that ask it. Romans
8.26.
And it so helps us in the duty of Prayer, that it makes us (which before we
straightened) to be free in the work. 2 Cor. 3.17.
For where the spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty. And from hence it is
that Gods Children are so frequent in the Duty: which is the second thing I
propounded to speak too. Believe it, God has never a Child but it is ever
craving; They pray continually, 1 These. 5.17.
because they find continual need of Gods grace and help, and they find
continual supplies thereof as an answer of Prayers. I read, That Constantine
the Great made his Court a Church where Prayers were made. Jerome lived four
years with Watchings, Fastings, and Prayers. Bernard prayed day and night till
his knees were so weary with fasting and prayer, that they could not uphold his
body. Latimer (many times) continued so long in fervent Prayer, that he was not
able to get up without help. And I read, that Clemens Alexandrinus prayed
thrice a day. Luther let no day pass over his head in which he spent not three
hours at least in Prayer. Master Robert Bolton prayed constantly six times a
day, twice with his Family, twice with his Wife, and twice in secret. Master
John Bruen prayed seven times a day. And why are Gods servants thus frequent in
prayer? Surely it is because they find no trade that has so quick and gainful
returns as this, and therefore they follow it so hard. And this leads me to
the third and last thing I propounded to speak to; and that is the excellent
and great privileges that belong to Gods people, that are frequent and
constant in this Duty O! praying Christian, how great are thy privileges?
Although thou may be slighted, and dis-esteemed by man, yet thou have free
liberty to confer with the King of Heaven; Cant. 2.14.
who not only delights to hear thy voice, but inviteth thee to come unto him,
and promises to give thee whatsoever thou ask of him. Mat. 7.7.
As long as thou constantly acquaintest thy self with God by prayer, thou shall
be sure to have him thy constant friend, Job. 22.21 24.
who will never fail, Heb. 13.5.
nor forsake thee, but will abundantly supply unto thee, the want of all
unfaithful, and unconstant friends that desert thee: where prayer is not
wanting, grace and comfort cannot be wanting. John 16.23.24.
Thou that art a child of God, and do the will of God, let the desires of thy
heart to God in Prayer be never so much enlarged, God will satisfy all thy
desires. Joh. 15.7. Psalm. 37.4.
And it must needs be thus, for that God, that is able to do (for his children,
and many times does for them) exceedingly above all that they ask or think,
Ephesians. 3.20.
He will not, (and for his promise sake) he cannot deny any of those needful
things his children ask of him. Ps. 81.10.
By prayer Gods people, not only obtain all the good things they pray for, 1 Timothy 4.5
but also a sanctified use of all those good things. Whatsoever is given by God
to man in a way of mercy, is given him as an answer of his Prayers. 1 John
5.14, 15.
Prayer is the key that open all the Treasures of God. 1 Kings 8.33, 35.
It is the great instrument of removing all evils from the soul and the body.
It is the Character of the Saints. It is the condition of Gods promises; Ezekiel.
36, 37.
the forerunner of Gods performances. Jer. 31.9.
The happy privileges of the praying Christian are beyond expression. They
have a constant Communion with God. They have daily supplies of grace from God,
1 John 1.3
whereby they are enabled to serve and please God, while they live here; Heb.
4.16.
and they shall be made everlastingly happy with God hereafter. Romans 10.13.
No greater privileges can be obtained then these; yet these are the
privileges of the praying Christian. Would you be happy? pray, pray that your
joy may be full: John 16.24.
He deserves to be miserable, that might be made happy by praying, and yet will
not set upon the Duty. But I shall pray, and hope, that these my labors may be
succesful for the ends intended; in directing in, and exciting to the Duty,
those that have not used it: in comforting and encouraging those in the Duty,
that daily practice it. And in whomsoever either of these ends be promoted, let
God have the glory; and forget not to pray for him, who is, to his power,

Thine in all Christian services for thy souls good, Sampson Tounesend.
July 1. 1658.
A TABLE OF THE Contents.
DOct. It is the duty of the people of God to pray. page 3
1. What prayer is. It is 1. A work of Gods Spirit. page 4 2. It flows out of
the spirit and heart of man: or, it is a talking of the heart and soul with
God. page 5
2. The several kinds of prayer Are 1. Mental. page 6 2. Vocal. Public,
Private.

3. The preparations to prayer, Are 1. Prayer. 2. Meditation. page 8 Meditate
upon 1. Gods infinite greatness. 2. The promises. 3. Thine own wants and
vileness. page 9



4. The duties or graces requisite in prayer: are, 1. Knowledge. page 9 2.
Faith. 3. Humility. page 10 4. Purity of heart. 5. Love to our brethren. 6.
Zeal and fervency. page 11 7. Unwearied constancy. 8. We must pray in the Holy
Ghost. page 12 9. In the name and mediation of Jesus Christ. page 13 10. For
things agreeable to Gods will. 11. We must use a due order in prayer. page 14
12. Take heed of loving long prayers. page 15 Lastly, hate the sin you pray
against, and love the grace you pray for. page 16
5. The gestures in prayer are, 1. Kneeling. page 18 2. Lifting and spreading
forth the hands. page 20. 3. Lifting up of the eyes. page 22 4. For men to be
uncovered. page 23 In what case gestures may be omitted. page 25 Reprehension
for these that neglect the forementioned, or use contrary gestures. page 29
Exhortation, to use more reverence in prayer. page 31


Six several motives to the duty of prayer. The First sort of motives are taken
from the necessity of the duty. 1. God commands it. page 33 2. The creature is
sanctified by it. 3. There is no comfort in the Ordinances without it. page 34
4. We lie under Gods curse if we neglect it.
A second sort of motives, are taken from the benefits that come by prayer. 1.
It shall not be in vain. page 35 2. It is a sign of true Conversion. 3. It is
always accompanied with salvation. 4. It is sweet and pleasant in Gods ears.
page 36 5. It will give ease to the grieved heart. 6. It is the only means to
get the heart filled with spiritual graces. 7. By prayer we approach into Gods
presence. page 37
A third sort of motives, are taken from the power and goodness of God. 1. God
has styled himself a God hearing prayer. 2. He is able to help his people.
page 38 3. He is willing to help them. 4. He has made many promises to help
them. page 39

Seventhly: the times of prayer, in general, continually. page 40 That is 1.
Upon all opportunites. 2. Without fainting. page 41 3. Daily, all their life
long.
The special times of prayer: are, The Lords days, fasting days, thanksgiving
days, and upon private occasions. page 42 But more particularly, 1. Every day.
page 43 2. Twice every day: morning and evening. page 44

Reasons why we must be thus constant and frequent in prayer, are because, 1.
We continually need blessings. page 45 2. Without prayer our calling prospers
not. page 46 3. Without it, our graces will decay. 4. The Devils temptations
will prevail. page 47 5. Our sins will multiply, and, page 48 6. We have need
to beg daily pardon of sin. page 49

Eighthly and lastly: several objections against prayer, are answered, as, 1.
Object. It is to no purpose to pray. 1. Because God knows our wants 2. He
has decreed what shall befall every man. 3. He is ready to give what is fit
for us. This is answered. page 50
2. Object. It is needless because the good success of things depend upons
second causes, and natural means. This is answered. page 54
3. Object. They that never pray, do as well as they that pray most: what need
then is there of this constant praying? This is answered. page 56
4. Object. I am unable to pray, I would pray, but I want faith, and the spirit
of prayer. This is answered. page 59
5. Object. I would fain pray, but I am so sinful and unworthy a wretch I dare
not: I know God hears not sinners, John 9.31. Yet such a one am I, and
therefore I dare not pray This is answered. page 16
6. Object. I have prayed, but I can find no answer. This is answered page 66
7. Object. I can find no good by praying, but I find I am rather the worse.
This is answered. page 71


The use of all: is,
1. For Instruction. 2. For Reprehension. 3. For Consolation. Lastly, for
Exhortation.
1 Use.
1. It instructs us in the right manner of prayer: where, page 75 1. We see,
dead, dull, formal, heartlesse prayers are not pleasing to God. 2. That wicked
men that have not the Spirit of God, cannot please God in their praying. page
76
2. It instructs us concerning the power of prayer: of which many examples in
Scripture are instanced. page 77
2. Use.
Reprehension, diverse are reproved.
1. Those that pray not at all page 81 2. Those that are lasie and sluggish in
prayer. page 82 3. Those that have evil ends in praying. page 83 4. Those that
pray for light and slight things. 5. Those that are formal and hypocritical in
their prayers. 6. Those that pray without judgment or understanding. page 84 7.
Those that pray, but resolve to go on in their sins. page 88 Lastly, Those
that pray without faith and fervency. page 90
3. Use.
Consolation: for all those that are faithful, frequent, constant and fervent
in this duty of prayer.
1. God usually blesses those families where prayers are daily used. page 91
2. God will answer secret prayers. 3. If thou can pray in faith, it is a
certain sign thou have the truth of grace; thou art a child of God, and shall
be saved. page 92 4. If thy heart be sincere in prayer, God will accept of
thee, although thou have many failings. page 93 5. When words fail, tears,
sighs, and groans, are a sign thou have the spirit of prayer. page 94 6.
Sincere seeking of God, will give comfort in all afflictions and trials. page
95 7. A constant course of praying, is a certain sign, the sin or judgment
thou prayest against shall be removed, or the mercy thou prayest for, shall be
granted. page 96 8. That God that calls thee to pray, he is able, ready and
willing to help thee. page 98 Lastly, all the prayers of Gods faithful servants
on earth, shall undoubtedly be heard, and answered in heaven. If, 1. They be
Righteous persons, and, page 99 2. Ask in the Name of Christ. page 100 3.
According to the will of God.

The fourth and last use is,
Exhortation: to the performance of the duty of prayer: where, first you have
diverse Directions in the duty: as,
1. Labor to be reconciled to Christ. page 102 2. Ask nothing but what God
has promised to give. page 103 3. Seek God with a contrite and broken heart.
page 104 4. Take heed of wandering thoughts in prayer. 5. Bear in thy mind
all the sins thou art to pray against, and the graces thou art to pray for:
mind also the mercies thou have received, to be thankful for them. page 105 6.
In thy prayers have a high esteem of God. page 106 7. Be as ready to be
thankful for what you have received, as to seek God for what you want. 8. When
your prayers be ended, take heed you rest not in the duty. page 107 9. Let Gods
glory be your utmost aim in all your prayers. page 108 Lastly, Take heed of a
selfish spirit prayer: Pray for all men. page 109
Two questions concerning prayer answered.
1. Question. I cannot tell how to pray, I want utterance: whether or no, is
not my reading a form of prayer acceptable with God in this case? This is
answered. page 110.
2. Question. I cannot read, and I know not how to pray: what shall I do in
this case? This is answered. page 113

Lastly, four encouragementts to the duty of prayer.
1. God is so well pleased with it, That he has heard the prayers of men for
temporal things, that had no grace. page 117 2. Whosoever sets upon the duty
with a sincere heart, shall find God carrying of him on in it beyond
expectation. page 118 3. God is more ready to answer his people than they are
to ask. page 120 Lastly, God is so well pleased with prayer, as that he makes
his readiness to hear a ground of encouragement to quicken them to the duty.
page 121
Books Printed by George Calvert at the sign of the Half Moon in Paul's
Churchyard.
MYsteriorum and Medulla Bibliorum. The Mystery and Marrow of the Bible: viz.
Gods Covenants with man, in the First Adam, before the Fall: and in the Last
Adam Jesus Christ, after the Fall; From the beginning to the end of the World;
by Francis Roberts, M. A. in fol.

The Communicant instructed, or practical directions for the worthy receiving
the Lords Supper: in octavo.

The Believers Evidences for eternal life; in octa.

An Alphabetical Table of the chief things handled in this Treatise.
A Ability to pray shall not be wanting to him that goes on in the duty. page
118 Anguish of mind, the cause why Gods people regard not answer of prayers.
page 73 Answer of prayers, five ways. page 66 Answer of prayers, sometimes as
a judgment. page 70 Asa's sin in seeking to the Physician, and not to God. page
54 Ask in the name of Christ according to the will of God, and thou shall be
answered. page 100 What it is to ask in the Name of Christ. page 13 No warrant
to ask what God has not promised to give. page 103 God is more ready to answer
than we are to ask. page 120

B Better with him that prays, than with him that prays not. page 56
Benefits that come by prayer. page 35 Blessings of God, not to be expected
without prayer. page 46 Bodies as well as souls must worship God. page 19

C Call of God to prayer, a sign God intends to answer. page 98 A Catalogue of
sins, of graces, and of blessings, will furnish thee with matter of prayer.
page 105 Cautions in reading forms of prayer. page 112 Commandments no prayers.
page 85 Constant seeking God, a certain sign God will answer. page 96 Continual
praying, what is meant by it. page 40 Creed, no prayer. page 87

D Daily prayers, a means to obtain grace, and to persevere and increase
therein. page 46 Dead, dull, formal, heartlesse prayers, are not pleasing unto
God. page 75 Delays of God are no denials. page 72 Directions in the duty of
prayer. page 102 The Devil is conquered, and daily sins prevented by daily
prayers. page 47, 48 Doubting in prayer sinful. page 90

E Earthly things must be sought conditionally. page 14 Ends bad in prayer
spoil the duty. page 83 Esteem highly of God in prayer. page 106 Examples of
frequent prayer. See Epist. to read. Examples of five in Scripture, that went
to God in the sense of sin, and obtained mercy. page 64 Eyes lift up to God in
prayer, examples for it. page 22

F Faith the condition upon which the promise of answer of prayers is made.
page 90 Faith may be, when thou feel it not. page 59 Faithful praying, is a
sign of one that has grace, that is a child of God, and shall be saved. page
92 Family prayers bring a blessing upon the family. page 91 Forms of prayer
lawful. page 110

G Gestures in prayer. page 18 God must first speak to the heart, before the
heart can speak to God. page 5 God must be sought in the use of means. page 54
Gods goodness, a motive to prayer. page 37 Gods ready hearing others, an
encouragement to prayer. page 121 Gods time, the best time for answering
prayers. page 100 Gods glory only to be sought in prayer. page 108 Grace in the
heart will enable a man to pray without reading forms. page 113

H Hands as well as hearts must be lifted up to God in prayer. page 20 Hands
lift up in prayer, what it signifies. page 21 Hate the sin you pray against.
page 16 Heart broken for sin, shall be broken by God from sin. page 104 Heart
to pray: where given, God will lend an ear to hear. page 115 Heavenly things
must be sought absolutely. page 14 Hypocrites serve not God, out of the love
they bear to him. page 84 Humility requisite in prayer. page 10

I If thy heart incline to sin, Gods ear will not incline to thy prayers. page
89 Encouragements four, to the duty of prayer. page 117 Instructions in the
right manner of prayer. page 75 Interest in Christ makes both our persons and
our prayers accepted. page 102

K Kneeling a part of divine worship. page 18 Kneeling in prayer: examples for
it. page 19 Knowledge requisite in prayer. page 9

L Labors to no purpose without Gods blessing. page 55 A lasie posture in
prayer is not to be used. page 28 Lasie and sluggish prayers provoke God. page
82 Love to our brethren, requisite in prayer. page 10 Love not long prayers.
page 15 Love the grace you pray for. page 17

M Meditation, a help to prayer. page 8 Men to be uncovered in prayer. page 23
Mental prayer. page 6 Morning and Evening, the fittest times for prayer. page
44 Motives to prayer. page 33

N Needs of Gods people, God is able and willing to supply. page 38 Necessity
of prayer, in four respects. page 33

O Objections against prayer answered. page 50 Order in prayer required. page
14 Outward gestures, when they may be omitted. page 25

P Power of prayer, in diverse examples. page 77 Prayer what it is. page 4
Prayer, several definitions thereof: See the Epistle to the Reader. Pray that
you may pray. page 7 Prayer, several requisites in it. page 9, etc. To pray for
light and slight things, a taking Gods Name in vain. page 83 Prayers, five
several ways answered. page 66 Prayers answered as a judgment, and denied as a
mercy. page 70 Prayer gives comfort in all afflictions. page 95 Prayer may be
effectual when a man is indisposed to it, and distracted in it. page 59 Prayer
is the Bucket by which we draw water out of the Wells of salvation. page 34
Prayer neglected, exposes a man to all sins and temptations. page 81, 82 Pray
aright, and be sure to speed. page 35 Preparations to prayer. page 7 Pride
keeps men from prayer. page 65 Privileges of the praying Christian: see the
Epistle to the Reader. Promises to prayer. page 39 He that turns the promises
into prayers, speaks to God in his own language. page 103

Q Questions, two concerning prayer answered. page 110
R Reasons, six for daily prayers. page 45 Reproof for those that pray without
judgment or understanding. page 85 Reproof for those that use irreverent
gestures in prayer. page 29 Rest not in the duty of prayer. page 107 Reverence
in prayer exhorted to. page 31 Reverence in prayer, an effect of faith. page 27

S Sacrifices under the Old Law, morning and evening figured out the Christians
daily prayers. page 44 Secret prayers shall be answered. page 91 Sense of sin
should not keep us from prayer. page 63 Sighs and groans a sign of the spirit
of prayer, and accepted with God. page 94 Sincerity in prayer, accepted with
God, although there be many failings. page 95 What sinners God will not hear.
page 62 Sitting in prayer, not found in Scripture. page 32 Not greatness of
sin, but want of faith, keeps men from seeking Gods mercy. page 5

T Tears have a voice in Gods ears. page 60 Temporal things must be prayed for
conditionally. page 15 Temporal things given to them that have no grace. page
117 Be as ready to be thankful to God for what you have received, as to seek
him for what you want. page 106 Three special duties to be daily practiced by
every Christian. page 2 Times of prayer. page 40

U Vocal prayer. page 6 Unbelief a greater sin than all thy other sins. page 65
Ungodly and wicked men pray not. page 81

W Wait Gods time for an answer of prayer. page 100 Wandering thoughts must be
avoided in prayer. page 104 Wicked men that pray not, may have temporal, but
not spiritual blessings. page 56 Wicked men, how they have a right to what they
do enjoy. page 57 Wicked men cannot please God in prayer. page 76 Words shall
not be wanting to him that has a sincere heart to seek God. page 115

Z Zeal and fervency required in prayer. page 11
Faults escaped, may be thus corrected.
PAge 14. line 21. read these. p. 17. l. 10. blot out may. p. 19. l. 8. after
glorify God, add, in your body and in your spirit which are Gods. p. 25. l.
the last, bl. out mance. p. 28. l. 20. after deadness, add, and dullness. p.
36. l. 13. after of, add from. p. 38. l. 15. r. God. p. 65. l. 4. r. from his
sins. p. 78. l. 9. r. him. p. 85. l. 12. bl. out as. p. 86. l. 6. after say. r.
to God. p. 86. l. 15. r. teaches. p. 91. l. 9. r. and secretly. p. 99. l. 3.
r. whatsoever. p. 114. l. 19. r. assistance. p. 117. after before me, add
because he humbles himself before me. p. 121. r. acknowledged.

Marginal faults correct thus.
Page 13. line 6. r. John. p. 19. l. 22. r. Acts 9.40. p. 45. l. 2. Heb. 13.5.
p. 50. l. 22. Phil. 4.6. p. 55. l. 12. r. 1 Corin. p. 63. l. 18. Mat. 9.12. p.
68. l. 6. r. Heb. 5.7. p. 76. l. r. Psalm. 143.8. p. 101. l. 5. Isa. 8.17.

THE CHRISTIANS DAILY PRACTICE; OR, A practical discourse of PRAYER. Very
useful for every Christian. By Sampson Tounesend, Minister of Gods Word,
Pastor of Hackford and Whitwel in Norffolke.

Evening and morning, and at noon will I pray, and cry aloud, and he shall hear
my voice,

Psalm. 55.17. Imprimatur. EDM. CALAMY.

LONDON, Printed by E. M. for George Calvert, at the sign of the Half Moon in
St. Paul's Churchyard over against the little North-door. 1659.

THE CHRISTIANS DAILY PRACTICE; Being the substance of eleven SERMONS, preached
on 1 THESSALONIANS. 5.17. Pray.
HAving undertaken to speak of Prayer; I have chosen this Text as the subject
upon which I intend to build my discourse. The Apostle having in the former
Chapter spoken of the last Resurrection, the coming of Christ, and the blessed
condition of those that die in the Lord after the Resurrection. In this Chapter
he prevents a needless inquiry that some might make; as they in Mat. 24.3.
When shall these things be? He tells them it shall be sudden, and unexpected,
verse 1, 2, 3. and then he exhorts them to watchfulness, that they may be
prepared for it, ver. 5, 6, 7, 8. And from the 13 verse to the 23, he exhorts
them to several duties: In the 23 verse he prays for them: In the 25 verse he
desires them to pray for him; and so concludes his Epistle. In the verse before
my Text, in the Text, and in the verse following, he requires three special
Duties, that are daily to be practiced by every Christian. Rejoice evermore,
Pray without ceasing; In everything give thanks. Teaching us, that our joy
should be such as it do not hinder Prayer: and our Prayers should be such as
they do not exclude spiritual Joy: and then we shall have occasion at all
times in every thing to give thanks. The Text it holds forth to us this
Doctrine:

That it is the duty of the people of God to Pray. Doct.


Concerning which, I intend to clear up unto you these things: 1. To show you
what Prayer is. 2. The several kinds of Prayer. 3. The preparations to
Prayer. 4. The duties in Prayer. 5. The gestures in Prayer. 6. The motives and
encouragements to Prayer. 7. The times of Prayer. 8. And lastly, I shall answer
diverse Objections about Prayer.


And when I have gone through all these, I shall make Use and Application of
all.

First of the nature of Prayer, First. Definition.
what it is. Prayer, it is a work of Gods Spirit, and so flows out of the
spirit and heart of man.

the spirit of grace and supplication. Zach. 12.10.
And the Spirit is said to help Gods Children in Praying. Romans 8.26, 27.
And we are commanded to pray in the holy Ghost. Jude 20.
That is, by the help of the holy Ghost. And says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 14.15.
I will pray with the Spirit. So you see it is a work of Gods Spirit.

David, Psalm. 62.8.
Pour out your heart before him, Psalm. 42.4.
I will pour out my soul in me. When God poures out upon the Soul the spirit of
Grace and Supplication, then the Soul pours out it self to God. And therefore
you may take an other definition of Prayer thus:

It is a talking of the heart and soul with God, Definition.
and of such a heart as is prepared by God. When the strength and stream of the
heart and affections are drawn out after God in Prayer: This is the Prayer that
God will hear and answer. And ye shall seek me, Jer 29.13.
and find me, when ye shall search for me with all your heart. And none can
thus seek God with all the heart, till God prepare, and dispose the heart thus
to seek him. Psalm. 27.8.
When thou say seek ye my face, my heart said unto thee, thy face Lord will
I seek. God must first speak to the heart, before the heart can speak so to God
as he will hear. Psalm. 10.17
Thou will prepare their heart, thou will cause thine ear to hear. So much for
the first thing propounded.

Secondly, Secondly.
I shall show you the several kinds of Prayer.

Moses is said to cry unto God, Exodus 14.15.
although he uttered no voice. And thus Hannah prayed: She spoke in her heart
only, 1 Samuel 1.13.
her lips moved, but her voice was not heard.

Psalm. 77.1.
I cried unto God with my voice, even unto God with my voice, and he gave ear
unto me. Again, there is secret prayer: Mat. 6.6.
When thou prayest enter into thy Closet, and when thou have shut thy door,
pray to thy Father which is in secret, and thy Father which sees in secret,
shall reward thee openly. And there is public Prayers with the Congregation;
and Prayers less public in the Family, or with others. So much for the second
thing.

I come to the third thing propounded, Thirdly.
The Preparations to Prayer. I shall mention only two: 1. Prayer. 2.
Meditation.


David, Psalm. 141.1, 2.
Let my prayer be set forth before thee as incense, and the lifting up of my
hands as the evening sacrifice: Set a watch O Lord, before my mouth, keep the
door of my lips. As if he should have said, O Lord, do thou so order and direct
me in my Prayers, that there may not a word proceed out of my mouth, but what
is acceptable unto thee. When a man prays daily that he may pray, by his
constant custom of praying, he will be the better fitted for Prayer.



Be not rash with thy mouth, Ecles. 5.2.
and let not thine heart be hasty to utter any thing before God; For God is in
Heaven, and thou upon Earth, therefore let thy words be few. This meditation of
Gods greatness will make thee humble, as it did Jacob, Genesis 32.9 10.
who acknowledged he was not worthy of the least of all the mercies of God.

Psalm. 50.15.
Call upon me in the day of trouble, and I will hear thee: Mat. 7.7.
Ask, and it shall be given you. With many others of the like nature, this
Meditation will make thee confident in Prayer.

Ezra. Ezra. 9.6, 7.
This Meditation will make thee fervent in Prayer, and it is the Prayer of the
humble faithful fervent soul, that shall prevail with God. So much for the
third thing propounded.

Fourthly, Fourthly.
I shall show you the duties or graces requisite in Prayer, and there are
diverse requisites in Prayer.

I will pray with the spirit, 1 Cor. 14.15.
and I will pray with understanding also. As if he should say, I will
understand, and know what I pray for.

Let him ask in Faith, nothing wavering, etc. Jam. 1.6, 7.
Let not that man think he shall receive any thing of the Lord, that asks
doubtingly.

Psalm. 10.17
Lord thou have heard the desire of the humble: He gives grace to the humble.
Jam. 4.6.


Let us draw near with a true heart, Heb. 10.22.
in full assurance of Faith, having our hearts sprinkled from an evil
Conscience. He that draws nigh to God with an evil heart, or defiled
conscience, shall never speed in his Prayers. Psalm. 66.18
If I regard iniquity in my heart, the Lord will not hear me. If thy heart
incline to sin, Gods ear will not incline to thy Prayer.

love to thy brother, as to forgive him an injury done to thee; God will not
hear thy prayers; nor pardon thy sins: for the promise of pardon is upon that
condition: Mat. 6.14, 15,
For if ye forgive men their trespasses, your heavenly Father will also forgive
you: But if you forgive not men their trespasses, neither will you Father
forgive you your trepasses.

The effectual fervent prayer of a righteous man avails much. Jam. 5.16.
Prayer is not effectual, unless it be fervent, though it proceed from a
righteous man.

the Parable of the unjust Judge and the Widow: Luke 18.1, to 9.
That men ought always to pray, and not to faint. And the woman of Canaan
teaches us this lesson of Constancy: She would not give over praying, though
she had many repulses, Mat. 15.22, to 29. Genesis 32.26.
till she had that she prayed for. And Jacob, he would not let God go till he
had a blessing. All which examples show, we must use unwearied constancy in
prayer.

Praying in the holy Ghost: Jude 20.
that is, by the help of the holy Ghost. This help is promised in Prayer. Romans
8.26.
Likewise also the spirit helps our infirmities; for we know not what to pray
for as we ought, but the spirit it self makes intercession for us with
groanings which cannot be uttered. Without this help our Prayers will not be
prevalent. Those are the best Prayers, that have most of the spirit of Gods
help in them.

1 John 14.13, 14. John 16.23.
Whatsoever ye shall ask in my name that will I do. Whatsoever ye shall ask the
Father in my Name, he will give it you. To ask in the name of Christ, is to ask
relying upon the Promises, Merit, and Mediation of Christ; or to desire to be
heard for the merit, and mediation of Christ's sake.

1 John 5.14.
This is the confidence that we have in him, that if we ask any thing according
to his will, he hears us. We can have no confidence of being heard in that
which we do not know whether or no it be according to Gods will. Christ did
justly deny the request of her that asked she knew not what. Mat. 20.21, 22.


Mat. 6.33.
Seek first the Kingdom of God, and his righteousness. So we are taught in
the Lords Prayer, to seek first the things that concern Heaven and Happiness,
before we seek Earthly blessings, We must seek Heavenly things absolutely, but
Earthly things conditionally; because Heavenly things are absolutely necessary
for us, as Faith, Repentance, Sanctification, etc. these things we know are
agreeable to the will of God; and therefore we are to pray for those things
absolutely, and not with a condition (if it be thy will.) But now for Temporal
things, they are not absolutely necessary for us, as health, or freedom from
the malice of unreasonable men, or deliverance out of this or that trouble; or
to prosper, or increase in their estate in the world, or the like. For these
things we must pray with condition (if it be the will of God.) Because God
gives, or denies these things to his children, according as he sees best, or
most fit for each of their conditions. For want of observing these things, and
so using a due order in Prayer; many times instead of a blessing, God makes a
breach upon them for seeking him disorderly, as it is acknowledge, 1 Chronicles.
15.13.
The Lord our God made a breach upon us, for that we sought him not after the
due order.

are long. Says Christ, When you pray, Mat. 6.7.
use not vain repetitions, as the Heathen do, For they think they shall be
heard for their much speaking. Long prayers can hardly maintain their vigor;
commonly there will be vain repetitions, as you see it was with the Heathen.
Know that God takes not men's Prayers by tale, but by weight. It is not gifts,
but Grace that moves God to hear prayers: He that is fervent in Prayer, prays
much, though he speak but little. Let not your words and matter exceed your
affections, and then pray and spare not; otherwise break off, the sooner the
better.

Lastly, Lastly.
Hate the sin you pray against, and love the Grace you pray for.

First, Hate the sin you pray against; a man cannot pray hearttily for the
pardon of (and strength against) those sins that he does not hate: but when
the sin of his heart is the grief of his soul, now may he exspect pardon. 1
Kings 8.38, 39.
When every one shall know the plague of his own heart, then hear thou in
Heaven, etc. When every one shall know his own fore, 2 Chronicles. 6.29, 30.
and his own grief, then hear thou in Heaven, etc. When a man may pray for
pardon of sin, with inward hatred of it, and heart grief for it, then may he
with comfort expect pardon.

Samaria, Joh. 4.10.
If thou knew the gift of God, etc. thou would have asked, etc. If thou
had known me, and the worth of the Grace that I give, this would have
quickened thy desires to have asked of me, and then I would have given thee
living water. The sense of the worth of grace draws love to it, and these
strengthen the desires of it. And so much for this fourth thing propounded, the
duties or graces requisite in Prayer.

Fifthly, Fifthly.
I shall show you the gestures that are to be used in Prayer: And I find in
Scripture principally these four; Kneeling, sifting up and spreading forth the
Hands, lifting up the Eyes, and for men to uncover their Heads.

O come let us worship, Psalm. 95.6.
and bow down, and kneel before the Lord our Maker. Here we see, that religious
kneeling is part of Divine worship. It is but equity, that he that made the
body should be worshipped by, or with the body: And for as much as Jesus Christ
has redeemed our Bodies as well as our Souls, he ought to be worshipped with
our Bodies as well as Souls: And so the Apostle argues, 1 Cor. 6.20.
For ye are bought with a price, therefore glorify God. Our bodies and souls
are Gods, not only by right of Creation, but also by right of Redemption,
therefore we must glorify God by worshipping of him with our bodies, as well as
our souls. And we find in Scripture diverse examples for kneeling in Prayer.
David, he kneeled in prayer: Psalm 95.6. 1 King. 8.54. Dan. 6.10.
and Solomon his son he kneeled on his knees in prayer: Daniel, he kneeled on
his knees in prayer: Stephen, Acts 7.60.
he kneeled down and prayed: Peter, Acts 9.14.
he kneeled down and prayed: Saint Paul, Acts 20.36.
he kneeled down and prayed, he bowed his knees to the Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ: Ephesians. 3.14.
and he in Mark 10.17. Mark 10.17.
came kneeling to our Savior. And we find that all the people, men, women, and
children kneeled down and prayed. Acts 21.5
All these Examples you have for kneeling in prayer: Take one more, who is the
Pattern of all patterns, our blessed Savior himself, Luke 22.41.
He kneeled down and prayed.

Lift up your hands in the Sanctuary, Psalm. 134.2
and bless the Lord: 1 Timothy 2.8
I will that men pray every where, lifting up pure hands. And for this gesture
also, we have several Examples; Moses, Exodus 17.11, 12.
he held up his hands to God in prayer: And David desired, that the lifting up
of his hads to God (in Prayer) may be acceptable, as an evening sacrifice:
Psalm. 141.2 2 Chronicles. 6.13.
Solomon, he spread forth his hands to God in prayer, and so did Ezra: And I
conceive this lifting up of the hands in Prayer, is to be used, to signify
these two things: First, that the heart is lift up to God; says the Prophet in
the Lamentations, Lam. 3.41
Let us lift up our heart, with our hands, unto God in the Heavens. That is,
let let your hearts be lift up as well as your hands. Some lift up their hands
while their hearts hang down in Prayer; but do you lift up your hearts first,
and then lift up your hands, to signify your hearts are also lift up to God.
Job. 11.13
If thou prepare thine heart, and streach out thine hands toward him: Streach
out thy hands to him, to signify thou have David, Hear the voice of my
supplication, Psalm. 28.2.
when I cry unto thee, when I lift up my hands toward thy holy Oracle. By
stretching forth our hands to God in Prayer, we do as it were tell him that we
depend wholly upon him for help, favor, mercy and pardon, and that unless he
help and deliver us, we are lost and undone for ever.

Savior, John 11.41. Joh. 17.1. Psalm. 123.1, 2.3.
He lift up his Eyes and prayed. And so did David, Unto thee lift I up mine
Eyes. This lifting up of the Eyes in prayer, it has the same signification
with the former, of lifting up of the Hands: Lifting up the Eye, it signifies
the eye of Faith and Hope, depending upon Gods help and assistance.

The fourth and last Gesture in prayer, Lastly.
is for men to have the Head uncovered: This the Apostle teaches, where he
says, 1 Corin. 11.4.
Every man praying or prophesying, having his head covered, dishonors his
head. I read the Turks neither kneel, nor uncover the Head in prayer,
esteeming it unmanly. But Christians in all places, and in all Ages have used
both these gestures in Prayer: And for men to be uncovered in Prayer, I
conceive this reason holds good; because it is usual amongst Christians, when
Inferiors are speaking to Superiors, to have their heads uncovered, to
manifest their subjection; and it is a shame, and a dishonor to a man to do
otherwise. So when poor weak frail mortal man is by Prayer speaking to the
great God of Heaven and Earth, it is requisite he should manifest his reverence
and subjection unto God, by being bareheaded; otherwise, as the Apostle says,
he dishonors his Head.

But may some Object, Object.
Will you tie us to these gestures, seeing we find that Gods people stood and
prayed? Neh. 9.2.
And the Publican and Pharisee stood and prayed: and it is said, Luke 18 11,
13. Heb. 11.21.
Jacob leaned upon his staff and worshipped.

To which I answer, I do not tie you at all times to the Gestures before
mentioned, No:

Neh. 9.2, 3, 4.
the Levites did stand and pray, and the people also stood and prayed. And for
the Publican and Pharisee, their prayers were but short Ejaculations, not the
solemn setting themselves to the duty of Prayer: therefore their example in
standing can be no rule for our practice in the set performance of the duty.
Secondly, outward gestures may be omitted when we cannot use them without
evident danger of health, or without such pain to the body as trouble and
distract the mind in Gods service. Some cannot kneel in prayer, through bodily
weakness and infirmities; in this case God perfers mercy before sacrifice.
Mat. 12.7.
And in this respect old Jacob rose upon his bed, Heb. 11.21.
leaned upon his staff and worshipped. And so if a man through age, or
weakness, cannot be bare-headed, he may have some covering: Only take this
rule (in these cases) if a man cannot kneel, or be bare-headed in Prayer, yet
must he use some other bodily gesture, to show as much bodily reverence as he
can: For so did Jacob, who being aged, and ready to give up the Ghost; yet
would he not lie along on his bed and pray, but he rose up, and leaned on his
staff: he showed as much reverence as he could: he was not able to kneel, or
sit upright, therefore he leaned; and this gesture is given as an effect of his
Faith. By Faith he did thus, to teach us, that those that have true Faith in
God, will show as much bodily reverence to him in prayer as they can.

If yet it be objected, Object.
Why may not a man sit, or lie along, or be covered, and pray?

I Answer, Answ.
If they can use the other Gestures which are most suitable to the duty, and yet
do not, they sin: For if sitting, or lying, be as fit gestures in Prayer as
kneeling, what needed David to have rose at midnight to perform the duty as we
find he did resolve upon: Psalm. 119.62.
At midnight I will rise to give thanks to thee. Psalm. 119.62.
When others were sleeping, he was praying: and that he might apply himself to
such a posture as was most suitable to the duty, he rose at midnight to perform
it; To teach us, that a lazy posture in the duty of Prayer is not to be used.
As a full answer to all cavils, take these two Conclusions:



public, that are of bad example to others, are not to be used: But sitting,
lying along, or being covered, are of bad example to others; therefore they are
not to be used in Prayer.

Now although it be my purpose to make a general application of all in the
close; yet observing, that many in the Congregation are defective in the
gestures of Prayer, give me leave to speak a few words by way of Use to this,
before I pass to the next thing propounded. And 1. For Reprehension. 2. For
Exhortation.


First, by way of Reprehension; 1. Use. Reprehension.
is kneeling, lifting up the hands and eyes, and being bareheaded commanded,
and commended in Scripture, as gestures requisite in Prayer? Tell me then, do
not those deserve to be reproved that neglect these Gestures, or use the
contrary: That instead of using these gestures, they sit, or lie along, and are
with their Hats half off and half on; are not these lazy, and irreverent
postures, more fit for those that give themselves to sleeping, then those that
set themselves to Prayer? If any of your Children should greatly offend you,
and then come and sit down before you, or lie along, or be with their hats half
off, and half on, and ask you forgiveness, would you not be displeased with
them, and condemn their want of reverence? Beloved, we ought to come to God as
a Father; but if we come to him with irreverent postures, may he not say unto
us, Mal. 1.6.
If I be a Father, where is mine honor? More reverence becomes children to
their Father. Can your Consciences serve you to use less reverence to God,
then you would use to man? think of it.

Secondly, for Exhortation: 2 Use. Exhortation.
I beseech you be exhorted to use more reverence in Prayer. God is greatly to
be feared in the assembly of the Saints, Psalm. 89.7.
and to be had in reverence of all that are about him. If thou have grace, it
will teach thee to serve God reverently. Therefore, Heb. 12.28.
Let us have grace whereby we may serve God with reverence, and godly fear. God
accepts not of that service that is not reverently performed: He therefore that
will serve God acceptably, must serve him reverently. That man that does not
behave himself reverently in respect of the outward man in Prayer, he can have
no reverent nor high esteem of God in his heart; for where that is, it will
cause an humble and reverent deportment of the body. Wherefore I Exhort, and
beseech you, for time to come, use not such irreverent postures in Prayer, as
if you scorned the Ordinance; but let the outward postures of the body express
the inward reverence and humility of the heart: Use all the reverence that is
suitable to the duty, unless age, or extreme weakness of body disinable thee.
Ezekiel. 33.31.
We find examples in Scripture of sitting to hear the Word, but throughout the
whole Book of God, I remember not any example of sitting in Prayer. Wherefore I
beseech you, use as much reverence in the duty as you can. And so much for this
fifth thing propounded.

Sixthly, Sixthly.
I come to lay down some Motivies to press you to the performance of the duty
of Prayer, and they shall be of two sorts: 1. The necessity of the Duty. 2. The
benefit that comes by the performance thereof.


First, of the necessity of the duty of Prayer. First.
It is necessary in these four repects.



For every creature of God is good, 1 Timothy 4.4, 5.
and nothing to be refused, if it be received with thanksgiving; For it is
sanctified by the Word and Prayer. It is one thing to have the Creature, an
other thing to have a Sanctified use of the creature; this is not obtained but
by Prayer.

Isai. 12.3.
With joy shall ye draw water out of the wells of salvation. Gods Ordinances
are the wells of Salvation, and faithful Prayer is the bucket that fetches the
water of Consolation out of these wells.

Fourthly, Lastly.
and lastly, Prayer is necessary, because without it we cannot obtain Gods
blessing, but are exposed to Gods curse. ler. 10 25. Psalm. 79.6.
Pour out thy wrath upon the Heathen, and upon the Families that call not upon
thy Name.

A second sort of Motives to Prayer, Secondly.
shall be taken from the benefits that come by Prayer, and they are many.

Ask and ye shall have, etc. Mat. 7.7.
I said not to the house of Jacob seek ye me in vain. To be sure, Isa. 45.19.
if you labor in this (or in any) work of God, your labor shall not be in
vain in the Lord. 1 Cor. 15.58.


Annanias that Saul was converted, and he might safely go to him; For behold
he prays. Acts 9.11.


Romans 10.13.
shall be saved.

Cant. 2.14
Let me hear thy voice, Psalm. 141.2 Rev. 5.8. and chap. 8.3, 4.
for sweet is thy voice. The Prayers of the Saints are unto God as Incense and
sweet Odours, for so they are called in Scripture.

David, Psalm. 31.22
I said in my haste, I am cut off before thine eyes; nevertheless, then thou
heardest the voice of my supplication when I cried unto thee. It is good to
have a bosom friend; and the very opening of our grief to such is an ease to
the heart.

John 16.24.
etc. Ask and ye shall receive, that your joy may be full. Let those that seek
thee, rejoice and be glad in thee. Psalm. 40.16.
The Apostle uses Prayer as a means by which all Grace should be wrought in the
Ephesians. Ephesians. 3.14. and 16. to 20 ver.


Psalm. 95.2.
God will not hide his face from his praying servants: Psalm. 22.24
But of an Hypocrite it is said, Job 13.16.
He shall not come before him. A rogue may beg without the gate, but he may not
be suffered to come within doors: The upright soul that seeks God, Psalm. 140.13.
shall dwell in his Presence.

The eighth and last Motive that I shall use to press you to the duty of
Prayer; Lastly.
it shall be taken from the goodness and power of God: And that does appear in
these four things.

Psalm. 65.2.
O thou that hear prayer, unto thee shall all flesh come. And of the
righteous that seek him, 1 Pet. 3.12
it is said, his ears are open to their Prayers.

2 Cor. 9.8
God is able to make all grace to abound toward you. He is able to do
exceeding abundantly above all that we ask or think. Ephesians. 3.20.
But may some say, If God be able to supply my need, if he be not willing, what
encouragement is this to Prayer?

He delights to exercise loving kindness. Jer. 9.24.
He waits that he may be gracious. Isa. 30.18.
He is very pitiful, Jam. 5.11.
and of tender mercy: Psalm. 103.13.
As a Father pittieth his children. No sooner do Gods people (in their
distress) cry unto him, but he being nigh at hand, he readily hears and helps
them. The righteous, Psalm. 34.17, 18.
cry and the Lord hears, and delivers them out of all their troubles; the
Lord is nigh unto them that are of a broken heart.

Fourthly, and lastly, Lastly.
God has made many promises to hear and help those that pray unto him; and
these you shall find in several places throughout the whole book of God. I
shall only mention two: Isa. 65.24.
Before they call I will answer, and whiles they are yet speaking I will hear.
The Lord is nigh unto all that call upon him, Psalm. 145.18, 19.
to all that call upon him in truth. He will fulfill the desire of them that
fear him, he also will hear their cry, and will save them.

Thus you have heard diverse Motives to the duty of Prayer: Now I beseech you,
let them take impression upon your hearts, whereby you may be moved to set
upon, and be constant in the duty of Prayer. So much for the sixth thing.

Without ceasing, 1 These. 5.17.
or continually: I shall 1. Show you what is meant by praying continually, or
without ceasing. 2. I shall show you what are the special times for Prayer.




Paul pray always for the Collossians; Col. 1.3.
that is, upon all occasions.

Luk 18.1.
And he spoke a parable unto them to this end, that men ought always to pray,
and not to faint. And in this sense the Apostle prayed for the Thessalonians,
Night and day exceeddingly. 1 These. 3.10.


Thirdly and lastly, Lastly.
(continually) That is, every day once or twice, (though not every hour of the
day) And thus the Offerings for the morning and evening Sacrifice, Number. 28.4, 6.
are said to be continual Offerings. As David said to Mephibosheth, Thou shall
eat bread at my table continually: 2 Samuel 9.7
that is, every day. And in this sense, it is said, Job offered burnt offerings
continually. And Cornelius, Job 1.5.
He prayed to God always. And the Apostles resolved to give themselves
continually to Prayer, Acts 10.2.
and the Ministry of the Word. Acts 6.4. 2 These. 1.11.
And says the Apostle, We pray always for you. Thus you see what is meant by
always, or continually: it is daily, all their life long.

I come now in the second place, Secondly.
to show you the special times for Prayer. And although the heart ought to be
continually carried out after God in Prayer: Yet are there special times of
Prayer. As public on the Lords Days, on Fast days, or Thansgiving days. And
also upon private occasions, as in time of affliction: Jam. 5.13.
Is any afflicted, let him pray? But yet more particularly, Christians ought to
have set-times for Prayer every day: And thus Daniel, Dan. 6.10
He prayed three times a day. And so did David, Evening, morning, and at noon.
Psalm. 55.17
And you shall find he was yet more frequent in the work: for he says, Psalm.
119.164.
Seven times a day do I praise thee, because of thy righteous judgments. And
of Anna it is said, that she served God with Fasting and Prayer night and day.
Luke 2.37
But I conceive that these did thus upon extraordinary occasions, and therefore
can be no standing rules for our practice.

But you will say unto me then, Quest.
What are the set-times for every Christians Prayers?

I Answer, they are to pray every day, Answ.
and at least twice in the day, Morning and Evening.

Mat 6.11.
Give us this day our daily bread. And so we must pray every day, Give us this
day. And this is also figured out unto us, Exodus 29.39, 42.
by the every days burnt offering. And this David exhorts unto, and himself
resolves upon. Psalm 96.2.
Sing unto the Lord, bless his name, show forth his salvation from day to day:
That is, every day: And so he resolves, saying, Psalm. 145.2
Every day will I bless thee, and I will praise thy name for ever and ever.
Psalm. 146.2
While I live, I will praise the Lord: that is, every day of my life. Thus you
see we are to pray every day.

Exodus 29.38, 39.
by the offering of the two Lambs every day, one in the morning, and another in
the evening. And this the Apostle hints us to, when he says, Let us offer the
sacrifice of praise to God continually. That is, as the Sacrifices of the Old
Law were offered to God continually every morning, and every night. Psalm. 92.1,
2.
And says David, It is a good thing to give thanks unto the Lord, etc. to show
forth thy loving kindness in the morning, and thy faithfulness every night.
That is, it is good night by night, and morning by morning; every morning, and
every night, to pray and praise God. And great reason their is why we should be
thus constant in Prayer, every morning and every night.



Psalm. 127.1, 2.
Except the Lord build the house, they labor in vain that build it; except the
Lord watch the City, the watchman waketh but in vain: It is in vain for you to
rise up early, to sit up late, to eat the bread of sorrow, etc. A man may rise
early, and sit up late, but he can never thrive without Gods blessing; and he
cannot expect Gods blessing without Prayer. And therefore every day in all our
labors, we ought to pray with David, Establish the work of our hands upon us;
Psalm 90.17
yea, the work of our hands establish thou it.

like this of Prayer. And therefore the Apostle did not cease to pray for the
Colossians, Col. 1.9, 10, 11.
that they might be filled with all grace. Prayer is as the food whereby graces
are preserved, revived and increased: As therefore we take daily food to
preserve, revive, and strengthen the body; so we must daily use Prayer (this
spiritual food) that our souls may be preserved and nourished up unto Eternal
life; therefore pray every day.

1 Pet. 5.8.
And there is no weapon like that of faithful Prayer to withstand him. And
hence it is that our Savior Christ bid his Disciples watch and pray, Mat. 26.41
that they enter not into temption. And in the Lords Prayer we are to pray
every day, Lead us not (or suffer us not to be led) into temptation. It is a
great advantage given to Satan, to neglect the duty of Prayer; therefore pray
every day.

David prays, Psalm. 19.13.
Keep back thy servant also from presumptuous sins, let not them have
dominion over me. Order my steps in thy word, Psalm. 119.133.
and let not any iniquity have the dominion over me. While we live in this
world, we cannot be free from sin, but Prayer is a special means to free us
from the dominion of sin. While we are in the body, sin will be there; yet
shall it not reign in our mortal bodies, so as we shall obey it in the lusts
thereof, Romans 6.12.
if we daily seek God for pardon of it, and strength against it; and that leads
me to

Mat. 6.11, 12.
Give us this day our daily bread, Forgive us our trespasses. It is requisite
we should, beg pardon in the morning for the sins of the night past, and we
should beg pardon at night. for the sins of the day past. And so continue
seeking of God every day, that our sins may be pardoned, that our Souls may
be saved. And so much for this seventh thing propounded; the times of Prayer.

I come now to the eighth and last thing propounded; Lastly.
and that is to answer diverse Objections about Prayer.

1. Mat. 6.8.
Because God knows our wants. 2. Ephesians. 1.11.
He has Decreed what shall befall every man. 3. Phil. 4.6.
He is ready to give us what is fit for us.


Let your requests be made known unto God. Christ knew that blind Bartimeus
had need of his sight, and yet he would have him to pray for it, before he
would give him it: Mark 10.51, 52.
Jesus answered, and said unto him, What will thou that I should do unto thee?
the blind man said unto him, Lord that I might receive my sight, and
immediately he received his fight.

Ezekiel 36. and yet in the 37 Verse he says, For all this I will be inquired
by the house of Israel. Ezekiel. 36.37.
God promises the restoration of Israel, Jeremiah 31. yet he says in the
nineth Verse, Jer. 31.9.
They shall come with weeping, and with supplications will I lead them. They
shall be led out of their captivity, but it shall be as an answer of Prayers.



ask and have. Mat. 7.7.


Psalm. 10.17
Thou preparest their heart, thou will cause thine ear to hear.

Cant. 2.14
Le me hear thy voice, for it is sweet, says Christ to his Church.

4. And lastly, Lastly.
God knows that his blessings will be then most sweet and comfortable to us,
when we have obtained them by Prayer. Says Hannah, 1 Samuel 1.27.
For this Child I prayed, and the Lord has given me my petition which I asked
of him. When mercy comes as an answer of Prayer, this engages the Soul to love
God, and quicken up the heart yet more and more to seek him; so it was with
David, Psalm. 116.1, 2.
I love the Lord because he has heard my voice, and my supplication: Because
he has inclined his ear unto me, therefore will I call upon him as long as I
live. You see, because God heard his prayer, he resolves to go on in this
course of praying as long as he lived. And thus you see, notwithstanding the
Objection, it is to good purpose we should pray.

Again, it may be Objected, 2. Objection.
It is needless to pray, because the good success of things depends upon
second causes, and natural means God uses to work by, as Physic, Bread, and
the like.

I answer, Answ.
this is a most profane and heathenish Objection: For although God works by
means, yet is it not in the means without Gods blessing to do us good.

Asa, 2 Chronicles. 16.12.
In his disease he sought not the Lord, but to the Physician.

Moses for resting upon Prayer, with the neglect of the means. And the Lord
said unto Moses, Exodus 14.15.
wherefore cryest thou unto me? speak unto the Children of Israel that they go
forward. Why do thou pray and stand still, and do not use the means? March
on, do not only pray, but use the means. He that prays, and uses not the
means, tempts God; and says Christ, Mat. 4.7.
Thou shall not tempt the Lord thy God. But when we pray to him, and trust in
him, in the use of means, then (and not till then) may we expect Gods blessing.
Arise therefore, 1 Chronicles. 22.16.
and be doing, and the Lord be with thee. For all our labors are to no purpose
without Gods blessing: 1 Chronicles. 3.7.
and our ordinary food cannot nourish us without Gods blessing. Mat. 4.4.
Therefore I conclude, although God work by secondary causes, yet those do it
not without his blessing. And we cannot expect Gods blessing without Prayer. It
is therefore needful, in the use of all means, to pray to God for a blessing.

Thirdly, It may be Objected, 3. Objection.
That they that never pray, do as well as they that pray most: What need
therefore is there of this constant praying?

I Answer, Answ.
it is most false to say those that pray not, do as well as those that pray
most: For,

Mat. 5.45.
He makes his sun to shine on the evil, and on the good; and sends rain on
the just and the unjust. But Gods children that pray unto him, are filled with
all spiritual blessings in heavenly things. Ephesians. 1.3.


Job 20.15 to ver. 19.
God has threatened to blast upon them: But those that pray, have a promise to
build upon, yea, many promises; especially this, Psalm. 34.10
They that seek the Lord, shall not want any good thing.

Solomon, Prove. 1.32
The prosperity of fools shall destroy them. They have no right to it, they
shall be the worse for it. But lest I should be mistaken, when I say wicked men
that pray not, have no right to the outward things they do enjoy, my meaning
is, they have no right to them by the virtue of any promise; neither can they
have a sanctified use of them: but they have a right to them in regard of Gods
free bounty; Psalm. 17.14
for he gives them the things of this world as their portion; and it is all
the comfort they shall ever have. Son, Luke 16.25.
remember that thou in thy life time receivedst thy good things. You see the
things of this world are called the wicked man's portion, his good things;
therefore they have a right to them, and no man ought in the least to wrong or
injure them in them. But on the contrary, Gods faithful servants that pray unto
him, they have a right too, and a sanctified use of all the blessings they do
enjoy. First they have a right to them, says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 3.22, 23.
All things are yours, and ye are Christ's. And secondly, by Prayer, every
creature is sanctified unto them for their good. 1 Timothy 4.4.5.
It must needs therefore be far better with him that prays, than with him
that pray not.

But may some say, 4. Objection.
I am unable to pray, I would pray, but I want Faith, and the Spirit of Prayer.

I Answer, Answ.
It is a good sign in the sense of the want of Grace to desire it. Let not
this therefore detain thee from the Duty.

Mat. 27.46
If thou mournest for nothing more then the want of Faith, it is a sign thou
have it. In the Gospel, Mar. 9.24.
The Father of the Child cried out with tears, Lord I believe, help thou my
unbelief. If thou desire nothing so much as to believe, it is a sign thou
have Faith: For as lusting after a woman is Adultery, Mat. 5.28.
so lusting after Christ is Faith, because God accepts of the will for the
deed; therefore let not this discourage thee.

his own feeling his heart is utterly indisposed to prayer. Thus it was with
Asaph, in Psalm. 77.2, 3, 4. My soul refused to be comforted; I remembered God,
and was troubled, etc. I am so troubled that I cannot speak. Psalm. 77.1.
Yet for all this, verse the first, God gave ear unto him. And says David, I
am feeble, and sore broken, I have roared by reason of the disquietnesse of my
heart. And yet in the next Verse he says, Lord, all my desire is before thee,
and my groaning is not hid from thee. Psalm. 38.8, 9.
O how sadly did Hezekiah mourn, Isa. 38.14. and ver. 5.
and chatter in his Prayers! yet God heard, and answered him. It is not the
brokennesse of our expressions that hinders the answer of our Prayers, if the
heart be thoroughly broken for sin: No, no, when words fail, tears will speak,
and they have a voice in Gods ears. Says David, The Lord has heard the voice
of my weeping. Psalm. 6.8. Psalm. 39.12.
Hold not thy peace at my tears. Thou tellest my wanderings, Psalm. 56.8.
put thou my tears in thy bottle, are they not in thy book? Yes, yes, beloved,
all the tears that Gods servants shed before him for their sins, they are all
put into his Bottle, and recorded in his Book. Therefore let not the sense of
thine own weakness and inability keep thee from thy duty: but go to God,
mourn for thy wants, and beg supply of him, and he will answer thee.

Fifthly, I would fain pray; 5. Objection.
but I am so sinful, and unworthy a wretch, I dare not: I know God hears not
sinners: John 9.31
yet such a one am I, and therefore I dare not pray.

I Answer, Answ.
Take heed thou do not mistake the Text, nor thy condition. If God hears no
man that sins, then no man should be ever heard of God; For there is not a
just man upon earth that does good, Eccles. 7.20.
and sins not. And therefore for the meaning of the Text, know that the
sinners that God will not hear, They are such as live and lie in their sins
without repentance, rejecting the worship and will of God: such sinners as
these God hears not; he will not accept of a good motion from such a bad
mouth: but as it follows in that place, John 9 31.
If any man be a worshipper of God, and does his will, him he hears. In every
Nation, Acts 10.35.
he that fears God, and works righteousness, is accepted with him. But for
a further, and fuller answer to the Objection, know

Psalm. 40.12, 13.
David cried out of his sins, that they were more then the hairs of his
head, yet he prayed. And Ezra, Ezra 9.6.
by reason of his sins, was ashamed to lift up his face to God, yet he
prayed. Saint Paul had a deep sense of his sins; 1 Timothy 1.15. Ephesians. 3.8.
Acts 9.12.
he said he was the chief of all Sinners, and less then the least of all
Saints: yet, behold, he prays.



their sins. See it in five examples in Scripture.

Mat. 9.20, 21, 22.
yet she was cured.

Centurion, who thought himself not worthy to come to Christ, or that Christ
should come under his roof, Luke 7.6, 7, 10.
yet his request was granted.

Prodigal, who acknowledged to his Father his sins, and unworthiness to be
called his son; Luke 15.20, 21, 22.
yet his Father embraced him, and entertained him.

Publican, who in the sense of his own unworthiness, durst not lift up his
eyes to Heaven; and to show his indignation against himself for his sins, he
smote upon his breast; yet was he justified, Luke 18.13, 14.
acquitted for his sins, and received to mercy.

Canaan; she acknowledged her self to be a Dog; Mat. 15.27, 28.
yet her prayer was answered. By all which examples, you see, that those that
are most sensible of their sins, are most welcome to God. It is not so much
sin as privy pride, that keep men from the duty of Prayer: As a beggar, he is
in want, and would fain have relief, but pride keeps him from begging.

Fourthly and lastly, Lastly.
Know it is not so much the greatness of thy sins, as the want of Faith that
keep thee off from seeking Gods mercy. And this sin of unbelief, is a greater
sin then all thy other sins thou art guilty of; because it makes thee to lie
under the guilt and condemnation of all thy other sins. Joh. 16.9. chap. 3.
36. Heb. 3.12.
It is the root of all other sins. It is such a sin as rejects the remedy
of Christ's blood, by which they should obtain pardon of sin. Therefore have
Faith in God, and let not the greatness of your sins hinder you from the
performance of your Duty.

Sixthly, 6. Objection. Answ.
I have prayed, but I can find no answer.

In answer to this I shall show you how many ways God answers his peoples
Prayers, that so you be not mistaken, in thinking God does not answer your
Prayers, when they are answered, and you take no notice of it.

begged in Prayer: And thus God answered Hannah when she prayed for a child. 1 Samuel 1.27.
And thus God answered Solomon when he prayed for wisdom. 1 King. 3.9, 12.
It may be God has not thus heard thy prayer.

Abraham begged Ishmael, Genesis 17.19, 20.
and he gave him Isaac. So the Disciples asked when the kingdom should be
restored to Israel; Christ deny them that, Acts 1.6, 7, 8.
and gives them power to be witnesses to him. So the Cripple, he asked an
Alms, Acts 3.3, 6.
and he had his limbs restored to him. So God many times denies the thing is
asked, but gives a better thing.

with his grace, to bear the want of it. Such an answer had David, Psa. 138.3
In the day when I cried, thou answeredst me with strength in my soul. And thus
Christ was heard in his sufferings, Heb. 5.9.
when he prayed he was supported. And thus the Apostle was answered, when he
prayed to be delivered from Satan's buffetings; 2 Cor. 12.8, 9.
The grace of God was sufficient for him. If God answer thee thus, say not thou
have lost thy labor in praying, for this is a gracious answer of Prayer.

prayer. Joh. 16.24.
Ask (says Christ) that your joy may be full. Although David's prayer was not
answered for the good of his enemies, Psalm. 35.13
yet his prayer returned into his own bosom; he had the inward comfort of it.
And this is the meaning of that promise to prayer, Phil. 4.6, 7
Let your requests be made known unto God, and the peace of God, which passes
all understanding, shall keep your hearts and minds through Christ Jesus. Your
hearts and minds shall be kept stayed upon Christ: And this is a sweet answer
of Prayers.

Fifthly and lastly, Lastly.
God answer prayers, when he does not grant the things we have prayed for, or
those inward comforts of his spirit, yet he make us able to continue praying:
this strength is a work and fruit of Gods Spirit; Romans 8.26, 27.
The spirit helps our infirmities, etc. So long as thou can pray with such
strivings, it is impossible God should neglect thee. Yet further know, That God
sometimes grants our prayers as a Judgment; and sometimes he denies them as a
Mercy.

Israelites their own desires, Psa. 78.29, 30, 31.
and withal his wrath seized on them to their destruction.

Job 6.8, 9.
And so he denied Jobs request, when he desired God would destroy him, and cut
him off. Jona. 4.8.
And so Jonah, he wished he might die; God denies his request as a Mercy.

The seventh and last Objection is this, 7. Objection.
I can find no good by praying, but I find I am rarher the worse.

I Answer, Answ.
Thus we find in Scripture Gods servants complaining; Job 30.20, 21.
says Job, I cried unto thee, and thou regardest me not; thou art become cruel
to me. And David says, Psalm. 69.3.
I am weary of my crying, my throat is dried, mine eyes fail while I wait for
my God. Psalm. 80.4.
How long will thou be angry with the prayers of thy peoples. And Habakkuk, he
cried out, Hab. 1.2
O Lord, how long shall I cry, and thou will not hears. But for further answer,
know, that God may do thus, and it may be out of love to thee: As

First, It may be God sees it better for thee to want that thou prayest for,
then to have it: the promise is, Psa. 30.10 Mat. 7.11.
They that seek the Lord, shall not want any good thing. If thou should have
it, it may be God sees it not good for thee.

Eccles. 3.11.
every thing is beautiful in his time, Luke 1.7, 13.
(or season.) Zachary prayed for a child, but God granted not his request till
he was old; that so God might have the more glory by it. John 11.3, 6, 15, 40
ver.
So Christ delayed to answer Mary and Martha's request concerning their brother
Lazarus, that so God might have the more glory in the close. Isa. 30.18.
The Lord waits that he may be gracious. Gods delays are no denials, his time
is the best time.

Dan. 10.12.
So it was with Daniel; the first day he prayed, his prayer was answered, but
he did not know it till afterward. And the causes why men perceive not Gods
answer of prayers, may be these:

David, I will hear what the Lord will speak. Psalm. 85.8.
I will attentively mark what God will say; and for want of this, God hears
many times, and they observe it not.

Job, If I had called, Job 9.16, 17.
and he had answered me, yet would I not believe that he had harkned to my
voice: For he breaks me with a tempest, etc. As the people of Israel, Exodus
6.5.
They hearkened not to Moses for anguish of spirit. So many times God answers
his peoples prayers; but anguish and trouble of mind is the cause why they
regard it not.

And thus I have gone through the eight things I propounded at first concerning
Prayer. I have showed you, 1. What Prayer is. 2. The several Kinds of Prayer.
3. The Preparations to Prayer. 4. The Duties in it. 5. The Gestures of Prayer.
6. The Motives to Prayer. 7. The Times of Prayer. 8. And lastly, I have
answered diverse Objections concerning Prayer.


I come now to make Use and Application of all that has been said. And the
Uses shall be 1. For Instruction. 2. For Reprehension. 3. For Consolation. 4.
And lastly, For Exhortation.


The first Use shall be for Instruction: 1. Use. Instruction.
And what has been said, may Instruct us: 1. Concerning the right manner of
praying. 2. Concerning the power and efficacy of Prayer.


1. We may be instructed in the right manner of Prayer. 1. Instruct.
Ye heard in the Definition of prayer, that it is a pouring out of the heart
and soul to God, etc.

David confidence of being answered in his Prayer: For I lift up my soul unto
thee. Psa. 14.38
Rejoice the soul of thy servant, Psa. 86.4.
for unto thee O Lord, do I lift up my soul. Cold heartlesse prayers are
sinful prayers. Observe this evermore as a certain truth, in prayer; the colder
the sutour, the greater thr sinner.

Prove. 15.8
And therefore the heartlesse prayers of wicked men are abomination unto God.
Their cries are no better in his esteem then the howlings of beasts. Says the
Lord, They have not cried unto me with their heart, Hos. 7.14
when they howled upon their beds. Their cries in Gods ears, are no better then
the cries of a Dog when they cut off his neck. Isa. 66.3.
Thus odious are the Prayers of wicked and ungodly men in Gods esteem.

Instruction.
I told you in the Motives to prayer, That by prayer we obtain whatsoever we
ask at the hands of God. I shall now show you several Examples in Scripture of
the power of Prayer.

1. Jam. 5.17, 18.
By prayer Elias stayed the Rain 3 years, and again obtained rain. 1 King.
17.21, 22.
By Prayer also he restored to life the Widows son. And by Prayer he
obtained Fire from Heaven to destroy the Captains, 2 King. 1.10 to 13.
and their Fifties.

2. 2 King. 2.9, 10.
By Prayer Elisha had the spirit of Elias doubled upon him. By Prayer he raised
from death the Shunamites son. And he prayed, 2 King. 6.17, 18.
and his Servants eyes were opened, and his Enemies smote with blindness.

3. Genesis 21.17, to 20.
By Prayer Hagars eyes were opened, whereby she saw a Well to refresh her and
her son. And by Prayer Sampson had water out of a Jawbone to strengthen and
revive them. Judge. 15.18, 19.


4. 1 Samuel 12.18.
By Prayer, Samuel procured Thunder to punish the Israelites.

5. Josh. 10.12, 13.
By Prayer Joshua caused the Sun and Moon to stand still a whole day. 2 King.
20.11.
And by Prayer Isaiah caused the sun to go back ten degrees.

6. Genesis 19.19, etc.
By Prayer Lot saved Zoar, when the Cities of Sodom and Gomorah were burnt with
fire from Heaven.

7. Job 42.8, 9, 10.
By Prayer Job pacified the Wrath of God, being kindled against his Friends,
and obtained a double Portion of that he lost.

8. Exodus 8, and 9 chap.
By Prayer Moses moved God to take away many Plagues that were brought upon the
Egyptians.

Lastly, That I may not be too tedious, I shall mention some of the multitude
of Deliverances that are mentioned in Scripture, which were procured as an
answer of Prayer. By Prayer Jacob was delivered from the wrath of Esau. Genesis
32.11, 12.
By Prayer the Israelites were delivered out of Egypt. Exodus 3.7, 8.
By Prayer Iossiah was delivered from the Plagues threatened to come upon him. 2
King. 22.19, 21.
By Prayer Iehoshaphat was delivered from the Moabites and Amorites. 2 Chronicles.
20.12, 22.
By Prayer the three Children were delivered from the Fiery Furnate. Dan. 3.
By Prayer Daniel was delivered from the Den of Lions. Dan 6.22.
By Prayer Jonah was delivered out of the Whales belly. Jona. 2.10.
By Prayer Nineveh was delivered from the Judgment threatened. Jona. 3.10.
By Prayer Iehoahaz was delivered from the oppressing hand of the King of
Syria. 2 King. 13.4, 5.
By Prayer Manasseh was delivered from the Babylonian Captivity. 2 Chronicles.
33.11, 12, 13.
By Prayer Peter was delivered out of Prison. Acts 12.5. etc.
And by Prayer also Paul and Silas were delivered out of Prison. Acts 16.25, 26.
O the Power of Prayer! O the many Miraculous things that have been done by
Prayer! I could instance in many examples that I have read in History, but I
forbear to mention them; let those formerly mentioned be sufficient. And so
much for this first Use which has been for Instruction. 2. Use. Reprehension.


I come now to the second Use, which is for Reprehension. It is the duty of the
people of God to pray, and that constantly every day, in the manner that has
been before mentioned. Then here come diverse persons to be reprehended.

First, those that pray not at all; First.
Certainly it is a most grievous sin to be ever in the neglect of this duty.
It is given as a note of a most wicked and ungodly person not to call upon God.
Psalm. 14.4, 5.
Wicked men will have nothing to do with God, and God will have nothing to do
with them: They cast off God, and God will cast off them. Whosoever they be
that go on in the constant neglect of this duty, they are exposed to Gods
wrath and curse: Jer. 10.25.
Pour out thy wrath upon the Heathen that know thee not, and upon the Families
that call not upon thy Name. They who neglect Prayer, expose themselves to all
manner of sins and temptations; for Prayer is the only remedy to prevent
sin. Says Christ, Luke 22.46.
Pray, lest ye enter into temptation. And therefore he that neglects to pray
often, will lie open to all assaults of Satan, and be in danger of utter
falling away from all goodness, into all manner of sin and lewdness, and
hereby expose himself to Gods eternal Curse.

Secondly, Secondly.
Those are to be reproved, that are lasie and sluggish in Prayer. Some never
pray till they be in bed; others compose themselves to such Gestures as make
them sleepy in Prayer. Mat. 26.41.
Is this to watch and pray? Is not this lasie sluggish praying, a negligent
doing of Gods work? And can you ever think God will be pleased with such kind
of service? No, no, in stead of a blessing, it will bring a curse upon thee:
Says the Prophet, Cursed is he that does the work of the Lord deceitfully:
That is, Jer. 48.10.
that does it negligently, slothfully, slowly; God is much provoked by lasie
slugish Prayers.

Thirdly, Thirdly.
Those are to be reproved that have evil ends in their praying. Ye ask, and
receive not, Jam. 4.3.
because ye ask amiss, that ye may consume it upon your lusts. When a man's
ends in Prayer are bad, his Prayer cannot be good.

Fourthly, Fourthly.
those are to be reproved, that pray for light and slight things: As for
example, when men are at play, to pray to God to win the game, or the like:
These kind of prayers are very displeasing to God, and is a taking his Name in
vain.

Fifthly, Fifthly.
Those are to be reprehended, that are Formal and Hypocritical in their
Prayers, that pray without any delight in the work; that seek God by fits, and
not in sincerity. Job speaking of the Hypocrite, says, Will God hear his cry
when trouble comes upon him? Job 27.9, 10.
Will he delight himself in the Almighty? Will he always call upon God? No, he
will not; For he that serves not God out of the love he bears to him, cannot
delight in Gods service, neither will he be constant therein. But the
Hypocrite, and mere Formalist, do not serve God out of the love they bear to
him; therefore they cannot delight in Gods service, neither will they be
constant therein; neither does God accept of them, or their Prayers.

Sixthly, Sixthly.
Those are to be reproved, that Pray without judgment or understanding, or for
things unlawful. A man may pray with good affections, and yet sin, because he
prays not with judgment, he understands not what he prays for: And therefore
says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 14.15.
I will pray with the Spirit, and I will pray with understanding also. I will
understand and know what I pray for: And Christ blames the mother of Zebedees
as children for asking she knew not what. Mat. 20.22.
O what a sad thing is it, that any should be so sottishly ignorant, as to
think they pray to God, when they are saying the Ten Commandments; yet I fear
there are such amongst us; If there be, I pray let me ask you these two things:
1. Whom do you pray to? 2. What do you pray for?


when you say the Ten Commandments? If you say you pray to God, (as all our
Prayers ought to be directed to him) then tell me; Is it not horrid Blasphemy
to say, Thou shall have no other Gods but me, etc? that thou should speak to
God, and tell him what is contained in the Ten Commandments, thinking while
thou art so doing thou art praying to him. O what a sad thing is this! For in
the Ten Commandments God speaks to us, and therein teaches us our duties to
him.

1 Timothy 2.1
Supplications, Prayers, Intercessions, and giving of Thanks.

1. Supplications, for the removal of Evils. 2. Prayer, for the obtaining of
good things. 3. Intercession, in the behalf of others. 4. Thanksgiving for
benefits received.
Now tell me, if any of you can apply any one of these to any of the
Commandments: If not, then learn to understand them, and teach them to your
children, that you, and they may know your duties to God and your Neighbor;
but use them not as Prayers. For in Prayer we speak to God; in the Ten
Commandments God speaks to us: And those that use the Creed as a prayer
deserve also to be reproved; the Arguments before used may be sufficient to
prove they pray without judgment. An other sort that pray without judgment,
are those that pray for unlawful things: as those who would have fire from
Heaven to destroy their enemies; but says Christ to them, Luke 9 54
You know not of what spirit you are.

Prove. 28.9
He that turns away his ear from hearing the Law, even his Prayers shall be an
abomination. It is just with God, Prove. 1.24, etc.
that when we refuse to hear him, he should refuse to hear us. Says David, If
I regard iniquity in my heart, Psalm. 66.18
the Lord will not hear me. If thy heart incline to sin, Gods ear will not
incline to thy Prayer. If thou sinnest with delight, God will not delight in
thee, nor in thy Prayers. Jer. 14.10, 11, 12.
Thus says the Lord unto this people, thus have they loved to wander, they
have not refrained their feet, therefore the Lord does not accept them, (and it
follows) pray not for this people for their good; when they fast, I will not
hear their cry. You see that those that delight in sin, God will neither hear
their Prayers for themselves, nor others for them. Says the Lord, Pray not
thou for this people, Jer. 7.16.
neither lift up a cry nor prayer for them, neither make intercession to me,
for I will not hear thee. And also, if thou be unmerciful to others, God
will not hear thy Prayers, nor show mercy unto thee: Prove. 21.13.
Who so stops his ear at the cry of the poor, he shall also cry himself, but
shall not be heard. He shall have judgment without mercy, Jam. 2.13.
that has showed no mercy.

Eighthly and lastly, Lastly.
All those deserve to be reproved, that pray without Faith and fervency. He
that prays doubtingly, Jam. 1.6, 7
prays sinfully, and shall get nothing by praying. He that has not Faith in
God, can never prevail with God in Prayer: Mark 11.22, 23, 24.
For Faith is the condition upon which the promise of answer of prayers is
made. To which also must be added Fervency: Jam. 5.16.
The effectual fervent prayer of a righteous man avails much. And therefore
those that have neither Faith, nor Fervency in their prayers, deserve to be
reprehended: So much for this Use.

I come now to the third Use, 2. Use. Consolation.
and that is for Consolation. And that for all those that are faithful and
fervent, constant and frequent in this duty of Prayer: That pray every day in
their Family, or in secret, or both in their Family or secretly. For your
Comfort go along with me, in these eight or nine things following.

Obed Edom, 2 Samuel 6.11.
because the Ark was in his house: So God blesses those Families where prayers
are daily used.

When thou Prayest, enter into thy closet, Mat. 6.6.
and when thou have shut thy door, pray to thy Father which is in secret, and
thy Father which sees in secret, shall reward thee openly.



I will pour upon them the spirit of grace and supplication. Zach. 12.10.
He that has the spirit of Supplication, has the spirit of Grace first,
otherwise he could not have the spirit of Supplication.

Gal. 4.6.
Because ye are sons, God has sent forth the spirit of his Son into your
hearts, crying Abba, Father. If thou were not a son, thou could not call
upon God as a Father.

Romans 10.13.
For whosoever shall call upon the Name of the Lord shall be saved. He that by
Faith calls upon God may miss of the particular mercy he begs for here; but he
may be assured he shall not miss Eternal Salvation hereafter: For the spirit
of Supplication is a certain sign of Salvation.

For if there be first a willing mind, 2 Cor. 8.12.
it is accepted according to that a man has, and not according to that he has
not. God accepts not of our service according to the worthiness of the work,
but the willingness of the mind in the work. So as he that unfainedly prays
for, and earnestly desires Faith, Repentance, and other graces, he has these
graces in Gods esteem, because God accepts of the will for the deed.

Romans 8.26.
The spirit helps our infirmities; for we know not what we should pray for as
we ought, but the spirit it self makes intercession for us, with greanings
which cannot be uttered. These unutterable groans proceed from the
supernatural motion of Gods Spirit in thee.

David complaining of the unkind dealing of his Adversaries, Psalm 109. but
says he ver. 4. I give my self unto Prayer. Psa. 109.4
As if he should have said, I use no unlawful means against them, but my only
refuge and defense is prayer unto God. So did Job, Job 16.20.
My friends scorn me, but mine eyes pours out tears unto God. I weep in my
prayers, and wait upon God to right my case. And doubtless those that
accustom themselves to a constant course of seeking God, shall have cause to
rejoice and magnify God in the greatest trials that can befall them: according
to that prophetical prayer of David, Psa. 40.16
Let all those that seek thee rejoice, and be glad in thee; let such as love
thy salvation, say continually, the Lord be magnified.

Exodus 17.11.
While Moses held up his hands in Prayer, Israel prevailed. There was no fear
of enemies Conquering while Moses was praying. And you shall find Moses
devotion prevented Gods indignation against his people, Exodus 32.10 to 15
verse, says the Lord to Moses, Let me alone, that my wrath may wax hot against
them, and that I may consume them: But Moses would not let God alone, but
continued praying for them: His Prayers are answered, the Judgment is
diverted, Verse 14. Exodus 32, 14.
And the Lord repented him of the evil which he thought to do unto his people.
And Jacob, Genesis 32.26, 29.
who continued wrestling for a blessing, obtained it. If Prayer be not
slackned, mercy shall be speeded. If thou continuest in a constant course of
praying against sin, for grace, and for the removal of judgments or
afflictions: know for thy comfort, thy sins shall be pardoned, grace shall be
conferred, and the judgments or afflictions shall be removed from thee, or
sanctified to thee for thy good.

Bartimeus went to Christ for his eyesight, and it was told him, Be of good
comfort, Mark. 10.49.
arise, he calls thee: Out of all question, at this report, the heart of
Bartimeus leapt within him; and he was confident, that seeing Christ called
him, he intended to grant his request in restoring his sight. So beloved, you
may be confident, that God that calls you to the duty of Prayer, he intends to
hear, and answer you: For he is able to help you: Psa. 115.3
Our God is in Heaven, and he does whosoever he pleases. And he is willing to
help and comfort you, For like as a Father pittieth his children, Psalm. 103.13.
so the Lord pittieth them that fear him.

Ninethly and lastly, Lastly.
All the Prayers of Gods faithful servants on earth, shall undoubtedly be heard
and answered in Heaven. This is always true, with these three Cautions.

Jam. 5.16.
The Prayer of the Righteous avails much. Says Christ, Joh. 15.7.
If ye abide in me, and my words abide in you, ye shall ask what ye will, and
it shall be done unto you.

John 16.23.
Whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my Name, he shall give it you

This is the confidence that we have in him, 1 John 5.14.
that if we ask any thing according to his will, he hears us. Only know
this, That although the Prayers of Gods servants shall be answered; yet it may
be not presently. You must not exspect the Mercies you pray for, when you will;
no, but ye must wait Gods time, which is the best time. Says the Prophet, Isa.
28.16.
He that believes, makes not haste. He is content to stay himself upon God,
and wait his leisure. So did David, Psalm. 40.1.
I waited patiently upon the Lord, and he inclined unto me, and heard my cry.
And so did the Church, in Isaiah, I will wait upon the Lord, that hides his
face from the house of Jacob, and I will look for him. I shall conclude this
Use with that in Isaiah 30.18. Isa. 30.18.
And therefore will the Lord wait, that he may be gracious to you; and
therefore will he be exalted, that he may have mercy upon you; for the Lord is
a God of judgment, Blessed are all they that wait for him. So much for the
third Use, which has been for Consolation.

I come now to the fourth and last Use, 4. Use. Lastly.
which is for Exhortation.

Is it so, Exhortation.
that it is the Duty of all the people of God to Pray: Then I beseech you be
exhorted to the performance of the Duty. In the prosecution of this Use I shall,

First, give you diverse directions in the Duty of Prayer.

Secondly, I shall answer two material Questions concerning Prayer.

Thirdly, and lastly, I shall lay down some Encouragements to the Duty of
Prayer.

Directions in Prayer.
of the first; I shall lay down nine or ten Directions in the duty of Prayer.

Abel first, Genesis 4.4.
then he accepted of his Sacrifice. His Faith in the promised Messiah was that
which made both his person and Sacrifice accepted with God. Heb. 11.4.
So by Faith get an interest in Christ, and then both thy person and thy
Prayers shall be accepted.

1 John 5.14.
and then you may be confident you shall be heard.

Thirdly, Approach to God in Prayer, with a contrite and broken heart for
sin: As God will not despise a contrite and broken heart; Psalm. 51.17
so neither will he despise the Prayers that proceed from such a heart. When
the heart is broken for sin, God will also break that heart from sin, and
satisfy the desires of that soul.

Jer. 4.14.
How long shall vain thoughts lodge within thee. Do thou complain of them to
God. And seek not that with thy tongue, which thy heart does not desire; for if
thou do, God sees thy hypocrsie, and will hate thee for it: Heb. 4.13.
For all things are naked and open unto the eyes of him with whom we have to
do (in Prayer.)

with sufficient matter for Prayer.

Soloman, Eccles. 5.2
Be not rash with thy mouth, and let not thy heart be hasty to utter any thing
before God; for God is in Heaven, and thou upon Earth, therefore let thy words
be few. Think seriously, what a God it is thou speak to; these thoughts will
make thee reverent, and serious in the duty.

to be thankful for what they have. But take heed of this; the way to obtain
new mercies, is to be thankful for the old. Says David, Psalm. 116.12, 13.
What shall I render unto the Lord for all his benefits toward me? I will take
the cup of salvation, and call upon the Name of the Lord. As if he should have
said, I will be thankful to God for what I have, and I will call upon him for
more blessings.

David, Psalm. 5.3.
In the morning I will direct my Prayer unto thee, and I will look up. He does
not rest in the duty done, but continued praying, and looking up to God for an
answer: So do you take heed, you rest not in the duty, neither let the work be
tedious to you: For as painfulnesse of speaking argues a sick body, so does
irksomeness in praying a sick soul.

John 8.50
I seek not my own glory. Neither should we seek our own glory in any thing we
do, much less in Prayer: For if Gods glory be not our ends and aims in
Prayer, it will render our prayers odious unto God.

Tenthly, and lastly, Lastly.
Take heed of a selvish spirit in Prayer. Pray not only for your selves and
your Friends; but (as the Apostle exhorts) for all men, of all degrees, 1 Timothy
2.1, 2.
Magistrates and Ministers, etc. Pray not only for your friends that pleasure
you, but also for your enemies that despitefully use you, as our Savior
exhorts. Mat. 5.44.
The more public our spirits are in the duty of Prayer, the more pleasing are
our Prayers unto God. It is good to have a public spirit in private duties.
Take heed therefore of a selvish or private spirit in the duty of Prayer. Thus
by way of Exhortation I have given you diverse directions in the duty of Prayer;
observe them for your good.

I come now in the second place, to Answer two material Questions concerning
Prayer.

The first is this; 1. Quest.
I cannot tell how to pray, I want utterance: Whether or no is not my reading a
Form of Prayer acceptable with God in this case?

It is far better to use the help of a good Prayer Book, Answ.
then not to pray at all: only be sure, that the Prayers you read be suitable
to your condition. And take heed the spirit of Grace and Supplication be not
wanting in him that reads the Prayer, nor in them that hear it. The best
Reformed Churches has, and does read Set-formes of Prayer.

It is Objected, Object.
To read a Sermon, is not to Preach; therefore to read a Prayer is not to Pray.

I Answer, Answ.
the reason is not alike in both; For the gift of Preaching is not showed in
reading, therefore reading a Sermon is not preaching: but the grace and gift of
Prayer may be showed in reading of a Prayer.

Again it is Objected, Object.
If we read Forms of Prayer, then we stinct the Spirit.

I Answer no. Answ.
For if we join with another that prays without a Form, his prayer is a Form
to us: For although our hearts be more enlarged, yet we must stick close to the
words of him with whom we join in Prayer. So as this is no stinting of the
spirit: For when thou art alone, thou may enlarge thy self. Yet further know,
that the enlargement of the heart stands not so much in the multitude and
variety of expressions, as in the extent of the affections. So that although
you be tied up in words, yet there is no tie upon the affections; they may be
enlarged in putting up the same petition, when an other is straightned. Thus
you see a man may read and use Forms of Prayer: only take these two Cautions:

First, 1. Caution.
Take heed you do not rest in this way: For although reading is a help to
Prayer; yet must you labor to pray without it. A child that cannot go alone
may be helped to go, but ye must not be always children; not always do thus.

Secondly, 2. Caution.
Take heed you neglect not to use and exercise the grace God have given you.
For know this, there is no man, that has any work of Grace upon his heart, but
is, able to pray without reading, or using a Set-forme of Prayer. There was
never any man in extreme need, but he could tell how to express his wants to
those that could relieve him without reading them.

I come to answer the second Question; which is this; 2. Quest.
I cannot read, and I know not how to pray; What shall I do in this case?

I Answer, Answ.
Go to God with David, and say, O Lord, open thou my lips, Psalm. 51.15
and my mouth shall show forth thy praise. Put into my mouth what I shall speak
unto thee. And then doubtless, that God that bids his people take unto them
words, Hos. 14.2.
and has promised his spirit shall help their infirmities, Romans 8.26
will undoubtedly give them words to seek him with. For God never puts a man
upon a duty, but he will help him in it. As you may see in the example of
Moses; he complains of his inability to speak; God bids him go, and promises
to be with his mouth, Exodus 4.10, 11, 12.
and to teach him what he shall say. And Moses (by Gods help) was mighty in
words (as well) as in deeds. Acts 7.22.
Let a man be never so full of words and matter, he cannot bring it forth in
Prayer without Gods assistance; he cannot utter his own conceptions without
Gods help. Prove. 16.1
Says Solomon, The preparation of the heart in man, and the answer of the
tongue is from the Lord. A man can neither prepare his heart to speak, nor
speak what he has prepared, without Gods assistance. And therefore go to God
to give thee a heart, and words to speak to him with; and doubtless, that God
that has promised to give a mouth to his children, Mat. 10.19. Luke 21.15.
to speak before their enemies, He will not deny to give them words, when they
come by Prayer to speak before himself. For a full answer to this question,
take these two Conclusions.

Psalm. 10.17
but he lends an ear to hear.

want words to seek him with. Have thou then a heart? go to God, and he will
give thee words; Psa. 19.14
Pray with David, Let the words of my mouth, and the meditations of my heart,
be acceptable in thy sight O Lord my strength and my redeemer: And then God
will make thy words acceptable in his sight. For there is no mouth into which
God cannot put fit words to seek him with. When God puts forth his power, the
weakest instrument shall be enabled to do his will. As appeared, Number. 22.27, to
32 verse.
when God enabled Balaams Ass to convince his Master. And so much for the
Answer to the two Questions. Lastly.


I come now in the third and last place to lay down some encouragements to the
Duty of Prayer: I have already given diverse in the use of Consolation. To all
which, in the close, let me add these three or four following.

First, 1. Encourag.
God is so well pleased with Prayer, that he has heard the Prayers of men for
temporal things that had no grace. You may see this in the example of King
Ahab, 1 King. 21.24, to the end.
who sold himself to work wickedness in the sight of God; Yet when he heard
the judgment threatened against him, he humbled himself by Fasting and Prayer;
and although it was not the humiliation of a true Penitent; for he turned not
from his sins: yet see what God says to the Prophet concerning him; 1 King.
21.29.
See thou how A hab bumbles himself before me? I will not bring the evil in
his days, but in his sons days will I bring the evil upon his house. If God
be thus moved with the humiliation and prayer of a wicked man, as to put off,
or defer a temporal judgment: how can God deny the Prayers of those that
have the truth of grace, when they seek him for pardon of sin, and spiritual
blessings? If external humiliation prevail thus with God, O how prevalent are
the Prayers of tender brokenhearted sinners, 2 King. 22.19.
such as good King Josiah was?

Secondly, 2. Encourag.
There is no man that has set upon this duty of Prayer with a sincere heart,
resolving to go on in the practice thereof, although he has been never so weak
and unable to the work at the first, yet in time he has found God carrying of
him on in it beyond expectations, and has found a daily growth and increase of
Grace and abilities to Pray: God despises not the day of small things. Zach.
4.10.
Though grace in the soul of him that humbly seeks God. be at the first but as
a grain of Mustard seed: Mat. 13.1 31.
yet afterward it shall abundantly increase, according to that promise, Job 8.7.
Though thy beginning was small, yet thy latter end shall greatly increase. And
that of our Savior, Mat. 25.29.
For unto every one that has shall be given, and he shall have abundance: He
that faithfully improves that little grace he has, in an humble constant
seeking of God for more grace, he shall have grace for grace, or grace upon
grace; John 1.16.
one grace after another, a daily increase of grace, until he has abundance of
grace.

Thirdly, 3. Encourag.
God is more ready to answer his people then they are to ask; more forward to
grant, then they are to crave. For if any with an upright heart resolve to seek
God, and in their hearts are studying how to seek him, God will hear them
before they pray, and will answer them when they pray; according to that
promise, Isa. 65.24.
Before they call I will answer, and whiles they are yet speaking I will hear.
Our Heavenly Father knows what things we have need of before we ask him: Mat.
6.8.
And therefore before we call, while we are yet thinking to speak, he will hear
and answer us, by giving us assistance in speaking to him, so as while we are
speaking, he will also hear and answer us; according to that promise also in
Isaiah, Then shall thou call, Isa. 58.9.
and the Lord will answer; thou shall cry, and he shall say here I am. Upon thy
cry, he will readily hear and help thee: Psalm. 46.1.
For he is a very present help in time of trouble.

The fourth and last Encouragement I shall mention, Lastly.
is this: God is so well pleased with Prayer, as that he makes his readiness
to hear his peoples Prayers, and to pardon their sins upon humble
acknowledgement thereof, a ground of Encouragement to quicken them to the duty.
Says David, I acknowledge my sin unto thee, Psalm. 32.5, 6.
and mine iniquity have I not hid; I said I will confess my transgressions
unto the Lord, and thou forgavest the iniquity of my sin: For this shall
every one that is godly pray unto thee in a time when thou may be found. As
if he should have said, because thou have been so merciful to me, in hearing my
Prayer, and pardoning my sin; therefore shall every godly man be encouraged to
pray unto thee for the like mercy. What an encouragement is this to Prayer,
when we hear that every one that went to God, humbly acknowledging their
sins, Prove. 28.13.
obtained mercy according to that Promise, Whosoever confesses and forsakes his
sins, shall have mercy. And that of the Apostle, 1 John 1.9.
If we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins,
and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness. For this shall every one that is
godly pray unto God in a time when he may be found. This argument (of God so
readily hearing others) will undoubted be an Encouragement to every godly man
to pray unto God. But as for wicked and ungodly men, neither this, nor any
other argument I have used in all my several Sermons on this subject, will in
the least move them to the performance of this duty of Prayer.

I have showed you what Prayer is: The several kinds of Prayer: The
Preparations to Prayer: The Duties in Prayer: The Gestures of Prayer: The
Motives to Prayer: The Times of Prayer: And I have answered diverse Objections
about Prayer. I have also gone through the several Uses, of Information,
Reprehension, Consolation, and Exhortation: In all which I have used my
uttermost endeavor, to persuade you to this so necessary a duty. And shall all
my labor be in vain? I hope better things of you, and such as accompany
Salvation. Wherefore I beseech you, for the Lords sake. For the Churches sake:
For your own Souls sake, Pray. You that have not heretofore prayed, Pray: You
that have formerly prayed, pray more. That which was the conclusion of a godly
Martyrs Letters, John Careless.
shall be the Conclusion of my Sermon, and this subject, Pray, pray, pray.


