ANTHROPOLATRIA; OR, THE SIN Of glorying in Men, ESPECIALLY In Eminent
Ministers of the Gospel.

Wherein is set forth The Nature and Causes of this Sin, AS ALSO The many
pernicious effects which at all times this Sin has produced, and with which
the Church of CHRIST is still infected.

WITH Some serious disswasives from this Sin, and Directions to prevent the
infection thereof.

A Discourse useful, and in these times very seasonable.

By JOHN TOMBS, B. D. and Preacher of Gods Word at the Temple.

LONDON, Printed by G. Miller for John Bellamy at the Sign of the three
golden-Lions in Cornehill near the Royall-Exchange, 1645.

Mr Gataker in his Answer to Mr Walkers Vindication, page 85.
I Love not siding in Gods Church, among Christ's Ministers especially, I love
not, I am for this man, and I am for that man: I am for this side, and I am for
that side. The Apostle himself liked it not, 1 Cor. 1. 12. Romans 16. 18. I love
not holding the faith of Christ with respect of persons. Another Apostle
forbids it, James 2. 1. I love not that any be tied to follow any one man, or
any number of men whatsoever in all things. The Apostles themselves required it
not in matter of fact, 1 Cor. 11. 1. nor may any now living in matters of
faith. Hence proceeded schisms, 1 Cor. 3. 3. and 11. 18, 19. and factions, and
uncharitabble censures, many times of those as unsound, that are it may be,
more sincere, have at least as good a share in Christ, as those that so censure
them. And surely if the words heresy and heretic were rightly understood, or
if they be so taken (as I suppose them to be constantly used in Scriptute; nor
do I think that the contrary can be easily evinced) the one for faction, Acts
5. 17. and 15. 5. and 24. 5, 14. and 26. 5. and 28. 22. 1 Cor. 11. 18, 19. Gal.
5. 20. the other for a factious person, Tit. 3. 10. none I fear will be found
more truly guilty of heresy, or better to deserve the title of heretic, then
those, who (therein concurring with the Papists, whom yet they profess most to
abhor) are so prone to contemn all as heretics, and tainted with heresy in
their sense, that is, as men cut off from Christ, and having no interest in
him, who do not in all matters of practice comply, or in all points of
doctrine concur with themselves. Or their side, Lord, let me never be: let my
soul never enter into their secret. Neither is it, nor shall ever be my
desire, either so to pin my faith upon the sleeve of any part or party, or to
engage my judgment to any mere man's or men's opinions (the Penmen of holy
writ only excepted) as to admit hand over head, whatsoever he or they shall
hold and maintain: nor yet again to refuse or reject any truth, which by the
light that God shall be pleased to send me, I shall be able to descry in the
writing of any, though otherwise never be erroneous or unsound.

To my worthy Friend Mr James Russel Merchant.
SIR,
SOme years are elapsed, since I took notice, and became sensible of that sin
which this Tract here declaimes against. Being driven by men, but led by the
mavelous providence of God to this City, I observed my fears did not deceive
me; but as then I did divine, so it is come to pass, that this sin has filled
this City with rents and errors; whereby the spirit of supplication and
walking humbly with our God, the spirit of love, minding the public, and
seeking one another good has left us, and instead hereof an evil spirit of
censuring, scoffing, insulting on weaknesses, wrangling, maintaining particular
parties, projecting how to promote self ends with neglect of the public,
evil jealousies and reports of one another, and which is to be feared, inward
rejoicing at one another harms, has overtaken even a great number of those,
who a few years ago seemed to be of another temper. I have now out of a deep
sense of the evils this sin has brought upon us, resolved to publish this
Treatise, as a monitory to men, to avoid this idolizing of men, as an evil
savor that may infect them, and to purge it out of their spirits as an evil
humor that may engender dangerous fevers in their souls, and is likely to
make this generation worse and worse; And as a forerunner to such Works as God
shall enable me to publish, for clearing of the truth to those that in this
time are deceived, by their dependence on their admired Teachers: The memorable
kindnesses which you have been pleased to exhibit to me in my low estate, and
the cordial affection I perceive you bear to the prosperity of Christ's
Kingdom, engage me to present this Sermon to you, as for your use, so for some
testimony of his gratitude, who desires to approve himself

Yours in the service of Christ, JOHN TOMBS.
From my Study at the Temple this 8th of May, 1645.
The Contents.
I. THe state of the City of Corinth. II. The state of the Church of Corinth.
III. That glorying in men is a sin. IIII. That glorying in men which is here
forbidden, is glorying in the Teachers of the Church. V. The conceit, that here
the Apostle uses a figure of fiction of persons. VI. This conceit is refuted,
and it is proved, that glorying in true Apostles is here forbidden. VII. The
objection to the contrary, answered. VIII. What glorying in true Teachers is
here forbidden, declared negatively. IX. What glorying in true Teachers is here
forbidden, declared affirmatively. X. Reasons of the prohibition, taken from
the nature of this sin. XI. Reasons of the prohibition, taken from the causes
of this sin. XII. Reasons of the prohibition, taken from the many pernicious
effects that follow upon this sin. XIII. Application the first, in a
discovery of this evil, as still infecting the Church of Christ. Application
the second, in a serious disswasive from this sin in these times, with some
directions to prevent the infection thereof.
ANTHROPOLATRIA; OR, The Sin of glorying in Men, Especially in eminent
Ministers of the Gospel.
1 COR. 3. 21. Therefore let no man glory in men, for all things are yours.


I.
The state of the City of Corinth.
FOr a more perspicuous understanding of this Scripture, something is to be
premised concerning the City and Church of Corinth.

The City was seated on the neck of Land, which parts Peloponesus from the
rest of Greece, very convenient for traffic, by reason of the meeting of two
Seas there, whence it is termed by Horace, bimaris Corinthus, Corinth that was
washed by two Seas; the one fit to bring in Commodities from Italy, Cicily, and
other Countries toward the South and West, the other fit to bring in
Commodities from Asia, Macedonia, and other Countries toward the East and
North. By reason of which conveniences, and the Grecian games exercised near
to it, (...), Theog. Gnom.
which drew a great confluence of people thither, and some other causes, that
City grew very populous and rich, and this made them (as usually it does)
luxurious and proud: Eo quod legati appellati erane superbius, Cicer. orat pro
lege Manilia.
whereby they became insolent, and by their haughty speeches provoked the
Romans to destroy that City under the Conduct of L. Mummius: but being in
Augustus Caesar's time reedified, it recovered quickly its former beauty and
wealth.

II.
The state of the Church of Corinth.
TO this City in his travailes to preach the Gospel of Christ, came St Paul,
Acts 18. 1. in the days of Claudius, ver. 2. and continuing there a great
while, much people were added to the Lord, and a flourishing Church there
planted, which being after watered by Apollos, so fructified, that as St Paul
testifies, 1 Cor. 1. 5. they were in every thing enriched by Christ in all
utterance, and in all knowledge, so that they came behind in no gift, ver 7.
But as formerly their earthly riches made them wanton, and insolent, so now
their spiritual gifts made them vain and contentious: for instead of a holy
employing and improving their gifts to the honor of the giver, they abused
them in vain ostentation of themselves, and glorying in their teachers, which
drew them into schisms and divisions, one saying, I am of Paul, another, I am
of Apollo, another, I am of Cephas, another, I am of Christ, ver. 12. whence
they were drawn into factions, Con in Tit. Epist. 1. ad Corinth. edit. a
Patric. ^unio. (...).
insomuch that as Hierome says, unusquisque eos quos baptizaverat suos putabat
esse, non Christi; each baptizer counted those he baptized his own, not
Christ's; and Clement (if we have his genuine Epistle) that they jussed out some
that deserved well, and hoysed up others that were light enough, and that
numerous Church in stead of being a well compacted body, became like a
dismembered Absyrtus, mangled into many pieces by reason of their schism. To
remedy which evil as tending to the scattering of the Church, and blemishing
of the Christian profession, the Apostle bends himself in the fore part of
this Epistle, using sundry arguments to show the absurdity of it, and in this
verse now read unto you, disswades them from that sin, which was the root of
their factious divisions, in these words, Therefore let no man glory in men,
etc.

III.
Glorying in men is a sin.
WHich speech seems to be a conclusion inferred from the words foregoing,
ver. 18, 19, 20. concerning the folly and vanity of men's thoughts, and
contains, 1. A prohibition, Let no man glory in men; 2. A reason of this
prohibition, for all things are yours; Which is amplified, ver. 22, 23. My
business will be at this time, to handle the Prohibition, and the Reason so
far only as it referres to the thing here prohibited; and that the mark at
which we shoot may appear to you, let the fixed point be this; Christians may
not glory in men; if they do, its their sin, and that no small one in Gods
sight. God has so ordered our calling, says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 1. 29. that
no flesh should glory in his presence; and therefore ver. 31. According as it
is written, he that glories let him glory in the Lord; Which seems to be
taken from Jer. 9. 23, 24. Thus says the Lord, let not the wise man glory in
his wisdom, neither let the mighty man glory in his might; let not the rich
man glory in his riches, but let him that glories glory in this, that he
understands and knows me, that I am the Lord, which exercise loving
kindness, judgment and righteousness in the earth, for in these things I
delight says the Lord. Like unto which is that Isa. 2. 22. Cease ye from man
whose breath is in his nostrils: for wherein is he to be accounted of? But
because the Apostles words, though general in form, as forbidding all
glorying in any men, yet are special in the accommodation, as forbidding
glorying in Ministers; therefore I conceive necessary to enquire, 1. What
glorying in men is here forbidden by the Apostle; 2. Why such glorying is thus
forbidden.

IIII.
Glorying in men here forbidden, is glorying in the Teachers of the Church.
THe Greek word translated [ glory] does sometimes signify the inward
esteem, joy, content, complacency and confidence we have in a thing,
especially when it is superabundant, though it be not outwardly expressed, but
for the most part, it notes a full joy, confidence, esteem or acquiescence,
expressed by words, or other signs. Glorying in men, is either when the
persons glorying, and gloried in, are the same, or when they are diverse; the
former is, when a man glories in himself, and then it is, when a man out of
high esteem of his own excellency or power, expresses confidence in himself,
or praise of himself, which is commonly the vice of vain boasting, though it
may be sometimes for just cause, as 2 Cor. 11. 18. But in this place the
latter, to wit the glorying in other men is forbidden, as the reason shows,
for they were not to glory in some as peculiarly theirs, because all were
theirs. And so to glory in men, is to glory in other men, whom we conceive to
have singular excellency, and our selves to have some proper interest in them,
or relation to them, and accordingly to boast of them, and the conceived
property we have in them. Thus men glory in their Ancestors, Princes,
Generals, Teachers: And the glorying in this last sort of men particularly as
Teachers or Preachers of the Gospel, is here forbidden, as the occasion of
this precept shows; for this precept was given upon occasion of their glorying
mentioned, chap. 1. 12, and the first instance, ver. 22. is of eminent Teachers
of the Church, Paul, Apollos, Cephas; so that the glorying here forbidden, is
the having, and expressing of high esteem and affection toward the Teachers
of the Church.

V.
The conceit, that here the Apostle uses a figure of fiction of Persons.
BUt then we are further to consider, Chrysostom. in 1 Cor. 1. 12. (...).
whether the Teachers in whom the Apostle forbids glorying, were the true
Teachers or Apostles, or the false; For there is a conceit in many and eminent
interpreters, that the Corinthian sectaries, did not glory in the names of
Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas themselves, but that they gloried in some false
Apostles, the authors of their schism, but the Apostle in reproving their
schism, Hieron. in 1 Cor. 1. 1^. sub nomine Apostolorum Pseudo-apostolos
tangit.
uses the names of the true Apostles, as it were under the vizard of the true
Apostles concealing the false: The ground of this conceit, is that speech which
St Paul uses, 1 Cor. 4. 6. And these things brethren I have in a figure
transferred to my self and Apollo for your sakes: that ye might learn in us
not to think of men [so our translation adds] above that which is written,
that no one of you be puffed up for one against another. Which they understand,
as if the Apostle had said, when I spoke of Paul and Apollos, I used a scheme
or figure called fictio personarum, the faining of persons, Chrysest. in 1 Cor
1. 12. (...).
such as the Lawyers use, when they put the names of Titius and Sempronius, for
some other men whose case is propounded. And that the Apostle says, he had
transferred to himself the arrogance of the false Apostles, being unworthy to
be named, or that he might not offend them, or that his speech might be less
grievous to the Corinthians: to this end, that ye might learn in us, that is
in our taking it upon us, not to think of men, that is of the false Apostles,
above that which is written, and that no one of you be puffed up with pride,
for one in the extolling of one against another to his contempt.

VI.
This conceit is refuted, and it is proved, that glorying in true Apostle is
here forbidden.
COncerning which interpretation, Parcus Com. in 1 Cor. 1. 12. speaks thus;
Miror vero hoc loco, omnes fere interpretes fictionem statuere, quasi quod in
pseudo-apostolos competebat, Paulus ad Apostolorum personas transferat. That
is; I marvel that in this place all Interpreters almost conceive a fiction,
as if the Apostle Paul had transferred that to the persons of the Apostles,
which did agree to the false Apostles. And indeed that such a fiction should be
here made, I conceive to be against plain and evident reason. For first if
this be so, then it is to be conceived that the Corinthians did not indeed call
themselves by the name of Paul, but by the name of some false Apostle, in whose
place in this Epistle St Paul has put his by a fiction. But he that shall
read Chap. 1. ver. 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17. may easily perceive by the
relation of this schism from those of Cloe, that the Apostle intended to set
down a history of that they did, now in narrations of facts done, no man uses
such a fiction. 2. He uses the name of Christ without a fiction, ver. 12. in
the same relation: surely then the names of those Apostles too. 3. To make it
yet clearer, he uses arguments to dissuade them from these schisms in his
name. And to clear himself as no occasion or abettour of them, though his
name were used, he alleges a thing or accident merely personal, ver. 14,
15, 16, 17. 4. When chap. 3, 4* he speaks again of their schism, he adds to
convince them of the evil in patronizing the schism by their name, ver. 5. 6.
Who then is Paul? and who is Apollo? but Ministers by whom ye believed, even as
the Lord gave to every man. I have planted, Apollo watered; but God gave the
increase. Now these things cannot be conceived as tralatitious, for it is said,
they were Ministers by whom they believed, and as the Lord gave to every man,
and that he planted, and Apollos watered, but God gave the increase. Now these
things are true of Paul himself and Apollos himself, as we read, Acts 18.
not of any false Apostles. 5. To which I add, that I find nothing of the false
Apostles, or of dissuading from harkening to them in this Epistle, but in the
second.

VII.
The objection to the contrary answered.
AS for the objection from 1 Cor. 4. 6. it is grounded upon an interpretation
that is not congruous to the words of the Apostle: For 1. the Apostle is
supposed to have put his and Apollo's name instead of the false Apostles, to
avoid offense of them, or conceit of their unworthiness, but the Apostle
says, he had transferred those things to himself and Apollo's for the
Corinthians sake, not for the false Apostles. 2. He says he did it to teach
them modesty. Now how the Apostles taking on him their arrogance might teach
them modesty, it is hard to conceive: What modesty is it to transfer another
crime on himself? But what then are the things transferred on himself and
Apollos, and how did he transfer them? Pareus conceives they were that which
he had said, chap. 3. 7. That he which planteth is nothing, and he which
waters is nothing; I add those things which he had said, chap. 4 1. That
they were Ministers of Christ, and stewards of the mysteries of God. These
things says he (...), that is, as they conceive translated by a figure of
Rhetoric: but in that sense I find it not used any where in the Apostle. I
find it used* 2 Cor. 11. 13, 14, 15. signifying the counterfeiting of an habit
like a Stage player, in which sense the Noune (...) is used, 1 Cor. 7. 31. and
the derivative (...), 1 Cor, 14. 30. Romans 13. 13. is translated from the habit
of apparel, to the fashion of manners. And (...) is used, Phil. 3. 25. for
Christ's transmutation of our bodies. I conceive that in this place the Apostle
uses by a Catachresis (...) for (...), and that he means no more but an
application or fashioning of those things he had said, without any change or
translation from any other to himself, that in them they might learn, not to
think of Teachers above that which is written, to wit, Mat. 23. 11, 12. and
that no one be puffed in arrogance for one, that is for the extolling of one
against another, that is to the despising of another.

VIII.
What glorying in true Teachers is here forbidden, declared negatively.
BUt what then is the glorying in the true Teachers here forbidden?

To this I answer, 1. Negatively, 2. Affirmatively. Negatively I say, 1. That
it is not the magnifying of the Apostles above other Ministers, by ascribing to
them an eminent, and extraordinary authority in assuring us of the will of God,
and in establishing the Churches. For as they had doubtless singular power in
working miracles and in giving the holy Ghost, so had they infallible guidance
of the Spirit of Christ in what they taught, according to our Saviors promise,
Joh. 16. 13. Howbeit when he, the Spirit of truth is come, he will guide you
into all truth, for he shall not speak of himself; but whatsoever he shall
hear, that shall he speak, and he will show you things to come. 2. That it is
not the giving of that regard to the true Teachers, which is due to them as
Ministers of Christ. For the Elders that rule well, are to be accounted worthy
of double honor, especially they who labor in the word and doctrine, 1 Timothy
5. 17. 3. That it is not the proper love to esteem of, and rejoicing in some
as our fathers in Christ, as the Apostle calls himself, 1 Cor. 4. 15. for
which cause it is likely Paul told Philemon, that he did owe himself unto him,
Philem. v. 19. 4. That it is not the desire of having, or rejoicing that we
have men of best gifts: For if it be lawful to covet earnestly the best gifts,
1 Cor. 12. 31. it is lawful to desire those that have the best gifts.

IX.
And affirmatively.
AFfirmatively I say, here is forbidden inordinate glorying in men which are
Teachers, and this is sundry ways; 1. When some Teachers are gloried in
peculiarly, as if they were the only Teachers worth the hearing, none else to
be regarded. And that this is the special branch of glorying in men here
forbidden, is manifest from the Apostles reason why the Corinthans should not
glory in men: because all were theirs, whether Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas. It
may seem that some of them accounted Paul the only Teacher, for his singular
knowledge in the mystery of Christ, of which we read, Ephesians. 3. 3, 4. Some
delighted only in Apollos, because of his eloquence, of which we read, Acts
18. 24. Some magnified Peter, as non-paril, whether by reason of his fervency
and zeal, or his seeming dignity among the Apostles, which seems to be
intimated, 2 Cor. 12. 11. Gal. 2. 9. Now this branch of inordinate glorying in
men, the Apostle does studiously forbid, as considering that this was the egg
out of which their contentions were hatched, and perhaps foreseeing that in
time, out of it would spring Prelaticall greatness, and Antichristian tyranny;
therefore the Apostle forbids this, 1 Cor. 4 6. that they should be puffed up
for one against another* so it is usual for hearers to take an inordinate
affection, to have an inordinate esteem of some Preachers, and thereupon to
count them theirs, to glory to be their followers, disdaining all others as not
to be named with them, though Teachers of truth: because they have an high
conceit of their learning, wit, eloquence, holiness or the like quality. 2.
When the so-magnified Teachers, are esteemed not as servants to a higher
Master, but as Masters themselves. And that thus it was with those Corinthians,
it may be gathered in that the Apostle does so diligently admonish them to
look higher then himself or Apollos, that they might not esteem them
authors of their faith. Thus 1 Cor. 1. 13. he expostulates with them, Is
Christ divided? was Paul crucified for you? or were ye baptized in the name of
Paul? And chap. 2. 1, 5. when I came to you, I came not with excellency of
speech or of wisdom, that your faith should not stand in the wisdom of men,
but in the power of God: and chap. 3. 5, 6, 7. who then is Paul? and who is
Apollos? but Ministers by whom ye believed, even as the Lord gave to every man.
I have planted, Apollos watered, but God gave the increase; so then, neither is
he that planteth any thing, neither he that waters, but God that gives the
increase: and 1 Cor. 4. 6. that ye might learn in us, not to think above that
which is written. Now this sin is very incident to many hearers, when they
admire some Teachers wit, eloquence, zeal, holiness or the like quality, to
ascribe their conversion, edification to them; to praise them superlatively, to
assume their names, forgetting that they are but Gods instruments, and Christ's
servants, and that their graces come not from the abilities of the Teacher, but
the power of Christ. Wherefore the Apostle, 1 Cor. 4. 7. expostulates thus with
these Corinthians: for who makes thee to differ from another? and what have
thou that thou did not receive? now if thou did receive it, why do thou
glory as if thou had not received it?

X.
Reasons of the prohibition, taken from the nature of this sin.
NOw the reasons why this inordinate glorying in men is here forbidden are
many, some from the nature of the sin, some from the causes of it, some from
the effects.

The first I shall take from the text it self, because all things are yours;
ye are Christ's, and Christ is Gods, and therefore ye behave your selves
unworthy of the great bounty of Christ unto you, in giving all the Ministers of
the Gospel to be yours for your good, when ye glory in some, and unthankfully
despise others. and ye do unbeseeming your privilege who are Christ's, not
Paul's, when ye account Paul the master of your faith, not Christ; magnify him
as the principal, who is but a subservient instrument. It is unthankfullnesse
to a bountiful Prince, when he bestows many Lordships on his favorite, if he
should regard one of them only, as if the rest were naught worth: it is an
unthankful and unworthy part if a Prince by his servant convay a Lordship, the
receiver magnify the servant and not the Master: so it is in this case when
Christ has been so liberal, as to give gifts to men in large measure, some
Apostles, some Prophets, some Evangelists, some Pastors and teachers, Ephesians. 4.
11. for the use of his people, to dote on one, and to ascribe to him that which
is due to Christ the supreme donour: for hereby the bounty of Christ is
lessened, and the honor due to him subtracted. 2. There Is injury done both to
Christ, and to the despised Teachers. To our Lord Christ, in that the glory
that belongs to Christ alone to be the author of, and to have the dominion
over our faith is ascribed to men: for whereas our Lord Christ forbad even the
Apostles, Matthew. 23. 8, 9, 10. that they be not called Rabbi: for one is your
Master even Christ, and all ye are brethren; and call no man your father upon
the earth, for one is your Father which is in Heaven: Neither be ye called
Masters; for one is your Master even Christ: by this glorying in some Teachers
they are made Rabbis, fathers on earth, and Masters. For what is it to make a
man a Rabbi, a father on earth, a Master, but to glory in him as the author of
our faith; to esteem him as the only Teacher, to depend upon his mouth as if
he were another Pythagoras, (...), that he has said were enough? now what is
this less then to unchaire Christ, and to lift up man into his seat, to
deprive the shepherd and bishop of our souls, and substitute another in his
room? It is in effect all one as to thank the Axe for building the house, and
to pass by the Carpenter. For as Moses, so Paul, were but faithful in Gods
house as servants, but Christ as a Son over his own house, whose house we
are, Heb. 3. 5, 6. It Is injurious also to the despised Teacher, in that he is
contemned, whom Christ has honored to make a Teacher of truth, a servant of
his: but this we shall further consider when we speak of the reasons from the
effects of glorying in men.

XI.
From the Causes of it.
THe Causes hereof minister also reasons unto us of the prohibition of it. For
whence comes it that there is such evil glorying in men, but from a spiritual
dotage, or childishness in understanding, inordinate affection in the will?
Therefore are men gloried in, because they are over esteemed, over loved,
either for their supposed eloquence, or learning, or zeal, or spiritual
graces, or authority, or power, or benefiting them, or suiting with their
fancies, or some such like cause. The admiring men's persons is often (...), Jude
16. by reason of some advantage or benefit: now all these Causes do import
some error or perverseness of the soul, which are always evil. Zanch. Tom.
4. lib. 1. cap. 11. These. 4. Tollat Deus ^as idololatrias ex ecclesia, nam
adorare homine^ and eorum placi^a idololatria est.
Yea it is no small evil to admire men when we should magnify Christ, to
delight in the picture instead of the prototype, to glory in the servant in the
place of the Master; in Zanchius his judgment it is no less then idolatry.
Assuredly it is an earthly affection, it is but wisdom of the flesh, (...),
not of Gods Spirit, and therefore enmity against God: adverse to his Law, 1
Cor. 3. 4. In lowliness of mind, each man is to esteem others better then
himself: yet no man is to think of another, no not of an Apostle, above that
which is meet, 1 Cor. 4. 6. In charity we are to seek, not our own, but every
man another wealth, to believe all things, to hope all things: yet not to
seek the elevation of one, to the disparagement of another, to be puffed up
for one against another, or to conceive of one above that he is to a derogation
of Christ's prerogative.

XII.
From the many pernicious effects that follow upon it.
BUt the evil of this sin is most clearly seen in the pernicious effects that
are consequent upon it, which are many: As 1. it is a direct cause of schisms:
so it was among these Corinthians; their glorying in Paul, Apollos, Cephas,
made them say, I am of Paul, I am of Apollos, I am of Cephas: it causes the
people to divide themselves one from another, under different Teachers, in whom
they glory: and it causes Teachers to sever those that affect them, from other
teachers whom they affect not so much: for occasio facit furem, advantage to
do evil is a great incitement to attempt it. Sundry are the causes of
schisms, sometimes the pride, tyranny, heterodoxie of the Teachers, and then
they are justifiable in the people, the power of Pastors not being Lordly, but
fatherly, pedo non sceptro, not in a compulsory, but a directory way: sometimes
the causeless hatred or contempt of the people toward some Pastors; the vain
esteem, light affection toward others causes a schism; and then the
Pastors are free, the people are under the guilt. And it is no small sin,
whether from the Pastors or peoples priding in gifts that a schism is made;
whereas the end of Gods Spirit in bestowing of gifts is, that there might be
no schism in the body, but that the members should have the same care one for
another, 1 Cor. 12. 25. Now schisms are contrary to Christian unity and love,
cause great alteration of heart in one member from another, substraction of
mutual helps, hinderance in the growth of the body, neglect of praying one for
another; yea bitterness, disdain, hatred, and the effects of these, declining
of society, excommunicating each other, and at last violence, and blood, and
these are bad enough.

2. The prohibited glorying in men, does expose the Christian profession to
obloquy and contempt* for whereas it is the honor of the Christian profession,
that they have one body, one spirit, one Lord, one faith, one baptism, one God
and Father of all, Ephesians. 4. 5, 6. by the glorying in some Teachers before
others, the Christian society is made like the several Schools of
Philosophers, some following Plato, some Aristotle, some Zeno, some Epicurus;
their doctrines accounted but as the proper opinions or placita of several
teachers; not proceeding from one and the same Spirit of God, but singularity
of conceit; and zeal for them is conceived to arise, not from a certain
knowledge of heavenly truth, but from strength of fancy, and peculiar humor:
which thing is a great stumbling block to those that are without, keeping them
back from embracing the truth, and an occasion of laying open the profession of
it to derision.

3. By glorying in men, as there is an over high esteem of the gifts of some,
so there is an undervaluing of the gifts of others: which thing as it is an
unworthy abuse of those various gifts Christ gives to his Church, so does it
infer an injurious imputation to the Spirit of God by whom they are bestowed.
For as it is said, Prove. 17. 5. Who so mocketh the poor, reproacheth his maker
who made him such: so it may be said by parity of reason; he that despises
those that are of small gifts, reproacheth the Spirit of God, as if he were
defective in his gifts; whereas the variety of gifts, and the bestowing of
them in different measures, sets forth the fulness and freeness of Gods
Spirit, who works all those, dividing to every man severally as he will, 1
Cor. 12. 11.

4. By the inordinate glorying in some, and despising of others, the despised
persons are often discouraged and disheartened, to the detriment of the Church
of God, and the grievance of the despised. For the remembrance of contempt, is
apt to cause dejectedness and grief of heart, which always benums a man's
spirit, and enfeebles him, and clogges him in his work: Thus the heart is made
sad, which should not be made sad; and the spark that should be blown up by
encouragements that it may flame forth, is extinquished, and the Spirit
quenched, contrary to the Apostles warning, 1 These. 5. 19 20.

5. By glorying in Teachers, it falls out that they are puffed up and
perverted: much experience has confirmed this as true, that popular applause
has filled Teachers with vain glory, and made them adulterate the word of God
to please their auditors. St Paul tells us of the false Apostles among the
Galatians, Gal. 4. 17. that they did zealously (in show) affect them, but not
well: intending to ex^lude him, that they might affect them. It is no strange
thing that Teachers perceiving the lightness of their auditors, and their
itching ears do sometimes (...), handle the word of God deceitfully, instead
of ministering (...), the sincere milk of the word, as it is called, 1 Pet. 2.
2. sometimes flattering pleasingly, when they should reprehend sharply;
sometimes balking the vice, they should freely convince of; sometimes inventing
new forms of Teaching, new opinions, sublimate conceits to fit the desires of
the people; making the Lesbian rule of their fancies, the measure of their
teaching, and this is a grand evil.

6. This glorying in men, begets an aptness to receive their errors, to
imitate their actions, which is the seed of heresies and superstitions: for
admiration and doting love to a person, easily draws the admirers to a blind
obedience, implicit faith in them, to an inslaving of their judgments, so as
jurare in verba Magistri. It is observed by an historian, that before the
miscarriage of Conrade the Emperor, and Lewis the French King, in their
expedition to the Holy Land, Fuller. of the holy war, lib. 2. chapter 3.
to which St Bernards Sermons persuaded, the people were too much transported
with an high opinion of him and his directions; as if that arrow could not
miss the mark that came out of St Bernards bow. Any thing is easily received
from him that we overmuch love. Affection makes men take down falsities, as
the rolling in sugar does make the stomach swallow bitter pills: Cicero lib.
2. de oratore. Advers. haeres* cap. 15.
as it befell Fusius, who so admired Fimbria's eloquence, that he imitated
withal his ill-favored faces and broad speaking. And God does often leave the
admired Teachers to err, for trial of the people, as Vincent. Lixin.
observes, alleging the speech of God, Deuteronomy. 13. 3. and the admirers of them
to receive error, according to his just judgment.

7. Add hereunto, that this gloring in men makes men's endeavors remiss in
things necessary, earnest in things vain; that time and labor that should be
employed in the maine duties of godliness, in seeking the advancement of
Christ's Kingdom, righteousness, peace and joy in the Holy Ghost, is often
bestowed in magnifying those in whom they glory, upholding their party,
promoting their opinions: whence it is, that such as are followers of those in
whom they glory, constant hearers of them, much in commendation of them, have
their sayings and tenants ad unguem, declare much zeal in their way, yet prove
but unskilful in the chief doctrines of Christian religion, defective in the
power of true godliness, in the mortifying of corruptions, such as pride,
impatience, self-conceitednesse, rashness, covetousness; and in the practice
of righteousness, mercy, meekness, diligence in their own business and the
like; in the provoking one another to love and good works.

8. On the contrary, the word of God though soundly and truly delivered, is
neglected, being either not heard, or without fruit, when it is spoken by such
a Teacher as they affect not, but disdained, censured, contemned. The prejudice
against one, through comparative extolling of another, causes the teaching of
the slighted person, though orthodox, holy, learned, to be passed over, to be
censured as barren, dry, hungry stuff, though it be the true word of God, as
if no teaching were wholesome meat, but such as is wet with their affected
Teachers spittle, I mean his phrase, method, action, elocution; as if fides
aestimanda esset ex personis, non personae ex fide, as Tertullians phrase is,
or as if our faith stood not in the power of God, but in the wisdom of men,
as the Apostle speaks, 1 Cor. 2, 5.

9. By this means the rule of Christianity is changed; for whereas* the rule
and ground of our faith and obedience is the word of God as Gods word, through
the addicting themselves to some men's authority, Gods truth stands at their
devotion for its acceptance: hence they that of old gloried in the Pharisees as
their Rabbis, regarded not Gods commands, but as pleased the Pharisees, and
they that this day glory in the Pope, or the Church as they call it, regard the
Scriptures so far only as the Pope or Church allow them, and they that depend
on their magnified Teachers of any other sort, do regard the word of God, but
as it bears their image, or comes from their mint; and so as it was said of
the heathens allowing or disallowing of gods by their Senates decree, Deus non
erit Deus, nisi homo velit, God shall not be God, unless man will; it may be
said in this case, Gods word shall not be Gods word, unless man will.

10. Lastly, They that glory in men, are either inconstant in their affections,
as experience often shows, they that one while would pluck out their eyes for
him whom they magnify, will at another time revile and hate him: for men's
minds are mutable, and the best of men are but men, that is, imperfect, and
will be so found, and therefore will not always satisfy, or else if they be
still affected, yet they be but mortal, and the sorrow for their loss will be
excessive, more then should be for a creature, an arbitrary instrument; for
immoderate affection to a thing while we have it, causes immoderate sorrow for
it when we loose it.

XIII.
In a discovery of this evil, as still in festing the Church of Christ.
THe first use hereof is to endite those that are guilty of this sin of
glorying in men, Applic.
of a breach of a Statute of Christ against his Crown and dignity, and the
peace of his Church. In the Apostles time you see the Corinthians found guilty
of it, and condemned as carnal. 1 Cor. 3. 4. for while one says, I am of
Paul, and another I am of Apollo, are ye not carnal? but the sin died not with
them. After ages have yielded us woeful fruits of this evil root, chiefly
in the Papacy: The glorying in the first Roman Bishops who were most of them
holy Martyrs for Christ, begat such an high esteem of that See, that other
Bishops and Churches began to esteem too much of their counsels and orders, as
if they were a rule for them to follow; which caused them quickly to take too
much on them, and the Christian Emperors and people to ascribe too much to
them; insomuch that quickly from a parity with other Bishops, they got above
them to a Patriarchate, and from a parity with other Patriarchs, to a
Precedence, and at last mounted up to the throne of universal Episcopacy*
whence it is that at this day they that subject themselves to the Bishop of
Rom, are become the most deeply guilty of the sin of glorying in men of any
that ever were; He teaches in his book against K. James under the name of
Tortus, and in his apology for it, that all are bound by an implicit oath in
Baptism to the Pope as Christ's Vicar.
for they ascribe an infallibility to him, a Power above Councels, so that his
determination is to be held as certain, though a general Council of all the
Pastors of the Christian world should gainesay it, his decrees and decretals
are held as or^cles equal to the holy Scriptures, a power to interpret
Scriptures unerringly, to declare points of faith, to canonize Saints, to
pardon sins, to deliver out of Purgatory fire, with many more, whereby he is
exalted above all that is called God, or is worshipped, as was foretold, 2
These. 2. 4. nor do they blush at the name of Papists being derived from the
Pope of Rome, but defend it, as Bellarmin. de Not. Eccl. cap. 4. And as all
Papists in common are guilty of this sin, so in special the several sects of
Schoolmen and Friars, Franciscans, Dominicans, Nominals, Reals, some glorying
in Scotus, some in Aquinas, some in Occham; and that with so much pertinacie
and devotion, that they will not swerve in the least point from their chief
Master; insomuch, that as I remember Bannes the Dominican disputing about an
article in Philosophy, Com. in Arist. de genesis and corrup. expresses his
dislike of one that dissented from Aquinas, saying that he was not a Thomist,
but an Anti-thomist. Nor do Protestant Divines dissemble, but complain of
this malady among themselves, as being the cause of that miserable rent, which
has been, and is still continued between those Pastors and Churches which are
distinguished by the names of Lutherans and Calvinists, which although it be
disavowed by the chiefest Writers of the reformed Churches, and by the Churches
in their public confessions, yet it is not denied, but that it has tainted
too many in them. Zanchius complains against this evil, Epist. ad Antverp.
praefat. tom. 7. operum.
calling it (...), a worshipping of men, and relates with indignation the
speech of one at Geneva, who being asked why he would not sometimes hear Viret
a worthy Preacher there, answered, that if Paul should preach at the same time
with Calvin, he would hear Calvin; Calvin Epist. 289. usque adeo (...) est ut
vel crepidas ejus adorandas putet.
and another complains in his Epistle to Calvin, of a certain person that was
so affected to Luther, that he thought his very shoes should be adored. I
would to God such exorbitancies had kept beyond the seas, and that this sin of
glorying in men had not crept into this Land, into this City. The signs and
symptoms of it are too manifest, disparaging some Preachers injuriously,
extolling others immoderately, disdainefully withdrawing from some without just
cause, inordinately running after others without sufficient reason; swallowing
down the dictates of some without chewing, loathing the wholesome food which
others present, without tasting. And have not the fruits been among our
selves, evil divisions, janglings, evil censuring, and such like? scoffing,
contempt, hardening of themselves among our adversaries? Brethren, if there be
any guilty of this sin here present, let him now know it to be his sin, and
that no small one, and let him be humbled for it, and repent of it, that he may
obtain pardon: possibly some godly persons may have fallen into it, not
knowing it to be a sin, but sure I am, no one that fears God, will dare to
allow himself in it being convicted that it is his sin.

Application 2. In a serious disswasive from this sin in these times, with some
directions to prevent the infections thereof.
2. Wherefore in the second place, give me leave to admonish you, that you take
heed of it. It is an evil that usually does follow those Churches to which
God bestows excellent gifts, and worthy Teachers; and doubtless the Lord has
enriched this City with this most desirable kind of riches above all places of
the earth; so that this City may be said in this respect, to be situated under
the line, and the inhabitants here to be without shadow. Great and many lights
God has given to you, and that in many successions a long time, uno avulso non
deficit alter, when one is removed, God supplies you with another. But to what
end is it? not that you should magnify them, but use them to bring you nearer
unto God, not to glory in the gift, but to rejoice in the giver, reverence and
make use of them, but reserve to their Lord his own prerogative: may not you
justly fear that God will take them away from you, when you give his due to
them? we blame not a father if he remove a servant from his child, when a child
does inordinately affect him, to the deminution of his respect to the father;
nor can we God, if he subtract a good thing which we abuse: the best way to
have good things continued by God, is to use them for God, and to esteem them
for his sake; but to set our hearts only on him that gave them. Besides does
not our glorying in men bring us into bondage to them? does it not insensibly
draw upon us an adherence to their errors, if God for our trial suffer them
to slip into any, or if they have none, to a dangerous and unsound disposition
to receive them if they happen. We stand much for our Christian liberty, and
there is great cause we should, it is a precious thing dearly bought, and is
it not one part of our Christian liberty, that we be not the servants of men, 1
Cor. 7. 23. It concerns us then much, that we labor to get such a firm
constitution of soul, that neither through weakness of understanding, nor
through foolish affection we endanger our selves to hang on men, and so to
bring our consciences in bondage to them. We account the yoke of Bishops to
have been a grievous yoke, and that justly; if Hierome be not mistaken, it was
first occasioned by this sin of glorying in men; Com on Tit. 1.
and it may be feared least this sin may occasion the keeping it on our necks:
for is it not alleged, take them away, men will follow whom they please, so
many schisms will be as Preachers? Any of these reasons, much more all of
them, should be a sufficient caveat unto you to warn you of this. I might
press this monition further, from the nature, causes and effects of this sin
before showed; but I will hasten to shut up all with a few directions to
prevent it.

1. Endeavor to have ample thoughts of Christ, his eminency, his fulness;
the more high thy thoughts be of Christ, the lower will thy conceits be of men,
the larger comprehension thou have of him, the less will thou doat on his
servants. A Courtier when he is by himself draws men's eyes after him, but
when he is with the King he is scarcely observed. If thou behold Christ as the
great Prophet of the Church, in whom are hid all the treasures of wisdom and
knowledge, Christ will only be gloried in his servants only respected as his
instruments and attendants. Remember that he is made to us of God, wisdom,
righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption; that as it is written, he
that glories might glory in the Lord, 1 Cor. 1. 30, 31.

2. Have a right esteem of all true Pastors and Teachers as the Ministers of
Christ, so the Apostle requires, 1 Cor. 4. 1. Let a man account of us as
Ministers of Christ, and Stewards of the mysteries of God, neither make more of
them nor less. Hear them as messengers from Christ, not for their singular
abilities, but for their message sake; respect them not only for their
excellent wit and elocution, but for their faithfulness: note and retain not
only fine speeches, but every solid truth, that is from God, least while thou
taste the dainty sauce, thou neglect the solid nourishment of thy soul;
whoever he be that preaches Christ truly, hear him gladly, and receive him
respectfully for his Masters sake.

3. Make a fruitful use of the gifts of every true Teacher, get somewhat by
all, and then thou will not glory in some, and disparage others; if thou did
profit by them, God should have glory and every Minister due esteem. It is in
truth the vanity of the hearers minds, their fulness that makes them slight
Mannah, and cry for Quails, that they cannot affect a good Teacher if he be
not excellent; the despising of the Teacher, is commonly used as a cloak of
their own unteachablenesse and disobedience, get an hungry soul after the
word, and then every wholesome truth will be welcome to thee: Remember that
every gift of the Spirit is given to profit withal, and should be received to
that end.

4. Lastly, Be well grounded in knowledge, and constant in practice of what
thou have learned: Have thy senses exercised in the word of righteousness,
that thou may be able to discern both good and evil, Heb. 5. 14. and so
thou shall be fitted to profit by every godly Preacher, and inslave thy self
to none, nor glory in man, but in the Lord.

FINIS.

