HIS MAJESTY'S MOST GRACIOUS MESSAGE TO THE Speaker of the House of Peers: To
be communicated to both Houses of Parliament, and to the Scots Commissioners.
ALSO, Colonel Hammonds Declaration concerning the Kings Majesty's coming into
the Isle of Wight, and for those which shall come thither from foreign parts.
TOGETHER, With His Majesty's Speech and Propositions, at His coming into the
said Island, several conferences between His Majesty, Colonel Hammond, and
others. Certified in a Letter, sent from an Officer out of the said Island.

Imprimatur,

Gilbert Mabbot.

LONDON, Printed by Bernard Alsop, and are to be sold at the royal Exchange in
Cornhill. 1647.

A Letter From a chief Officer in the Isle of Wight concerning the passages
between the King and Colonel Hammond since his Mejesties coming thither.
Sir,
YEsterday the Governor of this Isle Collonell Hamond, dispached a second
messenger to the Parl. with letters, by whom I thought to have sent this
enclosed; which nevertheless I hope will come as seasonable to you now, only
I shall come short in this, that will not come time enough to bring the first
intelligence of the Kings coming hither; which I dare aver to be altogether
unexpected by the Governor or any others here, and the manner as strange unto
us; for as Colonel Hamond was going from Carisbrook Castle to Newport, where
he was to meet diverse Officers and Gentlemen of the Isle, Sir John Barkley and
M. Ashburnham came riding suddenly to him, and acquainted him that his Majesty
had an apprehension that he could not stay at Hampton Court, without apparent
hazard to His Royal Person, as His Majesty was credibly informed; and
therefore thought good to come away from thence, and had made choice of that
place, desiring to put himself into his hands for protection and safety, which
His Majesty was the rather moved to do, for that he was a member of the Army,
from which he had not withdrawn himself, if he had not understood that some did
plot and combine against him to take away his life: And after some other
discourse between M. Ashburnham and Colonel Hamond, the Colonel desired to
know where His Majesty was at that time in Person, and M. Ashburnham and Sir
John Barkley did both affirm that they left His Majesty at a place called
Stichfield, near the waterside in Hampsheir, whereupon the Governor told them
that if His Majesty were pleased to come over into that Island, he would
undertake to protect him from violence, and do his best endeavor to preserve
his Royal Person in honor, safety, and freedom: Then Colonel Hamond sent
for Colonel Basket the Governor of Cawse Castle, who with some other officers
attended the Governor over the water; and when they came to His Majesty, the
Governor and the rest first kissed his hand, and then His Majesty spoke to him
to this effect.

Hamond, after an intolerable restraint to my Person at Hampton Court, I found
there was a further design against my Person, by some which insinuated
themselves into diverse Regiments of the Army, and having an earnest desire of
the serling of the Kingdom in such sort as might best conduce to a lasting
Peace throughout my Dominions; and not to be an instrument of stirring up a new
war; I have thought good to come in this place with confidence of your
fidelity in protecting my Person from danger, until by such addresses as shall
be made unto us by the Parliament, there be a mutual agreement concluded, and
our Kingdom settled.

To which Colonel Hamond declaring that he tendered His Majesty's Person above
his own life, and would not fail in doing his utmost in fulfilling His
Majesty's just desires (in relation to the orders and directions which he
should receive from the Parliament:) So His Majesty attended by the Governor
Colonel Hamond, Sir John Barclus, M. Ashburnham, and the other officers of the
Isle came over the water, and went to Cawse-Castle, when according to the time
there was to prapare, he was as Royally entertined as the Isle could afford.

Since which time his Majesty has rode abroad a hunting in the Park, which is
very plentifully stored with Deer, and his Majesty is gallantly accomodated
with all things, which is done with the more convenience and better facility,
for that the Govern. had newly settled his house, and (though a Batchellor) had
placed his household officers fit for his part and place; he has also sent for
his mother which lives at Cherse, and is expected here the next week; he has
also written several letters to the Parliament, not only to acquaint them of
the manner of the Kings coming hither, but also for to understand their
pleasure therein, and for provision of money and such persons, he decides about
His Majesty as may be most for his honor and content; to which end at least
some Divines, and three or four of the bedchamber which attended at
Hampton Court are desired, as also some Commissioners from the Parliament, for
the better carrying on of things so as may be most acceptable and
bestwarranted: In the mean time the Governor has a special care to keep
Delinquents of that Isle from having any free converse to his Majesty, and it
is declared at all the Ports, that none shall be admitted the Isle to come to
His Majesty from foreign parts, without approbation from the Parliament of one
or both Kingdoms: The other day as His Majesty was walking abroad, he asked
the Governor certain questions concerning the strength of the Isle, and the
number of inhabitants etc. to all which the Governor gave His Majesty
satisfaction; and truly I must confess ingeniously, I think here are men
sufficient with the benefit of (the inacessablenesse to the place by nature) to
preserve and defend it against all attempts whatsoever, but as yet the
Governors Regiment is not come thither: I the rather make mention of the
strength of this place to give satisfaction to that which may be infused by
some to breed further fears in those whom they would persuade to believe that
his Majesty is in danger of a foreign Nation which indeed is so frivalous an
objection, that it scrace deserves the remembrance much less the answering.

It is said that the Kins goes to morrow to Newport being the chief town
about the midst of the Isle but returns again to Cawse Castle, Our
expectations are now to hear what the Parliament will order concerning him,
The first messenger is returned and reports that they have voted that his
Majesty shall recide here a time for safety, which we are very glad to hear of,
for surely he cannot be in a safer place, nor more convenient, as affairs of
the Kingdom now stand, where a free intercourse may be had between him and the
Parliament, his residing here, may also hinder the raising of any new parties,
and frustrate the designs which were hatching by some, so that the like
opportunity for settling the Kingdoms peace, to the satisfying of all parts is
without the danger of a new war, is not thought to have been yet offered unto
us, for a blessing on which is the prayers of

Your assured friend, H. Tracey.
Cawse Castle, Nov. 17. 1647.
Postscript.
Sir
SInce the writing hereof there has been some means used for Mr. Maull and
others to be admitted to attend his Majesty, which I understand the Governor
will readily allow of, so soon as the pleasure of the house is known,
touching which business be has sent to the Parliament already. This morning
there was overtaken, which was landed here, one who is suspected to be a person
not fit to reside here: for that he seemed not to be able to give a good
account of his coming hither, or fidelity to the Parliament; he is to be
examined by the Governor, and then unless he can show a just cause for his
coming hither, he will be forced to depart again; for Colonel Hammond as he
declares himself that he will protect his Majesty's person does likewise
declare his realty to the Cause in which he has engaged in behalf of the
whole Kingdom, and assure your self will in this buisinesse approve himself a
gentleman which will not recide from his former principles, but a man full of
integrity, and looks more on the settling of this distracted Kingdom then on
any private interest, which if God be pleased to make him an Instrument of, he
desires it may redownd to the praise of him by whose providence his Majesty
came hither.

November. the 17. His Majesty sent a Letter to the house of Peers directed to
the Speaker of the Lords house pro tempore, to be communicated to both Houses
of Parliament, and to the Scots Commissioners. His Majesty in the said letter
expresses much affection toward the settling of the Kingdoms Peace. Also His
Majesty desires both Houses, that they would effectually proceed on in sending
the Propositions to him; and withal that he might have admittance to come to
London to treat with his Parliament, and His Majesty will give ample
satisfaction for the settling of a firm and well grounded Peace. This for
certain is the effect of His Majesty's letter, which was dated in this Island
of Wight, and

Signed CHARLES REX.
November. 17 1647.

