The Visible PORCH Or known Entrance into a Church, or Christian Fellowship.
THere is a Divine Relation between Persons teaching, and People taught;
wherein consists the entity or being of a Church: the making known that
Relation, contains the visibility of that Church. Know therefore, that we
Ministers and People desire to walk together in the unity of the Spirit, and
bond of peace, under these manifestations.
MOst manifest to us it is, That the glory of God in Christ Jesus, is the first
thing whereunto all our Christian Faith, Duties, Worship, and even the
salvation of our Souls appertains; And that the Holy Spirit by the sacred
Scriptures makes known unto us, how the Lord has, and will be glorified in all
those that draw near unto him.

We therefore manifest and delare our Desires, to receive and believe all
things contained in the sacred Scriptures; and by the knowledge of the Letter,
to attain the spiritual sense: and that also, not so much in the single
discoveries appropriate to some peculiar matter, as in the entire and more
comprehensive evidences; comparing Scripture with Scripture, thereby to come
nearest unto the mind of the Lord therein revealed.

It is manifest unto us, That there must be a time and place for the holding
forth these Scriptures: we desire therefore, to receive the Lord's day as the
necessary time, and the Temple as the necessary place for our convening and
meeting together; That then, or there, none of us be negligently or willingly
absent from the Duties of Prayer and Praises, and hearing the Word read and
taught; nor from the Sacraments of Baptism and the Lord's Supper, when they are
celebrated. That in all these Duties the Lord may be worshipped by us in Spirit,
(for the inward man;) and for so much of the outward man as must needs attend,
that it be in truth, putting no confidence therein, as to our selves; nor
giving offense thereby, as to others.

We manifest our desires to put a difference between matters essential to
salvation, and such as are but accidental thereunto.

Concerning essential matters, either of Faith of Manners; if any of us do
offend therein by Opinion or Practice, our desire is, that first a private and
gentle admonition be administered by them to whom the offense is first made
known; that a Christian satisfaction may be either given or received: But if
not attained, then the matter may be made known to our Minister, that he, with
such others as he please to take with him, may repair to the offendant, and
with the like favorable admonition, labor to reduce him: which second
endeavor, if it become ineffectual, then (as the last remedy) the matter be
made known to the Church: and in case of continued obstinacy, the name of the
offendant may be expunged from this fellowship; that others be not partakers
with his sin.

But concerning accidental matters, which a Christian may receive or reject
without peril of salvation, wherein the Scriptures appear not clear unto us; we
desire not to usurp the Tribunal of Christ, but that every one walk humbly and
inoffensively therein; that matter of this nature also may be done by us in
decency and in order.

The Ministers Subscription.
I desire, as a Minister of Jesus Christ, to take heed unto my self and
Doctrine, that I may save my self and others; and to watch for the Souls of
those more nearly united, that I may give account thereof with joy.

The Peoples Subscription.
UNtil clearer and fuller Regulations may be presented to us, and we fitted for
them, we desire to walk under these premised; not forsaking the assembling of
our selves together, as the manner of some is.

By Thomas Tookey Minister of Harwich.
Printed at London for Richard Moon, at the seven Stars in Paul's Churchyard,
near the great North-door.


