THE NAKED TRUTH Laid open, Against what is amiss: OR, May be mis-interpreted,
IN THOSE TWO BOOKS: The one, entitled, The Foot out of the Snare; And the
other, The Snare Broken.

Together with a Word of Invitation to all who are estranged to the True Faith,
that they would hear and receive the Word of Truth, which makes free the Israel
of GOD.

Set forth by me John Toldervy.

Romans 9. 31, 32, 33. But Israel which followed after the Law of Righteousness,
has not attained to the Law of Righteousness: Wherefore because they sought it
not by Faith, but as it wore by the works of the Law, for they stumbled at that
stumbling stone: As it is written, behold, I lay, in Sion a Stumbling stone,
and a Rock of Offense; and whosoever believes on him shall not be ashamed.
London, Printed for G. Calvert, at the Black-spread Eagle, at the West End of
Paul's, 1656.

The Naked Truth laid open, against what is amiss, or may be mis-interpreted,
in these two Books: The one, entitled, The Foot out of the Snare: And the
other, The Snare broken.
FOrasmuch, as there has appeared some secrecy in me, in that work which
first I appeared in to the World, entitled, The Foot out of the Snare.
By which, the true end and scope of my purpose, in the greatest part of what I
have discovered, is much clouded in obscurity from the general sight of men:
and also, for that I have stood up in the Defense of this my Vanity, in that of
The Snare broken.
By which, much prejudice may attend that work, which the Prince of
Righteousness is now in this our day bringing to pass, that his Name might be
known in the Earth, a Deliverer from the Bonds of Iniquity, a Leader Captivity
Captive, a Redeemer of ^i^ Chosen, which has long lain in Death, by the
disobedience of a Rebellious people: I say, having not been found faithful to
that Witness of God in my own Conscience, which condemns all deceit; and
being much rebuked and condemned for what I have done, I am constrained in this
further Discovery, that the Simple might be undeceived, and the Envious might
be reproved.

When first I was persuaded to write, I had principally 4. things in my Eye:
First, my design was to discover the emptiness, and the vanity of all that
Ministry, and of all those Ways, and Forms of Worship, which generally is
upheld amongst us by the dark mind of those who are blind in their
understandings; by which the people, who are in darkness, are mourished in
that condition, and the Seed of the Righteous, which creates a new heart, and
redeems out of sin, is kept in bondage. And, for this purpose, I began with a
Discovery of what I was, and how I was led, before I came amongst those people,
who go under the name of Quakers. where, I say, I was for diverse years full of
zeal led forth in love to seek after the knowledge of God and Christ; for which
cause I sought, if that I could find, those ways and those means, which were
most useful for the clearing of my Conscience, that I might walk in unity with
God by a holy and innocent life: to which end, I said (in my persuasion) I was
led forth with much fervency of spirit, after those teachers which were esteemd
of amongst the primest Professors, as men enlightened with the spirit of God: in
which way I labored, had there been a possibility to apprehend the true
knowledge and mind of God: but not finding a possibility in that way, to
apprehend the thing sought for, but instead thereof, unstability, and diversity
of Opinions, confusion in Societies, things which are at perfect enmity with
God, who is one Spirit, and cannot be divided; I said, I left them as they
were, and all that ever I received from them; and sought further, if that I
might find the way of Redemption, from under that heavy burden, which lay upon
me: in which seeking, (as I have spoken) I found such who declared against all
sin whose order and manner of teaching, and Duties, were united, complete in
one, they being the fruits of one Mind by which they were joined in one Spirit,
and so judges and witnesses for God, against all those false Christ's, and false
Prophets, who were going forth into the world, whose doctrine was of Man, who
(having slain the Witness) knew not the Word of Life; therefore incapable of
edifying the People, and so Ministers of the Letter, and not of the Spirit.

Here, my purpose was, to extinguish them, who are ever learning the people,
and themselves, and yet never able to know the truth; and withal, to confirm
those who appeared, in such a Witness against all sin, whom I concluded were
the people of God; whose doctrine and life, I have not denied [by words] in any
particular, of all what I then discovered, except in those things of civil
Expressions, and Carriages, which otherwise I called Ceremonies.

A second thing, which my mind was directed in, was, to invite, or persuade
such who were strangers to those people, and their ways, who are called (of
men) Quakers, That they should inquire after that Truth which is professed by
them; for which end, I discovered them as such who were united in one mind, and
so acted on in their duties, whose Ministry was one, being guided therein by
one Spirit, etc. and then I relate a Discourse ministered by one of those
people, with the effects which that Discourse wrought upon my Spirit; together,
with what I had received before from those people; as the Discourse holds soul;
also of my orderly forbearance, until I had received a more clear
understanding, before I complied with them; in which time, I received a further
Witness: And so I go on, discovering of their Judgment; without which
knowledge, there is none can ever come to see the Redemption of their Souls.
These things being considered, I was persuaded, that something of that end
might be effected, for which purpose they were discovered.

Having thus laid open my Understanding, I began in the third place, to give
warning unto all, who may be persuaded, to receive the Word of Truth; that when
convinced in their understandings, where that Word of Life, which redeems out
of sin, is to be found: That they consider and examine in themselves where
withal they are led, that they run not before they are sent, but to abide in
the watch, that so they lose not their Guide, and bring in Darkness upon their
Spirit: And for this cause, I discovered, what evil attended me through the
hastiness of my mind, in that I gave not heed to that obedience whereunto I was
called; which evil I wholly took upon my self, as being the work of myself:
with purpose therein, to unvail that Darkness, which was upheld, in many, by
their misunderstanding of the cause of those things, which generally had
passed abroad concerning me,

A fourth end, was to discover those things, practiced by those people who are
in that way: in which I conceived there was no evil in the not performance
thereof, And in respect of which things only, I my self did separate from
them, which things were none other, but a denial of those things, which
generally is called, Civil Carriage to Civil Persons.

These four grounds, being the chiefest ends of my purpose in writing, I was
well satisfied in what work I had done, though yet I appeared a transgressor (in
respect to my self) for which cause having received knowledge, that my ends are
generally frustrated, I am constrained (as I have said) in this further
appearance to the world.

Now that transgression (in respect to my self) was thus, in the consideration
of what condition I had brought my self unto, since first I became affected
with those people, who are called of men Quakers: My mind was directed (as I
have said) for the answering of those ends which I have related, in which work
I was glad; in that I was of any sufficiency to appear therein; but yet I would
scarcely have appeared to the world, as one who should discover himself in such
a work, that I might not be looked upon as one my self, with those people
amongst whom I was, lest the same reproach and loss of friendship from men,
etc. which once was my reward for the obedience of that faith, which the world
knows not, I say, lest self should thus have bin destroyed, I sought secretly
to discover my mind something in obscurity; but yet I made provision, that
such who were not engaged, but would read and understand my witness with a
single eye, that such might see the end of my mind, according as before is
discovered, which thing was unto me for the present, a satisfaction in what I
had done.

But yet further considering the strangeness of that Relation, which declares
of those delusions which the evil spirit in me guided me in subjection unto;
and also considering what prejudice had befallen me by those many reproaches
which has passed abroad concerning me, since my departure from those people:
together, with what loss of kindred and acquaintance had befallen me, since I
came amongst them: considering these things, I was much provoked, time after
time, to seek for some help, now in this my appearance to the world; but seeing
this provocation was from the tempter, I was fully persuaded for some time,
after I had writ, that none should have the least sight of what I had done,
until it was discovered to the world; but upon a further consideration, that I
might not appear ridiculous to men of serious minds, because of the
strangeness of what I had related, I was persuaded to desire a credible
witness of what I had so spoken, from some persons of sober minds, whose
moderation was something known to me, though some there are, whose Names were
made use of against my good will,) but that the people for their sakes, might
not understand and otherwise then I intended, I was led forth to discover more
plainly the cause of those distractions which I then declared, as the effect of
the evil One in me: Before which discovery, I spoke again of the darkness, and
the emptiness of that Ministry, which is of the outward Law of the Letter
under which Ministry I could never enjoy a true peace, etc. for which cause I
said, I departed from that way and Ministry having received knowledge where the
truth indeed was to be found: which knowledge, I received from those people
before named; and so having related the effects, which this knowledge should
have wrought upon me, I came to discover how I erred from that work of Faith,
wherein I was called, which first began with the Creatures Joy and Covenant and
forward zeal, which ran before the fear, and so led forth before the true
light, by which darkness was brought in: in which Darkness the Disputer was
raised to life, and exalted above the light of the Son formed in the shape of
a true light; and so delight got the power by which the true obedience was
lost, and so the Simple was deceived; and having thus done, I concluded in the
praise of that way, in which those people are led forth in, which leads to the
perfect Truth; which way and truth is but one, which the world knows not:
neither can they know, until they come to walk in it.

These things being laid open, my Judgment was, that although those names were
used in my book, yet the people would have considered the thing, as it was
discovered from me, and not in a general sense, as a thing proceeding from
their Judgments, whose Names were unto it, and so another thing than it speaks.

But now I am mistaken in my Judgment; and on the contrary, a Division amongst
men concerning the thing, such who are affected in the way of those, whose
Names appear in what I have done, they and these who have appeared, receive to
themselves a satisfaction of that, which the thing speaks not of, but condemns;
as also it condemns them and their way.

A second sort there are, in whom there is no prejudice unto the one, or unto
the other, but receives the thing as it is singly, and they give witness, that
surely a thing could not have appeared more (in such a case as this was) on the
behalf of those people, who go under the name of Quakers, than that did. And a
third sort have been unsatisfied, not knowing whether it speaks for the one, or
for the other.

These things I received knowledge of, time after time, from diverse whose
minds were thus different in the thing: but in the consideration, that there
were such who saw my mind, and meaning as it was, and so received my witness.
I abode hitherto silent, judging, that if such who were engaged, would leave
their vanity, they might see and understand as others did: and that such, who
say they could not understand the true meaning thereof, might leave the thing
as it was.

Now James Naylor, that person from whom there was discovered in answer unto
the thing, by what I now am given to understand, was otherwise minded, in
respect of some things, than what I at first understood of him, which was thus.
When having read his Book, and seeing much of the Spirit of Judgment upon me,
and all those who appeared with me, and that we were by him united in one, as
such who were joined in enmity against the light of Christ; and that he looked
upon them as one with me, and I with them, in the whole of what was discovered,
and so secret smiters against the truth: the thing being something in
obscurity-Seeing these things, I was moved, and sought to find what should be
the cause why he appeared in such a Spirit; for I saw that either he was much
mistaken, or else I was greatly deceived in what I had done; but when having
searched again, and again, I could not see that his judgment was true upon me,
except in that, of my receiving other witness to what I had discovered than my
own: the extent of which deed, I saw, as to me, little evil in; for that I had
discovered my Witness, according as I have before related, in which, if well
considered, there was no advantage for them, or any that might affect them:
Neither could I see his Judgment to be true, in some things, concerning those
who appeared with me, in that; he concluded them as one with me in what I had
done and as privy to what was contained in the Title or the Epistle. Now these
things being so by what I knew concerning their knowledge of the Title, or the
Epistle, or could apprehend concerning the other, I was much troubled
concerning him, and that work he appeared in: upon which, I considered with my
self what I were best to do, if to return an answer, or if to let it rest
silent: in which consideration, (my spirit being moved) I was persuaded to
return an Answer: for as yet I was displeased, in that I saw my designs were
wholly broken in many things, which in obscurity I had discovered with purpose
to advance the truth (though I would scarcely have been seen in so doing) and
so I was presented as a person unworthy, and my work, as confusion, though
other things, spoken in more plainness, appeared for me as a true Witness.

Now, having some advantage for the effecting of this work, and the more, by
some clouded expressions; which yet being discovered as my mind, that the Just
might not be condemned, I was therein satisfied, and so directed in a dirtle
anger against the person James Naylor, though (at the present) I thought I was
guided therein, by obedience to the Just in me, in that I made some provision
to secure the people and their way, though I judged his person, and condemned
his deed: But when after, what I had thus done was published to the world, my
mind being settled; in reading one of them seriously, I was smitten in my
judgment, and much reproved, for that I saw an envious spirit had appeared in
me: Then was there given me clearly to see the right mind in which James Naylor
was led, in the answering what I had discovered: by which I saw, truly, much of
what he spoke, to be another thing, then what I formerly apprehended, and his
Judgments, in a great measure, to be established in truth; for, in that I spoke
in obscurity, I saw I laid a stumbling block before the truth; and in that I
engaged others, this my obscurity became a snare to those, by whom they were
affected: and so I receiving their testimony, though not one with them in the
thing, nor they one with me: yet in respect of the end, which is effected by
their means, I was overcome, and so became one with them, in that end which the
thing it self does condemn: And thus (through my vanity) we all became secret
smiters against the truth; which things being made known, I could do no less
but discover that the burden of my spirit might be removed, and that the Just
might not suffer by my means, knowing there is a time in which all secrets
shall be laid open, and every deed shall receive its own reward: Therefore have
I rather chosen to own the Condemnation, that the truth might have its free
course without interruption, and to pass by what reproach might be cast upon
me, for that I have appeared herein, knowing that unto the truth I am made
manifest, by whom I am witnessed, that if by any means I could have put by this
work, I should have been much glad (with respect to my self) therein: But where
the blame is, my due, I must receive it (from all) as my due, and therein rest
silent: And for that deed of engaging the Ministers, I am sorry (as I have
said) that I should be so foolishly led forth as I was therein, both in respect
to them, and also to the thing in hand, by which my whole purpose (having
appeared something in obscurity) generally became void, and so deceived my self
and them also.

But now I would freely speak my mind, and utter words in knowledge, that the
just might receive its own due; yet not in the least envy, with respect to one
or the other; but in plainness, as I have received: Therefore, my desire is,
that none would receive to themselves any offense in this work: but if in any,
(as I have before said) in what formerly I have done; for verily (as I have
spoken) oftentimes I was diligent in seeking in those ways, which the primest
Professors of these Times, who were led by the Letter, were guided in, I ran
from one to another, from Mountain to Hill, I sought to find, but could not:
only I increased in wisdom (the work of my own labor) and this wisdom,
being of the flesh, was pleasant and delightful, and so I thought it was the
Mystery of the Spirit: But yet still this wisdom was unto me but little
satisfaction, though I labored very strictly in obedience to what I had
learned from the Law of the Letter, which was the end of that Ministry, by
which I was guided; for there was something yet in me that was unsatisfied,
which lay under a great burden, which all the wisdom and knowledge in my self,
and in those my Learners, was not, in the least, able to satisfy: Yet, in that
time, I could not see the cause of these things; but when after I came to hear
those people who are called (of men) Quakers, in a short time I was clearly
convinced, and given to see, the end of all my former labors, and the cause of
my troubled spirit: for they being redeemed out of the wisdom, out of the
imaginations of the brain, which is sensual, and of the flesh, etc. they spoke
by and from that Spirit of Life in them, by which they were redeemed; and so
their words, being from the Life, reached to the Life, the Seed of the
Righteous, which lay under the dark Mind burdened, and groaning for a
deliverance. And here was that Mystery that is of God, which ministers to the
Spirits in Prison: Which being made known, I was not in the least able to
gainsay: And then I saw, indeed, that Word of Faith which reveals the
everlasting Gospel to be near in the Mouth and in the Heart; and that
Circumcision which is of God, was of the heart, in the Spirit, and not in the
Letter; whose praise was not of Man, but of God. But now for any to judge, that
all, or any of those distractions, and works of deceit, which are delcared by
me, as the effects of my disobedience to the light; I say, for any to judge of
them otherwise than they are, and to cast them as a reproach upon the light, it
is vain and evil, and a thing contrary to my whole mind: for that (as I have
spoken) I dare not, neither can I say, but that the whole cause of all those
evils, was of my self: But though my sufferings was great, when after I came in
this way, yet I saw much good was the end of all, Peace and Rest in Spirit,
according to the measure of Grace received, which I never could see or attain
unto, by all those means, and in all those ways which formerly I was led forth
in: But to speak in truth (that the Just might receive its own) wherein I have
at any time withdrawn from that grace I then lived in, therein I have refused
the good, and chose the evil, which works I must acknowledge, as the works of
my self in the hour of judgment.

And now, I hope that none will judge of me, as an Offense to the Law of
Righteousness, but as one that establishes the Law in Righteousness (though
much against my own self-will) and have I chosen to acknowledge that thing
which is rejected of amongst men, because my Conscience bears me witness,
and seals to the truth thereof? I hope men will not be so vain to deny, but
that I have most reason in thus doing. I honor and respect all men, as they
are men: but should I honor and respect that in man, either in their Ministry,
or Practice; which I know assuredly in my own Conscience, is not of God, but of
themselves: I say verily, should I do so, I should be condemned of my self, and
for that deed of mine, in engaging other persons then my self in what I
formerly did, I looked otherwise upon the thing then it did effect: my mind was
principally to receive a civil favor from them (with respects to my self, as
I have before spoken) and not for the dishonor of the ways of Truth: And for
that I appeared in enmity to those things discovered by James Naylor, against
that end, which their appearance with me has accomplished, for that I so
appeared, I was mistaken: For now I see his mind was one and the same with what
first was in me: wherefore, I can no less but deny that my mistake, and receive
the Judgment which I did for so doing cast upon him, as due unto my self; and
did I in displeasure call him a false Prophet, Corruption, and a body of
deceit, etc. I must unspeak what I so spoke, and deny my self therein: Yet
however, my mind was what I so called him, to extend no further then the thing
in hand, for I knew another life in him, whose name is true, by whom the whole
body of darkness in all the ways of self-worship amongst men is seen, judged,
and condemned: and for those things of which I spoke in my first book though in
obscurity, (with purpose that I might be excused in the sight of men) which
were discovered in judgment upon me, by one of those people amongst whom I was,
by which I was denied as one of them, when first I departed from them, that the
light of truth might be left inexcusable, I must confess the judgment (in a
great measure) there in was true, I was fallen from that by which I was
convinced, which was the life of righteousness in spirit, and in power, which
being seen by those who abode in the faith, I was refused in so doing, (though
yet unto that eye with which the Professors of the world are led, I should not
have appeared a transgressor) and when it was seen of me that light in my
Conscience, unto which was discovered, was made manifest, was one with the
greatest part of the thing discovered, so that I had not a word for my self,
when the witness was made known unto me.

Yet as to those things which I called the fruits of Civility, and indifferent
things, in which I declared, there was no sin, I saw not at that time, neither
do I yet see (if used in moderation) that evil is the cause in the practice of
them, yet however, seeing my weakness, I will not be much confident concerning
them, though my Conscience at the present may not condemn them, neither would I
that any should follow my example therein, except they see a freedom in
themselves; for a time was when all the world could not have persuaded me in
the practices of any of them, my Conscience being my witness in defense against
all the persuasions of man and now whether I have erred or no, I know not. When
first I laid them down, it was in the observation of others, and not by any
Command I saw in my self; but when after some time of my continuance, in the
way and work whereunto I was called, I was verily persuaded, that all those
things I laid down in the imitation, was not then performed in the imitation;
but by a Command from the witness raised in me, in my own Conscience; but when
I was guided to take them up again, (as I have spoken) I considered the first
cause by which I was led in the laying of them down; and finding the deed was
wrought in my will, (being in the imitation) I was a little provoked to take
them up again, and the rather, because I saw no place of Scripture, which
directly condemned them, though I could not see any practice of them, by (any,
who appeared in Scripture: which persuasion for the present, for what I can
say, was out of knowledge, though at fifth I laid them down in the imitation;
but when I had taken them up for a little time, my spirit was free in the using
of them, as though I never had denied them; and now if I have done well, I know
not, but if evil, I must once again know the Judgment.

These things was I moved to write, not out of evil, with respect to one, or
unto other person or thing, yea truly I have not in the least been partial
toward my self, but my whole mind were directed, that I might remove the
burden of my spirit; and freely out of good will toward men, and that for the
sake of truth, whose light is made known, that men might see and understand the
things that belong unto their peace: now in this day of everlasting love. And
now what shall I say of my self? have I appeared an evil example, one tossed
to and fro, led aside by vanity, a burden to the Lord, and his ways of truth
and righteousness, a stumbling block to the simple, an offense to all, have I
thus done? I am disquieted with my self, and good had it been, that these
things had not been so; but now in that I have thus done, as I deny my self
therein, so also I should desire, that none would therein receive me; but in
that I have here spoken the words of truth, as they are in the truth (though
much against my will) suffer me a little, that I may prevail in that I have
thus done.

The Scriptures they declare of the mind of God, and of the practice of the
Saints, in which there is made known the whole Law, by which so far as men are
subjected unto it, they are found in the moderation, in temperance, in
chastity, in a degree of faithfulness to God and to man; and this is good; but
yet man (being fallen from God) is not redeemed by this obedience of the
outward Law, into that state from whence he is fallen, as it is written, But
that no man is justified by the Law, in the sight of God, Gal. 3. 11, 12.
it is evident, for the just shall live by faith, and the Law is not of faith,
but the man that does them, shall live in them; but the Scriptures they declare
of him, who is the Redeemer, and where he is to be sound; but they are not him,
which is in the month, and in the heart, the word of faith. Moses was a figure,
but he was not the Christ. Christ Jesus appeared in the visible, and was true
in himself, yet the spirit was not given until he was glorified: Now that Law
that is of faith in the spirit, that judges and condemns the Serpent, in the
root whence he sprang, which faith, whomsoever receives, will see that promised
seed which breaks the head of the Serpent, to be near in the month, and in
the Heart; and so the ministration of death being passed upon the unjust, the
spirit is renewed until the election be raised to life, unto which the promise
is two, and so that state witnessed, of which Paul spoke to the Colossians the
third and the third; For ye are dead, and Your life is bid with Christ in God,
by which obedience the spirit is renewed, they being the fruits of faith, There
is therefore now no condemnation to them Romans 8. 1. 2.
which are in Christ Jesus, who walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit;
for the Law of the spirit of life in Christ Jesus, has made me free from the
Law of sin and death, Gal. 3. 23. 24.
But before Faith came, we were kept under the Law, shut up unto the Faith,
which should afterward be revealed: wherefore the Law was our Schoolmaster, to
bring us unto Christ, that we might be justified by faith; but now they that
are not yet come to the hearing of faith are strangers to these things, Paul
was very strict in this profession: as touching his Conversation amongst men
blameless, he profited in Gal. 1. 14.
the Jewish Religion above many his equals, being more exceedingly zealous, of
the Traditions of the Fathers; yet all this while he was a stranger to the true
faith, until it pleased God to reveal his Son in him; and thus it is Gal. 1. 1.
516.
with all who are led by the letter, until they come to see Christ Jesus
brought to light in them; yet should I say, there is no other way under Heaven,
by which men can come to know their Redeemer, but by that light, with which all
are enlightened, Christ Jesus the light of the World, should I so say as I do,
vanity and darkness unto which what I so speak is unknown, would deny me in so
speaking; but my words are true, by which I may not be deceived, knowing they
come forth, from the word of truth, I have a little tasted of both ways, of
the good, and of the evil; but really I found the foolishness of preaching, to
be another thing then the wisdom of flesh, and base things, and things of mean
degree, to be another thing, then what is in the exaltation, though never so
lovely; but here is the misery, darkness is passed over, and so good is called
evil, and evil good: let not people believe general reports, but call to
mind a despised people, those were they in all generations; but if any thing
heard and seen in particular, may appear truly to be evil, then may it be
refused; but if good, why then are men so vain, that they will not see, that so
they may understand.

Abraham was taken from his first Habitation, and from his Genesis 12. 5.
kindred, and sent by revelation into a strange Land, in which obedience he
received the promises: now the promises are made unto the seed, not as of many,
but as of one, which seed is Gal. 3. 16.
Christ. I will bless them that bless thee, and curse them that curse thee,
and in thee shall all the Families of the Earth be blessed, not as of Ishmael,
but of Isaac, neither yet not of the Law but of Genesis 12. 3. 21. 10. Gal. 3. 18.
-- 3. Heb. 7. 28. Romans 5. 10.
promise; but the Law was added because of transgression, until the seed
should come unto whom the promise was made, against which inheritance there is
no Law, as it is written, but the word of the Oath which was since the Law,
makes the Son which is consecrated for evermore, and here is it now not of
works, but of grace.

Man being run out from God into the transgression, he has broken the Law, the
fruit was pleasant and delightful, he feels it is pleasant, (the daughters of men
were fair) and now he knows good and evil, he is under the Curse, he hides
himself, he is ashamed, and thus (having denied the obedience required, death
is passed over that seed created by God in him a living soul, and so that
breath of life which came forth from God, and breaths after himself is hid in
darkness, and now being lost in this fallen estate, the same nature in him,
which at first joined with the Serpent, feeding upon the Tree of knowledge,
seeks for a justification (having transformed it self into the outward forms of
worship and appearances of things) and thus the eye with which men should see,
being put out, the evil day is put a far off, and the good day rejected.

But now the Grace of God has appeared, by which is made Romans 10. 18, 19. Romans
10. 16. 17. Romans 10. 8, 9.
known the everlasting Gospel of Peace but yet who has believed our report. So
then faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the word of God which word is
near in the mouth, and in the heart, and here is the end of the Covenant, That
if thou shall confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and believe in thy heart
that God has raised him from the dead, thou shall be saved. Now to confess
with the mouth, and believe with the heart, is not only a belief in the mind,
what the Scriptures declare of him, that he is risen, and so a confession from
that belief; but to confess and believe to the Resurrection of him in us to
increase Col. 3. 1. 2. 19. 12. 2. -- 23.
with the increase of God; to the death and Resurrection of Christ, above the
rudiments of the world, and the Ordinances, which things have a shadow of the
wisdom, and so to witness what David spoke, I know my Redeemer lives, and what
Paul spoke I live, yet not I but Jesus Christ that lives in me. And now what
redeems but the precious blood of Christ, as of a Lamb Romans 5. 9.
(in all) from the foundation of the world: and this Redemption, Romans 5: 10.
Heb. 7. 25. Gal. 3. 21 Heb. 13. 8.
is perfock into the state in which man was first created, unto which there is
no death, by which regeneration, such who receive the power for the obedience
of the faith in Christ Jesus, boing born again of him, are become the seed of
Abraham, and so inhenitors of the promises, by Generation, and here is the
second Adam Christ Jesus brought forth into the World; but this is a Mystery to
such whose minds are without, who are yet seeking for a Christ without, whose
faith is without, whose obedience is without, who are estranged from the
discovery of Christ Jesus within, who is given of the Father, to work all our
works in as, and through us, that the praise might be alone of him that
calloth; but now it is of grace, and not by any works of righteousness, which
we have done, but through the obedience of faith in him, which is not of the
will; but by which the least motion to will is subdued, in its motion, which is
wrought in spirit, by obedience to the spirit, for the Resurrection of the
seed, which things the Adultress eye cannot see; but unto those that have
received the light, they are made manifest.

FINIS.

