TRUTH VINDICATED FROM The unjust accusations of the Independent Society, in
the City of NORWICH.

Wherein is proved, 1. That the Church of England is a true Church of Christ.
2. That it is a sin to separate from the true Church. 3. That the Independent
Society in the City of Norwich is no true Church of Christ. 4. Diverse reasons
and arguments used to persuade men not to separate from the Church of England
and join to their Society, showing the sinfulness of so doing.


By S.T.

Why gaddest thou about so much to change thy way?

Jer. 2.36. These be they who separate themselves,

Jude ver. 19. Where there have not been care in laying a good foundation at
the beginning, and where there is much liberty, what else can be expected but
division?

Mr. Buroughs Moses Choice, page 295, 296. Imprimatur,

Ia. Cranford.
Aug. 10. 1646.
LONDON, Printed by Tho: Harper, for Gifford Galton, and are to be sold at his
shop at the sign of the Kings Arms in the Poultrey. 1646.

To the Christian READER.
IN these our days under the notion of new light, many are led into
darkness, following those who rank things as they conceit, tyrannizing over
the minds of others, obtruding their errors on them as truths, so putting their
humor in the place of Gods Law: which is (as I conceive) the ground and cause
of all the Errors, Schisms, Factions, and divisions that are now amongst us;
But to prevent misleading, by following these night lights (or lantern men,
as they are vulgarly called) which will (if followed undoubtedly lead thee out
of the right way: I have written this following Treatise, and undertaken
therein, to deal with those of the City of Norwich, that would not be brought
under the power of any man, but would have liberty of conscience (as they call
it) that is to say, liberty to live and walk as their fancies move them, not
prescribing to themselves or others, any settled way or rule to walk by, but
every one to do what seems good in their own eyes, Judge. 17.6.
and therefore they are truly called Independents. I know it will be objected,
I once pleaded for them, and desired to be joined with them, why therefore do
I now write against them? I answer, before I examined their way, I did judge
them to be the true Church of Christ, but now I see it was my error so to
account of them, and I count it no shame to confess and revoke it as an
error, for the reasons mentioned in the following Treatise. And it is true, I
once desired of them to understand and know their way, with an intent (as I
told them) to join with them in it, if my judgment could close with them,
when I understood what was their way, (which they promised to acquaint me with)
at which time I did intimate to them, that it was my judgment, to hold
communion with other Christians, that were not of their Judgment and in their
way, although I should be a member of their society, which they seemed much to
dislike. I told them also (I intended) if I were admitted to declare in writing
my judgment, what I held concerning their way, which they took as great pride
in me to attempt, and were much displeased at me for it. So I waited for the
accomplishment of their promise, to acquaint me with their way, but it was
never performed, at which I was much troubled, that I might not declare mine
own judgment, and that they would not tell me theirs: I thought light should
not be put under a bushel, but on a Candlestick, that the way of God should
not be concealed, but revealed, that it might be practiced. Upon these
thoughts, I have examined their way, and I find them (as corrupted, so
likewise) exceedingly divided in their judgments: they do not speak all the
same thing, nor walk all in the same way; All (if I mistake not) deny the
Church of England to be a true Church, but all do not deny to hear the
Ministers thereof; some will hear some of them as gifted men, few or none will
hear any of them as the Ministers of Christ; all (or most) of them think it a
sin to hear any Ministers that speak against their way; some of them think
it a sin to hear any but those that are in their way. They are divided in
their judgments, in these and many other things, (which I forbear to name)
and while they are thus divided, how can their way be cleared? but I suppose
when their judgments be all reconciled, then will the Model of their way be
published; In the mean time, what comfort can be had to join with such a
society? To walk in a way unknown, into how many errors may they run? For a
man to enter into a way he is ignorant of, and cannot be informed in, argues
him to be, either weak in the head, or unsound at the heart. Upon these
considerations, I did at a meeting of diverse of the Independent society,
protest against their way as unlawful, and ungodly: since which time they have
raised and spread abroad many false and scandalous reports of me: but my intent
(at this time) is not to vindicate my self, but Gods truth which I prefer
ten thousand times before my own credit: But if I shall perceive they take
occasion from my present writing, to vent and spread abroad their clamourous
reproaches of me, so as I shall perceive my silence will incur the suspicion
of the guilt of sin or sencelesnesse and stupidity under the sensurers; I shall
then (God permitting) clear my self, and if in so doing, I shall make a
further discovery of them, and make their private miscarriages public, I am
not to be blamed, if they necessitate me thereto: In the mean time, I trust
(through the grace of God) my life and conversation shall be a real refutation
of my traducers, and proclaim them liers. What I have now written in this
Treatise, does clearly prove, that the Church of England is a true Church of
Christ; that it is a sin to separate from it: that the Independent society is
no Church, and that it is a sin to join to it. In all which my eye was upon
God to please him, not upon men to please them; nay, I am persuaded some godly
men will be offended with me, who many times, through their mistakes, looking
upon grace and acts of grace as gross sins, they censure men for exercising
of their grace. Truth is, I had rather a millstone were put about my neck, Mat.
18.6.
and I cast into the bottom of the sea, then that I should give them just
cause of being offended; but if I become their enemy for telling them the
truth, Gal. 4.16.
I pass it not. Gods glory in the convincing of some that are in a way of
error, and deterring of others from entering into such a way, is the maine thing
aimed at, which if obtained, let God have the glory, and your prayers be for
him who remains

Your friend in and for the truth, S.T.

TRUTH VINDICATED From the false Accusations of those of the Independent
Society, etc.
1. THat the Church of England is a true Church of Christ, for the clearing of
this I will show: First, the diverse acceptations of the word Church. 2. In what
sense the Church of England is said to be a true Church of Christ. 3. I will
lay down arguments grounded upon the word of God, whereby it does appear,
that the Church of England is a true Church of Christ.

For the first, the word Church is put, first, for all those that shall be
saved, Heb. 12.23. To the general assembly and Church of the first born that
are written in heaven, Colos. 1.18 And he is the head of the body the Church.

Secondly, it is put for the faithful of a family: we read of the Church in
Priscillaes and Aquilaes house, Romans 16.5. 1 Cor. 16.19. of the Church in
Nymphas house, Colos 4.15. And of the Church in Philemons house, Philemon verse
2.

Thirdly, it is put for the houses or places where the faithful do meet
together to preach the word of God, and to administer the Sacraments, as
appears if you compare, 1 Cor. 11.18 verse with the 20 verse. In the 18 verse
he says, when ye come together in the Church: and in the 20. verse when ye
come together in one place.

Fourthly, it is put for the professors of Christ, scattered, throughout
several Regions. Acts 8.13. Acts. 12.1. The Apostle Peter writing to the
strangers scattered throughout Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia, and Bithynia,
in the 1 Peter 1.1. he calls them in the second Chapter of that Epistle, and
the 5 verse, lively stones, built up to a spiritual house; (that is a Church
of God.)

Fifthly, it is put for every congregation gathered together to worship God. 1
Cor. 14.23. If therefore the whole Church be come together into some place. 1
Cor. 4.17. As I teach every where in every Church.

Sixthly, it is put for the representative Church, that is those who have the
government of the Church in their hands, and are to provide for the order,
peace, and discipline of it: Mat. 18.17. And if he shall neglect to hear them,
tell it to the Church; (that is to the Ministers or Governors of the Church,
who have power to cast him out as a heathen man, and a publican:) not every
particular member of the Church: as appears by the Apostle 2 Cor. 2.6.
sufficient to such a man, is this punishment (or censure) which was inflicted
by many, he would not have restrained it to many if it had been done by all.

Seventhly and lastly, by Church in Scripture is understood a Kingdom or
Nation, Province, County or City, enjoying the word, and ordinances of God, and
professing faith in God. Such a Church was the Church of the Jews, to whom
were committed the Oracles of God, Romans 3.2. And from whom should proceed the
word by which God works salvation, Isay 2.3. By which word they were
distinguished from all other Nations in the World, Psalm. 147.19.20. and became
the peculier people of God, Deuteronomy. 7.6. And thus the Kingdom of Israel, became
the Kingdom of God, or Church of God. Our Savior Christ speaking of the
rejection of the Jews from being his people, and Church, over whom he reigned
by his Word and Spirit, says, Mat. 21.43. the Kingdom of God shall be taken
from you, and given to a Nation bringing forth the fruits thereof; intimating,
that whatsoever Nation received, and believed the word of God, did become the
Church, and people of God, as the Nation of the Jews was, before they were
rejected. The Prophet Isay prophesying of the conversion of the Gentiles,
says, Isay 55.5. behold thou shall call a Nation thou knew not, and Nations
that knew not thee, shall run unto thee: by which it appears that whole
Nations shall become the Church and people of God; according to that promise,
Isay 52.15. he shall sprinkle many Nations. And thus ye have the diverse
acceptations of the word Church.

2. I come now in the second place, to show in what sense the Church of England
is said to be a true Church of God: And that is according to the last
acceptance of the word Church; which is when a Nation join themselves to the
Lord, by receiving professing, believing, and practicing the word of God to
salvation, by which God becomes their God, dwelling in the midst of them, and
they become his people, Psalm. 33.12. according to that in Zach. 2.11. and many
Nations shall be joined to the Lord in that day, and shall be my people, and I
will dwell in the midst of them: which was practiced, Jerem. 50.5 Come let us
join our selves to the Lord in a perpetual. Covenant, that shall not be
forgotten. And it was most exactly performed in this Nation, Deuteronomy. 26.17.18.
by our late National Covenant made with God. We read of a Covenant between
God and his people, consisting of mutual conditions; on the peoples part, the
conditions are faith, whereby they embrace him, and rely upon him as their God;
and obedience to his commands as their Lawmaker and Governor, verse 17. and on
Gods part, the conditions are to take them for his people, which imployeth both
his protection of them, and provision for them, both for this life, and the
next: in this 18 verse the Lord has avouched thee this day to be his people:
and in the 9 verse of the next Chapter; this day thou art become the people of
the Lord. Not, that they were not Gods Church and people before, for we find it
expressed they were so: Deuteronomy, 7.6.7. Deuteronomy. 14.2. But hereby it is yet further
confirmed to them, they were Gods Church and people. And thus, and in this
sense, the Church of England is a true Church of God: And this leads me to

The third thing propounded, to lay down arguments grounded upon the word of
God, by which it clearly appears that the Church of England is a true Church
of God. Our Savior Christ, when he would prove to the woman of Samaria, that
the Church of the Jews, was the true Church of God, he does it thus, John
4.22. Ye worship ye know not what, we know what we worship, for salvation is of
the Jews. Whence I infer this first argument.

1. That Church in which salvation is obtained, and God is worshipped according
to the knowledge of his will revealed in his word, is the true Church of God;
but in the Church of England, salvation is obtained, and God is worshipped,
according to his will revealed in his word: Therefore the Church of England is
the true Church of God. A second argument may be made which is necessarily
implied in the text; thus

2. Salvation is not ordinarily obtained out of the true Church of God; but
salvation is ordinarily obtained (by the preaching of the word) in the Church
of England: therefore the Church of England is the true Church of God. An other
argument may be grounded upon that by which the Apostle proves the Ephesians to
be the true Church or household of God, Ephe. 2.19.20.21. now therefore ye are
no more strangers and foraigners, but fellow Citizens with the Saints, and of
the household of God, and are built upon the foundation of the Apostles, and
Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the corner stone etc. whence I frame this
argument.

3. They that build upon the Apostles and Prophets making Christ the corner
stone, are no strangers but fellow Citizens with the Saints, and of the (Church
or) household of God; but the Church of England is sound in Doctrine, building
upon the Apostles and Prophets, making Christ Jesus the corner stone: Therefore
it is the true Church of God.

A fourth argument may be gathered, from that text: 1 Timothy 3.15. But if I tarry
long, that thou may know how thou ought to behave thy self in the house
of God, which is the Church of the living God, the pillar and ground of truth,
by which text it appears, that truth is the sign whereby the Church of God is
known: and from whence I thus reason.

4. Every Church that (as on a pillar) hold forth the truth of God, is the
house of God, the Church of the living God: But the Church of England, do hold
forth, the word of truth, John 17.17. which is the Gospel of Christ that
brings salvation. Romans 1.16. Therefore the Church of England is the true
Church of God. I take these arguments for granted, and therefore I do not
prove all these things to be found in the Church of England; because they are
so clearly manifest, that I think none will deny them; but if any should, I
desire to know it, and I doubt not, but to satisfy them therein. There is one
objection made by them that deny the Church of England to be a true Church;
which I desire to answer: It is this; the true Church of Christ, consist of
none but visible Saints; but the Church of England is a mixed company of
ignorant, wicked, and profane persons; Therefore they are not the true Church
of God.

To which I answer, That the true Church of Christ ought to consist of none but
visible Saints for the well being thereof, is a truth; But that a Church ceases
to be a true Church, because they are not all visible Saints, but some are
ignorant wicked and profane persons, this is false. The Church of Corinth was
a true Church, yet some of them were ignorant, and had not the knowledge of
God, 1 Cor. 15.34. some denied the Resurrection, 1 Cor. 15.12. some were wicked
and profane, for they were drunk when they came to the Sacrament, 1 Cor.
11.21. Therefore not all visible Saints, yet a true Church. In the Church of
Galatia some erred in the great point of justification, against which error
Saint Paul opposed his Epistle written to them, and yet they were a true
Church. In the Church in Pergamos, some held the doctrine of Balam and of the
Nicholaitans, teaching to eat things sacrificed to Idols, and to commit
fornication, Rev. 2.14. surely therefore not all visible Saints, and yet a true
Church of God. In the Church there are vessels of wood and earth, as well as of
gold and silver, 2 Timothy 2.20. And thus it appears, that notwithstanding there
are ignorant, wicked and profane persons in the Church of England, yet it is
the true Church of God. And so I come to the second proposition.

2. That it is a sin to separate from the true Church.

We ought not to depart from a Church in which God dwells and abides, lest we be
found departers from God: But God walks in the midst of his Church, Revel.
2.1. yea, he desires to dwell there, Psalm. 132.13, 14. and he promises to
walk amongst them, Levit. 26.12. therefore it cannot but be a sin to separate
and walk from them. Our Savior Christ did not separate from the Church of the
Jews, (although it was exceedingly corrupted, in worship, doctrine and
discipline, they saying well but doing, ill yet) he was circumcised, Luke 2.21.
and baptized in it, Luke 3.21. holding communion with it. In the Apologeticall
Narration, page 6. they profess before God and all the world, that multitudes
of the Assemblies and parochial Congregations of the Church of England are the
true Church and body of Christ, and the Ministry thereof a true Ministry: And
when the Churches of England were the most either actually overspread with
desilements, or in the greatest danger thereof, they then both did, and would
hold a communion with them, as the Churches of Christ. If this was their
judgment then, certainly, now that we are cleansed from those defilements,
and a further Reformation is daily intended and endeavored; they cannot but
acknowledge it to be a great sin to separate from our parochial Churches,
renouncing them as false Churches, and utterly denying to hold communion with
them. I shall not need further to clear this: All acknowledge it to be a sin
to separate from the true Church; They in the Apologeticall Narration do
acknowledge our parochial Churches, to be the true Churches, and body of
Christ. Therefore I proceed to the third thing propounded.

3. That the Independent Society (in the City of Norwich) is no true Church of
Christ.

I shall do it by these following arguments: the first is this, They that
separate from the true Church of Christ, are Schismatics; And a company of
Schismatics, being joined in society together, make a society of Schismatics,
but not a true Church of Christ: But the Independent Society, do separate from
the Church of England, which (as has been proved) is the true Church of
Christ: Therefore the Independent Society is no true Church of Christ. The
Major proposition is cleared to me by that text in 1 John 2.19. where it
appears, that they that separate from the Church, cannot be members of the
Church. Doctor Ames in his fourth book of Conscience, page 141. In his answer
to this question, Whether or no Schismatics are members of the true Church?
says, If an obstinate separation be made from all true Churches, or from any
one for, a case common to all, then such Schismatics (although it may be
retaining the faith, they continue members of the Church Catholic) they cannot
be esteemed as visible members of the Church. And for the Minor proposition,
themselves cannot deny but they were converted in the Church of England: And it
is a strange Paradox to me, that they should be converted in a false Church,
and so made fit members for a true Church. Certainly, that Church in which
they had their spiritual fathers to beget them to God, that Church is their
spiritual Mother. The Apostle says, the Church of Corinth, had ten thousand
instructors in Christ, yet not many fathers, 1 Cor. 4.15. but (blessed be God)
in the Church of England, there are, and have been many spiritual fathers,
who through the preaching of the Gospel of Christ, have and do daily beget
many to Christ; and they are the Ministers of God by whom we believe, 1 Cor.
3.5. And yet these Ministers are slighted (if not despised) and counted no
Ministers of God: And the Church in which they were converted and brought home
to God, is rejected and counted no Church of God: and can such a Society be the
true Church of Christ? surely no.

A second and third argument to prove them to be no Church, I gather from their
own tenants: In describing of a true Church, they did affirm (at a meeting
for dispute) that it was absolutely necessary for the being of a Church, that
there should be form as well as matter, and they said form was a Church
Covenant, without which a Church did cease to be a true Church: But I my self
have seen members received into their Society without a Covenant: (which one
of the chief of them told me, was to show they did not absolutely require it)
Therefore according to their own rule, they did then cease to be a true Church.

Again, some of them have affirmed that the form of a Church is government or
Church discipline (which I take to be the form of a true Church rather then
the other) but if so, then their Society cannot be a true Church, For they have
never a Church Officer, therefore cannot execute Church discipline: It is the
Elders of the Church, that are to rule the Church, 1 Timothy 5.17. Heb. 13.17. But
that Society have never an Elder, nor other Church Officers; therefore they
want form or government; and therefore according to their own argument they
are no Church.

Fourthly, how can that be a true Church, that take in members when in their
esteem they are good, when they have no power to cast them out, though they
should prove never so bad? certainly, in such a Church as this, all things
cannot be done decently and in order, 1 Cor. 14.40. but for want of power to
punish the disordered, nothing but confusion will (in time) be found in such a
Church: And certainly, God is not the Author of such a Church, in which there
is nothing but confusion, and no means to prevent it. Gods Church is his
building, 1 Cor. 3.9. his house, 2 Timothy 2.20. 1 Timothy 3.15. 1 Pet. 4.17. Fifthly
framed, Ephesians. 2.21. and formed by himself for himself, Esaias 43.21. he
having appointed in it Stewards, 1 Cor. 4.1. Luke 12.42. and all other Officers
for the well ordering of it. But a Society gathered together, without Rulers
over them, to see peace and order continued amongst them, will in a short time
be a Babell for confusion, Genesis 11.9. but cannot be the true Church of Christ:
For, God is not the Author of confusion, but of peace, as in all the Churches
of the Saints, 1. Cor. 14.33. And thus you see that the Independent Society in
the City of Norwich, is no Church. I come now to the fourth and last thing
propounded.

4. To lay down diverse reasons and arguments to persuade men not useperate
from the Church of England, and join to the Independent society showing the
unlawfullnesse of so doing.

First, because it is a direct violation of our oath made with our hands lift
up to the most high God, in our solemn League and Covenant. In the first
Article thereof, we covenanted to endeavor, to bring the Churches of God in
the three Kingdoms to the nearest conjunction, and uniformity in Religion,
confession of faith, form of Church government, directory for worship and
catechizing: And in the second Article, we covenanted to endeavor the
extirpation of Schism etc. lest we be partakers in other men's sins; but how
do those take this Covenant, with a true intent to perform it, (as is
expressed in the latter part of the Covenant,) who deny the Churches of the
three Kingdoms to be true Churches, and set up a new Church (as they call it)
against, and contrary to the government established, (or about to be
established) in the Churches of the three Kingdoms? Is this to endeavor the
uniformity of Church government, and the extirpation of Schism, that the Lord
may be one, and his name one in the three Kingdoms? Or is it not a retarding of
the work of Reformation, and the settling of Church government? And the
spreading of herisies, schisms, factions, and divisions amongst us. We are
commanded to keep our vows. (Deuteronomy. 23.21. Ecle. 5.4. And Covenant breakers
are reckoned amongst those that are given up to a reprobate mind. (Romans 1.13.)
And God has threatened the sword, to avenge the quarrel of his Covenant,
Levit. 26.25. therefore it is a grievous sin to break Covenant: And whether or
no the Independents, keep, or break their Covenant, let the world judge.

2. Secondly, to join in fellowship with the Independent society does hinder
men from walking with God in such a way wherein they may most honor him, in
the use of all his Ordinances, and in performing of all those mutual duties,
that God requires of his children one toward another. For first they deprive
themselves of the chief ministerial Ordinances of God, as the preaching of
the word of God, and the administration of the Sacraments: For as they look
upon the Church of England, as no Church, so also upon our Ministers, as no
Ministers: And therefore they prefer their own private meetings, before our
public preaching: And amongst themselves they have no Church Officer to
perform any of these ministerial acts: And therefore they cannot honor God
in the use of those Ordinances, as they might have done, if they had continued
in that Church of God, in which they did enjoy them. Secondly, they cannot
honor God in the performing of all those mutual duties, that God requires of
his children one toward another; for seperating from the Church of England as
a false Church, they look upon all the members of it, as without the pale of
the Church, (and they cannot otherwise do while they are of that judgment.)
And because they are so, they thus reason, as for those with whom we have
entered into Covenant and are members of our Church, we are bound to, but for
others they are without, and what have we to do with those that are without,
say they? Whereas we know it is Christ's command that all the faithful should
love one another, John 13.34. and they ought also to have fellowship one with
another, 1 John 13. and by love to serve one another, Gal. 5.13. and to let
brotherly love continue, Heb. 13.1. constantly provoking one another to love
and to good works, Heb 10.24. exhorting and instructing the ignorant, Heb.
3.13. Dan. 11.33. encouraging and strengthening the weak, 1 These. 5.14. Job
4.3.4. but all these duties are neglected, by them that separate, and walk at
a distance from other Christians, whereby they rob them of that spiritual
good, that charity requires (and formerly they have done to others;) and
deprive themselves also, of that edification, they might receive (and have
formerly received) by their communion with them: therefore it is a sin to join
with such a society, as thus hinder men from performing of their duty.

3. Thirdly, by seperating from the Church of England and joining to the
Independent society: Divine precepts are violated: For we are commanded that
all thingss should be done in charity, 1 Cor. 16.14. and it is a sin not to
walk charitably, Romans 14.15. but what charity is it to renounce a whole Church
without a ground? It is true Gods people are commanded to separate from
Heathens and Idolaters, 2 Cor. 6.17. Isa. 52.11. to depart out of Babylon,
Revel. 18.4. but not out of Sion: Not forsaking the assemblings of Gods Church
and people. Heb. 10.25. Therefore they that separate must account the Church of
England as Babylon, they must reckon them amongst the Heathens and Idolaters,
or else they cannot justify their separation from them. And if they so Judge,
where is their charity? Again says the Apostle, Romans 16.17. now I beseech you
brethren mark them which cause divisions and offenses, contrary to the
doctrine which ye have learned and avoid them: And we are commanded not to
meddle (or mix our selves) with those that are given to change, Prove. 24.21.
And well may such receive that check, that the Prophet Jeremie gives, Jer.
2.36. why gaddest thou about so much to change thy way: But how do those
perform these precepts that cause divisions and seperations, and gad about so
much to change their way?

Fourthly, it is denounced as a judgment of God to be separated from the
Congregation of Gods Church and people. Ezra 10.8. But the Independent society
make themselves the executioners of this judgment upon themselves; for God
casts them not out, neither does the Church cast them out, but themselves
separate themselves from the Church and people of God: and what greater evil,
then under pretense of joining to the Church of God, to depart from the Church,
in the midst whereof God abides, Ps. 46.5. Is it not to depart from God?

Fifthly, by seperating from the true Church of God, the unity of Christ's
mystical body is (in a manner) destroyed: for all the faithful are of one
household, Gal 6.10. children of one and the same father, Romans 8.14. Ephesians. 4.6.
and mother, Gal. 4.26. having all one elder brother, Heb. 2.11. and are all
begotten by the same spiritual seed, 1 Peter. 1.23. and are all nourished by
the same milk, 1 Peter 2.2. and are all heirs of the same kingdom, James
2.5. Mat. 25.34. all soldiers under the same Captain, 2 Timothy 2.3. all having
the same enemies, Ephesians. 6.12. Therefore it cannot but be a great sin for them
to separate and divide.

Sixthly, they that separate cause divisions, and discover themselves to be
carnal in so doing, says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 3.3. for ye are yet carnal, for
whereas there is amongst you envying and strife, and divisions, (or factions)
are ye not carnal, and walk as men? (as carnal and wicked men) Jude ver.
19. These be they that separate themselves, sensual, having not the Spirit,
(or as some read the words, These are makers of Sects) etc.) and in the verse
before, they are called mockers. We find that haters of Gods people separated
Gods people from their company, Luke 6.22. but we find not Gods people
rejecting of, and seperating themselves from the company of the Church and
people of God: yet so do the Independents.

Seventhly and lastly, they that separate from the Church of England, to join
to the Independent Society; they are merely deceived of their ends in their
joining; for first, they think they join themselves to a true Church, but
they do not. Secondly, they think they shall be bettered by their joining
with them, but they are not. First, in their joining with them, they are so
far from joining to a true Church, as thereby they cast themselves out of a
true Church, and are made members of no Church: And (if I mistake not) they
that excommunicate a whole Church of God, and themselves out of it, by
renouncing it, are in a worse condition then those that are excommunicated and
cast out by the Church; for casting out by the Church is for the destruction of
the flesh, that the spirit may be saved, 1 Cor. 5.5. And although the Church
account of such a one as a Heathen and a Publican, Mat. 18.17. yet he that is
so rejected, does not reject the Church, and count them as Heathens and
Publicans: But they that thus reject the Church of England, do account of them
as Heathens and Publicans, that is to say, such a company as it is not fit to
hold communion with as the Church of God. Now let who will judge, who is in the
worst condition, either he that is rejected by the Church as a remedy against
sin, or he that is not rejected by the Church, yet make it his sin to despise
and reject the whole Church? And how a company of such despisers and rejecters
of the Church of God, should make a Church of God, I know not. Secondly, they
that join themselves to that most strange Independent Society, are exceedingly
deceived, in thinking they shall be bettered by so doing. I know the benefit,
by meeting, for prayer and conference, is that which is much aimed at by some
that are joined with them, and others that have desired to be joined with them
(for that end) but are not. I confess the meetings of christians, for prayer
and conference, are duties I much prise and approve of, and have found much
benefit by them, but it was when there was more sincerity, humility, and
familiarity amongst christians, then is generally now to be found: Of late it
is come to pass (through the policy of Satan, and the pride and
deceitfulness of men's hearts) that under pretense of meeting for the
performing of these duties, men's fancies are vented, and all the errors
amongst us, are daily spread and increased; and how can it otherwise be, when
these duties are performed by those whose judgments are corrupted? When
christian society was maintained in humility and the fear of God, with all
that feared God, then God did approve of their meeting, Mal. 3.16. and they
found the fruit of it: But since pride and singularity have made a separation,
(so as not all that fear God are admitted into their Society, but only such
as are of their judgment, and will walk with them in their way) God has not
approved of their Society; for God is no (such) respecter of persons, Romans
3.11. Acts 10.34.35. neither would he have christian conference hindered for
any such ends. Gal. 2.6. And while it is so hindered, how can God be glorified,
or themselves bettered thereby? Does not experience prove, they are the worse,
since they have entered into the Independent society? Do they not neglect
public ordinances? Are not (many of them) remiss in family duties? Are not
Gods Ministers neglected (if not despised?) Are not former Friends slighted and
rejected? At least, is not their love to them abated? Do they not misconstrue
every man's words and actions, that are not in their affections? who have been
more ready then they to receive and spread abroad (if not to raise) false
reports of others, that have not complied with them? Have any credited and
divulged, the scandalous reports that have been raised of our Brethren the
Scots, more then they? Do not their very speech bewray, that they would be
glad, if there were sufficient matter of charge against them, to occasion
falling with violence upon them? Have they not high thoughts of themselves? Do
each of them in lowliness of mind esteem others better then themselves? Phil.
2.3. Do they abate in sin, and increase in grace? But can sin abate where love
decaies, Mat. 24.12. or grace grow, where pride increases? James. 4.6. Surely
no. Can a man sin against God and prosper? Job 9.4. It is true they that love
the Church shall prosper, Psalm. 122, 6. but can any cast off the Church and
prosper? While a man is in a way of sinning against God, I cannot but question
his thriving in grace. I confess I have heard much boasting of their thriving
in the Independent society, but I have not seen it. I find not growing
Thyatira boasting of their growth, Rev. 2.18.19. but I find decaying Laodicea,
vain gloriously boasting of their riches and increase, but it was their
ignorance made them think so, for they were wretched, miserable, poor, blind
and naked, notwithstanding their boasting, Rev. 3.14.17. To conclude, if to
join with the Independent society, be a violation of the Covenant: a hindering
men from performing their duties to others: a violating of divine precepts: a
bringing a judgment of God upon themselves: a breaking the unity of Christ's
mystical body: a discovering themselves to be carnal, a seperating themselves
from the true Church, and making themselves to be no members of any Church of
God: and a mere deluding themselves: All which has been proved it is:
Therefore it cannot but be a sin, and folly to join to that society. Consider
what has been said, and the Lord give you understanding in all things.

FINIS.

