A SERMON PREACHED IN THE Cathedral Church of Worcester the second of Febr.
last being Candlemas day, at the funeral of Mris ALICE TOMKINS wife unto Mr
Thomas Tomkins one of the Gentlemen of his Majesty's Chapel Royal.

BY JOHN TOY Master of Arts and one of the Petty Canons of the said Cathedral
Church.

London, Printed in the year 1642.

A Sermon preached in the Cathedral Church of Worcester at the funeral of
Mris ALICE TOMKINS.
JOB 14. part of the 14. verse. All the days of my appointed time will I wait
till my change come.


NOt to deduce this Text by long descent from precedent verses, this whole
Chapter is a short discourse of the course of man's life, how full of misery!
how miserably short! which holy Job considering arms himself with devout
resolve, All the days of my appointed time, etc.

Which resolve may be resolved into these six heads: 1. First, we have but
our time. 2. Secondly, this time is but of days, very short. 3. Thirdly, this
time nor comes, nor goes by chance, but by Divine appointment. 4. Fourthly,
after this time comes a change, death. 5. Fifthly, this change is not terrible,
but by all good men to be desired and expected. 6. Sixthly, this expectation by
Job's example should remain with us all our days, All the days, etc.


1. Yea indeed? he that is the Map, masterpiece, and wonder of the world, has
man but this time? Why did God make his chiefest vessel for use and honor of
such brittle stuff, which would serve him but for a season? why did he build
so gloriously to throw it down again so soon? wherefore would he print his
image in common clay? and adorn with such art a piece of mouldring earth? O
the pity, that worms should pull in pieces so Divine a Form, or that an
immortal soul should be married to worms meat, a rotten carcass; the stars
above far beneath man in dignity hold still their place and splendor, and
shine as clear as when fresh from the hand of the Creator; man like a bearded
Commet blazeth a while with troubled flame, and anon consumes to nothing; or
rather like the sparkle flies up with heat, and haste, as if it meant to visit
the Celestial fires, and vanishes by the way within few yards of the earth:
If any thing of the vast creation were worthy an immortal being, man more: yet
alas nothing more frail and mutable then he.

Why? and who may be thank? himself and his sins. Had he kept that
Righteousness with which God invested him in Paradise, he had equaled the
days of heaven; though this building were of clay, in the calm air, and
sunshine of Gods favor it might have stood for ever; our sin turned his
favor into fury and tempest, and so our Cottage cannot abide the blasting of
the breath of his displeasure; the spark deserves to die that in pride flies
away from the fuel that did feed it, so did man; the commet merits darkness
that bearded the stars, blazeth with pride and terror, fills the world with
blood and fears, so did man; what is the clay fit for but abjection? that has
lost the stamp and image that ennobled it above common dirt. Why should not
worms have justice, if man trespass on their kingdom? why may they not avenge
it? they have little reason to spare him; not only these Creepers, but even the
whole Creatures groan under a curse for him; that God formed so glorious a
Creature out of clay, teaches us his power, who ex omni ebore can work
wonders out of mean materials; that he made us of clay, kin to the dunghill
and dirt in the kennels, was to teach man humility, nor has he wronged the
celestial part the soul, by clothing her in clay, would she keep it clean
from sin: God himself desires no better dwelling, the Son of God Christ Jesus
did not disdain to become man.

Yea, and we may thank the mercy of God that we are thus confined to time; sin
so adheres to our tainted nature, that we can never cease to commit, till we be
committed to the earth; death does enlarge us from the slaverie of sin, since
the earth is cursed with thorns, our hearts hedged with cares, since nature is
become our stepmother, and the good which should satisfy our soul,
withdrawn; it is an happiness that we shall once die, and cease from our
labors; yea periissemus nisi periissemus, we had lost by our righteousness,
we got by our sin; the goodness and wisdom of our God has wrought a greater
weight of Salvation for us, out of our ruins; if the first Adam had stood we
had enjoyed but an earthly Paradise, the second Adam has made us heirs of a
celestial Inheritance.

2. As this life is but for a time, so this time is but of days, very short.
The sum is but short, where all the figures are but pence, the journey not
long that may be measured by Inches; the lease may well be termed little,
whose date is but for days. Were the life of man reckoned by Olympiads,
decads, lusters, ages, or years, we might expect a spacious being betwixt the
Cradle and the Grave; but there needs no such large Arithmeticke, no puzling
composition of numbers to fathom the life of man, minutes multiplied will make
hours, a small passage of ours will dispatch a day, and a few days will
measure the life of man: many do but just look upon the world, disdain, and
die: many rather commit patricide, and kill their mothers in the womb, then
they will daigne to look on such a world. How many come only to suck a Bib, or
shake a Ratle, and return again to earth? I dare say the third part of mankind
do not attain to a month.

Our common phrase is, All the days of our life, the same phrase is most
frequent in holy Scripture, Jacob had lived an hundred and thirty years ere
he descended into Egypt, yet he calls them but days, Few and evil have my
days been. Adams time was called but days, though 830. years, Genesis 5.5. They
whose possession is but for their natural life are allowed in Law to set but
from three years to three years, and truly the taker does presume, and
sometimes suffers for it: well then may we reckon humane life by days, when
our whole was casual and incertaine, and every piece of a day a several
mercy; hence it is (I think) that day is declined with the doubtful Gender.
But indeed days is a large expression, if you will consider it more narrowly;
all is but a day, yesterday was as to day, and to morrow will not much differ,
all days are sisters, so like, that there is little or nothing more then a
numericall distinction between them; he that sees but one day has seen the
Sun arise and set, he that lingers to an hundred years has seen but little
more. It is true the year like a Gentlewoman varies often her attire; but the
person and substance is always the same, and each day the Epitome of our whole
life; but me thinks a day is too much to attribute to man: that is his which
he enjoyes, what is that? the time past? no, that is dead and gone; the time to
come? no, that may never come: the present? yea, but what is that? an instant
point, an individuum, an ens rationis, a conceit of our brain, indeed almost
nothing: but stay, I should go beyond my Text, if I do, I do not go beyond
Scripture. David says, Mine age is nothing unto thee. Indeed that is half a
nothing which has an end, man has two, our whole space is even just nothing
in respect of the days of Eternity: for between finite and infinite is no
proportion, look back on all the time past, all the days, years, and hours
are measured with one sudden thought, which is next to nothing.

The generations of men, says the Poet, are like the succession of leaves,
which no sooner are green, but already turning yellow, and ready to fall.
Hark to the Prophets cry; what will he cry? that All flesh is grass, and the
glory thereof as the flower of the field: rising, withering, flourishing,
fading, growing, declining, living, dying, as it were all in an instant. David
calls man's life, a spanne, a dream, a vapor, a bubble. Solomon says less,
all things sublunary are vanity, that is the appearance of nothing.

Till thou can enjoy life, it is not a life but a being, or at most, but as
the life of trees, which is without sense of it self. We have perhaps seventie
years before us, but little of this do we enjoy, minimum est quod vivitur.
Infancy and Childhood is but the portall through which we enter into life, all
that while we are not come to our selves: in youth we are so sublimed with
pride; or so vehemently forced with headlong passion, that all that while we
live like madmen, beside our selves, we cannot well be said to live till we
arrive at gray hairs, and no sooner do we arrive at that Meridian, but we are
mellow and ripe for the grave, and indeed senectus ipsa morbus, age is nothing
but a long disease, a lingering death.

Again, of that space we live, how little do we live to our selves? half of
all is consumed in sleep, the sister of death (thanks to nature so long we are
innocent,) of the rest, much is worn out in business for others, much lost
and lavisht on our pleasures, some slips idly through our fingers, little
bestowed on God, or goodness, almost all expended on business that least
concerns us, diu fuit, non diu vixit, so much we have lived, as we have lived
well, and alas how ridiculously short are our lives, if measured by our
goodness?

O how much are they too blame, that haunt company, and hunt after pastime?
(that is the world) beguiling themselves of those precious hours which God has
given them to study and procure Eternity; alas are the wings of time so leaden
and lazy that we should add and impe more feathers to it? time lacquies with
the motions of the heavens; and they are as swift as thought, the Sun one of
the lower and slower Planets, moves not less then four thousand miles every
minute; if you are sure of heaven, spur on, delude time as you list: but if
not, O why should you hasten your misery.

O how much to blame is the covetous man, he not considering how short his time
is, rakes and toiles to heap up a miskin of wealth, as if he meant to live for
ever; what does he think to continue still? why? there is a statute of
mortality against him, Statutum est semel mori. Does he think to bribe death?
it will not be, Mors aquo pede pulsat pauperum tabernas, Regumque turres. The
rich man died also; does he think to carry it with him? no, we must not allow
transportation of our money to hell, nudus venit, naked he came, naked he must
return. What, will he lay it up for his children? I think he that truly loves
money little thinks of that: if he did (marry) he would do them a great
pleasure to leave them cursed wealth to undo them; he will lay it up for his
old age, and then enjoy it, least of all; quo minus via, eo plus viatici,
covetousness is fiercest in the close, he will rather choke himself with
cares, or starve himself, not daring to diminish his moldy god, his treasure.

Since our time is so short a Calendar of a day, O how much too blame is the
intemperate glutton, and drunkard, that drink away their health, and fill their
body with diseases; every intemperate draught is but a sweet poison, the
glutton eats his knife, and God may justly challenge them of self murder, that
thus will eat and drink in spite of health and nature, and so shorten that
precious time, which God indulged for better purpose.

Is life so short at utmost extension, O cursed condition of men that delight
in blood, that like Atropos make a trade of killing, butchers of their
brethren, traitors to nature, why should we cut that thread which another will
shortly cut? why should we envy our Brethren a little light? why should thou
envy light to thy self? thy thread (murderer) is twist with his whom thou
slayest, just vengeance has decreed, the bloody minded man shall not live out
half his days.

Is life so short? why then being mortal do we nourish immortal hatred
against our Brother? has he done thee wrong? forbear the fault, the sentence
of death is upon him; anon the worms will pull him all to pieces, what greater
revenge can thou desire? dum luctamur, aderit immortalitas; spite of all thy
spite death will disarm the, and make thee lie quietly in the grave with thy
contemned Brother. If life be so short? why do we post off repentance, and
make so little care to prepare for the presence of the Judge and hazard our
salvation to the extremest minutes? how many that long since might have been
raked up in the grave, are but beginning to live? nay it is not so well, they
do but say they will begin, but let him that means to go to heaven, set out
betimes, lest like the foolish boy we game out the candle which should light us
to bed; time past will not be recalled, and we have a spacious distance to
dispatch in a few minutes, how short and uncertain soever our days are to us,
with God they are determined and appointed: so says my Text, All the days of
my appointed time.

3. God Almighty has set up bounds which we cannot pass, and until that
hour which he has determined do approach, we cannot dye: this paper body of
ours is proof against all violence; to this agrees that of Job (above) thou
have made my days, as the days of an hireling; the hireling is but for a
certain time. That of Solomon, There is a time to be borne, and a time to dye,
this appears by this, that many amongst us are Prophets, and have with certain
prediction pointed out the time of their departure, if their departure were not
definite and certain, how could they foresee when they should expire?

This more especially appears by our many hairebredths escapes of death and
danger, who is alive to day, that has not been often at the gates of death?
Joseph was thrown into the pit, the pit did not shut her mouth upon him; Daniel
to the Lions, the Lions did not open their mouth to hurt him; Moses tottered in
an Arc of sedge, that simple boat brought him a shore, and landed him in the
arms of a Princess; the three children were thrown into the furnace, the fire
could not singe them; Jonah in the tempestuous sea, all the waters would not
drown him; Paul was in perils often, in death often, yet still reserved a sacrifice
for Rome; how often stood Caesar in the face of death amongst his enemies to be
at last slain in the Capitol by his friends; how many deaths did that Roman
avoid to be at last choakt with a hair; how many come safe from battle over
the dead bodies of those that stood round about them; behold how the pestilence
that walks in darkness, picks, and chooses out of some frequent families but
one; out of others all but one. Who would not admire how those floate upon the
deep three or four years within three or four inches of death, where every
wind and wave threatens death, yet return with safety to the shore; yea in a
common shipwreck how many have the broken pieces of the vessel saved, when the
whole one could not? what was all this, chance? let Atheists and Heathens say
so, we Christians must explode it, certainly it appears to me by this that God
Almighty has allotted each man his fate, which no danger how great, or near
can alter.

That to every man is an appointed time, appears also in part by this, that the
shadow of death flies him that pursues it, and follows him that would fly it,
death hovers over him that delights in life, and declines him that despises
it. It seems death dare not strike, but like the Clock, till the just numbers
of minutes be accomplished. Why else should he not come, when called and
importuned? I have heard some disdain, and call death partial, that they
cannot die; I have seen him hit others in the height and vigor of strength,
and beauty, with unexpected and most unwelcome stroke; the young and frolike
bullock falls for the shambles, the old ox reserved to groan in the accustomed
yoke.

Nor seems it any wonder to me, that man should be appointed his time, he was
not born at his own appointment, much less is it fit that he should dye at
his own discretion. The keys of life and death belong to God. If it be in my
power to grant the lease, it is also of my right to limit the time. It Is not
man alone, that has his time appointed, but even every creature; the sparrow
falls not to the ground but by Gods decree: yea, the whole creature, there is a
day and hour set down, when the whole world shall determine, when the Elements
shall melt, the Moon be turned to blood, the Sun eclipsed for ever, and the
great Machin of the world shaken and dissolved. From the consideration of this
point, we may make to our selves these wholesome uses.

First not to love life too much, not to be too anxious, and sollicitous to
produce and extend it; nor to trust in diet, herbs, air, or art; as if length
of days were to be had from hence. Let us not like Asa, seek to a second;
first the physician rather then the Lord, Let us look up to Jehovah, submit our
selves to his pleasure, and appointment. Let us not presume of that which is
not in our power, but refer our selves to God, and accept of every day as a new
life, and mercy; Grata superveniet quae non sperabitur hora.

A second use is of patience to wait the Lords leisure and salvation; not like
the fresh bullock to shake the yoke of affliction, and make it worse by our
anger, bear thine affliction patiently, it is by his appointment. Will thou not
suffer a little for the Lords sake? the Lord Jesus suffered all afflictions for
thee; nay, but it is appointed for thy sake, out of this furnace thou will come
like gold refined, this fire was but to purge thy dross, and burnish thee for
heaven. Shall we receive of God good and not evil? Shall we not welcome the
evil that comes for our good? be patient a while, anon thy pain will cease;
it is our a finite evil our days have their date, our life anon determines,
this heavy night may have a cheerful morn. Dabit Deus his quoque finem.

A third use is against too much mourning for the dead, this is our great
fault, we mortals love mortal things, as if the fruition and use were
immortal. Me thoughts it was a brave voice of that Roman, that at report of
his sons death, said, Scio me mortalem genuisse, I knew I did not beget a
God, that could not dye. Thy friend is dead, what has he lost? his lease is
expired, he had his time appointed; thou deservedst to loose, that would
build on lease-hold as tenure free for ever. Cadant lacrymae, non fluant, let
tears fall not flow. Can the hot waters of thy tears recover him? the voice of
thy groans awake him? Thy friend is dead, could help? can recall him? that
grief is to no purpose which will do no good. I will allow you to shed a few
tears over the hearse, as a ceremony of your friends funeral, and a monument of
your love, that you are not flint, or iron, but men sensible of others evils,
endued with natural affection; no farther. But why should we mourn? our friend
is not lost, but gone before, anon thou must go the same way: if he did thee
wrong to dye before thee, forgive him, he will never do so any more; thou will
anon show others the same trick, kick up the heels, and lead others mourning
after thy hearse. Thy friend is not dead, but sleeps, disturb not his rest
with thy noise. Thy friend is not dead, but divided, and like a foul watch
taken asunder, his materials remain. Thy friend is not dead, but changed, so my
Text calls death, All the days of mine appointed time will I wait till my
change come.

4. Mutability and mortality like ice and water beget each other; man was at
first perfect but mutable; his mutabilitie made him mortal, and his mortality
makes him again mutable; by this change Job must needs understand death. It Is
true, man, as if he had been the son of the Moon is full of change, no one
man is two days alike: the weather varies often, the face of Heaven is sometimes
lowering, sometime serene, sometime maskt with clouds, sometimes bathed in
mists; man varies with the weather, yea and more then the weather, now he is
calm and temperate, anon he is clouded with cares, one while he is gladsome
and cheerful, then the Sun shines; another time chafed and angry, then it
thunders; another while he weeps, then it rains; but this change of the Text
follows all our appointed days, which is only death. Death is a great change
indeed. First we change from health to sickness, then our cheerful looks are
changed into ghastly palenesse, our strength into pain and weakness, the whole
man into another man, happy if into a new man. The next change is from
sickness to death, a great change indeed: our handsome habits are changd into
a shroud, our habitation into a Coffin, our Lands into a Grave, nay we into our
Lands; our lively heat into an everlasting cold, our mirth into sable mourning,
Man goes unto his long home, and the mour ners walk about the streets, the
Bells ring of these changes; by this the Family changes too, the Wife is
become a Widow, the son fatherless, the master without a servant, the
servant masterlesse; these changes once in fifty years renew the face of the
world. Death does change a marriage into a divorce; life is the union of the
soul and body, death the separation; the soul is sent back to her heavenly
Father, the body to her Mother, the Earth; this is a great change indeed, that
two that lived so long, and so lovingly should be separated so long, and into
places so remote.

Death is a change of a compounded body into his native principles; the Air
receives our breath, the Sun our heat, the Sea our moisture, the Earth that
which we had of her, our dust; these Elements which were ere while knit in one
common building are now distructed into all the world; where will you look for
the parcels of your dead friend, his breath perhaps helps to drive a ship in
some remote Sea, his moisture perhaps went up into the grass which grew on the
grave, and the Horse has eat it, you must look quickly for the rest of his
carcass, ere the worms have eat it, perhaps the fisher has baited his weels
with the worms that fed on your friend; here is a change indeed.

Death is a change from variety of form and condition into all alike; among
the living there is much difference, one is noble, another base; in death
Diogenes as great as Mansolus, Menippus as good a man as great Alexander; In
this life some are rich, the rest poor; In death there is not respect of
riches, the carcass of Irus may boldly stink by Craesus without any offense;
Among the living some are fair, some ill-favored, among the dead there is not
a pin to choose between Sappho and Hellen, Thersites and Aeneas, all are bald
pate, hollow-eyed, flat nosed, chap fallen, and grim alike; Amongst us there is
difference of wits, one is sharp and subtle, another blunt and simple, let them
lie a little in the grave together, and you will not discern the wise man from
the fool, the grave Politician from the canting beggar. If that this change
were much in our mind, who then would be proud of wealth, that anon must be
stripped of all; of wit, whose fine head must be filled with musty mould; of
birth, that must descend into the bowels of the earth; of beauty, which will
wither into deformity; of his person, which lice and worms must eat; of any
thing, since anon all will be alike; the worst in the world as good as he.

5. But yet Beloved, this change is no robbery, although we suffer a little, we
shall not loose by it; we are not less men with God, he numbers and reckons
the dead, he is the God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob. We cannot loose by this
dissolution, it is impossible that any thing should perish into nothing, else
there would be vacuity, and God must create a new to repair the loss; no, the
earth will give back our dust, the Sun our heat, the air our breath, the water
our moisture; each part of the world each part of every man, and the dead shall
live again. Observe Jobs blessed confidence, I shall see God in my flesh, not
with other but with these same eyes: how possible is it to presume a
resurrection, when God Almighty that so made us at first out of nothing, has
now all the former materials, and the soul entire, ready and disposed for the
work? Nay we are so far from loosing by this change, that we get much by it; to
change labor for ease and rest, is a good bargain; life is torn and
distracted with many cares, in the grave is no noise or disturbance, Blessed
are the dead, they rest from their labors; to change corruption for
incorruption is a great bargain, the lying in the Grave does draine away our
poison and corruption, and returns it pure and perfect; to change a lease of
few years into a free, and perpetual tenure is great gain, by dying we turn
our Copyhold for life into life immortal; to change the world for Christ is a
glorious advantage, all things compared to Christ are loss and dung, by being
dissolved we come to Christ; In a word, if glorious and crowned liberty be
better than continual bondage, if a state triumphant be better than a
militant, if fullness be better than famine, and substance than shadow, heaven
than the dunghill earth, and eternity than doubtful time; then are we much
better, and more happy by this change of death; Hence it is that holy Job looks
and longs for this change, as he says in my Text, All the days of my
appointed time, etc. Of this one word.

6. If Job waits for the salvation of God, then has he faith toward him, for
we do not wait for that which we think will not come; If we will make this
change of death happy and beneficial unto us, we must like Job expect the
mercy of God, believe that he is, and that he is a faithful rewarder of them
that seek him; that this God has salvation in his hand for them that will
stretch forth the hand of faith to receive it from him.

If Job wait, then has he hope to receive, all expectation is mixed with hope,
if heaven be not hoped for, it cannot happen to us; if we want this anchor, we
may often try to land, and be as often driven back in the troubles of the
laboring deep.

This expectation cannot be without contented patience; He that is impatient
will not wait, You have heard of the patience of Job, you know the passion and
patience of the Lamb Christ Jesus. If we will follow him, we must take up our
cross, if we will reign, we must suffer, it is fit we should suffer somewhat,
for glory in heaven were cheap and contemptible, if we might attain it easily.

This waiting and expectation supposes preparation, every one that has this
hope, faith the Apostle, purges himself, as he is pure. How do we wash, and
comb, and trim our selves, when called to some honorable Feast; and think
we that the King of Heaven will accept into his glorious Palace, and immortal
Dainties, them which have not washed their hands in innocence? and made them
fit for such a Feast? the Feast is worth the waiting for, it is Immortality;
the Author of the Feast has long waited for us, we had need to wait with oil
in our Lamp; we know not when the Bridegroom will knock, we cannot do
better then to wait, this glorious Expectation will swallow up, or sweeten all
our present calamity, we have nothing else to do but to wait; indeed we
should do nothing else, and Blessed are they whom the Lord when he comes
shall find so doing.

The sum of all amounts to this, God with his glorious Angels is coming to
us, he sends his Ambassadors before him, to tell and warn us of his coming,
He tarries a while to try our Faith and Patience, He tarries a while to give us
time to prepare for his coming, that coming and finding us prepared he may
crown us with immortal glory.

Thus beloved have I hastened through a spacious Text, and 'twas fit I should,
Brevitie was the main subject thereof, and he that is coming might for ought
we know have come ere I had dispatched it; Please you now to wait while I speak
a word or two to this sad occasion of our meeting, and so I will dismiss you.

We are met here to do the last honor to our departed Sister, and in her name
I thank this worthy Assembly that come to wait on her deserved Obsequies;
would she had a better Orator, this presence, especially this subject deserved
it; my happiness is the goodness of the subject will help out my imperfect
Oratory. I know by her no infirmities that I should need to hide or color; I
need not rack, or torture my invention to force her a praise; I need not
strain or dissemble a syllable; she has filld my mouth with true and real
honor.

This Text is true in her, we have our time, she had hers, God be thanked a
time of peace and plenty; our time is short, it is true, hers was near
fourscore, almost two lusters beyond the age of man, if we reckon the number
of days, and innumerable grievances of life; she lived long I must confess,
but if we measure her life by the affection of her friends, and neighbors,
they will I know confess with me, that hers was too too short, she died much
too soon. Our time is appointed, so was hers; she was not cut off by untimely
chance, she shortened not her days by intemperate diet, she long enjoyed a
quiet and entire old age, and like an undisturbed taper burnt out to the last
week, yea a good while since with prophetique prediction she points out the
time of her departure. We shall have our change, she has wained some few
weeks and now has hers, from corruptible to incorruption, from mortal life
to life immortal, from the light of this world, by which we see a world of
misery, to the light of Heaven, and Righteousness, which shall never be
changed, obscured, nor eclipsed.

This for her we may well presume, for my own part I desire from my soul my
last end may be like unto hers, with firm faith, cheerful hope, settled
patience, and perpetual preparation, she waited, expected, called, and invited
Christ. So far with my Text, but I should wrong her much to say no more, she
was an excellent neighbor, I speak it before them that know it, and have most
ingeniously confessed it, she was grateful to the best, gracious to the poor,
peaceable, officious and affable to all.

She was an excellent wife, witness the many tears her husband shed, truer
tears I dare say never fell at funeral; witness his charge, and charity to
bring her home with honor. She like that Emblem of a good Houswife was
seldom far from home, at home most neatly industrious, but especially so
loving to her husband, that where to pattern such sweet conjugall Society I
profess I know not; Let us learn it, (beloved,) believe it, it is a great
advantage for heaven to be well skilled in the duty of marriage; this marriage
is but for a time, death will divorce it, the second time we should be married
to Christ, and will he wed them to himself whom he knew froward and unchaste
to a former Spouse? This true good tree has borne good fruit to the honor and
good of this Church, they that have tasted it truly, have praised it for a
fragrant and gracious savor, not many Orchards afford the like; she was happy
in it to the last.

But which is above all, she was a very good Christian, witness her meekness,
one of the truest marks of a Christian, meek she was as appeared by her
Matron-like plainness; so meek, that she scorned not to hold discourse with a
Child that could scarce speak again to her, an argument of that childish
innocence by which we attain heaven.

A good Christian she was, witness that great Example of her devotion, she
lived like Anna as it were continually in the Temple, twice a day for many
decads of years, she attended the worship of God Almighty in this Church, nor
would she leave that holy use, for age and weakness, but spite of sickness,
as if she meant to sacrifice her life to God, she came still, till the heavy
weight of death detained her in her bed.

For her Charity, a main part of the essence of a Christian; I must say for
that part of Charity that pertains to the tongue, in judging and censuring, she
did excel, she loved not to hear, she abhorred to speak evil of any, she
would give fair and candid constructions to all actions, loving and reverend
counsel to all that came near her. As for the Charity of her purse, I know
not what it was, nor indeed was it her desire that any should know; but this
know, she bred up Orphans, sent often meat, and money to her sick neighbors,
her servant has been seen to distribute good pieces of money to many poor
families from year to year, from house to house, I am sure if it were known who
sent it, it was the servants fault, for she charged her the contrary; she loved
(happy woman) to hide her treasure, and keep the left hand ignorant of what the
right had done. I am fain to glean and guess at her Charity, surely if all
were known, it would amount to a great sum, and her great glory, she rather
desired that God might have the glory, to whom of due it belongs. Go to the
earth blessed Earth, and sleep there sweetly, till the Resurrection, thy other
part is ere this safe arrived to the bosom of Abraham: Blessed Lord, give us
grace so to follow her holy example, that we may at last come to those
unspeakable joys, which thou have prepared for all them that unfainedly love
thee, and expect thy coming. Even so come Lord Jesus.

Amen. Soli Deo gloria.
FINIS.

