The Whole CONFESSION AND SPEECH OF Mr. Nathaniel Tompkins, Made upon the
Ladder at the time of his Execution, on Wednesday the Fifth of July; 1643.
Together with the manner of his coming to Execution.

July 5. 1643.
IT is this day ordered by the Committee of the House of Commons in Parliament
concerning Printing, That the Confession of Nathaniel Tompkins be printed by
Peter Cole.

JOHN WHITE.

London, Printed for Peter Cole at the Glove and Lion in Cornhill near the
Royal Exchange.

The two Provost-Marshals; viz. Master John Marshall, and Mr. Roger
Quatermain, accompanied with some Divines, diverse Troops of Horse, and several
companies of the Trained-Bands of the city of London, carried Mr. Nathaniel
Tompkins from Newgate on foot to Holborn, and just against Fetterlane end was
erected a Gibbet; and Mr. Tompkins being upon the Ladder, in the sight and
presence of many thousands of Citizens, the Confession he made, was as
follows:
GEntlemen, I do humbly acknowledge in the sight of Almighty God, (to whom, and
to Angels, and to this great assembly of people, I am now a spectacle) that my
sins have deserved of him, this untimely and shameful death, and I humbly
submit to it; And seeing all our times are in his hand, and that a Sparrow falls
not to the ground, but within his providence, much more Man that bears his
image: I am no Atheist, but do acknowledge Gods great protection to me, and his
goodness, and his mercy to me, in that he has during all this trouble I have
undergone, preserved my heart, and kept it from sin, and from thoughts of
distraction, I acknowledge his great mercy: I am no Papist, I must tell you,
why I shall speak a little of this, because I have bin desired by a good
friend, an ancient friend of mine, to declare my self in this point, and
therefore I shall say somewhat to you of this, I say that I was never Papist,
nor popishly inclined, and for some relations I have had to some that way, I
did never make any show of the least inclination to Papisme; I have sometimes
had conference, and disputes with some known Jesuits in foreign parts chiefly;
I thank God my Principles of Religion were so grounded, they could never shake
me; I have been called by some of them a Heretic in grain. But this is true
(which might make that worthy friend of mine put me in mind to clear my self,
in this point) in regard of some relations, and in regard I received very civil
usage from those of that Religion in foreign parts, where that Religion is
professed; I returned the like civilnesse to them here that J had occasion, and
especially to those whom any civil affair brought into my conversation; And
truly J speak this, if J were to live, J should do the same thing, having no
calling to the contrary; if J were an Officer it were somewhat.

J do forgive all the world, as J desire all the world should forgive me.

Touching the business for which J suffer, I do acknowledge that affection to
a Brother-in-Law, and affection and gratitude to the King, whose Bread J have
eaten now above 22 years, I have been a Servant to Him 20 years, I have been a
Servant to Him when He was a Prince, and ever since, it will be 23 years in
August next; I confess those two Motives drew me into this foolish business:
I have often since declared to good friends, that I was glad it was discovered,
because it might have occasioned very ill consequences; and truly I have
repented, having any hand in it.

Gentlemen, I thank God, God has given me so good a heart, and such presence
of mind, as I was confident he would either take me out of this danger, or he
would be present with me, to assist me in bearing this trouble; That J do
acknowledge this as a great mercy, either to take me away from the days of
sin, or to take me away from the evils of the time to come, which God avert; or
to take me away from the infirmities of age now approaching upon me: I know
not what more to say.

Then turning to the Executioner, he said:

HOnest Friend, J forgive you, as the Executioner of justice, J forgive you.
And I do recommend my self to the hands of God Almighty; And one thing, pray
give me leave to say, I hope to be saved only by Faith in Jesus Christ.

Lieutenant Colonel Washborn asked Master Tompkins this Question, Do you
acknowledge this your suffering to be just?

Master Tompkins answered, I have said it already, pray do not trouble me.

Lieutenant Colonel Washborne again spoke to Mr. Tompkins, and said; Whereas
you have had a hand in this you suffer for, if you know any other Plot that is
prejudicial to the Parliament or State, pray reveal it?

Master Tompkins answered, Pray trouble me not, I have done my duty.

It is to be noted that in all this time from the beginning to the end, he
never so much as altered his countenance, nor by his outward appearance seemed
to be in the least manner abashed with the apprehension of death.

July, 5. 1643.
IT is this day Ordered by the Committee of the House of Commons in Parliament
concerning printing, That the Confession of Nathaniel Tompkins be printed by
Peter Cole.

JOHN WHITE.

This is entered in Stationers' Hall Book according to Order.

FINIS.

