FOUR SERMONS, PREACHED By the Right Reverend FATHER in GOD, JOHN TOWERS, D. D.
L. Bishop of Peterburgh.

1. At the Funeral of the Right Honorable, William Earl of Northampton. 2. At
the Baptism of the Right Honorable, James Earl of Northampton. 3. Before King
JAMES, in Defense of The Material Church. 4. Before K. CHARLES at White Hall in
time of Lent.
He that has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says unto the Churches.
Rev. 2.7.

London, Printed for Thomas Rooks, and are to be sold at the sign of the Lamb,
at the East end of S. Paul's, near the School. 1660.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE JAMES, Earl of NORTHAMPTON: And to his Excellent Lady,
ISABELLA, The Right Honorable Countess of NORTHAMPTON.
Right Honorable, my singular good Lord,
IT is now more than time that these holy Sermons should come to light, into
the light of this World, to be themselves a Light to the World, after so many
years since the departure of the Reverend and Religious Author of them into the
light of God.

When they first come abroad, whom ought they earlier to greet than your noble
Lordship? that his Posthume Papers might crave protection from the same Family
which gave Patronage to his living Person.

From the service of the Earldom, he went up to wait upon the Throne, and yet
did never forget Your Castle-Ashby, after his arrive to the Kings White Hall;
though he was found to have merit enough to entitle his attendance upon the two
best Peers, in Chaplainry to your Grandfather who deserved to be (in respect of
the Earldom, though there was a deserved, and much more ancient rise of the
noble name of the Comptons) Ortus Domus suae (a fairer commendation than which,
the quickest best-tongu'd Orator could not invent for himself) and in Tutorage
to your Father, whose fall was so valiant, that he chose to pay a magnanimous
Death, rather than to owe a bestowed Life; though from thence, the same merit
carried him on to do yearly homage to the two choicest Kings, James the wise,
and Charles the Religious; yet he had also humble Gratitude enough, to confess
aloud, it was Northampton's Arm, more than his own hand and Pen, that raised
him.

My good Lord, you see already your just Title to the whole: But you have still
a more peculiar Interest in these selected four. One of them was Preached at
that Parish which was, all, your Ancestors, and the Authors; Nine parts yours,
and the Tithes his; and Tither, of duty, it ought to return: Another, at your
own (...), the second, the Baptismall Birth of your Noble self: A third, at
the third Birth of the most munificent, your Fathers Father, when he had passed
over the life of Nature, and the life of Grace, and was received up into the
life of Glory. A fourth is added, to expiate the delay in payment of the three
former.

Nay, my most noble Lord, all this will not suffice, that you should have title
to these Composures, from your Progenitors, from your self, from the Author,
unless I humbly acknowledge the right you have in my Transcription too, from
the claim which your Honor may lay to my very self also, your interest in me,
your jurisdiction over me, your purchase of me.

Your Honor had interest in me, before I was so happy as to see your Lordship,
or so wise as to know my felf, even whilst I was yet in Lumbis; for sure our
Birth is not so wholly wretched, as to have nothing else entailed upon us at
our coming into the world, besides original sin: we are even born with
respects, and duties, and devotions to original Benefactors too.

Your jurisdiction over me shall never be disowned by me whilst I have breath,
Dum spiritus hos regit Artus, in that, since I had breath, your Lordship was
the first Master I ever had.

Master, and Father too, by your purchase of me, in that I did eat of your
Lordships bread, when, by the common calamities of the Times, and the deserved
ones of my own, I had no bread of my own to eat, but went abroad to Preach the
Gospel like the Gospels first Disciples without P^rse or Scrip. Luke 22.35.


And now, my most excellently voriuous and meek Lady, is not your right the
same with my Noble Lords: and has not your own goodness bought a like
interest in me? I have nothing to return to either of your Honors, but my
prayers that You both may enjoy the whole benefit of this which is a dedication
upon design, that as you are regenerate by Baptism (the discourse of one of
these Homilies,) you may so love to serve God in his own House, (the subject of
another;) that when your Bodies are interred in the Church (the matter of a
third,) your souls may be conveyed to that place which Christ is gone up to
prepare for you (the subject matter of a fourth) there to enjoy honor and
bliss eternal. It Is really the Prayer of,

My Noble Lord, and my Religious Lady, Your Honors most Faithful, most obliged
Servant, William Towers.

A SERMON Preached at the FVNERALS of the Right Honorable WILLIAM EARL of
Northampton.
Rev. 14.13. Beati Mortui, qui in Domino moriuntur.
Blessed are the Dead, that die in the Lord.

FOR the Authority of this Book of the Revelation of S. John, Occasio Operis.
I should not need to plead, but that for the honorable memory of the Person of
Honor, whose Body we now interr; and because of the morenesse of Time since
his death, it will mis-become such an obliged Chaplain of such a bountiful
Patron, not to take pains somewhat more than ordinary, and to exceed the hour
in this last Public Service which he performs, for the most liberal of Masters
to the meanest of Gods Household Servants: Let this short Apology bear me out in
my prolixnesse after, since, by his own example, I desire to do much of good,
at his Death, (to those who are come hither to remember him, and to mourn their
own loss, though in his blessedness) the business of whose Life was, to do
all good to all.

The joint consent of the Ancient and Modern Church, Authoritus Libri.
has, with an easy refutation of some weak objections to the contrary, and
with a constant and unanimous submission of their Faith and Obedience to the
Contents of it, by the direction of the Holy Spirit, received this Book into,
and by the special Providence of the same Spirit, preserved it in the Canon of
the Scripture.

That the blessed Apostle and Evangelist S. John was the Author of it by
writing we doubt not; and that, being the Apostle of Christ, he wrote this, (as
he did his Gospels and Epistles) being inspired by the Holy Ghost, to remain in
the Church of Christ as Apostolical Scripture: for confirmation whereof, Verse 1.
He calls it also in the beginning, The Revelation of Jesus Christ, and tells us,
that God gave it unto him, and that he sent, and signified it by his Angel unto
his servant John.

It Is a slight cavil, that some have made against it, The place which it holds
amongst the other Books of Canonical Scripture; because forsooth it stands the
last, and was written some time after the other, and therefore (say they) was
added and foisted in, after the whole body of the Canon was perfected: Where
there are many several Books, must not some one be the last? And if this had
not been added, (added, but not foisted; for God and not Man, put it in) would
they have made the same exception against the Epistle of S. Jude, which was the
last before this? or against any other, which instead of this, Themselves call
the last? They cannot, for they own it: Or would they have God Date all his
Letters, Epistles, Writings to Man at the same time? what man does so?

But, as for the Order of it, that it stands last in place, it is so far from
diminishing the Authority of it, that, indeed it adds unto it, and does
exceedingly commend it to us; for, it is, intruth, as the Signet of God, with
which the Holy Spirit would seal up, and conclude the whole Canon, both Old and
New of Divine Scripture; in regard whereof we have it more extraordinarily
approved unto us, both in the beginning of it, with a Blessing upon him that
reads, and upon them that hear the words of this Prophecy, and keep those
things that are written therein, verse. 3. And in the end of it, with the same
Blessing upon him that keeps the sayings of the Prophecy of this Book, 22.7.
and with a dreadful curse upon him, who shall either add unto these things,
God shall add unto him the Plagues that are written in this Book, or, shall
take away from the words of the book of this Prophecy, God shall take away his
part out of the book of life, c. 22. v. 18, 19. he shall have no part nor lot
in it. Beloved, What could be spoken more thoroughly, to ratify the authority
of it? If we may add nothing to it, it is already every way absolute and
perfect, the word of God without question; the only word to which we may not
add our own inventions without great offense: If we may take nothing from it,
again it is a forcible Argument of the sacred in violablenesse of it, (for what
bold foisting man would ever dare to speak so arrogantly of the most Holy his
own Endeavors? He that could write all the rest so holily, could never be
guilty of such a pride, nor ever able to counterfeit so exact a Holiness) and
that it is indeed the Holy Scripture; for it is the Scripture of which Christ
says John 10. that It cannot be broken, v. 35.

This is a main point observable, in which this Book stands equaled to the
sacred unquestioned Writings of Moses himself, the first and chief of all the
Prophets, and Penmen of Gods Book; For, as those Books of his, because they
usher in, and are, as it were, the Foredoor, the entrance into the rest of the
whole Scripture, are therefore in several places, strengthened and fenced with
such a seal as this, Deuteronomy. 4.2. Ye shall not add unto the Word which I command
you, neither shall ye diminish ought from it. And again, c. 12. v. 32. Thou
shall not add thereto, nor diminish from it: So, this Book standing in the
rear, and, as it were, shutting up the back-Gate of the same Canonical
Scripture, is likewise furnished and stamped with the same Authentic Seal of
Gods Holy Spirit, to signify how perfect, how inviolable it is, that nothing
must be put to, no Postscript; or taken from it, no Deleatur, no Index
expurgatorius neither; that, as Moses was a main Coryphaeus, to lead on the
Vanguard, in Gods Spiritual Warfare; so was S. John another Coryphaeus of
special Note, to bring up the Rear in the same Battle.

Why it was ordered by the Church (which took care to gather together the
Writings of the Apostles and Evangelists) to be placed the last of all the
Books, there is a manifest reason; not that it is behind the rest in worth and
excellence, but in regard of the Time wherein it was written. In vita Johannis.
S. Jerome reports, that in the time of the second great Persecution of the
Christians under Domitian the Roman Emperor, (the first Tyranny they tasted of
was under Nero) in the 14. year of his Reign did S. Lib. 3. cap. 25. Vid.
Eusebius. Hist. Ecclesias. L. 3. c. 18.
John write this Book in the Island Pathmos: And Irenaeus (a Father in the
Church far more ancient than St. Jerome) affirms as much that it was not (then)
long, since St. John wrote his Revelation, Sed pene sub nostro saeculo, says
he, almost about our time, toward the end of Domitians Reign; so that, An. Dom.
96. it was written, after all, both Gospels and Epistles of the New Testament;
for he outlived all the Apostles, even to the third year of Traian the 14th
Roman Emperor, says Sophronius, and that was 102 after the birth of Christ,
and the 68. from his passion, by St. Jerome's computation, and 25 years after
the Destruction of Jerusalem: Therefore it is placed last, because written last,
not because least in Dignity and Divine Authority; no, it is truth which Beza
speaks of it, in his Preface to it, that the Holy Ghost did set down in this
precious Book, whatsoever Predictions of the former Prophets did remain, to be
fulfilled after Christ's coming; and therefore Ocolampadius, in his Preface to
Daniel's Prophecy, calls this Book the best Paraphrase upon all the other
Prophets.

The Argument of this whole Book is, Argum. Libri.
principally Prophetical; though there be Doctrinal, Exhortative, and
Instructive passages sprinkled here and there among the Prophecies; but
Prophetical, for the most part, it is; whence St. John, in the beginning,
calls it the words of this Prophecy, a Prophecy of things that should come to
pass, even from the time that he wrote, to the end of the world; of some
Occurrents that should befall the Church of God (then) presently, in St. John's
time; and of other Trials that the Church should endure continually, through
the whole course of her warfare here on earth; first, from the Roman Tyrants;
afterward, from diverse Heretics; and lastly, from Antichrist himself; of
their several oppositions and insultings against her, wherewith they should
grievously vex her, (seeming in a manner to be forsaken of Christ her Head) and
almost utterly oppress her: But withal, of those sweet consolations which the
Elect of God should have under their cross; and that those Tempests of
Afflictions which they underwent, were not carnal, blown upon them with every
wind, or merely from the rage and malice of their Enemies; but that God (that
Wind, Joh. 3.8.
that Spirit which blows where it will) had the chief hand in them; and
that, by his providence, things were so ordered for the exercise of the
faithful; and that they should not always continue, no, not too long a time;
and that they should, in his good and appointed time, be changed up into the
glory of Heaven; and that all the Enemies of the Church should at length, by
the power of Christ their victorious Captain, be thrown into the ever burning
Lake of fire and brimstone.

We may divide the whole Book (briefly, Partitio libri.
for I must not stand long upon this Discourse; Divide it I may; I come not to
expound the whole Book; and the Text it self affords matter enough for this
short time, though I eke it out with a borrowed part of another hour) into a
Preface, Paraeus.
to the ninth verse of the first Chapter; the Prophecy it self, from thence to
the sixteenth verse of the last Chapter; and from thence to the end, the
Epilogue, or Conclusion.

We are now in the midst of the Prophecy, and the whole Prophecy may be
distinguished into 7 several visions notoriously distinct asunder to them that
read them with careful observation; which Christ was pleased for the future
good of his Church to show to his beloved St. John, whilst he lived a banished
man in the Isle of Pathmos.

I may not stand now to show you these 7 Visions, with the subject matter of
them: I read not a Lecture upon them all, nor upon any one, entirely: This Text
is a small part of the fourth Vision, which takes up three whole Chapters, the
twelfth, thirteenth, and fourteenth: It is of the Woman traveling in birth,
and the Draggon gaping to devour the fruit of her womb; of her flight into the
Wilderness, and his pursuit after her, resisted by Michael and his Angels;
then of the two Beasts, one with seven heads and ten horns, the other with two
horns like a Lamb, which spoke as a Draggon; both persecuting the Saints: then
of the victorious Lamb, upon that Mount Sion, and of the three Angels, one
preaching the Gospel, another proclaiming the fall of Babylon; a third
denouncing punishment to them that worship the Beast: Lastly, of Christ upon
the Cloud, with a sharp sickle in his hand, and the Angel proclaiming the last
Harvest of the World; and the Vintage, and Wine Press of the Wrath of God: All
this is the subject of the fourth Vision; in which the future estate of Gods
Church in this World, even from the Infancy of it, under the Ministry of
Christ's Apostles, unto the end of the World, is far more clearly shaddowed out
unto us, than in the former Visions.

The third Angel begins at the 9. verse of this Chapter, and continues to the
end of the 11. Then, in the 12. and 13. verses (part of the last whereof I read
unto you) follows an Epiphonema of exhortation and consolation to the Saints of
God, that in all these vexations with which Antichrist shall grate them, they
persevere with patience and constancy in the faith of Christ, and obedience to
his Gospel; that they faint not under their tribulations, but hold out to the
end, being held up with the hope of eternal felicity in Heaven, which is here
propounded.

The Exhortation to perseverance is in the 12. verse; the Argument for it is
taken from that Tragical end, that miserable and woeful event which must befall
Antichrist, and his unsound followers; that seeing they shall (at last) drink
of the Wine of the Wrath of God, and drink it off, the very dregs of it; that
they shall be tormented with fire and brimstone, and shall have no rest day and
night; here is the patience of the Saints, v. 12. Here is an Argument for their
perseverance, that the Holy ones of God, who keep the Commandments of God, and
the says of Jesus, that they suffer manfully under the bitterest Tyranny of
their Adversaries, as knowing, that it shall at last be guerdon'd to them with
the fearful endlesnesse of insufferable torments in Hell fire.

Then follows the Consolation in this verse of my Text, And I heard a voice
from Heaven, saying, Write, blessed are the Dead that die in the Lord: The
Argument which the Holy Ghost here uses, to strengthen and comfort them, ready
now to droop under the weight of their sufferings, is drawn from the assurance
of (the most inestimable Reward) eternal bessednesse in Heaven; and that Death
it self (the last and greatest evil, with which the faithful can be afflicted
by their most despiting enemies) is no evil at all, for it is the ready, though
straight, and narrow, and severe Way, to the certain joy and glory of the
Heavenly Kingdom.

I heard a voice from Heaven: from thence we see (though through a cloud,
through the water of that, and the tears of our own eyes) our comfort comes;
It Is most certain, most true; were it the voice of God himself, or of one of
his Angels at his command, St. John says not whether; but, the voice of Christ
himself his Sheep are sure it is, they know his voice; the same in effect
which we have heard from him before, in his holy Gospel more than once, Joh.
5.24. Verily, verily, I say unto you, he that hears my Words, and believes on
him that sent me, has everlasting life, and shall not come into condemnation:
There is no condemnation to them that are in Christ, (Romans 8.1.) and there is
no condemnation too to them, in the ears of whose Souls are the words of
Christ; and in John 8.51. (not without another and another) a double Verily, I
say unto you (to cast off all doubt) If a man keep my saying, he shall nevtr
see death, the eternal, the cursed death: The very same, to all purposes that
this Voice says here; Write, blessed are the dead, etc.

There are three things observable in this Voice from Heaven; Divisio Versus.
first, the command to Write. Christ will not put his Church to trust to the
uncertainty, the deceivableness of unwritten Traditions: but, as in the
beginning, there was a general command for the writing of this whole Prophecy,
Write, says Christ to the Prophet St. John chap. 1. v. 19. Write the things
which thou have seen, and the things which are, and the things which shall be
hereafter,: so has he, here again, a special command for the writing of this
heavenly voice, concerning the blessedness of them who die in the Lord; he
will have our comfort confirmed to us here, as the Divel's several suggestions
were rejected and confuted by himself, Matt. 4.
with a Scriptum est; the Scripture, the written Word of God, shall be the
ground, as of our Faith, so of our Hope, our encouragement and consolation
through that Faith. Secondly, the Argument, the substance of what he is
commanded to deliver to the Church by writing, blessedness. And thirdly, the
assurance and proof of this blessedness by two strong Reasons; one, that they
are now gotten to the end of their Race, that they enjoy a perpetual rest from
all the labors and sufferings which they have sustained under the Sun, they
rest from their labors; and the other, that they have so run as to obtain; 1
Cor. 9.24.
that having finished their course, they have not rest only, but their Brabium,
their Crown also, which was laid up for them, 2 Timothy 4.7, 8.
their Crown of righteousness, their works do follow them; It Is a Metalepsis,
a figurative speech, as much as to say, the fruit of their Works, the Reward,
the Crown of their Righteousness, which was laid up in Heaven, is given to
them by the Lord the righteous Judge at that day, the day of their death, as S.
Paul speaks, 2 Timothy 4.8.

That which is the Argument of this Scripture, is now our Text, and must be
anon the Argument of our Discourse, Blessed are the dead, a most sweet and
comfortable Argument, a Theme (beloved) full of gracious solace, wherewith to
arm the faithful against the evil day, that of death, that it is not, as the
Epicurean Sect of Philosophers taught, Extrema linea rerum, the end of all our
being; that when the body returns to the earth as it was made, the spirit does
not so too, but unto God who gave it, Eccles. 12.7. that we are not born at all
adventure, and shall be hereafter as though we had never been, as those ungodly
fools dreamed, Wisd. 2.2. that the breath of our nostrils are not as smoke, and
a little spark in the moving of our heart, which being extinguished our body
shall be turned into ashes, and our spirit shall vanish as the soft air: They
taught ill, and their Disciples, the Sadduces learned as ill from them, that
there is no Resurrection, Act. 23.8. No, if Christ be preached that he rose
from the dead, we may ask S. Paul's question, How say some among you, that there
is no resurrection of the dead? 1 Cor. 15.12. And. If in this life only we have
hope in Christ, we are of all men most miserable, v. 19. but we are therefore
miserable in this life, that at our death we may be blessed, as my Text has
it, Blessed are the dead.

In the handling of which, to fit you to the more profitable hearing of what
shall be delivered, let me put you in mind of the Wise man's counsel, Eeclus.
7.36. Remember the end, (the last things) and thou shall not do amiss: There
are Quatuor novissima, four things, which do, last, befall the state of man,
Death, Judgment, Blessedness in Heaven, and Torments in Hell: These would be
often thought on, and duly considered by us, as a most sovereign Antidote
against the Infections of this world, a precious preservative against Sin;
Death, which must bring us to Judgment; Judgment, which must either convey us
to Heavenly Bliss, or condemn us to eternal restless misery; there is the
blessedness of the Saints in Heaven, to inflame our hearts with a holy desire
after it; and the wretched state of the damned in Hell, to make us wise and
wary for the avoiding of it: It Is a rule of St. Chrysostom's that we should be
so, and a promise thereupon to ascape it, Non sinet in Gehennam incidere,
Gehennae meminisse, the awful thinking of it, will keep us from falling into
it. These are the Quatuor novissima, the four last things, which the Wise man
would have engraven in our memories, with a Pen of Iron, and with the point of
a Diamond, to keep us from doing anisse; Memorare novissima, Remember the end,
and thou shall not do amiss.

Within the compass of this short Text, Divisio Textus.
we have two of these four last things to employ our thoughts upon, Death and
Blessedness; Death, which all men by nature fear; Blessedness, which all men
by that same instinct, desire; and therefore no man living, but this Text
concerns him; no man, but may reap profit from the Doctrine it affords: That Is
twofold; in the unfolding and applying of which, I entreat your attention and
devotion.

1. That Death, though in it self it be bitter and terrible, yet, to Gods
children, it is so sweetened by Christ, that, in them, it is made the way to
blessedness; Psalm. 118.80.
This is the Gate of Heaven, and the Righteous shall enter in thereby: The Dead
are blessed that die in the Lord.

2. That Blessedness, though it be so sweet a thing, the object of all men's
desires, so generally aimed at by all men in their several endeavors, yet,
all our life time here we come short of it, we attain it not till our death;
Dicique beatus antiobitum nemo; nemo, before that; and not omnes after, not all
of us then, but they only, who die in the Lord: Blessed are the dead that die
in the Lord.

I desire first to fasten your considerations upon Death, which is the way to
blessedness; and (to keep the best wine till the last) in the second place, to
refresh you with the Meditation of Blessedness which insueth upon death.

Nor will this former discourse, Praefatio ad partem primam.
as it is pertinent to the business we are now upon, the death of that Worthy
and Right Honorable Patriot of his Country (for whom wise men religiously
mourn in a Sermon, as witty men used to lament for Heathens in an Elegy) be
needless and superfluous to those that live; since the often taking occasion
(as it is now most unhappily for us, and most blessedly for him whom we
remember, offered by that God who has taken him from us to himself) to six
the eyes of our mind upon the end of our life, is so behoovefull, that even
Plato, the Heathen Philosopher, but admirable for wit and learning, found such
a benefit of it, that he defined Wisdom to be the Meditation of death; and
though, in that, he aimed not, as we do, to persuade men to the often thinking
upon it, (for, difinitions are the Commonplace of one sort of Learning, the
speculative and persuasions of another, the practical) yet, in this respect
especially, may we more truly affirm it than he did, that it is a great part of
wisdom to accustom our selves often to the meditation of death: and howsoever
the Devil, that great enemy of Mankind, does, for his own ends, and the
readier advancement and enlarging of his Kingdom, labor by all means, to lull
us into security, by the pleasures of this World, and to steal out of our
thoughts the remembrance of our death, that so our death may steal upon us at
unawares, Luke 21.34. and take us unprovided; to make us, ducere in bonis dies
nostros, to spend our days in jollity, that we may go down to the Grave in a
moment, Job 21.13. yet the Spirit of God directs us a safer course, Eccles.
11.8. If a man live many years and rejoice in them all, yet let him remember
the days of darkness: There is danger when death steals upon us (Oh then we
have lost that blessing of our Text, which the soul of this our dear Father
departed, has found! It Is a Curse, let death come hastily; and sure it is
lawful to pray as we do in our Letany, against a Curse, from sudden death good
Lord deliver us) when we have not made our selves acquainted with it, and
digested in our thoughts, the worst that it can do; then is it true indeed that
S. Paul has fore-warned us, 1 Thessalonians. 5.2. that the day of the Lord comes as
a Thief in the night: Then, as the Fishes that are taken in an evil Net, and as
the Birds, Eccles. 9.12.
that are caught in a snare, so are the sons of men snared in an evil time,
when it falls suddenly upon them.

First therefore we consider, how bitter, how fearful, and terrible a thing
death is in it self to all mankind, and how grievous it continues to the
Natural man. Secondly, How the bitterness, of it is taken away by Christ to the
Faithful, and that, to them, it is made a way to blessedness.

How unpleasing death is, in it self, Mors terribilis.
in that it is so contrary to Nature, that it destroys our being in Nature,
which every thing that has a being does, by an instinct of Nature, labor to
preserve; but those things that have life, especially, and so a sense and
knowledge of their being; nothing is so irrecoverably hurtful to them as
death, which takes away their being; the very Beast trembles at it; But Man
above all, who is endued with understanding, to know (more than by a sensitive
knowledge) the benefit of his Being, how does he, even by Nature, shrink at the
fear of it! Behold Saul the King of Israel, the stout and valiant man, so
trained up and exercised in war, who had slain many men, and been so conversant
with the face of death in its cruellest and most ugly shapes! yet, when it came
to concern himself, when he heard from that spirit which the Witch of Endor
had raisd, in the likeness of Samuel, that to morrow, he and his Sons should
be with him, his courage failed him, and his heart fainted, he was so stricken
with a sudden fear of amazement, that (half-dead already with the news of
death) he fell all along on the earth, 1 Samuel 28.20. I, even the best of mere
men, Gods holy Servant David, by the dictate of Nature apprehended this fear,
and fled from Saul, 1 Samuel 26.13. and Eliah feared and fled from the threats of
Jezabel, 1 King 19. and those holy men, those hundred Prophets of the Lord
together thrust themselves into Caves for fear of her raging, 1 Kings 18. I,
beyond all these, our Savior Christ himself, that holy one, Gods Righteous
Servant, Is. 53.11.
that had done no wickedness, 1 Pet. 2.22.
nor was there any deceit in his mouth; he, as he was Man, yielding to the
power, to the very weakest of humane nature in himself, did not free himself
from this fear of death; I speak not of his quitting his place, and departing
by ship into a desert upon the beheading of John, Matthew. 14. but, when the
treason of Judas grew close upon him, when he was at hand that betrayed him,
then did he (...), Matthew. 26.37. The word is two significant for our English
phrase; it signifies such a deadly grief and astonishment with fear, as makes
all the spirits faint within, being utterly forsaken of help; now do the
sorrows of the grave compass him, the snares of death overtake him, Ps.
116.3.18.4.
and the floods of wickedness make him afraid.

Beloved, if he suffered the force of Nature to prevail so far, to be so strong
in him, what can the strongest of weak men hope to meet with in his encounter
with death, if left to himself, and that help which Humane Nature can afford
him, but faintness of heart, and dejectedness of spirit, and a trembling of
his best blood through every joint?

It Is a strong and violent breach of one of the goodliest Frames of Nature,
(for I speak still of the Natural man) when the Soul is enforced from the body;
we hear not without a secret compassion the forsaken Ox bemoaning his own
loss, with his lowing, when his Fellow, that had long drawn with him in the
same yoke, is haled from him to the slaughter. The Turtle does more, upon the
loss of her Mate, mourns in solitariness, and pines away: When two friends
who have converst together in amity for some years space, are now to be parted
and removed into several places far distant, where they shall no more enjoy the
pleasure of each others familiarity (I speak it feelingly, and I even weep it;
he whose remove we now grieve, though I always reverenced him as my Lord, yet
he vouchsafed even to love me as his Friend) what sadness is this to them? and
how pensively do they brook it!

Think, when a man and wife who have spent much time together in that near tie
of love and mutual society, shall at last be parted by that violent necessity,
and unkind stroke of death, what a heartbreaking it must be to the Husband, to
have the wife of his bosom, whom his soul loved so tenderly, to be rent from
his side by that Iron-hand of dissolution; now all his joys leave him, and he
refuses to be comforted, because she is not: And then, think withal what a
sad divorce this muct needs prove betwixt the soul and the body, who have lived
long together in a strict neernesse of affection, as greater cannot be; when
the soul must leave the body, his so dear Consort, to which he gave life, and
formed a better being; when he must be forced to take into his consideration
the miserable condition that then attends either of them: first for the body,
that it must, after a few hours, be shut up in a dark and loathsome Grave, and
be made food for Worms and Toads; that body which now lives and breathes, and
sees, and speaks, and hears, and stretches it self upon a bed of Down,
presently to be laid forth upon the cold earth, blind and deaf and dumb,
without sense, without speech, without life; that body which was so lately
cherished with such variety of food, whose belly and palate was courted and
served with the riches of Sea and Land, which was clothed with Silks and
Purple, and was lodged in a Couch of Ivory, decked with Coverings of Tapestry,
with carved works about it, and fine linen upon it, and perfumed with Myrrh,
Aloes, and Cinnamon, and was defended from heat and cold, and the least
unpleasing Air, with a thousand divis'd curiosities, which lived in stately
Palaces of magnificent structure and costly furniture; that delicate body to be
so soon clapped up with a Habeas Corpus into so narrow a Prison, into a loathsome
stinking Grave of dead Carcasses, full of bones and rottenness, noysomnesse
and Vermin, and it more noysom than they; What a thought of horror must this
be to the afflicted soul in behalf of the body, when he contemplates that sad
change! Instead of his lofty Palace, the homliness of a Sepulcher; of his soft
bed, the harshnesse of the earth; of his delicate Garments, the baseness of
the Windingsheet; for his former neatness nothing but putrefaction; for his
perfumes, a stinking savor, (and for his savor it self, deadness;) for his
Servants and attendants, the company of crawling worms at the best, which will
more really destroy him, than (when alive) the most unfaithful of his servants
could: How must he be tormented with extremity of grief, for that which shall
befall his body!

But then, to imagine the state of the Soul which has not hope in Christ (for
we are in Nature yet) to think of that Incognita, that new Region, unknown to
any living Wight, whither it must now travel naked and unaccompanied, save with
the horror of his gnawing Conscience, to labor to conceive those unconceivable
woes of that other world, and to comprehend that incomprehensible eternity of
them, it is wonder he can live a moment to digest that indigestible thought;
it is a wonder that the terror of it does not prevent the hand and sithe of his
approaching death, that it does not anticipate his fate, and prove more quick
to dead him, more nimble than his disease to strike and slay his soul: For one
to be taken from his wealth, pleasure, honor, friends, wife, children; to
leave these outward contentfull things makes death bitter to him; it is another
death, This O mors quam amara est memoria tuis! it is the Wise-mans exclamation,
Ecclus. 41.1. O death, how bitter is the remembrance of thee, to a man that
lives at rest in his possessions, that has nothing to vex him, that has
prospepity in all things! The separation that is made betwixt him and his
world, afflicts him; but the separation betwixt him and himself (his soul and
his body) is intolerable; how loathly it leaves that old companion? how
loathly it goes out of that beloved dwelling! St. Hierome writes the life of
Hilarion, a good Christian, a devout and holy man, one that feared God, and in
most of his life so little feared death, that he desired nothing more, than to
be dissolved, and to be with Christ: Phil. 1.23
and yet, when death began to seize upon him, when he was now in his last
agony, his soul had a strong touch of this fear, and was loath to go, insomuch
that he was fain to have recourse to his faith, and, by the help of it to
encourage his fainting soul in his journey to Heaven; Egredere, go out my soul,
what fear thou? go out valiantly; have thou served God these seventy years,
and do thou now fear to leave thy body? Beloved, Eratenim eremita; and
moriebaturoctoginta annos natus.
if this Holy man, who had, from ten years age, dedicated his whole life to the
service of God, found yet the natural man so strong in him, that he was put to
his plunge, in which he might have stuck, had he not awakened his faith (
awake, awake, why sleep thou, O my faith?) and called that to his help, how
terrible must this dissolution needs appear to them who have lived in their
sins, and not yet cast off those sins by repentance! who, when they should
grapple with death, and conquer it by their faith in Christ, alas! they lie
under the weight of their sins and cannot rise; they struggle in vain; that
load oppresses them; their sin, 1 Cor. 15.56.
which is the sting of death is fastened in their hearts and slayes them; their
death is a flaughter, the worst death of all, Mors peccatorum pessima, Psalm.
34.21. Evil misfortune shall slay the ungodly; Siccine separas, amara mors? may
be their complaint, in the bitterness of their spirit they may well call it
the darkness of death, as Agag did, 1 Samuel 15.32.

Beloved, have you looked enough upon death in his worst shape? and can ye
collect how terrible he must needs appear to the wicked, over whom he has full
power? since, even to Gods holy servants, out of a natural desire to preserve
their being, since, even to Gods beloved Son, when to show himself truly man,
he was content to yield so sar to the sway of humane nature within himself, he
seemed so odious, that in the presence of some of his Apostles, he did not let
to discover his passion, My soul is exceeding sorrowful, even unto death,
Matt. 26.38. Mat. 26.44.
to pray to his Father thrice against it; and, but that the will of his Father
was in the midst of his bowels, and his obedience stronger than death, he would
have begged three times more, that the Cup might have passed from him; so
odious, that for the comfort of the Elect, it is one of the greatest blessings
betroath'd to them in the New Jerusalem, that, there shall be no more death,
Rev. 21.4. Then now cheer up your thoughts again by faith in Christ, and with
that eye of faith, behold death vanquished by that Christ, behold him trampled
under those victorious feet, so languishing, so dead himself, that he cannot
hurt you, he cannot scare you.

This is the second consideration of death, Mors Porta Coeli.
that how evil soever it be in it self, even the way to Hell, yet, by Gods
goodness it is become a Portal to the Children of Grace, by which the soul
passes out of the miseries of this life into the joys of Heaven; even the
dead are blessed, that die in the Lord.

God made not Death, Wisdom 1.13. through the envy of the Devil it came into
the world, Wisd. 2.24. it is he that was the Murderer from the beginning, Joh.
8.44. Murderer of our bodies and of our souls too, death of both is his work,
it is he that has the power of death; Heb. 2.14
and if only the body di'd, he would soon disown the name, and disvalue all the
power he had: Now wherefore came Christ into the world? wherefore was he
manifested in the flesh? why, for this purpose says S. John, ut dissolvat
opera, that he might destroy the works of the Devil, 1 John 3.8. He took part
of our flesh and blood; why? that he might die; without that he could not die;
the Godhead is immortal, and why die? but, that through his death he might
destroy him that had the power of death, the Devil, Heb. 2.14. So truly might
he say of himself, John 10.10. I am come, that they might have life.

This was it which was prophesied so long since, Hos. 13.14. O mors, ero mors
tua: O death, I will be thy death, thy plagues; O grave, I will be thy
destruction; the Prophecy is not yet fulfilled, if we read that place as the
Vulgar Edition has it, I will be thy death; Death shall be destroyed indeed,
but not yet, it is the last enemy, 1 Cor. 15.26.
that must be destroyed; but if we read it, as we have well translated it, O
death, I will be thy plagues, it is every day fulfilled in that glorious
victory, with which so many of the Saints of God, at their dissolution, do
triumph over it; Christ does not take away death, but the evil of death; not
the being, but the sting of it; as, whilome he suffered Esau to meet his Jacob,
but first he drove all enmity out of the heart of that Esau, Genesis 33.4.

This is one degree of the change, which Christ has wrought in the nature of
death to his Servants, that it has no power over them to hurt them; they shall
not be hurt of this second death, Revel. 2.11. who overcome the first, that of
the soul by sin; conquer that by Faith, and thou subduest the fear of this, He
that believes in me, though he were dead yet shall he live, John 11 25. he
shall chaunt out S. Paul's triumph, 1 Cor. 15. O Death, where is thy sting? O
Grave, where is thy victory?

This is one degree, but this is not all; it is not enough to make us blessed,
that death hurts us not; it must be forced against the own nature of it, to
help us; it is a part, as being a means, of our happiness, that we die; Thou
fool, that which thou sowest is not quickened, except it die, 1 Cor. 15.36. so
that the very blow we receive from this hard hand, is healing; that which our
sin made to be our last enemy, the goodness of God has made the first friend
that we meet with in our passage to another world.

When a child sees a goodly cluster of ripe Grapes, he thinks it pity to put
them into the press, and to deface them; but the skillful man knows, that this
hard usage preserves the liquor of them from corruption: we are sometimes these
ignorant children; we think it pity that such a holy, devout, religious good
man should die; alas, he can be ill spared, yet God in his wisdom, makes this
man, thus ripe for heaven, the more happy by death it self; he falls into the
ground, that he may bring forth much fruit, Jo. 12.24.

This is the true ground, beloved, of all our spiritual rejoicing upon our
Deathbed, that we know we leave this, for an infinitely better life, that we
can say with the Apostle, Phil. 1.21
Mori mihi lucrum, we gain by this change: That we receive no hurt by death;
that it is, at the worst, but a sleep, in which we rest from our labors, this
is much; but that we should reap profit and honor, that the Crown of
Righteousness is laid up for us, that the reward of our works does follow us:
this is all; this is the very blessedness of the dead that die in the Lord.

The former is sufficient to enforce the Apostles Exhortation, 1 Thessalonians. 4.13.
concerning them who are asleep, that we sorrow not for them; but this is able
to make us so affected toward our Brethren, when they go before us to our
heavenly Father, as our Savior Christ would have his Disciples affected
toward him upon the like occasion, If ye loved me, ye would rejoice, because I
said I go unto the Father, John 14.28. Be not sorry, not only so, but rejoice
rather, because (as Solomon taught long since) the day of death, is not so sad,
is better, more joyous, than the day of our birth, Eccl. 7.1. If any man could
have found a life worthy to be preferred unto death, so wise, great, and
glorious a King must needs have done it; and yet he, in his very Throne,
commends his Coffin above his Scepter, and would rather choose to be a subject
for worms to feed upon, than a Prince of men: This makes us no more to marvel
at those Heathens, who mourned at the birth, and feasted at the death of their
children; and yet alas, they had not half the cause, that we have, of
rejoicing; they knew some of the miseries that accompanied this life, what
troubles, and cares, and anxieties, and wants men passed through, what crosses
and calamities they endure here, which are the punishments of sin; but sin it
self, the greatest burden of this life, the sorest evil that waits upon, and
makes it most wearisome, this malum culpae, this evil of sin, they were not, as
they ought, aware of; and yet they were so affected with the feeling of those
other ills, that they made merry at the death of their friends, out of a
miserable conceit they had, that they then ceased to be miserable.

We know what they did, and more; we understand the wretchedness of living in
this vale of tears; and we understand what causes it, the snares of sin, from
which we are loosed, when we are freed out of the prison of this body, he that
is dead, Romans 6.7
is free from sin: We understand the Happiness of dying, that it not only
unfetters us from these chains of sin an shame, but conveyes us to an eternity
of holiness and glory: How should we cheer our selves in this expectation,
yea, assurance of being so happy? How should we say, out of choice and faith,
what the Prophet Jonah said out of bitter passion? It is better for me to die,
Jon. 4.3.
than to live, to die in the Lord, for such, when they are dead, are blessed.

It is time for us to have done with this first discourse,

Now turn your thoughts with patience ('it is high time to beg that) upon the
other subject matter of the Text, Blessedness.

A subject, that we shall find of as great importance, and as nearly to
concern every of us, as the other: If that were needful to us, for the weaning
our affection from the vanities of this world, this is as useful for the
inflaming those affections toward the glory of another World; Forget not the
former, but afford this also some time of meditation: by no means lose the
memory of death; Be as wise in this point, as those wise men, Philosophers of
India, who were called Brachmanae; they would have open Sepulchers placed
before the doors of their houses, that as they went out and in, they might
think of that place, whether they must go at last; that was a bridle to them
with which they held themselves in awe; and let us still place our graves
before the door of our minds, and imagine we hear God speaking to us, as to his
Prophet Jeremy, Descend in domum figuli, Go down to the Potters house, Jer.
18.2.
and there I will cause thee to hear my words: God could have spoken with his
Prophet in any other place, as well as that, where men were busied about clay;
but he would thereby admonish us, that the Tombs of dead men, where all humane
clay, all the carcasses of men, that were made of clay, (and of which clay is
made) are gathered together, as in a Potters house, that these are the fittest
Schools of wisdom to us; there God usually expounds unto his Auditors, the
most deep and hidden mysteries of wisdom; there not with logical Sophisms, but
by evident undeniable demonstration, he lays before our eyes, the frailty of
our flesh, the shortness of our life, the deceitfulness of the world, the
vanity of all things under the Sun; and what becomes, at last, of all the
strength of Man, and beauty of Woman, and pride of both, and of the glory of
all the world, that all of it is vainglory.

And, indeed, from this inconsideration spring so many errors of our life, so
much arrogance and ambition, and covetousness; such immoderate desire, to join
Title to Title, and House to House, and Field to Field, till we forget that
title of Dust which is due unto us, and the House of the Grave, and the Field
of the Potter; that we look not often enough into the Monuments of dead men,
and read this lesson in them, that they might have been before now, and very
shortly may be, must be, our own habitation; how many of us now sin with great
ease, and so little remorse, as if we had a God of wood and stone, or at best,
but a breaden God (such as they have in every Church, and at every Altar,
within the Popes great Bishopric) who saw us not, nor could take vengeance of
our sins, unless when superstitious man takes his unprovoked God, and throws
him at our head; yet, when death appoaches, and affrights our wakened
consciences with remembrance of our former abasing of Gods mercies, and the
sight of his angry countenance against us for it, how would we wish a thousand
times, it were undone! how would we buy it off, were it in our power, with
thousands of Rams, and ten thousands of rivers of Oil! Mic. 6.7.


Well, If the consideration of this be so behoovefull to us for the withdrawing
of our Souls from sin (for which purpose I have thus long chafed your memories
to the due meditation of it) the consideration of the other can be no less
behoovefull for the inkindling our souls after glory; for which purpose I must
entreat a new attention and devotion in you.

I will not be still presuming upon so much time, Beatitudo
as I shall need to speak of blessedness at large, and to discourse, as the
true nature of it, so the manifold errors of others about it; nor does my Text
require it: There is no man but has, by nature, some kind of knowledge of it,
that it is the best and choicest thing that can be, and as Boethius defines it,
an estate made perfect by the enjoying of all good things; which, who so has
obtained, he is fully satisfied; he seeks, he desires, he wishes nothing more:
But what that is, in the possession whereof this happiness consists, and which
endoweth a man with this perfect estate, that has ever been a thing so
difficult and obscure to the most learned ages of old Heathenism, that there is
no one question has bred such perplexity and differenee in opinions amongst the
ancient Philosophers; some placing it in knowledge, some, in virtue, some, in
plenty, some, in pleasure; I cannot, I list not, I need not name them all: St.
Austin tells us, De Civit. l. 19. c. 1.
the learned Varro has observed, that Philosophers have wrangled about this
point, to the number of 288 different opinions; not to trouble you with the
relation of them.

That which I propound to be observed, briefly, is that,

1. True blessedness is a thing generally desired of all men.

2. That notwithstanding this so general desire, it is never fully obtained by
any man till his death.

3. And then, not by all men, but by those only who die in the Lord, Blessed
are the dead, who die in the Lord.

That every one man does, Votum omnium.
in his desire, aim at blessedness, no one man will deny; so little need there
is to prove it; ask every man by the poll, if he would be blessed? ye know his
answer beforehand; we are all alike born with that desire in us; nor is there
any thing which we do at any time, in which we have not a close purpose to
bless our selves; in every humane action there is an end propounded for which
we work; not the finis cujus, the end of the action; as, when a man gives over
to work; but the finis cui, the end, for which he works: as, he that
studieth, he studieth to this end, that he may attain knowledge; and the
Merchant that traffiques, he trades to this end, that he may grow rich; and the
ambitious, that serves and flatters, he does it to this end, that he may get
into some place; this end is the beginning in every of our actions; it is primum
in intention, as the Philosopher speaks, the first thing in our intentions;
that which sets us at work: and when we have propounded to our selves, that we
will atchieve knowledge, or riches, or honor, then we betake our selves to
such actions as we think to be the means for procuring them, as study, or
merchandise, or servile flattery, the practice of the undeserving Parasite, as,
of the ingenuous mind, to high actions of virtue.

Now that which is the finis ultimus, the last end of all, that which all men,
in their several projects aim at, as their Master-prize, and upshot of all
their endeavors, is agreed on by all sides, to be blessedness: He that
studies to be such, either he falsely places true happiness in that, or else
by that he thinks to compass some higher degree of being happy: He that labors
for a quiet and retired life, either he believes that to be the only happy
estate, or else hopes by that to make way to a settled happiness: Men may
diversely err in their opinions, either concerning what is true happiness, or
concerning what is the true way to it; but happily, blessed they would be; they
know, to be blessed, is to be best; therefore they desire nothing so earnestly
as that; no, nothing at all, but what they think to be a means to that; but
that they desire only for its own sake, as being the most perfect good, in
respect whereto, all other good is imperfect, and subordinate; and that being
purchased, nothing can be wanted or wished for by the boundless thoughts of Man.

Not unfitly therefore does David the Father countenance his whole Book of
Psalms, Psalm. v. ^.
with such a blessed Introit, Beatus qui non abiit in consilio impiorum,
Blessed is the man that has not walked in the counsel of the ungodly: a very
omen and presage of blessedness to him that shall take delight to read and
meditate on that book of Psalms, as it was his own encouragement for his
entrance into so holy a work: And most comfortably does our Savior Christ, his
Son, commend unto us his most excellent Sermon upon the Mount, with that
gracious assurance, in the very beginning of the same, blessedness, upon
several holy endeavors, Mat. 5.
of Poverty in spirit, of Mourning, of Meekness, etc. Beati pauperes; Beati
qui lugent, etc. Blessed are the poor in spirit; Blessed are they that mourn;
Blessed are the meek; the merciful; the peacemakers, and the rest: as
knowing, there was no so ordinary ready way to win a reverent respect in his
new Auditors to that unheard of doctrine he was to deliver, as, at first, to
open unto them a door of hope concerning that which every one of them, in their
several studies and practices, and wishes, and endeavors, did propound as the
utmost end, and best good of all, to be blessed.

All men seek it in this life; Non ante obitum.
but no man can enjoy it til another life: That is the second Consideration;
which will the better appear unto us, when we shall, first, in some measure, as
our weakness is capable of it, apprehend what it is, to be truly blessed: And
that is, in it self, of such an excellent high nature, as it can better be
declared and conceived by the negative, than by the affirmative; that, as it is
truly said of God himself, who is the Fountain of blessedness, in regard of
the sublime and transcendant glory of his being, that we can better be taught
to know what he is not, than what he is; so this which does so immediately
proceed from his so glorious essence, can better be shadowed out to the
darkness of our understanding, in saying, wherein it does not consist, than in
venturing upon the inaccessible brightness of it.

The Prophet Isaias told us, 64.4. and the Apostle St. Paul has quoted it from
him, 1 Cor. 2.9. that eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered
into the heart of man, the things which God has prepared for them that love
him: If no man has seen or heard, nor conceived in his heart (which, yet, can
conceive more than it can express) those admirable perfections with which the
Heavenly Jerusalem is enriched, he cannot possibly declare it to another: we
can say with the Evangelist, S. John in his Revelation, 22.3. that there shall
be no more curse, but the throne of God, and of the Lamb shall be in it; that
there shall be no night; they shall need no candle, nor the light of the Sun,
for the Lord God gives them light, v. 5. We can descend lower to these
transitory good things, in which the Worldling makes himself believe that he
can find happiness; and affirm boldly against all the strength of reason
which humane wisdom has devised, that it is not to be found in Humane
knowledge, since the wisest of natural men has confessed, Socrates.
after all his greedy search for an extraordinary measure of it, he knew but
this one thing, that he knew nothing: and another of their greatest Clerks has
set it down under his hand, Seneca.
that the greatest part of those things we know, is the least part of those
things whereof we are ignorant; And a third, more learned than they both, even
then, Aristotle.
when he labored most certainly and demonstratively to know, (...), we know
not, we do but think we know: That it is not to be had in Riches, which could
never yet give satisfaction to man's extensive covetousness; nor ever any man,
who drank the deepest draught of this bewitching cup of Fortune, could slake
his excessive thirst of having more, Quo plus sunt pota, plus sitiuntur opes,
which break our sleep, and disquiet our thoughts; we cannot enrich one man,
but by impoverishing another, (a rude Art which true blessedness was never yet
aware of) which the greater they grow, the more care, and watch, and keeping
they require: True blessedness keeps the man, and not the man it; he that once
has it, can never fear to lose it: That Might and Power affords it not, since
the most commanding Emperors cannot safeguard themseves and their Countries
without the assistance of servants and Soldiers, and abundance of warlike
provision: whereas none is truly happy who cannot stand of himself, who has
not an assurance of all provision within himself, though all without him
should fail him: That worldly honor comes far short on it, which is so often
exposed to the scorn of Fortune, which can never be free from hatred and envy,
and suspicion, which ever shows men in their own colors, looked upon quite
through their purple to their very selves, and most while, to the making of
them ridiculous; for, as he who is set to view upon an open stage, is not
therefore favored, because all men's eyes are upon him, but does more clearly
appear to all men, how fair or foul he is in his person or action; Aristot. ex
Biante
so, Magistratus virum (non facit, sed) indicat: High places of honor do not
make men wiser, or better, but make lower men see, how wise, or how foolish,
how good, or how bad they are: That the pleasures of this life have nothing in
them to make us happy, which hinder the use of our Reason, darken the light of
our understanding dull the edge of our best wits, and are accompanied with
nothing more, than their own contraries, Grief, and Repentance.

Yea, admit this were not so, that our knowledge were not stark ignorance; our
riches miserable poverty; our power manifest weakness; our honor mere shadowy
titles; our pleasure bitterness of spirit; but that all the good things of
this world were fair, and real, and substantial, yet, the short continuance of
them, that they are not eternal; eternal! not durable, not lasting; so fading,
so momentary, so soon lost by him that holds them longest, this alone is enough
to prove, that they are so far from affording true blessedness, that they are
no pieces, no fragment, no, not worthy to be counted shadows of it,

If none of these, which by vnlgar men, and wise men too, are rated for the
best things of this life, what is it can settle us here in a state of bliss?

If any thing can possibly do it, it is, without all question, Religion that has
the pre-eminence, that will bring this mighty thing to pass, and if any man be
capable of it in this life, it is only the good Christian that may glory in it;
Blessed is the man that has not walked in the counsel of the ungodly, Psalm. 1.
Blessed are they that are undefiled in the way, and walk in the Law of the
Lord, Psalm. 119. Blessed are all they that fear the Lord, and walk in his
ways, Psalm. 128. Blessed is he that considers the poor and needy, Psalm. 41.
Blessed are they that hear the word of God, Lu. 11.28
and keep it: So that, here, if any where, appears some contradiction to our
doctrine; these may challenge an enjoying of blessedness while they live in
this world of wretchedness.

And enjoy it, indeed, they do, in some measure, though far short of what they
shall do; there is Beatitudo viae, such a blessedness which may be had whilst
they are on their way (undefilednesse in the way, walking in Gods ways, are
but the way, and ways, to that which is the end, even the salvation of their
souls, 1 Pet. 1.9.) that they truly and indeed are possessed of in this life;
Haec est vita aeterna, says our Savior, John 17.3. This is life eternal to
know thee and Jesus. He that hears my words, and believes on him, has eternal
life, John 5.24. he has it in that degree as, here, he is capable of it: But
Beatitudo patriae, the perfection of bliss; the sight and fruition of God in
Heaven; that entire union with him, when we shall be like unto himself, for we
shall see him as he is, 1 John 3.2. This is for another life; this is the crown
laid up, which the righteous Judge shall give at that day: 2 Timothy 4.8.
Vltima semper Expectando dies homini est; Dicique beatus Antiobitum nemo,
supremaque funera debet: Ovid.
This expect not till death; for, thus, only the dead are blessed.

To take away all scruple, it is an observable truth, that S. Gregory Nyscen
has in his book De Beatitud. that God in himself is Vere Beatus, most
properly blessed, as having it in, and from himhimselfe; and that from him, as
from a Fountain, it issues forth upon Angels and Men, who are blessed in the
participation of it, which they receive from him: Such as is the difference
between the face of man which God made, and his Picture drawn by an earthly
skillful hand; though this be too distant to express it, yet it is the best we
can light upon; there the prime and true beauty is in the living face; and the
second, the resemblance, the counterfeit of it in his image: so here, the most
excelling blessedness is in the Deity it self, and the next from him, upon
those creatures of his, who were facti ad similitudinem ejus, made after his
likeness, and are his Image.

He is true Blessedness, in himself, and to us; but to us, how? no otherwise
than as he is applied unto us, and we conjoined unto him, which act of joining
us unto him, and applying him unto us, is that which is called Fruitio, or
Visio Dei, when we perfectly enjoy him by our sight of him, and see him as he
is: This is that act, which is our formal blessedness; For God, though he be
blessedness, yet he is not formally in us, but objective, as the School
speaks, or effective: That which makes us formally blessed, is the sight of his
glorious countenance; that which makes us, thus like to him, is, that we see
him as he is; His servants shall see his face, and his name shall be in their
foreheads, Revel. 22.3, 4, 5.

Now can this be the portion of any living man, to see his face? this which was
denied to Moses, his so beloved Servant, to whom he had said, I know thee by
name, and thou have found grace in my sight, Exodus 33.12. (grace in it, but not
the sight it self) yet to him, Thou can not see my face; no, no man shall
see me and live, v. 20. if not see his face and live, then, not that true
blessedness which consists in that sight while we live: There is a measure of
seeing God in this life; and so a measure of happiness; but neither full; we
see God in his works; O come hither, and behold the works of the Lord, Psalm.
46.8. And, These see the works of the Lord, Psalm. 107.24. And, Behold the
goodness and severity of God, Romans 11.22. This is, with Moses, to see the back
parts of Jehovah, Exodus 33.23. to behold him in his works, of Power, and
Justice, and Goodness.

So then, there is a clear and open seeing of our Creator, that true beatifical
Vision, which the blessed Saints and Angels in Heaven only enjoy; and there is
a weaker sight, a more obscure glimpse of the Deity, which only the servants of
God have here by faith; they, and none else; neither Heathen, who are not
called to the knowledge of God, nor wicked men, who resist the Grace of God
calling them, who do not open to him when he knocks, nor yield obedience to the
good motions of his Spirit; these see him not at all; They have eyes, but see
not; Matthew. 13.14.
at most, seeing they see, but do not perceive; the eye of their mind is so
wholly darkened, that it is, and they are, darkness it self, as S. Paul tells
the Ephesians before they were called to the light of grace, Ephesians. 5.8. Now, if
the eye of thy wind, if the light that is in thee be darkness, how great is
that darkness? Matthew. 6.23. And, can darkness it self see? so great a
darkness, see God himself! him whom eye has not seen! Isa. 64.4.
He is seen, but by one of these two ways; clearly, by them in heaven, and
sub-obscurely, by his on earth; we have ground for them both in one verse of
St. Paul's, 1 Cor. 13.12. Now we see through a glass, darkly; but then, face to
face: just the same that I told you from 1 John 3.2. We shall see him as he is.

In a word, we are blessed here, only in that we hope we shall be blessed
hereafter; and that hope of blessedness is grounded upon the hope we have,
that we shall see God face to face: Blessed are the pure in heart, says
Christ, Matthew. 5.8. why? they shall see God; they are blessed because they
shall be blessed: This was the ground of Job's happiness while he lived, in
regard whereto, death and destruction could not hurt him; Though after my skin,
worms destroy this body, yet in my flesh shall I see God, Job 19.26. This was
it that made David blessed here, and was such a preservative to him against
fainting in the midst of all his troubles; I should utterly have fainted, but
that I believe verily to see the goodness of the Lord: where? in the land of
the living, Psalm. 27.15. So that the blessedness which we have here, consists
in the hope, that we shall be blessed in Heaven.

Without salvation no perfect blessedness, that is sure; but, we are saved by
hope, Romans 8.24. and we are blessed only by hope, whilst here we live; neither
is revealed yet, the glory that shall be revealed; so the Apostle calls it, Romans
8.8. for, what a man sees, why does he yet hope for? v. 24.

I hope we may now conclude this point with that saying of the wiseman,
Ecclesiasticus 11.28. Judge no man blessed before his death; for, before
blessed he shall be, die he must says our Text; Blessedness is first, in the
order of the words; but, in the order of nature, death; and with that
exhortation of the Prophet David, which follows upon the confidence he had that
he should see the goodness of the Lord in the land of the living, Psalm. 27.
that, for blessedness sake we would not rush upon death, as some Heathens,
being taught the immortality of the soul, cast themselves and their souls away,
that they might be immortal; but rather, Tarry the Lords leisure; be strong,
and he shall comfort thy heart; and put thy trust (thy hope) in the Lord: Let
none, by their impatience to bear a less misery, rid themselves into a
greater; whoever he be that can speak with that Emphasis, I am the man that
have seen affliction, Lam. 3.1. and does therefore with Job abandon the day of
his birth, Job. 3.3.
and importune for the hour of death, would this man have death be good unto
him, and save him! O then, let him apply the counsel of the 26. verse as a
remedy against the complaint of the first, It is good that a man should both
hope, and quietly wait for the salvation of the Lord.

Well, Non omnes post obitum.
the last part remains yet to be handled; no man can obtain true blessedness
till he leaves this world; that we have done with; nor then all men, but
morientes in Domino; they who so cease to live, as that they die in the Lord;
these are they who are blessed.

Beza renders it, propter Dominum, who die for the Lord; who in their fervent
love to him, lay down their life for his sake, as his Son did for theirs, and
lose it, or rather give it, or rather yet, sell it, in his quarrel, and for the
defense of his truth; true this; but not all; for, thus to expound it, ties
this promised blessedness, only upon the Martyrs of God, those valiant and
faithful Servants of his (as if his many many promises to the faithful became
void, if they were not valiant too, or, though valiant, if they had not a cruel
occasion to try their valor) who patiently underwent the torments of a
violent death at the hands of persecutors, for the witnesse-bearing to the
truth of his Gospel: These, no doubt, are blessed in Heaven; He that loses his
life for my sake shall find it, Matthew. 10.39. blessed with a double crown,
both as they regarded the glory of God, and the good of their Christian
brethren, by their example of constancy; the blood of the Martyrs having ever
been the seed of the Church, and that which is fire to their flesh and bones,
water to the Gospel to make it slourish; a good confession witnessed before the
wicked Tyrants of the world, does good service to God and his truth; so it fell
out in that martyrdom of S. Paul which he suffered in his life time, (for they
are Martyrs too, which for Gods cause stoutly endure any kind of misery besides
death; and yet, to humor some rigid Interpreters, who will not be brought to
allow of a living Martyr, let us for once call every affliction a death too,
not only by the example of Pharaoh, who persecuted the Church of God; Take
away this death, Exodus 10.17. but especially, by that of S. Paul, who, in this
afflicted sense, suffered many, yea, daily deaths for the Church; he was in
deaths often, 2 Cor. 11.23. he did die daily, 1 Cor. 15.31.) The things which
bappened unto him in his persecution at Rome, they fell out unto the
furtherance of the Gospel, insomuch, that many of the brethren in the Lord,
waxing confident by his bonds, were much imboldned to speak the word without
fear, Phil. 1.12, 14. This is it that has made many of Gods righteous servants
not sparing of themselves, that Christ might be magnified in their bodies,
whether it be by life or by death, by life I say, and S. Paul says so too, as
well as by death, v. 20. and that they might be blessed after this life and
death, as those Martyrs the Apostle speaks of, Heb. 11.35. who were tortured,
and cared not to be delivered, that they might obtain a better resurrection.

But we must not restrain this blessedness to those only who thus die for the
Lord, since the Lord bestows this crown of bliss upon them also, who are
(...), so the Text, who die in the Lord.

If we will know what this is, Mori in Domino
to die in the Lord, and who they be that so do, we must first understand what
it is, to be in the Lord while we live; for, even then this happiness begins
in us, when we begin to be in Christ; There is no condemnation to them that are
in Christ, Romans 8.1. If no condemnation, then no wrath of God; if not that,
then Grace and Love, and Favor; and consequently, salvation, and eternal life;
Man is no indifferent thing to his Maker; if he does not hate, he loves; nay,
the very earth upon which Man is, God does either bless it with increase, or
curse it with barrenness; and the Lord of the earth (under the Lord of Heaven)
Man, much more: and no less than this is the effect of Gods love to Mankind;
God so loved the World, John 3.16. So, how? even to everlasting life, v. the
same. Now what it is, thus uncondemnedly, to be in Christ? we have it
explained, John 3.18. He that believes on him is not condemned: so, in the
verse before, Whosoever believes in him, shall not perish, 16. Not be
condemned! not perish! what them! he shall have life everlasting: that is the
effect of Gods love; that is the consequent of Gods not condeming: So then, to
be in Christ, is to be in the love of God, and faith of Christ, to cleave unto
him, and rely upon him; then are we, by his Holy Spirit, ingrafted into him;
made his members, spiritually joined unto him, and live in him.

There is a general conjunction, which all men living have with the Son of God,
in that he took upon him our humane nature; not the flesh of man, but of
mankind; Forasmuch as the Children are partakers of flesh and blood, he also
himself likewise took part of the same, Heb. 2.14. But this conjunction which
is so general with all men, does not therefore make all men to be in him; we
are thus conjoined with him, as I may say, only in regard of the matter; and to
say sooth, all this notwithstanding, there is a great disjunction betwixt him
and us, and the nature of men, as of men, does much differ from that nature
which the Son of God took upon him; that Humane Nature of his (now with him in
Heaven) is of it self immortal, without spot or stain, free from all sin,
adorned with all holiness, and purity, and the fullness of all excellent
graces; ours is impure and unholy, and woefully subject to corruption, because
miserably defiled with sin; we are conceived in sin, Psa. 51.5.
says holy David; we are by nature the sons of wrath, says S. Paul, Ephesians.
2.3. our natural, our first birth in the flesh separates us from him, keeps us
out of him; but our second, our spiritual birth, our regeneration, when we are
born again, Joh. 3.5.
of water and the spirit; when we are endued with the spirit of Christ, to
believe in him, to live according to the direction of his Holy Spirit; then is
our nature so repaired, so renewed, that we come near to his nature; we are
thereby conformed to the image of the Son of God, Romans 8.29. so conformed, that
we are members of his body, of his flesh, and of his bones, Ephesians. 5.20. it is
an Hebrew phrase; they were wont to say of their Brothers and kindred, Os meum
est, and caro mea; he is my bone, and my flesh, as having received from the
same loins, and womb, the same matter of flesh and bones common between them.

I, beyond all this, besides the fleshly substance which Brothers receive from
the same Parents, they do most what agree in the likeness of disposition,
which they draw from the same common birth: It Is so with the Sons of God, when
they are made the Brethren of Christ, being born of the Spirit of God; besides
that, they partake of the same nature, they are of the same mind with him;
which token of Brotherhood the Apostle requires in us, Phil. 2.5. Let this
mind be in you which was in Christ Jesus, they are of the same spirit, and
mind; they are pure, even as he is pure, 1 John 3.3. It Is his quickening and
sanctifying spirit, that puts life into them, and makes them his members; that
puts holiness into them, and makes them his Brethren; The Sanctifier and the
sanctified are all of one, for which cause he is not ashamed to call them
Brethren, Hebr. 2.11.

This our so near conjunction with Christ, and being in him, the Apostle has
fitly expressed ( Romans 11.) by a Graft grafted into a Plant, by which
resemblance is fully made good what I have said concerning the nearness of a
Christian to Christ by faith, and his spiritual living in him; in as much as
the Graft, and the Plant are now made both one thing; not only one and the same
matter, which before was different, and two, the one a good Olive Tree, the
other wild; but further, that the same sap also does nourish all, and the same
spirit gives life and growth to all, and all this by faith, as v. 20. because
of unbelief, they were broken off, the natural branches, the Jews, Tu vero
fide, but thou stand by faith; thou stand, as he that tells thee so, S.
Paul lived, by the faith of the Son of God, Gal. 2.20.

It Is the same in effect with that which the Son of God had taught before, John
15. I am the Vine, ye are the branches, v. 5. Now the branch (who knows not)
lives in the Vine, has the same life common with it, sprouts and springs forth
from the same power within; and we, as that, must bring forth the fruits of the
same spirit: For, deceive we not our selves, beloved, it is not enough to
profess Christ outwardly, to say we believe in him; this does not prove us to
be ingrafted into him, no more than the bramble was therefore King, because it
said unto the Trees, If in truth ye anoint me King, Judge. 9.15. this was only
said; there was no truth in it, therefore there was no truth in it, because of
that other truth which Christ has said, that of a Bramble-bush men do not
gather Grapes, Luke 6.44. because it is altogether fruitless: But if we do
indeed and in truth cleave unto Christ, by a true and lively faith, an
effectual and operative faith, a faith working by love, and bringing forth the
fruits of good Works, then be sure we are in him; The branch cannot bear of it
self, except it abide in the Vine, no more can ye (says Christ) except ye
abide in me, John 15.4. And therefore when S. Paul had comforted the faithful
with an assurance of freedom from condemnation, to them that are in Christ,
Romans 8. because our being in him by faith, is an internal note, and cannot so
easily be discerned, he adds presently, v. 1. another, an external, a practical
note of Gods children, whereby they may be known, even by the fruit of their
Faith, who walk, says he, not after the flesh, but after the spirit: All men
carry their flesh about them, with the infirmities of it, and do often feel the
force of sin within themselves; but, Romans 6.13. Verse. 12.
so they yield not to it; so they suffer it not to reign in their mortal
bodies; so they do not obey it in the lusts thereof, Romans 8.13. Romans 6.4
but daily strive to mortify, by the Spirit, the deeds of the body; so they
walk in newness of life, and not after, the old man, the flesh; this is to
them a token of the spirit of God in them; that spirit is a pledge of their
faith; and both an assurance that they are in Christ, so, as not to be
condemned when they are judged; so, as to have begun their state of
blessedness.

Now if they be thus happy who are in him, as in that Text of the Apostle, and
thus in him, as in our exposition upon it; then surely, they who abide in him,
as in that other Text of S. John, holding fast that which they have, that no
man take away their crown; abide in him, till they have passed through Epistle
and Gospel, and come to this Text here in the Revelation, that they die in the
Lord; holding fast the same faith unto the end; and by the force of it,
recommending their spirit, Lu. 23.46
in the end, into the hands of him that gave it; they must not doubt to partake
of this blessedness, pronounced by a voice from Heaven, Blessed are the dead
that thus die.

They are blessed who live in the Lord, by the faith of Christ, who believe in
him; Beata quae credidit, says Elizabeth to the blessed Virgin, Luke 1.45.
thou are blessed in that thou have believed; but in a far lower degree;
according to the measure of our knowledge, such is our happiness; but that
knowledge which we have of God by faith, is but a beginning of that we shall
have by sight: we know him now but in part, 1 Cor. 13.9. But when that which is
perfect is come, then that which is in part shall be done away: Then we shall
know even as we are known, v. 12. then shall we enjoy that perfect bliss which
only can give us satisfaction; satiabor, cum evigelavero, says holy David,
Psalm. 17.16. I shall behold thy face in righteousness, and when I awake up
after thy likeness, I shall be satisfied with it.

Beloved, ye have seen, in part, wherein this blessedness consists, which is
the greatest, and most absolute good to man that he can desire; and who they be
that shall obtain it. To exhort you to the desire of so great a good, were
needless, since every man does, by nature, long after it, with the strongest
bent of his affection; it is a thing born with us, and we cannot choose but
covet earnestly this best gift, to be happy: but, 1 Cor. 12.21.
because we often fail in our judgment of the right way to it; and now that
this voice from Heaven has made known unto us the only certain entrance that
must convey us thither, yield we willingly to this persuasion for our own good,
that we apply our hearts unto it; labor we, by being in Christ, as born of
God, by living in Christ, as abiding in him, that at length we may also die in
the Lord.

If, to die in the Lord were all, perhaps to persuade that also, will not need
much ^^^^ur; there is no man, but with half (...) Exhortation will be easily
induced to (...) of the Prophet Ba^^am's mind, concent to die the death of the
righteous, and that his last end might le like his, Number. 23.10. but will they
consider, that to effect this they must first be as well content to live the
life of the righteous, and let their beginning and continuance be like his? If
we would die in the Lord at the last, and so be blessed, we must, in the mean,
holily endeavor to live in the Lord, by Faith and Repentance, Acts 24.16.
and a good conscience both before God, and toward men: If we spend the time
of our life upon our own lusts; if we now live unto our selves, little hope we
have to die in him: Live we not then, and live we too; do we both as S. Paul
counsels, 2 Cor. 5.15. not ^enceforth to our selves, but to him who died for
us. Be we in Christ, and abide we in him, only this way we shall surely di^ in
Christ, and be blessed by him, and with him.

Beatus qui vigilat, Revel. 16.15. Blessed is he that watches: To watch, in
holy Scripture, is to live the life of fifth (as on the other side, sin is
(...) the sleep of the soul) Watch ye, stan^ (...) in the faith, 1 Cor. 16.13.
and Awake, thou that sleep, Ep^. 5.14. (i.e.) Rouse up thy self, shake off
the sleep of sin, and lead the life of righteousness; now, this watch must
continue till the Bridegroom comes; this holiness of life must hold out, till
Christ calls fo^^^ ^y death; we must watch till we shall never sleep; we must
be holy till we shall never sin; we must do the one, and be the other, till we
get up to Heaven: Bratiquos cum venerit, Luke 12.37. Blessed indeed are those
servants whom the Lord when he comes shall find watching: to have watched
before, will be but a drowsy excuse, if then we sleep in sin: to have done
many good things, Mat. 7.22
even to the casting out of Devils, will not avail us, if we be not then found
doing; Blessed is that servant whom his Lord, when he comineth shall find
doing; as he has lived to, so shall he die in the Lord; of a truth, the Lord
will make him Ruler over all that he has, Luke 12.44.

What an encouragement is this, Consolatio.
beloved, to the servants of God, against the fear of death? that, as Christ,
when he began to give his Law, which contained many Precepts, that seemed
strict and difficult for our ability to perform, that he might draw us the more
willingly to an obedience to them, does severally prefix before them this
blessedness, whereto at last they bring us, Mat. 5. so because death had been
made by fin, so terrible to the Natural man, therefore Christ, who died to
overcome death, and to take away sin, which is the sting of it; as, by this
means he has made it easy and sweet to them that die in him, so he would make
it appear so also, by this assurance of blessedness upon it, Blessed are the
dead that die in the Lord.

Be we not therefore afraid of Death, which must be the means to convey us unto
bliss: Be we not loath (when God shall call us) to leave the miseries of this
life, this warfare upon earth for the crown in Heaven; nay, be we careful, by
a life to him, that we may die in the Lord, and we shall find that such a
certain remedy against the fear of death, that we shall rather, with S. Paul's
cheerfulness, make choice of S. Phil. 1.23
Paul's Cupio dissolvi, even desire to be dissolved, and to be with Christ the
Lord; we shall not pitch our thoughts upon that false shadow of blessedness,
which the few and evil days of this life can afford, but look toward our
Country, our Home, to that green Pasture, Psa. 23.2.
and those waters of comfort, whither the Shepherd of our Souls shall conduct
those Sheep which belong unto his Fold; we shall resolve to fight the good
fight here, 2 Timothy 4.7.
and expect to triumph in peace there; we shall set up our rest to sow in tears
here, Ps. 126.5.
and comfort our selves with the assured hope of reaping in joy there: In a
word, we shall not look for true bliss in this wretched world, which cannot
give it, but stay our time with patience; all our time wait with joy, all the
days of our appointed time, till our change comes, 14.14. not hasten to
gather our Grapes in the Spring, before they be ripe, sour Grapes to edge our
teeth here, Eze. 18.2 Lu. 13.28
and give us gnashing of teeth in the other World, but constantly bear the heat
of the Summer here, and stay for the sweetness of Autumn, and the delight of
the Vintage in Heaven, where we may gather o^ full Clusters, full ripe, and
drink of the fruit of the Vine, even new, with our Christ, in his Fathers
Kingdom.

This grant, good Christ, unto us all, that we may live in thee, by a true
faith and holy life, and die in thee, by our constancy in that faith, which we
have here possessed, and inherit that blessedness which thou have promised,
even for thy Names-sake, and for thy great Mercies-sake.

To thee, etc.

A SERMON Preached at the BAPTISM of the Right Honorable JAMES, EARL of
Northampton.
Matthew. 19.14. Suffer little Children, and forbid them not, to come unto me;
for of such is the Kingdom of Heaven.


THe whole History of this business is not long to be read unto you, that you
may better conceive the occasion of these words: It Is recorded by three of the
Evangelists; so worthy a passage it was thought by them not to be omitted; but
in fewest words by S. Matthew: he concludes it in three short verses, almost as
short as sweet; please you hear it.

Verse. 13. Then were there brought unto him little children, that he should put
his hands on them, and pray; and the Disciples rebuked them.

Verse. 14. But Jesus said, Suffer little Children, and forbid them not, to come
unto me; for, of such is the Kingdom of Heaven.

Verse. 15. And he laid his hands on them.

In which short History there are three several parts acted: The first, by them
who brought the children, the Parents, in all probability: Christ had, now, for
the space of three years, traveled about that Country of Palestine, helping
and healing; he went about, says S. Peter, doing good, and healing all, Acts
10.38. For this the people magnified him, and followed him: but the Priests and
the Pharisees (they especially of Jerusalem) were mad with anger and
indignation, to see a stranger so go in strength of Authority and Repute
amongst them, and the esteem which the people had of them, daily to decrease:
This drives them to a consultation (what pity it is, so wholesome a word should
be infected by their conspiracy!) for to make him away, and to censure
whosoever should acknowledge him to be the Messiah. The Messiah, in the mean
while, bestirs himself (he knows he has not much time,) through Judea and
Galilee, to bid a farewell to his Auditors, whom he had lately foretold of his
passion and death: They, poor souls, hearing they were like to lose him, and
having had good trial of his miraculous power, and what good they had received
from him, by the imposition of his hands, and by his prayer, now therefore as
Joseph, when he hears his old Father Jacob is sick, makes haste to bring his
young sons unto him, that he may lay his hands on them, and they may partake of
his blessing, ere he leaves them, Genesis 48.1. so these here come, with their
babes i'their arms, that they also may receive some benediction from him before
his last departure, that he should lay his hands on them, says the Text, and
pray: That was their part.

The next part was acted by the Disciples; but not so well; they were out
i'their part, nothing like the Disciples of such a Master; we cannot here say
of them as he of Theophrastus his Scholar, Vt Christi Discipulos possis
agnoscere: They whom he had entertained for that service sake specially; to be
Fishers of men: to get all into their nets; to draw all to him; they must be
the forwardest to make them stand back, to forbid their approach; I, to rebuke
them that brought them; who did, in this, perform the duty of Disciples better
than they?

But now enters the best Actor i'this Scene; he spoke, Never man spoke like
this man, John 7.46. he put life and spirit into his words; the words that I
spoke unto you, says himself, they are spirit, and they are life, 6.63. and
his speech was not without action, they go together in this story; a
comfortable speech, a charitable action; Suffer little children to come unto
me, and forbid them not, etc. there is his speech; he laid his hands on them:
S. Mark tells what he did more; he took them up in his arms, put his hands on
them, and blessed them, Mark 10.16. that is his action.

Of all these we have only the last and best Actor to intend at this time; and
in him, if we can make good use of his speech alone, 'twill be an hour well
spent; so much was the Text read at first, Suffer little children to come, etc.

It is Christ's general command, Division.
concerning the Children of believing Parents (for such were these, and of such
he speaks) that they be admitted to him.

An absolute command, and a reasonable one, and showed to be so; he gives a
Reason of it, as a righteous Lord, who does not though his least word might
bind us to strict obedience) enforce any thing by his absolute and mere
anthority, but deals reasonably and justly with us; he gives an account, of
whom no man wisely durst ask, What do thou? why do thou this?

So, there is not only a command in the Text, Suffer them to come; but a reason
of it also, for, of such is, etc. Two general parts.

And the command it self is not lightly given, lest so they should slight it;
Sub-division.
but to show the importance of it, and the necessity of the duty, he charges it
upon them a second time; he commands affirmatively, and he commands negatively;
there is Sinite, and there is, Ne prohibit: Suffer them, that is once; and
again I say unto you, Forbid them not: So there be two points in the first part.

And in the Reason too there is an Observation that scarce any Expositor
misses, whom I have read upon the place, that in the Original it is not, (...),
but (...); not illorum, theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven; but talium, of such
is, etc. So in all the three Evangelists; and that, says Musculus, (and
indeed, who not?) is much more than if he had said theirs; to give notice,
that, not only those little ones did belong to Heaven, but also, that they did
so belong to it, that whosoever were not like them, were not such a one as
they, he must have no entrance there.

And this observation will require also a twofold discourse in the second
part; one for Illorum, and another for Talium: the first for these children,
their right to this Kingdom, for they are included; the second for those that
are like them, and that whosoever is not such is excluded.

We begin with the Command, and first with the affirmative part of it; Sinite
parvulos, Suffer little children to come unto me.

Christ therefore came to us, Sinite.
that he might make us able to come to him: And as his coming to us was
general; not to some one man; not to some one Family; not to some one People,
but in Mundum, into the whole World; Jesus Christ came into the World to save
sinners, 1 Timothy 1.15. As he came to all, so he invites all to come to him;
Venite omnes, Matthew. 11.28. Come unto me all: If the Jew may come, the Greek
may come also; if the free may come, the bond may come also; if the Male may
come, the Female may come also; and, as S. Paul speaks there, Gal. 3.27.
concerning Nations, and Sexes, and Conditions of life, that there is no
difference, they are all alike, in this respect; There is neither Jew nor
Greek, there is neither bond nor free, there is neither Male nor Female, ye are
all one in Christ Jesus: So may we go further upon the same ground, to all
estates, all fortunes, all ages; there is neither noble nor ignoble, there is
neither rich nor poor, there is neither old nor young, there is neither man nor
child; but as both of them are Homo, so all of them are unum, Omnes unum, ye
are all one in Christ Jesus.

But yet, lest Generalities should not take enough deep impression in men's
minds; and that these little children, who are not able to plead their own
cause, nor to urge the strength of this Grant, which they have as largely from
God, as any others, lest they should lie neglected, as not contained in the
Roll of them that are invited, as if Christ had not room and entertainment for
their children, as well as themselves, when they come to his House; therefore
upon the sight of these Children, he does from them, as from thender flowers,
gather the sweet comfort of this more particular Doctrine, to feed his
Disciples with; add after this general invitation, Matthew. 11. he claps down
this as a Postscript, that they be not left out, Sinite parvulos, bring them
with you too; he that provides for Pulli Corvorum, Job 38.41. the young ones of
the Ravens, and is still a Helper of the friendlesse, as the Prophet styles
him, Psalm. 10.16. he will also be a Father even of the fatherless, Ps. 68.5.
and take special order for the Childrens coming; a command in particular for
them: Suffer little children to come unto me.

It Is worth the while to consider, how fully Christ does express his love to
children upon any occasion: once, besides this time, we read in the Gospel,
that he had to do with a child, that child whom he propounded to his
Disciples imitation, Mark 9. and both him at that time, and these at this time,
he took up in his arms, Verse. 36.
that we may believe they were dear to him.

And indeed, very easily may we be induced to believe it, when we consider the
nature of God, and the condition of Children; God is a God of pity and
compassion, as he styles himself; nay, as he proclaims himself (so well he is
pleased with it) Deus, Deus misericors, and clemens: The Lord, The Lord God,
merciful and gracious, Exodus 34.6. And no so fit an object of pity; nothing so
like to move compassion, as the very fight of tender children: Jacob knew this
well enough when he was to meet his enraged Brother Esau, of whom he was
greatly afraid, says the Text, Genesis 32.7. (for indeed the rage of a Brother is
rage indeed, as Tacitus has noted, Quae apud concordes vincula charitatis,
incitamenta irarum, apud infensos sunt. Annal.1. That which binds men together
in love, whilst they are at concord, puts them farther at variance, being once
enemies) when he was to meet the wrath of this Brother, so incensed against
him; and therefore bethought himself of the best means to appease him, sending
Present after Present (great and rich ones) to win upon his favor, before he
durst come near him: All this notwithstanding, when he drew near him, when
Jacob lifted up his eyes, and looked, and beheld Esau come, and his Army with
him, four hundred men, he mistrusted the strength of all his presents; he
doubts he is not reconciled enough, he is driven to his utmost shift for the
effecting it, to that which surely will (if any thing can) make his fury fall,
and his heart even melt within him; he takes the children, and divides them to
their several Mothers; he puts the handmaids and their children foremost, and
Leah and her children after, and Rachel and her Joseph after; this, this
prevailed against all his Brothers prae-conceived malice; Esau ran to meet him,
and embraced him, says the Text, and fell on his neck and kissed him, and they
wept, Genesis 33.4.

May we not think, Jacob learnt this way from the story of his Uncle Ishmael?
who, when he was a child, being in distress, with his Mother Hagar in the
Wilderness, so near death, that the Mother left him, as not able to endure to
see the death of the child, but went a good way off, and wept, and cried, lift
up her voice and wept; yet, that place tells us not, that God heard her loud
cry, but that he was moved to compassion with the voice of the child, which
yet was so soft a cry, that we hear nothing of it in the story; Hagar cried
aloud, but God heard the voice of the Lad, and for his sake sent her comfort,
Genes. 21.17.

We cannot easily conceive it; the compassionate love which God bears to little
children, he loves the very name of them, and gives it to them he loves most;
and that then, when he most desires to make them know he loves them; what name
did Christ call his beloved Disciples by, when he was, now, shortly to leave
them, and was newly entered the lists of his conflict with death, when Judas
had taken the Sop, and Satan was entered into him, and had set him on working
(not the works of God, but of his Father the Devil) that he went out
immediately, when the plot was now laying, that must anon take effect upon his
life? John. 13.33.
Then, then Filioli, little little children; filii will not serve to speak the
extent of his affection: all children are beloved of their Parents; but
filioli, their little, their darling children are tenderly doted on; he takes
any occasion to do them reputation among men; Their Angels, Matt. 18.10. Though
the Angels that guard all men do continually behold the face of God, yet Angeli
little, (...), by way of excellence, it is published of them, that their Angels;
nor is it published by the voice of any Prophet or Apostle, but Audivi vocem de
coelo, by a voice from Heaven; and thence too, it is not the voice either of
Saint of God, or of Angel of child, but of Christ himself, to show his love to
them; his pusille, his little ones, he would have none be their Herald but
himself, himself in person; Non alienae vocis ergano sed oraculo suae, from
none other, but from his own mouth, as here, to give the charge for their
coming to him, so in the chapter before, for not despising one of them; for, I
say unto you, that in Heaven their Angels do always behold the face of my
Father who is in Heaven, v. 10.

Such was his liking to them, that he would be made one of them, and would be
prophesied unto us under that title, above all other; Parvulus natus nobis,
Isa. 9.6. Unto us a child is born: And those happy Babes, those Innocents that
were his Coaetanes, he honored them with the first crown of martyrdom in his
Church, and for his sake, through whose tender sides his own more precious life
was aimed at: And ever since, and before, did, and does, God take special care
of children, as those who being destitute of all help in themselves, have most
need of his; insomuch, that as truly as David did, may all men living in a
thankful acknowledgement of his mercy, sing it of themselves, Thou art he that
took me out of my Mothers womb; thou wast my hope when I hanged yet upon my
Mothers breast, I have been left unto thee ever since I was born; thou art my
God even from my Mothers womb, Ps. 22.9.

So great care argues as great love; and so great love loves to enjoy the thing
that is loved, that as wise Solomon brings in this wisdom of the Father, the
Son of God, speaking of himself, Pro. 8.31. Deliciae meae, esse cum filiis
hominum, My delight is to be with the sons of men, so will it not offend him to
be spoken in his name, Deliciae meae, esse cum Filiolis hominum, My delight is
to be with the Children of men: and therefore, if not for their sakes, yet for
his sake, Sinite Parvulos, Suffer little Children to come unto him.

But, Nolite prohibere.
is it enough once said? if not, you must hear it again, for come they must; if
not with Sinite venire, then with Nolite prohibere; for now, as if the former
were not enough, another is added to signify, though not a different command,
yet the same, because the second time uttered, with a more intensive, and
forcible affection: Many, with me, do observe here, that the repetition of the
Injunction does argue the earnestness of Christ's Will and Law, to have it take
place; for, ever, commonly an ingemination either of one and the same word
again repeated, or of sundry words bearing the same sense, gives, as 'twere, a
double strength to the declaration of what is delivered, Noct. At. 13.23.
as Phavorinus in A. Gellius,

(...), War not any longer beloved young men, nor fight together: where both the
words signify the same thing, says yet, that the addition of the second word,
though adding nothing in signification to the former, is not to make up the
verse, but as they continued in their strife, so, duplex eadem compellatio
admonitionem facit instantiorem, his second time urging the same manner of
speech, did give the more earnestness to his advice; and though they were the
same words in sense, yet one might very well think them to be others, quia
aures and animum saepius feriunt, because they beat upon the ears and mind of
a man more often; therefore Suffer them to come; I, and beside that, Forbid
them not.

A repetition that one of us, at first, would think needless, and that none
would be so hard-hearted, to repel such Innocents; yet something sure there
was that ministered occasion to this, which seems so needless a behest, and we
need not look far for it; the last words before the Text tell us, that the
Disciples rebuked them: why they should do so would be enquired, and it will be
no hard matter to guess at it; for, the best do no more than as probability of
Reason leads them, seeing it is not expressed in the Text; of one thing they are
all agreed (they will not, and we must not be too harsh in our censure upon the
Disciples) what was not the cause; not envy in them, or ill will toward the
children, or their friends that brought them: And for what was the cause, in
the general, there is no great difference; a wrong-grounded zeal that they bare
toward their Master (such a one as S. Paul discovered to be in Israel, Romans
10.2. that they had a zeal, but not according to knowledge) S. Chrysostom
says, 'twas zeal of his Honor, for they ran regardlesly to him, and almost
upon him; and so Theophylact conjectures, that the women came in disordered
heaps, thronging about him with their children for a blessing, and this they
thought some disparagement to the dignity and authority of his Doctrine, that
he should have any thing to do with Children; S. Jerome is of opinion, that
they had regard to his ease in so doing, that he should not be pressed too
much, and wearied with the throng, and he there-hence argues the imperfection
of their faith; and with him agrees S. Ambrose in his Comment upon S. Luke,
that it was their observance toward their Master, to avoid the trouble of the
crowd. Again, whereas the common causes of men's coming to him, were either to
receive the benefit of instruction from his Doctrine, or the ease from some
infirmity, by the power of his Miracles; these were not sick, might the
Disciples think, and so, not in need of the one; they were Children, and
therefore not capable of the other.

But these were the thoughts of men, who judged of Christ, by their carnal
sense, and according to his outward appearance; and yet not unlikely to be the
Disciples errors; especially the first of them, which men are prone to run
upon; they are needlessly afraid to think too meanly of Christ, and that has
been the cause of too many superstitions in the Church; this one amongst the
rest, that men become Suitors to the Saints in Heaven, to mediate their Prayers
to God, because they think it dishonorable to Christ, to be the common
Advocate; as also, to fear to think too honorably of him, and to deal too
bountifully with him, in his House and Household, has been the cause of
prophanations more than enough; (...), betwixt both, the Mean would do well.

Whatever was the ground, evil action to some good end; how all things work
together for good, Romans 8.28.
to them that love God; how from this very slip of his Disciples, which he
suffered them to fall into, he is pleased to take occasion the more, to
manifest his love to little Children, and to leave this sweet and comfortable
saying, amongst the rest of his Monuments, as a Testimony of it to all
posterity, Suffer little Children to come unto me; so much the rather, forbid
them not.

But is there no more required on our part? Baptism.
only to suffer them? not to forbid them? Yes: That was specially directed to
those whom it chiefly concerns to admit them to him, his Disciples, and their
Successors, the Ministers of his Word and Sacraments; the rest must do more,
help them forward, lend them feet to bring them; when they cannot run with
their own feet (says S. Sermon. 10. De verbis Apostoli.
Austin) they run by the help of others; Accommodat illis Matter Ecclesia,
aliorum pedes, ut veniant: And it is no more than that which was so long since
foretold by the Prophet Isaiah, in his Prophecy of the ample Restoration of
the Church, chap. 49.22. They shall bring thy Sons in their arms, and thy
Daughters shall be carried upon their shoulders.

But whither so fast with these Sons and these Daughters that are carried? why,
to Christ no question; thither the Text calls them: True, but the way to him?
No other left us by his direction, for our first entrance, but Baptism; to that
our Church Liturgy applies this Text: nor is there any of our Ancient Writers,
but does so; yea, in a manner appropriate it thereto; and wheresoever they
treat of Baptism, ever this verse comes in; that has made some of them call
Baptism, Introitum ad Regnum Coelorum, Heavens entry: Some, the Sacrament of
Initiation; Some, the Door; Some, the Gate of Heaven.

For, whereas no man can come to Christ, except he be a New man, and we are all
born with the corruption of the Old man upon us, Quod natum ex carne, caro,
John 3.6. That which is born of the flesh, is flesh: Conceived in sin, and born
in iniquity, Psalm. 51.5. and therefore, Natura, filii irae, S. Paul assures us,
Sons of wrath by nature, Ephesians. 2.3. Not filioli here; grown Sons of great wrath:
Therefore of necessity we must be renewed, regenerate, born once again; Nisi
quis Renatus fuerit, John 3.3. Except a man be born again, he cannot enter into
the Kingdom of God; born of the spirit, if we will leave to be flesh, Quod
natum ex spiritu, spiritus; That which is born of the spirit, is spirit; he is
the only Author, the principal efficient cause of our new Birth.

The Principal, I say; for, he does not use to work Regeneration in the heart
of any man (...), as the Enthusiasts will have it, immediately; but by such
ordinary means as he has appointed, both for himself to offer, and for us to
apprehend, eternal Salvation: The means allotted to us in this behalf, who are
Receivers, is Faith, the only Hand he has given us, to reach out, and lay hold
on, and apply unto ourselves the Grace of God offered, the merit of Christ,
with the consequents thereof, Forgiveness of our sins, justification and
eternal salvation: By faith of Jesus Christ the righteousness of God is unto
all, and upon all that believe, Romans 3.22.

But then in respect of God, who is the Donor, the means by which he does
usually bestow these Graces upon us, and convey them unto us, are two; his
Word, his Sacraments.

Of the efficacy of his Word no Christian doubts; By hearing comes faith,
Romans 10.17. and by the hearing of faith is the spirit received, Gal. 3.2.

And, for the Sacraments, they have as little reason to trouble themselves, and
the Church of God with seruples of doubt, as if they were but bare signs and
no more: Do not the Fathers call the Sacraments, Verbum visibile, a visihle
Word? Are they not, as it were, an Epitome of the Gospel? Receive they not all
their worth and virtue, and operation, not only from the present Grace, but
from the ancient Appointment and Ordinance of God, and from the Word of God,
which, by Divine, as well as Ecclesiastical Ordination, is joined to the
outward Elements?

But, to make it good against them, in this one Sacrament, which we have now in
hand. If he, and he only, shall be saved, in an ordinary course, who believes
and is baptized, Mark 16.16. may we not well reckon Baptism an ordinary means
of this salvation? If of salvation, then also of those other graces which are
the way unto it, regeneration, remission of sins, righteousness, and renewing
of the mind; Except a man be born of water and the spirit, John 3.5. there is
regeneration by it: John Baptist preached the Baptism of Repentance for the
remission of sins, Luke 3.3. Repent, says S. Peter, and be baptized for the
remission of sins, Act. 2.28. and, Arise, says Ananias to Paul upon his
conversion, and be baptized, and wash away thy sins, Act. 22.16. there is
remission: Ye are washed, says St. Paul, 1 Cor. 5. then presently follows upon
that, Ye are sanctified, ye are justified, in the name of the Lord Jesus, v.
11. there be two other graces: As many of you as have been baptized into
Christ, have put on Christ, Gal. 3.27. and having Christ upon us, we have his
obedience, his merits, his righteousness; how shall he not with him also
freely give us all things? Romans 8.32.

So that, as S. James, in the case of our regeneration, does join together the
Spirit and the Word, which is one of the means he uses to that purpose; Of his
own will begat he us, with the Word of Truth, Jam. 1.18. so our Savior Christ
does join the Holy Ghost and Baptism, which is another effectual means;
Except a man be born of water and the spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom
of God, Joh. 3.5. And S. Paul couples both these means together, makes them
march hand in hand, as equally useful to sanctification in the Church of God;
Christ loved the Church and gave himself for it, that he might sanctify it and
cleanse it, with the washing of water by the Word, Ephesians. 5.26. what shall I say
more? This will I say, that,

A cause, therefore we need not fear to call it, of our regeneration and
salvation, though not the principal; that is God himself; yet, the
isntrumental, as we speak in Schools, or medium; He saved us, says the
Apostle; God, Tit. 3. there is the principal cause, by the washing of
regeneration, there is the isntrumental, v. 5.

We have the steps of all the ancient Fathers of the Church walking in this
Track, a warrant to us for this confidence: (...) we find it called, and (...),
a second Birth, and a Divine Generation by Dionysius; (...), a being born
again, by Greg. Nazianz. (...), the Bath by which we wash away our sins,
Clem. Alexandr. Peccatorum omnium remissionem, the forgiveness of all our
sins, by S. Ambrose; Fons Divinus, quo Fideles in Creaturam novam regenerantur,
by Cassiodorus, the Divine Fountain by which the Faithful are made up into a
New Creature; and by every one, the Door of Heaven, the Sacrament of
Initiation, the first admission into Gods Kingdom.

Not, that all that are baptized, are thereby necessarily admitted into the
Kingdom of Heaven; or, that all do receive the Grace of God, who receive the
Sacrament of his Grace: for, as not the Bread and Wine in the Eucharist, so
neither the water in Baptism, does contain, in it self, any vital force or
efficacy: That Grace which is a consequent of the Sacraments, it does accompany
them as their end, the benefit whereof whosoever partakes, he receives it from God
himself, the Author of Sacraments, and not from any other natural or
supernatural quality in them: And therefore their manner of necessity to life
supernatural, is not in all respects, as food unto natural life; they are not
Physical, but Moral Instruments of Salvation; Duties of Service and Worship,
which unless we perform, as the Author of them requires, they are
unprofitable: Hugo's Rule we acknowledge, and follow in this case, De Sacr.
lib. 1. c. 3,
Fideles salutem ex istis elementis non quaerunt, etiamsi in istis quaerunt;
though we seek for salvation in Baptism, yet not from Baptism, but from God;
for, this is the instrument of God to that end and purpose, a Moral Instrument,
the use whereof is in our hand, the effect in his; for the use, we have his
express command; for the effect, his conditional promise: so that without our
obedience to the one; there is of the other no apparent assurance: whereas on
the other side, where the signs and Sacraments of his Grace are not either
omitted, through contempt,, or received with contempt, we are not to doubt, but
that they really give what they promise, and are what they signify: The same
is true here, which Solomon's Wisdom observes in the Brazen Serpent, He that
turned himself to it was not healed by the thing he saw, but by thee, O
Savior of all, Wisd. 16.7.

The necessity therefore that Ispake of, for the coming to Christ this way,
for our being renewed by this second Birth, I hope appears: which necessity
notwithstanding we do not preach unto you to be so absolute, as if God had
never another door into Heaven; as if he had so tied his saving Grace to this
means, as without it 'twere impossible to be attained by any: this is the
highway, the common door, by which he has appointed us to enter; and
therefore, on our part, we are bound to this way, if we can get to it; but if
there be an impossibility on our part, and that without our contempt, or
neglect of his Ordinance, it shall please God we be prevented (I speak not of
them that are born out of the Church, Qui foris sunt, Deus judicat, 1 Cor.
5.13. we leave them (with S. Paul) to be judged by God, but) for them who are
born in fidere, in that league which God made with Abraham and his seed for
ever; God forbid such unmannerly, uncharitable thoughts in Christians, that
because God binds our obedience to this ordinary means, we should likewise
prescribe to him, and tie him to his own Ordinance; that we should think he
has not other ways to let us into his Kingdom; that because he does not
usually, therefore he cannot extraordinarily work saving Grace in the hearts of
some, without this outward means.

As therefore on the one side, we blame those men as too remiss, who have too
mean a regard of this ordinary and immediate means of life, relying wholly
upon the bare conceit of that eternal Election, which, notwithstanding includes
a subordination of means, without which we are not actually brought to enjoy
what God secretly did intend; and therefore to build upon Gods Election, if we
keep not our selves to the ways which he has appointed for men to walk in, is
but a selfe-deceiving vanity: So on the other side, we may as little approve
the too severe conceit of those who condemn the children of Christian Parents
dying before Baptism, into a place in Hell, which their own fancies have built
for them, and that of several fashions, according to their several conceits;
a Limbus Infantum, wherein some are so mild, as to inflict no other punishment
upon them, but the not seeing God, Vid. Bellarm. De Amissione Gratiae. Tom. 3.
l. 6. c. 1.
which they call Poena damni: Some, more anstere, will have them suffer some
grief also, for that loss; others cruelly award them the perpetual torment of
Sense, added to the loss of Gods presence (so well they agree amongst
themselves, who are at discord in opinions, to the Church of England.)

S. Tom. 7. De Bapt. l. 4. c. 22.
Austin tells us another tale, that the Sacrament of Baptism is, then, invisibly
fulfild, when not contempt of Religion, but the point of necessity does exclude
it. And seeing that our Baptism under the Gospel, does succeed in the very
stead of Circumcision under the Law, we ought not to set a harder censure upon
the Babes of believing Parents, dying without Baptism, and without contempt of
it; than all antiquity has done upon the sons of the Hebrews, whom either
Infirmity of disease untimely cut off, or the cruelty of Pharaoh, Exodus 3. or
of Antiochus, 1 Maccab. 1. suffered not to see the eighth day of their age,
till when by the Law they might not be circumcised: In which case it has ever
been held the part of prudent and holy charity to hope; and to make men rather
partial than cruel Judges, as having reason in a charitable presumption, to
gather a great likelihood of their salvation, to whom the benefit of believing
Parents being given, the rest that should follow is prevented by some such
casualty, as man had in himself no power to avoid.

One error more there is, Paedobaptismus
concerning this way of Children in Baptism coming to Christ, with which
though I may not now trouble you long, yet unless I would betray my Text, I
must needs discover it unto you; because it does so flatly bid defiance to my
Text, and stands in such direct terms of opposition to it.

The Disciples here may be suspected to be in a fair way to have turned
Anabaptists; they liked not that Children should come to Christ: but Christ was
displeased with them; and for fear the Devil (who is such a professed enemy to
the Church of God, and to the increasing of his Kingdom) should, from this ill
example of theirs, take advantage afterward to establish such a Sect, he nips
it in the bud; he takes the children of this Edom, and throws them against the
stones; he sets down a Canon in his Church, for the direction of succeeding
Ages, a Canon of such a Council as can never err, nor which shall ever be
repealed, Suffer little Children, and forbid them not, to come unto me.

Could any man have thought, that so long as this Canon had been in force, it
should not have been preservative strong enough against that poison, which the
Devil has since instilled into some men's brains, who have enacted a Statute in
their Conventicle, as it were in spite of this, that till they come to years
of discretion, to the use of reason, they come not to Baptism, that is to say
(say Christ what he will) till they cease to be children, they shall in no wise
come to Christ: They slept surely while the enemy sowed these Tares in their
hearts! Is It possible they should be conversant in any of Christ's fields? that
they should read any of his Gospels, and not light upon this Ear of good Wheat
which grows in so many of them? Me thinks the Devils should have clapped these
three Gospels into the Inquisition, or caused the Council of Trent to have
taken them into their consideration, to have enlarged their Index
expurgatorius, and expurg'd this sweet command of Christ out of all these three
Evangelists, before he had gone about to make an Anabaptist.

The very Reason that they give for their Fancy, is the same that is given by
so many for the Disciples mistake here, because that for want of the use of
Reason, they are not yet capable of such heavenly Mysteries; which, had it been
of force, S. Peter had also long since, with his too much modesty, deprived
himself of that mystical heavenly blessing of having his feet washed with our
Saviors own hands; Lord (says he) do thou wash my feet? thou shall never
do it: but what Christ said then to him (who was but a Child in the knowledge
of Heavenly Mysteries) the same may the Ministers of Christ, in his Name,
pronounce to any of these Children, upon the like occasion, Quod ego facio, tu
nescis modo, What I do thou know not yet, but thou shall know hereafter, Jo.
13.7.

Euntes, Docete, Baptizate; it is our Saviors last charge to his Disciples, in
the end of S Matthews Gospel, Go and teach all Nati^ns, baptizing them; (not to
ward this blow with the original Text, which does not signify to teach, but to
make Disciples, but to try it out with their own translated weapon) See, (say
they) The Word preached and the Sacrament must go together, and therefore they
that are not capable Auditors of the one, are not fit Receivers of the other:
And Qui crediderit, and baptizatus fuerit, Mark 16. He that believes and is
baptized, shall be saved: Verse. 16.
No Baptism therefore (say they) before a Profession of their Faith: S. Epist.
23.
Austin makes answer to Boniface, a Bishop in his time concerning this very
difficulty, whether it may truly be said for Infants at the time of their
Baptism, as we use by our Godfathers, that they do believe? and the effect of
his Answer, is, Yea; but with this distinction; a present actual habit of
faith there is not in them; but, that habit of faith, which afterward does come
with years, is but a farther building up of the same Edifice, the first
foundation whereof was laid by the Sacrament of Baptism; for, that which then
we professed, without any understanding, when we afterward come to acknowledge,
do we any thing else, but only bring unto ripeness the very seed that was
sown before? We are then Believers, because then we begin to be that, which
more of Gods Grace, in process of time, makes perfect: And till we come to
actual belief, the very Sacrament of faith is a shield as strong as, after
this, the faith of the Sacrament, against all contrary infernal Powers.

But, not to trouble your patience too long with discussing these points, a
thing fitter for the Schools; and because there is more Pulpit-matter in the
other part of the Text, let this, in one word, be the Church's Challenge to
them; either let them make it appear unto us, that Baptism gives a greater
blessing to our Children, than Christ gave to these; or, that the same reason
applied to the seed of faithful Parentage, whom the Apostle avows to be holy
from the very birth, 1 Cor. 7.14. will not make them also capable of an equal
blessing; for, not illorum only, but talium; not only of these, says Christ,
but of such is the Kingdom of Heaven; That Is the Reason of the duty, and the
second part.

If of such, Illorum.
then of these also; for, horum must be the ground of talium: And if Heaven
belongs unto them who are like the Children of Christian Parents, because they
are like them; then surely they themselves have, by virtue of Gods gracious
Promise, an interest unto it; they, concerning whom he has made his Covenant
with the Father of them all, his Servant Abraham, the Father of the faithful,
Ero Deus tuus, and Seminis tui post te, Genesis 17.7. I will be a God unto thee
and to thy Seed after thee: not his seed according to the flesh only, but even
vobis, and filiis. vestris, as S. Peter preached it generally to them, all of
so many several Nations, Act. 2.39. The promise is to you, and to your
Children, and to all that are afar off, even as many as the Lord our God shall
call.

No, says our Anabaptist (that loves to imbrue his hands, with Pharaoh and
Hered in the spiritual death (as much as in him lies) of so many tender
Sucklings) not illorum for all this; No Children are meant in this clause, but
they who are like them: How? not in years, but in simplicity, in innocence, and
in humility: A good Interpretation, I grant, and not of their own finding out;
but that which the most reverend Interpreters of Scripture in the purest times
(how little soever they regard their Elder Books) have laid before them, but
with little purpose by their Allegorical Interpretation (which is also good
and lawful) to afford them a hint for the avoiding the literal.

If these here whom Christ blessed had not a right to the Kingdom of Heaven,
surely our Savior gave a very improper Reason for his action, which even
themselves will not be so impious to affirm: and these here are Children, and
that little ones; if (...) will not serve, they are (...); if Parvi be not
small enough, they are Parvuli, the diminutive little children; lap-children S.
Mark makes them, for he reports, Christ took them in his arms when he blessed
them, 10.26. as we do little children when we baptize them; and S. Luke he has
a less word for them than either S. Matthew or S. Mark, less than (...), than
ordinary litte ones, that can newly go, or speak, (...) he calls them; and
that is properly Infants; so we have translated it.

But we take this for granted of all but them, whom we labor not much to
satisfy in so manifest a truth; and therefore hasten to the last particular in
the Text; that, as of them, so, of such as they are, Talium (says Christ) est
Regnum coelorum, of such is the Kingdom of Heaven.

And in it, Talium.
having first acknowledged the simplicity of the Truth in the literal sense, we
will follow the Fathers in this Allegory, seeing the Scripture does often
abound in several senses, all agreeing to the Analogy of faith.

And indeed it must needs be so, when we consider, that not only such are
admitted, but that whosoever is not such, is excluded; so S. Mark and S. Luke
too in setting down this Story, Whosoever shall not receive the Kingdom of God
as a little child, he shall not enter therein: Are we driven then here to
Nicodemus his question? Joh. 3.4.
How can a man be a child when he is old? Can he enter the second time into his
Mothers womb? No, it is not the age of a child that Christ requires, but that
that innocence and humility which does naturally appear in them, should, by
Education and Grace, be practiced in as many of us as would find the way to
Heaven; so S. Paul expounds it for the former, Be children in malice, 1 Cor.
14.20. (i. e.) be harmless, be innocent; and our Savior Christ expounds it
for the later, Whosoever shall humble himself as this little child, the same is
greatest in the Kingdom of Heaven, Matt. 18.4.

So that every childish quality is not to be imitated by us; S. Paul forbids
that in that place to the Corinthians, Be not childish in understanding, and
(perhaps he too) chides those men, Heb. 5.12. who were so childishly ignorant,
that they had yet need of milk, and not of strong meat: Solomon is weary of
enduring them, Quousque parvuli diligitis Infantiam? Prove. 1.22. How long, ye
simple ones, will ye love simplicity? But they are propounded to our imitation,
in regard of those good qualities, in which God is specially delighted; those,
amongst the rest, are chiefly, the two I named unto you, Innocence and
Humility: of each of which very briefly, and we have done.

This Innocence we must not so understand, as I find some of the Papists,
Innocentia. Darrad, etc.
in expounding this place, are willing to do, who think that children, upon
their Baptism, are so clear from sin, that, now, they have not the least spot
or stain left in them, and would have us be so: They are indeed in that
Wellspring of New Birth, so thoroughly washed from the guilt of Original sin
which they brought with them into the world, that it is not laid to their
charge to condemn them; No, no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus,
Romans 8.1. But yet the seeds of that concupiscence, which does deprave our whole
nature, are not so done away, but that we have still need to crucify the Old
man within us all the days of our life; Mendaces sumus, says S. John, it is a
bold lie, to say we have no sin in us, 1 John 1.8. Take heed of this Plea; if
we once plead it, Vide Cassiani Collationem 22. c. 13.
we shall set God on pleading too: I will plead with thee, says God, because
thou say, I have not sinned, Jer. 2.35.

Innocent we may be, as Job was, who, maugre the Devils malice, yet held fast
his innocence, Job 2.3. Such innocence we may attain to, as David washed his
hands in when he went up to the Altar of God, Psalm. 26. we may, and must,
strive to be like Zachary and Elizabeth his wife, righteous before God (i. e.
without hypocrisy) walking in the Commandments of God: But that walking is an
argument, that we are not yet come to the mark; I, In all the Commandments and
Ordinances of God, without reproof, Luke 1.6. but how without reproof? S.
Austin does interpret it to Innocentius, sine querela, non sine peccato; not
without sin, but without grievance, quarrel, just complaint, or exception to be
made against them; he does often distinguish betwixt peccatum and querela; the
one sin in general, which no man is freed from (for it is an absolute Sentence,
and needs no exposition, Gal. 3.22
God has concluded all under sin) the other, some great offense (as David
calls it) some malicious wickedness, some heinous, notorious scandalous sin,
culpable in the eyes of men, and worthy of censure and crimination: An Innocence
we may, and must aim at, for the model and capacity of this life, for the state
of Passengers and Wayfaring men; but to magnify the arm of flesh, and the
nature of man, more than reason admits (as the Pelagians of our Time do) and by
a sophistical and deceitful conclusion, to seek to obscure the Truth, and to
overreach the World in this point, that because they find in the Scripture
often mention of the Innocence, Justice, Righteousness, Perfection of the
Children of God, (dissembling, or not rightly weighing the drift of the place)
they should infer hereupon, that a man may in this life attain to such a
Saint-like Innocence, as to be clear from all sin, is a conceit which savours
not of that Humility commended in these Children.

And therefore, Humilitas
if we mark it, our Savor Christ, where he expounds himself, c. 18. insists
more upon that other childlike quality, and commends it unto us for the best
way to Christ, and to Heaven, Humility; Not whosoever shall be without sin, as
this little child, but, Whosoever shall humble himself as this little Child,
Verse. 4.
the same is greatest in the Kingdom of Heaven. Now, Humility may be, and
ought most to be in him who is subject to sin; and it is the want of it only
that puts that same Non sum sicut caeteri in the mouth of our Pharisee; 'Twas
to the sinful, but humble Publican, Luke 18. that Christ applies this very
speech to in effect, Matt. 18. not he that is without sin, but he that humbles
himself shall be exalted, there in S. Luke; exalted indeed, for he shall be
the greatest in the Kingdom of Heaven, here in S. Matthew.

Of this in few words, and I Will tire your patience no longer.

Of such is the Kingdom of Heaven: Of such little ones, of such humble ones:
see the Pattern first, and the humility that is in them. What child, though
never so Nobly born, though the Son of a Prince, takes advantage from the
greatness of his birth, to lessen his Humility? Who ever saw spark of pride in
Swathing-clouts? or the least show of disdain for any usage, though he were
laid in a Crib, in a Manger, as the best Child was? The Heir of the House, as
long as he is a Child, (S. Paul tells us) differs nothing from a Servant,
though he be Lord of all, Gal. 4.1. The Heir of the Kingdom took upon him the
form of a Servant, Phil. 2.7. I, as he would come to us by the name of a
Child, Ecce, Parvulus natus, so he propounds himself the Pattern of nothing so
expressly, as of this virtue; Discite ex me, Matthew. 11. Learn of me: what? I am
meek and lowly in heart, v. 29. Learn of him that, and then we may learn any
thing, all that this Book of his can teach us; we shall be nourished and grow
strong by the sweetness in it, if we come to it as S. Peter bids us, and as
new born Babes, desire the sincere milk of the Word, that we may grow thereby,
1 Pet. 2.2.

We see the Pattern; consider what need there is that we imitate it; that as
our children are so, so Gods Children must be so: We must know therefore, that
the way to Heaven is directly contrary to the way of this world; that as Seneca
bids his Wise man go against the Crowd, march the contrary way to the
multitude; so in things appertaining to salvation, we must omnino diversa via
incedere, says one, For they proceed in such a course, as in the eyes of
worldly men seems most unlikely; here, If any seems to be wise, let him become
a fool, that he may be wise, 1 Cor. 3.18. Here, He that finds his life shall
lose it, and he that loses his life for my sake shall find it, Matthew. 10.39.
Here, Whosoever will be great, let him be your Minister, and whosoever will be
chief, let him be your servant, Matthew. 20.26. Here, he that became obedient to
death, even the death of the Cross, God highly exalted him, and gave him a
Name above every Name, Phil. 2.9. and even therefore, says S. Paul; and here,
Whosoever shall humble himself as this little Child, the same is greatest in
the Kingdom of Heaven, Matthew. 18.4. so truly said the Lord by the Prophet
Isaias, My thoughts are not your thoughts, neither are your ways my ways,
55.8.

From this consideration the devoutest Fathers of the Church of Christ have
trod this uncouth path, and because it is so hard to light on, have chalked it
out to us. S. Gregory, Ep. 39. Humiliemur in mente, si ad solidam conamur
pervenire celsitudinem, Let Us be lowly in mind, if we think of rising to the
true height: S. Austin, Sermon. 10. De Verbis Domini, Magnus esse vis? a minimo
incipe. Will thou be great? begin to be so at being little: No safe erecting a
stately structure for magnificence, without first digging deep to lay the
foundation in Humility; that thou may be great in Gods eyes, (says he in
another place, Sermon. 11. De Temp. be small in thine own eyes; just so said
Samuel to Saul, When thou wast little in thine own sight, then wast thou not
made the Head of the Tribes? then the Lord anointed thee King over Israel, 1 Samuel 15.17. God looks upon us, as we look upon things through a
Perspective-Glasse; to see great things we use it not, but with it we look at
small things; for this Glass makes such as them great in our eyes; so these
men that are great, I wis, in their own thoughts, that say with the Church of
Laodicea, Rev. 3.17. that they are rich, and increased with goods, etc. when
they are poor and miserable, they that thus belie themselves with a false
conceit of Greatness, God looks not on them at all, He that tells lies shall
not tarry in my sight, Psalm. 101. But behold, the eye of the Lord is upon them
that fear him, that are so little as to be afraid, and so humble as to mistrust
themselves, and to put their trust in his mercy, Psalm. 33.17. Those that do
with the ten Lepers in S. 17.12. and 18.13.
Luke, and with the humble Publican, stare a long, stand a far off: To us they
seem small, and of no reputation, but the Perspective eye of his wisdom makes
them great; when they are little in their own sight, then does he make them as
the Heads of their Tribes.

He is not like these Children, that brags, with the Pharisee, Luke 18.11. he
is not like other men; (yes, like men, like natural men he is, but not like
Children, like these Children) and he makes himself most unworthy of this
Kingdom who says of himself, as the Jews of the Centurion, Luke 7.4. that he
is worthy for whom the Lord should do this: Non, Non sum dignus, we learn from
one that was worthier than any of us, a greater than whom was not among the
sons of women, Matthew. 11.11. I am not worthy to loose the latchet of his shoe,
Luke 3.16. Quis ego sum, Domine? was the question of a great King, Lord, who am
I? says David, 1 Chronicles. 29.14. and minor sum, was the answer of a holy
Patriarch, I am less than the least of thy mercies, says Jacob, Genesis 32.10.
Like those Plutarch writes of, that saild to Athens to get Philosophy, first
they were called Sophistae, wise men; after that, Philosophi, but Lovers of
wisdom; then Rhetores, only Reasoners, and Discoursers; last of all, Idiotae,
simple, unlettered men; still the more they profited in learning, the less
they acknowledged it: so these holy men, like Circles, the nearer they came to
their Center, Christ Jesus, upon whom they rest, the less still they made
themselves: And so must we in spiritual graces, study to be great, but not know
it; as the stars in the firmament, though they exceed the earth in bigness,
yet seem much less, and the higher and bigger of them, less than the least;
In alto, non altum sapere, not to be high-minded in high deserts, is the way to
high preferment.

The preferment in my Text, Regnum. Joh. 14.2
the Kingdom of Heaven, 't has many Mansions, says Christ; but 't has not one
for a high-minded, for a proud man, no, not for a proud Angel; they, when they
lost their humility, lost their place there; and shall Man, by getting pride,
get in thither? Pride has once already sorely shaken the walls of Heaven, and
cast down the (too big spirited) spiritual Inhabitants; and therefore a sure
guard there is against the re-entry of such an enemy; he had need be a strong
man to recover that place which Angels could not hold, freed by Gods grace in
Christ, from all sins, but especially from that daring sin Angusta Porta;
though this Kingdom within be spacious and glorious, Mat. 7.14
yet the gate is straight that leads unto life: as they be few, so those few
are little ones, humble ones, Tales, says my Text, such as these little
Children that enter in thereat.

This grace of all other, (I know not how, whether for the excellency of it in
it self, or for the necessity of it in regard of us) there is more to be said
of it than of any other, and a man has more to do to hold a mean; it is both a
Grace it self, and a Vessel to comprehend other Graces; and this is the nature
of it, the more it receives of the blessings of God, the more it may, for it
ever emptieth it self by a modest estimation of it is own gifts, that God may
always fill it; it wrestleth, and striveth with God, according to the policy
of Jacob; that is, wins by yielding, and the lower it stoops to the ground,
the more advantage it gets to obtain the blessing: O quam excelsus es, Austin
Confess.
Domine? and humiles cord sunt domus tuae: O Lord, how high and sovereign art
thou? and yet the humble of heart are thy houses to dwell in: Where is the
house (says God) that ye build unto me? and where is the place of my rest? To
him will I look, even to him that is poor, and of a contrite spirit, and
trembles at my words, Isa. 66.2. What was it in the blessed Virgin, (the
Mother of Gods Firstborn, the Glory and Flower of Woman-kinde) that God
regarded so much? she tells us in her Magnificat, He has regarded the
lowliness of his Handmaid; Lu. 1.48.
yea, the blood and juice of the whole Song is in praise of this one Grace; He
has scattered the proud, he has put down the mighty, V. 51, 52.
he has exalted the humble and meck.

I must end with this one Observation more, that ye may be assured it is this
Grace of Humility is intended in the Talium of my Text, this especially in
which we must be like these children, if we will gain the Kingdom of Heaven,
because the very same blessing, in the very same words, is, in another place of
the Gospel, by Gods Charter, confirmed upon the very same Virtue, Blessed are
the poor in spirit, Matt. 5.3. quoniam ipsorum est Regnum Coelorum, for theirs
is the Kingdom of Heaven: And if we hope to enter this Kingdom, by the help of
this humble Poverty in spirit, let none of us be so proud to refuse to learn
and practice the Prayer of a King against Pride, Let not the foot of Pride come
against me, Psalm. 36.12. (Let not the proud man insult over me, and trample on
me with his feet, so some expound it; I, let not the sin of Pride get any
foothold in my heart, so the very Letter will warrant S. Austin's Exposition,
Non veniat mihi pes superbiae) that so, we being like little Children, may be
suffered to come to this Child that was born to us, that we may meek and lowly
creep to him, who himself is meek and lowly in heart; to him, in whom the
Father blesses us with spiritual blessings in heavenly places, Ephesians. 1.3.
who himself was thus highly exalted, to this Kingdom, not without his Propter
quod, even for this cause, that he humbled himself, and who will, with the
Reward of the same Kingdom, make good his promise upon all his humble, his
little Children, Suffer little Children, and forbid them not to come unto me,
for of such is the Kingdom of Heaven: Come ye Children of my Father, receive
the Kingdom. Amen.

To him, even to him; etc.

A SERMON Preached before the SACRED MAJESTY OF K. JAMES, When he was
entertained at the Right Honorable, the Earl of Northampton's House, in
Castle-Ashby.
Matthew. 21.13. My House shall be called the House of Prayer.


OUR Savior Christ, a little before he humbled himself to death, the
shameful death, would, by this extraordinary act of Power, proclaim to the
World, that he did indeed humble himself; none else could do it; that Pilate
was deceived in his imaginary Power he thought he had to crucify him, or to
release him, John 19.10. that he was the good Shepherd, who gave his life for
his Sheep, John 10.11. No man could take it from him, but he laid it down of
himself, v. 18. Therefore he would ride in triumph into Jerusalem; and in the
Temple, his Fathers House, he would do an act (of Justice, true; but withal)
of Majesty and Authority; one, the greatest that ever he vouchsafed to show
while he lived among us: Such opinion S. Jerome had of it, though the giving
sight to one born blind were a great Miracle; Jo. 9.6, 7.
and the restoring life to a Carcass putrified in the grave, Jo. 11.44
a greater; Mat. 17.2
and the showing his glory on the Mount in his Transfiguration, might exceed
those, yet, Mihi inter omnia signa quae fecit, hoc videtur mirabilius, I
account none like this (says he) that one Man, at that time grown contemptible
amongst them, so far, that they had even marked him out for slaughter, should
then (maugre the anger of the many Priests, of the Chief Priests, who were so
potent in that place) play Rex among them (as Zachary's prophecy of him is
applied to this one particular action) should overthrow their Tables and their
Seats, and send them all packing, Zach. 9.9
Mat. 21.5 21.12.
not any of them, not all of them daring to resist him: Sure there appeared
more than humane Majesty in his face, and his eyes sparkled Divinity, thinks
that holy Father; and who can think otherwise? As when in the Garden over
Kedron, Captain Judas, and his Band of men came armed to take him he did, with
a word (and his Aspect now, was as his language then) with an Ego sum, Joh. 18.6
I am (that dreadful name of his Deity, by which he would of old be made known
to the Egyptians) cast them all upon their backs. Exo. 3.14


And besides his power manifested in his Miracle, the story gives us a taste
also of that care which he had of his Fathers glory, and the just indignation
which he had conceived against them that had dishonored his House; soon as he
was entered the City in State, whither goes he? not to David's Tower, not to the
Kings Palace; no, he sought not his own glory, he had told them plainly before,
John 8.50. nay, he shunned it, when they would have taken him by force, to make
him a King, John 6.15. His Kingdom was not of this world: Jo. 18.36
But I honor my Father, says he, John 8.49. He goes to his House, and all the
honor he had received by the Peoples late acclamations, Mat. 21.9
he gives up to him; he intends an employment of great importance, that
concerns the honor of his Fathers House; Luke 2.48
wist ye not, (so he satisfies his Mothers grief for his absence) Wist ye not
that I must be about my Fathers business? Luke 2.49. This in particular above
all other businesses, he took special care of; when he began his Preaching, he
began this Reformation; against the first Passover that we read he showed
himself at, Joh. 2.13
(that S. John only tells us of) He whipped them out of the Temple, Verse. 15.
and poured out the Money, and overthrew the Tables: And now he was to end his
Preaching, and his life, he will end well as he began; he will to the Temple,
and sweep it clean before he goes, and once again, cast out all that sold and
bought there, Mark 11.15. Lu. 19.45
and overthrow the Tables, and the Seats; and this we have related by every of
the other three Evangelists.

And this we have followed by Christ, with the greatest measure of severity
that ever was forced from him in any other of his actions that we read of in
all the story of his life: Alas, he was in his own nature, Isa. 53.11
the Prophets Sheep before the Shearers, the Prophets and the Evangelists
Sheep, and Lamb too, Act. 8.32.
for the slaughter, dumb, Joh. 1.29
and not opening his mouth the Agnus Dei, not of Rome, but of the World;
meekness was his Virtue, his exemplary Virtue, that he professed to teach, and
set up his Bill for it, Matthew. 11. Discite a me, quia mitis; Come to me, to my
School, v. 28. If you will learn meekness Learn it of me, v. 29. He came not
to condemn the World, but that, through him, it might be saved, John 3.17. He
was the Instrument of Gods mercy, the Peacemaker, Matt. 5.9.
( blessed Title for ever) the means of reconcilement betwixt God and the
World; and yet when it comes to the point of Honor for his Fathers House, then
this Merciful and Peaceable, this mediating and reconciling Man, first falls
upon himself, the very Peacemaker, and after, upon his Fathers Enemies; then
Zelus Domus tuae comedit me, Psalm. 69.9. The zeal of thine House has eaten me
up; It has even-eaten, and it has eaten even-Me; and us Moses, to whom God
himself gives testimony of being endowed with this Virtue of Christ's, that he
was very meek, above all the men that were upon the face of the Earth, Number.
12.3. yet, when Gods worship was at stake, I, lost, and the Golden Calfe had
got the better, and won upon the peoples hearts, this meek man had anger for
such a sin, anger that waxed hot against the Idol and Idolaters, Exodus 32.19.
So this meeker than Moses, even than, when he comes according to that
Prediction of the Prophet, Ecce! Rex tuus venit Metis, Behold! thy King comes
unto thee meek, Zach. 9.9. yet, when he sees the place appointed for his
Fathers worship converted to a petty Staple of Merchandise, Gods House of
Prayer made a Den of Thieves, this was a height of Sin, to beget an anger in
him who was made of mildness; and though he spared the Adulteress; Jo. 8.11.
pardoned an Extortioner, Luke 19.9
Zachaeus; Ate with Publicans and sinners; Mat. 9.11 Luke 5.27 Lu. 23.42
received one Publican into his Service, and one Thief into his favor, nay,
into his very Paradise; suffered the Betrayer of him to dip in the dish with
him; bear with great sins, Mat. 26.23.
and great Sinners in other kinds, yet, If any man defile the Temple of God,
him shall God destroy 1 Cor. 3.17. he is more moved, expresses greater
indignation at this, than in all his life besides; He seems here to forget his
Office of Mercy which he came for (save that severity against Sacrilege, is
favor to the Saints, in rescuing the place of their solemn Assemblies from
rude and covetous profaneness) and to be wholly set upon execution of
judgment.

And yet, though he may seem so; and that he be sore displeased, he does not
shut up his loving kindness in his sore displeasure, Psalm. 77.9. It is not
altogether S. James his Judicium sine Misericordia, 2.13. Judgment without
Mercy: No, Deus diligit Misericordiam and Judicium, Psalm. 33.5. He loves Mercy
and Judgment, the earth is full of his goodness: They who will sing unto the
Lord as David did, their Song must be of Mercy and Judgment, as David's was,
Psalm. 101.1. even in this Judgment he remembers Mercy: Hab. 3.2.
He will not proceed in Justice against them, without a merciful inclining to
give them a reason of this his proceeding; and though it be true which we find
in Job, Who will (that is, who dare? who may?) say unto the Lord, what do
thou? or, why do thou so? Job 9.12. yet there he denies them not, that as
they see and feel what he does, so they should know, why he does it; let them
hear his sweet words (for Reason is sweet, Ps. 142.6.
even to him that smarts under it, and Religion much more, even when it threats
and shoots, to have us return to it, that we may get within the arrow, and
without the danger) and they cannot mislike his deeds, not this, the very
sharpest of them; to stay them from murmuring, he prevents with a scriptum est,
so that if they will not know him to be the Lord, Ex. 16.8.
they shall not choose but know, if they do murmur, their murmuring is against
the Lord; he preaches to them out of two of the Prophets; he shows them the
right use and end, why, and for which that house was founded out of Isaias
56.7. My House shall be called the house of Prayer, and the intolerable abuse
they had put upon it, out of Jer. 7.11. ye have made it a Den of Thieves. The
first part of his Sermon is our Text.

In which we have, first, Divisio.
this House laid claim to on God's behalf, as his possession, My House, says
God. Secondly, we have the Owner of this House (who best may do it) disposing
of it to a certain use; it must be a House of Prayer: And thirdly, we have the
Note of distinction, to know it from all other Houses of Prayer; the difference
which God, in his Heraldry, sets upon the Elder House; it shall not only be so,
but, (...), by way of excellence, It shall he called. Domus Mea, Domus
Orationis vocabitur, My House shall be called the House of Prayer.

My House. Here Is first, Domus Mea.
this House appropriated to God, and his claim put in for his special title to
it: Three common titles there are that God has to all things in the world, by
which they become properly all his, his by all right: 1. the unquestionable
right of Creation; Man, that cannot make a hair, not one hair white, or black,
Matthew. 5.36. and if not so small a thing, not so much as one, nothing; God is
the Maker of all. 2. of Possession, he holds them all: Man is but Tenant at
will of the very breath he draws; it is God, says David, who when he will,
takes away his breath, Psalm. 104.29. God is Proprietary of him, and of all he
has. 3. of Preservation; he saves them all, God, who gives, takes away too,
Job 1.21. that chapter proves it by Induction, by enumeration of almost every
thing, Servants, Oxen, and Asses, 15. Sheep, 16. Camels, 17. House too, and
children also, v. 19. and those of both sorts, sons and daughters, as it is
expressly set down, v. 13. Man cannot preserve himself, and his cattle much
less; it is thou O God, that preservest Man and Beast, Psalm. 36.6. It Is thou, O
God, that say, the Cattle upon a thousand hills are mine, at my keeping,
Psalm. 50.10. And thus to be his, is all no more than the very reference to
nature in the things, and to the God of nature, as the Fashioner, the Owner,
and Conserver of them.

But yet, in particular, besides Nature, some other respect there is in God, as
it were in a civil and moral kind, whereby things become yet further his; His
by Use, when he specially employes them, and makes them his Instruments, above
the ordinary course of nature; and then are they his by claim and challenge
too, he calls them so, and himself sets his own name upon them; and that is
here in this Domus mea, the subject of my Text, Gods own demand of it in
particular to himself as his own, and for his more peculiar service, Domus
mea, it is my House.

The whole earth is the Lords, and all that therein is, Psalm. 24.1. And
therefore he might freely give it as a Patrimony to his Son, the uttermost
parts of the earth for his possession, Psalm. 2.8. yet the earth he has given
too to the children of men, Psalm. 115.16. But still the Land of Canaan is Terra
mea, my Land, 2 Chronicles. 7.20. the rest (as himself speaks of his Vineyard) he
sets out, and lets out to Husbandmen at large, Mat. 21.33. Ps. 44.12.
(though he does not increase his wealth by their price) who Hold of him in
Capite, in Christ their Head; but that he holds to himself as his own Demeans;
All the Beasts of the Forest are mine, Psalm. 50.10. But the Beasts that were
offered up in sacrifice to him, they were his, after a more special manner; the
Cattle upon a thousand hills mine, and the City upon seven hills mine, mine by
my general right I have to them, and belonging to my general care and
providence over them; but cattle for burnt offerings mine by divine
institution, and Cities wherein I am truly worshipped mine, as partaking of my
special love and favor; all Israel, my People, but more peculiarly, the Tribe
of Levi mine; Israel mine Inheritance, Deuteronomy. 9.26. but to the Priests and
Levites, the Lord himself is their Inheritance, Deuteronomy. 18.2. O ye, the whole
House of Israel, trust in the Lord, he is their Helper and Defender, Psalm.
115.9. He shall bless the House of Israel; but shall he not also (and more
especially) bless the House of Aaron, v. 12. All her Houses have need of
succor and from him; In her Palaces God is well known for a sure Refuge, Psalm.
48.2. And of every House, it is truly said, Exc^pt the Lord build the House,
their labor is but lost that build it, Psalm. 127.1. But Solomon shall build a
House for my Name, says God, 1 Chronicles. 22.10. His Name is great in all Israel,
Psalm. 76.1. but here it dwells; Go to my Palace in Shilo, ubi habitavit Nomen
meum a principio, Jer. 7.12. where my Name has dwelt from the beginning.

God, as soon as he had a People of his Own, whom he honored above all the
world with that denomination; when he had severed them from the Refuse, those
of Egypt, though they were yet in the vast Wilderness, and had, themselves no
seeled habitation, yet, there, a moveable Tabernacle God would have them make
for him; and, though it be after called, The Tabernacle of the Congr-gation,
Exodus 28.43. ('it was theirs to serve God in) yet it has an earlier Name, which
must not be forgotten; Let them make me a Sanctuary, (a place to dwell in) that
I may dwell amongst them, Exodus 25.8. a House of his own, when he had a People
of his own. Some go further, and observe, that Mountains and Groves served
instead of this, and for this same purpose, in the time of the Patriarchs, that
Abraham planted a Grove, and called there on the Name of the Lord, the
everlasting God, Genesis 21.33. and that he had his Mountain in the land of Moria,
whereon to appear before God with sacrifice, Genesis 22.2. and his Altar about
Bethel, Genesis 13.4. and there he called on the Name of the Lord: That the first
sons of Adam, Cain and Abel had whether to bring their Sacrifices, Genesis 4.3, 4.
I, and that their Father (so soon) even during the space of his small
continuance in Paradise, had where to present himself before the Lord, Genesis
3.8. But of that in the Wilderness, Exodus 25
we are sure they had their charge and direction from God for the framing of
it; himself drew the model for his own House, being himself
Architect-Generall (in the most general and inclusive sense of the word) for
all the Princes and people too of the earth, and for the very God of them all,
in appointing a place, (though a place loco-motive) and pointing out the
pattern of it for his Worship: And against the time that they should come to
settle themselves in the Land which he promised to their Fathers, he gives them
a strict command concerning that House which should be built, Unto the place
which the Lord your God shall choose to put his name there, even unto his
habitation shall ye seek, and thither shall you come, Deuteronomy. 12.5.

The honor of building this House David did much desire to have, and Solomon
did much rejoice to have: And after the overthrow of this, for the sins of the
people, when the second was erected, though 'twas viewed with great grief, to
see how short it came of the glory of the former, Ezra 3.12
yet the loud shouts for joy were equal to the voice of weeping, Ezra 3.13.
And, being finished, Ezr. 6.16
'twas dedicated into Gods possession with a general joy.

Besides which Temple, there were, both in other parts of the Land, and even in
Jerusalem, by process of time, no small number of Synagogues (Houses of God
all) for men to resort unto for his public service; whose necessarinesse
together with the Temple our Savior himself, and after him the Apostles,
confirmed with their frequent presence.

So we see all along till Christ's time, God had his House, his Houses, besides
the Temple, his main Mansion House; which Christ here reduced to the purity of
its first Institution.

And presently after his time, though Temples, such as now, were not presently
erected for the exercise of Christian Religion; it has been nevertheless, not
unreasonably conceived, out of those the Apostles words, Have ye not houses to
eat and drink in, or despise ye the Church of God? 1 Cor. 11.22. that he there
teaches what difference should be made betwixt House and House; what is fit
for the dwelling place of God, and what for man's habitation: At the first,
poverty was a hindrance to them, they could not provide Houses (such as they
would for God and his worship; but as soon as he blessed them with favor in
the eyes of Princes, and blessed Princes with his favor of Christianity, they
were not well till they had expressed their thankfulness that way; Good
Constantine presently finished one for him at Jerusalem, and gave it up into his
hands with very solemn performance, the greatest part of the Bishops of
Christendom meeting at it, each one setting forth that action to his power in
Orations and Sermons, and the sacrifice of Prayer for the peace of the world,
and safety of the Church, and the Emperors and his Childrens good, Eusebius. De
Vita Constantini, lib. 4. c. 4.
etc. Athanasius, in his Apology to Constantius, reports the like of a Bishop
of Alexandria, in a work of the like magnificence: And after them the work
went up apace throughout the coasts of Christendom, and they that hewed timber
out of the thick trees, were known to bring it to an excellent work, Psalm. 74.5.

By this means God has given us a plentiful pledge of his presence amongst us,
even ad satietatem usque: woe worth the while; we have enjoyed his mercy in
this kind, as the Israelites in Quails, till we slight it. They were furious
mad-brains, not to be remembered but with disdain (for, to be pitied would but
have hardened them, and made them set their faces, not toward, but against the
Temple) who, because these Houses had whilome, been stained with Idolatry,
would have burned them to cleanse them, would have had them pulled down and
levelled with the ground; who yet, I wis, had they some Papists
dwelling-Houses, fair and stately bequeathed to them, would not fall a
demolishing of them, though Saints had been prayed to in them more than once
every day; no, Man will not (he is of a more thriving Religion) none but God
shall be the loser: And we are still too near their sick humor in the mean
esteem we have of them; we are afraid to place any holiness in a Temple, more
than in a School-house, or a Barn: This is the House of the Lord God, would we
have said so, with Solomon, 1 Chronicles. 22.1. of that Temple, had we seen it? If
we would, yet that was but a Figure of Christ the Lamb, the true Temple, Rev.
21.22. and is gone; and we have learned now of Stephen (for we dare not Saint
him, we must not allow him holy) that God dwells not now in Houses made with
hands, Act. 7.48. (Houses say they, for Temples they are loath to call them,
(though Stephen did so) even then when they deny them to be Gods) Solomon's
people might have taken the like hint from his mouth, for their neglect of that
holy place, Behold, the Heaven of Heavens cannot contain thee, how much less
this House which I have builded, 1 King 8.27. or, if that was modesty in him,
they might have caught hold of an excuse from Gods own mouth; Thus says the
Lord, Isa. 66.1. Heaven is my Throne and Earth is my Footstool; where is the
House that ye shall build unto me? And yet for all this, Solomon was not afraid
to say, nor need we scruple to learn of him, I have surely built thee an House
to dwell in, a settled place for thee to abide in for ever, 1 Kings 8.13. Let
them take, and stand to Calvin's exposition of their misunderstood Text; that
indeed God is not locked up in these Temples, nor fastened to the Pillars of
them, as those whom they made their gods in the Church of Rome; his presence is
not bounded here, nor his favor so cemented within these walls, that it no
where else shines upon his people; but yet, here he is in a more extraordinary
manner, in a larger and fuller manifestation of his presence than elsewhere:
Our blessed Redeemer is every where; but where a few are gathered together in
his name, (and this is the place for that) He will be in the midst of them,
Mat. 18.20. more near to them by the special gifts and graces of his Holy
Spirit, which he will pour out amongst them. Jacob was not such a Novice in
Religion at seventy years of age, but that he knew God was present every
where; notwithstanding when God vouchsafed him the Vision of himself, and his
holy Angels, and that he had a more special enjoying of his presence in that
place than elsewhere; O then, How dreadful is this place! this is Bethel; this
is none other but the House of God, and the Gate of Heaven; surely the Lord is
in this place, and I was not aware, Genesis 28.17.

And we are not aware often times, that the Lord is in this place; if we were, we
would come into it as into his presence; we would demean our selves in it as
before God; Solomon should not lose the labor of his good Council, we would
take heed to our feet (those of our body too, and especially to our affections,
the feet of our soul) when we entered into the House of God, Eccles. 5.1.
Ecclesiam, ut Coelum, Nilus.
ade; I have much esteemed that direction of an Ancient, and wish it engraven
upon the Porch, that when we bring our bodies into the Church, we would (by the
remembrance of the Church, whose House it is, of the very Door, the very Porch
of it) send our Souls, our couversations up to Heaven; it is the Gate of Heaven,
Jacob tells us, the very Door of it is so; and it is holy ground, God tells us
where he shows himself, Exodus 3 5. and they, who put off the shoes from their
feet, who lay aside all earthly respects and cogitations, and have their souls
fitted for the entertaining the tender of of his gracious presence which he
makes unto them in this place, they feel themselves, for the time, in Heaven,
and the heavenly joy that thereby they conceive, does thenceforth fasten such
an impression in their minds, as bre^ds an awful respect in them, and
nourishes a reverent affection toward (...) very place, wherein they were
par^aker of so great a benefit.

O how the Priests of Dagon, and all t^^ men of A^^ded shame us in their z^^^^!
Their false Idol-God, fell in his ^o^^e, before the Ark of the Lord, with his
(...) and hands upon the Threshold; and a^^er that, so religious are their
thoug^^^ to the place once touched by any part of him? of It (so far from a God
it was, that it was not a He) They never tread on the Threshold of Dagon in
Ashdod unto this day, 1 Samuel 5.5. How far^esse effect ^oes a far greater and
better cause work with us in the Houses of our true God? we are so afraid to
profane them, o^^^ one side, with superstition and Idolatry and false worship,
that we dash upon that other impious profanation of neglecting, contemning
them, giving occasion to men that make a mock at Religion (men as false as
Dagon was a false god) to account no more of them than as of an Out-room about
their house, Dum vitant stulti vitia, Horat.
in contraria currunt: Is this the Holiness which becomes Gods House for
ever? Psa. 93.5.
I have seen (and my soul has grieved to see it) a pissing-Channel built up
against a Church-wall; Jer. 5.30.
A wonderful and horrible thing is committed in the land: posuerunt
offendicula, Jer. 7.30. they have set their abominations in my House which is
called by my Name to pollute it. If we dare tell Rome of their too much
superstition in this kind, to stop our mouth, they hit us in the teeth with
our cold and careless regard; when they tell us of Pater Noster's building
many Churches, and how much a do we have to mend up one, notwithstanding the
great charge, and devout care of one of our Fathers, we shame and sorrow to
hear, Et doci potuisse, Horat.
and non potuisse refelli. Sure God sees we use it not well, not this, and
other his Houses as we should; else he would warm all our hearts with King
David's affection, Quam dilecta Tabernacula! O how amiable, how beloved are thy
dwellings! Psalm. 84.1. The zeal of Gods House, would, if not eat us, yet so
affect us, that we would love the habitatation of it, decorem Domus tuae, in
the Latin, the beauty, the comeliness, the decency of thine House, and the
place where thine honor dwells, Psalm. 26.8.

I am too long in this first part, I hope I am; and that, verbum sapienti, one
word to the wisest in this Auditory, in this Nation, in this World, would be
enough; nor dare I now spend time in bootlesse complaint, that so many Houses
of God in our Land are dis-inherited, like those of decayed Gentry, without
Revenues, that his servants in them, being defrauded of their Masters
allowance, do live on Alms, small, grudged Alms; that especially in the most
populous places, where the Tradesman abounds, the Minister suffers want: Arise,
O God, maintain thine own cause, Ps. 74.23.
Maintain those thy poor painful Servants who lack maintenance; Mat. 5.14
as thou have called them the light of the World, so do thou pour Oil into
their Lamps; pour thy grace into the hearts of thy people, to give earthly Oil
to those from whom they expect heavenly light; not to account it a great thing
if they, who sow unto them spiritual things, reap their carnal things, 1 Cor.
9.11. thus to buy the Gospel, is a lawful, a charitable, a holy Simony; holy,
though a Heathen has said it, (...).

One word more from Domus mea; That this is Gods House: I would fain have you
tell them, who will not come into Gods House to hear it from me; that they
wrong the right Owner of it, by giving his possession to so many other Deities,
for no less than Deities they make their Saints, Martial.
when they invoke them; Deos, qui colit, ille facit: and they do no less than
give them possession, when they inshrine them in so many Temples built for, and
dedicated to God alone: I cry them mercy; perhaps the blessed Virgin amongst
them, and the several Apostles, have more Churches consecrated them, than God,
the Holy Trinity, or Christ under his sundry Titles; We have our Churches
called by those several names too, for distinction sake, but not, thereby,
superstitiously meaning, either that those places which are denominated of
Angels and Saints, should serve for the worship of so glorious Creatures, or
else those glorified creatures, for defense, Protection, and patronage of such
places; a thing which the Ancients do utterly disclaim; The Nations, says S.
Austin, erected Temples to their gods; we to our Martyrs, not Temples, as unto
Gods, but memorials, as unto dead men, whose spirits with God are still living;
and therefore, besides that special name of distinction, by which we know one
of these Houses from another, we keep still the general name, in which all
these Houses agree together (...), Kirk, the Lords House; thereby
acknowledging, that as it is his, and by him appointed for Prayer, so we must
not give away the right of his Title to this House, by giving away the glory of
his Worship in this House, either to Saint or Angel: Gloriam alteri non dabo;
that which is the House of Prayer is my House; my House is that, it is the House
of Prayer.

That Is the second thing in order to be taken into our consideration, the use
of this House; what the first Founder intended, when he gave order for the
building of it; to what purpose it should be employed, it must be a House of
Prayer.

Under the title of Prayer we understand, Part. 2. Domus Orationis.
and comprehend the whole worship of God, which he had commanded them to
perform unto him in his Temple; Diverse were their Sacrifices and Ceremonies in
joined by God; but the Prophet would, in one word, instruct them to what scope
all these must be referred, Joh. 4.24
even to that worship, which is in spirit, to that spiritual sacrifice of
Prayer: Just as in the 50. Psalm, God does disclaim their Sacrifices and burnt
offerings, and reduces all the services of piety to those two parts of Prayer,
Thanksgiving, and Invocation; He will no Bullock out of their house, nor
He-Goats out of their folds, v. 9. But offer unto God thanksgiving, v. 14. And
call upon him in the day of trouble, v. 15. And therefore, when the Prophet
Jeremy would (to aggravate the fault of their misbehaviour in this House) set
down their proper description of it from the end of its institution, it is this
of Prayer; What? this House become a den of Robbers? In qua invocatum est Nomen
meum in oculis vestris? this House in which my Name is called upon? Jer. 7.11.
Will not that respect check you? And he who was likeliest to know what was Gods
intention in it, who was instructed with the whole care of building it; when he
had finished that goodly structure, and was to solemnize the dedication of it
before the Elders of Israel, and all the heads of the Tribes, the chief of the
Fathers, yea and all the men of Israel, with sacrifices of sheep and Oxen, that
could not be told, nor numbered for multitude, 1 Kings 8. That they might not
think there was no other, nor no excellenter employment for that place than
that offering of bodily, I, and bruit-bodily sacrifice, when he comes to the
blessing, the chief part of that Exercise, then all and some is, That God will
bear the Prayer that shall be made in that place: Harken to the supplication of
thy Servant, and of thy People, when they shall PRAY in this place, and hear
thou in heaven thy dwelling place, v. 30. And so all along to the end of his
blessing: What prayer and supplication soever be made by any man, or by all thy
people Israel, which shall know every man the plague of his own heart, and
spread forth his hands in this place, then hear thou in Heaven, and forgive,
and do, etc. almost in every verse of twenty in that Chapter.

We heard what Solomon told God before, that he had built him an House to dwell
in: and God had told Solomon before that, by Gods own Prophet, and his own
Son, that there he would dwell, Psalm. 132. Here will I dwell: Why? for I have a
delight therein. Verse. 13.
It Is meet in deed, that the House he dwells in should be so dressed up, so
fitted to his mind, that he may desire it, delight in it: Now what is that
Furniture of this House, that delights him? He that built it to him, can best
direct us to furnish it for him; The Prayer of the upright is his delight,
says Solomon, Prove. 15.8. Templa propter Sacrificia; Sacrifice of Beasts,
before Christ, was the most usual, and most notable external Rite; and
sacrifice of Prayer, since Christ has more than the same pre-eminence; This
fills with Incense the golden Vials in the hands of the four and twenty Elders
before the throne in Heaven, Rev. 5.8. And if with this Incense of Prayer, we
mingle the Myrrh of our tears, and sighs, and groanings, we not only sacrifice
our Prayers, but we mortify, we kill, we offer up our selves; that is the
acceptable sacrifice, if we believe the Apostle, Romans 12.1.

It Is then a House of Prayer, but not of Prayer only; we exclude not
Preaching, as some hot spirits, who are all for Preaching, would allow no room
for Prayer in this House of Prayer; or, if for Prayer also, most of all for the
Pulpit-prayer, the very place helping to mis-perswade the People, that the
Prayer is to be valued, not for its own, but for the Sermon sake; I wish that
all such (who are content to be exceeding brief in their Desk-prayers, and as
large as may be elsewhere) would heartily consider, whether we are not to come
to, and go off from the very Word of God, with more reverence and devotion and
supplication, than either the Notes, or the effusions of Man upon Gods Word;
does not this seem to magnify a short verse when it is called a Text, above
whole Psalms and Chapters? Nay, let them give me leave to wish again, that they
would heartily consider, whether such a practice, as it is begun with an
esteeming of their own private wisdoms beyond that of the Church, is not
continued also with a secret preferring of their own Meditations above that
which they meditate upon, the Word of God; I would not wrong them in what they
do; nay, I would rather rectify them, that they should not do amiss, so much
as to a suspicion; and therefore I will, as excusingly as I may, say of them,
Surely this sin is got into that high place, and they are not aware: If it be
not so, why is it, that by degrees there is less and less of Gods Word read
amongst them, shorter praying before and after Gods own Word, and instead of
more of both these, more and longer of their own Preaching: How would they
have cried it up, if God had here christened this place Concionatorium, a House
of Preaching, instead of Oratorium, a House of Prayer! We give unto each his
place, and acknowledge, that in these two Ghostly exercises, we have verified
unto us that continual intercourse of Angels, betwixt the throne of God in
Heaven, and his Church here militant on earth; that the assembling of Gods
people to hear, is the receiving of Angels descended from above; that their
meeting to pray, is the sending of Angels upwards; his heavenly inspirations,
and our holy desires are as so many Angels, ascending and descending in
intercourse and commerce betwixt God and man: Preaching brings us to know, that
God is our supreme Truth, as praying testifies, that we acknowledge him our
sovereign good: As concerning the people, we exhort, with David, to worship the
Lord in the beauty of holiness, Psalm. 96.9. So, with Solomon also, When thou
go to the House of God, appropinqua ut audias, Eccl. 5.1. be ready to hear:
And concerning our selves, as we say with Samuel, God forbid that we should sin
against the Lord, and cease to pray for you, 1 Samuel 12.23. So, with S. Paul,
Vae mihi, si non Evangelizavero 1 Cor. 9.16. a woe befall us if we preach not
the Gospel. We lessen not the necessity which is laid upon us to teach, and
upon you to learn, Gods holy will out of his Word; yet without prejudice to
that, or any other duties out of this place, we would have no man think he is
less bound to present himself to God in the Church, though in the Church,
there be then no other Service than the Common Prayer, which the more Common,
by being common to more, by more praying together, the better. There, we are to
be have our selves as in the sight of God, and his holy Angels, the one sitting
there to here, and the other attending to further our Suits; for so the gravest
of the Ancient Fathers were seriously persuaded, Chryost. Hom. 15. ad Heb. and
24. in Act.
and do often times plainly teach, that the House of Prayer is a Court beautified
with the presence of Celestial powers; that there we pray, and praise God,
having his Angels intermingled, as our Associates; with reference whereunto the
Apostle requires so great care to be had of Decency, for the Angels sake, 1
Cor. 11.16. They have their golden Censers, and in them they offer up the sweet
odours of our Prayers; Incensa multa de orationibus sanctorum, says the
Vulgate Edition, Rev. 8.3. O let them not in vain come hither with their
Censers prepared, and either not find us here, or find us empty of any thing
worthy their offering up to God; when they see us in these places full of
neglect, or contempt, or drowsinesse, or vain wandering thoughts, or idle
unnecessary talk instead of Prayer, they leave the place and us, offended with
that steam and ill scent that rises from us, where they might justly expect the
sweet odours of our Prayers, grieved to see us commit Idolatry, and sacrifice
the calves of our lips, the watchfulness of our eyes, the firstlings of our
thoughts, and our whole mind also to him who has stolen away our hearts, and
set them upon some service of his, instead of Gods.

Nolite facere, says Christ, at his first cleansing of the Temple, do not ye
make my Fathers House a House of Merchandise; do not Ye make it so; as who
should say, if such it be, it is of your making such: God never intended it for
such impertinent service; a House of spiritual Merchandise he has made it, of
traffic for our souls, where, in exchange for our Petitions, we shall have
His favors, not a Ladies glance, or glove, or Ribband favors; and Hers, do
some of ye call such as these in this place? yea, I Will tell ye what, and whose
they are; they are Baits, and Satan's; it is he who thus loosly makes this very
place his Chapel to some, which to other stricter some, is indeed Gods House,
where he sells his Mercies, his Grace, his Glory, his Heaven, himself unto
them, at that cheap rate, of their faithful, and humble, and earnest
supplications.

I would feign make as much haste as the time does; and that. I may do so, Last
part.
must presently throw my self upon the last part, Vocabitur
that it shall not only be, but it shall be known to be; it shall have Gods
special Note of difference upon it, it shall be called the House of Prayer: As
Prayer, in it self, is the proper virtue of Christians, the Christian virtue,
that by which God does distinguish his People from all the people of the world;
the rest, who live on the earth, are earthly-minded, have the hearts and the
thoughts of them fixed that way, grovelling downwards; but Gods Children, a new
selected kind of men, who have their life from Heaven, and expect all their
happiness, every good and perfect gift from above; Jam. 1.17 Phil. 3.20
they have their conversation also in Heaven, their eyes, and hands and hearts
heaved up, by daily and hearty Prayer: As Prayer does sever them from all other
People, so this title, that it must be called so, does distinguish Gods House
of Prayer, from all other Houses, in which we ought also to pray to God.

Every servant of his, whom he has made Master of a House, ought (for the
better testifying of his dutiful affection) to have his heavenly Exercise so
frequent in His House, as to make it to be (in an especial, though not in an
only sense) a House of Paayer, and that is the next way to make it Gods House,
and so to be called too; to be called so by Man, who remembers from whom he had
it, Except the Lord build the House, (build and bestow it too) Man must dwell
without doors, sub Deo; Coelo Tegitur, qui non habet Aedes, Lucan.
and therefore, by a principal designation, to make it a House of Prayer for
the Family thereof, Gal. 6.10.
for the whole Household of the faithful, of Thanksgiving-Prayer for the House
it self; but still to remember, and zealously to frequent that other House,
which God has made and called The House of Prayer, 1 Cor. 11.22. Jo. 6.35. 1
Cor. 10.16.
a House not to eat and to drink in, unless the bread of life, and the Cup of
blessing, a House only for Divine Worship. Many Sons did God vouchsafe to
acknowledge, as a dopted in Christ, John 1.12. but of Christ himself, his
natural Son, the Son of his Love, that holy thing which shall be born of thee,
says the Angel to the Virgin Mary, shall be called the Son of God, Luke 1.35.
Many were the Prophets of the Lord at sundry times to declare his will to his
people, but John Baptist Christ's forerunner, a Prophet? Mat. 11.9
yea, I say unto you, and more than a Prophet, thou shall be called the Prophet
of the Highest, Luke 1.76. Many Houses in which it is lawful, I, necessary to
pray; but of this, says God, and his Christ, It shall be CALLED the House of
Prayer: Nay, not only the House of Gods Servant, but his Field also, his
Highway, his Street, his Prison may be a House of Prayer; the Dunghill shall
serve Job, from whence to send up this sacrifice; and the Whales belly can
Jonah use for a Church; Jon. 2.1.
the Lions den for Daniel; and the Furnace for the three Children, do not
hinder their requests from ascending to the Mercy-seat; God heard Moses from
the midst of the Sea; Isa. 38.2.
and Ezekias from his Bed; Jeremy from the Mire; and the Thief from the Cross,
Lu. 23.42
when they called upon him: And therefore St. Paul wills, that men pray every
where, 1 Timothy 2.8. every where in their private Devotions; no place is a bar to
one so holily affected, for the lifting up his soul, and pouring out his heart
to God in his secret Meditations; for, surely the true worship of God is, to
him in it self, acceptable, who not so much respects the place where, as the
affection wherewith he is served: Yet, in regard of us, especially then, when
we are to put up our public requests to God; when we are to join our forces
together, Jon. 3.5.
as the Prince and people of Nineveh did, like a main Army of supplicants, that
it shall not be in the power of God, (because God will not use his adverse
power then) to withstand us, then sure there is great virtue, great force and
efficacy in the very Majesty and holiness of the place where Gods Name is
called upon, if for nothing else, yet for that it serves as a sensible help to
stir up devotion, and in that respect, no doubt, bettereth even our best and
holiest actions in this kind.

Wherefore else is this called the Holy place? Levit. 16.3. but by way of
excellence, in respect of all other? And why does S. Hierom translate it, Psalm.
78.69. not Sanctum, but Sanctuarium? a place which is not only made holy by
consecration, but that makes others holy, by God in it? For, Churches are not
only made public by the solemn dedication of them, but that right also, which
otherwise, their Founders might have in them, is thereby surrendered up to God,
and he made owner of them; why the separate, and holy and religious use
notified in the dedication of them, to which they shall be put a part from
other secular and profane usages? why, but that it may be a dumb Instructor of
piety, when ever we behold a Temple? what heart is there will pass by a
Church-wall with the same carnal inconsideration of God and Heaven, as he
walks a street in which he beholds no such reverend prospect? for this cause
also at the consecration as well of the Tabernacle, Exo. 40. as of the Temple,
1 King. 8. it pleased the Almighty to give a manifest sign, that he took
possession of both; in the one chapter, The Cloud covered the Tent of the
Congregation, and the glory of the Lord filled the Tabernacle, v. 34. In the
other, a cloud filled the House of the Lord, v. 10. A Cloud, and Glory too, and
that of the Lord himself, filled the Lords own House, v. 11. God made account
his House was sufficiently born witness to already for all ages, and that he
needed not such another Cloud for the place of Christian worship, Mat. 12.8
but only to bear record to the Lord of their Sabbath, Mat. 17.5.

The sensible increase of holiness from a sensible-holy object; this it was
made David value at so high a rate, the liberty of worshipping God in his House
and amongst his people; Blessed are they who dwell, where thou do, in thine
own House, Psalm. 84.4. One day in thy Courts is better than a thousand
otherwhere, v. 10. My soul longs, yea, and faint^th for the Courts of the
Lord, v. 2. 'twas his Vnum petii, his one, his great suit to God, that he might
dwell in the House of the Lord, that he might there behold the beauty of the
Lord, and visit his HOLY TEMPLE, Ps. 27.4. This favor did Hezekias obtain at
Gods hands, by his prayers and tears; when he had heard his prayers, and seen
his tears, and was resolved to heal him, he does express the greatness of his
favor to him, by adding his singular benefit to his health, (whereby the more
to inhealthen his soul too) On the third day thou shall go up unto the House of
the Lord, 2 Kings 20.5.

Justly therefore may the Churches censure of Excommunication, whereby men are,
as Cain was, Genesis 4.16
cast out of that presence of God, which is enjoyed in holy Assemblies, it may
justly be reputed so great a punishment, 1 Cor. 5.5 1 Timothy 1.20.
as a giving over to Satan; it is like a man's being out-lawed in matters of
civil government; Outlawry is defined by the Lawyers, to be the loss or
deprivation of the benefit belonging to a subject: i.e. of the Kings protection
and the Realm; Such is the nature of this censure rightly executed; it cuts a
man off from the privileges of a Christian, I would they were even cut off
which trouble you, Gal. 5.12. he is out of Gods protection for the time, and
reckoned as a Stranger and Forreigner, as a Heathen or a Publican, says our
Savior, Mat. 18.17.

What they lose who are deprived of this liberty, and what we have by it who
enjoy it, vouchsafe to hear in a word.

Here is first, Gods more especial and gracious presence; When shall I come to
appear before the presence of God, was David's moan? Psalm. 42.2. when in his
banishment under Saul or Absalom he was denied access to this Presence Chamber
of his great King; and to be deprived of that comfort, which must needs come to
a man's soul by such a presence, David knew what a loss it was, when he cried
in the agony of his soul, upon the sight of his great sin, Psalm. 51. O cast me
not away from thy presence, v. 11. But consider withal further, what be the
particular blessings we there enjoy through Gods mercy, Blessings, of that
worth in S. Peter's account, that the Angels do desire even to stoop down to
behold, 1 Pet. 1.12. there is the Ministry of reconciliation, 2 Co. 5.18 Act.
14.27 Romans 10.14. Ephesians. 1.10 Psa. 50.5 Ephesians. 4.12 Lu. 10.17 18. 1 Co. 10.4 Act.
20.27. Romans 4.11.
the precious Treasure of Gods holy Word, the Word preached, which is the door
of faith, the Ordinance of God, by which his Saints are gathered, and the body
of Christ edified; the powerful means by which Satan is made to fall from
Heaven like lightning, and his strongest holds beaten down; the Key of
knowledge, by which is opened to us the whole counsel of God; there be the
Sacraments, Seals of righteousness which is by faith; both of them, as Glasses,
by which we see more clearly into the mystery of our Redemption, and as
Monuments before our eyes of Gods exceeding love to us in Christ Jesus; and
besides all these, there is the exercise of Common Prayer and joint praising,
in a more peculiar respect whereto, it is termed, called, the House of Prayer;
Prayer, and praise too, says the Psalmist, wayteth for God in Sions Praise
waits for thee, O thou that hear prayer, Psalm. 65.1, 2. It cannot be small
comfort to enjoy, (are such consolations of God, Vid. Hier. in Ps. 31. p. 306.
ad finem.
as these, small with any, Job 15.11.) or small loss to be deprived of the
fruition of these things. By the want of public Prayer (to omit the other
inconveniences) a man is destitute of that quickening which the children of
God receive, by being provoked, edified, and inflamed with one another
forwardness, and has less interest in that blessing, which the joint Prayers
of more of the Faithful, with a united force, do bring down in a full measure
upon those by whom they are offered up and presented to the Throne of Grace:
And however a man in his own reason may imagine he does well enough with the
private use of Prayer, though he enjoy not the public; yet, this alone, that
there is no such promise of blessing to the single, as to the concurrent, (nay,
none at all to the private, if the public be not waited upon and desired) this
cuts off all solatary contentment and grounded satisfaction therein, and
confirms the woe still upon those, Eccl. 4.10
who not only are alone, but will be sequestered from the presence of God in
the holy Assemblies.

Alas! we do not generally understand our own happiness herein, and as Christ
said to the Woman of Samaria, John 4.10. we do not know the gift of God, else
with what cheerfulness would men call upon themselves, and out-call the Bell!
Come, let us go to the Mountain of the Lord, to the House of the God of Jacob,
and he will teach us his ways, Isa. 2.3. How glad would they be, with David,
when any should say unto them, we will go into the House of the Lord? Psalm.
122.1. Up, let us go and pray to the Lord of Hosts; I will go also, Zach. 8.21.
Thus would it be, if we had David's heart.

Poor, woeful, miserable men they in the mean while, who do, even wilfully,
excommunicate and banish themselves from Gods House; so as do not only some
Separatists, who (as if our Church, because perhaps she wants some beauty, and
is certainly not altogether so fair here, as she shall be in Heaven, had
therefore utterly lost her face) fly from our Congregations, as if they were
so many Cages of unclean Birds, or else Market-Cages of men more unclean than
they and our Recusants, who, because they see not their Breaden and Wooden gods
amongst us, refuse all society with us in holy things; I must only say to the
former, Can we not be holy at all, unless we are more holy than all, holy
beyond the state of militarinesse? Nulla fides pietasque viris, Lucan.
qui castra sequuntur, they have no faith, no holiness, who delight in war in a
secular war; Ps. 68.30.
and their holiness is but imperfect, their faith but a growing faith, who are
banded in a spiritual warfare: and to the latter, Can we not be holy, unless
we are unholy too? not serve God, unless him only, Mat. 4.10 Mat. 6.24 2 King.
5.18.
we do not serve? unless we serve Mammon as well as God? unless we bow in the
House of Rimmon, as well as in Gods House? unless we bow to the God of the
King of Syria, as well as to Elisha's God, the God of Israel? unless we have
our several sorts of holy waters, those of Abana and Pharpar, Verse. 12.
as well as holy Baptismal water, that one of Jordan? But too many others there
are who will have no House, and in a manner no God too, who caring only for
their purses, that they may not pay for their abscence, and, a little for their
reputation, that they may not be thought plain Atheists, do otherwise almost
wholly cast themselves out of the presence of God, in their carnal laziness,
(they cannot rise time enough) and loose profaneness (they have somewhat else
to do than to take care for Heaven) passing over many of these days, wherein
the service of God in these Houses can have no attendance from them; they have
no love to the preaching of the Word, no respect nor appetite to the
Sacraments, no delight to the duties of Invocation and Prayer.

Not in this place; that is the point we stand upon from this Text; further we
cannot judge: They will say they pray at home; perhaps they do so: but shall
God appoint a House for the Prayer of the Church? and shall not the Church in
gratitude as well as obedience, appoint Prayer for the House of God? Because no
man has hitherto been so impious, as plainly and directly to condemn Prayer;
therefore the best stratagem Satan has (who knows his Kingdom to be no way
more shaken, than by the public devout Prayers of Gods Church, in Gods Church)
is, by traducing the dignity of the place ( yea, Genesis 3.1.
has God said, that his House is a House of Prayer?) and the necessity of the
number, to bring both of them into contempt, and so to slack the fervency of
men's devotion toward them, he has made some, in this case, wiser in their
generation than he could hope to make either David, Luke 16.8
who, notwithstanding the one of his suggestions, would still worship God in
the beauty of holiness, Psalm. 96.9. or S. Paul, who should be likely to
prevail with God as much as one; and yet he, not yielding to that other
temptation, thought it much more both for Gods glory, and his own good, if
Prayers might be made, and thanks given in his behalf, by a number of men, by
many persons, 2 Cor. 1.11.

O the true judgment of the Ancient Church in this point, Lib. de Ponit.
delivered to us by the Fathers, by S. Ambrose, Multi minimi, dum congregantur
sicut nives sunt magni and multorum preces impossible est conteri, ones single
prayer, like one feather of Snow, soon melts away, whereas many of both these
littles grow to much, so much that God cannot slight the Prayers which come
from the consent of his many: Apolog. 1.39.
by Tertullian, we come by troops to the place of Assembly, that being banded
as it were together, we may be supplicants enough to besiege God with our
Prayers; by more than these: but I am weary of this cavil, and your trouble.
The Lord of his infinite mercy give us such a due respect to these public
Devotions, that he may not in his wrath, Psalm. 95. ult. Ps. 51.11.
take away both the place of his Rest, and his holy Spirit from us, that he may
not leave us to our own Styes, to our own Spirits, to nothing else but a bare
pretense to his Holy Ghost, Psalm. 106.48.
and let all the most deluded of his People say, Amen.

A SERMON Preached in the Lent, at White Hall, before K. CHARLES.
John 14.2. Vado parare vobis locum.
I goto prepare a place for you.

PAlatum ejus dulcissimum, says the Spouse, of Christ, Cant. 5.16. As we have
well translated it, His mouth is most sweet; and that most sweet, because of
that sweet doctrine, those sweet instructions, exhortations, consolations,
those verba vitae aeternae acknowledged by Simon Peter, Jo. 6.68. those words
of eternal life that distill from it. Jud. 14.14.
And if ever Sampsons Riddle were a truth that out of the strong came sweet,
then nevermore, than at this time, when this strong Lion of the Tribe of Judah
was to be rent and torn, Rev. 5.5.
when all his strength was for a while, to be covered in weakness, when as St.
Paul speaks, 2 Cor. 13.4. He was to be Crucified through weakness when he was
to leave his sorrowful family, to go from them, his last farewell to them, the
last song of this spotless swan, the Prologue to that direful Catastrophe, his
death, the preparing his poor Disciples against it, is most full of sweet, to
allay, to temper the bitterness of their sorrow for it.

A miserable fear, a bitter sorrow was lately wrought in them; by that
intimation of his departure in the end of the foregoing Chapter, that modicum
vobiscum, V. 33.
and non potestis venire, that he had but a little while to be with them, and
(worse then so) whether he goes they cannot yet come, and (worse than that too)
during that time of his absence from them, they should be sifted by Satan as
wheat, Luke 22.31. they should be continually subject to the violence of his
persecuting instruments, and (that which makes all this so much worse) they,
who had hitherto lived in peace, and in a competency of Estate, while they
enjoyed his presence, should now, from that, fall into the malice of the
world; they, whose memory he had newly rubd'd with the contemplation of their
former settled estate, When I sent you without purse, or scrip, or shoes,
lacked ye any thing? nothing, Lu. 22.35. Now to them, he that has a purse let
him take it, he shall have need of it, and he that has no sword let him sell
his garment rather than not buy one, v. 36. A severe a strict Lent, this was to
them against his Passion; because I have said these things unto you, Tristitia
implevit cor vestrum, Jo. 16.6. sorrow has filled your heart; A strange nature
of the little-great heart of man; so wide, so large it is, of such immence
infinite extent for the receipt of joy; it so opens it self for that, that all
the glad tidings which the world can afford are not able to fill it; for that
it still cries give, give, till it finds that greatest joy of which it is not
capable, that joy which cannot come into his heart, because his heart cannot
contain it, but his heart and self must enter into it, intra in gaudium domini
tui, Mat. 25.21. Enter thou into the joy of thy Lord, thy Lord and thy God, 1 John 3.20.
who is, major cord, says S. John, God is greater then thy heart, but pour a
drop or two of grief into it, it is soon filled, it is soon contracted into such
a straight, the poor worm, that gladly stretches forth it self to the sunshine
of the spring, does not more draw in his little body upon the sudden tread of
a careless hoof, then man shrinks in his heart at the report of loss, or fear
of smart; that as a thick cloud makes our sun to set at noon, so troubles our
heart and presses it to so narrow a context, that it may be soon said to us,
tristitia in plevit cor, sorrow has soon filled our hearts.

And when can this Chapter begin more seasonably, then upon a cor contritum and
tribulatum, upon a troubled heart? when his Disciples hearts are so confounded
with grief and fear, in the last Chapter, it is high time to begin this, and to
begin it with this cordial Non turbetur cor vestrum, Verse. 1.
let not your heart be troubled, the ingredients to this cordial are two, Faith
and Hope; Faith in the first verse, ye believe in God, believe also in me;
there must be a faith to lay hold on God in general, and a faith to apprehend
Christ also as God, to believe him to be God of the substance of his Father,
infinite Almighty, and so able to overcome this death; that though he goes from
them, yet he goes not one step only to his death, but another step to his
resurrection, and a third step to his assension; and then comes in hope v. 2. a
fit ingredient too for hearts-ease, but for which (we say in our Proverb) the
heart would break, hope, whose object is some future good to our selves, though
hard, yet possible, so the School defines it, possible, though not by our
selves, yet by the help of this Christ, whom we believe in as God; the future
good is the many mansions in his Fathers house, and the possibility of our
attaining them by his help is in my Text, Vado parare, I go to prepare a place
for you.

So then, as to his former speeches, it suited well, because I have said these
things unto you, sorrow has filled your heart; so to this, and that which
follows, it will as well agree, which our Savior has in the beginning of the
16. chapter, these things have I spoken to you, (...), that ye should not be
offended; for that there was a Contristabimini, ye shall be sorrowful, and for
this a Tristitia vestra vertitur in gaudium, Joh. 16.20. but your sorrow shall
be turned into joy: His vado, which before was such cause of grief to them,
expressed by Simon Peter's lamentable expostulation as well as question, Domine,
quo vadis? Lord, Jo. 13.36
whither? and, Lord, why? to what end go thou from us? that it may now
refresh them with consolation, has an Expedit annexed to it, John 16.7. It is
expedient for you that I go away; expedient, that so ye may receive the Holy
Ghost, to lead you into all truth: If I go not away, the Comforter will not
come unto you; but if I depart, I will send him unto you: And therefore is
that, John. 7.39. The Holy Ghost was not yet given, because that Jesus was not
yet glorified: Expedient, for the weaning them from their Milk, that so he
might' begin to feed them with stronger meat, for the withdrawing them from
that bodily knowledge they had of him, and that carnal affection they bare to
him, to a more sublime knowledge of him as God, so as to know him is eternal
life, the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom he has sent, John 17.3. and to
a more spiritual love of him, to love God, as S. John speaks, 1 John 4.20.
whom they see not, that his absence from their sight might be an exercise of
their faith, that they might be blessed in not seeing, and yet believing, as
Christ speaks to Thomas, Joh. 20.29. for, it is not he that sees, but, he that
believes on the Son of God has everlasting life, John 3.36. and, Sicarni
carnaliter adhaeseritis, S. Austin tells us, Capaces spiritus non eritis, we
cannot receive the Holy Ghost, so long as we persist to know Christ, and to
love him according to the flesh only; And lastly, expedient for this cause in
my Text, to which both the former tend, (...), to prepare a place for you.

So that these are (shortly) the two Parts of our Text; Divisio.
The Tristitia implevit cor vestrum, the sorrow which the Disciples of Christ
conceived in their hearts, upon notice of his departure from them, in the first
word, Vado, I go: And secondly, the Non conturbetur cor vestrum, the removing
that sorrow from their hearts, by informing them of the expediency of his
departure in regard of themselves, in the other words, Parare vobis locum, To
prepare a place for you: First, he brings his Disciples and us into the Mount
Calvary; there we see him going, departing from us by his death, Vado, I go;
then he brings us into the Mount Thabor, where he shows himself unto us in his
glory; He prepares a place for us, where we shall partake of his glory, I go to
prepare a place for you.

I go: Vado.
Here it would be considered, how Christ is said to go. And, for the better
understanding it, it will be needful to answer Simon Peter's question, to calm
his expostulation; Lord, whither? Lord, why? to what end do thou go? And for
that we have some light in this verse where my Text lies; I go to prepare a
place; and that place is among those many Manfions in his Fathers House, In my
Fathers House are many Mansions: And that thither he goes, it is most evident,
by his own clear answer to the question, John 16.5. I go my way to him that
sent me: or, if we be ignorant who that is, he gives it us in plainer terms
yet, John 14.12. Vado ad Patrem, I go to my Father.

Now this brings in the difficulty that would be cleared, Quomodo.
how Christ can be said to go to his Father, God to God; I will not take up
time with that common objection, that God is every where, and fills all places,
Heaven and Earth full of his glory; the answer is obvious; but for this
particular, how Christ should go to the Father, who has told us before, that
the Father is in him, and he in the Father, John 10.38. and that the Father,
who dwells in him, he does the works, John 14.10. how can he be said to go to
him? shall we think that thought of blasphemy, that the Father was now gone from
him? had forsaken him? No, Non derelinques, Ps. 16.10.
thou shall not leave my soul when it is in Hell, not his Godhead only, which
he had from the Father, but also his soul, and that humane nature which he took
from the Virgin, Ego and Pater unum, John 10.30. I and my Father are one: The
Father is with that, in that also; and yet for all this, relinquo mundum, and
vado ad Patrem, says Christ, I leave the World, and go unto the Father: Jo.
16.28.
I leaven the World, and go; See, if this phrase will help any thing for our
satisfaction in this doubt! we indeed do then go to God, when we leave the
World; that is, Col. 3.2.
when we cease to set our affections on things which are below, when we give
over to love the World, 1 Jo. 2.15
and the things that are in the World; when by strength of faith we unintangle
our selves from the Birdlime, the baits and allurements of it; when, 2 Pet.
2.20.
as speaks S. Peter, we get to escape the pollutions of the world; when having
our minds enlightened by Faith, and our hearts encouraged with Hope, and our
breasts inflamed with divine Love, we begin to know God, to contemplate his
Goodness, to delight in his Testimonies, to trust in the Lord God, then we go
to him, and we cleave fast to him, andhaerere bonum we cry with David, It is
good for me to hold me fast by God: Ps. 73.28.
Thus we leave the World, and go to the Father: But Christ does not so, for he
was never entangled, never polluted; he was that holy, Innocent, unpolluted; he
had never set his affections on things below, that, by a change of them, he
should go to the Father.

But yet we too, go one step nearer than this; by this we but begin to go to
God, we do not perfectly arrive at our journeys end; we but come to the
threshold, the outward Court, Gods House; we then enter into his Privy Chamber,
Lu. 22.30
to eat and drink in his Kingdom, when after this life, instead of our faith,
we shall obtain the light of God; instead of our Hope, we shall come into
possession; instead of our weak imperfect charity here, we shall be most safe
in that degree of perfect love which casts out all fear, 1 Jo. 4.18
when in the light of his glory we shall hear himself speaking to our souls,
Euge, bone serve, Well done, Matt. 25.21.
good and faithful servant, enter into the joy of thy Lord.

But neither does this assoil the doubt; nor can Christ's going to the Father
hold any proportion with this second step of ours; he, in the very beginning of
his Conception in the womb, was thus forward; that blessed Soul of his, at the
very instant of being created by God, and joined unto the Word, had in it the
fullness of all Wisdom, Grace, Glory, eternal beatitude, and therefore could
not, in this respect, to speak properly, pronounce his Vado ad Patrem, I go
unto the Father.

Proceed we then, yet, one step further in Man's journey, and see, if by that we
can find out the way that Christ went; for, all this while we have drawn but
one part of Man, his Soul, out of the world, and reduced it to its native home:
But at the last day, when this Mortal body of ours shall put on immortality, 1
Cor. 15 53.
this corruptible flesh shall put on incorruption; when it shall also be freed
from those necessities, with which it is encumbered in this world, when it shall
have no need to be refreshed with meat and drink and sleep, to be warmed with
clothes and fire, or cooled with gentle blasts, or defended with house and
harbor, then shall we go quite out of the world, finish the utmost of our
journey, and the whole man come to the end of it, to his God in Heaven.

This, beloved, is the third and last step, which Christ himself had not yet
gone, and must go; his Body was not yet in Heaven: This was it he meant, when
he said of himself, I came forth from the Father, and am come into the World;
Again, I leave the World, and go unto my Father, John 16.28. What means he by
the first, I came from my Father into the World? why I took upon me this
humane body, subject to hunger and thirst, and cold and heat, and troubles and
sorrows, and smart and death, such as the rest of men's bodies in this world,
which are abased under the yoke and burden of mortality and corruption; what
means he by the last, I leave the world, and go to my Father? Not that he
leaves this humane body which he had once taken, and remains only that which
before he was, God with the Father; but, I cast off all ensigns, all badges and
tokens of mortality and corruptibility; I will still wear this humane body,
but now by me made a glorified body, which shall still live; but free from the
bondage of worldly griefs, of worldly necessities; in rest, in tranquillity, in
joy, in glory: These are the words (says Christ to his Disciples after his
resurrection, when his Body was glorified) These are the words which I spoke
unto you while I was yet with you, Luke 24.46. What think we of this, while I
was with you? Was not Christ now with them when he spoke thus unto them? while
I was with you, while I was as you are in the world, subject to those miseries
which the world imposes, and in need of those supplies which the world
affords; now I am not with you, I am with the Father, I live now even in
respect of my body, that same life which the father lives; free from all
trouble, from all change: and thus may Christ truly be said to go unto the
Father.

And why should this then breed so much grief to his Disciples? why should
their hearts be so filled with sorrow for this? what should need our Saviors
non turbetur cor vestrum? any counsel, or comfort, where there is seeming so
little cause of discontent: one would think they should rejoice rather; and so
Christ tells them plainly, If ye loved me, ye would rejoice, because I said I
go unto the Father, v. 28. but poor souls, they were so wounded with the vado,
't should seem they minded not the rest, so heart-stricken with the sad news of
his going from them, that they never thought of, to whom; their love was such
to him, that they would not go from him to any, Domine ad quem ibimus? when
Jesus asked them, will ye also go away Jo. 6.68. Lord to whom shall we go? and
their weakness did happily expect a reciprocal affection in Christ suitable to
their ignorant desires, Lord to whom shall we go from thee? Lord to whom will thou go, from us?

And in truth, beloved, let not the strongest amongst us, blame this
distraction in their oppressed hearts; it is a word from Christ's mouth, I go,
enough to fetch blood, not sighs alone, from the greatest heart of the best
resolved Christian: Behold thy King comes! Mat. 21.5.
O Hosanna for that, Blessed is he that comes in the name of the Lord, Hosanna
in the highest, Mat. 21.9. his coming was the expectation of Israel, I, and
expectatio gentium, Genesis 49. the expectation of the world; Ver. 10.
Veniat dilectus, Cant. 4.6. let my Beloved come into his Garden; and, veni
dilecte mi, 7.11. Come my Beloved, let us go forth into the field, it is rogans
eum, ut veniret, Luke 7.3. the Centurion sent the Elder to him, beseeching him
that they would come; the most comfortable word that ever flew to the ears of
any Christian, ecce venio, behold I come quickly; then, Rev. 22.12. Verse. 20.
merces mea mecum, there is a reward to be looked for, even so, come Lord Jesus;
have thee unto us O Lord; come, though thou come to visit our offenses with
thy rod, Psa. 89.32 Psa. 23.4.
and our sins with scourges; Thy rod and thy staff shall comfort us; come,
though thou come to chasten us, to rebuke us, only rebuke us not in thine
anger, Psa. 6.1.
neither chasten us in thy heavy displeasure, only in anger, in displeasure
come not Lord, that is a coming against us, not to us, but excepting that, come
any way; this word venio of Christ I come, to his servants, should be as
welcome as his venite will be at the last day, Mat. 25.34.
come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom; but, go from us, spoken to
Christ, what man in his right wits can be so cruel to himself, as to send such
a word from his heart to his lips? who but the besotted earthly-minded
Gergesenes can beseech him to depart out of their coasts? yes, the Devils can
too, and they are both as two rare examples, recorded together in the same
passage of story at the latter end of the eighth chapter of St. Matthew, they
can cry quid nobis tibi, Jesu? what have we to do with thee, Jesus thou Son of
God? Indeed I read it once from St Peter, in his weakness, in the beginning of
his conversion, Depart from me, Verse. 8.
Lord, for I am a sinful man, Lu. 5. But the Lord knew it was a speech of
modest humility in him, when upon the first sight of his sins, he apprehended
Christ as an angry Judge according to the desert of them, and was therefore so
desirous afterward to redeem that fault, when he knew him better, with his
loathnesse to leave him, with his readiness to go with him, both into prison
and to death, Lu. 22.13. our discede to Christ now, our putting him from us,
should be as irksome to every of his servants, as his discedite shall be, at
the last day, to his enemies, Matt. 25.41
depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire. And as our discede to him
cannot be spoken but with horror, so his vado, alone to us, his going from us
cannot be heard but with extremity of grief, and therefore in one place where
it is set down alone, it has a vae with it to the Author of it, Filius hominis
vadit, ve autem, Matt. 24.26. the Son of Man goes, but woe to that wretch, woe
to that man, says Christ, by whom he is betrayed; and therefore too, in so
many other places where himself must give notice of it to his Disciples, he
knew it would be so heavy news to them, if alone delivered, yet he seldom,
throughout all the Gospels, utters the word, without another word of comfort to
poyze with it in the balance, vado I go, Jo. 14.12. that dejects them; but
presently, ad patrem, I go to the Father, that to raise them up again; si
abiero, if I depart, Jo. 16.7. there is the weight of grief; but presently,
mittam eum, I will send the Comforter unto you, there is the ease of
consolation: in the next verse to my Text, if I go, that confounds them with
sorrow; but presently, I will come again, and receive you unto my self, that to
cheer them with unspeakable joy; and so here in my Text too, I go, enough to
break their hearts; but presently, parare locum, I go to prepare a place for
you; 2 Cor. 4.9.
enough to make a dead man live; so, though they be cast down, they are not
destroyed, for it is the Lord that kills, 1 Samuel 2.6.
and makes alive, he brings down to the grave, and brings up again. I go,

To prepare a place for you. Parare locum.
And this second general part of the Text will employ our Meditations about
these three particulars: 1. The Place. 2. The Preparation of it. And 3. The
parties for whom it is prepared: Vobis, for you.

For the first, it is a Place; Locus.
one place for all; Locum vobis, A place for you: And, in the beginning of this
same verse, it is Mansiones Multae, Many Mansions: And this has caused some
Haesitancy, and variety of opinion among learned Writers, concerning the
difference, or equality of the joy and glory which shall be in the Saints of
God in Heaven; either opinion makes so fair a show, that, if in it self it be
not probable enough, it is free from danger: I quarrel not those who see not
with my eyes, and therefore say, that neither of them is clearly and
convincingly deducible out of any place of holy Scripture, and therefore I
quarrel them not, because it is no way determined by the Church; I love not
breaches in things which are not of absolute necessity to salvation, nor
perfectly fundamental; Vnusquisque suo sensu abundet (though his sensus be not
mine) without breach of Charity.

One side does urge those several places from the Word of God, Psalm. 62. Matt.
17. Romans 2. Rev. 22. etc.
where it is said, that God shall reward every man, how? according to his works;
and from the inequality of our works on earth, infer a greater or less degree
of reward in Heaven. The other side will understand that saying generally; in
regard of glory to some, and condemnation to others, To them who by patient
continuance in well doing, seek for glory, eternal life; and to them who obey
not the truth, Indignation and wrath, Romans 2.7. The Sheep on the right hand, to
the Kingdom prepared; and the Goats on the left hand, to everlasting fire:
It Is every man's reward according to his works, say they; for, there is Merces
iniquitatis too, 2 Pet. 2.15. The wages of unrighteousness; and that
stipendium peccati, that wages of sin is death, Romans 6.27. And again, they
answer these places by opposing another for themselves, that in Mat. 20. the
men that had differently labored in the Vinyard, which was a representation of
Gods Church upon earth, some had born the burden and heat of the day, some
wrought but one hour; yet, to all the same proportion of reward; they received
every man a penny, v. 10. and the householder justifies himself against their
murmuring, that he had done them no wrong, v. 13. again, they on that one side,
argue for the contrary, there are degrees of punishment for the damned in Hell;
It shall be easier for them of Tire und Sidon, Matt. 11. v. 21, 22, 23.
than for them of Chorazin and Bethsaida; and for the men of Sodom, than for
them of Capernaum, ergo, several measures of joy, for the Saints in Heaven:
they on the other side, acknowledge that argument probable, but not necessary;
it is a way of reasoning, that does not always hold; a man may kill himself but
not do the contrary, not revive himself again: besides, they are differenced in
suffering, because they draw it upon themselves, according to the several
demerit of their offenses here, so do not the elect their glory, that is only
miserentis Dei; it is the gift of God, eternal life through Jesus Christ our
Lord, Romans 6.23. and then they oppose that of our Savior, Mat. 13.43.
fulgebunt justi sicut Sol, the Righteous shall shine as the Sun in the kingdom
of their Father; all the righteous there as the Sun, as well as they, that turn
many unto righteousness as the stars, Dan. 12.3 and there is no greater
splendour to be compared to, than that of the Sun, and whosoever comes there, he
must be righteous, he must exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and
Pharisees, Mat. 5.20. many more places are brought on either side, and
afterward by the other, I might spend the time of a Sermon, in but relating
them, Luke 20.36. Mat. 25.
we shall be like unto Angels; and they differ in their orders, the five
Talents well employed, were rewarded more then the two, he that sows
sparingly, 2 Cor. 9 6.
shall reap sparingly; and diverse more, so for the other, as Christ promised to
his Disciples, they should sit upon twelve Thrones judging the twelve Tribes,
Mat. 19.28. So S. Paul would have the Corinthians know, that the Saints shall
judge the world, 1 Cor. 6.2. and that we shall judge Angels, v. 3. that the
sufferings of this present time are not worthy to be compared with the glory
that shall be revealed in us, Romans 8.18. And if God, in giving glory, respects
not any worth in our works, why (say they) should one man's work exceed another
in the reward? Much more is contended by either party: But he that subscribes
to neithers, when he has heard all they have hitherto said, without clearer
evidence from the Word of God, may be a good Christian still, and
notwithstanding this unfundamental incertainty, in the right way to Heaven,
either to a different Mansion, if he so believe, or to an equal place, if he so
surmise, which Christ is gone up to prepare for him: I not deny the
probability; more than that, the Verisimilitude; more than that too, to him
that will have more than that, the assurance of an unequal measure of joys and
glory; that in coelestibus, Ephesians. 1.3. in heavenly places; these many Mansions
may be, are different Mansions: only, I do not peremptorily conclude every
other man under my own faith; in this case, and in such like to this, the
Apostles humble Rule is mine, I am content to have faith to my self before
God, Romans 14.22. and not to measure another man by my Bushel (in things
indifferent, for want of ample Revelation, or large capacity, there is no
standard-faith) and not to call his weights, diverse from mine, either
deceitful or abomination, Prove. 11.1.
because it does not exactly jump with my own Balance; and therefore with
submission I believe, that every man may be persuaded in his own mind (as S.
Paul speaks in another point of difference as unnecessary to salvation, Romans
14.5.) and that without hazard of losing this place prepared for him: Once for
all; I am sure, upon good ground, that there is a place prepared for Gods
Saints; and the meanest that is placed there, shall in that place receive a
full reward, 2 Jo. 8. What would we more? that God shall be all in all, 1 Cor.
15.28. that in his presence is the fullness of joy, and they who are placed on
his right hand shall have pleasures for evermore, Psalm. 16.11.

I shall have no time at all to speak of that, which all time, and all the
tongues and pens of the most ready Writers, employed all that time, can never
express the excellency and dignity of this place; so high seated, which we
may, in some sort, measure by the stars, each of which being so huge a bulk,
does therefore only seem so small to us, because it is so high above us: But
this Holy City, far above them, so large in extent, that we can never name the
height and largeness of it: S. John's twelve thousand furlongs, Rev. 21. and
his hundred forty four cubits, by the Angels measure, was but of that City
which descended out of Heaven, a small Epitome of this. All the several
Dominions of all the Princes in the world, put all together, are not so much as
one star there; and yet how numberless to us are they! and what another
infinite number of them could it contain? O Israel, how great is the House of
God! and how large is the place of his possession! Great, and has no end,
high, and unmeasurable, Baruch 3.24. we may a little guess, and but guess, at
the surpassing beauty, and magnificent structure of it, by comparison with this
place where we now dwell, this Stabulum Pecudum, as one calls it, this Ox-stall
in respect, this place of exile, this Vale of miseries and fears; yet this has
that great Work-master builded of so famous a frame; such a goodly aspect to
our sense has the large Theater of this World, the roof of Heaven over us, so
fairly adorned, gilded, enameled; the Pavement of earth under us, so spread
with Natures Carpets, of all colors pleasing to the eye; such spacious Seas,
such sweet Springs, and gliding Rivers; the Mountains so stately without pride;
the Valleys so low without envy; the Woods so pleasant with their shade; the
Fields and Meadows so delightsome and profitable; at this Spring time chiefly,
when the clearness of the Sky, and the warmth of the Air, helps our old
Grandam Earth to spin and weave her Tapestry, and all Trees to spread forth
their Hangings: not to speak of the erected Towns, the sumptuous Cities, and
majestical Palaces, the artificial works of men's hands; if there be a mere
Worldling that has mistaken his way, and is by chance got to Church, such a
description as this is enough to make him mistake his Heaven too, and take this
World for it, to make him wonder why Christ should ever go from such a Paradise
of pleasure to prepare any other place; why he is so taken with the show of
these, that he could be content to set up his rest here, to conclude with
Peter, Bonum est esse hic: these delights do so possess his heart, that he
sticks in the gay mire of them, lifts not up his thoughts above them: But,
know, O thou man of this World, all this which is wealthy enough to be thy
Heaven, is so poor and contemptible for Christ's sake, that it is scarce worthy
to be the Christians Dunghill; however, Phil. 3.8.
one of the best of them, S. Paul will at best bestow no better a name upon it;
we must learn by these, to meditate what far better cost, and more unmatchable
work our God and Father has bestowed upon his own heavenly habitation, the
Palace of the great King, the New Jerusalem; the outside of it we can see, and
that we see bedeckt with so many thousands of thousands of glittering spangles,
of rich Gems; the inside of it, the blessed Saints only and Angels in Heaven
behold with God, and we cannot immagine the beauty of it; Eye has not seen,
nor ear heard, neither has entered into the heart of man to conceive, the
things that God has prepared there for them that love him, 1 Cor. 2.9. It Is
but Humanum loquor, that which man's Reason is capable of, the description which
S. John gives of it, the Jasper and pure gold, those precious stones, the
Sapphire, and Emerald, and Sardonix, and Sardius, and Chrysolite, Rev. 21. O
quam dilecta Tabernacula! O how amiable are thy Dwellings, thou Lord of hosts!
Psalm. 84.1. Blessed are they that dwell in thy House, they will be alway^s
praising thee, v. 4.

And shall we, beloved, who know there is such a place there, whose excellency
we cannot know here, shall we still so over-please our selves with the Gawds of
this lower World, as to keep back our Conversation from being in Heaven? Shall
we spend our time in striving for place here? Matthew. 23.6. for the uppermost
Rooms at Feasts, and the chief Sears in Synagogues? till we shuffle our selves
out of this place, this uppermost room, and great Feast, the Supper of the
Lamb, the Supper of the great God? Rev. 19.9, 17. This Kingdom, if that will
inflame our hearts with a longing for it; I appoint unto you a Kingdom, Luke
22.29. not an earthly Kingdom, such as the Mother of Zebedees children dreamed
of, Matthew. 20. No, his Kingdom is not of this World, v. 20, 21. but, such as
his Father had appointed unto him, Joh. 18.36. so are all they who are washed
from their sins in his blood, made Kings unto God, and to his Father, Rev. 1.5.
not a temporary, but an everlasting Kingdom: of his Kingdom, says Daniel,
shall be no end, Dan. 4.3. The word Mansion here intimates the durance, the
perpetuity of it, a manendo, no fear, no danger of the loss of it, of trouble
in it; such a glorious Kingdom, says Solomon, and such a beautiful crown is
there to be received at the Lords hands, Wisd. 5.16. And if this will not, I
know not what outward expression can make us pray heartily every day, Adveniat
Regnum tuum, adveniat nobis; Let thy Kingdom come to us, that holy passionate
desire which David had to enter into these courts of the Lord, Psalm. 84.2. This
place which Christ is gone to prepare for us.

The Preparation of the place is another branch of this second General part,
Vado parare.
Vado parare; he goes upon an Errand, for all his Disciples, to prepare this
place for them.

But if this be all the occasion to draw Christ from them, one would think he
should not need to make such haste for them; for, if we remember, this place
needs not now preparing; 'twas prepared long since; What says Christ to the
Guests of it? Mat. 25.34. Come ye blessed, inherit the Kingdom, Paratum vobis a
constitutione mundi, prepared for you; when? even from the beginning of the
world: Surely Man was borne to no less than a Kingdom from the beginning: In
the very beginning see it; Let us make Man, Genesis 1.26.
says God, in our Image, after our likeness: what then? why presently in the
next words, Let them have dominion over the Fish of the Sea, and over the Foul
of the Air, and over all the Cattle, and over all the Earth: A Dominion, a
Kingdom, at the first, in the beginning; and a large one too, but not
permanent; he held it but a while; Man being in honor, had no understanding,
Psalm. 49.12. to hold what God had given him, to abide by it; he was soon
dispossessed by his early sin, soon vanquished out of this Dominion: And
therefore well was it with him, that God had prepared another, a better for
him; this place, this Kingdom, Paratum a Constitutione mundi, from which he
could not fall.

But how will this hold? Paratum, and Vado parare? why, as S. Austin (Tract.
68. in Jo.) quotes that saying from the Prophet, Deus fecit quae futura sunt:
It Is no unusual phrase in holy Scripture, when they speak of Gods actions
which are infinite, eternal as himself, to whom all things are continually
present, which are, and which were, and which are to come, Creavi, and faciam
illud, Isa. 46.11. So Tremelius translates it, as well as the Vulgat edition, I
have created, and I will make it; just as in these two Texts, I have prepared a
place for you, and I will prepare it: There is the like expression in the end
of the two and twentieth Psalm, The Heaven shall declare his righteousness
unto a People that shall be borne, whom the Lord has made: He has already
made them, and yet they shall be borne, in their succession, to the end of the
World; as David does acknowledge of himself, Psalm. 139. that, before he was
borne, All his members were written in Gods Book, when as yet there was none of
them.

So this place was prepared, as Christ is said to be slain, ab origin mundi,
from the foundation of the World; and yet he was slain after that, by the
promise of God, The Serpent shall bruise his heel, Genesis 3.15. He was slain in
the faith of the Father, before his incarnation; he was slain in the sacrifices
of the Law, which were this Lamb sacramentally; he was slain in his several
members, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? Act. 9.4. He was slain in Abel;
The death of innocent Abel, says Lyra, was a Figure of the death of this Lamb;
And yet after all this, he was still to be slain upon the Cross. So, this
place was prepared before, in Gods eternal preordination; and yet Christ goes
now to prepare it by his Death, and anon, by his Resurrection; and after that,
by his Ascension into Heaven: By his Death he purchases it, and pays the
great price of our Redemption, and opens the gates of Heaven to us: The High
Priest went into the Sanctum Sanctorum, not without blood; and this High Priest
of ours by his own blood must enter into the Holy place, and so obtain
eternal redemption for us, Hebr. 9.12. so having conquered Death by his
Resurrection, he then ascends to take possession of this Place for us; He is,
Praecursor pro nobis, Hebr. 6. The forerunner is for us entered, even Jesus,
verse. 20. Initiavit nobis viam Novam, in the tenth of that Epistle; That New,
that hitherto untrodden, way has he consecrated for us, and is entered into
Heaven it self, now to appear in the presence of God for us, Heb. 9.24. That Is
the last particular.

Vobis, for you, God, whatsoever he does he does it for some end; a wise man is
not lightly so little master of his actions, but he still propounds to himself
some end in every of them: now because the end intended must still be the most
perfect good, and all meaner ends must conduce to that last end, that best
good, and because God, in himself, is summum bonum, the greatest good that can
be, and so could not possibly advance his actions to any end better than
himself, therefore, for himself, has he done all things whatsoever he has
done, universa propter semetipsum, Prove. 16.4. All things were created by him,
and for him, Col. 1.16. for himself chiefly, but not for himself wholly: the
first thing that he did for us, 'twas for himself too, for his own glory; his
own glory is that finis ultimus, the maine, the utmost, the principal end of
all his actions, and should be of ours; his Election and Predestination of us
before the faundation of the world; 'twas ad laudem gloriae, To the praise of
the glory of his grace, Ephesians. 1.12. But there is a subordinate end too, by which
his actions tend to the last end; and that is the benefit of that creature,
which he made after his own image, the good of man: as in the first creation,
whatsoever he made, was for man; and therefore he made the world and all the
other creatures before he made man, that they might be ready for his use; so,
in that great work of re-creation, of redemption, all that he did, was for man,
the very birth of his son (to begin there) for that the song of the heavenly
host was, Gloria in excelsis Deo, Glory to God in the highest; but not a
minims rest in it, before they come to Peace on earth, and good will toward
men, Luke 2.14. there is the Prophet's, natus nobis he was born for us Isa. 9.6.
his whole life, it was chiefly, honoro patrem, Jo. 8.49. I seek not my own
glory, v. 50. but I honor my Father; upon the man born blind, John 9. ver. 4.
He must work the works of him that sent him, and 'twas ver. 3. That the works
of God should be made manifest in him; and Lazarus sickness, Jo. 11. that he
might die and be raised again by him, 'twas pro gloria Dei, v. 4. for the glory
of God; but both these actions of his, were for both their good too; and so was
all the rest of his life spent in that employment, the good of man, that one
verse, Mat. 4.23. is a short true abstract of it all, He went about, teaching,
and preaching, and healing all manner of sickness, and all manner of disease
among the people, there is his vixit nobis, he lived for us too: come to his
death, he humbled himself, and became obedient, there was the glory of his
Father in his obedience, he humbled himself to death, that death should have no
more dominion over him, To. 6.9. that that last enemy, death might be
destroyed, 1 Cor. 15.26. that, through death, he might destroy death, and him
that had the power of death, that is, the Devil, Heb. 2.14. that death might be
swallowed up in victory, ver. 54. There Is his victory, his glory; but, pro
nobis too, Christ died for us, Romans 5.8. by his death are we reconciled to God,
ver. 10. there is his mortuus pro nobis: his resurrection next, Christ was
raised up from the dead, Romans 6.4. (...), Paraeus.
some translate it, (and they may well, the word bears it home, In or propter
gloriam) for the glory of the Father; and, propter nostrum justificationem,
Romans 4.25. He was delivered for our offenses, and raised again for our
justification; there is his resurrexit pro nobis: Lastly his ascension, that was
all glorious, when he ascended up on high, he led captivity captive, Ephesians. 4.8.
having spoiled principalities and powers, he made a show of them openly,
triumphing over them, Col. 1 Pet. 3.22.
2.15. He is gone to sit on the right hand of his Father, in height of majesty
and glory, and all this, as all else for us, to appear in the presence of God
for us, Heb. 9.24. to make intercession for us, Heb. 7.25. To prepare a place
for us, here in my Text, here ascendit pro nobis, all for us, in every of his
actions, an expedit vobis; and particularly in this, it is expedient for you,
that I go, Jo. 16.7. for, I go to prepare a place for you.

For you, who never cared to prepare a place for me, when in great humility I
came to visit you, as he might object truly, if he would enter into judgment
with us; a poor provision here made for him, a stable his presence chamber, and
a Cratch his Cradle, from thence driven into Egypt, and from place to place, I,
to no place; This Son of Man, had not where to lay his hend, Mat. 8. ver. 20.
Master where dwell thou? Jo. 1. ver. 38. his Disciples might well ask, 'twas
a hard question, that, no place prepared for him here, even when he was to eat
the Passover, not a place prepared for that; and those few poor Disciples,
that would have prepared one for him, could not tell where without his help;
prepare it! I, with all the heart we have; but, where will thou that we prepare
for thee to eat the Passover? Mat. 26.17. Thus, we rewarded him evil for good,
to the great discomfort of his soul, and sinful shame of ours, Psalm. 35.12. yet
he, we see here, loves his enemies, blesses them that curse him, does good to
them that hate him, and would have us do so, in imitation of him, that, as he
is, we may be, the children of our Father which is in Heaven, Mat. 5.44.

We have but small time for the large extent of this Vobis, Verbum sapienti.
sat.
who they be that are contained in it; of this, one word will suffice to all
that are wise unto salvation: Not a man here but would gladly be one of those
You's, and therefore would be loath to give it so narrow a Scantling, as to
reach only to those few Disciples to whom Christ then spoke it; That other
Paratum, Matthew. 25. extends it further, to all those whom he shall, at the last
day, place on his right hand; Paravi vobis, it is prepared for all you, for all
those who, since the speaking of it, have been, and who, to the end of the
world, will be his Disciples; God prepares both, Place and Inhabitants too,
Place for Inhabitants, and Inhabitants for the Place, Those Vessels of Mercy
whom he had before prepared unto glory, Romans 9.23. In the Parable, Matt. 25.
Those Virgins only, quae Paratae erant, who were Prepared, Ready, went in with
him to the Marriage.

Now, Non salvat te sine te, is a true Rule; Austin.
Entreat God first to prepare us by the working of his sanctifying Grace in our
hearts; but when we have received that Talent of Grace, we must employ it also,
and and work together with God, 1 Cor. 3.9. Who shall ascend into this Hill of
the Lord? Psalm. 24. He that has clean hands, and a pure heart, in one place;
Psalm. 15.
He that leads an incorrupt life, and does the thing that is right, in another:
Here is one way of preparing our selves, by purifying the heart through faith,
( Act. 15.9.) to an incorrupt life, and cleansing the hands in innocence to
good works; that which St. Paul prescribes, if we will be Vessels unto honor,
we must be prepared unto every good work, 2 Timothy 2.29.

We must be prepared to do good, and to suffer evil, if occasion requires, and
it may conduce to his glory; that is one way more: When Christ speaks of this
Kingdom Luke 22. he thus describes those for whom it is designed; first, Ye
are they that have continued with me in my temptations, verse. 28. and then, I
appoint unto you a Kingdom, verse. 29. This was the way which Christ himself
went, Ought not Christ to have suffered these things, and to enter into his
glory? Luke 24.26. He entered this holy place by his own blood, Hebr. 9. Be we
not sparing of our pains and labor, and sweat and blood, if need be, rather
than not follow him; follow the Lamb whither soever, Revel. 14.4. and which way
soever he goes; even Agnum occisum, follow the Lamb which was slain, Rev.
5.12. Suffer with him, that is the way to reign with him, 2 Timothy 2.12. to have
Kingdom and Glory too, to reign with him, and to be glorified with him, Romans
8.17. Let us not grudge, beloved, to take pains, to suffer pain, in this place
of our Preparation for that Place; we will not, if we look with faith to this
Place which is set before us; if we look unto Jesus the Author, and Finisher
of our faith, Heb. 12.2. 'Twas a course that himself took, to strengthen
himself in his Combat here, as he was Man; He, for the joy that was set
before him, Ibid.
endured the Cross, and despised the shame: The sufferings of this present
time, in the worst of their nature, are not worthy to be compared with the
glory that shall be revealed, Romans 8.18. though they were lasting; but they are
momentary too, our Affliction is light, and but for a moment, 2 Cor. 4.17. When
the Prophet Daniel had reckoned up many sore calamities upon the people, they
are encouraged to the constant undergoing of them with this certain comfort,
Vsque ad tempus, Daniel 11.24. it is but for a time: whatsoever the burden of
worldly crosses be, which the faithful servants of God groan under; drown not
your selves in tears; faint not in your trial; make not your life more bitter
with pensive thoughts, nor waste your spirits with impatient complaints; apply
the Balsome, this sweet contemplation of the short continuance, Vsque ad
tempus, it is but for a time; when ye are reviled and persecuted, Matthew. 5.11.
when ye have trial of cruel mockings and scourgings (Heb. 11.36, 37.) yea, of
Bonds and imprisonment, destitute, afflicted, and tormented; why, Vsque ad
tempus, all this is but for a time: They are the damned in Hell, Drexelius De
Aeternit.
that are more overwhelmed with the eternity, than with the extremity of their
sufferings; no measuring of Time there; no hope of release, after thousands of
millions of Ages; there is cause of, there is place for impatience; But these
temporary woes, these short afflictions, lightened with an expectation of
enlargement, endure we them, have we patience in them; Vsque in tempus, says
the Son of Syrach too, Ecclesiasticus 1.23. Vsque in tempus sustinebit patiens,
A patient man will bear for a time, and afterward joy shall spring up unto him.

This is the Exhortation, that from hence, I desire to leave with you, Possess
your souls with patience, Luke 21.19.
notwithstanding the miseries of this life, though they were greater, and
comfort your selves with a hopeful looking for of this place prepared by
Christ; Troubles here, and Crosses, and discontents, and perhaps great causes
of them; to some, their whole time is a Lent, and their whole Lent a
Passion-Friday; But, there is a Place prepared: To do good, and to suffer evil
(the Christians virtue) is a hard task, not to plot and prosecute revenge of
received wrongs; not to undermine others to a fall, and upon their necks step
higher; to curb the irregularity of our affections, to wage a continual war
with our own rebellious thoughts, ambition, and covetousness, and
voluptuousness, and all the other Devils about us, exceeding difficult to
flesh and blood; but here is a help from the Spirit, our LENT cannot last long;
the Feast of CHRIST's, and of our Resurrection is not far. There is a Place
prepared, a Place of Peace and Rest, and joy, and glory, fullness of joy, and
pleasures for evermore. Thither, Lord, in thy good time, bring us, who art gone
before to prepare it for us.

To thee, O Christ, with the Father, and the Spirit, etc.

These Books following, (being worth buying) are to be sold at the sign of the
Lamb at the East end of St. Paul's near the School.
CHristian Prayers and holy Meditations, as well for private as public
Exercise.

The True Catholic, collected out of the Oracles and Psalteries of the Holy
Ghost, for Instruction and Devotion, by Tho. Parker, his Majesty's Servant.

Godly Prayers and Meditations, by John Field D. D.

An Admonition to all such as shall intend hereafter to enter into the state of
Marriage godlily, and agreeable to Laws, by A. B. Cant.

Dr. Hewits Sermons (the right) with his Prayer before and after Sermon.

A New-years-gift for a Christian.

Angel of Peace, by Causin.

Thorndike's Learned Discourse on the Church and Service.

Robinson's Birth of a Day.

Dr. Hewit's Funeral Sermon, by Mr. Hardy.

ALSO,

Mr. Theophilus Buckworth's famous and approved Lozanges, which perfectly cures
all sorts of Colds, Coughs, Consumptions, Catarrhs, Asthmaes, and all
Infirmities of the Lungs; and is a sovereign Antidote against the Plague, and
other infectious and contagious Diseases. Every Paper of Lozanges is sealed
with his own Coat of Arms, to distinguish them from counterfeit.

FINIS.

