A BRIEF COMMENTARY OR EXPOSITION Upon the GOSPEL according to St JOHN: WHEREIN
The Text is explained, diverse doubts are resolved, and many other profitable
things hinted, that had been by former Interpreters pretermitted.

By JOHN TRAPPE, M. A. Pastor of Weston upon Avon in Gloucestershire.

JOH. 20.31. These things are written, that ye might believe that Jesus is the
Christ, the Son of God: and that believing, ye might have life, through his
Name.

Ideo scribuntur omnes libri, ut emendetur unus. Aug.

LONDON, Printed by G.M. for John Bellamy, and are to be sold at his Shop, at
the Sign of the three Golden-Lyons in Cornehill, near the Royal Exchange.
1646.

(...) did their thrice-worthy Father, whom they entirely personated, and
exactly resembled. (...) Eusebius M. John Lang ley, now chief Schoolmaster of
Paul's, London. Ast. and Mon. fol. 1179.
You have still at hand, my Lord, for a faithful Remembrancer, Your
once-painfull Tutour, and mine ancient friend, who has dropped, I doubt not,
into Your Lordship that divine learning, that will, by Gods grace, render You
both a good man, and a good Patriot. What an honor was that to King Edward 6.
and what a comfort to his Tutour St John Cheek, that Cranmer and Ridley (two
such men) should assure him, upon just trial first made, that his Pupil (the
King) had more Religion in his little finger, then they (both) had in all their
bodies? It is Religion, my Lord, it is Religion (maugre Machivels mad Maxim to
the contrary) that ennobleth indeed, that enhanceth all worth, that crowns
all commendation: As without it, Dignitas in indigno est ornamentum in luro.
Salvian.
all the rest (Riches, Revenue, Retinue, etc.) are but shadows and shapes of
Nobleness. It lies for ever as a foul stain upon the Nobles of Tekoah, Neh.
3.5. that they put not their necks unto the work of their Lord: When the old
Nobility of Israel, that made their staves (happily the Ensigns of their honor)
instruments of the common good, are therefore worthily renowned, and
eternalized. Numb. 21.18. Them that honor me, I will honor, is a bargain of
Gods own making, 1 Samuel 2.30. And Your Lordship sees it daily made good, as in
sundry brave Heroes of that August Senate, that The Parliament in the 25. of
Edw 3.15. known to posterity by this name. Sir Thomas Fairfax Silius Italic.
Parliamentum benedictum, whereof You are now a Member, so in our Victorious
General, whom God has so highly honored in the hearts of all good people,
that they are even ready to sing of him, as Silius did once of Fabius Maximus,
Hic Patria est, murique urbis stant pectore in uno.

Now examples (my Lord) are the best lectures, (...), Plutarch. Sicut bos
armenta, sic ego bonos sequar, etiamsi ruant. Cic. Ep. ad Atticum. (...), etc.
Dio Cassius. Psalm. 119.63. Psalm. 101.6. Psalm. 16.3.
and virtue the best example. It was an excellent Law of the Ephesians, Ever to
bear in mind some virtuous man to imitate, as Themistocles did Miltiades, as
Alexander did Achilles, as Coesar did Alexander, as Cato Major did M: Curious,
and as Tully resolved that he would follow good men, yea though he fell with
them: I had rather be with Cato in the prison, then with Coesar in the palace,
said M: Petronius. It shall be Your highest honor (my good Lord) and Your
friends greatest joy, that You side with the better sort, that Your eyes are
upon the faithful in the land, that Your delight is, as David's was, in those
Excellent ones, the Saints, (those Chrysostom. Monachos quosdam sui temporis
(...) vocat. Hom. 55. in Mat. Heb. 11.38. Rev. 15.3. Isa. 63.9. 1 Ioh. 2.6.
earthly Angels, those Worthies of whom the world is not worthy,) the LORD
CHRIST especially, that King of Saints, that Angel of Gods presence, that
perfect pattern of the Rule, whose Life and Death, whose Oracles and Miracles
are here recorded by his beloved Disciple, and somewhat illustrated for Your
and the Churches behoof, and benefit, by the meanest, and unworthiest of His,
and Your Lordships servants,

Most humbly devoted in all duty John Trappe.
Ex museolo nostro November. 12. 1645.
(...).
(...),
(...),
(...),
(...)
(...).
(...),
(...),
(...),
(...).
(...)
(...).
(...)
(...);
(...),
(...),
(...),
(...),
(...),
(...).
(...)
(...),
(...)
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...),
((...))
(...).
THOMAS DUGARD. Art. Mag. Cantabrig. The Epistle to the Reader.
READER,
THE worth of the Author of this Book is already well known in the Church of
Christ, by some former labors of his which are extant: and they which are well
acquainted with him, cannot but know and testify, that he is a man of singular
Prudence and Piety, of an acute wit, of a sound judgment, and of an
indefatigable spirit, who has wholly devoted, and given up himself to the
service of Gods Church, and does naturally care for the good thereof: witness
his constant preaching, even whilst the burden and care of a public School
lay upon him: and now in these calamitous and bloody times, wherein he has
suffered deeply, being driven from his charge, and forced to shroud himself in
a Garrison of the Parliaments, yet notwithstanding his daily labors amongst the
soldiers, and in the midst of the noises of gunnes and drums, he has
betaken himself to writing of Commentaries upon the sacred Scriptures; and
besides this present Book, which has stepped forth before some of its elder
brothers, he has prepared for the press a Comment upon Genesis, and upon the
other three Evangelists, whereof that on Matthew is very large: as also upon
the Acts, and all Paul's Epistles to the first to the Thessalonians, and is
still going on, intending (if the Lord lend him life and liberty) to go over
all the remaining Epistles. I presume that it will be superfluous for me to
tell thee how useful and advantageous his labors in this kind may be; for
though we have many Comments in Latin, yet but few in English; and for want
thereof, and a right understanding of the Scripture, daily experience shows how
woefully many persons are led aside into erroneous ways: For that which the
Apostle Peter says of St Paul's Epistles, is true of all the word of God; 2
Pet. 3.13. That therein some things are hard to be understood, which they that
are unlearned and unstable pervert to their own destruction. Bless God
therefore for stirring up the hearts of those who are pious and judicious, to
lay forth their labors this way: and amongst others, make use of this Comment,
which by Gods blessing will prove no less pleasing then profitable, in regard
of the variety and excellency of the matter contained therein; which that it
may do, his prayers shall not be wanting, who subscribes himself,

Thine in the Lord SA. CLARKE.

A COMMENTARY UPON THE GOSPEL according to St. JOHN.
CHAP. I.
VER. 1. In the beginning,]
HEre this Heavenly Eagle, John the Divine, (...).
soars at first out of sight: Here does God, detonare ab alto, thunder from on
high, says Calvin. St. Austin stands amazed at the mystical Divinity here
delivered. This Barbarian (said the Philosopher, Amel. Platonic. ap. Clem. Alex.
concerning our Evangelist) has comprised more stupendous stuff in three
lines, then we have done in all our volumnious discourses. Happy had it bin for
him, if he had been made, by this first Chapter, Iun. in vitae sua, operib.
praefix.
of an Atheist, a true Christian, as learned Junius was: But he only ad mired
it, and so left it where he found it; as too many do the Word at this day.

Was the Word.] Personal, and Enunciative, Isa. 6.1. Dan. 8.13.
Isaiah saw him on the Throne, and heard him speaking, Daniel calls him
Palmoni hammidabbir, that excellent speaker, and asks him of the Vision, the
Syriack Interpreter here calls him Meltha, the Word uttered; and the Chaldee,
Pithgam Adonai, The Lord, the Word.

And the Word was with God.] (...), Chrysostom.
which sweetly sets forth his co-eternity and co-existency with the Father,
says Chrysostom, Moscopulus renders it, secundum Deum; as being the express
Image of the Father. Others, ad Deum; as importing a deliberation and
conference of the Father and the Son.

And the Word was God.] Selnec. Paedag. Christ. par. 1. page 150.
(...) without an article: Hence the Arrians cavil, that the Son is not God
co-equall, but a secondary God, inferior to the Father. But Gal. 1.3. The
Father is also called (...) without an article; Eusebius. Hieronym.
therefore this follows not. This whole Gospel is a continuate demonstration
of Christ's Deity, which began to be denied, while this Evangelist lived, by
Ebion, Cirinthus, and other odious Antichrists.

Verse 2. The same was in the beginning] In the instant of Creation, as Genesis
1.1. therefore also before the Creation, therefore from eternity, Ephesians. 1.4. 1
Pet. 1, 20. Prove. 8.22, 23. H^nc Johannes augustum illud et magnificum
Evangelii sui imtium assumpsit. Mercer. in loc. Pro (...) substituit (...).
The Lord possessed me (says Christ, the essential Wisdom of God there) in
the beginning of his way. Arrius corrupted the Greek text, reading it thus;
The Lord created me in the beginning, etc. and there hence blasphemously
inferred, that Christ was no more then a creature. But he was set up Vncta sum
in reginam et dominatricem oleo laetitiae. Psalm. 45.7. (...). Laert. in vit.
from everlasting, from the beginning, or ever the earth was, verse 23. Hence
he is called, the Ancient of days, Dan. 7.9. And Thales, one of the seven
Sages of Greece, styles him, The most ancient of any thing that has Being.

With God.] Being alius from his Father, not aliud; a distinct person, yet
co-essentiall and co-eternall; for he was with him in the beginning of the
creature which God created, as himself speaks, Mark 13.19.

Verse 3. All things were made by him.] So, he was not idle with the Father
(though he were his darling, sporting always before him, Prove. 8.30.) but by
him, as by a principal efficient and co-agent with the Father, and the holy
Ghost, all things were made; as some shadow and obscure representation of his
Wisdom, Power, Goodness, etc. seen in the Creature, as the sin is seen in
water, or as letters refracted in a pair of spectacles are beheld by a dim
eye. We can see but Gods back-parts, and live; we need see no more, Exodus 33.23.
that we may live.

And without him was nothing made.] This is added for the more certainty: it
being usual with the Hebrews, thus by negation to confirm what they have
before affirmed, where they would assure, that the thing is so indeed; as Psalm.
92.15. Ioh. 7.18.

Verse 4. In him was life.] As he created, so he quickneth and conserveth all,
being the Prince and principle of life, Est Deus in nobis, agitante calescimus
illo.
Acts 3.15. both of natural life, Acts 17.28. (The Heathen could say as much)
and of spiritual, 1 John 5.12. Hence his members are called heirs of the grace
of life, 1 Pet. 3.7. and all others are said to be dead in trespasses and sins,
Ephesians. 2.1. living carcases, walking sepulchers of themselves. In most families
(as in Egypt, Exodus 12.30.) there is not one, but many dead corpses, Ephesians.
4.18.
as being alienated from the life of God, through the ignorance that is in them.

Verse. 5. And the light shines,] The light both of nature, and of Scripture.
The former is but a dim halfe-light, a rush candle, that will light a man but
into utter darkness. The later is a clear thorow-light: The Commandment is a
lamp, et lex, lux, and the Law is light, Prove. 6.23. As for the Gospel, it is
set up as a Beaconon an hill, Tit. 2.11. or as the Sun in the firmament, (...).
Luke 1.78, 79. bringing life and immortality to light, 2 Timothy 1.10. Where God
by his holy Spirit illightneth, Organ, and Object, Acts 26.18. and shines on
the heart, in the face of Jesus Christ, 2 Cor. 4.6.

And the darkness comprehends it not.] Nor will be comprehended by it, Phil.
3.12. but repels it, rebels against it, Job 24.13. imprisons it, as those
wizards did, Romans 1.18. spurns at it (as Balaam the devils spelman did, Numb.
24.1, 2, when he set his face toward the wilderness, and resolved to curse
howsoever;) Herodat. Job. 24.17.
execrates it, as the Ethiopians do the rising Sun. The morning is to such as
the shadow of death; for, being born in Hell, they seek no other Heaven.

Verse 6. There was a man sent from God.] As he ran not, till sent, Jer. 23.32.
(St. Paul holds it not only for incredible, but for impossible, that men should
preach that are not sent, Romans 10.15.) (...).
So he declined not his Embassage, as did Jonas; who was therefore met with by
another messenger of God, and sent into the Whales belly, to make his Sermon
for Nineveh; and in his prayer before, Ion. 2.8.
to acknowledge out of sad experience, that they that hunt after lying vanities
(as he had done) forsake their own mercies.

Verse 7. The same came for a witness.] This he performed with a witness,
verbis non solum disertis, sed et exertis. He witnessed plainly, and
plentifully, with a clear and punctual pronunciation, profession,
indigitation, verse. 26, 29, 32, 36.

That all men through him might believe.] Our Savior expected, that men should
have come as far to hear his forerunner and him, as the Queen of Sheba came to
hear Solomon, Mat. 12.42. But the one thing necessary lies (alas) neglected.
Men will run to Hell as fast as they can: and if God cannot catch them (says
one) they care not, M. Steph.
they will not come to Christ, that they might live, John 5.40.

Verse 8. He was not that light.] As some sinisterly conceited, which therefore
occasioned that most necessary digression, verse 6. to 10. and drew afterward,
from the Baptist himself, that most vehement profession, verse 20. He
confessed and denied not, but confessed, etc. He knew well the danger of
detracting in the least degree from Gods glory. To look upon it only, and lust
after it, is to commit spiritual fornication with it in our hearts; for it is
Gods beloved Spouse, and he being jealous, cannot bear a corrivall. Look upon
it therefore, but with a single eye, Matthew. 6.22. and in all addresses to God,
Illi da claritatem, tibi bumilitatem, Aug. ad Bonifas. epist. 205.
give the honor to him; take humility to thy self, as Austin well advises;
let that be thy motto that was his, propter te, Domine, propter te. Study Gods
ends, and we may have any thing of him, as Moses, Exodus 32.

Verse 9. Which lights every man, etc.] Or, that coming into the world,
lights every man. All, with the light of reason, Job. 35.11. his own, with a
supernall and supernatural light, (To know heavenly things, is to ascend into
Heaven, Prove. 30.3, 4.) an affecting, transforming light, 2 Cor. 3.18. such as
makes a man to be a child of light, Ephesians. 5.8. partaker of the inberitance
of the Saints in light, Colos. 1.2.

Verse 10. He was in the world.] Here the Evangelist goes on where he left;
resumes, and proceeds in his former argument, verse 5.

And the world was made by him.] This is the second time here set forth, and
reinforced, that we may the better observe and improve it. See the like,
Revel. 4.11. For thou have created all things, and by thee, they are, and were
created, without help, tool, or tiresomnesse, Esaias 40.28. That one word of his,
fiat, made alls shall we not admire his Architecture?

And the world knew him not.] Man is here called the World, and Mark. 16.15. he
is called every Creature. This little World knew not Christ, for God had hid
him under the Carpenters Son; his glory was inward, his Kingdom came not by
observation. And because the world knew not him, therefore it knows not us,
1. John 3.1. Princes, the saints, are in all Lands, Psalm. 45 16. but they lie
obscured, as did Melchisedech. The Moon (say Astronomers) has at all times as
much light as in the full; but often, a great part of the bright side is turned
to heaven, and a lesser part to the earth. So it is with the Church.

Verse 11. He came unto his own,] His peculiar picked people; as touching the
election, beloved for the Fathers sake (Ownnesse makes love) though the more he
loved, the less he was beloved. Romans 11.28.
This may be the best man's case, 2 Cor, 12.15. Learn we to deserve well of the
most undeserving. God shines upon the unthankful also, Luke 6.35. Christ came
to the stiff-necked, and uncircumcised in heart and ears, Act. 7.51. His
comfort was (and may be ours) Though Israel be not gathered, yet I shall be
glorious, etc. Isa. 49.5.

And his own received him not.] Nay, they peremptorily and pertinaciously
denied the holy One, and the Just; and desired a murderer to be given unto
them. For the which their inexpiable guilt, Acts 31 14.
they are, as it were cast out of the world by a common consent of Nations,
being a dejected and despised people. Howbeit, we long, and look daily for
their conversion, their resurrection, Romans 11.15.
as Saint Paul calls it. And Augustine argues out of the words, Abba,
Father; that there shall one day be a consent of Jews and Gentiles, in the
worship of one true God. There are that say out of Daniel, 12, 11. That this
will fall out, Anno Dom. 1650. Mr. Hout. Mr. Case.
Fiat, Fiat.

Verse 12. To them he gave power,] Or, privilege, (...) Non.
preferment, prerogative royal, heavenly honor, as Non^us here rendereth it,
and fitly. For if sons, then heirs, Romans 8.17. Hence that Ecce admirantis, 1
John 3.1. and that Who am I? 2 Samuel 7.18. with 14. Kings can make their
firstborn only heirs, as Jehoshaphat, 2 Chronicles. 21.3. But here all are heirs
of God, and co-heires with Christ.

Even to them that believe in his name.] Though with never so weak a faith,
such as may seem to be rather unbelief, then faith, Mark 9.24. The least bud
draws sap from the Root, as well as the greatest Branch. The weakest hand may
receive a ring. Credo languida fide, sed tamen fide, said Dr. Cruciger on his
death bed. Selneccer. paedag. Christ.
A weak faith is a joint possessour, though no faith can be a joint purchaser
of this precious privilege here specified.

Verse 13. But of God.] Whose sons therefore they are, and so higher then the
Kings of the earth, Psalm, 89.27. as those that prolong the days of Christ upon
earth, (...). Hom.
being begotten by the travel of his soul, Isai. 53.10, 11. Hence faith is
said to adopt us, verse 12. in like sort as it justifies us, viz. by virtue of
its object, Christ. Filiabitur nomine ejus. Trem.
Hence Psalm. 72.17. there is said to be a succession of Christ's name; it is
begotten, as one generation is begotten of another. This is true nobility,
where God is the top of the Kin, Religion the root.

Verse 14. And the Word was made flesh,] Put himself into a lousy leprous
suite of ours, Nazianz.
to expiate our pride and robbery, in reaching after the Deity, and to heal us
of our spiritual leprosy; for (...) if he had not assumed our flesh, he had
not saved us.

Verse 15. John cried, saying;] He entered upon his calling in the year of
Jubilee, which was wont to be published by the voice of a Crier, Rolloc. in loc.
with the sound of a Trumpet. And hitherto allude the Prophets and Evangelists,
that say, he cried, and call him, the voice of a Crier, etc.

Verse 16. Of his fullness.] Which is both repletive, and diffusive; not only
of plenty, but of bounty: not a fullness of abundance only, D. Preston.
but of redundance too. In Christians is plenitudo vasis; but in Christ,
Fontis: these differ (say the Schoolmen) ut ignis, et ignita. Take a drop from
the Ocean, and it is so much the less; but the fullness of the fire is such,
that light a thousand torches at it, it is not diminished.

And grace for grace.] That is (say some) the grace of the new Pestament, for
the grace of the old. And so in the next verse, Grace shall answer to the
moral Law, Truth to the Ceremonial. Or, Beza. D. Preston.
(as others) Grace for grace; that is, a latitude answerable to all the
Commandments, a perfection answerable to Christ's own perfection. As the
father gives his child limme for limme, part for part, etc. so does this
Father of Eternity ( Isa. 9 6.) There are that render it, Gratiam nova gratia
cumulata^. Pasor.
Grace against grace, as in a glass as face against face, See 2 Cor. 3.18. Or
Grace upon grace, that is, one grace after another, a daily increase of graces.

Verse 17. For the Law, etc.] Lex jubet, gratia juvat. Petamus ut det, quod ut
habeamus jubes, says Augustine. Aug in Exodus quest. 55.
We have his promise ever going along with his precept. The Covenant of grace,
turns precepts into promises, and the spirit of grace, turns both into prayers.

Verse 18. The only begotten Son,] In the year of Grace, 1520. Alsted. Chron.
Michael Servetus a Spaniard, taught, that there is no real generation or
distinction in God; and was therefore worthily burnt at Geneva, in the year
1555. He would not recant; Bellarm. lib 1. de Christo c. 1. Calvin. Opusc.
and yet feeling the fire, could not with patience endure it, but kept an
hideous roaring, till his life was exhausted; crying out to the beholders, to
dispatch him with a sword.

He has declared him.] In a divine and extraordinary manner, (...) Lege Bez.
Annot. major.
as the word here used imports.

Verse 19. Jews sent Priests.] Whose proper office it was to enquire into new
Doctrines, and by preserving, Bonos illos quidem viros, sed certe non
pereruditos. Cic. 20 de Finib. Vives in Aug. de Civ. Dei 4. c. 1.
to present knowledge to the people, who were to seek the Law at the Priests
mouth, Mal, 2.7. Cicero complains of his Roman Priests, that they were good
honest men, but not very skillful. And V^^^o upbraids them with their ignorance
of much, about their own gods and religions.

Verse 20. He confessed and denied not, but confessed] Sincerely and
studiously; he put away that honor with both hands earnestly, as knowing the
danger of wronging the jealous God in his glory, that is as his wife. All the
fat was to be sacrificed to God.

Verse 21. Art thou Elias? And he says, I am not.] scil. That Elias that you
imagine; Elias, the Thesbite, by a transanimation. (...) Pythagorica.
As neither was he an Angel, as some in Chrysostomes time would gather out of
Malch. 3.1. They that wrest the Scriptures, are blinded; as Papists, and other
brainsick heretics.

Verse 23. I am the voice of one crying] Christ spoke not a word to Herod,
faith one; because Herod had taken away this voice of his, in beheading the
Baptist.

In the Wilderness.] Not in the Temple; To show that the legal shadows were
now to vanish. Chrysologus calls John Baptist, fibulam legis et gratiae.

Verse 25. Why baptizest thou then? Why do thou innovate any thing in the
rites of Religion? A change they looked for under the Messiah, and had learned
it out of Jer. 31. But this testimony brought by John Baptist out of Isaiah, to
prove his own calling; either they did not, or would not understand; nor yet do
they seek to be better informed by him.

Verse 27. I am not Worthy,] Yet Christ held him worthy to lay his hand upon
his head in Baptism. And there is one that tells us (but who told him?) that
for his humility on earth, he is preferred to that place in heaven, from which
proud Lucifer fell.

Verse 28. In Bethabara,] That is, by interpretation, the place of passage, or
Traiectum, where Israel passed over Jordan. So the acts of Joshua and Jesus
begin both at a place. Baptism also is first administered, where it was of old
fore-shadowed. Christ is the true Bethabara, Ephesians. 2.18. we sail to Heaven on
his bottom.

Verse 29. (...).
Takes away.] Or, that is taking away, by a perpetual act, Isa. 55, 7.
as the Sun does shine, as the Spring does run, Zech. 13.1. This should be as a
perpetual picture in our hearts. As we multiply sins, he multiplieth pardons.

Verse 31. And I knew him not.] By face not at all; left the people should
think, that this was done and said by consent, or compact aforehand betwixt
them. Nor did John ever know Christ so fully, till now: his former knowledge
was but ignorance, in comparison; none are too good to learn. The very Angels
know not so much of Christ, 1 Pet. 1.12.
but they would know more, Ephesians. 3.10. and therefore look intently into the
mystery of Christ, as the Cherubims did into the Arc.

But that he should be manifested,] Ministers must hold up the tapestry, as it
were, and show men Christ. They are the mouth of the holy Ghost; whose office
it is to take of Christ's excellencies, and hold them out to the world, John
16.14.

Verse 37. And they followed Jesus.] So powerful is a word or two (many times)
touching Christ and his cross, to change the heart. Phil. 1.13. Acts and Mon.
fol. 920.
Paul shows, that the very report of his bonds, did a great deal of good in
Caesar's Court. Bil^eyes confession converted Latimer. Galeacius Caracciolus
(that Italian Marquess) was wrought upon by a similitude, used by Peter
Martyr, reading on the 1. Epist. to the Corinthians. So were Earl Martinengus,
and Hieronymus Zanchius (both of them Canonici Lateranenses) by some seasonable
truth, Ea^ch. Miscel Epist. ad Lanteran. p. 3, 4.
falling from the same mouth. Luther having heard Staupirius say, that that is
kind repentance, which begins from the love of God; ever after that time, the
practice of repentance was sweeter to him. Also this speech of his, took well
with Luther, The doctrine of Predestination, Melch. Adam. in vita Luth.
begins at the wounds of Christ.

Verse 41. He first findeth] Yet afterward Peter out-stript Andrew in faith,
and forwardness for Christ; as likewise Luther did Staupicius, etc. So the
first become last, and the last first. But that charity is no churl, Andrew
calls Simon, and Philip Nathaneel, etc. as a Lodestone draws to it self
one iron ring, and that another, and that a third, So etc,

We have found the Messiah.] Little it was that he could say of Christ's person,
office, value, virtue, etc. but brings him to Christ. So let us do ours to the
public ordinances. Do the office of the sermon-bell at least, we know not what
God may there do for them. Bring them as they did the palsie-man upon his bed,
and lay them before the Lord for healing.

Verse 43. Follow me.] Together with Christ's word, there went out a power. His
words are operative and efficacious. This Prophecy the Atheist, and Julian the
Apostate understood not; and therefore lighting upon this and the like places
of the Gospel, they blasphemously affirmed, that either the Evangelists were
liars, or the Apostles fools; that with one word only of our Savior, would be
drawn to follow him. So the Papists blaspheme assurance, which they have not,
as if it bred security and loosnesse. They may as well say, the sea burns, or
fire cooles.

Verse 44. Now Philip was of Bethsaida, Mark. 9.27.
] So was Andrew and Peter, who would not be wanting to preach to this Town,
and pray for it. But all in vain: whence that Woe to thee Bethsaida, Matthew.
11.21. Christ would not suffer so much as the blind man he had cured to go
thither, Mark. 9.

Verse 45. Philip finds Nathaneel,] Whom some make to be the same with
Bartholmew. I affirm nothing.

We have found,] The Greek word imports, (...) lu^rum n^speratum, and repent
obla^tu^.
the sudden and unexpected finding of such a commodity as he looked not for.
See Isa. 65.1.

Verse 46. Can there any good, etc.] When men take a toy in their heads against
a place or person, they are ready to reason in this manner. Good Nathancel was
in the common error, as was likewise Philip, in the former verse, with his
Jesus of Nazareth, the Son of Joseph. Four words only, and scarce ever a true
one. Epidemicall diseases are soon caught.

Verse 47. Behold an Israclite, etc.] Here Christ wondereth at his own work of
Renovation, as wonderful, doubtless, as that of Creation. Or the upright
person has here an ecce for imitation, as the hypocrite, for detestation,
psalm. 52.7.

Verse 48. Before that Philip, etc.] Christ thinks of us, when we little think
of him. See Romans 5.10.

Verse 52. (...).
Upon the son of man.] The Jacobs Ladder, the bridge that joyneth Heaven and
earth together, as Gregory has it.

CHAP. II.
VERSE 1. There was a Marriage.]
Whether St. John's marriage, I have not to say: Some will have it so.

Verse 2. Jesus was called. That was the way to have all sanctified, 1 Timothy
4.3. and disorders prevented. Cave, spectat Cato, was the old watchword.

Verse 3. Mendicato pane bic vivamus, annon boc pulchre sar^itur, in eo quod
pascimur pane cum angelis? etc. Luther.
And when they wanted wine,] Wine then may be wanting, though Christ be at the
Wedding: yea bread, though Christ be at the Board. But the hidden Manna is ever
ready; and anon in our Fathers house will be bread enough, and wine,
Gods-plenty. What though we beg our bread here, heaven will make up all: and it
is but winking, and we are there presently, said that Martyr.

The Mother of Jesus says unto him,] To show her authority, belike over him.
Howsoever, she was too hasty with him, and is taken up for halting. It is not
for us to set the sun by our dyall.

Verse 4. What have I to do with thee? etc.] Is it fit to prescribe to the only
wise God? to send for the King by a post? The Chinois whip their gods, if they
come not at a call.

Verse 5. His Mother says to the servants,] Not a word to her Son, Job. 40.5.
Ion. 4.
though he had publicly reproved her. Once I have spoken, but I will not
answer, says Job. Jonah, reprehended by God, shuts up his prophecy in
silence, in token of his true repentance. David was dumb, because it was Gods
doing, Psalm. 39.9. Bring God into the heart, and all will be hushed.

Verse 6. After the manner of the purifying, etc. But who required these things
at their hands? Men are apt to over-do in externals. The Devil strove to bring
this superstition into the Christian Church, by the heretic Ebion, and has
done it by the Pseudo-Catholikes, with their lustrall-water, and sprinkling of
sepulchers; for the rise whereof, Baronius refers us not to the Jews, Baron.
Annal.
but to Juvenals sixth Satyr.

Containing two or three firkins] For ostentation sake. Superstition, is
pompous and ambitious.

Verse 7. Up to the brim.] God permits his people an honest affluence. Nimirun
ad libras mill octingentas: quod pertiuet ad miraculi magnitudinem.
Christ supplies them here with great store of wine, to the quantity of a
thousand and eight hundred pounds, as Beza computes it: No small gifts fall
from so great a hand, Jam. 1.5.

Verse 8. The governor of the feast.] The Jews had a sort of officers at
their feasts, called praefecti morum, (...), Gaudentius. Casaubon.
the Eyes and Overseers of the feast, that took care that none should drink
too much. The Latins called them Dictatours; the Greeks, plautus.
Symposiarchs: Howbeit, among the Greeks, those officers power extended no
further, then to see, that at feasts or banquets, Heyl. Geog. ^79. Hin^
pergraecari^ and, as merry as a Greek.
men drank small draughts only at first, which by degrees they increased, till
they came to their height of intemperancy: At which point, when they were
arrived, they kept no rule, nor order: whereas before, to drink out of ones
turn, or beyond his allowance, was counted incivility.

Verse 9. The water that was made wine.] Does not Christ daily turn water into
wine; when of water falling upon the Vine, and concocted by the heat of the
sun, he produces the grape, whence wine is expressed? His love (that is better
then wine, Cant. 1.2.) turned brown bread and water into Manchet, and wine, to
the Martyrs in prison.

Verse 10. Every man at the beginning,] Ingenium bominem adumbrat, natura
fallax et sophisticum. Sic Satan nos ad se allicere solet, Pantheris in morem:
Christus contra. His work is worst at first; the best is behind: the sweetest
of honey lies in the bottom.

Verse 11. This beginning, etc.] For as for his miraculous disputation with the
Doctors, and fasting forty days; these were rather miracles wrought upon
Christ, then by him. He works his first miracle for confirmation of God the
Fathers first Ordinance.

His Disciples believed on him.] So they did before, but now more. So 1 John
5.13. The Apostle writes to them that believed on the name of the Son of God,
that they might believe on the name of the Son of God. 1. e. that they might be
confirmed, continued, and increased in it. Faith is not like Jonahs Gourd, that
grew up in a night; or like a bullet in a mould, that is made in a moment, etc.
But as the sound of the trumpet grew louder and louder; and as they went up to
Salomons throne, by steps and stairs; so men proceed from faith to faith, till
they come to full assurance.

Verse 12. Matthew 8.
To Capernaum.] Where he had hired him an house; for Foxes had holes, etc. but
the Son of man had not a house of his own to put his head in.

Verse 14. And found in the Temple.] The Talmudists tell us, that it was grown
to a custom to set up tables in the Temple, and money changers at them; that
those that ought to offer half a shekel, might have those at hand that might
change their bigger money, or take to pledge what else they brought. Here also
they might buy oxen, sheep, doves for sacrifice, which the covetous Priests often
received, and then sold them again to others.

Sitting, Plerique emnes mensari^ ^unt, fanerat^riam exercentes, ideo faetent.
] The Jews at this day being great Usurers, and through much sitting, and not
stirring about, are thought to stink, so as they are said to do: Sedentary
lives, are subject to diseases.

Verse 15. And when he had made a scourge,] Here he put forth a beam of his
Deity; whiles, as another Sampson, he lays heaps upon heaps (yet without
bloodshed) with the jaw bone of an ass. Zeal is attended by revenge, Ber.
Annot.
2 Cor. 7.11.

The changers money, Non exp^^^o plenam (...) etc. R^^o^. (...).
] Gr. small money (...) in minuta frusta concidere.

Verse 16. And said to the Dove-sellers,] These (belike, as more tractable, and
not so gross offenders) he deals more gently with, but bids them be packing. I
expect not (says Reverend Rolloc) a plenary and perfect reformation of the
Church, Nota, Est E^^le^^ae, Scoticanae praev leg^u raru^, prae ^ultis, quod
^ine ^chi^mate, (...) b^^resi unita te^ cum p^ritat^ doct^inae retinu^rit. Sic
in Elo^ prafator: de co ^fess. in princip. Syntag Confess p 6 edu. G^^ev.
after so horrible an apostacy under Antichrist, till Christ come again to
judgment. And yet that Church of Scotland is said to have this rare privilege
above many others; that since the Reformation there wrought, they have, without
heresy, or so much as schism, retained unity, with purity of doctrine.

An house of merchandise.] So he calls it, for all their goodly pretexts of good
intentions. So the Churchwarden of Ipswich was much trounced and troubled in
the High Commission, for writing over the place where the spiritual Court was
kept, My house shall be called an house of prayer, but ye have made it a den of
thieves, November. 6. 1635.

Verse 17. The zeal of thine house.] Apostates, on the otherside, eat up their
zeal of Gods house. But as in falling forward is nothing so much danger, as
backward: So the zealot, though not so discreet, is better then the Apostate:
Howbeit, zeal should eat us up, (says one) but not eat up our wisdom, Mr.
Vines.
nor should pride eat up our zeal.

Verse 18. What sign.] They might have seen sign enough, in his so powerful
ejecting of those money-merchants. But Church-Reformations are commonly thus
diversely entertained. The Disciples call it zeal, the Jews, rashness.

Verse 19. Destroy this Temple.] This was the same in effect, Romans 1.4.
with that sign of the Prophet Jonas, Matthew. 12.39, 40. His resurrection was a
plain demonstration of his Deity. Superas evadere ad auras, hic labor, hoc opus
est, befitting a God.

Verse 20. Forty and six years,] All, so what lacks; for it was six years work
only, but they reckon the interim of interruption, Ezra 3. to the 7th, to
aggravate the matter. So they are not only blinded, but hardened.

Verse 21. The temple of his Body.] Wherein the Godhead dwelt bodily, Colos.
2.9. that is, personally, as he dwelt in the material Temple, sacramentally,
and does dwell in the hearts of his people, spiritually. This Tabernacle of
Christ's Body, Heb. 9.21.
was not made with hands, not built by the power of nature.

Verse 22. His Disciples remembered,] In the mean, time they murmured not, much
less opposed. We can do nothing against the truth; when at worst, but for the
truth, 2 Cor. 13.8. They laid up what they understood not: and as the water
casts up her dead, so did their memories; that which seemed dead therein, by
the help of the holy Ghost.

Verse 23. Many believed.] Fides fuit minime fida, quippe historicae, ex
miraculis nata. These thought they had laid hold on Christ: but they did but as
Children, that think they catch the shadow on the wall. There Is a great deal of
this false faith abroad. The sorcerers seemed to do as much as Moses.

Verse 24. Did not commit himself unto them.] Who yet would needs obtrude upon
him. None are so impudent as hypocrites; they deceive themselves, they would do
others; God too. I read not (says one) in Scripture of an hypocrites
conversion; and what wonder? for whereas, after sin, conversion is left as a
means to cure all other sinners; what means to recover him, Pract, of piety,
page 261.
who has converted conversion it self into sin?

Verse 25. Nihil cord ac renibus magis intimum; adeo ut per multos meatus
atque incurvos ans fractus de^erri elaborati cibi debeant, antequam eo possint
perduci. Lemnius de complex. lib. 1. p. 26.
For he knew what was in man.] Artificers know the nature and properties of
their works; and shall not Christ of the heart? He searches men's hearts, and
tries the reins, which of all their inwards are the most inward: besides, that
they are the seats and springs of all our thoughts and lusts. Deus intimior
nobis intimo nostro, says one; God is nearer to us, then we are to our selves,
and knows our thoughts long before; as a Gardener knows what flowers he shall
have at spring, because he knows the roots.

CHAP. III.
Verse 1. A ruler of the Jews.]
EIther a chieftain of the Pharisees, as he was, Luke 14.1. Or one of the
Sanhedrin, one of the seventy Seniours, whose learning hung in their light, 1
Cor. 2.8. Yet was neither learned Nathaneel, nor Nicodemus a Master of Israel
excluded from Christ's discipline (says Joan. de Turrecremata;) lest if he had
admitted simple men only, Ne si solos simplices vocasset, credi possit quod
fuissent ex simplicitate decepti (...) quasi (...) Plato.
it might have been thought they were deceived through their simplicity.

Verse 2. We know] But will not know. Hence they became sinners against the
holy Ghost, Matthew. 12.23. etc. The Devil that commits this sin every day, is
full of objective knowledge, and thence has his name.

No man can do these miracles,] Those juglers of Egypt, Jannes and Jambres,
Miracula a diabolo edita sunt praestigiae, imposturae, mantasmata, ludibria.
Bucholc.
did but cast a mist, and beguile the sight of Pharaoh, and his followers. How
Tindall hindered the jugler of Antwerp, that he could not do his feats, see
Acts and Monuments, fol. 985.

Verse 3. Except a man be born again,] E supernis, Erassm. Except a man be
first un-made (as St. Peter expounds our Savior) and new-made up again; (...)
1 Pet. 2.24. 2 Pet. 1.3.
except the whole frame of the old conversation be dissolved, and a better
erected, there is no heaven to be had Heaven is too hot to hold unregenerate
persons; no such dirty dog ever trampled on that golden pavement, it is an
undefiled inheritance.

Verse 4. How can a man, etc.] He understands no more of the doctrine of
Regeneration (though he could not but have often read of it in Ezekiel
elsewhere) then a common cowherd does the darkest precepts of Astronomy, 1 Cor.
2.14. All this is gibbrish to him. Water arises no higher then the spring
whence it came; so the natural man can ascend no higher then nature.

Verse 5. Be born of water, and the holy Ghost.] That is, of the holy Ghost
working like water, cooling, cleansing, etc. In allusion, belike, to that first
washing of a newborn babe from his blood, Ezekiel. 16.4. Or else to those
Leviticall washings, and not without some reference to Nicodemus, and his
fellow-Pharisees, who placed a great part of their piety in external washings,
as do also the Mahometans at this day. Every time they ease nature (says one
that had been amongst them) they wash those parts, Blunt voyage into Levant,
page 100.
little regarding who stands by. If a dog chance to touch their hands, they
wash presently; before prayer they wash both face and hands, sometimes the head
and privities, etc.

Verse 6. That which is born of the flesh, etc.] Whole man is in evil, and
whole evil in man. Quintilian saw not this; and therefore said, that it is more
marvel that one man sins, then that all men should live honestly; sin is so
much against man's nature. Many also of the most dangerous opinions of Popery
(as justification by works, state of perfection, merit, supererogation, etc)
spring from hence; that they have slight conceits of concupifcence, as a
condition of nature. Yet some of them (as Michael Bains professor at Lovaine,
etc.) are sound in this point.

Verse 7. Marvel not, etc.] viz. through unbelief; Miracula assiduitate
vitescunt.
for otherwise it is a just wonder, far beyond that of natural birth; which,
but that it is so ordinary, would surely seem a miracle.

Verse 8. The wind blows, etc.] Libero et vago impetu. Watch therefore the
gales of grace: we cannot purchase this wind (as Sailors in Norway are said to
do) for any money. This Hawke, when flowen, will not easily be brought to hand
again.

Verse 9. How can these thing be?] Christ had told him that the manner of the
Spirits working is incomprehensible, and yet he is at it, How can these things
be? Luth. apud Scultet. in Annalib.
Sed scribo haec frustra (says Luther in a certain letter of his to
Melancthon) quia tu secundum philosophiam vestram, has res ratione regere, hoc
est, ut ille ait, cum ratione insanire pergis.

Verse 10. Art thou a master, etc,] The Pharisees and Philosophers, for their
learning, are called Princes of this world, 1 Cor. 2.8. And yet, had they
known, they would never have crucified the Lord of Glory. Indoctirapiunt
caelum, etc. The poor are gospellized; (...)
not only receive it, but are changed by it. But Bellarmine cannot find in all
the Bible, Matthew. 11.5. Promissio de remittendis peccatis eis quae consitentur
Deo non videtur ulla extare in divinis literis. Bell. de Just if. l. 1. c. 21.
where remission of sin is promised to such as confess their sins to God.

Verse 11. Ye receive not our witness.] Our Savior joins himself with the
Prophets (whose writings Nicodemus had read so negligently) and takes it for a
dishonor, that he should have written for men the great things of his Law, and
they continue strangers thereto, Hosea 8.12.

Verse 12. If I have told you earthly things,] That is, spiritual things,
under earthly gross similitudes, of wind, water, etc. In the mystery of
Christ, the best of us are acute obtusi. But for the natural man, that cannot
tell the nature of the wind, or enter into the depth of the flower, or the
grass, etc. how should he possibly have the wit to enter into the deep things
of God, especially if darkly delivered.

Verse 13. And no man has ascended, etc. Caput and corpus unus Chrislus.
] Object. Therefore all but Christ are shut out of heaven. Sol. The Church,
and Jesus, make but one Christ, 1 Cor. 12.12. He counts not himself full
without his members, who are called the fullness of him that fills all,
Ephesians. 1. ult.

Verse 14. And as Moses lifted up the serpent,] There it was, vide, et vive:
here, creed, et vive. And as there, he that beheld the serpent, though but with
a weak squint-eye, yea, but with half an eye, Selniccer. in pedag, Christ.
page 321.
was cured. So here, if we look upon Christ with the eye, though but a weak
faith, we shall be saved. Doctor Cruciger when he lay a dying, cried out,
Credo languida fide, sed tamen fide. I believe with a weak faith, but with a
faith, such as it is.

Verse 15. That whosoever believes, Luther. Ioh. 6, 35, 36.
] Faith is the soul, hand, ( sidei mendica manus, says one) foot, whereby we
come to Christ, mouth ( hic credere est edere, says Austine) wing, whereby we
foare up, and fetch Christ into the heart.

Verse 16. God so loved the world,] This is a sic without a sicut, there being
nothing in nature wherewith to parallel it. The world, that is, all mankind
fallen in Adam. This the Apostle fitly calls gods, Philanthropy, Tit. 3.4. it
being a sweet favor to the whole kind of us, that any are saved by Christ.

Verse 17. Indg 9 At peitaru and viv^t re^ne^que beatus (...) ^^sse re^al. Her.
ep^^ 1.
] Not to condemn the world.] Unless it be by accident, because they will not
be saved; they will not have heaven upon Christ's terms, they will not part
with their fat and sweet (with the V ne in Jothams parable) no not for a
Kingdom: they will not be constrained to live happily, reign eternally.

Verse 18. Is condemned already.] The sentence is passed, the halter about his
neck; there wants no more then to turn him off the ladder of life, and he is
gone for ever. In the mean while, he hangs but by one rotten twined thread,
over hellfire.

Because he has not believed.] He says not, because he has committed
adultery, murder. There is no righteousness now but of faith; no sin (says
one) but from unbelief; for thy sins against the Law are not imputed unto
thee, if thou do but believe the Gospel. (...) Gal. 3.23.
It is unbelief that shuts a man up close prisoner in the Laws dark dungeon,
whence faith only can fetch us out.

Verse 19. This is condemnation] This is hell above ground, and aforehand.
Affected ignorance is the leprosy in the head, which makes a man undoubtedly
unclean, and utterly to be excluded, Levit. 13.44.

Verse 20. For every one that does evil, Herodot.
] As the Ethiop ans are said to curse the Sun for its bright and hot shining.
Christ came a light into the world; (...) Tit. 2.12.
his Gospel has appeared as a Beacon on a hill, or as the Sun in heaven; his
Saints shine as lamps, etc. Now when men hate these, as thieves do a torch in
the night, and fly against the lights as Bats do, this is condemnation.

Verse 21. But he that does truth.] Tenebriones Papistae male sibi conscii,
Aeternum atri, et tetri sunte, et habentor, Rex Platon.
qui non tam cute, quam cord Aethiopici, Solemn quo magis luceat, eo magis
execrentur. But our hearts (as our clymate) have more light then heat. Sir
Philip Sidney used to say of Chaucer, that he wondered how in those misty times
he could see so clearly; and how we in these clearer times go on so
stumblingly. If any be ignorant, 1 Cor. 14.38.
let him be ignorant, says Paul. And so much any one knows, as he does of
Gods will, as the Apostle intimates, when he tells us, 2 Cor. 5.21.
that Christ knew no sin; that is, he did none.

Wrought in God.] Right. 1. Quoad fontem, a pure heart. Aug.
2. Quoad finem, the glory of God. Esse they are but splendida peccata, sins in
a silk n suite.

Verse 22. And baptized.] Where ever we are we must be doing. If Moses may not
do justice in Egypt, he will do it in Midian, Malim mibi male esse quam
molliter. Sen.
Exodus 2.14, 17. I had rather be sick, said Seneca, then out of employment.

Verse 23. And John also was baptizing,] Here Mimsters may learn not to be
wanting to their duties, though God stir up others about them of greater
parts, and better success, to obscure them. Verbi minister es, hoc age, was Mr
Perkins his Motto. Summum culmen affectantes satis honest vel in secundo
fastigio conspiciemur, D Ward. Colum. lib. 1. in praefat Cic. de Orat. ad Brut.
says Columella. And, Prima sequentem, honestum est in secundis, tertiisve
consistere, says Cicero. Every man cannot excel, nor is it expected.

Verse 24. Cast into prison,] The Primitive Bishops were found more frequently
in prisons, Act and Mon. fol 1565. (...). Dio Cass.
then Palaces. Bocardo became a College of Quondams, as the Marian Martyrs
merrily called it. If Petronius could tell Caesar, that he had rather be with
Cato in the Prisonhouse, then with him in the Senate House: why should it
grieve any to suffer bonds with, and for Christ? Chrysostom had rather be Paul
a prisoner of Jesus Christ, then Paul rapt up into the third Heaven. Homil in
Ephesians. 3.1.

Verse 25. And the Jewes] Who joined themselves to John's Disciples, craftily,
and maliciously, that they might both set against Christ. Like as the Jesuits
at this day, will cunningly comply with the Lutherans, and seem to side with
them, that they may both set against the Calvinists.

About punifying] That is, Baptism; called elsewhere, the Laver of
regeneration, Tit. 3.5. and by a Father, (...) a purging preservative. Not the
putting away of the filth of the flesh, says Peter, but a better thing, 1 Pet.
3.21.

Verse 26. Rabbi, he that was with thee] They envied for John's sake, as Ioshna
did for Moses, and with as little thank. John would have been glad they had
gone after Christ, as Andrew did. Howsoever, it was good news to John, that
Jesus was so frequented and busied.

Verse 27. Videtur bominis appellatio magnum habere momeatum, etc. Equide on
pluris secerim justam commendationem, etc. 3 John 12.
A man can receive nothing] There is much in this word [Man] as Beza thinks, to
set forth the most miserable indigency of all mankind by nature. The Greeks,
when they set forth one mis reble indeed, they call him (...), thrice a man.

Verse 28. Ye your selves bear me witnesse] I should rather choose the just
commendation of one good man (says Rolloc upon this Text) then the foolish
admiration of a whole multitude. Demetrius has good report of the truth it
self; that is enough for him.

Verse 29. The friend of the bride-groom] Such is every faithful Minister, 2
Cor. 11.2. whose office is to woo for Christ, and not (as some) to speak one
word for him, and two for himself. This is foul-play.

Verse 30. He must increase, but, etc.] And this was John's great joy. That man
has true light, that can be content to be outshined by others; and nothing
will more try a man's grace, then questions of emulation. Ezekiel can commend
Daniel his Contemporary, Ezekiel. 14.14.
matching him with Noah, and Job, for his power in prayer. And Peter highly
praises Paul's Epistles, though he had been publicly reproved by him at
Antioch. Yea, 2 Pet. 3. Gal. 2
Plato called Aristotle (...) and (...) the intelligent Reader. And Aristotle
is said to have set up an Altar in honor of Plato, with this inscription.
Hier. Walls. in Hermiae lib
Nulla ferent talem secla futura virum. But Luther showed himself so much
discontent at the Reformation wrought at Wittenberg in his absence, by
Carolostadius, Cum Lutherus ex sua eremo Wittenbergan redvs^et, etc. Alsted.
Chron. page 520.
because it was done without him, that he doubted not to approve those things,
that till then he had disapproved, and to disapprove what before he had
approved of. So hard it is for a man willingly, and gladly to see his equals
lifted over his head in worth, and opinion. Self-love makes men unreasonable,
and ever teaches them to turn the glass, to see themselves bigger, others
lesser then they are, etc.

Verse 31. He that comes, etc.] Hitherto Christ has been compared with John:
In the rest of the Chapter, he stands compared; First, with all men. Secondly,
with the faithful, and infinitely preferred before them all. He is the chief
of ten thousand; Cant. 5.10.
or the Standard Bearer, which ever are the goodliest.

Is earthy] Terra est, so Augustine renders it in the same sense, as he is
flesh, verse. 6. God will smite this earth with the rod of his mouth, Isa. 11.6.

Speaks of the earth] As Ducklings have always their bills in the mud, as
Swine are ever rooting in the mire.

Verse 33. Has set to his seal, etc.] Has given God a testimonial, such as
is that Deuteronomy. 32.4. After which, God also sets his seal (quasi in
redhostimentum) to the believer, Ephesians. 1.13.

Verse 34. Speaks the words of God] This the true believer is convinced of;
and therefore sets to his seal, Luke 1.1.
as to an undoubted truth. He is fully persuaded, as Saint Luke was.

Verse 35. The Father loves the Son.] Therefore faith may have firm footing.
God has laid help upon one that is mighty, Psalm 89.19. that our faith and hope
may be in God, 1 Pet. 1.21.

Verse 36. Has eternal life] 1. In promisso. 2. In pretio. 3. In primitiis.
He stands already on the Battlements of heaven, he has one foot in the porch
of Paradise.

He that believes not] There is a twofold un-beleefe, one in the
understanding, (...). Heb. 8.10.
and is opposed to faith: the other in the will, and lives, and is opposed to
obedience. For cure of both, God has promised to write his Laws, both in the
minds of his people, and in their hearts too.

The wrath of God abides upon him] (...), as in its mansion-place, as upon its
basis, tanquam trabali cbavo fixa, says one; there it nestles, settles, and
never will away. The unbeleever can neither avoid it, nor abide it.

CHAP. IIII.
Verse 1. Baptized more Disciples.]
BAptizing was used by the Jews, before John, or Christ took it up; Broughton
on Dan. 9.
from which custom, though brought in without Commandment, our Savior
authorizeth a seal of entering into his Rest; using the Jews weakness, as an
allurement thither.

Verse 2. Jesus himself baptized not] A sweet comfort, that Christ is said to
baptize those whom the Disciples baptized. The Sacraments administered by
Ministers are no less effectual, then if we had recived the same from Christ's
own hands.

Verse 3. He left Iudaea] God must be trusted, not tempted.

Verse 4. He must needs go] Happy for them, that they lay in our Saviors way,
Masim prasente Christ^ esse in inserno, quom absente eo in calo Luth in Genesis c.
3^. Genesis 48.22. (...), Proporttorate ad miseriam condelere. Heb. 5.2. Heb. 13.3.
to be looked upon; his feet drop fatness. Luther had rather be with Christ in
hell, then in Heaven without him.

Verse 5. Jacob gave to his son Ioseph] Having first wone it with his sword and
his bow; that is, with his prayer and supplication (says the Chaldee
paraphrast:) which as Saul's sword, and Ionathans bow, never return empty, 2 Samuel 1.22.

Verse 6. Jesus therefore being wearied] And in that he himself had suffered,
he was the more able and apt to help this poor Samaritesse. So the Apostle bids
us pity those in adversity, as being our selves in the body, i. e. in the body
of flesh and frailty, subject to like misery. He that has had the tooth-ake,
will pity those that have it. Non ignara mali, etc. We are orphans all (said
Queen Elizabeth, Englands Elizab. p. 186.
in her speech to the children of Christs-Hospitall) let me enjoy your prayers,
and ye shall be sure of mine assistance.

Verse 7. A woman of Samaria] A poor Tankerd-bearer, such as Festus calls
Canalicolas, quod circa canalem fori consisterent, Berman. de Originib.
because they were much about the Conduits.

Verse 9. Ask drink of me?] The Samaritans knew that they were slighted of
the Jews, and took it ill, Gens haec (says Giraldus Cambrensis, of the
Irish) sicut and natio quaevis barbara, quanquam honorem nesciant, honorari
tamen supra modum affectant. No man would be slighted, how mean soever.

For the Jews have no dealings, etc.] Josephus writes, that at Samaria was a
Sanctuary opened by Sanballat, for all Renegado Jews, etc. The Jews therefore
hated the presence, the fire, Antiq. lib 11. cap. 7.8.
the fashion, the books of a Samaritan. Neither was their any hatred lost on
the Samaritans part; for if he had but touched a Jew, he would have thrown
himself into the next water, clothes and all; Epiphan.
both of them equally sick of a noli me tangere.

Verse 10. The gift of God] That is, Christ himself, (...)
called by St. Paul, the Benefit, 1 Timothy 6.2. Let him not be to us as Iethers
sword to him, which he drew not, used not; but as Goliahs sword to David, none
to that; None but Christ, none but Christ, said that Martyr.

Verse 11. Sir, thou have no Bucket] See how witty we are naturally, with our
armed dilemma's, to reject grace offered, and with both hands as it were, to
thrust away from us eternal life, (...).
Acts. 13.46.

Verse 12. Our father Iacob] Josephus tells us, that these Samaritans, whiles
the Jews prospered, would needs be their dear Cousens; but when they were in
adversity (as under Antiochus) they would utterly dis-own, and dis-avow them.
They wrote to Antiochus, because he tormented the Jews, to excuse themselves
as none such; and they styled Antiochus, The mighty God; Oh baseness!

Verse 13. Shall thirst again] So shall all they, quibus avaritiae aut
ambitionis salsugo bibulam animam possidet. He that seeks to satisfy his
lusts, goes about an endless business. Give, give, is the Horsleeches
language. The worldling has enough to sink him, not to satisfy him.

Verse 14. Shall never thirst] His lips water not after homely provision, that
has lately tasted of delicate sustenance.

Clitorio quicunque sitim de font levanet, Ovid Metamor. lib. 15.

Vina fugit, gaudetque meris abstemius undis.
Verse 15. Sir, give me this water] We would all have immortality, but here on
earth. Some think she jeers our Savior here; who therefore in the next words
arowseth her conscience.

Verse 16. Go call thy husband] It was a great favor in Christ to receive that
sinful woman, that washed his feet with her tears, and wiped them with her
hair, and not to kick her out of his presence, as the Pharisees expected. How
much greater is this, to fetch in an idolatrous harlotry that fled from him, to
entertain her that lad rejected him? (...). 1 Timothy 1.14.
etc. Well might St. Paul say, that the grace of our Lord, is exceeding
abundant, or does abound to flowing over, as the sea easily over-floweth
mole-hils.

Verse 17. I have no husband] Lucretius ait, quasdam mulieres effugere unius
viri torum, Sphinx Philos.
ut omnium fiant torus.

Iesuitae etiam sunt
Connubisanctifugae, clammeretricitegae.
Verse 18. He whom thou now have, etc.] Here he comes home to her conscience;
so must all that will do good on it, striving not so much to please, as to
profit. Bees are killed with honey, but quickened with vinegar. The Eagle,
though she love her young ones dearly, yet she pricketh and beats them out of
the nest; so must Preachers drive men out of the nest of pleasure. John
Speiser, preacher at Ausborough in Germany, did his work so well at first, that
the common strumpets left the Brothel-houses (then tolerated) and betook
themselves to a better course, Scultee. Annal. 118.
Anno 1523. Yet afterward he revolted to the Papists, and miserably perished.

Verse 19. 1 Pet 3.
Sir, I perceive that thou art a Prophet] To the hid m^^n of the heart the
plain song ever makes the best music. The Corinthian idiot, convinced of all,
and having the secrets of his heart ripped up by the two-edged sword, 1 Cor.
14.4.25.
falls down upon his face, worshipping God, and reports that God is in the
Ministers, of a truth.

Verse 20. Our fathers, etc.] No sooner does she acknowledge him a Prophet, but
she seeks to be satisfied in a case of conscience. Proh stuporem nostrum! Woe to
our dullness.

Verse 21. Ye shall neither in this mountain, etc.] Herod's temple at Jerusalem
was so set on fire by Titus his soldiers, that it could not be quenched by the
industry of man. And at the same time Apollos temple at Delphi was utterly
overthrown by earthquakes, and thunder bolts; and neither of them could ever
since be repaired, The concurrence of which two miracl s (says mine Author)
evidently shows, that the time was then come, when God would put an end both
to Jewish Ceremonies, Godw. Antiq. Heo.
and heathenish Idolatry; that the Kingdom of his Son might be the better
established.

Verse 22. We know what we worship] Christ also, as man, worshippeth, being
less then himself, as God: Christ is worshipped by Angels, as God, being
greater then himself, as man.

Verse 23. The Father seeks such] Oh how should this fire up our hearts to
spiritual worship! that God seeks for such, with, Cant. 2.14.
Let me see thy face, hear thy voice, etc. He solliciteth suitours.

Verse 24. God is a Spirit] Omnes nominis Iehovae literae sunt spirituales, ut
denotetur Deum esse spiritum. Though, Alsted.
to speak properly, God is not a spirit. For first, spirit signifies breath,
which indeed is a body; but because it is the finest body, the most subtle,
and most invisible; therefore immateriall substances, which we are not able to
conceive, are represented unto us under this name. Secondly, God is above all
notion, all name. Plut. lib. de Isid. and Osirid.
Afri dicunt Deum ignotum Amon. i. e. Heus tu, quis es? One being asked what
God is? answered, Si scirem, Deus essem.

In spirit and truth] As opposed to formality and hypocrisy.

Verse 25. I know that Messiah, etc.] As who should say, we are not altogether
so ignorant as you would make us, verse. 23. A dead woman must have four men to
carry her out, as the Proverb is: we are apt to think our penny good silver.

Verse 26. I, that speak unto thee, etc.] No sooner do we think of Christ, with
any the least true desire after him, but he is presently with us. He invited
himself to Zacheus his table, etc. Tantum velis, and Deus tibi praeoccurret,
said a Father.

Verse 27. That he talked with the woman] Solum cum sola. Beza.
He might do that that we must beware of, lest concupiscence kindle. Abraham
may see Sodom burning, Lot may not.

Yet no man said] All ill thoughts, and sinister surmises, of superiors
especially, are to be presently suppressed, and strangled in the birth.

Verse 28. Left her water-pot] She had now greater things in hand, better
things to look after. As Alexander, hearing of the riches of the Indies,
divided his Kingdom among his Captains.

Verse 29. Come see a man, etc.] Weak means may, by Gods blessing, work great
matters. He can make the words of Naamans servants greater in operation, then
the words of great Elisha, and by a poor captive girl bring him to the Prophet.

Verse 30. Then they went out] More to see the news, then else: as Moses his
curiosity led him nearer to the bush, where-hence he was called. It is good to
come to the Ordinances, though but for novelty: absence is without hope. What a
deal lost Thomas by being out of the way but once?

Verse 31. Master, eat.] Animantis cujusque vita in fuga est, and must be
repaired by nutrition, in a natural course. Only we must eat to live, and not
live to eat only, as belly-gods.

Verse 32. I have meat to eat, etc.] Abraham's servant would not eat, till he
had dispatched his errand, Genesis 24.33. When we are to woo for Christ, we should
forget our own interests and occasions, Quaerite primum, etc.

Verse 33. 1 Cor. 3.3.
Has any man brought, etc.] Are not these yet carnal, and talk as men? How
dull and thick-brain'd are the best, till God rent the vail, and illighten both
organ and object?

Verse 34. My meat is to do the will, etc.] Job preferred it before his
necessary food, that that should keep him alive. So did Christ, Job. 23.12.
when disappointed of a breakfast at the barren fig tree, and coming hungry
into the City, Mat. 21.17.33.
he went not into a victualling-house, but into the Temple, where he taught the
people most part of that day.

Verse 35. Say ye not, there are yet three months.] As who should say, ye so
long for the time, that ye count how many months, weeks, days, it is to
harvest: Should ye not be much more sollicitous of such an heavenly harvest?
These Samaritans do but hang for mowing, etc.

Verse 36. That he that sows, etc.] That is, that both the Prophets that
sowed, and the Apostles that reaped, etc. for the people were prepared by the
writings of the Prophets to be wrought upon by the Apostles. The Samaritans
also had the Bible, agreeing for most part, with that we have from the Jews.
The copy of this Samaritan Bible was first brought from Damascus into
Christendom by one Petrus de Valle, an. Dom. 1626.

Verse 37. That saying true, etc. Camerarius recites the Senary at large,

(...). Verse 38. (...) of (...).
Other men have laboured] Labored even to lassitude, as the word signifies.
The Ministry is not then an easy trade, an idle man's occupation. Luther was
wont to say, Sudor Oeconomicus est magnus, Politicus major, R^^lesiasticus
^^^ximus: The householder has somewhat to do, the Magistrate more, but the
Minister most of all.

Verse 39. For the saying of the woman.] An unlikely means to effect so great a
matter. But what is that to the Almighty? So Junius professes, that the very
first thing that turned him from Atheism, was conference with a Country man
of his, not far from Florence. The next was, the Majesty of the Scriptures,
which he observed in Joh. 1. So, for our forefathers in times of Popery, Act.
and Mon. fol. 767.
Mr Fox observes, that by the reading of Chaucers books some were brought to
the knowledge of the truth. And, in that rarity of books, and want of teachers,
this the thing I greatly marvel at (says he) to note in the registers, and
consider how the word of God did multiply (...) exceedingly, as it did amongst
them. For I find that one neighbor resorting to, and conferring with another,
Ibid 750.
eftsoons, with a few words of their first or second talk, did win and turn
their minds to that, wherein they desired to persuade them, touching the truth
of Gods Word and Sacraments.

Verse 40. Were come unto him.] We no sooner believe, but we would fain see,
and be brought a spe ad speciem.

Verse 41. Because of his own word.] This is it alone that is the foundation of
faith, and converts the soul, Psalm. 19.7. That, of good wives winning their
husbands, 1 Pet. 3.1. is meant, by way of preparation only ^^^^enerall. And
that of winning a soul by private admonition, (...) ult. is meant of persuading
them to some good duty, or to receive some truth, or to forsake some one evil
or ^^^^ur.

Verse 42. Not because of thy saying.] properly, (...), propter lo ^^acitatem
tuam. Intus existens prohiber alien^.
because of thy prittle-prattle. So perhaps it seemed to some of them at first,
who believed indeed when they hea^^^^m. Plato give a good rule, Consider not so
much (...). Prejudicate opinion bars up the understand (...) causes the best
liquour to run over.

Verse 43. After two days he dep^^^^^.] (...) never so much made of, we must
away, when the (...) something elsewhere to be done for God.

Verse 44. Jesus himself testified.] Had test^^^^ when he was cast out at
Nazareth therefore he came no more there. A Minister that can do no good on it
in the place where he lives, is bound to remove, though the fault be not in
him, but the people, says an Interpreter here; Metuendum est ne donum quod
acceperla, amittas, vel degeneres in errores, vel haereses, vel, si retineas
puritatem doctrinae, evadas tamen frigidus and aridas do etor. Rolloc. in toc.
Zanch. Miscel. epist. dedicat. (...), A Royalist.
otherwise (if for self-respects he there abide) it is to be feared that he
will lose his gifts, and either fall into errors and heresies, or prove but a
dull and dry Doctor.

Verse 45. The Galileans received him.] Though those of Nazareth would not,
others did. He that is sent and gifted by God, shall have one where or other to
exercise his gifts, as the English exiles at Geneva, Zurich, etc. as Zanchius,
when he could not rest at Argentina, was received at Clavenna.

Having seen all the things he did, etc.] Christ's miracles were as the
Sermon-bell, that called them together. These the men of Nazareth also had
seen, but with prejudice, and therefore to no profit.

Verse 46. A certain Nobleman.] One that belonged to the King: for so the
vulgar flatteringly styled Herod the Tetrarch. Few Noblemen came to Christ:
this, not till he was driven to him, by his sons sickness, Not many Noble are
called: if any, they are as black Swans, 1 Cor. 1.20.
and thinly scattered in the firmament of a State, even like Stars of the first
magnitude.

Verse 47. Besought him that he would, etc.] Even Darius king of Persia, can
give order for prayers to be made at Jerusalem, for the Kings life and his sons
( Ezra 6.10.) when he had seen diverse of his children die before him, as
Ctesias relates.

Verse 48. Except ye see signs, etc.] Our Savior first chides him, and upon
his well-bearing of that, accommodates him. He saw the Courtiers unbelief more
dangerous to his son, then the disease could be to his sons body.

Verse 49. Sir, come down.] He fumes not at reproof (as many great ones would
have done, Heb. 13.
Tange montes, and fumigabunt) but suffers the word of exhortation, being
subdued thereunto by affliction.

Verse 50. Thy son lives.] Is in very good health; for non est vivere,
Martiat.
sed valere vita: So, God is better to us, oft-times, then our prayers, then
our hopes.

Verse 51. Thy son lives.] So the son was restored by his fathers faith.
It is a benefit to be born of good parents. Personal goodness is profitable
to posterity.

Verse 52. Then enquired he, etc.] by a sweet providence, that God might be the
more glorified, and the man's faith confirmed. All things cooperate, etc. Romans
8.28. So, at the same time, wherein the States of Germany. (after long debate)
concluded for the truth of the Gospel. Luther came leaping out of his closet
where he had been praying (though many miles distant) with vicimus, vicimus in
his mouth. Act. and Mon. fol. 669.
So Muscle-borough field was wone by the English, the self-same day and hour,
wherein those Balaams-blocks (idolatrous images) were burnt at London, by order
of Parliament.

Verse 53. And himself believed,] With a justifying faith, introduced at first
by a common faith.

CHAP. V.
VERSE 1. A feast of the Jews.]
THis was the feast of Pentecost. Others say, the Passover which came but once
a year. The true Christians (for whom the true Passover was sacrificed, 1 Cor.
5.7.) keep a continual feast, or holy day, (...).
with the unleavened bread of sincerity and truth, ver. 8. Diogenes could say,
That a good man keeps holy-daie, and has gaudies all the year about, Exodus
5.1. (...). Laert.
Let my people go, that they may hold a feast unto me. In other messages it
is, that they may serve me.

Verse 2. Having five porches,] Built, belike, by some well-affected persons,
at the motion of Gods Ministers, for the use of such impotent folk, as here lay
looking and languishing at Hopes Hospital: K. Edward 6. his life (...) Sir I.
He ^^. p. 169 etc.
Like as King Edward the 6. was moved by a Sermon of Bishop Ridley, touching
works of charity, to grant his two Houses in London, (...) and the Savoy, for
such like good uses, together with lands and moneys, for their maintenance.

Verse 3. Of impotent folk.] that had tried all other ways, Isidor.
and could not otherwise be cured, Omnipotenti medico nullut ins^nabilis
occurrat (...).

Verse 4. For an Angel (...).] The (...) of this pool was granted to the Jews,
par^^^^ (...) the true worship of God under the persecution of (...) the fail
of prophecy a partly to retain them in their religion^ course of ^^crificing
to the true God, against the scoffs of the Romans. (that were now their Lords.)
Such a virtue being given to that water, wherein their Sacrifices were wont to
be washed. See a (...) sovereign bath then this, Zech. 13.1. an ever-flowing,
and overflowing fountain, not for one at once, as here, but for all that come,
they may wash and be clean, wash and be whole.

At a certain season,] Once a year only, says Tertullian. Others (more
probably) at all their great feasts, Semel quotannis. Tert.
when the people met out of all parts at Jerusalem, taking (...)
distributively, as Matthew. 27.15.

Troubled the water] Not in a visible shape, likely; but as it appeared, by a
visible troubling of the waters, and a miraculous healing of the diseased. But,
that troubled waters should do cures was the greater wonder: since holy-wels
(as they call them) and waters that heal, are commonly most calm and clear. It
was a witty allusion hereunto of him that said, Angels trouble the clear stream
of Justice at certain times.

Verse 5. Thirty and eight years.] A long while to be in misery: but what is
this to eternity of extremity? We need have some thing to mind us of God, to
bring us to Christ. King Alvered prayed God to send him always some sickness,
whereby his body might be tamed, and he the better disposed and affectioned to
Godward.

Verse 6. Lam. 3.
And knew that he had been, etc.] Christ's eye affected his heart, he could not
but sympathize, and succor this poor creeple, out of his mere Philanthropy,
which moves him still (...), to show mercy according to the measure of our
misery, whereof he bears a part, Heb. 5.2.

Verse 7. I have no man, etc.] He looked that Christ should have done him that
good office; and could not think of any other way of cure. How easy is it with
us to measure God by our ^^odell, to cast him into our mould, to think that he
must need^ go our way to work?

Verse 8. Rise, take up thy bed, etc.] A servile work upon the Sabbath Day.
This our Savior here commands, not as a servile work, but for confirmation of
the truth of a miracle, greatly tending to Gods glory: like as another time, he
bad them give meat to the Damsel he had raised, not for any necessity, but to
ensure the cure.

Verse 9. Dei dicere, est efficere.
Andimmediately the man.] Christ's words are operative (together with his
commands there goes forth a power, as Luke 5.17.) So they were in the Creation,
Genesis 1. So they are still in regeneration, Isa. 59.21.

Verse 10. It is the Sabbath, it is not lawful, etc.] Vere, sed non sincere.
It more troubled them that Christ had healed him, then that the Sabbath had
been broken by him. The poorer Swedes always break the Sabbath; saying that
its only for Gentlemen to keep that day.

Verse 11. He that made me whole, etc.] So, it seems, Christ had healed him, in
part, on the inside also: and given him a ready heart to obey, though it were
contra gentes, as they say.

Verse 12. What man is he.] Not that made thee whole, but that bad thee take up
thy bed, etc. They dissembled the former, and insisted only upon the later,
which shows the naughtiness of their hearts.

Verse 13. Had conveyed himself away.] Lest, by his present, that work should
be hindered. True goodness is public spirited, though to private
disadvantage; and works for most part unobserved, as the engine that does all
in great businesses, is often inward, hidden, not taken notice of.

Verse 14. Finds him in the Temple,] Praising God, likely, for his unexpected
recovery. So Hezekiah; the first work he did, when off his sickbed, Isa. 38.22.

Behold, thou art made whole, etc.] Hence is, 1. Magdeburgens. praef. ad cent.
5.
Commemoratio beneficij. 2. Commonitio off^eij. 3. Comminatio supplicij.
Ingentia beneficia, ingentia flagitia, ingentia supplicia.

Verse 15. Told the Jews] Of a good intent, surely, to honor Christ: however
it were taken by the spiteful Jews, Probi ex sua natura caeteros fingunt. The
Disciples could not imagine so ill of Judas, as it proved. Mary Magdalen
thought the Gardener (who ever he were) should have known as much, and loved
Jesus as well, as she did.

Verse 16. Therefore did the Jews persecute Jesus] This he foreknew would
follow, and yet he forbear not. In the discharge of our consciences (rightly
informed and regulated) we must not stand to cast perils: but do our duties
zealously, what ever come of it. This courage in Christians, Heathens counted
obstinacy, but they knew not the power of ^he Spirit, (...) the privy armor
of prooff that Saints have about their (...).

Verse 17. My Father works.] Yet (...) labor or lassitude, in conserving the
whole creature. This he does every day, and yet breaks not the Sabbath. Erge
nec ego.

Verse 18. The Jews sought the more] Persecution is (as Calvin wrote to the
French King) Evangelij genius, the bad genius, the devil that dogs the Gospel.
Ecclesia hearts crucis (says Luther.) Veritas odiurn parit. Ter.
Truth breeds hatred, says the Heathen, as the fair Nymphs did the
ill-favored Fauns and Satyrs.

Verse 19. The Son can do nothing, etc.] He denies not himself to be the
Son, though they quarreled him: but sweetly sets forth the doctrine of his
Deity, which they so much stomacked, and stumbled at.

Verse 20. For the Father loves the Son.] This notes that eternal power of
doing miracles, that is in Christ. As that which follows, He will show him
greater works, etc. is to be referred to the declaration of that his power.

That ye may wonder] Though ye believe not; for such was the hardness of their
hearts grown; as neither ministry, misery, miracle, nor mercy, could possibly
mollify: Behold, ye despisers, and wonder, and perish, Acts 13.41.

Verse 21. Raises up the dead] Bringing them from the jaws of death, to the
joys of eternal life: which none can do but God alone.

Verse 22. The Father judges no man] viz. The Father alone, but by the Son, to
whom all judicatory power is committed.

Verse 23. He that honors not the Son] As Jews and Turks do not. Nor
Papists, that (upon the matter) despoile him of his threefold office, and so
deny the Lord that bought them.

Verse 24. He that hears my Word] As death came into the world by the door of
the ear, so does life eternal, Isa. 55.3. God was in the still voice, and the
Oracle bad, Hear ye (...) Mat. 17.

Verse 25. The dead shall hear the voice] The (...) shall believe the promises,
and shall live the life of (...), and of glory in Heaven.

Verse 26. So has he given to the Son] What wonder then, if faith,
apprehending the infinite fountain of life, derive thence some rivelet of
(...). and apply the same to us, for spiritual quickening?

Verse 27. (...) id est (...), Beza.
Because he is the Son of man] Or, as he is the Son of man. By virtue of the
hyp^st ar^^^ll union, his manhood came as near to God as could be. He had the
best natural parts both of mind. Isa. 11.2, 3. and body, Psalm. 45.2. and the
best supernatural, whereby he found favor also with God, Luke 2.52. for he
had more near familiarity with the Godhead, then ever had any creature;
together, with a partner-agency with his Godhead, in the works of mediation, 1 Timothy 2.5. In the state of exaltation, the Manhood has 1. excess of glory. 2,
the grace of adoration; together, with the Godhead. 3. Judiciary power, as
here, and Act. 17.30.

Verse 28. Marvel not at this] And yet who can but marvel at this great
mystery of godliness, whereat Angels stand amazed? yea, whereat he himself
wonders; and therefore calls his own Name Wonderful, Isa. 9.6. It is truly
affirmed of Christ, Mirari decet, non rimari.
that he is created, and uncreated, without beginning, and yet began in time, a
Jew, according to the flesh, and yet God, blessed forever, etc. The manner
hereof is to be believed, not discussed, admired, not pried into, etc.

His voice] Put forth by the Ministry of mighty Angels, 1 These. 4.16.
and called by the Apostle (...); a metaphor from Watermen, (...) call upon
one another, and strike oars together, as it were with one consent.

Verse 29. They that have done good] In die judicii, plus valebit conscientia
pura, quam marsupia plena. Bern. Dan. 12.1, 2. Though other things be darkly
delivered; yet when the Jews were to lose land, and life, the Resurrection is
plainly described. So Heb. 11.35.

Unto the Resurrection of damnation] As Pharaohs Baker came forth to be hanged,
when the Butler was exalted. Good therefore is the counsel given us by the
heathen Orator, Ita vivamus, Cic. quar^a in Verrem.
ut rationem nobis reddendam arbitremur. The wicked shall come forth of their
graves like filthy Toads, against that terrible storm, Psalm. 9. the Elements
shall melt like scalding lead upon them, etc. (...). 3.

Verse. 30. (...) of mine own self do nothing] But by the power communicated
unto me, in that ere nall generation.

As I hear] So verse. 19 as I see, which Beza understands to be spoken in
respect of his humane nature, as it is hypostatically united to the Divine.

Verse 31. My ^^^^nesse is not true] That is, fir, firm, valid, foro humano.
Concessio Rhe^^^^^. (...).

Verse 32. There is another (...)] God the Father, by this miracle wrought upon
(...). Virtutis stragulam pudefacis, said Diogenes to Antipater; who being
vicious, wore a white. cloak.
Give we real testimony to our profession by our (...) ^^edire quam miracula
facer^ ^^id Lather. Profliga^^^ (...), do put Religion to an open shame.

Verse 34. That ye might be saved] That was that he fought (...) all his
oracles and miracles. ^^^lvation properly notes the privative part of our
happiness; because it is easier to tell from what we are saved, then to what.

Verse 35. Nazianz.
He was a burning, etc.] Burning in himself, and shining to others: or, as it
was said of Basil, thundering in his doctrine, Acts and Monuments. Fol. 1781.
and lightning in his life. And of Rogers and Bradford, that it was hard to
say, whether there were more force of eloquence and utterance in preaching, or
more holiness of life and conversation to be found in them.

For a season to rejoyce] But he soon grew stale to them; so that they made no
more reckoning of him, (...), to dance a galliard. It was a formal joy, or
jollity rather. Joh. Manl loc. com. 698.
then of a reed shaken with the wind, Matthew. 11.7. Principes favebant Luthero,
sed jam it erum videtis ingratitudinem mundi erga ministros, etc. said good
Melancthon, in the year of Grace, 1559.

Verse 36. The works which the Father has given me] Lo, Christ accounts his
work, a gift: So Joh. 17.4.

The works that I do, bear witnesse] Let our works likewise speak for us,
Matthew. 5.16. as they did for the Primitive Christians; of whom Athenagoras
(their Ambassador to the Emperor) boldly says; (...). Athan. Tert. ad
Scapulam.
No Christian is evil-mannered, unless it be such as dissemble themselves to
be Christians. And Justin Martyr confesses of himself; that beholding the
piety of Christians in life, and constancy in death; he gathered, that it was
the true Religion that they professed. Non aliunde noscibiles quam de
emendationt vitiorum, says Tertullian of the Christians of his time. And
Chrysostom speaks of some in his days, whose lives were Angelical, they so
walked up to their principles.

Verse 37. Has borne witness of me] By they (...) Heaven, and the descending
of the holy Ghost in the shape (...) a Dove, Matthew. 3. Isa. 42.19.
yet ye have neither heard his voice, nor seen his shape. Who so blind as he
that will not see?

Verse 38. And you have not his Word abiding in you] As an ingraffed words ye
have heard it, Jam. 1.21.
but with your bodily ears only, with those gristles that grow upon your heads:
ye have not drawn up the ears of your minds, to the ears of your bodies, that
one sound piercing both, ye might believe, ye have not mixed the word with faith
in your hearts, as in a ^^^^ell, etc.

Verse 39. Search the Scriptures] Audite saeculares, comparate vobis Bibli^,
animae pharmaca, says Chrysostom. But Bibles lie (like old Alman^cks)
moulding in corners, whiles play-books (the Devils Catechismes) are even worn
out with over-diligent perusal. It is a sad complaint which Reverend Moulin
makes of his Countrymen, the French Protestants, whiles they burned us, says
he, for reading the Scriptures, we burnt with zeal, to be reading of them. Now
with our liberty, is bred also negligence, Moulins Theophilus. page 278.
and disesteem of Gods Word. Is it not so also with us?

They are they which testify of me] The Babe of Bethlehem is bound up in these
swathing-bands. He is both Author and Matter of the Scriptures, and is
therefore called the Word. The dignity of the Scriptures (says one) and the
Majesty of Christ mutually look on one another; as the Sun does on the Stars,
and the Stars on the Sun. For as the excellency of the Sun appears by the glory
of the Stars, to whom it gives light: So the Majesty of Christ is manifest by
the Scriptures, to whom he gives credit. On the otherside, as the glory of the
Star is magnified, because it is the light of the Sun: so the credit of the
Scripture is exalted, because they concern the Son of God.

Verse 40. Ye will not come to me] Though clearly convinced by the Scriptures.
See their obstinacy and malice. Amos compares such untameable, untractable,
masterlesse monsters, to horses running upon a rock, where first they break
their hoofs, Amos 6.12.
and then their necks.

Verse 41. I receive not honor from men] q. d. I need you not, though I
complain you come not to me. It is for your sakes that I seek to you, Christ
could be happy, though all men should miscarry: as the Sun would shine, though
all the world were blind. He seeks not ours, but us.

Verse 42. Ye have not the love of God] Though ye pretend zeal for his glory,
to your opposing of me, yet there is aliud in titulo, aliud in pixide.
Hypocrites are like Egyptian Temples, beautiful without, but within, some Cat
or such like thing to be worshipped.

Verse 43. Him will ye receive] As they did Barchochab; and that Pseudo-Moses
(the Devil he was) that cozened so many of them in Creet, An. dom. 434.
persuading them to cast themselves after him into the sea, which should part,
Funco. Chron.
and make them way into their own Country again, whereby many of them perished.

Verse 44. Which receive honor one of another] Faith empties a man of himself,
purges upon ambit on, and is an act of the will; else the seeking of praise
with men, could be no impediment to the act of believing. Surely, as Pharaoh
said of the Israelites, they are entangled in the Land, the wilderness has
shut them in: so may we say of many, They are entangled in the creature, the
world has shut them in, they cannot come to Christ. They are shut up in the
cave of the world, Josh. 10.18.
as those five Kings in a cave, Josh. 10. have hardness of heart, as a great
stone, rolled to the mouth, and honors, riches, and pleasures, as so many
keepers, etc.

Verse 45. Do not think that I] That is, that I only.

Even Moses] So your faithful Ministers (whom men pretend to love and
reverence, but obey not their doctrine) these shall judge you.

Verse 46. For he wrote of me] Both clearly and mystically, in the many
sacrifices and ceremonies of the Law. (...) Sermon. ^. de prin^.
Whence Theodoret calls Moses, the main Ocean of Divinity, out of whom all
the Prophets and Apostles have watered their several gardens. And Pareus
closes up his Commentary upon Genesis, with these words, Quicquid Scripturarum
sacrarum dehinc sequitur, hujus est Commentarius.

Verse 47. But if ye believe not his writings] He that will not take Gods word
in one place, will take it in no place.

CHAP. VI.
Verse 9. Five Barley loaves, and two small Fishes.]
Was not Tyrabosco hardly driven; when, from these five loaves, and two
fifhes, he concluded seven Sacraments? So in the second C uncell of Nice under
Irene, Via tu^a by Sir Hump. Linde. p 164. Heyl. Geo. p. 533.
John (one of the Legates of the Eastern-Churches) proved the making of Images
lawful, because God had said, Let us make man after our own Image. A sound
argument to overthrow one of Gods Commandments, and yet it prevailed.

Verse 11. He distributed to the Disciples] These fiveloaves, (by a strange
kind of Arithmetic) were multiplied by division and augmented by
substraction. The Macedonians found, that not getting, but giving, is the way
to thrive, 2 Cor. 9.8. Ex fame quaestum captabat Josephus; and benignitate sua
emit Aegyptum nos etiam coelum. So in spiritual alins and good offices: Gods
gifts grow in the hands of them that employ them, to feed many. Salienti
aquarum fonti undas si tollas, nec exhauritur, nec extenuatur, sed dulcescit.
D. Bedding^.
Scientia, docendi officio, dulcedinem sentiat, non minutias.

Verse 14. This is of a truth, that Prophet] Yet anon they are at it, what sign
show thou? Verse 30:
that you may know them to be the Pharisees disciples. Of whose sour leaven
also, that in the next verse savours; where they would needs take him by force,
to make him a King. They could not imagine a Messiah, that had not an earthly
Kingdom.

Verse 15. Take him by force] Superstition will needs obtrude upon Christ
will worship, whether he will or no, and despite him with seeming honors, as
the Lycaonians would needs have stolen a sacrifice upon Paul and Barnabas; and
the Salvages of Nova Albion, upon Sir Francis Drake, and his company, at their
parting with them. They had set it on fire ere we were aware, faith he; we
labored by all means to withold, or withdraw them, but could not prevail;
till at length we fell to prayers, and singing of Psalms, The world encompasled
by Sir Francis Drake, p. 81.
whereby they were allured immediately to forget their folly, and leave their
sacrifice unconsumed, suffering the fire to go out; and, imitating us in all
their actions, they fell a lifting up their hands and eyes to heaven, as they
saw us to do.

Verse 16. His Disciples went down to sea] By Christ's own command, Matthew.
14.22. Mark. 6.45. yet they met with a sore storm. So may the best with
trouble, in their most lawful employments, Psalm. 34.18. But these make them
look to their tackling, patience; to their anchor, hope; to their helm, faith;
to their card, the Word; to their Captain, Christ, who is ever at hand.

Verse 17. Jesus was not come to them] This was worse to them then the storm.
It was woeful with Saul, 1 Samuel 28.15.
when the Philistims were upon him, and God would not come at him, nor answer
him. So when danger or death is upon a man, and God is far from him. That doom,
Jere. 16.13. I will not show you favor, was worse then their captivity.

Verse 21. Immediately the ship was at land] A dying Saint has no sooner taken
death into his bosom, but he is immediately landed at the key of Canaan, at
the Kingdom of heaven. Aug de civ. Dei lib 9. ^. 16.
Fugiendum est ad clarissimam patriam: ibi pater, ibi omnia, said Plotinus the
Platonist.

Verse 26. Because ye did eat of the loaves] More then for love, Vix diligitur
Jesus propter Jesum, Aug. But as the mixed multitude came out of Egypt with
Israel for a better fortune, and as he Math. 20. As the harlot looks to the
love tokens more then to the Donour: so was it here.

Verse 27. Labor not for the meat, etc.] When Basil was tempted with money and
preferment, he answers, Pecuniam da quae permaneat, ac continuo duret, gloriam
quae semper floreat. The fashion of this world passes away, as the water of a
River that runs by a City, or as a fair picture drawn upon the ice, that melts
away with it. Men come to the worlds felicities, as to a Lottery, with heads
full of hopes, but return with hearts full of blanks.

Labor for the meat that endureth] We may not dream of a delicacy in Gods
ways, or think that good things will drop out of the clonds to us, Plut in
Sylla. Revs. Symb A (...) Luke 13.14.
as Towns were said to come into Timotheus his toyls, whiles he slept. We must
be at pains for Heaven. Laborandum was one of the Emperors motto, and may be
every Christians. Strive they must even to an agony, ere they can get into the
strait gate: together with our stooping, there must be a certain stripping of
our selves.

Verse 29. This is the work of God] The (...). It is an easy matter to believe
(thinks the worldling) but he that goes about it, shall find it as hard a work
to believe the Gospel, Rogers of Futh.
as to keep the Law. For God must enable to both. Non minns difficile est nobis
velle credere (says Beza) quam cadaveri volare. Bez. consess. page 22.
We believe with much conflict, says another. The combat was not so great
betwixt Michael and Satan, about Moses dead body, as between Satan and the
beleeyer, Dine of the deceit^ heart.
concerning Christ's living body. Faith is fain to tug wrestle for it, till it
sweat again.

Verse 49. Did eat Manna] They fed upon Sacraments, and yet many of them
perished eternally. A man may go to hell with Font-water on his face, and be
haled from the table to the tormentour, as he Matthew. 22.13.

Verse 50. This is the Bread] (...), pointing to himself. So David, This poor
man (meaning himself) cried, and the Lord heard him, etc. Psalm. 34.6. So Hic
sat lucis, said Oecolampadius on his death bed, laying his hand on his breast.

Verse 51. If any man eat, etc.] Hic edere est credere, says Augustine: Faith
being the souls hand, mouth, stomach, etc. The Fathers commonly expounded this
part of our Saviors Sermon, as spoken of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper;
and so fell into that error, that none but Communicants could be saved:
Wherefore also they gave the Sacrament to Infants, and put it into the mouths
of dead men, etc. We are not to think that either our Savior spoke ^^re
properly, and eex professo, of the Sacramental eating of his flesh, and
drinking of his blood; or that this discourse pertains nothing at all
thereunto. The Papists have expunged a great part of Origens Commentary upon
this Chapter, as directly making against their monster of Transubstantiation.
Act. and Mon. fol. 772.
And Cardinal Campeius affirmed against Luther, that faith is not necessary to
him that receives the Sacrament. As for Bellarmine, although we believe, Bell.
lib. 3. cap. a. de Eccles. milit.
says he, that all virtues are found in the Church, yet that any man may be
absolutely said to be a member of the true Church, we do not think that any
inward virtue is required, but only an external profession of the faith, and
such communion of the Sacraments, as is received by the outward man. This mark
very well agrees to the Church of Rome, wherein if any be truly virtuous, it is
by mere accident; as Cicero wittily said of the Epicures, Si quando viri boni
sint, vinci bonitate naturae.
that if any one of them were good, he was merely overcome by the goodness of
his nature; for they taught a licencious looseness.

Verse 53. Except ye eat the flesh, etc.] Fulbert Bishop of Charters (who lived
in the eleventh century) speaking upon the Eucharist, has these words; Except
ye eat the flesh of the Son of man, etc. Facinus vel flagitium videtur jubere.
Fol. 168.
Figura ergo est, praecipiens passioni Domini esfe communicandum tantum, and
suaviter and utiliten recondendum in memoria, quod pro nobis caro ejus
crucifixa and vulnerataest. Now in the year of Christ 1608. there was set out
an edition of him in Paris, where we have interserted, after Figura exgo est,
these words, Dicit Hareticus; to make what Fulbert spoke assertive, from
Augustine, to speak recitative of the Heretic, as if the heretic should say,
This is a figure, etc. which if admitted, then there is no Transubstantiation.
De doct Christ. lib. a. cap. 16.
The words produced by Fulbert, are indeed S. Augustines. And the publisher of
Eulbert being told hereof, that the words were Augustines, that he had branded
with herefie, he put afterward his Dicit Haereticus amongst his Errata, as ye
may read in Bishop Vshers answer to the Jesuits challenge, page 15.

Verse 60. This is an hard saying] The hardness was in themselves, not in the
word; but that must bear the blame howsoever: as she in Seneca that was
stricken with sudden blindness, and then cried out of the light. An hypocrite
is not discovered, till upon some critical point. If it come to a matter of
cost, he cries, What needs this waste? if of pains, This is an hard saying.

Verse 63. It is the Spirit that quickneth] Had those carnal Capernaites but
stayed out our Saviors Sermon, they might have bin satisfied for the sense of
his words, that they so stumbled at, and had not patience to hear him here
expounding himself. Quoniam Christiani (Pontificii) manducant Deum, quem
adorant, sit anima mea cum Philosophis, said Averroes; who, had he consulted
with Divines, might have known more.

Verse 69. We believe and have known] In matters of Divinity, we must first
believe, and then know, not know, and then believe. In humane Sciences it is
otherwise: Men are brought to assent and believe by experience, knowledge, and
sense; as to believe that fire is hot, etc. But here, believe, and assent, go
before experiment all knowledge, sense, and use.

CHAP. VII.
Verse 2. The Feast of Tabernacles]
THe Jews at this feast dwelt without doors, in boothes and bowers, in
remembrance of their wandering of old through the wi^dernesse. This gave occasion
to Plutarch, and other profane Heathens, to devise and broach so many base
lies of the Jews, as if they were worshippers of Bacchus. Florus calls the
Temple of Jerusalcm, Plut. (...). cap. 5.
impiae gentis arcanum. Another tells us, that the Jews were forced to rest
every seventh day, for an evil disease they had cleaving unto them.

Verse 5. For neither did his brethren beleeve] This the Jews at this day read
with much wonderment; and take occasion from this Text, Blunts voyage into Lev.
115.
to slander our Saviors miracles, as nothing so manifest as we conceive them,
since his own kindred believed not in him.

Verse 11. Where is he?] Not, where is Jesus? they could not find in their
hearts to call him by his name, they were so full of malice against him. So
Joseph's brethren called him not Joseph, but the Dreamer: Saul asked not for
David, but the Son of Iesse. Act. and Mon. fol. 810.
After Stephen Brune the Martyr was put to death, his adversaries commanded it
to be cried, That none should make any more mention of him, under pain of
heresic. And ubicunque invenitur nomen Calvini, Luk 6.22.
delcatur, says the Index expargatorius. But what says our Savior, Blessed
are ye, when men shall hate you, Tacit. Annal.
and cast out your name as evil, for the Son of man's sake. The wise Historian
observed, that the Statues of Brutus and Cassius, eo praefulgebant, quodnon
visebantur. And Cato said, he had rather men should question why he had no
Statue or Monument erected to him, then why he had?

Verse 13. For fear of the Jews] Who had made an order (it seems) somewhat like
that of the Jesuits edict at Dola in the Country of Burgundy, that for
prevention of heresy, no man should speak of God, either in good sort, or bad.
This the Jews did, 1. Heylin Geo. page 125.
To save themselves a labor of confuting our Saviors doctrine. 2. To persuade
the people that it was such horrible blasphemy, as was not fit to be named. So
the Papists debar the people all sound of the Religion, in prohibiting the
books of the rformed Writers, and hiding their own Treatises, wherein the Tenet
of the Protestants is recited, only to be confuted: Heyl. Geog. page 189.
so that you shall seldom in all Italy meet with Bellarmines works, or any of
the like nature to be sold.

Verse 20. Thou have a devil] This he passes by as a frontlesse slander, not
worth refuting: but proceeds to maintain the lawfulness of that he had done on
the Sabbath Day. Sincerity throws off slanders, as Paul did the Viper; yea, in
an holy scorn, it laughs at them, as the wild ass does at the horse, and his
rider. Wicelius and Cochleus say, that we betrayed the Rhodes (says
Melancthon) and some other such foul businesses they lay to our charge. Dicant
ipsi talia quoad velint.
These are such gross lies, that we need not disprove them: let them tell as
many such lies of us as they will, etc. our names are oyled, they will not
stick.

Verse 22. Ye on the Sabbath Day circumcise] q. d. If you may wound a man on
the Sabbath Day, may not I heal one? If you may heal on the Sabbath one member
of the circumcised, may not I make a man whole every whit? If you may be at
pains to cure such a one with your hand; may not I without pains cure a man
with my word only? What if circumcision be a Sacrament? Arbitror nonnal os
opinaturos me sensisse quod non sensi, a ^t non sensisse quod sensi, Aug. de
Trin, lib. 1. cap. 3.
so was this that I have done, a special means of bringing much glory to God.

Verse 24. Indge not according to the appearance] Nothing is more ordinary with
many, then to precipitate a censure, to exercise their critics, and to
reprehend that which they do not comprehend. I suppose, says Augustine, that
diverse in reading some places in my books, will think that I thought, Annal
tom. 6. ad An. 450. n. 17.
that which never came into my mind to think, and the contrary. This was his
fear, and this befell him, as Baronius witnesses. Erasm. epist. ad Cardinal.
Moguntin.
Compertum est, says Erasmus; It is well known, that many points are condemned
as heretical in Luthers books; which in Austins and Bernards books are read,
and received for good and orthodox. Hill in his quartem of reasons, says, The
Catholics follow the Bible, but the Protestants force the Bible to follow
them. Reas. 8. page 41.
And the Author of the Gagge for the new Gospel assures his Catholics, that
our condemnation is so expressly set down in our own Bibles, Pref. to the
Cathol. Reader.
and is so clear to all the world, that nothing more needs hereto, then that
they know to read, and to have their eyes in their heads, at the opening of our
Bible. Qui totam li. em D^^^nicam vacat ten ulentiae, scor. it is and alcae. an
dit bellus ho. mo etc. Erns. Schol. in Epist. ad Episc. Basil. de delectu
ciborum. Isal. 119.
This is their judgment of us. But what among themselves? He that tastes an
egg, says Erasmus, at an undue time, is cast in prison, and made to answer
for his heresy: but he that spends all the Lord's Day in drinking, drabbing,
dicing, is called a good fellow, and passes unpunished.

Verse 27. No man knows whence he is] This error might arise out of some
Texts of Scripture misunderstood, as Isa. 53.8. Psalm. 110.4. We should whenever
we open the Bible, pray, Lord, open mine eyes, that I may see the wondrous
things of thy Law.

Verse 28. Ye both know me] Either this is an Ironie, or else a heavy
aggravation of their sin; a proof that they sinned that sin unto death, 1 Ioh.
5.16. for which there remains no more sacrifice, Heb. 10.26. Two sorts of men
in our times are in danger of this sin. 1. Hypocritical professors. 2. Those
they call the Wits of the world, your most knowing men.

Verse 33. Yet a little while am I with you] Christ is but a while with men in
the opportunities of grace. There is a prime of man's life, yea, a prime of
every man's ministry. Christ stands (not sits at the door) and knocks. Now
while one is standing, he is going.

Verse 34. Ye shall seek me, etc.] Because ye shall dye in your sins, which is
worse then to dye in a ditch.

Verse 35. Teach the Gentiles] Which the Jews could not endure to think on.
They profess at this day, that rather then the Heathen-bastards should have
benefit by their Messiah, they would crucify him over and over, Goi Mamzer.
Luke 4.25. The rusticks of Nazareth understood our Savior of preaching to the
Gentiles, which put them into an anger, and him into a danger.

Verse 36. What manner of saying is this?] He would not tell the Jews what he
meant by this dark saying. His Disciples he told afterward, Psalm. 25.
chap. 13. and 16. The secret of the Lord is with them that fear him: when the
wicked shall be neither of his Court, nor Council.

Verse 37, 38. In the last day] In this eighth day (which the Jews called
Hosanna Rabbah) they read the last section of the Law, Tremel. ex Talmud.
and likewise began the first; lest they might otherwise seem more joyful in
ending their sections, then willing to begin them. Upon this day also, by the
institution (say they) of Haggai and Zechary, (but more likely, by their own
superstition) they did, with great solemnity and joy, Godw. Antiq. Heb.
bring great store of water from the River Shiloah to the Temple; where it
being delivered unto the Priests, it was poured upon the Altar, together with
wine; and all the people sang that of the Prophet Isa. 12.3. with joy shall ye
draw water out of the Wels of salvation. Hereunto our Savior is thought to
allude, Verse. 38. Out of his belly shall flow Rivers of water; provided, that
he believe in me, so as the Scripture says, he should. For so (after
Chrysostom) Heinsius De-dieu, and others expound it.

Verse 41. Shall Christ come out of Galilee?] Satan, (that subtle Sophister)
though he confessed Christ to be the Holy One of God, Mark. 1.24. Yet he
calls him Jesus of Nazareth, to nourish the error of the multitude, that
thought he was born there, and so not the Messiah. Neither did his cunning
deceive him, as here appears. Satan etsi semel videatur verax, millies est
mendax, Bucholcerus.
and semper fallax, says one. Diabolus capite blanditur, ventre oblectat,
Rupertus.
and cauda ligat, says another.

Verse 46. Never man spoke like this man] It is good to come to the Word,
though with ill intent; they that come to see fashions only, as Moses came to
the Bush, may be called as he was. They that come but to sleep, may be taken
napping, as Father Latimer says. They that come to catch, may be caught, as
these in the Text. The serpent that comes forth to sting, may be charmed ere he
go back. When Henry Zutphen was preacher at Breme, the holy Catholics could
not be idle, but sent their Chaplains to every Sermon, to trap him in his
words. But God (whose foot-pathes are in the midst of the flood) would have his
mavelous power to be seen in them, for he converted many of them: insomuch,
that the greater part of them that were sent to hearken, did openly witness
his doctrine to be Gods truth, against which no man could contend; Act. and
Mon. sol. 8^0.
and such as in all their life before they had not heard: persuading them
likewise, that they forsaking all impiety, should follow the Word of God, and
believe the same, if they would be saved. But the chief Priests, Canons, and
Monks were so indurate and hardened, with Pharaoh, that they became the worse
for these admonitions.

Verse 48. Have any of the Rulers, etc.] Argumentum stultum, says Theophylact.
Sapientes sapienter in infernum descendunt, says one. And Potentes potenter
torquebuntur, says another. None so deep in hell, as knowing men; they are too
wise to be saved by the foolishness of Preaching. But Paul the babbler must be
heard, ere Heaven can be had.

Verse 49. But this people, etc.] He howled and wept (said D. Story concerning
Philpot) in the Convocation-house, Act. and Mon. sol. 1631.
and made such ado, as never man did, even as all the heretics do when they
lack learning to answer. When as yet M. Philpot disputing in the
Convocation-house against the Sacrament of the Altar, made this offer: If I
shall not be able to maintain by Gods Word that I have said, and confound any
six of you, let me be burned with as many fagots as be in London, said. 1285.
before the Court-gate; and this he uttered with great vehemence of spirit,
which the cankerd Doctor happily called howling and weeping.

Verse 50. Nicodemus says unto them] Good blood will not belie it self: (...).
Herodot.
love, as fire, will not long be hid. Croesus his dumb son could not but speak,
to see his father ready to be slain. Nicodemus, though hitherto a night-bird,
now shows himself for Christ in a Council. How far had Judas outstripped
Nicodemus, till it came to the upshot? Nicodemus was only a night-professour,
Judas in the sight of all. Nicodemus a slow-schollar, Judas a forward Preacher.
Yet at last, when Judas betrayed Christ in the night; Nicodemus faithfully
professed him in the day, etc.

Verse 52. Art thou also of Galilee] They thought to mock him out of his
Religion, as the Devil does many at this day. But Nicodemus was well resolved:
and if we can bear reproach for Christ, its an argument we mean to stick to
him; as the servant in the Law, that was brought to be bored in the ear. And
Cujetan gives the reason, Vt si non horreret servitutem, horreret saltem
ignominiam publicam, ut multos habeat inspectores and testes.

Verse 53. And every man went, etc.] Nicodemus, with one word seasonably put
in, dissolves the Council, and keeps them, for this time, from attempting
against Christ. See what one man may do against a mischievous multitude
otherwhiles; (...)
Ille regit dictis animos, and pector a mulcet. What a stickler was Nehamiah at
Jerusalem, Paphnutius at the Nicene Council, Wicliffe, Hus, Luther, in their
generations? Its good to be doing, though there be few or none to second us:
and though we be asked, as that good Bishop Liberius was by the Arian Emperor
Constantius, Theodoret. lib. 2. cap. 16.
Quota pars es tu orbis terrarum? It is said of Luther, quod unus homo solus
totius orbis impetum sustinuerit.

CHAP. VIII.
Verse 1. Jesus Went unto the Mount of Olives.]
HIs usually Oratory. There he prayed by night; and then early in the morning
he came again into the Temple to preach. Thus he divided his time betwixt
praying and preaching. So did the Ministers of the old Testament, Deuteronomy. 33, 10.
and of the New, Acts 6.2. So must all that will do good of it; 1 Cor. 3.6.
since Paul may plant, Apollos water, but God only gives increase.

Verse 3. And the Scribe etc.] Deest haec historia apud quamplurimos
interpretes. Beza.

Verse 4. In the very act] Gr. In the very theft: (...). Capell. of Tempt.
perhaps to intimate the great theft that is in adultery; whiles the child of
a stranger carries away the goods or lands of the Family: which therefore the
adulteress is bound in conscience to confess. Defraud. i. e. in re Venerea,
in adulterio. Sic intelligunt. Hieron. Chrysostom. Heinsous.
Saint Paul gives charge, that no man go beyond, and defraud his brother in the
matter: that is, in the matter of the marriage bed; but that every one possess
his vessel, that is, his wife, the weaker vessel, in sanctification and
honor, as some interpret it.

Verse 5. Such should be stoned.] Adultery was to be punished with death.
Society and the purity of posterity could not otherwise continue amongst men:
Huet of Conse. page 5^.
which is well observed by Divines to be the reason, why Adultery is named,
under it all uncleanness being forbidden; when yet other violations are more
heinous, as Sodomy, and bestiality: Nevertheless, other sins do not so
directly fight against society, which the Law mainly respects.

Verse 9. Convicted by their own conscience] Which is Gods spy, and man's
over-seer; index, judex, vindex: (...).
so that sinners are self-condemned, and often betrayed by their own blushing,
and heart-beating, when yet the offense is secret. Yea, a man feels an inward
shame in his own heart, disgracing, and abusing him, though he make no outward
show of it. For albeit an innocent person, upon the fullness of an aspersion,
may conceive shame, as did David, Psalm. 44.15. Yet it is usually the effect of
an ill conscience.

Verse 11. Neither do I condemn thee] Hence an Anabaptist will argue, that
adultery is not to be punished (as they did from that Text, An^^aptistae
sa^pserunt adulteria noa esse pua^enda per h^^tnes, etc. Joh. M^nl. loc. con. p
487, Jul. Seal De Subt^^^at.
Whoremongers and adulterers God will judge, therefore men ought not to meddle
with them.) But they may as well say, that inheritances are not to be divided
between brethren, because our Savior refused to divide them, Luke 12.14. it
being without the lists of his calling; no proper employment of his.

Verse 12. I am the light of the world] (...), ut Plato loquitur, quia (...),
ut Scaliger.

The light of life] Light in good and bad men differs as the light of the Sun
(wherein is the influence of an enlivening power) and the light of torches.

Verse 15. I judge no man] viz. After the flesh, as ye do. Christians are
Antipodes to the world; yea, they have their feet there, where other men's heads
are; Prove. 15.24.
they go not only another, but an upper way to work. Like Eagles, they delight
in flying.

Verse 18. I am one that bear witness, etc.] Christ is Alius from his Father,
not Aliud. Another person, not another thing. As in the person of Christ, there
is aliud, and aliud (against Eutyches) not Alius and Alius: (against
Nestorius.) In this Text, the Divinity of Christ is plainly distinguished from
his humanity: how else should He and the Father be two witnesses to himself?

Verse 19. If ye had known me, etc.] For milk is not so like milk, as Christ is
like his Father.

Verse 21. Ye shall dye is your sins] A heavy doom, the very door to
damnation. It is a sad thing to dye in prison, to dye in a ditch, but far worse
to dye in your sins. This is to be slain with death, according to that Revel.
2.21. I will kill her children with death. All men dye, but wicked men only are
killed with death. As a godly man said, that he did aegrotare vitaliter: so do
all the righteous, mori vitaliter, because they have hope in their death; which
to them is as the valley of Achor, a door of hope, to give entrance into
Paradise. Whereas to the wicked, it is as a trap-door to let them into hell: so
that it is a just wonder, that foreseeing their danger, they go not roaring and
raving out of the world. Nothing should be done (we say) to trouble a dying
person, no shreiking or crying out. Oh take heed, and prevent the shreikings of
conscience at that hour, etc. Take heed ye dye not in your sin, in that your
sin of unbeleefe. (...)
In hoc peccato (as Beza here rendereth it;) for unbeleef shuts a man up close
prisoner in the Laws dark dungeon till death come with a Writ of Habeas corpus,
and hell, with a Writ of Habeas animam, etc.

Verse 23. Ye are from beneath] Vos infernales estis, Ego Supernas, Rev. 12.12.
Gal. 4 26.
Beza. So the wicked are called the inhabitants of the earth, and of the sea,
in opposition to the Church, which is said to be in heaven, and called
Jerusalem which is above.

Verse 24. For if ye believe not etc.] And yet Venator the Arminian says, Nego
hanc propositionem, Nemo potest salvus fieri, qui Christo per veram fidem non
est insitus. Is not this to contradict Christ to his face? what an os durum is
this?

Verse 25. Even the same that I said, etc.] To wit, The way, the truth, and the
life. Some render it thus; Prorsus id quod loquor vobiscum, I am the very same
Word that I speak with you.

Verse 28. When ye have lift up the Son, etc.] 1. Upon the Cross, as the
brazen Serpent was upon a pole. And 2. by the cross to the Crown, though they
intended no such thing. If there be any way to Heaven on horseback (said that
Martyr) it is by the Cross. Brads^rd.


Verse 31. If ye continue in my Word] Non quaeruntur in Christianis initia, sed
finis, says Hierome. (...). Ba^^l.
And that which is but almost done, is not done says Basil. It is the evening
that crowns the day, and the last act that commends the whole scene.
Temporaries flashings, are but like Conduits running with wine at the
Coronation, that will not hold: or like a Land-flood, (...) seems to be a great
sea, but comes to nothing.

Verse 32. The truth shall make you free] From the tyranny of sin, and terror
of hell. Paul's freedom saved him from whipping; Acts 22.29.
this, from perishing.

Verse 33. Were never in bondage] When yet they were scarce ever out of bondage
to one enemy or another. At this time they were vassals to the Romans. But
brag's a good dog. Pride will bud. Ezekiel. 7.10. Spaniards are said to be
impudent braggers, Heyl. Geog. pog 30. Al^led Chronol. 43^. Servit^ gravessima
est, sibi. ipsi servire. S n. Victrix Gent um, captiva vitiorum. Aug.
and extremely proud, in the lowest ebb of for tune. There is not a more
vainglorious people this day under Heaven, then the Jews, (says Alsted.)
Antiquum obtinent, they are no changelings, they sill up the measure of their
fathers sins.

Verse 34. Is the servant of sin.] Has as many Lords as lusts: That as
Argustine said of Rome, in her pride: She conquered countries, but was
vanquished of vices: And as the Persian Kings commanded the whole world, but
were commanded by their wives and concubines; Captivarum suarum captivi.
^lut^ich.
so is it with sins slaves. This slavery they may easily shake off, says
Seneca: wherein the wise man was utterly out, heavenly-wide, as Sr Philip
Sidney englisheth, Toto errat cael^.

Verse 40. A man that has told you the truth.] Yea, but you tell them not
toothlesse truth, Hist. lib. 1. cap. 1.
but such as breeds hatred. He that prizeth (preaches) truth, shall never
prosper by the possession or profession thereof, says Sr Walter Rawleigh. And,
Truth is a good mistrisse, says another; but he that follows her too close
at heels, may hap have his teeth struck out. The hearing of truth galls; as
they write of some creatures, that they have fell in qure. Praedicare, nihil
aliud est, quam derivare inse furorem mundi, said Luther, who had the
experience of it.

Verse 41. We have one Father, even God.] Yet God is not in their heads, Psalm.
10 4. nor hearts, Psalm. 14.1. nor words, Psalm, 12.4. nor ways, Tit. 1.16. In
such a posture of distance, nay defiance, stand wicked men. And yet none so
forward to call God Father, Jer. 3.4, 5.

Verse 43 Why do ye not understand my speech?] Any more then if I spoke to you
in a strange language. So, many of our hearers.

Verse 44. Ye are of your father the Devil.] Who has set his limbs in you: so
that ye are as like him, as if spit out of his mouth. Satan is called the God
of this world; because as God at first did but speak the (...), and it was
done: so if the devil do but hold up his finger, give the least hint, they obey
him.

The lusts of your father ye will do.] If the fruits of the flesh (sard that
Martyr) grow out of the trees of your hearts, Bradford. Sermon. of Rep. p. 70.
surely, surely, the devil is at Inn with you: You are his birds, whom when he
has well fed, he will broach you and eat you, chaw you and champ you, world
without end, in eternal woe and misery, etc.

And abode not in the truth. Bu^^olc.
] Si satan in conspectu Dei tantas res ausus est, quid apud nos non audebit?

When he speaks a lie, he speaks of his own.] And so when we do evil, we
work de nostro, and secundum hominem, 1 Cor. 3.3. It is as impossible for us
naturally to do good, as for a road to spet cordials.

For he is a liar, and the father of it.] The devil did only equivocate to our
first parents, and yet is here called a liar, and 2 Cor. 11.3. a cozener. A lie
has been always held hateful: but equivocation is now set forth, of a later
impression. The Jesuits have called back this pest from hell, alate, for the
comfort of afflicted Catholics, as Archpriest Blackwell, and Provincial
Garnet shamed not to profess. Est autem satanae pectus semper faecundissimum
mendacijs, says Luther. He began his kingdom by a lie, and by lies he upholds
it, as were easy to instance. See my Notes on Genesis, chap. 3. ver. 5.

Verse 48. That thou art a Samaritan.] And why a Samaritun, trow, but that they
thought the worst word in their bellies good enough for him? Malice cares not
what it faith, so it may kill or gall: and these dead dogs (as he calls
Shimci) will be barking. 2 Samuel 16.9.
The Primitive Persecutours used to put Christians into bears and dogs skins,
or other ugly creatures, and then bait them: so does the wicked put the Saints
into ugly conceits, and then speak against them.

Verse 54. It is my father that honors me.] 1 Samuel 2.30.
According to that, Them that honor me, I will honor: this is a bargain of
Gods own making. Fame follows virtue, as the shadow, the body: or if not, yet
she is proprio contenta theatro, content with her own applause.

Verse 55. Yet ye have not known him.] There is a two fold knowledge of God: 1.
Apprehensive. 2. Affective, or cognoscitiva, standing in speculation, and
directiva vitae.

Verse 59. Then took they up stones.] This is merces mundi, the worlds wages.
Let Us look up, with Stephen, and see Heaven, as he did, through a shower of
stones, etc.

CHAP. IX.
Verse 1. He saw a man which was blind.]
THis was enough to move Christ to mercy, the sight of a fit object. When God
sets us up an Altar, be we ready with our sacrifice.

Verse 2. Who did sin, this man?] Imbuti era ^r Iu^ai dogmate (...). Beza.
How could he sin before he was borne? But the Disciples dreamed of a
Pythagoricall transanimation; hence this foolish question.

Verse 3. But that the works of God etc.] Hinc Alexander Ales, Paena, inquit,
duplicem habet ordinationem, Vnam ad culpam, quae praecedit; alteram ad
gloriam, quam praecedit. God sometimes afflicts for his own glory, but sin is
never at the bottom. And though God does not always afflict his for sin, as
Job: Job. 11.6.
yet Job shall do well to consider, that God exacteth of him less then his
iniquity deserves, as Zophar tells him.

Verse 4. Whiles it is day.] As other men do, Psalm. 104.22. None can say he
shall have twelve hours to his day: And night (death) is a time of receiving
wages, not of doing work. On this moment depends eternity: on the weakest wier
hangs the greatest weight.

Verse 6. Made clay.] As he did at first in making Man, (the Poets tell us some
such thing of their Prometheus) to show that this cure was done by that
Almighty power, that he put forth in the Creation.

Verse 7. He went his way and washed.] He obeyed Christ blindling. He looked
not upon Siloam with Syrian eyes, as Naaman did upon Jordan: but, passing by
the unlikelihood of a cure by such a means, he believes, and does as he was
bidden, without sciscitation.

Verse 16. This man is not of God.] True, if he had indeed made no conscience
of keeping the sabbath. Sanctifying the Lords day in the primitive times was a
badge of Christianity. When the question was propounded, Christianu^
su^^intermittere non possum
Servasti Dominicum? Have thou kept the Sabbath? the answer was returned, I am
a Christian, and may not do otherwise. The enemies and hinderers of sanctifying
the Sabbath, are called unbeleevers, vagabonds and wicked fellows, Acts 17.2,
5. B. White. Act and Mon. Sometipsum detestatus est, quod Regi poitus quam Deo
studuisset placere. S^uitet. Sueton Dio in Ve^pas.
That late great Antisabbatarian Prelate, so much cast off by the rest, after
he had served their turns, might well have cried out with Cardinal Wolsey,
Surely, if I had been as careful to serve God as I was to please men, I had
not been at this pass.

How can a man that is a sinner.] Yes that he may, by divine permission, or at
least he may do something like a miracle; as the false prophets, and
Antichrist. Suetonius tells us, that Vespasian cured a blind man by spetting
upon his eyes. And Dio testifies that he healed another, that had a weak and
withered hand, by treading upon it. And yet Vospasian lived and died a Pagan.
This therefore was no convincing argument, that the Jews here used.

Verse 17. He is a Prophet.] The more the Pharisees opposed the truth, the more
it appeared. Veritas abscondi erubescit, says Tertullian. The Reformation was
much furthered in Germany by the Papists opposition. Among many others, two
Kings wrote against Luther, viz. Henry 8th of England, and Ludovicus of
Hungary. This Kingly title, being entered into the controversy, made men more
curious; And as it happens in combats, that the lookers on are ready to
favor the weaker, and to extol his actions, though they be but mean: so here
it stirred up a general inclination toward Luther, says the Author of the
hist. of the Council of Trent. Luther also in an epistle to the Electour of
Saxony, Hist of Count. of Trent, fol. 16.
triumphs, and derideth the foolish wisdom of the Papists, in causing him
and the other Protestant Princes, Scultet. Annal. 274.
to rehearse the confession of their faith in a public Assembly of the states
of Germany, and in sending copies thereof to all the Courts of Christendom for
advice: whereby the Gospel was more propagated, and the cause of Christ more
advanced, then if many preachers had been sent out, and licensed.

Verse 21. He is of age.] (...). Felix ab (...), say the Etymologists, ut felix
sit homo floridae and vegetae aetatis, Becman.
corpore and animo valens.

Verse 22. Put out of the Synagogue.] This was that kind of excommunication
they called Niddui or separation; and such were by the Greeks called (...), and
(...). There were two other more heavy kind of excommunications in use among
the Jews, Cherem, and Samatha or Maranatha, which they derive as low as from
Henoch, Jude 14. The Heathens also had their public execrations, not rashly to
be used against any: Est enim execratio res tristis, and mali ominis, says
Plutarch: who therefore highly commends that Athenian Priest, that being
commanded by the people to curse Alcibiades, refused to do it. That Archflamen
of Rome, the Pope, is like a wasp: Cum pontisex Romans diras in ^u livic. 12.
Gall. Regem evomeret; Atqui (a^t rex) Precandi ille, non imprecandi causa
pontisex constitutus est. Firron. lib. 2. de gest is Gallor.
no sooner angry, but out comes a sting (an excommunication) which, being once
out, is like a fools dagger, rattling and snapping without an edge, etc. It was
grown to a Proverb among our forefathers, In nomine Domini incipit omne malum.
John Cornford, (one of the six last that were burnt in England for the true
Religion) when he heard himself and his fellows excommunicated, stirred with a
vehement zeal of God, and proceeding in a more true excommunication against the
Papists, in the name of them all, pronounced sentence against them in these
words, In the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, and by the power of his holy
Spirit, and the authority of his holy Catholic and Apostolic Church, we do
give here into the hands of Satan to be destroyed, the bodies of all those
blasphemers and heretics, that do maintain any error against his most holy
word, or do condemn his most holy truth for heresy, to the maintaining of any
false Church, or feigned Religion: so that by this thy just judgment, Act. an
I Mon, fol. 1862.
most mighty God, against thine adversaries, thy true Religion may be known, to
thy glory, and our comforts, and to the edifying of all our Nation. Good Lord
so be it.

Verse 24. Give God the glory.] It appears Josh. 7.19. and 1 Samuel 65. that this
was some solemn form, in use among that people when they required an oath of
delinquents: This the hypocrites made use of, as when the devils adjured Christ
by the living God not to cast them out. So their forefathers would persecute
godly men, and molest them with Church Censures, and then say, Let the Lord be
glorified. Isa. 66.5. With like honesty as the Conspiratours in K. Richard the
seconds time here in England indorsed all their Letters, with Glory be to God
on high, on earth peace, good will toward men: This poor man might have
answered as Rob. Smith the Martyr did, when Bonner began the sentence of death
against him, Act and Mon.
In Dei nomine, Ye begin in a wrong name, said he.

Verse 27. Will ye also be his Disciples?] A bold speech of so mean a man so
little enlightened, to the Cheif-Priests and Pharisees. Such was that of Dirick
Carver Martyr, to Bonner; Your doctrine is poison and sorcery. If Christ were
here, you would put him to a worse death, then he was put to before. You say
you can make God, Act. and Mon. fol. ^5^7.
you can make a pudding as soon, etc. And that of Henry Lawrence, who being to
subscribe the Bill of his examination, wrote, Ibid, 2533.
Ye are all Antichrist, and him ye follow, etc. And that of Anthony Parsons;
Thou call us thieves, said the Bishop of Salisbury. I say, quoth Anthony, ye
are not only thieves, but murderers, ye are rather bitesheeps then true
Bishops, Ibid. 2111.
etc.

Verse 31. We know that God hears not sinners,] Their incense smells of the
hand that offers it: The lepers lips should be covered according to the Law:
the wicked compass God with lies, when they cry, Hos. 11.12.
My father, my father etc. This is one of those natural notions that the devil
could never blot out of man's mind, that God hears not sinners, Hine Achilies
Homericue,(...).
he will never accept of a good motion from a bad mouth, as that state in story
would not. He silenced the devil acknowledging him; and of witches good prayers
one says, Si magicea, Dius non vult tales: si piae, non per tales.

Verse 34. Thou wast altogether borne in sinnes] Because borne blind: so they
upbraid him with his misery, as if therefore a notorious offender. This is
harsh and rash judgment.

And do thou teach us?] Oh, take heed of that. But a mortified man will
yield to learn of any body: a little child shall lead him, Isa. 11.6. Acts
18.16.
Learned Apollos was better instructed by a couple of poor tent-makers.

Verse 35. And when he had found him.] So when the Pope had excommunicated
Luther, and the Emperor proscribed him, Christ Jesus was with him, and carried
on the work. Long majora parturit mihi jam calamus, says he: Nescio unde
veniunt istae meditationes. And in his book of the Babylonish captivity, Luth.
Epist.
he professes, se quotidie, velit, nolit, doctiorem fieri.

Verse 39. For judgment I am come. To judge, much otherwise then those unjust
judges have done, that have cast out this poor servant of mine, for a
blasphemer. B. Bonner having a blind harper before him, said, that such blind
abjects, that follow a sort of heretical preachers, when they come to the
feeling of the fire, will be the first that will flee from it. To whom the
blind man said, Act and Mon. fol. 1821.
that if every joint of him were burnt, yet he trusted in the Lord not to flee.
A blind boy, that had suffered imprisonment at Gloucester not long before, was
brought to Bishop Hooper, the day before his death. Mr Hooper, after he had
examined him of his faith, and the cause of his imprisonment, beheld him
steadfastly, and the water appearing in his eyes, said unto him: Ah poor boy,
God has taken from thee thy out ward sight, for what consideration he best
knowith, but has given thee another sight much more precious: for he has
endued thy soul with the eye of knowledge, and faith, Ibid. 1321.
etc. It is a worthy speech of Mr Beza upon this Text, Prodeant omnes
Pharisaeorum nostri temporis Academiae. Let all our University-Pharisees come
forth together: That blind and heretical Church (as they call it) has, by
the blessing of God, Habet ecclesia illa caca and boreticaseprennes pueros, qui
test un^^er o mundo, etc.
children of seven years-old, that can, before all the world, confute and
confound their erroneous doctrines: witness the children of Merindall and
Chabriers, John Fettyes child of eight years old, that told Bonners Chaplain
(who said Fetty was an heretic) My father is no heretic; but you are an
heretic, for you have Balaams mark. This child they whipped to death, etc.
Alice Driver Martyr, Act. and Mon. fol. 1864.
nonplust all the Doctors that examined her: and then said, God be honored;
you be not able to resist the spirit of God in me a poor woman. Ibid. 1857.
I was never brought up in the University as ye have been: but I have driven
the plow many a time before my father, and yet I will set my foot against the
foot of any of you all, etc.

Verse 41. But now ye say, We see] If, after conviction, men run away with the
bit in their mouths, Basil in ep. ad E^vag.
the sin is the greater: But their case is deplorable, qui quod verum sit neque
scient, neque sustinent discere, as Basil complains of the Western Church in
his time.

CHAP. X
Verse 1.Verily, verily I say unto you.]
A Men is in holy Scripture either prefixed to a discourse, and then it is a
particle of certain and earnest asseveration, when it is doubled especially, as
here: Or else affixed; and then it is either of assent, or assurance, or both,
as in the end of the Lords prayer.

Verse 2. But he that enters in by the door] That is, called by Christ to the
office of his under-shepherd. In physicis aer nonfacit seipsum ignem, Aquin ad
Heb. 15.
sed fit a superiori, says Aquinas.

Is the shepherd of the sheep] To the which is required, that he be both
learned and loving. (...) quasi (...), of (...) a sheep: and (...) to desire
eatnestly.
This note arises out of the notation of the word here used.

Verse 3. To him the porter openeth] That is, God approves such, and usually
seals to their ministry. Jer. 23.22. giving them a testimonial, 2. Cor. 3.2.

Verse 4. He goes before them] According to the custom of shepherds in that
country, not to drive their sheep, but to lead them, as David shows in his
divine Bucolicon, Psalm. 23.2.

Verse 5. A stranger will they not follow] For they have senses exercised to
discern good and evil; Heb. 5 14.
yea they have a spirit of discerning, 1 Cor. 12.10. the mind of Christ, 1
Cor. 2.16. and though simple to evil, yet are wise in that which is good. They
are sheep, but rational: their service, a reasonable service, Romans 12.1. their
obedience the obedience of faith, Romans 16.26. they try before they trust, they
look before they leap, and so grow to such a certainty in that truth they hold,
such a plerophory of knowledge, Coloss. 2.3. that it is impossible for them to
be fully or finally deceived, Mat. 24.24. False and heterodox doctrines they
hate, Psalm. 119 104, and all such impostours as seek to buzze doubts into their
heads, Romans 16.17.

Verse 6. But they understood not] So thick-braind and incapable we are, till
that vail be rent, Isa. 25.7. Luscosi, si quando oculorum aciem intendunt,
minus videns. Vives in Aug. de civ. Zei. l. 22. c. 6.
Those that have a blemish in their eye, the more wishly they look into any
thing, the less they see of it, as Vives has it. So it is here.

Verse 8. All that ever came before me, etc.] Manes (that mad heretic) made an
argument from this text against Moses and the Prophets, as going before Christ.
But Austin answers: Moses and the Prophets came not before Christ, but with
Christ. Intruders, whether before or since our Saviors days, are these
thieves and robbers. Ah whoreson-theeves, rob God of his glory! said Doct.
Tailor Martyr, in a dream, of the Scribes and Pharisees of his time.

Verse 9. And shall go in and our, etc.] That is, shall live securely, and be
fed daily and daintily, as David shows, Psalm. 23. where he sweetly strikes upon
the whole string through the whole hymn.

Verse 10. The thief comes not but for to steal] How slily soever heretics
seek to insinuate, with their Pithanology and feigned humility, whereby they
circumvent and beguil the simple, it is deadly dealing with them. Shun their
society as a serpent in your way, as poison in your meat. Perniciofissimum
Hildebrandine doctrinae veuenum lectoribus ebibendum, quasi aliud ageas
propinat. D^g. Wnear. Bill. Observe. sacr. l. 1. c. 26. Scultet Annal. 279.
(...). Ephel. 4 14.
Spondanus (the same that Epitomized Baronius) gives his Reader Popish poisen
to drink so slily, says one, as if he were doing somewhat else, and meant no
such matter. And learned Billius observes the like of Socrates the
Ecclesiastical Historian, a cunning Novation. Swenkfeldius, who held many
dangerous heresies, did yet deceive many by his pressing men to an holy life,
praying frequently and fervently, etc. by his stately expressions, ever in his
mouth, as of Illumination, Revelation, Deification, the inward and spiritual
man, etc. Some are so cunning in their cogging the die, as S. Paul phraseth it,
Ephesians. 4. in the conveyance of their collusion, that like serpents, they can
sting without hissing; like curre-dogs, suck your blood only with licking; and
in the end kill you and cut your throats without biting. Muzzle them therefore,
says S. Paul, and give them no audience. (...). Tit. 1.11. Tit. 3.10.
Sezo^nen. lib. 7. cap. 7.
Placilla the Empress, when Theodosius Senior desired to confer with
Eunomius the heretic, dissuaded her husband very earnestly; lest, being
perverted by his speeches, he might fall into heresy. Anastasius the second,
Bishop of Rome, in the year 497, Jac. Rev. de vitis Pontis page 42.
whiles he sought to reduce Acacius the heretic, was seduced by him. A little
leaven soon sowreth the whole lump. One spoonful of vinegar will quickly tart
a great deal of sweet milk: but a great deal of milk, L Brooks.
will not so soon sweeten one spoonful of vinegar. Error (says a Noble
Writer) is like the Jerusalem-Artichoak: plant it where you will, it over-runs
the ground and choaks the heart.

Verse 11. I am the good shepherd] So he is by an excellency: for he left his
glory, to seek out to himself a flock in the wildernesle: He feeds them among
the lilies, Cant. 2.16. gives them golden fleeces, and shepherds, to keep them,
after his own heart; watches over them night and day in his Migdal-Eder, Genesis
35.21.
or tower of the flock: seeks them up, when lost, bears them in his bosom, and
gently leads those that are with young, Isa. 40.11. pulls them out of the power
of the Lion and the Bear: punishes such as either push with the horn, or foul
with the feet, Ezekiel 34.19. Washes them in his own blood, and so makes them
Kings and Priests to God, Rev. 1 5, etc. so that they need not fear the
spiritual Assyrian, Micah 5.5.

Verse 12. The wolf scattereth] To Non-residents and other unconscionable
Ministers, Christ will say as once Eliab did to David; With whom have thou left
those poor few sheep in the wilderness? Vare, reddi legiones, said Augustus,
fighting. The like will this good shepherd say, judging: Pan curet oves,
oviumque magistros, say many of our Pluralists, and idol-shepherds. About
Hildebrands time, so great was the negligence and wickedness of the Clergy,
that some set forth letters, as dated from the devils of hell to them; Match.
Paris. Hist. Anno Don 1072.
wherein they give them many thanks for the souls they had sent to hell, in
such abundance as never was known before.

Verse 13. The hireling fleeth] Yet is not every one that flees to be judged
an hireling presently. There is a lawful flight, as when the quarrel is
personal, etc. Christ fled often, when persecuted: so may we. God has made us
not as butts to be perpetually shot at: but as the marks of rovers, moveable,
as the wind and Sun may best serve. Melib. Adam in vit Bremij.
Fuge, fuge, Brenti, cito, citius, citissime: So friendly did a Senator of
Hala advise Brentius. He embraced the advice, and saved his life by it.

Verse 14. And know my sheep] With a knowledge of approbation and delight.
Verba notitiae apud Hebraeos secum trahunt affectum. Psalm 1.6.

Verse 15. Aesop. Fab.
I lay down my life] Yet as man he was (...). Quis vitam non vult? says
Augustine: And, Quis enim vult mori? prorsus nemo, says another. And, Skin
after skin, Job 2.4.
or skin upon skin, and all that a man has will he give for his life, said
that old deceiver, truly. Yet our Savior held not his life dear for his sheeps
safety. Because he saw we should fall sore (said that Angel John Bradford)
therefore he would suffer sore: Yea, if his once suffering had not been enough,
he would yet once more come again, Bradf. Sermon. of Repent. 63.
God the Father, I am sure, says he, if the death of his Son incarnate would
not serve, would himself and the Holy Ghost also become incarnate, and die for
us.

Verse 16. And other sheep I have,] viz. The elect Gentiles, whose conversion
to Christ was, among other types, not obscurely fore-shadowed, Levit. 19.23,
24, 25. as some Divines think. The first three-years in Canaan, the Israelites
were to cast away the fruits of the trees, as uncircumcised: So our Savior
planted the Gospel in that land for the first three years of his public
ministry: But the uncircumcisions are cast away; that is, to the uncircumciled
Gentiles, the doctrine of Christ is not declared by general and public
preaching. The fruit of the fourth year was conscerated to God: That is, Christ
in the fourth year from his baptism, laid down his life for his sheep, rose
again, ascended, and sent his holy Spirit: whereby his Apostles and others were
consecrated as the first fruits of the promised land. But in the fifth year,
the fruit of the Gospel planted by Christ began to be common, when the same
doctrine was not shut up in the strait bounds of Judaea, or walls of the
Temple, Romans 16.26.
but was made known (and shall be more and more) to all Nations, for the
obedience of faith.

There shall be one sild] Of Jews and Gentiles. The full and final
restoration of the Jews will fall out in the year 1650. as some have
calculaetd out of Dan. 12.11. I wait and wish it.

Verse 17. Therefore does my Father love me, because] This because, is nota
consecutionis, non causae, says Beza.

I lay down my life] I do it even now: for he suffered many a little death all
his life song, and at length the cursed death of the cross.

That I might take it again] For Christ being life essential, swallowed up
death in victory, as the fire swallows up the fuel, as Moses his serpent
swallowed up the sorcerers serpents, etc.

Verse 18. I lay it down of selfe] A necessity there was of our Saviors death,
but it was a necessity of immutability (because God had decreed it, Acts 2 23.)
not of coaction; He did willingly. Therefore, when he gave up the ghost, he
cried with a loud voice; which shows that his life was not then spent; he might
have retained it longer if he would: and thereupon the Centution concludes him
to be the Son of God.

Verse 19. There was a division therefore, etc.] This our Savior foresaw, and
yet forbears not. Gods truth must be spoken, however it be taken. Men be they
pleased or displeased, God must be obeyed, and his whole will declared. If men
refuse to receive it, we must turn them over to God with a Non convertentur,
and then let him alone with them.

Verse 20. He has a devil, and is mad] It was wonder if the Heaven did not
sweat, the earth melt, and hell gape at the hearing of these horrid
blasphemies. Tigers rage at the fragrancy of sweet spices: so did these
monsters at our Saviors sweet Sermons.

Verse 21. These are not the words, etc.] Wisdom is ever justified of her
children. They fitly argue from his oracles and miracles, both which this
Evangelist does more largely relate; purposely to prove our Saviors Divinity,
and is therefore styled John the Divine.

Verse 23. (...). Inittalia, five Renovatra.
The feast of the dedication] viz. Of the Temple newly purged from the
pollutions of Antiochus, that little Anti-chirst. So when the Christian Temple,
the Church, was purged from the popish abominations (called the tramplings of
the Gentiles, Rev. 11.2) by those two witnesses, that is, by Luther and other
Heroical Reformers, there was great joy among Gods people. And in the year
1617. as the Pope proclaimed a Jubilee for the peace of Italy and Austria,
Jacob. Renius de vit. Pontis, page 306.
etc. so the Reformed Churches in Germany did the same, for Gods mercy in
restoring to them the Gosp I, a just hundred years before: for in the year
1517. Luther began to decry the Popes indulgences. In like sort, at same time,
when the Greeks were busy in their Olympic games, Burbol. Chron. page 541.
the Prophet Isaiah saw that glorious vision of God in his Majesty, Isa. 6.1,
2. (as the Divine Chronologer observes it,) singing, With Seraphims, that
sweetest Trisagion, Holy, holy, holy, Lord God of hosts. The new Jerusalem,
which signifies the state of the Church in this world (says a Reverend Divine)
when it shall be refined to the utmost, is all of fine gold and precious
stones, D. Siblcs on Cant. 5. p. 380.
etc. to show the excellency of Reformation: which golden times are yet to
come, and will prove very festival.

Verse 23. And Jesus walked in the Temple] Taking the opportunity of that
public meeting to do good; as the Be is abroad so soon as the Sun arises.
The Greeks were great walkers, as the Stoics in their porch, Biddulph, l 3. c.
5.
etc. But the Turks wonder to see a man walk too and fro: and usually ask
him, whether he be out of his way, or out of his wits? Pliny said to his
Nephew, when he saw him walk out some hours, without studying, Poteras has
horas non perdere.

In Solomon's porch] So the Jews called that porch (for honors sake) which they
built again after the captivity; and which, Partim ambitione ductus, partim
Iud^orumberetolentiamcaptans, etc. Beza Annot. in Joh. 2.20.
together with the whole Temple, was beautified by Herod the Great, to curry
favor with the people; which yet would not be, for they hated him extremely.

Verse 24. How long do thou make us to doubt?] They lay the blame upon him,
as if ( Heraclitus-like) he were a dark Doctor: when themselves were blind
and did shut the windows, lest the light should come in unto them. Gods
Ministers must look for the like measure. Howbeit God darkens their doctrine
sometimes (as he dealt by Ezekiel) for the sins of the people.

Verse 26. Ye believe not, because ye are not. etc.] Reprobates cannot believe,
yea, they cannot but resist the external offers of Gods grace. The Word,
Sacraments and all Gods common temporal favors are, in respect of external
participation, communicated to them by way of concomitancy only, because they
are intermixed with the elect.

Verse 27. My sheep hear my voice] Buxtorf in his Teberias notes, that the
seventh verse of the one and twentieth of Jeremy, Constat ex 42 vocibus,
literis 160.
consists of two and forty words, and of an hundred and sixty letters. I am
not at leisure to count the words and letters of this and the following verses:
But it is easy to observe in them those five linkes of that golden chain of
Gods grace in our salvation, My sheep, there is Election; hear my voice, there is
Vocation; And I know them, there is Justification; And they follow me, there is
Sanctification: and I give unto them eternal life, there is Glorification.
Pastor over spon let se abso. lute servatu rum, nunquid libcrabitsidem? etc. D.
Pridiaux de Persev. sancto.


Verse 28. They shall never perish] This is the good shepherds promise: Is he
now as good as his word, if he suffer his sheep to wander and perish, whom by
promise he was tied so to keep, as that they should not wander, as they are
naturally apt to do, to their destruction?

Verse 29. No man is able to pluck them] Impostours seek to thrust us from God,
Deuteronomy. 13.5. and to drag disciples after them, With such violence as if they
would pluck them lim-meal (as the word signifies, (...).
Acts 20.30.) so to deceive, if it were possible, the very elect, Mat. 24.24. A
thing is said to be possible, vel respectu Dei, vel respectu Rei. True grace,
in it self considered, is easily separable from him that has it, who, left to
himself also, would soon lose it. (...). ^^^ l. 5.
But with respect to God, by whose power the Saints are kept (as in a strong
guard or garrison) through faith unto salvation, it is impossible that any of
his should finally miscarry.

Verse 30. I and my father are one] Both for nature or effence, and for one
consent, both in willing and working. Out of the harbor of Goodwins sands the
Pilot cannot make forth, they say, without sinking in those sands, unless he
so steer his ship, that he bring two steeples, which stand off, so even in his
sight, that they may seem to be but one. So is it here.

Verse 31. Then the Jews took up stones] This is the worlds wages to faithful
Ministers. Many conceit discharge of their duty without persecution: they would
pull a rose without pricks. Non decet, ut sub capite spinis coronato, vivant
membra in delicys. Zarch.


Verse 32. From my Father] i.e. Ejus authoritate fretus. Bez. All our works
must be done in God, and for God: then they are of the right stamp, and carry
Heaven in them, Heb. 6.9. Besides that, they are unanswerable syllogismes,
invincible demonstrations, to confute and convert even Pagans, says Chrysostom.

Verse 33. Christianu ^ son, uirem D js victi ram esse ^ra essiman, Ier^ul.
But for blasphemy] These were holy persecutours, in pretense at least. So
Maximinian thought the blood of Christians would be an acceptable sacrifice to
his gods. So Francis the second of France, and Philip the second of Spain, held
the same opinion of the Lutherans in their dominions. Zeal without knowledge is
like mettle in a blind horse.

Verse. 34. In your law] So he calls it, to show that there was no necessity on
his part to prove what he delivered by any Scripture, since he was to be
believed on his bare word; but for their sakes only he did it. (...).


Verse 35. Unto whom the word of God came] That have their authority from God,
whose substitutes and vicegerents Princes are, and of whom they have their
Patent. With what face then can the Schoolmen defend Thomas in that Paradox,
Dominium and Pralatio introducta sunt ex jure humano? Aquin. 2.2. q. 10. ar 10.


Verse 36. Has sanctified and sent] Sanctified, that is, Anointed, and that in
both his natures, as whole Christ. For his anointing imported; 1. His
consecration or ordination to the office of a Mediator; and so the Godhead
also was anointed. 2. Qualification or effusion of fulness of graces: as the
holy oil was compounded of diverse spices, so the manhood, and that without
measure, as far as a finite nature was capable of.

Verse 37. If I do not the works of my father, believe me not] Thus said
Christ, but so says not Christ's Vicar, as the Pope will needlessly be called.
His Placite must be obeyed, not examined: and though by his evil example he
draw thousands to hell, none must mute, or say so much, as what do thou?

Verse 38. But if I do, though ye, etc.] q. d. Stumble not at the meannesse of
my person, condition, followers, etc. When it was sometime disputed among the
Romans in the Council, using to deifie great men, whether Christ, having done
many wounderfull works, should be received into the number of the Gods? it was
at length concluded (says the Historian) quod non deberet recipi inter Deos,
pro eo quod non haberet cultores, propter hoc quod paupertatem praedicaret and
eligeret, quam mundus contemnit.

Verse 39. Therefore they sought again to take him] They could not answer his
arguments; they turn them therefore to a course of violence, wherein they
doubted not but to be too hard for him. Thus they dealt with Ridley and Latimer
at Oxford: thus with other Martyrs, who yet overcame them by the blood of the
Lamb, yea, were more then conquerours, Romans 8. A faggot will make you recant,
says the Bishop to Mr Hawks Martyr. No, Act. and Mon.
no, said he; a point for your faggot; you shall do no more, and your Master to
help you, then God permits you. In the year 1166. the Synod at Oxford burned in
the foreheads, Alsted. Chronol. page 357.
and afterward banished out of the realm thirty Dutch doctors, that taught
here the right use of Wedlock, and the Sacraments.

Verse 40. And went again beyond Jordan] The further from Jerusalem the safer.
Jerusalem was then, as Rome is now, the Saints slaughterhouse. Roma radix
omnium malorum.

Into the place where John first baptized] As well for his own comfort (for
there he had heard at first from Heaven, This is my beloved Son, etc.) as for
the peoples conversion and confirmation, who there called to mind John's
testimony of Jesus, and believed.

Verse 41. John did no miracle] Lest he should be mistaken for the Messiah. But
how got he then so much credit? by his mortified conversation especially. Holy
and reverend is Gods Name, says the Psalmist: therefore reverend, because
holy. Holiness has honor in the consciences of the very worst.

But all things that John spake] The word works not sometimes, till many years
after it has been preached, as here: and as they say of the Elephant, that she
goes with young thirteen years, after she has conceived.

Verse 42. And many believed on him there] Place is no prejudice to the
powerful operation of the word, when by the Spirit it is made prolificall and
generative.

CHAP. XI.
Verse 1. Bethany the town of Mary, etc.
NOt the tower of Mary and Martha, Caflellum.
as some Monks have doted; digni sane qui ad Grammatices elementa remittantur,
says an Interpreter. Bethany was a small town or village nigh to Jerusalem,
where dwelt these three, Lazarus and his two sisters, all in one house (though
fratrum concordia rara) to whom our Savior joins himself a fourth in their
friendship. Behold how good and how pleasant it is for brethren to dwell
together in unity. Psalm. 133.1, 3.
Surely there the Lord commands the blessing, even life for evermore.

Verse 2. Cant. 1.
It was that Mary which anointed] This makes her name as an ointment poured
out. And she spared for no cost, being of her mind it seems, Plaut.
that said, Ego si bonam famam servasso, sat ero dives.

Verse 3. Behold, he whom thou love is sick] This was enough to say to a
loving Savior. Phil. 4.6.
We need not be careful in any thing, more then to make our wants known to
God, and let him alone to help us, God may give the dearly beloved of his soul
into the hand of her enemies, Ier. 12.7.
how, and when he pleases. So, to mind and move Christ for the laboring
Church, it shall suffice to say, She whom thou love is sick, is in ill case,
etc. But St Austin asks, Si amatur, quomodo infirmatur? Oh, well enough:
Afflictions are Christ's love tokens. As many as I love, says he, I rebuke and
chasten. See my Treatise upon that Text.

Verse 4. But for the glory of God] Happy Lazarus, though sick and dead, to be
an instrument of glory, to be given to God. (...) Phil 1.20.
St Paul stood atiptoes (as it were) to see which way Christ might be most
magnified in his body, whether by life or by death.

Verse 5. Jesus loved Martha] The Saints are all round about his throne, Rev.
4.4. because he is alike near to them, for solace and tuition. Howbeit, as man,
living amongst men, he was affected to some more then some, as to these three,
and the beloved Disciple. (...). Plato.
These were his Jedidiahs, his singularly affected, and this was an high
prerogative. Plato commends his country of Athens for antiquity of the
people, etc. but chiefly for this, that they were beloved of the Gods.

Verse 6. He abode two dayes] Waiting to be gracious, but as a God of
judgment, he knows best when to deal forth his favors, Isa. 30.18. To
prescribe to him is to set the Sun by our dial. This Caesar terms sauciness
in his soldiers.

Verse 7. Then after that, says he, etc.] When help is seasonable, his fingers
itch, as the mothers breast aches, when it is time the child had suck.

Verse 8. And go thou thither again? Yea; with the hazard of his life, to
the help of his friend. The Ancients painted friendship, a fair young man,
bare-headed, in a poor garment, at the bottom whereof was written, Death and
Life, in the upper part, Wilkins Com. in Muret. orat. 1. de^aud. lit.
Summer and Winter: his bosom was open, so that his heart might be seen,
whereupon was written, Long, Prope, a friend at hand, and afar off.

Verse 9. Are there not twelve hours?] q. d. Is there not an appointed time to
man upon earth? Shall I not live out my stint? Job 7.1.
The Turks shun not the company of those that have the plague: Blunts voyage
into Levant. ^^.
but pointing upon their foreheads, say, It was written there at their birth
when they should die. A Priest indeed might enter without danger, into a
leprous house, because he had a calling from God so to do. A man may follow God
dry-shod through the red sea. This our Savior calls here [to walk in the day]
by an excellent and elegant similitude. But he that keeps not within Gods
precincts, may not look for his protection. I commend the charity, but I
question the discretion of Mr Stafford, public Professor of Divinity in
Cambridge, who hearing that a certain Priest called, Sr Henry Conjurer (in K.
Henry the eights days) lay sore sick of the plague, was so moved with pity to
the poor Priests soul, that he came to him, exhorted and so labored him, that
he would not leave him, before he had converted him, and saw his
conjuring-books burnt before his face. Act. and Mon. fol. 924.
Which being done, Mr Stafford went home, and immediately sickened, and shortly
after most Christianly deceased. He might have, I confess, an extraordinary
call to this work. But Zanchius somewhere makes mention of a colleague of his
in the Ministry, that by the like means took his death, and much bewailed upon
his deathbed, that he had not yielded to Zanchius advising him to the contrary.

Verse 10. But if any man walk in the night] As good Josiah did, in that rash
expedition against Pharaoh-Necho: either hoping to ingratiate with the
Assyrian, or fearing to have an over-heavy neighbor of the Egyptian; he went
up to battle, not so much as asking leave of the Lord: though he had Jeremy at
hand, and Zephany, and a whole College of Seers besides. The best are sometime
miscarried by their passions, to their cost.

Verse 11. Rev. 14.13. 1 These. 4.14. (...).
Lazarus sleepeth] The Saints are said to die in Christ, to sleep in Jesus. The
Greeks call their Churchyards dormitoryes, sleeping-places. The Germans call
them Godsacre, because their bodies are sown there, to be raised again. The
Hebrews Beth-chaym, the house of the living.

Verse 12. If he sleep, he shall do well] Sleep (says one) is the nurse of
nature, the sweet parenthesis of all thy griefs and cares.

Verse 13. Jesus spoke of his death] Which profane Writers also do call a
sleep, but only because the functions of the faculties are extinct by death:
therefore they call it an iron sleep, an eternal sleep etc. Vt somn^^ morttis
sic ^ect^ imago sepu^chri. Isa. ^6 19.
Christians call death a sleep, because it is to them a sweet rest in their
beds, warmed and perfumed for them by Christ's body, laid in the grave; with
whom also they look to rise to life eternal. Thy dead men shall live, with my
dead body shall they arise.

Verse 14. Then said Jesus unto them plainly] Because they understood him not.
Ministers must be gentle to all men, apt to teach, patient, in meekness
instructing the ignorant, yea, the insolent, 2 Timothy 2.24, 25. Austin confesses
he was glad to use some words, Breerw. enquiries, page 29
sometimes, to his hearers that were not Latin; to the end that they might
understand him.

Verse 15. I am glad for your sakes] If the confirmation and increase of faith
in his, be so great a joy to Christ, how acceptable must it needs be unto him,
that we believe at first in his name? we cannot do him a greater honor, a more
pleasing service. None greater in the fathers house, then the prodigal
returned. And what an high price did our Savior set on the Centurions faith?

Verse 16. Let us also go that we may die with him] A blunt speech, and (as
some think) over-bold. He would die with Christ, and so would Peter: yet none
so shamefully forsook him, when it came to the proof, as these two. Thomas was
to seek, when he should have seen Christ risen: he had not yet recovered his
fright at our Saviors apprehension.

Verse 17. That he had lien in the grave four dayes] So that he might seem now
to come too late. The faith of the two sisters must needs be much shaken, to
see their brother dead, though Christ had sent them word he should not die.
Hold out faith and patience, God will be seen in the mount: he usually reserves
his hand for a dead lift, when our faith begins to flag and hang the wing, when
our strength is gone, and we have given up all for lost. Isa. 33 10.
Now will I arise, says the Lord, now will I be exalted, now will I lift up my
self.

Verse 19. To comfort them] A pious office, and yet never thought of by the
superstitious Papists, amidst all those vain fopperies they prescribe to be
done about the dead. Only, what the Ancients used for the comfort of the
living, is perverted by them to the pretended service and help of the dead.

Verse 20. But Mary sat still in the house] So, while faith sits at the center,
love walks the round. Dicit Fides, Parata sunt mihi omnia: Dicit Spes, Mihi
ista servantur: Dicit Charitas, Ego curro adilla, says Bernard.

Verse 21. Lord if thou had been here, etc. Was she sure of that? but why was
he dead, if Christ would not, though he were not there? We are all too much
fastened to his bodily presence: howbeit we never come to believe indeed, till
we are well perswaped of his omnipotency. But how fitly may many a poor soul
say to the bloody Non-resident; Sir, if thou had been here, my brother,
child, husband had not been dead in his sins?

Verse 22. Whatsoever thou will aske] This is our comfort, that our Advocate is
all in all with his Father; and may have what he will of him. What need we any
other Master of requests then Christ? If David will hear Joab for Absalom; and
Herod, Acts 12.
Blastus for the Tyrians, what may not we hope?

Verse 23. Thy brother shall rise again] Let this consideration comfort us in
the decease of our dearest friends: they are not lost, but laid up with Christ,
who will bring them back with him at his coming. 1 These. 4.
As the same divine hand that buried Moses, that locked up this treasure and
kept the key of it, brought it forth afterward glorious in the
transfiguration. The body that was hid in the valley of Moab, appeared again in
the hill of Tabor.

Verse 24. In the Resurrection] The Syriack has it Benuchama, in the
Consolavion. So the Resurrection was ever, to the disconsolate believers of
both Testaments, Dan. 12, 2. Heb. 11.35. In the Primitive Church, when they
repeated that Article of the Creed, I believe the refurrection of the flesh,
they would point to their bodies, and say, etiam hujus carnis, even of this
very flesh.

Verse 25. He that believes in me, though, etc.] O the wonderful force of
faith? M. Sa. Ward.
Questionless (says a Reverend man) justifying faith is not beneath
miraculous, in the sphere of its own activity, and where it has warrant of
Gods word, etc.

Verse 26. Beleevest thou this?] He says not, Understandest thou this? For the
mysteries of Christian religion, says Rupertus, are much better understood by
believing, then believed by understanding.

Verse 27. I believe that thou art the Christ] What could Peter say more? Mat.
16.16. Damar is may be as dear to God as Dionysius, Rupert, Abbas Turciensis.
a woman, (of no note otherwise) as an Areopagite, Acts 17. ult.

Verse 28. Called Mary her sister secretly] By Christ's command: and secretly,
belike, she did it, lest any should tell the Pharisees, and Christ thereby be
brought into danger. Be wise as serpents.

Verse 29. She arose quickly] Love is winged, and a ready heart makes riddance
of Gods work. His people art free-hearted. Psalm. 110.3. Where the carcass is,
there will these Eagles be: they scour to his presence, as the Doves to the
columbary, they flee as the clouds, etc. Isa. 60.8.

Verse 30. Was not yet come into the town] To eat and refresh himself after his
long journey, he would do his work first, as Abraham's servant. Genesis 24.33.


Verse 31. She goes unto the grave] That, Niobe-bike, she might weep herself
into a tombstone. Ex little more qui luct is sut irrname la querunt. Call.
Such a hearthenish custom it seems they had amongst them, and many other
funeral rites, forbidden by the Law. But what should droppsy-men do eating
saltmeats?

Verse 32. She fell down at his feet] Giving him divine honor, before all the
Jews that were present. So did not Martha, that we read of. Mary had been more
diligent in hearing and meditation of the Word: hence her greater love and
respect to Christ.

Verse 33. When Jesus saw her weeping] Tears are our most effectual orators
to Christ: when he was going to the Cross, he could find time to look back,
and comfort the weeping women.

And was troubled] So as for the present he could not utter himself. Yet these
passions in Christ were, as clear water in a crystal glass, without sin.

Verse 35. Jesus wept] He wept with those that weep. And the same tondernesse
he retains still toward his afflicted. As Aaron, Levit. 10.
though he might not lament his two sons slain by Gods hand in the sanctuary,
yet he had still the bowels of a father within him: So has Christ now, in the
heavenly sanctuary: he has lost nothing by heaven.

Verse 37. Behold how he loved him.] What? for shedding some few tears for him?
oh how then did he love us, for whom he shed the dearest and warmest blood in
all his heart? Ama amorem illius etc. says Bernard.

Verse 37. And seem of them said] Thus our Savior is diversely interpreted and
censured: and so it is still with his Ministers. When we see our Auditors
before us, little do we know with what hearts they are there, not what use they
will make of their pretended devotion. Doeg may set his foot as far within the
Tabernacle as David. If some come to serve God, others come to observe their
teachers, and pick quarrels: yes, if conscience might be judge, many a hearer
would be found to have an Herod's heart toward his Minister.

Verse 38. Goroaning in himself] To consider, belike, Mihi experto credit,
quod apertis sepulcbris in capitibus invenietis busones saltantes generates
excereb^o, etc. Sermon 48. ad fratres in eremo.
the woeful effects of sin, that brought death into the world, even on the
best; and makes them a ghastly and loathsome spectacle: so that Abraham desires
to bury his beloved Sarah out of his sight. Believe me, who have made trial of
it, says Sr Augustine, Open a grave, and in the head of the dead man ye shall
find toads leaping, that are begotten of his brain, serpents craw Ang on his
loins, that are bred out of his kidneyes, worms creeping in his belly, that
grow out of his bowels: Ecce quid sumus, and quid jam erimus: Ecce in quod
resolvimur: En peccati originem and faeditatem! says that Father.

Verse 39. By this time he stinketh] By, the better for that; Christ's power
will be the more manifested. As St Austin said of one that hit him in the teeth
with the sins of his youth; The more desperate was the disease, the greater
honor redounded to the Physician that cured me. Beza's answer to one that did
the like to him, was, Hic homo invidet mihi gratiam Christi.

Verse 40. Said I not unto thee, etc.] A foul fault in her to be so
incredulous; and enough, without the greater mercy of Christ, to have marred
all. For unbelief is so vile and venomous an evil, as that it transfuseth a
kind of dead palsy into the hands of omnipotency. Mark. 6.5. Christ that can
do all things by his absolute power, can do little or nothing, by his actual
power, for unbeleevers. He cannot, because he will not.

Verse 41. Father, I thank thee that, etc.] Beginning to pray, he brings his
thanks in his hand, as sure to speed. So must we, Phil. 4 6. And therefore in
the Law, whatever request they had to God, they must be sure to come with their
peace offerings, in token of thankfulness: Psalm. 65.1.
that they might sing with the Psalmist, Praise Waits for thee, O God, in
Sion. It is said of Tiberius the Emperor, that he never denied his favorite
Sejanus any thing, T^cit.
and oftentimes prevented his request, so that he needed only to ask and give
thanks. All Gods people are his favorites, and may have any thing that heart
can wish, or need require.

Verse 43. Lazarus, come forth] if this voice of Christ had been directed to
all the dead, they had presently risen; as sure as they shall rise, when the
Lord himself shall descend with a shout, with the voice of an Archangel,
crying, Surgite mortui, venite in judicium. Pliny reports of the Lioness, that
she brings forth her whelps dead, and so they remain for the space of three
days; until the Lion coming near to the place where they lie, lifts up his
voice and roars so fiercely, that presently they are raised from death to life.
The Prophet Jeremy tells us the like of this Lion of the Tribe of Judah, Jer.
25.30, 31. See the place.

Verse 44. And he that was dead] But where was his soul therewhile? In manu
Dei: not in Purgatory as Papists say, for that is against their own principles:
They send none to Purgatory, but men of a middle-make, bewixt just and unjust.
Now Lazarus was, surely, a very good man: else had he not been so dear to
Christ. But that Purgatory is the Popes invention, as Tindall has it: Aug de
chriet.
hear St Angustine, Nemo se decipiat, fratres: duo enim loca sunt, and tertius
non est visus. Qui cum Christo regnare non meruit, cum diabolo, absque
dubitatione peribit.

Verse 45. Believed on him] And so God had this honor, and Christ his end in
this, according to verse. 4.

Verse 46. But some of them, etc.] Lo, reprobates will not believe, though one
rose from the dead to them.

Verse 47. Then gathered the chief Priests] Like unto this was the Council of
Trent, gathered on purpose to supptesse Christ in his true worshippers; and
carried by Antichrist with such infinite guil and craft, without any sincerity,
apright dealing and truth, as that themselves will even smile in the triumphs
of their own wits (when they hear it but mentioned) as at a masterstratagem.

Verse 48. The Romans shall come, etc.] And so they did: the thing that they
feared came upon them, for their inexpiable guilt in killing the Lord Jesus.
Demades, when the Emperor sent to his countryment of Athens to give him divine
honor, and they were loath to yield unto it, but consulted about it; Take heed,
says he, you be not so busy about heavenly matters, as to lose your earthly
possessions. These refractory Jews lost both.

Verse 49. Ye know nothing at all] Why no: you know all (Caiaphas:) all the
Assessours are but Asses to you. Hoc est superbire, quasi super alios ire.
Hoyl. Geog. page 343. Irenaeus. Penes nos est imperium lite. rarum. Eudae ^
This fellow would have made a fine Duke of Russia, by whom it is cautionated,
that there be no schools, lest there should be any scholars but himself. So the
Gnostics bragged that they were the only knowing men. And the Jesuits at this
day tell us, that the Empire of learning is confined to their territories.

Verse 50. That one man should die for the people] A brutish and bloody
sentence: as if evil might be done, that good may come thereof. So, when
Farellus, that worthy Reformer, came first to Geneva, and was convented there
by the Bishop, as a disturber of the public peace, one of the Popish Assessors
cried out, Away with this pestilent Lutheran, better he perish then the town be
disquieted. To whom Farellus answered, Noli Caiaphae voces, sed Dei verba
proferre, Speak not in the language of Caiaphas, Soultet. Annal. Tom. 2. p. 504.
but in the word of God, etc.

Verse 51. This he spoke, not of himself] God spoke through him, as through a
trunk; or as the Angel spoke in Balaams ass. Wholesome sugar may be found in a
poisoned cane, a precious stone in a roads head, a flaming torch in ablinde
man's hand.

Verse 52. Gather together in one] In one spiritual body, though in place
never so distant one from another, Ephesians. 4.4. My dove is but one, the
daughters saw her and blessed her, Cant. 6.9. No such oneness, entirenesse,
any where else: Other societies may cleave together as the toes of clay in
Nebuchadnezzars image, but not incorporate.

Verse 55. Before the Passover, to purify themselves] They had their
parasceve, and proparasceve, their preparation and fore-preparation. 2 Cor. 7.1.
We must also purify our selves before the Sacrament from all filthiness of
flesh and spirit, cast all the baggage into the brook Kidron (that is, the
town-ditch) and then kill the Passover, Godw. Antiq.
2 Chronicles. 30.14. The very Heathens had their caenam puram before their
sacrifices.

Verse 56. Then sought they for Jesus] Whether these were his friends or
enemies, the Doctors are divided.

Verse 57. Had given a commandement] So diligent were they, and earnest to
execute that cruel decree of the Council. This is check to our oscitancy in
the best things. What a shame is it, that they should out-work the children of
light, in a through dispatch of their deeds of darkness? and be at more pains
to go to hell, then we will be to go to heaven?

CHAP. XII.
Verse 1. Came to Bethaxy]
TO convert some, confirm others, and to refresh himself with his fast
friends, ere he fell into the hands of his bloody enemies. So Cromwell, Earl of
Essex, going to his death, first called for his breakfast, and cheerfully
eating the same, and, after that, meeting the Lord Hungerford going likewise to
his execution, and perceiving him to be all heavy and doleful, with cheerful
countenance and comfortable words asking him why he was so heavy, he willed him
to pluck up his heart, and to be of good comfort: For, said he, there is no
cause for you to fear; Act. and Mon. fol. 1096.
for if you repent and be heartily sorry for that you have done, there is for
you mercy with the Lord, who, for Christ's sake, will for give you; therefore be
not dismayed: And though the breakfast we are going to be sharp; yet, trusting
to the mercy of the Lord, we shall have a joyful dinner. And so went they
together to the place of execution, and took their death cheerfully.

Verse 3. Of spikenard, (...). In Thatia.
very costly] Herodotus reckons an alabaster box of ointment among the precious
gifts that Cambyses sent, for a present, to the King of Ethiopia. Mary thinks
nothing too good for him, whom her soul loved. She will honor him with the
best of her substance: she knew there was nothing lost; but though it took from
the heap, yet it increased the heap: as it is said of tithes and offerings,
Mal. 3. This made David so free and frollick, that he would not serve God of
that which cost him nothing: and that he made such plentiful preparation for
the Temple work. It is both love and good husbandry, to make our service to
God costly: His retributions are bountiful. This ointment in the text was a
costly confection, like that of the Church, Cant. 4.14 Spikenard and saffron,
calamus and cynamon, etc. Lib. 1. Antidot.
Now Galen writes, that in his time cynamon was very rare, and hard to be
found, except in the storehouses of princes. And Pliny reports, that a pound of
cynamon was worth a thousand denarij, that is 150 crowns of our money.

Verse 4. Then said one of his Disciples] St Matthew tells us, that all the
Disciples said thus. Judas was of so great esteem and authority amongst them,
that what he did, they are all said to do. So cunningly he had carried his
conspiracy, that they all suspected themselves rather then Judas, every one
said, Is it I?

Verse 5. Sold for three hundred pence] He, the thief, had quickly computed and
cast it up. Pliny tells us, that a pound of ordinary ointment might be had for
ten pence; but the best was worth three hundred and ten pence. So that Judas
was much about the good, as they say: And Mary spared for no cost; as neither
did Justinian in his rich Communion Table, Cedren. hist ad Annum 32. Justin. p.
317.
offered up by him in the Temple of Sophia in Constantinople, that had in it
(says the Author) all the riches of land and sea.

Verse 6. He was a thief] It Is the conceit of Tertullian, that even Judas
carried himself honestly and aright, usque ad loculorum officium, till he bare
the bag. When once he came to be master of the money, he grew into such a
devilish humor of covetousness, that rather then he would be out of taking,
he would sell his very Savior: And a fair match he made: For as Austin says,
Judas sold his salvation, and the Pharisees bought their damnation.

And had the bag, and bare] Our Savior then had a bag for store; and so big,
that it had need to have one specially deputed, to bear it: This was Judas; who
could be well content to bear the cross on his back, so, he might bear the bag
in his hand; which he thought (as all covetous men do) to be the best tongue a
man can use for himself, (...).
as the Greek word here used imports. But what an odions piece of hypocrisy
is that in the Cappucine Friars, that none of them may take or touch silver? at
the offer thereof they start back, as Moses from the serpent. Yet have they
ever a boy with a bag in their company, D. Hall's Epist. 5. Decad. 1.
that takes and carries it, and never complains of either metal or measure.

Verse 7. Let her alone] Christ crossed the traitor in his covetous desire of
fingering such a sum. Hence his discontent put him upon that desperate
design of contracting with the chief Priests. Horat.
He is resolved to have it, how ever he come by it: Rem, rem, quocunque modo
rem. Take heed of discontent. It was the devils sin, that threw him out of
heaven. Ever since which, this restless spirit loves to fish in troubled
waters, to dwell in a darkened soul: as in Saul, envious at David: and as some
heretics missing of preferment, have invented their heresies, ut se
consolarentur, as Epiphanius observed.

Verse 8. The poor ye have always with you] To give to when you please; and,
in gratifying whom, ye may glorify God, and secure your substance: for Manus
pauperum gazophylacium Christi, says an Ancient.

But me ye have not alwayes] And yet we have, in his poor members, the family
of faith. Hence Salvian sticks not to say, That Christ is Maximus mendicorum,
the greatest of beggars; and adds, Salv. ad Eccles. Cathol lib. 4.
Non eget miseria, sed eget misericordia: non eget deitate prose. sed eget
pietate pro suis.

Verse 9. And they came, etc.] Do the Pharisees what they could to the
contrary. Truth may be oppressed, not suppressed. Impij sunt piorum (...). (...),
ascandendo.
This people (like those branches of palmtrees borne by them, ver. 13.) spread
and sprang up, the more they were held under by the Highpriests.

But that they might see Lazarus] And fish somewhat out of him concerning the
future estate of the dead. But here they lost their labor.

Verse 10. That they might put Lazarus also to death] In malice is steeped the
venom of all vices. What agiant like madness was this, to take up arms
against heaven it self? to seek to kill a man, only because God had made him
alive? was it not because they were even acted and agitated by the devil? Si
videris aliquando persecutorem tuum nimis saevientem, scito quia ab ascensore
suo daemone perurgetur, says Bernard. Mr Bar. his Moses choice, page 34.
These Pharisees had sinned that sin to death; which made another, in the same
case, wish that his wife and children, and all the world might be damned
together with him. Hacket at the gallows cried out, O heavenly God -- show some
miracle out of the cloud to convert these Infidels, and deliver me from mine
enemies: But if not, Camdens Eli. sabeth 403.
I will set the heaven on fire, and with these hands pluck thee out of thy
throne: and other speeches he used, more unspeakable.

Verse 11. Because that by reason of him] This was it that imbittered the
Pharisees, as it does now their successors, the Papists. Ab eo tempore quo per
vos Papa Antichristus esse caepit, non modo non crevit ejus imperium, etc. De
Papa Romans l. 3. c. 21.
Bellarmine bewrayes his grief, and tells us, That ever since we proclaimed the
Pope to be that Antichrist, his Kingdom has not only not increased, but daily
more and more decreased. And Erasmus being asked by the Electour of Saxony, why
Luther was so hated by the Popish Clergy? For two great faults that he has
committed, said he, For meddling with the Popes triple Crown, and the Monks fat
paunches. Scultet Annal. page 25.


Verse 12. On the next day much people] The envious Pharisees feeding the while
upon their own hearts. Israel never increased so fast, as when Pharaoh most
oppressed them. Plures efficimur, quoties metimur, says Tertullian.

Verse 13. Took branches of palm-trees] Plutarch writes, that the Babylonians
make 360 benefits of the Palm Tree, and therefore do highly honor it. Pintus
upon Daniel tells us, that the Palm Tree will not grow in a fat ground, but
in a light and sandy: And if the soil be strong and fertile, they must cast
salt and ashes at the root, to qualify the strength of the ground. Sure it is,
that if prosperity be not seasoned with the salt of grace, it will be
unfruitful and unprofitable.

Hosanna, Blessed is the King, etc.] This shows they were well seen in David's
Psalms, which are, says Chrysostom, (...). Chry. Iost.
a rich storehouse of all good doctrines: And they are so penned, says
Athanasius, that every man may think they speak de se, in re sua, of himself,
and for his particular purpose; which, of other parts of Scripture, cannot be
affirmed.

Verse 24. When he had found a young asse] To make religion dance attendance
upon policy, Spec. belli sacri. p. 240. Sapientia mundi quae vult omnia
redigere in ordinem, etc. Melch. Adam in Luch. (...) Hinc Heraclidae Sophistae
(...). Ptolom. Sophista. Wolph. Mem. Lect.
says one, is to set the ass upon Christ, and not Christ upon the ass. These
three things, said Luther, will be the ruin of religion, Unthankfullnesse,
Security, and Carnal Policy.

Verse 15. Sitting upon an asse] Not upon a stately palfrey, as an earthly
Potentate; but upon a silly ass, without pomp, to comfort the poorest, and to
teach us humility, tolerance, patience. An ass is a beast profitable (whence
he has his name in the Original) but borne to bear burdens. Oneramus asinum,
says Bernard, and non curat, quia asinus est. But what notorious asses are
those superstitious Papists, that show the asses tail at Genua in Italy,
whereon our Savior rode, for a relic, and give it divine worship? Are not
these given up to the very efficacy of error?

Verse 16. These things understood not, etc.] They only beheld it, as a pretty
Pageant. They had read it often, in the Prophet, and now saw it acted; yet were
never the wiser, for present. Reader hear, though thou understandest not, God
may drop in divine light, when thou least look for it.

Verse 17. When he called Lazarus, etc.] This notable miracle the Evangelist,
as he had punctually described it, chap. 11. so, he cannot but again and again
recite it. We should set forth Gods noble acts, and not be sated. David never
linns talking of what God had done for his soul. Those in heaven have no rest
(and yet no unrest neither) crying, Rev. 4.8.
Holy, holy, holy, etc.

Verse 18. For this cause also the people met him] To the Pharisees extreme
grief and regret: to show that there is neither wisdom, nor understanding, nor
counsel against the Lord, Prove. 21.30.

Verse 19. Perceive ye how ye prevail nothing?] Thus they stir up one another
to more madness, as if hitherto they had been overmilde, Act. and Mon. fol.
1461.
and used too much gentleness. So Steven Gardener, being charged of cruelty by
Bradford, answered, I for my part have been challenged for being too gentle
oftentimes. Which thing Bonner confirmed, and so did almost all the audience,
that he had been ever too mild and moderate. So Bonner in open Court to the
Lord Major, They report me, said he, to seek blood, and call me bloody Bonner,
Ibid. 1537.
whereas. God knows, I never sought any man's blood in all my life, But a
certain unknown good woman, in a letter to Bonner, told him his own in these
words: Indeed you are called the common cutthroat, and general
slaughter-slave to all the Bishops of England. And therefore it is wisdom for
me and all other simple sheep of the Lord, Act. and Mon. fol. 167^.
to keep us out of your butcherly stall, as long as we can: especially since
you have such store already, that you are not able to drink all their blood,
lest you should break your belly; and therefore ye let them lie still, and die
for hunger, etc. Thus she to Bonner. As for D. Story, who was hanged, drawn and
quartered for his treason in Q. Elizabeth's reign, I see (said he in open
Parliament) nothing to be ashamed of (though he had been a furious persecutour
under Q Mary) so less I see to be sorry for, but rather because I have done no
more: Ibid. 1925.
wherein he said there was no default in him, but in them, whom he often and
earnestly had exhorted to the same: being not a little grieved therefore with
them, for that they labored only about the young and little sprigs and twigs,
while they should have stricken at the root (the Lady Elizabeth he meant) and
clean rooted it out. The Lord Paget in a certain consultation said, that King
Philip should never have any quiet commonwealth in England, Ibid. 1899.
unless Lady Elizabeth's head were stricken from her shoulders. Whereunto the
Spaniards answered, God forbid that their King and Master should have such a
mind, to consent to such a mischief. A Writ came down, whiles she was in the
Tower, subscribed with certain hands of the Council, for her execution, Engl
Elisah. page 109.
Steven Gardener being the engineer. Mr Bridges, Lieutenant of the Tower,
mistrusting false play, presently made haste to the Queen, who renounced and
reverst it. And yet of her, that was true that Josephus writes of Alexandra,
Ipsa solemn nomen regium ferebat, caeterum omnem regni potestatem Pharisaei
possidebant.

Verse 21. Sir, we would see Jesus] That is, We would have private conference
with him; for they had seen him, likely, as he came riding into the City. Our
Savior seems not to have yet admitted them, because the time appointed for
their calling was not yet come. Every thing is beautiful in its time: Eccles.
3.11.
but as fish and flesh, so other things too, are naught out of season.

Verse 23. That the Son of man should be glorified] That is, crucified: but he
looked through death, and saw Heaven beyond it: so must we: then shall we say,
Surely the bitterness of death is past. This made Simeon sing out his soul:
Hilarion chide it out; 1 Samuel 15. Egredere o anima mea
Taylour fetch a frisk when he was come near the place where he was burned;
Bradford put off his cap and thank God, when the keepers wife brougth him word
he was to be burned on the morrow: Act. and Mon.
Roper stand in the fire with his arms stretched out like a rood: Hawks clap
his hands over his head three times, when they were all on a light fire, etc.

Verse 24. Ne Iesum quidem audias glorio^um. nisi videris prius cruc fixum.
Luch. epist. ad Melanct.
Except a corn of wheat etc.] The Apostles thought Christ should have been
presently glorified. He lets them here know, that he must first suffer, before
he enter into his glory; bear the cross, before he wear the Crown; pass the
stroke of deaths flaming sword, before he come into Paradise.

Verse 25. He that loves his life] As Christ loved not his life to the death
for us: so neither must we for him. If every hair of my head were a man, Act.
and Mon. fol. 1438.
I would suffer death in the opinion and faith that I am now in, said John
Ardely Martyr, to Bonner. God be praised, said D. Taylour, since my
condemnation, I was never afraid to die: Gods will be done. If I shrink from
Gods truth, I am sure of another manner of death then had Judge Hales, Ibid.
1382.
etc.

Verse 26. If any man serve me, let, etc.] Art thou not glad to fare as
Phocion? (...). plut.
said he to one that was to die with him. How much more to die with and for
Christ?

Verse 27. Now is my soul troubled] Christi perturbatio nos tranquillat, and
infirmitas firmat, says Augustine.

Father, save me from this hour] As man, he naturally feared and deprecated
death; such a dreadful death especially as he was to suffer. (...), says the
Greek Letany; by thine unknown sufferings, Good Lord deliver us. Howbeit this
was but with his sensitive will; for his rational will was ever the same with
that of his Father.

Verse 28. Then came there a voice from Heaven] God sometimes gives a sensible
answer to the prayers of his people, as they are praying, or immediately after,
as Dan. 9.21. Acts 4 31. And Luther praying for the good success of Gods cause
in Germany, came leaping out of his study, with Vicimus, vicimus, in his mouth.

Verse 29. Fuerunt praeter Apostotos etiam aliqui minas sinistri interpretes.
Calvin.
That it thundered: others said, An Angel, etc.] But the Apostles and some few
others understood, that it was neither thunder, nor an Angel, but God that
spoke. In like sort nowadayes God speaks by his word, but few hear him in it.
The word of God (says Forbes on Rev. 14.) has three degrees of operation in
the hearts of men. First, it falls to men's ears, as the sound of many waters;
a confused found, which commonly brings neither terror nor joy, but yet a
wondering and acknowledgment of a strange force, and more then humane power,
Mark. 1.22, 29. Acts 13.41. The second effect is, the voice of thunder; which
brings not only wonder, but fear: These two may be in the reprobate, as Faelix,
and the multitude in our text. The third effect, proper to the elect, is the
sound of harping; whiles the word not only ravisheth with admiration, and
strikes the conscience with terror, but also fills it with sweet peace and
joy.

Verse 30. But for your sakes] That ye might believe: which if ye do not, how
shall ye escape, that neglect so great salvation, such an heavenly preacher?
See then that ye refuse not, that ye shift not off him that speaks from heaven:
(...) Heb. 11.15, 16.
see that ye turn not from him, whose voice once shook the earth, but now
heaven too, etc.

Verse 31. The Prince of this world] Gratian says, Ignatius his Concl. 43.
The devil is called Prince of this world, as a King at chesse, or as the
Cardinal of Ravenna, only by derision. That power he has is merely usurped,
and because the world will have it so, which even lies down in that wicked
one, as St John has it, that is, 1 John 5.10. Quomodo Plautus. In fermento
tota jacet uxor.
under the power and vassallage of the Devil. It is wholly set upon
wickedness, as Aaron says of the people, Exodus 32.22.

Verse 32. And if I be lifted up, etc.] Pope Urban the sixth said, that these
words, Give unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's, were abolished when Christ
was lifted up from the earth, and drew all things to him; Jacob Rev. de vit
Pont. page 213.
that is (as he expounds it) when Christ ascended, he drew to the Popes Empire
all Kings and their Kingdoms, making him King of Kings, and Lord of Lords. Is
not this a sweet Interpreter?

Verse 33. Signifying what death, Absalom Mart fureus pensitis a^^bre obit.
etc.] Be lifted up betwixt heaven and earth, as Absalom was, who therein says
Gretser the Jesuit, became a lively figure of Christ crucified. Sed o mirum
and delirum figurativae crucis fabrum!

Verse 34. Quilibet nos flrum de lege interrogatus, faciltus quam nomen suum
respondet. Jos.
We have heard out of the Law] But had they never heard out of the Law, that
Christ must first suffer, and then enter into his glory? Isa. 53 2. Dan. 9.26.
There Is none of us Jews, says Josephus, but being asked of any point of the
Law, can answer to it more readily, then tell his own name. Is it then
ignorance or malice that they thus cavil and quarrel our Savior?

Verse 35. Yet a little while is the light, etc.] The day of grace, which is
very clear and bright, is usually a short one. Therefore break off your sins
by repentance: be abrupt in the work: for life is short, opportunities
headlong, and, once past, irrecoverable. He is the wise man that prefers
opportunity before time, in laying hold upon eternal life: but fools are
semper victuri, says Seneca, they will, and they will, etc. so they trifle,
and by futuring, fool away their own salvation. Amend, before the drawbridge
be taken up. Charles King of Sicily and Jerusalem was called Cunctator: not in
the sense as Fabius, because he stayed till opportunity came; but because he
stayed till opportunity was past. Too many such. Manna must be gathered in the
morning, or not at all: and not kept till the morrow, lest it stink.

Verse 38. That the saying of the Prophet] These unbeleevers were not such,
because the Prophet had so foretold it; but the Prophet therefore foretold it,
because they should be such. Like as Joseph's foretelling the famine, was no
cause of it, but an antecedent only.

Verse 39. Therefore they could not believe, etc.] They could not, because they
would not, says Theophylact out of Chrysostom, who yet extolleth man's
free will more then is meet. Contra Julian. l. 1 c. 2.
Pelagianis nondum litigantibus, Patres securius loquebantur, says Augustine.

Verse 40. He has hardened their hearts] With a judiciary hardness. This is in
some respect worse then hell; since (besides that God inflicts it as a
punishment of former obstinacy) it is one of the greatest sins, and so far
greater in evil then any of the greatest punishments. Hence it was the saying
of a Reverend man, If I must be put to my choice, I had rather be in hell with
a sensible heart, then live on earth with a reprobate mind.

Verse 41. When he saw his glory] His train only in the Temple. Isa. 6.1. where
the Seraphims are said to hide their faces with two wings, as with a double
scarf before Gods glorious brightness, that would put out their eyes else: they
clap their wings on their faces, as men do their hands, when the lightning
flasheth in their eyes.

Verse 42. Lest they should be put out etc.] which would redound to their
disgrace: and this, these Ambitionists could not away with. But what says a
Reverend Divine? Bravely contemn all contumel es and contempts for thy
conscience, taking them as crowns, and confirmations of thy conformity to
Christ.

Verse 43. They loved the praise of men] Which what is it else, but a little
stinking breath? These have their reward, Mercedem suam, non Dei, says
Hierome. How much better Luther, Haud velim, Erasme, gloria aut nomine vehi:
Epist. ad Nic. Hansm.
Major est mihi timor in laudibus, gaudium vero in maledictis and blasphemijs.

Verse 44. Jesus cried, etc.] As being now to cry his last to them, and is
therefore so earnest in his contestation. This was the Conclamatum est to this
perverse people, his farewell-Sermon, etc.

Verse 45. Sees him that sent me.] For God was in Christ reconciling the world
to himself, Col 2.
and in him the Godhead dwelt bodily: So that in all our addresses, we must
fix the eye of faith on the humane nature of Christ, and there speak as to our
God. Like as where I see the body of a man, there I know his soul is, and
therefore I speak to his understanding, when and where I see his body, because
they are not severed: so, viewing by faith Christ's manhood now glorified, I
there see and speak to the great God, because I know he is there personally
united.

Verse 46. I am come a light into the world] Not by participation only (as the
Apostles were the lights of the world, Mat. 5.14.) but by nature. How
prodigiously blasphemous then was that Bishop in the Council of Trent, that
(in his oration there made, C^r el. Episcop. Bipontan.
) applied this text to the Pope, who at that time was Paul the third, an odious
hypocrite?

That whosoever believes in me etc.] And he that this way seeks the Kingdom of
Heaven, must, with him in Justin, Stratonis servus, ap. Justin. l. 18.
look for this Sun of righteousness in the West; that is, dying upon the altar
of his cross: so shall he become King of Heaven.

Verse 47. I judge him not] viz. Whiles I am here on earth. I sustain another
person now, that men may come apace to me without fear. Some ancient heretics
hold, that God in the time of the Law, was a severe Judge: and now, in the
days of the Gospel, he was all made of mercy and mildness. But the Apostle
says somewhat otherwise. Heb. 2.1, 2, 3. God is more peremptory in his
judgments now, then ever of old.

Verse 48. The word that I have spoken] If the word shall judge us, then ought
it much more to be a Judge of our doings now, said Mr Philpot Martyr. Therefore
let it be president in all Assemblies and judgments, says Beza: as in the
Nicen Council, Constantine caused the Bible to be set upon a desk, as Judge of
all controversies.

Verse 49, 50. For I have not spoke of my self] The divine authority of
Gospel-doctrine, is here, in the close of this last Sermon ad populum, most
gravely asserted by our Savior; as that which is undoubtedly authentic,
because it comes from the Father, Sic de Virgilio S^aliger, dc Tacito Peacham.
e cujus ore nil temere excidit. David (says one) sets the 119 Psalm as a Poem
of commendation before the book of God. The son of David (say I) sets this
Text, as his Imprimatur, his authoritative License, at the end of the Gospel.
And as a friend once wrote to Aegidius Abbot of Norinberg, concerning the 119
Psalm, that they were, verba vivenda, non legenda, words not to be read, but
lived: the same may I affirm of our Saviors Sermons, and I know that his
commandment is life everlasting.

CHAP. XIII.
Verse 1. That he should depart, etc.]
THis definition of death, Calv. in loc.
says Calvin, pertains to the whole body of the Church. It is to the Saints no
more then a passage to the Father, an inlet to eternal life. Whether a
Christians death be a burnt-offering (of Martyrdom) or a peace offering (of a
natural death) whether it be by a sudden change, as Eliah's, or a lingering
sickness, as Elisha's, it is a sweet sacrifice ascending to God, as Manoah's
Angel ascended in the smoke. This made Basil, when the Emperors Lieutenant
threatened to kill him, cry out, (...). (...). Ioa. Manlij. loc. com.
(...), I would he would: for so should he soon send me to my heavenly father,
to whom I now live, and to whom I desire to hasten. This made Velcurio a Dutch
Divine, when he lay upon his deathbed, break out into these sweet words, Pater
est amator, Filius Redemptor, Spiritus Sanctus Consolator; quomodo itaque
tristitia affici possim? The Father loves me, the Son redeemed me, the holy
Ghost comforts me, how then can I be cast down at the approach of death? And
the like triumphant words were uttered to me, by my late Reverend good friend
and father, Mr John Jackson, Pastor of Binton in Warwickshire, when he lay a
dying, and laid his last charge upon me, to preach Christ, who had swallowed up
death in victory.

To the end he loved them] Such fast frinds are hard to find. (...). Plato.
A friend is a very changeable creature, says one; as soon on, and as soon off
again: as soon in, and as soon out, as Joabs dagger was; clear at the top, and
muddy at the bottom, as ponds are; white at the waxing of the moon, and black
at the waining of it, as the fish Scolopidus in the river Araxis is said to be.
Andronicus the Greek Emperor, whom but yesterday he had used most kindly, and
enrolled among his best friends, upon them to day he frowned and tyrannized
most cruelly: Turk. hist.
so that you might have seen (says the Historian) the same man the same day
(as it is reported of Xerxes his Admiral) to be crowned and beheaded, to be
graced and disgraced. So of Tiberius and Mahomet the first Emperor of Turks,
it is said, that in their love there was no assurance; but their least
displeasure was death. Christ whom he loves once he loves ever, and though we
break often with him, yet he abides faithful. 2 Timothy 13. and his foundation
stands steady, having this seal; The Lord knows them that are his, verse. 19.

Verse 2. The devil having now put] He is, likely, at one end of every
temptation to sin: as the hand of Joab was in the tale of the woman of Tekoah.
He rubs the firebrand of evil concupiscence, and makes it send out sparkles.

Verse 3. Jesus knowing, etc.] This is prefaced to the washing of his Disciples
feet; to show that he did it not rashly, or out of baseness of spirit, as
forgetting the dignity of his person and place, as Ahaz did, 2 King. 16.7. and
those, Isa. 57.9. and David also in the Court of Achish. There is a (...), a
comeliness to be kept in every condition.

Verse 4. He rises from supper] So the rite of the Paschall supper required:
as Beza shows in his Annotations upon, Mat. 26.20.

Verse 5. After that he powers water, etc.] So does the Pope once a year, in
an apish imitation of our Savior. As likewise, when he is new elected, in his
solemn Lateran procession, he takes copper out of his Chamberlains lap, and
scatters it among the people, D. Hall on Mat 5.20.
and (lie and all) says, Silver and gold have I none.

Verse 6. Then comes he to Peter] He came first to him (for the former verse
sets forth his intent, rather then his act of washing.) And yet St Chrysostom
tells of some, that would needs have it, that he began with Judas. Like as the
Papists say, that our Savior appeared first, after his resurrection, to the
Virgin Mary: though the text be plain, that he first showed himself to Mary
Magdalen. Antipheron Orietes apud Aristot.
These are like him in Aristotle, that thought that every where he saw his own
shape and picture going before him.

Verse 7. But thou shall know hereafter] Disterent degrees of knowledge are
bestowed at several times. Our hearts are like narrow mouthed vessels: but
then shall we know, if we follow on to know the Lord. Hos. 6.3. and take heed
that we leak not, Heb. 2.1.

Verse 8. Thou shall never wash my feet] This was an immoderate modesty, a
proud humility: so is it in them that refuse Gospel-comforts because they are
unworthy. Domine, non sum dignus, at sum indigens, Mat. 3.15.
said Pomeran. Tibi adest nimia humilitas, Thou have too much humility, said
Luther to Staupicius. So the Baptist was as much to blame, in refusing to wash
Christ, as Peter here to be washed by him.

Verse 9. Lord, not my feet only] Here he seems to be as far out on the other
side. Medio tuti ^^mus ibis Ovid. Plin. lib. ^. cap. 8.
How hard is it to hold a mean? Virtue is placed between two extremes, as the
Planet Jupiter between cold Saturn and fiery Mars.

Verse 10. Needs not save to was his feet] For though bathed in that blessed
fountain, Zech. 13.1. and fully justified, yea, and freed from the stain and
reign of sin, yet not from the relics, to keep us humble; that when we look
upon our feathers, we may withal look upon the feet still defiled, and so be
still cleansing our selves from all silthinesse of flesh and spirit. 2 Cor 7.1.
The inwards and the feet in a sacrifice were to be washed above the rest;
because the intrails contain the excrements: and the legs, because they tread
in the dirt. Answerable whereunto, we are called upon to wash our hearts, Jer.
4.14. and our feet, here. The comparison seems to be taken from those that are
washed in baths: for though their whole bodies besides are washed; yet, going
forth, they touch the earth with their feet, and so are fain to wash again.

Verse 11. He knew who should betray him] And yet he vouchsafed to wash his
feet. This was stupenda dignatio, a wonderful condescension, an imparallelled
patience.

Verse 12. Know ye what I have done to you?] This was our Saviors usual order
to catechize his Disciples, (...) Sicut in (...) una vox his audiri dehet, tain
ex Cate^^^ ^e^o, quain ^x i^ so Catech sta Palor.
after he had said or done any thing for their instruction. So did the
Apostles, Gal 6.6. 1 Cor. 14.19. and the Primitive Pastors: They had their
Credis? Credo: Abrenuncias? Abrenuncio, as it were by an Echo, as the word
imports.

Verse 13. Ye call me Master, and Lord] A little before our Savior came in the
flesh, the Jew-Doctours had taken up diverse titles in this order, Rabbi,
Rabban, Rab, Rabba, Gaon, Moreh, Morenu, Alsted Chrozol. page 429.
and Moreh tsedek. These they did arrogantly appropriate to themselves: But
Christ was the true owner of them all.

Verse 14. Ye ought also to wash one another feet] What so great matter is it
then to salute others? to seek reconciliation with them, etc? Angels think not
themselves too good to serve the Saints: Kings and Queens shall bow down to
them with their faces toward the earth, and lick up the dust of their feet,
Isa. 49.23.

Verse 15. For I have given you an example] (...). This St Peter calls (...), a
copy for us to write after. 1 Pet. 2.2^. Ibid ver. 9. (...).
And in the same chapter says, that we should preach forth Christ's virtues:
our lives should be as so many Sermons upon Christ's life, whilst we strive to
express him to the world, in all his imitable graces. This is to walk in
Christ, Collos. 2.6. to walk as Christ walked, 1 John 2.6. The meditation of
Christ's meekness, converted the Eunuch, Acts 8.32, 33. etc. And we read of an
Earl, called Eleazarus, that being given to immoderate anger, was cured of that
disordered affection, by studying of Christ, and of his patience. This
meditation he never suffered to pass from him, before he found his heart
transformed into the similitude of Jesus Christ. In vita ejue apud ^uriu^^.
Crux pendentis, cathedra docentis.

Verse 16. The servant is not greater, etc.] This answers all our exceptions
against brotherly offices, I am his elder, better, greater then he, etc. But
which of us can say, I am a God? Christ washed his Disciples feet, though he
knew that the Father had given all things into his hands, etc. as is expressly,
and for this very purpose noted here by the Evangelist, verse. 3.

Verse 17. If ye know these things, etc.] Knowledge without practice, is but as
rain in the middle region: or as a horn in the Un corns head; which if it
were in a wise man's hand, would be very useful and medicinable, but as now, is
hurtful.

Verse 18. I know whom I have chosen] Judas he had not chosen, but to the
Apostleship only. All this Judas hears, and is not moved at it: such a
stupifying sin is hypocrisy. The Germans have a Proverb, Quam Deus
excaecaturus est, huic primum oculos claudit. And the Latins say, Deus quam
destruit, dementat. Baclolcer.
God besots the man, whom he means to destroy.

Verse 19. Ye may believe that I am he] And that ye may not stumble or stagger,
though ye see Judas play the traitor. 2 Timothy 2.18, 19. The apostasy of
Hymenaeus and Philetus, a pair of eminent professors, was like to have shaken
many: Insomuch as the Apostle was fain to make apology, Nevertheless, the
foundation of God remains sure, etc.

Verse 20. Verily, verily I say, etc.] Here our Savior seems to go on where he
left, verse. 17. That between, being a digression. Digressions, says one, are
not always and absolutely unlawful. Gods Spirit sometimes draws aside the
doctrine, to satisfy some soul, which the Preacher knows not, and sparingly
used, it quickens the attention. Bisi^^d in the Gelo^.
But God may force it, yet man may not frame it: and it is a most happy
ability, to speak punctually, directly to the point.

Verse 21. He was troubled in spirit.] The Stoics then were out, in holding,
that passions befall not a wise man: And Jesuited Gonzaga, was not so much to
be magnified, who would not permit any man to love him: and when his father
died, all the grief be took, Cae^erum (...) videtur vester Gonzaga. etc. D.
Pride. contra Eudemon.
was no more then this; Now, said he, there is nothing hinders me to say, Our
Father which art in Heaven. Christ was thoroughly troubled here, that any one so
highly advanced by him (as in the former verse, He that receives whomsoever I
send, receives me, etc.) should be so ill-minded toward him, as to betray
him. Id^o deteriores sumus, quia meliores esse debemus, says Salvian, we are
therefore the worse, because we should be better. It was no small aggravation
to Solomon's sin, that he forsook that God, 1 King. 11.9.
that had appeared unto him twice. Our offenses are increased by our
obligations.

Verse 22. Looked one upon another, doubting, etc.] Our Savior sifted them;
and hereby put them upon the duty of self-examination; ever seasonable, but
especially before the Sacrament, as here, (...). (...) 11.28.
Let a man examine himself (and do it exactly, as the word signifies) though
the heart hang off never so much. Men are as loath to review their actions, and
read the blurt'd writing of their hearts, as school-boyes are to perse their
lessons, and false-latines they have made. But this must be done, or they are
undone for ever. And sparing a little pains at first doubles it in the end: As
he who will not cast up his books, his books will cast him up, at length.
C^lie^ exuti, and put (...) inni^i, in l^^^u^is semisupin ja^e^a^^. (...). in
for.


Verse 23. Now there was leaning on Jesus bosom] So must we do at the
Sacrament, by the actuation of our faith, ascending up into heaven, and
fetching down Christ into the heart, that we may have intimate and entire
communion with him. By the force of our faith at the Lords table, cruci
haeremus, sanguinem sugimus, Cyp. de ca^a Dom.
and intra ipsa Redemptoris nostri vulnera figimus linguam, says St Cyprian.

Verse 24. Simon Peter therefore beckned:] Peter, that heretofore could not
think his heart so unfound as to deny his master, now fears the ugly monster
of fearlesse betraying. In man's heart, as in the sea, there is that Leviathan,
therefore also creeping things innumerable, Psalm. 104.26.

Verse 25. He then lying on Jesus breast] Ad pectus allapsus, In accubitu mes
ille ut accumberent uxores in sinu vtrorum. Lips ad Tacit l. 11.
as laying his ear to our Saviors mouth, that he might whisper him who it was:
for things were as yet secretly carried, and the traitor not discovered, save
to John only, who knew Christ's soul-secrets, and afterward received his
Revelation.

Verse 26. He it is to whom I shall] Here our Savior not only feeds his hungry
enemy, but shows him like courtesy as we do to one we drink to at table; yea,
though he knew the traitor would make an ill use of it. Thus should a
Christian punish his persecutours. No vengeance but this is heroical, and fit
for Christ's followers. Thus Bradford saved Bourn, that helped to burn him. Act
and Mon. sol. 1456. Ibid. 1358.
Saunders sent to prison by Steven Gardener, gave God thanks that had given him
at last a place of rest and quietness, where he might pray for the Bishops
conversion. It was grown to a Proverb concerning Cranmer, Do my Lord of
Canterbury a shrewd turn, and then you may be sure to have him your friend,
Ibid. 169^. Domine recedatis: nam si percipiunt T^u ^onici, and nostri devoti,
morte moriem^ni. Func.
while he lives. Henry the seventh, Emperor of Germany, feeling himself
poisoned in the Sacramental bread by a Monk, called him, and said unto him,
Domine, recedatis etc. Be gone, Sr, for if my followers find you, you will die
for it.

Verse 27. Satan entered into him] Gat more full possession of him. Let them
that depart the public assemblies ere all be done, as Judas did, take heed
they meet not the devil at the door. Canon. 24.
The fourth Council of Carthage excommunicated such, and so delivered them up
to Satan; which is a grievous punishment; for then they lie open to all
wickedness, as Ananias, whose heart Satan had filled from corner to corner.
Luther, when he had read certain letters sent to him from Vitus Theodorus,
fetched a deep sigh, and said, Heu, Selneccer. Paedag. Christ.
quam furit satan, and impellit securos homines ad horrenda flagitia, quae
corpus and animum perdunt! Oh how the devil rages and drives on secure
persons, to horrible and damnable wickedness! That which moved Luther to say
so, was a sad relation made in that letter, of a certain widow, who being with
child by a young scholar, could not have her child baptized, unless she
would tell the Priest, who was the childs father: Whereat she being grievously
vexed, first killed her child, and then hanged her self. Which when the
scholar heard of, he likewise stabbed himself to death. The Priest
understanding what tragedies had followed, upon his refusing to baptize the
child, hanged himself also. Now, who can doubt but all this was done by the
instigation of the devil? Men usually defy him and spet at his name: but they
spet not low enough, they spet him out of their mouths, but not out of their
hearts: there he plays Rex, and, so long cares no more for their cursings of
him, then he does for holy water.

That thou do, do quickly] This is no command, but a prediction by way of
detestation; like as when God said to Balaam, Go, for I know thou will go after
the wages of wickedness. Some note here, Wards Sermon.
that, even to Judas, Christ says, That thou do, do quickly, so odious is
dullness unto him.

Verse 28. Now no man at the table knew, etc.] For John had not told Peter the
secret committed to him by Christ, though he were very desirous to have known
it, Si sapis, arcano vina reconde cado. (...). L^nan exemp. Prigy ^. Chapter 1.
A friend, that can both keep counsel and give counsel, is worth his weight
in gold. When one desired to see Alexanders treasure, he bad one of his
servants show him, not his talents of silver, but his trusty friends.

Verse 29. For some of them thought] An example of Christian simplicity. As bad
men muse as they use, so good men measure others by themselves; and so are
often deceived, as here. Charity thinks no evil 1 Cor. 13.5.

Or that he should give something to the poor] Christ had not much, yet had
somewhat for the poor: so must even the poor day-labourer, Ephesians. 4 28 the
necessitous widow, Mar. 12 42.

Verse 30. He then having received the sop] So many, having received the Supper
of the Lord, eat their bane, and drink their poison: that they eat is sawced,
and that they drink is spiced with the bitter wrath of God: their hearts are
woefully hardened, and their dispositions to sin seven times more inflamed
then ever before.

Verse 31. Therefore when he was gone out] The room being rid of the traitor,
Christ deals more freely and familiarly with the rest: and arming them against
the scandal of the cross, he calls his death his glory, esteems his crown of
thorns, more precious then Solomon's diadem; looks upon his wales as spangles,
his blows on the face as ingots, his wounds as gemms, his spittings on as sweet
ointment, his cross as his throne. This is a paradox to flesh and blood: Jews
and Gentiles jear at it; (...). Luc. in vita Per^er. Persuaserunt sibt
tefaelices se immortalitate fruitures, etc. Ibid. Actius Antoninus in Asia cum
perse ueretur Christianor, etc. Tertull.
as Lucian the atheist, who rails upon Christ blasphemously, calling him the
crucified Impostour: And as for Christians, they foolishly believe, says he,
that they shall enjoy immortality, and live in bliss for ever: therefore they
set light by life, yea many of them ofter themselves voluntarily to be slain
for their superstition. Thus he. And another Heathen Proconsul, when he had
tired himself with killing Christians, and saw no end of it, but that they came
thicker upon him, crying out, we are Christians, etc. he cursed them, and cried
out, O miseri, si libet perire, number vobis rupes aut restes desunt? O wretches,
can you find no other way to die, but I must be troubled with you?

Verse 32. And shall straightway] Thus for the joy that was set before him, he
endured the cross, despising the shame; as being shortly to sit down at the
right hand of the throne of God, Heb. 12.2. Look we on him, and do likewise.
There were in Greece certain fields, called. Palaestrae, where young men
exercised themselves in wrestling. In these were set up statues of some valiant
champions, that the young wrestlers might fix their eyes upon them, and so be
encouraged. Can we choose a better Champion then Christ to eye and imitate,
should we be called to resist unto blood, striving against sin? He did not only
sanguinem suffundere, sed effundere: And how did he support himself under the
cross, but by the forethought of the crown?

Verse 33. Little children, yet a little while] Here our Savior uses the
self-same words to his Apostles, which before he had used to the Jews, with
whom he was angry; so to cut off all hope from them of his corporal presence.
The fiction of the Ubiquity began about the time of Berengarius; was fostered
and furthered by Gerson, Chancellor of Paris, who first taught the real
communication of properties, by means whereof the humane nature of Christ
received this prerogative, said he, that at his Supper (and then only) it might
be in many places at once, wheresoever the Supper was celebrated. But in the
year of Christ 1524, Jacobus Faber Stapulensis taught at Paris, that by the
same reason Christ might be as well corporally present in all places at once,
as he was at the Supper. For which doctrine of the Ubiquity, he was opposed,
the year following, by one Natalis Beda, and, by the Sorbonists, banished out
of France. This is the Nativity of that famous Ubiquity, which being cast out
of France, Luther brought back into the Churches of Germany; Brentius furbished
it over, and Smidelinus obtruded it upon many places and persons, whether they
would or no: whence he is surnamed, Vbiquitatis Apostolus. How much better that
good woman in the book of Martyrs, that being asked by the Bishops; Act. and
Mon.
Do thou believe that the body of Christ is in the Sacrament really and
substantially? I believe, said she, that that is a real lie, and a
substantial lie. Domitius Calderinus the Italian, who flourished in the year
1442. when he was called by his friends to go to Mass, L. Vives.
was wont to say (as Vives tells us) camus ad communem errorem.

Verse 34. A new Commandment, etc.] New, ratione claritatis and facilitatis;
for now there is abundance of spirit given by Christ, who writes this affection
in our hearts; as of old, the Law was written in stone. Besides that, he is
become a new pattern and example of the rule: and so, it is become a new
commandment: not in respect of the matter of the duty, but of the form of
observing it. For the old rule was, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self.
But now that form (as I have loved you) has something in it that is more
express; and, for the incomparable sufficiency of the president, is matchless
and more full of incitation to fire affection: there being far more
incentives and motives to love since Christ came, and gave himself for us. And
this is appointed here, for the Disciples and our solace in the want of Christ's
bodily presence, as loving fellow members to strive by all means to delight in
the loving society one of another.

Verse 35. By this shall all men know] Other men's disciples are known by their
titles, habits, ceremonies, etc. as the Popes shavelings (which yet is grown so
bald a business, that now they begin to be ashamed of it) but love is Christ's
cognizance, acknowledged by very Heathens; who could say, that no people in the
world did love one another so, as Christians did. As the curtains of the
Tabernacle were joined by loops: so are true Christians by love Philadelphia is
blamed for nothing, Rev. 3.18.

Verse 36. Whither go thou?] That deep conceit he had drunk in of an
earthly Kingdom, so nung in his light, that he could not see whither Christ was
ascending. A little sawcer held close to the eyes, hinders the sight of a huge
hill.

But thou shall follow me] Perhaps, in the same kind of death; but to heaven,
most certainly.

Verse 37. I will lay down, etc.] Peter was melius semper animatus quam
armatus, better affected then appointed. Petrus se Christo opposuit, se
caeteris praeposuit, sibt totu^n imposuit. Chrysostom.
His heart deceived him, as did David's, Psalm. 39.1, 2. He said he would look to
his ways, bridle his tongue, etc. but soon after, he brake his word; My heart
was hot, etc.

Verse 48. The cock shall not crow.] Christ mentions the cock, quia tam
strenuum pugnatorem decebat tale praeconium. So Rev. 6.13. Pastors revolt, as
green figgs fall off, with no ado. In the Palatinate they fell to Popery, as
fast as leaves fall in Autumn.

CHAP. XIV.
Verse 1. Let not your heart, etc.]
OUr Savior sweetly proceeds in his swan-like song. (...) Host. var. lib. 1.
Mortis articulo instante, and sanguine vale affe^^o va^de horride mugiunt.
Sirenes.
Aelian tells us, that he once heard a dying swan sing most heavenly and
harmoniouslly. The Poet shows the manner of it, when he says, -- longa canoros
Dat per colla modos --. Of the Sirens, (on the contrary) it is reported, that
how sweetly soever they sang before, yet at death they make a horrid noise, and
unpleasant roaring. Semblably, good men utter their best usually at last; the
wine of the spirit being the strongest and liveliest in them. Whereas wicked
men are then usually at worst, and go out with a stench, as the devil is said
to do: And as Melancthon said of Eccius his last wicked work, written of
Priests marriage, 10. Manl. loc. com. Melch. Adam. in vita Calvini. M. Boltons
Assiz^ Ser^^, ^ 7.
Non fuit cygnea cantio, sed ultimus crepitus: and sicut felis fugiens pedit,
sie ille moriens, hunc crepitum cecinit. So of Baldwine the apostate, one
says, that vivere simul and maledicere desiit, he died cursing, as that wretch
did swearing, who desperately also desired the standers by to help him with
oaths, and to swear for him.

Verse 2. I would have told you] And not have sed you with false hopes of an
Utopian happiness, as the devil deals by his, whom he brings into a fools
paradise; as Mahomet by his, B^unts voyage, page 6^.
to whom he promises in Paradise delicious fare, pleasant gardens, and other
sensual delights eternally to be enjoyed, etc. Christ is no such Impostour.

Verse 3. I will come again, etc.] O look up and long for this consolation of
Israel; say as Sisera's mother, Why are his charets (those clouds) so long in
coming?

Heu pietas ubi prisca? profana o tempora! Mundi Faex! Vesper! prope Nox! o
mora! Christ veni. There may ye be also] Christ counts not himself full, till
he have all his members about him: hence the Church is called, the fulness of
him that fills all things, Ephesians. 1.23.

Verse 4. And whither I go ye know] Some little knowledge they had, such as
Thomas in the next verse denies to be any at all, yet Christ acknowledges it.
The tenor of the new covenant requires no set measures of grace. The first
springings in the womb of grace, are precious before God, Ephesians. 2 1. he blesses
our buds, Isa. 61.11. and in our dunghill of ignorance, can find out his own
part of knowledge, as here.

Verse 5. Lord, we know not whether thou go, etc.] No, Thomas? what, are ye
also ignorant? They knew, but knew not that they knew: their knowledge was yet
but confused and indistinct; they saw men, but as it were walking like trees,
till their eyes were better anointed with the eye salve of the Spirit. A man
(says one) may have grace, M. Gatak Just man's Jay, p. ^1.
and yet not know it, (as the Embryo has life, and yet knows it not) yea, he
may think he has it not, as we seek for keys that are in our pocket; or think
we have lost a jewel, that we have looked up in our chest: yea, as the butcher
looks for the candie that sticks in his hat, by the light of that he
seeks.

Verse 6. I am the way and the Truth, etc.] As if he should say, Thou have no
whither to go but to me, nor which way to go but by me, that thou may attain
eternal life. Which made Bernard say, Mel^h Adam. in vites exter. page 235.
Sequemur, Domine, te, per te, ad te: Te, qui a Veritas, per te, quia Via, ad
te, quia Vita. And this was one of those sweet sayings, that old Beza had much
in his mouth, a little before his death.

No man comes unto the Father, but by me.] Christ has paved us a new and
living way to God, with his own meritorious blood: and his flesh stands as a
skreen betwixt us, and those everlasting burnings, Isa. 33.14. Let Papists say
of their Saints, Per hune itur ad Deum, sed magis per hune. Let us say of all
their he and she Saints, as that Heathen, Contemno minutos istos Deos, modo
Jovem (J^sum) propitium habeam.

Verse 7. And from hence firth ye know him] Or else the more shame for you,
having had me (his express image) so long amongst you. Christians have a
privilege above he Church of the old Testament. The sea about the Altar was
brazen, 1 King. 7.23. and what eyes could pierce through it? Now our sea about
the Throne is glassie, Revel. 4.6. like the Crystal, clearly conveying the
light and sight of God in Christ to our eyes.

Verse 8. Lord, show us the Father] They would have seen the Father face to
face with their bodily eyes, as they saw the Son. But that no man can do and
live, Exodus 33. We cannot see the Sun in rota, as the Schools speak, in the
circle wherein it runs, but only in the beams. So neither can we see God in his
essences: (...). Heb. 1.3.
in his Son we may, who is the resplendency of his Fathers glory.

Verse 9. Have I been so long, etc.] May not Christ justly shame and shent us
all for knowing no more of him all this while? Ignorance under means of
knowledge is a blushfull sin, 1 Cor. 15.34.

Verse 10. The words that I speak.] Our Savior alleges for himself the
Divinity both of his word and works. He was mighty, says Peter, both in word
and deed. Ministers also must, in their measure, be able to argue and approve
themselves to be men of God, by sound doctrine and good life. And not be, as
our Savior says, the Pharisees were, and as Epictetus says many Philosophers
were such, (...)

Verse 11. Believe me that I am, etc.] Take my bare word without any further
pawn or prooff. This is an honor due to Christ only, that he is, (...), He is
Amen, the faithful and true witness. Revel. 3.14.


Verse 12. And greater works then these.] Greater in regard of the matter, as
converting three thousand souls at a Sermon, reducing a great part of the world
to the obedience of Christ, etc. But yet less then those Christ did, for the
manner. For, 1. They did them not in their own name, but in his. 2. They
preached not that they were Gods, as he, but they preached Christ the only
Lord, and themselves the Churches servants, for Jesus sake. They were the white
horses on which Christ rode abroad the world, conquering and to conquer, Revel.
6.2. In memory whereof, as it may seem, the Saxon-Princes, having born a black
horse till then, Cranzius in Saxon.
in their military Ensigns did, after they had received the faith and were
baptized, bear a white horse, and gavo it for their Arms. And Tertulliam could
say in his time, that, Britannorum inaccessa Romany loca, Christo in men
subdita.

Verse 13. that I will do.] An undoubted argument of Christ's Divinity, that he
hears and grants prayers. When the people, in Ahabs time, saw God answering
Elijah by fite from heaven, they cried out, 1 King. 18.39. Psalm. 65.2.
The Lord he is god, the Lord he is God. O thou that hear prayers, is a
deseription the Psalmist gives of God.

Verse 14. If ye shall ask any thing, etc:] This is not a vain repetition,
Seneca.
Nuquaam saris dicitur, quod nunquam satis discitur. When God spoke but onee,
David heard it twice: O that we would once hear and believe, what Christ for
our comfort has said over so often!

Verse 15. If ye love me, keep my Commandments.] No better way to seal up love,
then by being obedient. How can thou love me, Judge. 16.
said she, when thy heart is not with me? Hushai, to show his love to David,
set upon that difficult and dangerous setvice for him, of insinuating into
Absaloms counsels, and defeating them.

Verse 16. And lee shall give you another Comforter] Or, pleader,
Deprecatour,(...) Advocate. Properly it signifies such an one as wesnd for,
when we are in any danger, to advise and counsel us. The devilies called the
M^^ser, (...)
in full opposition to this name and title given here to the holy spirit; whose
office it is (as this Attribute here imposts) to make intercession in our
hearts to God for us, and; upon our true Repentance to make our Apology, 1
Cor. 7.11. to comfort us, by discovering our graces, 1 Cor. 2.12. and by
pleading our evidences, Romans 8 18. which they that refuse to read over and rest
upon, they help Satan the Accuser, taking his part against themselves, and
pleading his cause against the Spirit their Comforter.

That be may abide with you for ever.] D. Sibb^.
The Spirit (says one) is Christ's Vicar-generall, with whom he leaves us, and,
by whom, he is with us to the end of the world.

Verse 27. For be dwells with you] Next to the love of Christ in dwelling in
our nature, we may wonder at the love of the holy Ghost, that will dwell in the
dark dog-hole of our defiled souls; and be there as those two golden pipes,
Zech. 4. through which the two Olive branches empty out of themselves the golden
oils of all precious graces; which are, there hence, called the fruits of the
Spirit, Gal. 5.22. yea, the Spirit, verse. 17. God also in giving us his Spirit,
is said to give us all good things, Matthew. 7.11. with Luke 11.13.

Verse 18. I will not leave you comfortless.] Orphans, or darkling. (...),
enebrae. (...) Dedi me in via. 1 Cor 2 ult
I your Lord am taken indeed from your head for a while: but you shall have the
supply of my Spirit, Phil. 1.19. And I, even I, will come again to you ere
long; yea, I am now upon the way: I come to fetch you, I come to meet you, I
come, I come.

Verse 19. But ye see me.] The spiritual man has the mind of Christ, and
those things revealed onto him that natural eye never saw, carnal ear never
heard, neither has it entered into the heart of man the things which God has
prepared for them that love him; neither prepared only, but imparted to his
aforehand, even in this life. For he reserves not all for the life to come, but
gives a grape of Canaan in this wilderness, such as the world never tasted off.

Verse 20. That I am in my Father, and you in me.] O happy union, the ground of
communion! Interest! the ground of influence! Hence we have communication of
Christ's secrets, 1 Cor. 2.16. the testimony of Jesus, 1 Cor. 1.5. Consolation
in all afflictions, 2 Corinthians. 1.5. Sanctification of all occurrences, Philip.
1.21. Participation of Christ's merit and Spirit, and what not?

Verse 21. And I will love him and manifest] Increase of the saving knowledge
of Christ is promised, (...), 'aciie and clam indicabo, ^rasin. Imo palam and
iu media luic. Beza.
as a singular reward of our love to him, and fruit of his love to us. This is,
says Agur, to ascend into heaven, Prove. 30.3, 4. This is, says our Savior
elsewhere, the great talent of all others. There is a (Much) in it, Luke 12.48.
This is, says Saint Paul, the Christians riches, 1 Cor. 1.5. And David reckons
of his wealth by it, Psalm. 119.32.

Verse 22. How is it that thou will manifest.] Many a wise Question the
Disciples ask him in this Chapter; and yer our Savior bears with their
rudeness, and gently instructs them, preaching as they were able to hear, Mark
4 33. So did Paul, 1 Cor. 9.22. So must all Ministers, 2 Timothy 2.25. if they
mean to do good on it.

Verse 23. Jesus answered and said unto him] Our Savior passing by that
frivolous Questions proceeds in his discourse. Some follies are best confuted
by silence. One having made a long and idle discourse before Aristotle,
concluded it thus; I doubt I have been too tedious unto you, Flutar de
garru^^tate.
Sir Philosopher, with my many words. In good sooth, said Aristotle, you have
not been tedious to me, for I gave no heed to any thing you said.

Verse 24. But the Fathers] Therefore to be obeyed, because of divine
authority. Gods impresse makes authentike, and binds every good heart to
obedience. Inepist. ad Oeco^amp.
Veniat, veniat verbum Domini, and submittemus ei, sexcenta si nobis essent
colla, said Baldassar, a godly Dutch-Divine.

Verse 26. But the Comforter, etc.] The Spirit teaches only things consonant
to the Scripture, and is thereby discerned from a spirit of delusion: He is not
novarum revelationum architectus, as Papists, Mahometans, Anabaptists, and
Libertines would make him. The Jews also had many traditions and unwritten
verities (as they called them) wherewith they believed their Scribes and
Doctors were inspired, for the peoples better direction in observing the law.
These they called Mashlamnuthoth, Completiones, Perfectiones, Buxt. Tiberias.
because they thought that the written law was perfected and completed by them.
These were those our Savior cried down, Mat. 15.3. And the Prophet tells us,
that in vain shall we look to hear the voice behind us, where our eyes see not
our teachers, Isa. 30.20, 21.

Verse 27. Peace I leave with you] As a farewell, or legacy, Sacrosancta (...)
nobis committitur non (...), aut (...) Christ is the Prince of Peace, yea, he
is our peace, says the Apostle, and brings true peace, which is a piece of his
Kingdom, Romans 14.17. Of him it may be more truly said, then it was of our
Henry the seventh, that the came in, Twinu^ Comment de rebas Britan^.
Vt cum pacem exulantem exul, extorremque extorris concomitatus esset, reducem
quoque redux apportaret.

Not as the world, etc.] They cry peace when there is no peace, and make fair
weather, when such a storm of Gods wrath is ready to hurst out, as shall never
be blown over. They complement, and wish peace, when war is in their hearts:
as the Pope sent away Henry the third Emperor in peace, Auth Apolog. de ^^it.
eccles.
but it was (says the Historian) Qualem scilicet pacem Judas simulavit, non
qualem Christus reliquit.

Verse 28. My Father is greater then I,] To wit, as I have voluntarily
submitted my self to the office of a Mediator. Lo, here this Sun of
righteousness is gone back ten degrees in the dial below his Father. Thou
have made him little less then the Angels; Psalm. 8.
there (as man) he is gone back ten degrees below the Angels. I am a worm and
no man: there he is gone back ten degrees below men. A living dog is better
then a dead lion: Psalm. 22. Eccles.
there he is gone back ten degrees below worms. For he was not so much as a
living worm, but was laid in the grave as a dead Lion; there to have been meat
for worms, but that it was impossible for Gods holy One to see corruption.
(...).
See how he emptied and humbled himself, that he might exalt and fill us with
his fullness.

Verse 29. And now I have told you before] Which none besides God himself could
do, but by divine revelation. The knowledge of future contingents is of God
only, and of such as to whom he is pleased to communicate it; as he did to the
Prophets: who when they foretold things only as in their causes, they might
fall out or not, as Isa. 38.1. Jonah 3.4. and 1 King. 21 20. Weems. his
exercitar.
But when they foretold things, ut futura in scipsis, then they fell out
infallibly. The devil also may come acquainted with such things, Cusanus oblit,
an^o 'Do. 1464. Alsted Chrono. log. p. 472. Trithem. scri. psit. an. 1508.
Genius verd. qui Trithemio haec dictavit, alb^^ an ater sucrit, ego non facile
dixerim. Bucholcer.
and be able to foretell them, if God reveal them to him, as he did Ahabs
death: and as Trithemius the Abbot, and Cusanus the Cardinal foretold a change
of religion to fall out in the year, 1517. which was the year wherein Luther
begun to stickle for Christ against the Pope.

Verse 30. Hereafter I will not, etc.] Make we the best of our Christian
friends while we have them; as we would do of a borrowed book or tool, that we
know not how soon they may be sent for, by the right owner.

The Prince of this world cometh] In his limbs and instruments, those breathing
devils that put Christ to death. Persecutours are set awork by Satan; The devil
shall cast some of you into prison, Rev. 2.10. Why? Is he become a Justice of
peace, to send men to prison? Yes, by his Agents. But why would Christ be so
used by him and his? Hear the next words;

Verse 31. But that the world may know] Not you only, but all must take notice
of my ready obedience to the will of mine heavenly Father, even to the
suffering of death. Christ's passion must shine as a perpetual picture in our
hearts: therefore is it so accurately described by all the four Evangelists;
whereas his birth is recorded but by two of them only.

CHAP. XV.
Verse 1. I am the true Vine etc.]
Our Saviors way lying (as it is thought) by the vineyards, he takes that
occasion of comparing himself to a vine, as he does elsewhere to many other
creatures, every where obvious; that therein, as in so many optic glasses, we
may see him, and be put in mind of him. Tam Christi meminisse opus est, quam
respirare, says a Father. A Be can suck honey out of a flower, that a Fly
cannot. Fire will be aspiring: so will true grace.

Verse 2. Every branch in me] That thinks himself to be in me, and is so
thought to be by others, but proves not to be so. These are said to deny the
Lord that bought them, to trample on the blood of the Covenant, 2 Pet. 2.1.
Heb. 10 20. 2 Pet. 2.28.
wherewith they were sanctified, to wallow in the mire from which they had been
washed, etc. So here, to be branches in Christ, and yet unfruitful. Not that
they ever were in Christ, but seemed to be so: as a pole fixed in the earth,
but not rooted: as a rotten leg cleaves to the body, but is no part of it: or,
as wens and ulcers, which are taken away without loss to it.

He purges it.] (...), Am^utat. putat
Of all possessions, says Cato, none requires more pains about it, then that
of vineyards. Corn comes up and grows without the husbandmans care, Mark 4.27.
he knows not how. But vines must be dressed, supported, sheltered, pruned every
day almost: lopt they must be ever the anon, lest the juice be spent in leaves.
And if it be painful to bleed, it is worse to wither. Better be pruned to grow,
then cut up to burn.

Verse 3. Vinitoris culteltus ad surdes purgan^as Call.
Through the word, etc.] Which is the pruning knife, to lop off our
luxuriancies, rotten boughs, raw grapes, to pare off our gum of pride, moss
of formality, etc. The word hid in the heart keeps from sin, as an amulet,
Psalm. 119.11. and keeps youth from uncleanesse, ver. 9. mixed with faith, it
purges upon corruption, Act, 15 9. and will not suffer men to rest in sin.

Verse 4. As the branch cannot bear fruit, etc.] All our sap and safety is from
Christ. The bud of a good desire, the blossom of a good resolution, and the
fruit of a good action, all comes from him, Gratia praevenie nos ut velimus,
and subsequitur ne frustra velimus. Aug.


Verse 5. The same brings forth much fruit.] Christ is a generous vine, a
plant of renown, and all his, are filled with the fruits of righteousness,
Phil. 1.11. have hearts full of goodness, as those, Romans 15.14. and lives full
of good works, as Tabitha, Act. 9.33. Melch. Ad. in vlia.
In Bucholcero vivida omnia ficerunt; vivida vox, vividi oculi, vivida manus,
gestus omnes vividi, Nehemiah never rested doing good for his people; he was
good all over. Like the Egyptian fig tree, that bears fruit seven times a
year: Solin. Polyhist.
or the Lemmon-tree, which ever and anon sends forth new Lemmons, as soon as
the former are fallen off.

For without me ye can do nothing.] This is point blank against the doctrine of
free will, Sub laudibus natura latent inimici gratia, says Augustine. These
will needs hammer out their own happiness, like the Spider, climbing by a
thread of her own weaving, with Motto accordingly, Mihi soli debeo. Whereas the
Apostle demands, Who made thee to differ? Greevinchovius the Arminian boldly
answers, Ego meipsum discerno, I make my self to differ. This he had learned
from Heathens belike, That we live, Quod vivamus deorum munu^ est, quod been
vivamus, nostrum. Iudiciu^ boc omnium mortalium est, etc Cic. de not de Aug. de
civit. Dei, l 5.
is from God: but that we live well, is from our selves, says Seneca. And this
is the judgment of all men (says Cicero) that prosperity is to be sought of
God, but wisdom is to be taken up from our selves. St Augustine was of another
judgment, and says, Ciceronem, ut saceret homines liber^s, ficisse sacrilegos.

Verse 6. Cast them into the fire, and they are burned] So they must needs be,
may some say: but his meaning is, that temporaries, of all others, make the
fiercest, hottest fire, because they are trees most seared, and fuel fully
dry. Nahum tells us, that such are but as stubble laid out in the Sun a drying,
that it may burn the better, Chap. 1.10. or like grapes, let to hang in the
Sunshine, till they be ripe for the wine press of Gods wrath, Revel. 15.16.

Verse 7. Ask what ye will, and it, etc.] Either in money, or monies-worth. If
ye ask and miss, it is because ye ask amiss. Vir iste potuit quod voluit.
One was wont to say of Luther, that he could have of God what he would. And
being one time very earnest with God for the recovery of a godly useful man,
he cried out, Fiat voluntas mea, Mea voluntas, Domine, qu^^ tu^.
let my will be done; and then he falls off sweetly, My will, Lord, because thy
will.

Verse 8. Herein is my Father glorified, etc.] There is not (says one) so much
of the glory of God in all his works of Creation, and Providence, as in one
gracious action that a Christian performs; how much more in a life full of good
fruits? This makes others say, ^ere magnus est D^us Christianorum, said one
Calocenus, a Heathen.
Surely God is in them. God also accounts that he receives a new being, as it
were, by those inward conceptions of his glory, and by those outward honors
that we do to him, especially, when we study Gods ends more then our own, and
drown all self-respects in his glory. Surely, they that do thus, may have what
they will (says one) and God even think himself beholden to them.

Verse 9. Continue ye in my love] In the love wherewith I do dearly love you.
As who should say, Suffer your selves to be loved by me: lo, the Lord Christ
even makes love to the good soul, and wooes entertainment.

Verse 10. Even as I have kept my Fathers.] Christ's obedience must be our
pattern of imitation. All his actions were either Moral or Mediatory. In both
we are to imitate him. In the former, by doing as he did, Matthew. 11.29. 1 Pet.
2.23. In the later, by similitude, translating that to our spiritual life,
which he did as Mediator: as to die to sin, to rise to righteousness.

Verse 11. These things have I spoken, that, etc.] Sound joy is wrought in the
heart by the hearing of the Word, Make me to hear joy and gladness, that the
bones which thou have broken (with the sense of sin, and fear of wrath) may
rejoice, Psalm 51.8. And God creates the fruit of the lips to be peace, Isai.
45.

That my joy may remain in you.] The temporaries joy, as it is groundless,
like weeds that grow on the top of the water, so is it but frothy and slashy,
such as may wet the mouth, but not warm the heart, smooth the brow but not fill
the breast; like a slight dash of rain, or an handful of brush wood, etc.
Eccles. 7.6. The true Christians joy is full and firm, solid and substantial,
Gaudium in re, gaudium in spe, gaudium de possessione, gaudium de promissione.
He has still enough to make him everlastingly merry, under whatsoever misery.
He can turn into his counting house, and find there sufficient ot sustain him,
as David did, 1 Samuel 30.6.

Verse 12. This is my Commandment] Love is the complement of the Law, and the
supplement of the Gospel.

Verse 13. Greater love then this, etc.] Of any such love, but in Christ, we
shall hardly read. David in a passion may wish, Would God I had died for thee:
but in cold blood I doubt whether he would have done it. A certain Citizen of
Toledo, B. Fulg ^. 1.
being condemned to die, his son ceased not by prayers and tears to entreat
that he might die for his Father; which accordingly he did: but this is rare,
for life is sweet, and love is cold in this case. Every man is his own
next-neighbour.

Verse 14. If ye do whatsoever, etc] In desire and endeavor, lifting at the
latch, though ye cannot open the door: and looking to both the magnalia and
minutula of the Law: Boni Catholioi sunt (says Augustine) qui and fidem
integram sequuntur, and bonos mores. And they are written in the book of life,
Qui quod possunt, saciunt, ersi quod deben^, non possuns.
(says Bernard) that do what they can, though they cannot do what they should.

Verse 15. I call you not servants] And yet it was the top of Davis titles to
be the servant of the Lord; and the height of his ambition to be a doorkeeper
in his house. All his servants are sons, and all his sons, heirs.

But I have called you friends.] It was an high honor of old, to be the Kings
friend. Such honor have all his Saints: Christ does freely unbosome himself
unto them.

Verse 16. And ordained you, that you should go, etc.] Not that ye should Lord
it over your brethren (as the Pope ordains his Caterpillars) and get up the
best of the land for your private use and pleasure. The Pope when he makes his
Cardinals, uses these words, Estote confratres nostri, and principes mundi.
The Archbishopric of Toledo is said to be worth an hundred thousand pounds a
year: a greater revenue then some Kings have.

That whatsoever ye shall ask, etc.] Bernard in his Meditations gives diverse
rules of strictness, of purging the heart, of being faithful and fruitful,
Et cum talis fueris (says he) memento mei: Intimating, that then they might
have what they would of God, for themselves or others, Meditat. de^et. cap. 5.
that were so qualified.

Verse 17. That ye love one another] That ye hold together, because the world
will hate you. A spirit of perversities made way for the ruin of Egypt, Isai.
19.14, 16, 17. Si collidimur, frangimur, If we clash, we break, Of the ancient
Britains Tacitus tells us, that nothing was so destructory to them, as their
dissentions, Dum singuli pugnant, universi vincuncur. And of the Thracians,
Herodotus says, that if they had been all of one mind, they had been
invincible. Keep therefore the staff of binders unbroken, Zech. 11.7, 14. Keep
the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace, Ephesians. 4.3. In the cause of
Religion every subdivision is a strong weapon in the hand of the enemy; as in
the disagreement of Luther and Zuinglius. The Jesuits have a practice of
ruinning over to the Lutherans, pretending to be convers; but it is only to
keep up that bitter contention that is between the Calvinists and Lutherans;
the virulency whereof is much fomented by these renegado Jesuits.

Verse 18. If the world hate you, etc.] As it will, because it is condemned by
your contrary practice, and is carried on by a contrary principle. Moab was
irked because of Israel, or, did fret and vex at them, Numb. 22.3, 4. Bats sly
against the light. Some barbarous Nations curse the Sun, when he shines hot
upon them, and shoot up their arrows against it.

Ye know that it hated me first] Shall we think to speed better then our
betters? Elias is not better then his fathers. Luther was angry with those that
set forth his sufferings, since they were nothing to the sufferings of Christ.
All our troubles are but as the slivers and chips of his cross.

Verse 19. If ye were of the world, etc.] They jangle among themselves, and
intertear one another, as dogs fighting. For, though there be not a
disagreement in hell (being but the place of retribution, not of action) yet on
earth there is no sound peace among the wicked. Howbeit, let Ephraim be against
Manasseh, and Manasseh against Ephraim, they will soon be both against Judah: as
if a Hare run by dogs that are fighting, they will agree to pursue the Hare

Therefore the world hates you] As inhospitall salvages do those that land on
their coasts, as the Cyprians; for an old grudge, slay all Jews they meet with,
though but cast upon their coasts by contrary winds, Tac. l. (...). Tami (...)
est ^o^um, quanti est odium Christ innorum. Ter. Bodin. de rep. l. ^. cap. 6.
Odio humani generis, and per flagitia invisi, says Tacitus of Christians,
Davis adversaries sought not only his life, but his soul, his damnation too; as
that monster of Millain mentioned by Bodinus. Now we commit thy soul to the
devil, said the persecutours to John Husse. And Hierom of Prague could hardly
obtain a Confessor, being it seems conscientious that way.

Verse 20. Remember the Word, etc.] Else all is lost, 1 Cor. 15.2. (...), H^^.
^. 1.
Naturally the word runs through us as water through a riven vessel: Pleni
rimarum sumus, huc atque illuc diffluimus. Our memories are as seives that
retain the chaff, let go the good corn: or as ners, that keep the pelf, let
go the clean water: or as hourglasses, that are no sooner full, but running
out again. Beseech we God to put his finger upon the hole, and to make his Word
an engraffed word unto us, to settle it upon our souls, etc.

If they have kept my saying, etc.] But they will do neither. Holy Melancthon,
being himself newly converted, thought it impossible for his hearers to
withstand the evidence of the Gospel: But after he had been a preacher a while,
it is said he complained, that old Adam was too hard for young Melancthon.

Verse 21. Because they know not him, etc.] For had they known, they would not
have crucified the Lord of glory. St Paul thanks his ignorance for all his
cruelties to Christians. Arist Echie. l. 3.
Ignorance is a breeder and great-bellied. Aristotle makes it the mother of all
misrule and mischief.

Verse 22. If I had not come, etc.] Here our Savior shows that their ignorance
was affected; as theirs is with us, Bern.
Qui ut liberius peccent, libenter ignorant, they shut the windows lest the
light should come in, Sic fit, Seneca Epist.
ubi homines majorem vitae partem in tenebris agunt, ut novissime solemn quasi
supervacuum fastidiant. This is the ignorance to which mercy is denied, Isa.
27.11.

Verse 23. He that hates me] It Is wonder how any should; Omne peccatum est
Dercidium, Psalm. 18.46.
yet we read of God-haters, Romans 1.30. and all sin is a kind of God-slaughter:
the wicked wish there were no God, when David cries out, vivat Deus, etc.

Verse 24. Works, which none other man did] More stupendous, because by mine
own power, and all to the peoples profit. These were of use in the Churches
infancy, and Papists boast of them still; but those are the devils lying
wonders, 2 Thessalonians. 2.9. As for our Religion, Pudet diabolum Lutheri doctrinam
miraculis conformare, says Gretser the Jeurite. But we answer with Augustine.
Qui adbuc prodigia quaerit, magnum est ipse prodigium.
He that now looks for a miracle, is himself a great miracle. Christ was the
only Thaumaturgus, or Wonderworker. This is attested by Josephus the Jew, and
confessed by Mahomet.

Verse 25. They hated me without a cause] So they dealt by David, so by Christ,
and so still by his members. There is but the same Pageant acted over again, as
of old: In moribus compositi, and modesti sunt, was the worst the persecutours
could say of the Waldenses, B. Vsh^r.
those ancient Protestants: They are good in their lives, true in their
speeches, hearty in their affections, etc. Sed fides eorum est incorrigibilis
and pessima, Hist. of Coua. Trent 7, 8. Tanta est morii integritas, ut nee
bostes reperiant quo lealumnic tur. Erasm. de Lu^h.
said the Dominican Inquisitour concerning the Hussites. So the Bishop of Aliff
in the Trent-councel said, That as the faith of the Catholics was better; so
the Heretics exceeded them in good life. Hominis vim magno omnium consensu
probatur, said Erasmus of Luther: And yet a Friar of Antwerp wished that Luther
were there, that he might bite out his throat with his teeth, as the same
Erasmus testifies.

Verse 26. Whom I will send you from, etc.] Christ has satisfied the Wrath of
the Father: and now the Father, and Christ both, as reconciled, send the
Spirit, as the fruit of both their loves, and as an earnest, which is part of
the whole sum.

Verse 27. And ye also shall bear witnesse] Thus word and spirie go together,
according to the promise, Isa. 59.21. The Manna of the Spirit comes down from
Heaven, in the dews of the Ministry of the Gospel, Numb. 11.9. 1 Pet. 1.22.

CHAP. XVI.
Verse 1. That ye should not be offended.]
AS with a thing unexpected and intolerable. Darts foreseen are dintlesse.
Crosses coming on the sudden, find weak minds secure, make them miserable,
leave them desperate.

Verse 2. Whosoever kills you, etc.]. Christiano um sanguinem Dijs
gratissimam es se victivam. T^rtul.
Maximinian the persecutour thought that the blood of Christians would be a
well-pleasing sacrifice to his gods. Budaeus thinks that the Apostle, 1 Cor.
4.13. alludes to those Heathenish expiations, wherein certain condemned persons
were brought forth yearly with garlands upon their heads, and offered up, as
sacrifices, to their gods, in time of any contagious infection especially: and
these they termed, (...), Budaeut in Pandect.
and (...). At Colen, certain Divines preached, that the death of certain
heretics, (as they called them) should pacific the wrath of God, which then
plagued Germany grievously with a strange kind of sweating sickness. Act. and
Men. fol. 808. Heyl. Geog. p. 33.
In the sixth Council of Toled, it was enacted, that the King of Spain should
suffer none to live in his Dominions, that professed not the Roman Catholic
Religion. King Philip, accordingly, having hardly escaped shipwreck, as he
returned from the Low Countries, said, Hist. of Coun. of Trent. 4.7.
He was delivered, by the singular providence of God, to root out Lutheranisme,
which he presently began to do; professing that he had rather have no Subjects
then such. Siquam sui corporis partem i. sta contagione, etc. Sleid. Comment l
9.
Another Catholic King said, That if he thought his shirt were infected with
that heresy, he would tear it from his own back, and rather go woolward: nay,
if any member of his body had caught the contagion, he would cut it off, that
it might creep no farther.

Verse 3. Because they have not known] Through blind zeal. The dark corners of
the earth are full of cruelty, says the Psalmist. Psalm. 74.10. Isa. 11.9.
And they shall not destroy in all mine holy mountain; For knowledge shall
cover the earth, as the waters do the sea. See the Notes on Chap. 15.21.

Verse 4. Ye may remember, etc.] And act, what I have foretold and taught you.
The difference between Divinity and other Sciences is, that it is not enough to
know, but you must do it; Non est haec umbratilis philosophia sed quae. ad
ujum and praxin aptan. da. Calv.
as lesions of music must be practiced, and a copy not read only, but written
after.

Verse 5. None of you asks me etc.] This they had asked him, but not, as well
apaid of his going: this he would have of them, and of us, when we part with
friends that die in the Lord, say as he, Hieron. ad Julian.
Tulisti liberos quos ipse dederas: non contristor, quod recepisti: ago
gratias, quod dedisti.

Verse 6. Sorrow has filled your hearts] So that you are, for the time, not
more uncomfortable then uncounsellable. Thus also it fared with those
Israelites in Egypt: Exodus 6.9.
Their ears were so full of gall, that meek Moses even lost his sweet words
upon them. Passions are headstrong, and can hear no counsel: Fertur equis
auriga, nec audit currus habenas.

Verse 7. I will send him unto you.] This our Savior often repeats, Joel 2.28.
that they might once take notice of it, as an inestimable favor, that God
should pour forth his Spirit upon all flesh. What so precious as spirit? What
so vile as flesh? It is received among the Turks, that when Christ said, That
though he departed, he would send them a Comforter, it was added in the Text,
And that shall be Mahomet; but that the Christians, in malice toward them, have
razed out those words. Is not this the efficacy of error?

Verse 8. And when he is come etc.] This Text had been easy, had not
Commentatours made it so knotty.

He will reprove] Or undeceive the world, by refuting those odd conceits and
erroneous opinions, (...), Ita ut nibil habeat, quod praetexat.
that men had before drunk in, and were possessed of. He shall clearly convince
them of the hatefulness of sin, of the necessity of getting righteousness,
both imputed and imparted: both that of justification inherent in Christ,
imputed to us, and that of sanctification also, imparted by Christ, inherent in
us: This later is here called judgment, as it is likewise, Mat. 12.20. (...)
Mat. 12.20. Com vi quada^, frustra obsistente Satana, etc.
Till he bring forth judgment to victory; that is, weak grace, (called before
a broken reed, smoking weeck) to perfect conquest over corruption. Compare
with this Text that of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 6.11. Such were some of you
(Scilicet, mundus immundus) but ye are (in general) washed from your sins, of
the hatefulness whereof ye are now clearly convinced: And (in particular) ye
are sanctified by the Spirit of our God, and ye are justified in the Name, that
is, by the merit of the Lord Jesus the Righteous, who is the propitiation for
our sins.

Verse 9. Of sin, because they believe not on me.] Our Savior instanceth in
the greatest of sins, unbelief; which was the first sin, and is still the root
of all the rest, Heb. 3.12. It is a sin against the Gospel, and rejects the
remedy, that both of Christ's blood, to the which even the Princes of Sodom are
invited, Isa. 1.10. It gives God the lie, and subjects a man to the rigor,
coaction, and curse of the Law.

Verse 10. Of righteousness, because, etc.] What strength is there in that
reason? This: Christ took upon him to be our surety, and he must acquit us of
all our sins, ere he can go to his Father.

Verse 11. Of judgment, because the Prince, etc.] Satan is, by the mighty work
of the holy Ghost, cast out of his Trenches, Forts, (...). 2 Cor. 10.4. Luke
10.18.
Cages, Castles, Heaven of men's hearts: corruption is dejected, though not
utterly ejected, The Spirit lusts against the flesh, etc. So that as we
cannot do what good we would, because of the flesh; so neither what evil we
would, because of the Spirit.

Verse 12. But ye cannot bear them now] Because your spirits are dulled with
worldly sorrow. But the Spirit shall be unto you a powerful Removens,
prohibens.

Verse 13. He will guide you into all truth] Many are the benefits that we
receive by the Spirit. Ephesians. 5.9.
The fruit of the Spirit is in all goodness, and righteousness, and truth.
This our Savior delivers to his disciples at several times, and by degrees,
as they could bear it. Here he represents him as a guide to godliness. Simeon
was brought into the Temple by the instinct of the Spirit. Paul would have gone
to a certain place, but the Spirit would not suffer him. Lo, such is the
working of the holy Ghost still in good men's hearts, The steps of a good man
are ordered by the Lord, Psalm. 37.23.
and he delights in his way. Kings suffer their children to ride with them,
but yet set Tutours and governors to overruled them. So here. And because
Delicam res est Spiritus Dei, therefore we must observe and obey his motions,
which are the sound of his goings, the footsteps of his anointed, Psalm. 89.51.
We should lay our selves (as instruments) open to the Spirits touch, submit to
his discipline, as Paul did, Gal. 2.20. And this requires a great deal of
self-denial.

Verse 14. He shall glorify me, etc.] And if the holy Ghost could not use any
better means to glorify Christ, then to take of his excellencies, and hold
them out to the world, what should Ministers, the mouth of the holy Ghost, do
rather?

Verse 15. All things that the Father has, etc.] So that if we can but marry
the heir, we have all. The Father says unto him, as he did to his eldest Son,
Luke 15.31. Son, thou art ever with me, and all that I have is thine: therefore
we may go boldly to him for all things needful for life and godliness. When
Joseph sent to Jacob that Pharaoh had put all into his hands, he was not a
little comforted, that one so near to him in nature was so able to accommodate
him. Let us also come boldly to the throne of grace, since our flesh and blood
has all power to do us good. Christ, as Mediator, is able to make all grace
abound toward us, that we always, having all sufficiency in all things, may
abound to every good work, 2 Cor. 8.8. Well might Ignatius say, Ignis, crux
and diaboli tormenta in me veniant, tantummodo ut Jesum nanciscar.

Verse 16. A little while, and ye shall not see me.] This little seemed a long
while to them, Dubito, a duo and ito Secman. Sic (...).
so that they began to doubt (though it were but the third day after his death)
whether or no it were he that should redeem Israel, Luke 24.21. Gods help
seems long, because we are short. A short walk is a long journey to feeble
knees. Isa. 54.7, 8.
It is but for a moment in his anger that God hides his face from his, though
it should be during life; he has an eternity of time to reveal his kindness
in. And to say that God has cast you off, because he has hid his face from
you, is (says one) a fallacy fetched out of the devils Topics: M. T. Geodw.
Child o^ light, etc.
When the Sun is eclipsed, foolish people think it will never recover light;
but wise men know it will: and at such a time though the earth want the light
of the Sun, yet not the influence thereof: So neither are the Saints at any
time without the power, heat and vigorous influence of Gods grace, when the
light and comfort of it is intercluded.

Verse 18. We cannot tell what he saith] We know here but in part: Aug.
the greatest part of our knowledge is the least part of our ignorance, says
one. Man's heart, says another, may be compared to a vessel, the means to a
pipe, the Spirit of God to the wheel that beats the water into the pipe: The
Minister is the servant that opens the cock. And then the reason why we know
but in part is, either the cock always runs not, or not always in the same
measure: And sometimes our vessels are filled with other things, (as the
Apostles here were with worldly grief, and the conceit of an earthly kingdom)
and so they run over: and usually our vessels run over, and lose what we
received by the means.

Verse 19. Now Jesus knew that they were, etc.] He graciously prevents their
requests, so he does ours often; And usually in Scripture the answer is given,
the question concealed. God thereby providing for men's infirmity, who are ready
to ask such odd questions, as the Disciples here do, to the discovery of
their own dullness.

Verse 20. Ye shall weep and lament] So long as ye abide in this valley of
tears, (...)
as the Septuagint render that, Psalm. 84.6. In hoc exilio, in hoc ergastulo, in
hac peregrinatione, in hac valle lachrymarum, as Bernard has it. My tears have
been my meat, says David, Psalm. 42.3. alluding to the Heart, which being
pursued, sheds tears. These, instead of gemmes, were the ornaments of David,
bed, says Chrysostom. The Churches eyes are as the pools of Heshbou, Can. 7.4
ever glazed with tears of compunction or compassion. Tertullian speaks of
himself, that he was borne to nothing else, but sorrow and mourning.
Athanasius, by his tears, as by the bleeding of a chaft vine, cured the
leprosy of that tainted age. Hierome writing of his own life, says, that
there were furrows in his face, and Iceicles from his lips with continual
weeping, etc.

But the world shall rejoyce] The merry Greeks of the world laugh themselves
fat, and are so afraid of sorrow, that they can never find time to be serious;
counting it no sport, unless they may have the Devil their playfellow; no
mirth, but madness; Eliamsi Leta tibiobi eniant o^unia, non est tamen quodlae.
teris. Ribera in Hos. 10.1.
no venison sweet, but that which is stolen. These are forbidden to rejoice in
any thing, Hos. 10.1. But if they do, there is a snare or cord in the sin of
the wicked, to strangle their joy with; but the righteous sing and rejoice,
Prove. 29.6. Woe be to mirth mongers, that flear when they should fear, Luke 6.25.

But your sorrow shall be turned into joy] God shall soon give you beauty for
ashes, the oil of gladness for the spirit of heaviness, etc. he shall turn
all your sighing into singing, all your laments into laughter, your sackloth
into silks, your ashes into ointments, your fasts into feasts, your wringing
of hands into applauses, etc.

Verse 21. A woman when she is in travel, etc.] The sorrow of a Saint is often
compared to that of a traveling woman, Isa. 26.17. Jer. 6.24, etc. 1. In
bitterness and sharpness; which made Medea say, that she had rather a
thousand times be slain in battle, Millies in bello perire mallem, quam semel
parere. Keckerman.
then once bring forth child. 2. In utility, it tends to a birth. 3. In hope
and expectation, not only of an end, but also of fruit. 4. In that there is a
certain set time for both. And Finis edulcat media.

Verse 22. And ye now therefore have sorrow,] No sorrow like to that, when we
see not Christ in his favor. He hides his love often, as Joseph did, out of
increasement of love; and then we cannot see him for crying; as Mary Magdalen
could not, she was so bleared: But when he seems farthest from us, his heart
is with us: and he must needs look through the chinkers, as in the Canticles, to
see how we do, as that Martyr expresses it. Saunders in a Letter to his wife
and friends.
There is a presence of Christ that is secret, when he seems to draw us one
way, and to drive us another. Cant. 5 6.

Verse 23. And in that day ye shall, etc.] q.d. Ye shall be so exact and so
expert, that you shall not need to ask such childish questions, as hitherto ye
have done. This is like that of the Prophet, They shall not each man teach his
neighbor, saying, Jer. 31.34.
Know the Lord; for they shall all know me, from the least to the greatest.
They shall be all taught of God. Cathedram in coelo habet qui corda docet,
says Augustine. And Quando Christus docet, quam cito discitur quod docetur? So
St Ambrose, Ne scit tarda molimina spiritus sancti gratia. When the Spirit
undertakes to teach a man, 1 Ioh. ^.
he shall not be long a learning. Now all Gods people have the Unction that
teaches them all things: And as in pipes, though of different sounds, yet
there is the same breath in them: so is there the same spirit in Christians of
all sizes.

Verse 24. Hitherto ye have asked nothing] To what ye should have asked, 1 King
13.19.
and might have obtained. Prayer, as those arrows of deliverance, should be
multiplied, the oftener we come to God, the better welcome: neither can we anger
him worse, then to be soon said or sated. Melistius erat ei nibil peti, quam
dare.
It was more troublesome to Severus the Emperor to be asked nothing, then to
give much. When any of his Courtiers had not made bold with him, he would call
him and say, Quid est cur nihil petis? etc. what meanest thou to ask me
nothing? So Christ here.

Ask, that your joy may be full] Pray, that ye may joy: Draw water with joy
out of this well of salvation. David was excellent at this: His heart was often
more out of tune then his harp; He prays, and then cries, Return to thy
rest, o my soul, etc. In many of his Psalms, the beginnings are full of
trouble; but by that time he has prayed a while, As Psalm. 6. and 22 and 51.
Mouli. de ^amout devin.
the ends are full of joy and assurance, So that one would imagine, says Peter
Moulin, that those Psalms had been composed by two men of a contrary humor.
Hudson the Martyr, deserted at the stake, went from under the chain; and having
prayed earnestly, was comforted immediately, and suffered valiantly.

Verse 25. These things have I spoken, etc.] He spoke plain enough, Legum
obscu^^^ates non assigne^us culp e scrihentium, sed inscitiae non ass^quenti^
Sex. Cecil, apui Gell. Isa. 28.10, 11, 22. Ac si blesis esse^ lab. js.
but they were so slow of heart and dull of hearing, that they thought he spoke
to them in riddles and parables. So though the Prophet dealt with the people as
with little ones newly weaned, mineing and masticating their meat for them,
laying before them precept upon precept, line upon line, etc. yet was he to
them (through their singular stupidity) as one that lisped half words, or
spoke in a strange tongue.

Verse 26. At that day ye shall ask, etc.] Christ had promised them further
light, but yet expects they should pray for it. Prayer is a putting the
promises in suit; we must pray them over, ere we get the performance. Ezekiel.
36.37. Christ himself was to ask of his Father the world for his inheritance,
etc. Psalm. 2.

Verse 27. For the Father himself loves you] We say, Non be ne convenient, nec
in una feed morantur, Majestas and amor -- Sport etiam. roa roganie me. Vt
apud Hom. (...) Synes. epist. 9. Am. Marcell. lib. 25.
Majesty and love cannot dwell together: because love is the abasing of the
soul to all services. But it is otherwise in God; Majesty and love meet in his
heart; so that of his own free accord, he will give us any thing we ask, and
as it were, prevent a Mediator, crowning his own graces in us.

Verse 28. Again I leave the world, etc.] So Plotinus the Philosopher, when he
died, said, (...). Nay, Julian the Apostate (if Marcellinus may be credited)
went out of the world with these words in his mouth, Vitam reposcenti naturae,
tanquam debtor bonae fidei, rediturus exulto.

Verse 29. His disciples said unto him] How apt are we to over-ween our
little-nothing of knowledge or holiness? to swell with big conceits of our own
sufficiency? and, when we see never so little, to say presently, with her in
the Poet, Arachae ap. O vid. 1 Cor. 13.2.
Consilij satis est in me mihi? to think we understand (as St Paul has it)
all mysteries, and all knowledge? How truly may it now be said of many, as
Quintilian says of some in his time; that they might have proved excellent
scholars, (...).
if they had not been so persuaded of themselves already? Conceitednesle cuts
off all hope of proficiency.

Verse 30. Now we are sure, etc.] What? not till now? Nicodemus was before you
then, Joh. 3.2. But better late then never: Nunquam sero, si serio.

Verse 29. Do ye now believe?] Ey now, ere trouble comes, you are jolly
fellows. But it is easy to swim in a warm bath: and every bird can sing in a
sunshine day. We shall see shortly what you can do. if ye faint in the day of
adversity, your strength is small. Prove. 24.10.
Hard weather tryes what health: hot service what courage.

Verse 32. Behold the hour comes, etc.] So bladder-like is the soul, that
filled with earthly vanities, though but wind, it grows great and swells in
pride: but if pricked with the least pin of piercing grief, it shriveleth to
nothing.

Verse 33. These things I have spoken,] This Sermon of our Savior then would
be read in time of trouble. It has virtutem pacativam, if mixed with faith.

That in me ye might have peace] Though surcharged with outward troubles.
Josiah died in peace, according to the promise, though slain in war. True
grace, like true gold, comforts the heart: Alchymy gold does not.

In the world ye shall have tribulation] There Is no avoiding of it. It Is not a
paradise, but a purgatory to the Saints. It may be compared to oath straits of
Magellan, Heyl. G^og. page 80^.
which is said to be a place of that nature, that which way soever a man bend
his course, he shall be sure to have the wind against him.

I have overcome the world] Therefore we are more then conquerours, ^om. 8.37.
because sure to overcome aforehand. We are triumphers, 2 Cor. 2.14. We need
do no more then, as those in Joshuah, set our feet on the necks of our enemies,
already subdued unto us, by our Jesus.

CHAP. XVII.
Verse 1. And lift up his eyes to Heaven]
THis and the like outward gestures in prayer, as they issue from the fervency
of the good heart, so they reflat upon the soul, whose invisible affections by
these visible actions, in the Saints, are the more inflamed. Howbeit
hypocrites, though they have their hands elbow-deep in the earth, will seem to
pierce Heaven with their eyes lift up in prayer, videntur torvo aspectu coelum
ad se attrahere, says Calvin somewhere: they so fix their eyes in public
prayer, as if they would leave them on the roof of the Church: when as all is
but histrionicall, (...), to be seen of men, Matthew. 6.
theatricall, counterfeit. The eagle, when she soareth highest, has ever an
eye to the prey below: so has the hypocrite, to profit, credit, etc.

The hour is come] q. d. I ask not before the time is come, and ripe and ready
for thy kingdom. Some would be in Heaven, ere they have done their work upon
earth. But what said that Ancient? Domine, si tibi sim necessarius, non recuso
vivere: Lord, if thou have any further service for me to do, I am willing to
live longer. When we come to Heaven, the reward will be so large, that we shall
repent us (if it were possible there to repent for any thing) that we have done
no more work. It is not lawful (says one) to wish for death simply, neither
to be set free from the troubles, fears and cares of sin, Capell of Tempt. par
3.
nor that we would not conflict, nor wrestle any longer (for this were to serve
our selves, and seek our own ease and ends) but in hatred to sin, as it is sin,
etc.

Verse 2. That he should give eternal life] And what more free then gift? Note
this against our Merit-mongers, who not only cry with Novatus, Non habeo,
Domine, quod mihi ignoscas: I have done nothing that thou should forgive me;
but with Vega. Vitam aeternam gratis non accipiam. I will not have heaven for
nothing. How much better S. Auguctine, Homo ignoscat, says he, ut Deus
ignoscat. And William Wickam, Act and Mon.
founder of New-Colledge, who, though he did many good works, yet he professed
that he trusted to Jesus Christ alone for salvation.

Verse 3. That they may know thee] To know God in the face of Christ, is Heaven
aforehand, Qui non habet Christum in horoscopo, Bucholcer.
non habet Deum in medio Coeli. By his knowledge shall my righteous servant
justify many, says God concerning Christ, Isa. 53.11. that is, by faith;
which infolds assent of the judgment, consent of the will, and affiance or
assurance of the heart. Papists place faith in the will only, and exclude
knowledge. Nay, Bellarmine affirms that faith may be better defined by
ignorance (that mother of devotion) then by knowledge. They dig out men's eyes
(as they dealt by Samson) and then make sport with them; they confine faith to
the will, that they may do what they will with the understanding and the
heart; as the Friars send men on pilgrimage, that they may lie with their wives
the while. Heyl. Geog. 288


Verse 4. That thou gave me to do.] Our Savior counts his work a gift: So
should we take it for a favor, that he employes us, that we may have any
office about him, that we may magnify him with our bodies, whether by life or
death, Act. and Mon.
Phil. 1.19. As an heretic I am condemned (said Mr Bradford) and shall be
burned, whereof I ask God heartily mercy, that I do no more rejoice then I
do, having so great cause, as to be an instrument, wherein it may please my
dear Lord God and Savior to suffer. And the greatest promotion (said Latymer)
that God gives in in this world, is, to be such Philippians to whom it is
given, Ibid. 1565.
not only to believe, but also to suffer. Ignatius professed he had rather be a
Martyr then a Monarch. Ibid. 1831.
John Noyes took up a Faggot at the fire, and kissed it, saying, Blessed be the
time that ever I was born to come to this. The Apostles rejoiced that they were
graced so, to be disgraced for Christ, Act. 5.41.

Verse 5. With the glory which I had, etc.] Our Savior then is no
up-start-God, and of a later standing, as the Arians and Mahometans would make
of him. Mahomet speaks very honorably of Christ, except only in two things.
First, he denied that he was crucified, but that some other was crucified for
him. Secondly, he took up the opinion of the Arians, to deny his Divinity.
Arius at Constantinoply sitting upon the close-stool purged out his guts.
Mahometisme is now there in that place, as it were the excrements of Arius.

Verse 6. I have manifested thy name] The Jews seek to detract from the glory
of our Saviors miracles, by giving out, that he did them by I know not what
superstitious or Magical use of the Name Jehovab. Bern.
But that name of God that he is here said to manifest, is that nomen
Majestativum, that holy and reverend name of God, set down, Exodus 34.6, 7. A
name that would fill our hearts with heaven, and answer all our doubts, had we
but skill to spell out all the letters in it.

Verse 7. Now they have known etc.] That the Gospel is a plot of Gods own
contriving, and no device of man; as that Evangelium regni was, set out by the
Family of Love: and those Fanatikes mentioned by Irenaeus, that were so
besotted with an opinion of themselves, that they accounted their own writings
to be Gospels. In the year 1220. certain Monks at Paris set out a Gospel full
of all filthiness and blasphemy, Rec. hive of Rome, p.30.
naming it, Evangelium aeternum. And in the book called Conformitates S.
Francisci, made in the year 1389. it is written, that the same book is better
then the Gospel, and S. Francis set in Lucifers chair above Angels. The Council
of Constance comes in with a non obstante against Christ's institution, Caranz.
sum. Council sess. 13.
withholding the cup from the Laity. And when the Pope sets forth any Bulls,
commonly he concludes thus; Non obstantibus constitutionibus and ordinationibus
Apostolicis, caeterisque contrariis quibuscunque. And the Popes interpretation
of Scripture, be it what it will, seem it never so contrary to the Scripture,
is, Ipsissimum Dei verbum, the very word of God, says Hosius.

Verse 8. For I have given unto them] A sweet and precious gift. (...),
Primarium quided and res magns mementi.
It was the Jews primary privilege, that unto them were committed the oracles
of God. There is a (chiefly) set upon it, Romans 3.2. See my Grue Treasure.

Verse 9. I pray for them.] Christ has left us this prayer here recorded, as a
pattern of that intercession he uncessantly makes for us, 1 King. 2.
at the right hand of his heavenly Father. Joab was heard for Absalom: shall
not Christ for us? Solomon denied his mothers request: God will not deny
Christ's. The Prodigal came without out a mediator to his Father, and was
embraced: Much more shall we, presented by Christ.

Verse 10. And I am glorified in them.] It will be a singular prop to our
prayers, if we so carry our selves, that Christ in his daily intercession may
give this testimony of us to the Father. He undertakes for us, as it were, and
gives his Word, that we, being mindful of our reconciliation by him, shall
shun sin by his grace, and not provoke him as before. This should cause us to
live so as Christ may have credit by us, and we may have courage to come to God
by Christ.

Verse 11. Keep through thine own Name] The Name of the Lord is a strong Tower,
Prove. 18.10. A munition of rocks, Isa. 33.18. Hither the Saints run for the
securing of their comforts, and safeguarding of their persons, as Coneyes do
to their burroughes, all creatures to their refuges, 2 Samuel 5.6, 7^
as the Schechemites fled to their Tower, when their City was beaten down to
the ground, Judge. 9. The lame and blind, the most shiftlesse creatures, when
they had gotten the strong hold of Sion over their heads, thought then they
might securely scoru David and his host, and yet their hold failed them. So
does not God, those that flee to his Name. Pray, to be kept by it.

Verse 12. But the son of perdition.] This exception shows, that Judas was
never of Christ's body: for, can he be a Savior of a son of perdition? But why
is he then excepted? First, by reason of his office the seemed to be of his
body. Secondly, our Savior speaks here in particular of the twelve; and to
be an Apostle, was in it self but an outward calling.

Verse 13. And these things I speak in the world.] Not for his own or his
Fathers sake, but for the comfort of his Disciples; to cure them of their
anxiety and anguish, when they heard him praying and providing such things for
them. For this also it was, that he prayed thus in their presence (when at
other times he went apart) for their consolation doubtless and instruction. Mr
Bradford Martyr, when he shifted himself in a clean shirt, Act. and Mon. sol.
1548.
made for his burning, he made such a prayer of the wedding garment, that some
of those that were present, were in such great admiration, that their eyes were
as truly occupied in looking on him, as their cars gave place to hear his
prayer.

Verse 14. I have given them thy Word, etc.] I have put my word into their
mouth, therefore the world hates them: Persecution being the black Angel (as
Calvin said) that dogs the Gospel. When our Savior preached at Nazareth, so
long as he was opening his Text they admired him, but when he came to apply it
close to their consciences, Luke 4.
they pulled him out of the Pulpit, and would have broken his neck down the
hill. The book that the Angel gave John to eat, Revel. 10.9. Brightman. Pare^.
was sweet in his mouth, but bitter in his belly, to note, that the knowledge
of divine truths is pleasant, but the publishing of them, whereby the fruit
thereof might come to the rest of the members (like the concoction and
distribution of meat digested in the stomach) is full of trouble.

Verse 15. That thou take them out of the world.] Many godly men, weary of the
worlds ill-usages, are found ort sitting under Elias his Juniper, and wishing
to die: for what are they better then their Fathers? Job 6.8, 9.
Oh that I might have my request! says Job, and that God would grant me the
thing that I long for: And what was that, trow you? Even that it would please
God to destroy me; that he would let loose his hand and cut me off. But was
that well prayed, Ion. 4 3, 8.
Job? Or was that wisely done, Jonas? to fret, one while, at Gods goodness to
the Ninevites? to faint, another while, at the loss of the gourd? And both
times to wish to die, Act. 13, 2 Timothy 4. Job 14. 1 Job. 5.18.
saying, It is better for me to die then to line? Were it not better to serve
out your time, with David? To finish your course, with Paul? to wait till your
change shall come, weil assured that that wicked one shall not touch you, as St
John has it, that is, tactu qualitativo (as Cajetan senseth it) with a deadly
touch?

Verse 16. They are not of the world, etc.] Here indeed they have their
commoration, (...). Tim. ^.21. Revel. 13 1.
but their conversation is in heaven: they are clothed with the Sun of
righteousness, and have the Moon (all earthly things) under their feer.
Pearls, though they grow in the sea, yet they have affinity with the heaven,
the beauty and brightness whereof they resemble: so here. It is Chrysostomes
comparison.

Verse 17. Sanctify them by thy truth.] Affect their hearts therewith, that
they may the better affect others: speaking a cord ad cor, which is the life
of preaching, Quod jussit and gessit, says Bernard, Bern. epist 42. Basil. n
Ps. ^3.
of one, (...), says Basil, of another. A Minister had need to pray, as
Elishad did, for a doubled and trebled spirit; that he may out of the good
treasure of his heart, bring forth good things new and old for the peoples use.

Verse 18. Even so have I sent them, etc.] Therefore they have need, that there
be put upon them of my spirit, that they may be fit for the work. This boon
none are to expect, but they that are sent of Christ, and such are sure to be
gifted.

Verse 19. And for their sakes do I sanctifie] As both Priest, Altar and
Sacrifice: and this Christ did from the womb to the Tomb; at his death
especially, when this Paschall lamb was roasted in the fire of his Fathers
wrath, that his people might be made partakers of his holiness, Heb. 10.10.
Here also it is worch the noting, that these Petitions in our Saviors prayer,
do so sweetly depend one upon another, that if you take away one, you deface
the other. Phavorinus in Gellius, comparing between the style of Lysias and
Plato, observes this difference, Quod si ex Platonis oratione aliquid demas
mutesque, de elegantia ta et um detraxeris; si ex Lysiae, de sententia.

Verse 20. Neither pray I for these alone] Lo here a sure and sweet haven for
all believers to have recourse to, where they may sit and sing away care of
miscarrying: for here Christ does as much as if he should solemnly swear to
secure and set them safe from danger, since the Father denies him nothing. John.
11.42.


Verse 21. That they all may be one] Though not by the same kind of union,
whereby the Father and Son are one, yet by an union every way as real and
indissoluble; such, as whereby the world may be convinced that Christ is the
very Messiah, and the faithful, the true Church. So it was acknowledged in the
Primitive times, Act. 4 32. But what a sad thing was it, that a Heathen should
soon after have cause to say, Am Marcellinus l 2. c. 2. Trist issima illa
persecur to sub Diocletiano, poress. or ta est a petulantia, superbia and rixis
sacerdotum. Eusebius. 2 Cor. 3 ul^. Ephesians. 2 6. Heb 6, 2. (...)
Nullae infestae hominibus bestiae, ut sunt sibi ferales plerique Christiani;
No beasts are so mischievous to men, as Christians are one to another. They had
not so learned Christ. Love and humility are his cognizances. Why then should
the Turk have occasion to say, that he should sooner see his fingers all of a
length, then Christian Princes all of a mind? Why should the Jew stumble at
our dissensions, which is one of the main scandals they take from Protestants?

Verse 22. And the glory which thou, etc.] That is, the grace, which is glory
begun, as glory is grace perfected: we are here transfor med into the same
image from glory to glory; and set together in heavenly places in Christ Jesus.
Such honor have all his Saints. Such things are found in them as do accompany
or comprehend salvation.

Verse 23. I in them, and thou in me] Christ was the only fit Mediator: as
being God for the business with God, and man, for the business with man. He
is the bridge that joyneth Heaven and Earth together, says Gregory. He is that
ladder of ascension to God: faith first lays hold upon Christ, as man: and by
it, as by a mean, makes way to God; and in it embraces the Godhead, which is
of it self fire consuming. We may safely fail through Christ's blood into the
bosom of the Father.

Verse 24. Be with me, Where I am.] It is part of Christ's joy, that we shall be
where he is. He will not therefore be long without us. David is sent by God to
Hebron to be crowned: he will not up alone, but takes with him all his men with
all their households. They shall take such part as himself, not withstanding
their late mutiny at Ziklag. So deals the Lord Christ with all his; and this
should digest all their sorrows. Christ will not be happy alone: as a tender
Father, he can enjoy nothing, if his children may not have part with him.

Verse 25. O righteous Father.] Gods righteousness is either, 1. Of equity, to
punish offenses. Or, 2. Of fidelity, to make good his Promises. Act and Mon.
tol. 15 53.
In which refpect it is no arrogance nor presumption (said M. Glover, Martyr)
to burden God, as it were, with his Promises; and of duty to claim his aid,
help and assistance.

Verse 26. That the love, etc.] Clarit as in intelle ctu parit ardorem in
affectu. Igxoti nulla cupido

CHAP. XVIII.
Verse 1. Over the brook Cedron.]
THis was the Town-dirch, 2 Chronicles. 30.14. and had it is name from it is darkness
or muddinesse: for it received the baggage, as a common sink. Not far from
hence was the valley of Hinnom, wherein there was kept a continual fire for
the burning of dead carcases and other garbadge, as Kimchi notes upon Psalm. 27.
Hence hell is called, Gehenna.

Verse 2. And Judas also which betrayed him] No such danger to Christ's Church
by any, as by Apostates and false brethren, Gal. 2.4. Julian, of a for ward
Professor became a furious persecutour, and drew more from the faith by fraud
and crast, then all the Heathen Emperors before him had done, by their force
and cruelty. Eo tantum fine ut ipsi ob mutuam inter se contentionem bello
intest ino oppusnarent ecclesia^. S. zom. Jac. Reu. de vit. Ponuf p. 176.
He persecuted by his persuasions, as Nazianzen witnesses, and called back the
Bishops that were banished by Constantine, that, by their mutual wranglings
amongst themselves, they might embroyl and overthrow the Church. About the year
of grace, 1240. One Robert a Bulgarian fell off from the Waldenses, and turning
to be a Dominican, he proved to be a sore enemy to the Church of Christ, in
Flanders especially. Bishop Bonner was at first advanced by Cromwelol, and
seemed muck to dislike Stephen Gardener for his Popery. Act. and Mon. Jol. ^^87.
His words to Grafton at Paris, when he was newly made Bishop of London, were
these, Before God, the greatest fault that I ever sound in Stokesly (who was
his Predecessor) was for vexing and troubling of poor men for their Religion,
as Lobley the Book-binder and others, for having the Scripture in English: And
(God willing) he did not so much hinder it, but I will as much further it, etc.
Baldwin the renegado, and Bolsecus (that was hire by the Papists to write
Calvin's life) were desperate enemies to the truth they had formerly professed.
Harding, that had conference with Jewel, was once a zealous Protestant, Camd.
Eliz. fol. 115.
and Chaplain to Lady Jane Gray. Campian of S. John's College in Oxford,
Proctour of the University, 1568. dissembled the Protestant Religion, which he
afterward opposed to his utmost. So did Parsons, who was of Balioll College,
till he was for his dishonesty expelled with disgrace, and fled to the Papists.
Christ's greatest enemies are usually those of his own house. He was of the
society of Jesus, that betrayed him.

Verse 3. Judas having then received a band.] These are the enemies best
arguments, and those they fiee to when ali's done. So the Jesuits, those sworn
swordmen of Satan, give out that their weapons are only, preces and
loachrymae, prayers and tears; and that it is unlawful for them to use any
other, even then when they are about their most bloody designs. Camd. Eliz
Epist. to Read.
A late King of France (after his revolt to Popery) being persuaded by a great
Dake about him not to read mit the Jesuits, which had been justly banished the
Realm, he answered suddenly, Give me then security for my life. He therefore
admitted them, even into his bosom, giving them his house for a College; and
in a public speech, laying, Vita Devid. Parei operth. praefix.
That they were Timothies in the house, Chrysostomes in the Chair, Augustines
in the Schools, etc. But what came of it? One of the Popes slaughter flaves, by
the instigation of the Jesuits, stabbed him to the heart: These Timothies
proved Judasses; these Chrysostoms, Catilines; these Augustines, Assassines.

Comes thither with lanterns, Essries divine and moral.
etc.] Hypocrites may be compared (says one) to those soldiers in the Gospel,
which came to seek Christ with lights and lanterns, as if they meant not to
miss of him; yea, they brought clubs and staves, as if they would fight for
him: Yet, when he says, Here I am, take you up my Cross, they stumble at the
Cross, and fall backwards.

Verse 4. Went forth and said unto them] Met his enemy in the face, after he
had prayed; whereas till then, he feared. See the power of prayer. So Esther,
when she had fasted and prayed, found her heart fortified against fear of man;
and putting her life in her hand, went boldly to the King. So Hudson the
Martyr, of whom before.

Verse 5. Jesus of Nazareth. Jesus says, I am he] They called him Jesus of
Nazareth by way of reproach. He takes it upon him, and wears it for a crown:
And should not we do like wise?

And Judas also, etc.] With what face could the Traitor stand there? But being
full of the devil, he was past grace, and could blush no more then a sack-but,
Effraenis and effronque

Verse 6. Affoon then as he had said, etc.] Here our Savior let out a little
beam of the Majesty of his Deity, and sive hundred men fell before him, Q^id
autem judicaturus facier, qui judicandus hoc fecit, Psalm. 1.7.
says Augustine? The wicked shall not stand in judgment, Ila. 11.4.
says David. Christ shall smite the earth with the rod of his mouth, says
Isaias; and with the breath of his lips shall he slay the wicked. Godly men
(who have but a drop of Christ's Ocean, a spark of his flame) have a daunting
presence. When Valens the persecuting Emperor came to S Basil, while he was in
holy exercises, it struck such a terror into him, that he reeled, and had
fallen, had he not been upheld by those that were with him. And another time,
when he should have subscribed an order for St Basils banishment, Triport.
b^stor.
such a sudden trembling took his right hand, that he could write never a good
letter, whereupon be tore the order for anger, and there was an end of the
business. When an Officer was sent to apprechend a godly Deacon at Miltenberg
(a Town in the territory of Ments) the Deacon embracing him, said, Salve,
frater, frater enimvero meus es, en adsum, transfode me, suffoca me, Domine, a
me quidem nibil mali expectes. Scultet. Annal. p. 174.
Here I am, brother, stab me, hang me, do what you will with me. The officer,
as if changed from heaven, answered, Sr, you shall receive no hurt from me. And
when the Boars ran in to kill the Deacon, he delivered him, and set him safe
out of danger. Judas dealt not so by Jesus but as he fell with the rest, so
rose with the rest, who desperately went on with their devil. sh design,
nothing daunted by their late disaster.

Verse 7. Then asked he them again.] Though struck to the earth, they desist
not: So the Sodomites, smitten with blindness, grope for the door. Pharaoh in
that palpable darkness, rages against God, and menaceth Moses, Monoceros
interim potest, capi non potest: Stubborn men will sooner break then bend. Man,
Solinus.
faith Polibyus, is held the wrsest, but to me he seems the most foolish of
all creatures: for they, where they have miscarried once, will not easily be
driven thither again, Solus home ab evo adaevum peccat fere in y them: Only man
will not be warned, though he have soundly smarted. We load an Ass (says
Bernard) and he cares not, because he is an Ass, Caver quantum potest, quta
vitam amct, and mortem timet.
and born to bear burdens: But if you would drive him into a ditch, or thrust
him into the fire, he shuns it as well as he can, because he loves life, and
fears death. Yet silly man fears not his eternal bane.

Verse 8. Let these go their way] This he seems to indent with the Jews, ere
he yielded himself their prisoner. As a good Shepherd, he interposeth between
the Wolf and the Flock: as an heavenly Eagle, he has ever an eye to his nest,
when he flies highest from it.

Verse 9. That the saying might be fulfilled, etc.] Christ spoke it of their
fouls, it is here applied to their bodies. God has a fatherly care of both,
and will not lay more upon the outward man, then the inward shall be enabled to
undergo. Hence that of the Prophet, Behold, I have tried thee, but not as
silver, Why so? Isa. 48.10.
Because Gods weak children having far more dross in them, then good oar,
would never be able to abide a strict trial.

Verse 10. The servants name was Maelchus] A busy fellow belike in surprising
our Savior. L Brook.
But it was a sad Omen (says a noble and renowned Writer) that Peter's sword
should cut off the ear of Malchus, which signifies a King or kingly authority.
How the Pope has lifted up himself, (...), above all that is called Augustus,
or Emperor, is better known, then that it need be here related. And if Bishops
forbear (says he) to touch the Scepter (which they strive to sway) it is but
as once Mercury spared Jupiters thunderbolts, which he durst not steal, lest
they should roar too loud, or at least burn his fingers.

Verse 11. Put up thy Sword.] Our Savior checks him for his inordinate zeal;
wherein to be over-carried, is easy and ordinaty. The memorable story of
William Gardener Martyr in Portugal, who in the very presence of the King and
his Nobles could not forbear, but fell upon the Cardinal, as he was acting a
Mass. See Act. and Monum. fol. 1242. So William Flower, upon an Easterday at
Westminster, seeing a Priest ministering the Sacrament of the Aitar to the
people, struck and wounded him upon the head, and also upon his arm and hand
with a wood-knife: In the which so doing, as indeed he did not well, nor
evangelically: so being afterward examined by Bishop Bonner, he did no less
confess his not-well-doing in the same, submitting therefore himself willingly
to punishment, when it should come. Howbeit touching his belief in the
Sacrament, and Popish ministration, he neither did, nor would submit himself:
But when he was rempted to turn, and also threatened, he answered, Do what ye
will, I am at a point: for the heavens shall as soon fall, as I will forsake
mine opinion, Act. and Mon. Jol. 1430.
etc. At his execution, first his hand being held up against the Stake, was
stricken off: At the which, some that were present affirmed, that he shrunk
not, but once a little stirred his shoulders.

Verse 12. Took Jesus and bound him.] This was done (...), as Irenaeus has it,
whiles the Deity rested: for he could as easily have delivered himself, as he
did his Disciples; but this Sacrifice was to be bound with cords to the Altar:
he was pinnioned and manacled, as a malefactor. So was not Abner: His hands
were not bound, nor his feet put into the fetters, 2 Samuel 3 34. But Christ was
bound for our transgressions, he was bruised for our iniquities. Paul by his
privilege was freed from whipping; (...).
but we by Christ's bondage, from those chains of darkness, 2 Pet. 2.4. from
those scourges and scorpions in hell.

Verse 13. And led him away to Annas first.] Who would not go to bed (late
though it were) till he had seen Christ brought bound before him, and then
cried out, likely, as Hanuibal did, when he saw a pit full of man's blood, O
formosum spectaculum! So Stephen Gardener would not sit down to dinner, till
the news came of the good Bishops burnt at Oxford. Then he came out rejoicing,
and saying to the Duke of Norfolk, Act. and Mon. fol. 1622.
Now let us go to Dinner: but it was the last that ever he eat for it. Shall
they escape by iniquity? No: In anger cast them down, o God, Psalm. 56.7.

Verse 14. Now Caiaphas was he, etc.] So Balaam, the devils Spelman, spoke
excellently of the Star of Jacob. See the Notes on Chap. 11.51, 52.

Verse 15. That Disciple was known to the High Priest.] Perhaps for that he and
his father Zebedee were wont to serve the fat Priest with the best and
daintiest fish: (for this other Disciple was John, who had first fled with the
rest, and now came sculking in, De not. anima.
to see what would become of his Master.) Of the Asse-fish Aristotle affirms,
that he, of all other creatures, has his heart in his belly: Such a thing was
this Priest.

Verse 16. But Peter stood at the door] Better he had kept him further off. He
that will not fall into the ditch, must not walk too near the brimme. Peter
might better have bestowed himself somewhere else: Long utilius fuisset
gemere, and precari in obscuro aliquo angulo, says Musculus. It had been
better for him to have been praying in a corner, then thus to put himself upon
a danger, unless he had known himself the stronger. Luther comfort the men
of Miltenberg by an Epistle; and because they were forbidden to meet and talk
together, about matters of Religion, upon pain of death, Qui infir miores sunt,
tacit in Domino gaudeant, Deumque rogent, ut se quoque animet ad publicam
veritatque prosessionem.
he advises those of them that were strong in the spirit, to do their duty,
notwithstanding the danger. But for the weaker sort, he exhorts them to
rejoice secretly in the Lord, and to pray to him for further strength, that
they may be able to make a bold and wise profession of his truth.

Verse 17. He says, I am not.] False dissimulation is true denial. A silly
wench is too hard for this stout stickler, who was always, Melius animatus quam
armatus, as one observes of him: Sir Elias fulminator ad Jesubelis minas
trepidat, factus seipso imbecillior. Thou also stand by faith: Romans 11.
be not high-minded, but fear.

Verse 18. And Warmed himself.] But whiles he warmed without, he cooled within.
Evil company is a great quench-coal, an ill air for zeal to breathe in, it
casts a damp. For the abundance of iniquity, Mat 24.
the love of many waxes cold. Peter's evil example was a compulsion to other
good people, Gal. 2.14. What marvel then if the swearing, cursing soldiers
compelled him to do the like? They were the trunks, through which the devil
delivered himself, jeering at, and railing upon Christ, no doubt, etc.

Verse 19. Alsted Chron. Aventin, An. nal l. 3. Cade of the Church.
Asked Jesus of his Disciples] Questioned him in the spiritual Court first, as
an heretic; as afterward in the temporal Court, for a seditious person. So
the Papists condemned married Priests for Nicolaitans, in the Synod of Millain,
anno 1067. Virgilius a Germane Bishop, and a great Mathematician, they
condemned for an heretic, for affirming that there were Antipodes. Paulus 2.
Iac. Reu de vit. Pontis p. 139. Act and Mon. fol. 1550.
Pope, pronounced them heretics that did but name the name Academy, either in
jest or in earnest. Innocent 2. condemned Arnoldus Brixius of heresy, for
saying that the Clergy should have their temporalties taken away, and be tied
to their spirituals only. Bonner objected to Philpot the Martyr that he found
written in his book, In me Joanne Philpotto ubi abundavit peccatum,
superabundavit and gratia. And when the Bishop of Worcecter exhorted Philpot,
Ibid. 1637.
before he began to speak, to pray to God for grace: Nay, my Lord of Worcester,
said Bonner, you do not well to exhort him to make any prayer; for this is the
thing these heretics have a singular pride in, that they can often make their
vain prayers, in the which they glory much: For in this point they are like to
certain arrant heretics, of whom Pliny makes mention, Plin Epist.
that they sing Antelucanos hymnos, etc. Was not this well aimed? Those he
spoke of were the Primitive Christians, whom Pliny excuses to Trajan the
Persecutour. But it is easy for malice to make heresy what it pleases, when
it is armed with power, and can make havoc at pleasure.

Verse 20. Veritas absconde crubescit.
I spoke openly to the world.] Truth is bold and bare faced: when heresy hides
it self, and loatnes the light. What said John Frith, Martyr, to the
Archbishops men, that would have let him go and shift for himself? If you
should both leave me here, and go to Croydon, declaring to the Bishops, that
you had lost Frith, Act. and Mon. fol. 19 7.
I would surely follow as fast after as I might, and bring them news that I had
found and brought Frith again. Do ye think that I am afraid to declare my
opinion to the Bishops of England in a manifest truth?

Verse 21. Why ask thou me?] We are to be ready always to give an answer,
to those that ask as a reason of our hope, so they do it to learn of us, and
not to ensnare us. Thus I kept the banddogs at staves end (said Nicolas
Shetterden, Act. and Mon. sot. 1575.
Martyr) not as thinking to escape them, but that I would see the Foxes leap
above ground for my blood, if they can reach it (so it be the will of God) yet
we shall see them gape and leap for it. Mr Hawks, Martyr, asked a Parson that
examined him, what kin he was to the weathercock of Paul's? Ibid 1445.
And told one Miles Huggard a Hosier in Pudding-lane, who began to question
him, that he could better skill to eat a pudding, and make an hose, then in
Scripture either to answer or oppose.

Verse 22. One of the Officers.] Because our Savior gave not the high Priest
his usual titles, but dealt freely with him, this officer to curry favor,
Veluti pontificy honoris vindex, beats our Savior with his hand, or stick, and
is the better thought of. Like Master, like man. Disploso sclopeto a Vicarij
samuto, sed frustraimpetitur. Scultet.
So the Bishop of Geneva's servant discharged his Pistol at Farellus (that
faithful man of God) when he was convented before his Lord; but by Gods good
providence, missed him. Great men's vices go as seldom unattended, as their
persons: they shall be sure of such about them, Ne leonum laudibus murem obruas.
as will lick up their spettle, and load the Mouse with the Lions praises.

Verse 23. If I have spoken evil.] Christ bears with the officers insolency,
but forbears not to clear his own innocence. We must, when aspersed, labor as
the eclipsed Moon, by keeping our motion, to wade out of the shadow, and
recover our former splendor.

Verse 24. Bound, to Caiaphas the High Priest.] Who should have done our
Savior better justice, then to have suffered him, bound and uncondemned, to be
injuriously beaten before his face. But the times were then law less and
licentious for the sans of the people. Tales sunt principum mores, quales
subditorum humores, ut malo nodo non desit malus cuneus.

Verse 25. He denied it, and said, I am not.] Take heed by this example, Patres
nos instruunt tum docentes, tum labantes, says Augustine. See thou such as
Peter to make shipwreck? Look well to thy tackling, They that will not profess
Christ (unless they repent with Peter, which Stephen Gardener said at his
death, Act. and Mon. fol. 190^.
that he could not) shall be sorted with such in participation of plagues, as,
through excess of pain, and defect of patience, gnaw their own tongues, Revel.
16.10.

Verse 26. Whose ear Peter cut off.] A great mercy it was, that Peter had not
been then hewed in a hundred pieces, by the ruffianly soldiers. But God had
designed him to a further service. My times are in thy hand, says David. They
were deceived, that swore to kill Paul by such an hour, Act. 23.12.

Verse 27. Peter then denied again.] He that is fallen down one round of hels
ladder, knows not where he shall stop or stay, till he come to the bottom.
Sin is of an encroaching nature; modest and maidenly at first; but yield to it
once, and there is no hoe with it.

The Cockcrew.] And withal Christ looked back upon him, as a piece of his
sufferings, with (...), what thou my friend, Peter? Scipio had rather Annibal
should eat his heart with salt, then Laelius give him a cross word.

Verse 28. Lest they should be defiled.] Putid hypocrisy! they stand upon
legal defilements, and care not to defile their consciences with innocent
blond. (...).
What is this but to strain at a gnat, and swallow a Camel? So Saul seemed to
make a heinous matter of eating the flesh with the blood, 1 Samuel 14.33. when it
was nothing with him to spill the blood of innocent Jonathan. Nay, he was so
scrupulous, that he would not so much as name a guilty man, or sinner, but, in
casting of lots, in stead of saying; show the nocent on guilty, he said, show
the innocent or upright person, as Tremellius reads it, yet at the same time
(as is well observed) he made no conscience of bloody baths. So Doeg was
detained before the Lord, either because it was the Sabbath, or his vow was not
finished, etc. But when he went thence, he became deaths-man to the Lords
Priests.

Verse 29. Pilate then went ant unto them.] It was much he would gratify them
so far in their stand further off, for I am holier then thou; Breerw. Enq. p.
^8.
that he would yield to their superstition, which he could not but contemn. But
the very Turk, so the Christians pay him his yearly tribute (which is one
fourth part of their increase, and a Sultan for every poll) permits them the
liberty of their religion.

Verse 30. If he were not a malefactour] Why? What evil had he done them? Might
he not have said to them as Themistocles to his Athenians? Are ye weary of
receiving so many benefits by one man?

Verse 31. It is not lawful for us.] That is, upon this or any such like day,
upon an holy day, or holy-day-Eeve. For otherwise they had power, or at least
took it at their pleasure; as when they stoned Stephen, Act. 7. and would have
killed Paul, Act. 24. But note, that they would seem to do all according to Law
by any means; so would their successors, the Catholics. Which, if it be so
(says M. Fox) how did they then to Anne Askew, Act. and Mon. fol. 1392.
whom they first condemned to death, and then set her on the tack? By what law
did they call up Mr Hooper, and prison him for the Queens debt (when the Queen
in very deed did owe him fourscore pound) and kept him a year and half in
prison, and gave him never a penny? By what Law did Bishop Bonner condemn and
burn Richard Mekins, a lad of fifteen years, when the first Jury had quit him,
and at the stake he revoked all heresy, and praised the said Bonner to be a
good man: and also having him in prison, would not suffer his father and mother
to come to him, to comfort their own child? What Law had they to put Mr Rogers
our Protomartyr in prison, when he did neither preach nor read lecture, after
the time of the Queens inhibition? And when they had kept him in his own house
half a year, being not deprived of any living, yet would not let him have one
halfpenny of his own means to relieve him, his wife and eleven children? By
what Law was Thomas Tomkins hand burned, and after his body consumed to ashes?
What good Law or honesty was there to burn the three poor women at Garnes^e,
with the Infant-childe falling out of the mothers womb, when as they all before
recanted their words and opinions, and were never abjured before? So, what
right or order of Law did Stephen Gardener follow, in troubling and imprisoning
Judge Hales, when he had done nothing neither against Gods Law nor man's,
proceeding in order of Law against certain presumptuous persons, which, both
before the Law, and against the Law then in force, took upon them to say their
Mass?

Verse 32. Signifying what death he should die.] This shows that the Jews had
power to put to death, but by a providence he was brought to Pilate, that,
according to the manner of the Romans he might be crucified a that kind of
death being not, otherwise, in use among the Jews. Hence our Lord is said to
have been crucified at Rome, Rev. 11.8.

Verse 33. Entered into the judgement-hall again.] For without among the people,
there was nothing but clamor and confusion: much like to that regnum Cyclopum,
ubi (...), Pilate therefore retires himself into the palace, that he might
more sedately set himself to sift the business.

Verse 34. Say thou this of thy self,] As who should say; If thou do this
of thy self, what reason is it that thou should be both Judge and witness? If
others have done it, why are not mine accusers brought face to face? If to be
accused be enough to make a man guilty, none shall be innocent. Judges are to
proceed secundum allegata and probata.

Verse 35. Am I a Jew?] This he asks in scorn of that Nation; hateful among
the Heathens for their difference from them in Religion. Caius the Emperor
cast them out with their Orator Philo, Serab, Geog.
who came to make Apology for them against Appion of Alexandria their adversary
and accuser. Strabo of mere spite, says, that Judea is a dry and barren
country, when the Scripture calls it a land flowing with milk and honey,
plenty and dainty; and Tacitus cannot but grant as much. Heyl. Geng. Au. de^iv,
Dei
Florus calls the Temple at Jerusalem, impiae gentis arcanum, a Sanctuary for
rogues, as the Papists fay of Geneva. Seneca jeers them for casting away the
seventh part of their time upon a weekly Sabbath. Juvenal plays upon their
circumcision. Lib (...). ^ap. 5 Ta^. Ann^t. ^. 21.
Plutarch tells a long Story of their feast of Tabernacles, which, says he,
they keep in honor of Batcbus. Tacitus says, they were called Asinarij,
because they worshipped the golden head of an Ass, etc. No wonder though
profane Pilate disdeign to be held a Jew, when they were thus traduced.

Verse 36. My kingdom is not of this world.] Christ could not be received as a
god into the Pantheon at Rome, for that he wanted worshippers, preached
poverty, and chose mean men for his Disciples. Domitian the Emperor, after he
had banished John into ^^thmos, and Damicilla Flavia his own ssiters daughter,
with many more, into Pontus, and put diverse to death for that they were
Christians, he commanded all such Jews as he could find, to be put to death,
that were of the stock of David. Amongst whom meeting with some Christians
also, that were allied to Christ, and understanding that they were poor,
harmless people, he dismissed them, and by Proclamation forbad any more to be
martyred. Eus^b. l. 7 c. 20.


Verse 37. That I should bear witness of the truth.] Our Savior speaks
religiously to a profane person: So does Jacob to Esau. Each Countryman is
known by his language. Genesis 33.5.
God will turn to all his people a pure lip, Zephan. 3.9. They are none of his
that can shift their sails to the sitting of every wind, tune their fiddles
to other men's base, and, as the Planet Mercury, be good in conjunction with
good, and bad with bad.

Verse 38. What Is truth?] In a scornful, profane manner. As indeed profane
spirits cannot hear favoury words, but they turn them off with a scorn.
What Is truth? Fastidientis atque irridentis vox, non interrogantis, says Beza.
Some think it is, vox admirantis. As if Pilate wondered at Christ, that when
his life was in question he should talk of truth, q. d. Your life is in
danger, and talk you of truth? Politicians think Religion niceness. How ever
it was, or with what mind soever, out he goes, and stays not an answer: As
Saul bad the Priest bring to him the Arc, but, ere that could be done, draws
forth his Army, 1 Samuel 14.

Verse 39. But ye have a custome] An ungaine, ungodly custom it was, Prove.
17.15. What ever were the ground of it. Some think it was in memory of
Jonathan, In is it a consuetudine turpe and crassum suit vitium Calv. Goodw.
Antiq. Heb p. 39. Prove. 28.97.
rescued from his father by the people. Others, that the Feast might be
celebrated with the greater joy and gladness. Others, more probably, in
remembrance of their deliverance from the Egyptian bondage. But why should any
Barabbas escape by it? A bloody man shall flee to the pit, and no man may stay
him.

Verse 40. Now Barabbas was a robber] And a murderer too, Act. 3.14. yet
preferred before Christ, who was also crucified in the midst of two thieves, as
the worst of the three. Thus he was peccatorum maximus, both by imputation, for
he bore our sins, which were all made to meet upon him, Isa. 53.6. And by
reputation, for he was numbered with the transgressors, ver. 12. and made his
grave with the wicked, verse. 9.

CHAP. XIX.
Verse 1. Took Jesus and scourged him.]
SO God scourges every son whom he receives, Heb. 12.6. One son he had that
was sine corruptione and flagitio, but none that was sine correptione and
flagello. In him therefore that rule held not, Flagitium and flagelium, sicut
acus and filum, Punishment follows sin, as the thread follows the needle.

Verse 2. And the souidiers piatted a crown of thorns.] Prickly and sharp as
the point of a sword (so the word signifies) And our Savior, (...) videtur
o^tum a voce (...), cuspis, acies mucro. Pasor.
being of the finest constitution, must needs be extreme sensible. The
soldiers did this (it is thought) by the command of Pilate, to give content to
the Jews, and to move them thereby (if it might be) either to contemn him, or
commiserate him. But nothing would do but his death; these bloud-hounds would
not other ways be satisfied. Godfrey of Bullen, first King of Jerusalem,
refused to be crowned with a crown of gold, saying that it became not a
Christian there to wear a crown of gold, where Christ, Turk. hist. fo. 24
for our salvation had some time worn a crown of thorns. Some report, that he
would not be otherwise crowned, then with a crown of thorns, as he kneeled at
our Saviors sepulcher: To testify (perhaps) that he did dedicate his head and
life to Christ crucified, Tradu^t coro a^ sptream ei esse impefitam flenis
gen^bus ad sepu^chrum Dom^^tcum pro. cu^b. nti, etc. Bu^nolcer.
and despised not for his sake a crown of thorns here, so he might wear a
crown of glory with him in Heaven. Canutus, for like purpose, set his Crown
upon the Crucisix. It is not fit, since the head was crowned with thorns, that
the members should be crowned with rose-buds, says Zanchius.

Verse 3. And said, Hail, King of the Jews.] They scoff at him, as a
ridiculous and stage-play-King, whom therefore they clothed with purple, which
was a color affected by the Emperors and Nobility of Rome: as Herod, for like
cause clothed him in white, (...)
a color much worn by the Nobility of the Jews, Jam. 2.2.

And they smote him with their hands.] So do hypocrites still by their
unchristian practice, when they bend the knee to Christ with ludibrious
devotion. Perba tua Dei plane sunt, facta ve^o diaboli^^de^tur.
They have the voice of Jacob, but the hands of Esau. Their words are Gods,
their deeds the devils, as John Capocius told Pope Innocent the third,
preaching peace, and sowing discord.

Verse 4. That ye may know that I find no fault.] But why did he not then
deliver him out of their hands? Pusillanimity and popularity would not suffer
him: but howsoever, he shall give testimony to his innocence. Act. and Mon.
fol. 1469.
So when Doctor Weston was gone from Mr Bradford, Martyr (with whom he had had
conference) the Keeper told Bradford, that the Doctor spoke openly that he saw
no cause why they should burn him. This Weston being Prolocutour in the
Divinity Schools at Oxford, when Cranmer was brought forth to dispute, thus
began the disputation, Ibid 1300.
Convenistis hodie, fratres, profligaturi detestandam illam haeresin de
veritate corporis Christi in Sacramento, etc. At which, diverse learned men
burst out into a great laughter, as though even in the entrance of the
disputation he had bewrayed himself and his Religion. God will have such words
fall sometimes from the mouths of persecutours, either wittingly, or by
mistake, as shall one day rise up in judgment, and out of their own mouths
condemn them.

Verse 5. Pilate says, Behold the man.] Q. d. If ye be men, take pity upon a
man, so miserably misused: as, if ye be good men, let him go, that is so
innocent. But these monsters, like those beasts at Ephesus, had put off
manhood: And for good men amongst them, it fared with Pilate, pleading for
Christ, as it did with him at Nola in the Story, who, when he was commanded by
the Roman Censor to go and call the good men of the City to appear before
him, went to the Churchyards, and there called at the graves of the dead,
Anton di Cuevara in Retor. de los princip. l. 1. c. 2.
O ye good men of Nola, come away, for the Roman Censor calls for your
appearance: for he knew not where to call for a good man alive.

Verse 6. Crucify him, crucify him] So afterward the primitive persecutours
cried out, Ad bestias, ad bestias, Christianos ad leones, Tertul Apci. cap 40.
Tollantur sacrilegi, tollantur.
imputing the cause of all public calamities to them, as Tertullian
testifies. So they cried out at Geneva against Farellus, when the Bishop first
convented him, In Rhodanum, in Rhodanum, as the Papists still cry out against
the Professors of the truth, ad ignem, adignem, to the fire with them, to the
fire with them. Indeed in the form and style of their own sentence
condemnatory, they pretend a Petition to the secular power, In visceribus Jesu
Christi ut rigor juris mitigetur, a^que ut parcatur vitae. So they will seem
outwardly to be lambs, but inwardly they are ravening wolves: witness that
Chancellor of Salisbury Dr Jeffrey, Act and Mon. fo. 1864.
who was not only contented to give sentence against certain Martyrs, but also
hunted after the High Sheriff, not suffering him to spare them, though he
would. So Harpsfield, Archdeacon of Canterbury, Ibid 1862.
being at London, when Queen Mary lay a dying, made all Post-haste home to
dispatch those six, whom he had then in his cruel custody; and those were the
last that suffered for Religion in Queen Mary's reign.

I find no fault in him.] No wonder: For he was (as Peter says) A lamb
without blemish (of original sin) and without spot (of actual sin. 1 Pet.
1.18.
) Neither was it without a sweet providence of God that he should be so often
absolved from the desert of death, that thereby we might escape the manifold
deaths that we had so well deserved.

Verse 7. The Jews answered them, etc.] When they saw that the treason they
laid to his charge ( unicum crimen eorum, qui crimine vacabunt, Not. ad Tacit.
says Lipsius) would not do the deed, they accuse him of blasphemy another
while, that by some means or other they might take away his life. Thou, and
such as thou (said Bonner to Thomas Brown, Martyr) report, I seek your blood:
To whom he answered, Act. and Mor. so. 1685.
Yea, my Lord, indeed ye be a bloud-sucker; and I would I had as much blood as
is water in the sea, for you to suck. Another unknown good woman, told this
Bishop in a letter, Ibid. 1672.
that he had such store of Christ's lambs already in his Butchers-stall, that he
was not able to drink all their blood, lest he should break his belly, and
therefore he let them lie still, and die for hunger. Ibid. 1358.
My Lord (said M. Saunders to Bonner) you seek my blood, and you shall have it:
I pray God you may be so baptized in it, that you may hereafter loath
bloud-sucking, and become a better man.

Verse 8. He was the more afraid,] Christ's innocence did besore triumph in
Pilates conscience. But now, that he hears that he made himself the son of God,
he was in a mighty maze, He was afraid, says the text, of lifting up his hand
against God. The greatest men, if not utterly debauched and satanized, cannot
but quake at the apprehension of God; and as the worms, when it thunders,
wriggle into the corners of the earth. Culigula (that dared his Jove to a duel
with that Hemistich in Homer, (...), Either kill me, Sueton, in Calig.
or I Will kill thee) when it thundered, covered his eyes with his cap, running
under the bed, or any bench-hole.

Verse 9. Whence art thou?] He questioneth not Christ of his country, but of
his condition, q. d. Art thou a man, or a God? Such a dung-hill-Deity he meant,
as the Heathens worshipped: And therefore our Savior would not once answer
him. Especially since if he should have asserted his Deity, Pilate likely would
have acquitted and dismissed him; whereas Christ knew that he was now, and
here, to be condemned. There are that think that Pilates wives dream was from
the devil, who sought thereby to have hindered the work of our redemption,
which could not be wrought but by the death of Christ.

Verse 10. Speak thou not unto me?] No, and yet S. Paul says, he witnessed
a good confession before Pontius Pilate, 1 Timothy 6.13.
because he had said sufficient before, and was now ready to seal up the truth
with his blood. But to be delivered, he would not once open his mouth to
Pilate. So M. Saunders had so wholly devoted himself to the defense of Christ's
cause, Act. and Mon. so. 1359.
that he forbad his wife to sue for his delivery: and when other of his friends
had by suit almost obtained it, he discouraged them, so that they did not
follow their suit. I pray you let me make labor for you, said one Creswell to
Master Bradford. You may do what you will, said Bradford. But tell me what
suit I shall make for you, quoth Creswell. Forsooth said the other, that you
will do, Ibid. 1467.
do it not at my request; for I desire nothing at your hands. If the Queen will
give me life, I will thank her: if she will banish me, I Will thank her: if she
will burn me, I Will thank her: if she will condemn me to perpetual
imprisonment, I Will thank her. Life in Gods displeasure is worse then death:
and death in his true fear, is true life.

I have power to crucify thee.] To crucify an innocent man? Who gave him that
power? But profane persons bear themselves over-bold upon their power, as if
they were little gods within themselves. So Caesar told Metellus he could as
easily destroy him, Rideo quod uno nutu meo jugulare vos possim, and uxori lam
bona cervix, si ^ul ac jussero, demetur.
as bid it be done. So Caligula speaking to the Consuls, I laugh, said he, to
think that I can kill you with a nod of my head, and that this fair throat of
my wives shall be presently cut, if I but speak the word.

Verse 11. Except it were given thee from above.] Therefore be good in thine
office, lest thou give a dear account to him that is higher then the highest,
as Solomon has it: who therefore calls the judgment seat, the holy place,
Eccl. 8.10. Pilate was after wards kicked off the bench by Caius, for his
perverting of justice, and, for grief and shame became his own deaths-man.

Verse 12. But the Jews cried out, saying, etc.] They return again to their
former accusation, and enforce it. One way or other they are bent to have his
blood. In K. Edward the sixths days, when the Duke of Sommerset was cleared of
the treason laid to his charg, yet he must suffer (so his potent enemies would
have it) for I know not what flight suspicions of felony. At which time also,
Sr Thomas Arundel was, Sir John Heyw. life of Edw 6. p. 14^.
among others, with some difficulty condemned. Unhappy man (says the
Historian) who found the doing of any thing, or of nothing dangerous alike.

Verse 13. When Pilate therefore heard that saying] That saying, and the base
fear of being shent by Caesar makes him warp and go against his conscience. But
should not Judges be men of courage? Should not the standard be of steel? the
chief posts in the house be heart of Oak? Solomon's tribunal was underpropt
with Lions, to show what metal a Magistrate should be made of. It is a mercy to
have Judges, Cic. pro Milo.
Modo audeant quae sentiunt, says the Orator, so they dare do their
consciences.

Verse 14. Behold your King.] Q.d. A like matter that this poor man should
affect the Kingdom; and not rather that he is like to lose his life, Act and
Mon. so. 1590.
byforged cavillation. Christ himself was misreported and falsely accused (says
father Latymer) both as touching his words and meaning also, etc. Core and his
accomplices object to the meekest of men with one breath, pride, ambition,
usurpation of authority, Lips. in Tacit.
Invenies apud Tacitum frequentatas uccasationes majestatis: unicum crimen
eorum qui crimine vacabant.

Verse 15. We have no King but Caesar.] Why but, Is there no King in Sion? is
her Counselor perished? says the Prophet, Mica. 49. Did not these men look
for a M^ssi^^h? Or if not; will they reject the Lord from being their King? Oh
how blind is malice, how desperately set upon it is ends and enterprises! But
in Christ's kingdom this is wonderful, says Za^chius, that this King wills
and causes that the Kingdoms of the world be subject to his Kingdom: In reg^o
Christi hoc mirabile est, quod i^^e rex vult and efficit, etc. Zanch. M^scel.
and again he wills and causes that his Kingdom be also subject to the
Kingdoms of the world.

Verse 16. Then delivered he him, etc.] Overcome by their importunity, and
overawed by the fear of Caesar, to condemn the innocent. It was Eato's
complaint, that private men's thieves are laid by the heels, and in cold irons;
but these public thieves that wrong and rob the Commonwealth, sit in scarlet,
with gold chains about their necks. Sinisterity is an enemy to sincerity.
Privatorum fures in rervo and compediba^ vitam agunt: publici in auro and
purpura visuntur. Cato. ap. Gell. l. 1^ c 18. (...).
All self-respects and corrupt ends must be laid aside by men in authority, and
justice justice, as Moses speaks, that is, pure justice without mud must run
down, Deuteronomy. 16.20. Durescite, durescite, said the Smith to the Duke, that durst
not do justice.

Verse 17. And he, bearing his cross, etc.] This was the Roman fashion (as
Plutarch relates it) that every condemned person should bear that Cross, that
anon should bear him. Hence grew that expression of our Savior, He that will
be my Disciple must take up his Cross, and so fill up that which is behind,
Col. 1.24.

Into a place called the place of a skull.] Where his tender heart was pierced
with grief, no doubt, at the sad sight of such a slaughter of men made by sin:
like as it could not but be a sore cut and corrosive to Mauritius, to see his
wife and children slain before him, when himself was also to be next stewed in
his own broth. Sain John is exact in setting down our Saviors sufferings, and
this for one.

Verse 18. Where they crucified him,] An ignominious, accursed, and dolorous
death: for he was nailed to the tree in the hands and feet, which ae th most
sensible parts, as fullest of sinews, and therefoe (in so fine a body, as his
especially) of most exquisite sense. Look wishtly upon sin in this glass, and
love it if thou can. For our sins were the nails, and our selves the
Traitors, that fastened him to the tree. Pilate and his soldiers, Judas and
the Jews were all set awork by us. Learn to lay the blame on the self, and
say, It was my gluttony that reached a cup of gall and vinegar to his mouth;
mine incontinency, that provided stripes for his back; mine arrogance, that
platted a crown of thorns upon his head; mine inconstancy, that put a reed into
his hand; my treachery, that nailed his hands and feet; my vanity, that grieved
his soul to the death; my self-love, that thrust a spear into his side etc.
Adsum ego qui feci. Virgil.


Verse 19. Jesus of Nazareth, etc.] To persuade the people to bow
superstitiously at the Name of Jesus. Papists commonly (but ridiculously) teach
in their Pulpits, that Christ himself on the Cross bowed his head on the right
side, to reverence his own name, which was written over it; Europ Spec.
as Sir Edwin Sands relates from his own experience.

Verse 20. In Hebrew, Greek and Latin.] In Hebrew, for the Jews who gloried
in the Law: in Greek, for the Grecians who gloried in wisdom: in Latin, for
the Romans who most gloried in dominion and power. As if Pilate should have
said, This is the King of all Religion, having reference to the Hebrews; of all
wisdom, to the Greeks; of all power, to the Romans. The holy Ghost would also
hereby commend unto us the dignity and study of these three languages, to be
retained for ever in the Church of Christ.

Verse 21. Write not the King of the Jews.] They would needs be mending
Magnificat, as they say; and this, of pure spite, that the disgrace might rest
only upon Christ, and not at all reflect upon their Nation. Whereas in truth,
nothing so ennobleth, as any the least relation to Christ. M^t. 2. Mic. 5.
Bethlehem, where he was born, it, though the least, yet therefore, not the
least among the Cities of Judah. Among those that were marked, Revel. 7. Judah
is reckoned first, of all the Tribes by Leah's side, because our Lord sprang
out of Judah: And Nephtali is named first among those that came by Rachels
side, because at. Capernaum (in that Tribe) Christ dwelt: which therefore also
is said to be lifted up to heaven, Mat. 11. Vt utrobique superemin^a^ Christi
praerogativa.

Verse 22. What I have written, I have written,] i. e. I am unchangeably
resolved it shall stand. Non retractat bo^o pro^anus quod ve^e, licet fi^e
mente and consil^o^^e Chri. ^lo ^c^ipfit C^^.
So God says, I am that I am; that is, I am yesterday, and to day, and the
same for ever. Learn we may of Pilate to be constant to a ood cause. Marcellus
the Pope would not change his name, according to the custom, to show his
immutability, that he was no changeling.

Verse 23. Took his garments.] Christ, as Elias, being now to ascend into
heaven, did willingly let go his garments: and the rather, that he might cloth
us with his righteousness. Let us suffer with joy the spoiling of our goods,
as knowing in our selves (not only by books or relation of others) that we have
in heaven a better and more enduring substance. H^b. 10.32.
But what a wise fool was Sir Thomas Moor, who being brought to the Tower, as a
malefactor;and one of the Officers demanding his upper garment for a fee,
meaning his gown, he said, he should have it; and took him his cap, Act. and
Mon. fol. 97^.
saying it was it was the uppermost garment that he had? So, when he was to be
beheaded, he said to the hangman, I pray you let me lay my beard over the
block, lest you should cut it. He thought it no glory, unles he might die with
a mock in his mouth. These be the worlds wizards.

Now the Coat ws without seam.] Christi tunica est unica: They that rent it by
schisms, are worse then the rude soldiers. Indexpiabilis discordiae macula
mar^yrij sanguine ablui and pa^sione purga. ri non potest. Cypr deun^t. eccles.
Chrysostom Hom. 11. ad Ephesians. Occol. ad fratres in Suevia.
There can be no greater sin committed, says Cyprian, then to break the
unity of the Church: Yea, though one should suffer martyrdom, yet cannot he
expiate thereby his sin of discord. This, says Chrysostom, is a bold, but a
true speech of Cyprian. And like to this, is that of Oecolampadius to the
Lutherans in Swethland; Our error may be pardoned, so that Christ by faith be
apprehended, Discordiam, neque si sanguinem fundamus, expiabimus, but the blot
of our discord we cannot wash off, with our heart blood.

Verse 24. That the Scripture might be fulfilled.] So exactly is the old
Testament fulfilled in the New: The testimonies whereof are cited not only by
way of accommodation, but because they are the proper meaning of the places.
The soldiers could not cast the dice upon our Saviors garments, but it was
foretold. This shows that our Redemption by Christ is no imposture, but a plot
of Gods own contriving. Let this settle us against all doubtings.

Verse 25. Now there stood by the Cross, etc. Act. 18.18. Rom, 16.3^ 2 Timothy
4.19. Act. 16.13.
] The men were fled, the women stood to it. Souls have no Sexes. Manoah's wife
was the more manly of the two. Priscilla is sometimes set before Aquila. When
S. Paul came first to Philippi, he had none that would hear him, but a few
women.

Verse 26. When Jesus therefore saw his mother.] In the midst of his miseries
he thinks of his mother, and takes care for her weldoing after his decease.
Doctor Tailour the Martyr, among other things that he said to his son at his
death, said this charge upon him: When thy mother is waxed old, forsake her
not, Act. and Mon.
but provide for her to thy power, and see that she lack nothing: for so will
God bless thee, and give thee long life upon earth and prosperity. The
Athenians punished such with death, as noutished not their aged Parents. And S.
Paul says, that to require paents is good and acceptable before God, 1 Timothy
5.4. (...), sc. cora^ homi^i^us. Scul.


Verse 27. The Disciple took her, etc.] A precious depositum; the house was the
better she abode in: yet dare we not deifie her, as the Papists: as neither
will we vilify her, as the Author of the famale glory basely slanders some of
us, that we rudely call her, Mall Gods maid, Os durum! Our Parents, says the
Heathen, are our Household gods. (...). Hierocles. Luke 2.35.
Honor them we must both in word and deed. That our Savior here calls her
Woman, and not Mother, was either because he would not add to her grief, who
was now pierced to the soul with that sword Simeon spoke of; or, lest he should
create her further trouble, if she had been known to be his mother; or, for
that, being now in his last work, and ready way to heaven, 2 Cor 5. Act. and
Mon. fol. 1450.
he knew none after the flesh. Thomas Wats, Martyr, spoke thus at his death to
his wife and six children. Wife; and my good children, I must now depart from
you: therefore henceforth know I you no more, etc. But whereas Christ commends
the care of his mother to his beloved Disciple, with, Behold thy mother, the
Samians used the like speech, (...).
when to the richer of the Citizens, the mothers of those who died in the wars
were given to be maintained by them.

Verse 28. That the Scripture might be fulfilled.] It is a high point of
heavenly wisdom to do our ordinary business in obedience to Gods command,
and with an aim at his glory; to go about our earthly affairs with heavenly
minds, and in serving men to serve God; to taste God in the creature, and
whether we eat or drink, or what ever else we do, to set up God. Every action
is a step, 1 Cor. 10.31.
either to heaven or hell. The poor servant in being faithful to his Master,
serves the Lord Christ, Col. 4. who was more careful he of fulfilling the
Scripture, and working out our salvation, then of satisfying his own most
vehement thirst.

Verse 29. Now there was set a vessel full of vinegar.] Cold comfort: Grarum
thuris in calice vini.
they used to give others wine to comfort them; according to Prove. 31.6. and
mingled myrrh with the wine, that might at tenuate their blood, and so help to
dispatch them: as also, to cause a giddines in them, They might go no further
on the preparation day then three pasae, i.e. twelve miles, lest coming home
too late, they might not have leisure to prepare Buxt. Synagog. Iudaica.
that they might be the less sensible of their pain. But they dealt much worse
with our Savior, mingling for him, in mockery, vinegar and gall, to add to his
other misery. This he drank, that we might drink of the heavenly Nepenthes,
that torrent of pleasure, Psalm. 16.

Verse 30. It is finished.] Christ would not off the Cross till all were done,
that was he to be done: that which remained being rather a play then a work to
him.

Verse 31. Because it was the Preparation.] Their preparation to the Sabbath
began at three of the clock in the afternoon. The best and wealthiest of them,
even those that had many servants, did with their own hands further the
preparation: so that sometimes the Masters themselves would chop herbs, sweep
the house, cleave wood, kindle the fire, etc. Our Ancestors also were wont to
give over work on the Saturday, when it rang to evensong. And usually as men
measure to God in preparation, he remeasureth to them in blessing. K. Edga
ordained, that Sunday should be solemnized in his Land from Saturday nine of
the clock, till Monday morning. Act and Mon. (...). Mat. 27.62. (...). Mark
15.42. Ante sabbathu^ Vetus ecclesia vigniliam vocabat. Buxtorf.
The Jews before their preparation had their fore-preparation: And before their
Sabbath, their fore-sabbath, their sabbatulum, antesdabbathum. Those of
Tiberias began the Sabbath sooner then others: those at Tsepphore continued it
longer, adding, De profano ad sacrum. We are now so far from this, that we
trench upon the holy time, and say, When will the Sabbath be over? yea, in too
many places Gods sacred Sabbath is made the voider and dunghill, for all refuse
businesses: As by others, it is made as Bacchus his Orgies, with Ales,
May-games, etc. So that it should be named according to these men's observing of
it, Daemoniacus, Alsted. Encycloped.
potius quam Dominicus, as Alsted has it.

Verse 32. Brake the legs of the first.] The good thief also had his legs
broke, and his life taken away: though by his repentance he made his cross a
Jacobs ladder, whereby Angels descended to fetch up his soul.

Verse 33. And saw that he was dead already.] He took his own i am to die: and
therefore, ver. 31. it is said, That he bowed his head, and gave up he ghost;
whereas other men bow not the head, till they have given up the ghost. He also
cried with a loud voice and died, which shows that he wanted not strength of
nature, to have lived longer, if he had listed.

Verse 34. But one of the soldiers with a spear.] What an odd conceit is that
of the Papists, that from the Greek word, (...), have made this soldiers name
Longinus? Notetur turpi^-Pontificiorum laosus in Longino, and inscitia Graecae
linguae. Cartw. In Deorum numerum relatus: ut de Franci co. B^mbus, Hist. Ven.
1 Job. 5.6.
and to make up the tale, they tell the people, that, whereas before he had
been blind, by the anointing of his eyes with the watery blood that came out
of Christ's side, he received his sight, became a Christian, a Martyr, a
canonized Saint, and that his relics were afterward worshipped.

There came out blood and water.] The pericardium being pierced, which nature
has filled with water to cool the heat of the heart. Hereto S. John addudes,
when he says, that Christ came by water and blood, to teach us, that he
justifies none by his merit, but whom he sanctifies by his Spirit. Poffumus
etiam hinc asseverare ex latere Christi fluxisse nostra sacramenta, says
Calvin, We may safely say that our Sacraments issued out of Christ's side.

Verse 35. Plus valet oculatus testis unus quam auriti december. Ex quibus postea
historia Evangelica est contexta. Scult. Annal. ep. de^ic.
And he that saw it, etc.] Nothing so sure as sight. One eyewitness is more
then ten ear-witnesses. It is probable their Day-books, wherein they recorded
his daily Oracles, and other occurrences, and out of which they compiled the
Gospels.

His record is true.] The Gospel is called the Testimony, Isa. 8.20. because it
bears witness to it self. The Law is called light (Lex, Lux) because by it
self it is seen to be of God, as the Sun is seen by it is own light.

Verse 36. Not a bone of him was broken.] So he appeared to be the true
Paschall Lamb, that was roasted whole in the fire of his Fathers wrath, to
deliver us from the wrath to come. The soldiers could not break his legs,
because God had otherwise ordered it. Voluntas Dei, necessitas rei.

Verse 37. (...).
They shall look upon him] This is not a threat, but a promise, Zech. 12.10.
fulfilled, Act. 2.37. when Peter's hearers felt the nails wherewith they had
crucified Christ, sticking fast in their own hearts, and piercing them with
horror.

Verse 48. A Disciple of Jesus, but secreily for fear.] A Disciple he was,
though a dastard. Infirmities, if disclaimed, discard us not. Vzziah ceased not
to be a King, when he began to be a leper. Zech. 32.
Jehoshuah the High Priest, though ill-cloathed, yet stood before the Angel;
Christ did not abhor his pretense, nor reject his service. The Church calls
her self, black, Cant. 1.5. but Christ calls her fair, etc. In Peace Offerings
they might offer leavened bread, to show that God will bear with his peoples
infirmities.

Verse 39. And there came also Nicodemus.] Another nightbird; a chieftain in
the Ecclesticall State, as Joseph of Arimathaea (or Ramath, Samuels country)
was in the Civil. The faith of these two now breaks our, though it had long
lain hid, as the Sun under a cloud, as seed under a clod: now they manifest
their love to Christ, so curelly handled; as the true mother did hers to her
child, when it was to be cut in two.

Verse 40. With the spices, as the manner of the Jews] To testify their hope
of a resurrection. In an Apish imitation of whom, the Gentiles also, though
they had no such hope, kept a great stir, and made much ado about the decent
burial of their dead. Habent and vespaefavos, and simiae imitantur homines,
says Cyprian.

Verse 41. A new sepulcher.] Fit for him that was the firstborn from the dead,
the first fruits of them that sleep. (...). Theodo^^^.
Besides, else it might have been said, that some other had risen, and not he,
(says Theodoret) as Mathomet says, that Christ was not crucified, but another
for him.

Verse 42. Because of the Jews.] That they might not do servile work on the
Sabbath, though it were to inter Christ's body. See Luke 23.56.

CHAPT. XX.
Verse. 1. The first day of the week.]
NOw the Christian Sabbath in honor of Christ's resurrection, and therefore
called, The Lords day, Revel. 1.10. as the holy Supper is called, The Lords
Supper, 1 Cor. 10. as the Saints are called (...), Kirk, Church. The title of
the 24th Psalm is, A Psalm of David: To this the Greek adds, Of the first day
of the week, meaning that this Psalm was wont to be sung in the Temple every
first day of the week, which now is the Christians Sabbath; and of Christ, his
Church and Kingdom, and the entertaining of his Gospel, does this Psalm
entreat. (...), etc Igna^ ep. 3 ad Magnes.
Let every one of us keep Sabbath, says Ignatius, in a spirituallmanner,
rejoicing in the meditation of the law, not in the rest of the body. And in
those Primitive times, when the Question was asked, ervasti Dominicum? Have
thou kept the Lord's Day? the answer was returned, Christianus sum, intermittere
non possum: I am a Christian, and may not do otherwise. See ve^stegan. Al^^
numerant, Feria prima, secunda, tertia, etc.
The Jews gave that honor to their Sabbath, that they named from it all the
other days of the week, as the first, second, third day, etc. of the Sabbath,
which we from the Heathens (a worse pattern) name Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday,
etc. Ex instituto Mercurij Tresmegisti.

Verse 2. Then she runs.] Amor addidit alas, Love is impationt of delays.
Cant. 2.17.
Christ comes leaping over the Mountains of Bether, all manner le^s and
impediments. And the Church, as impatient as he, bids him, Make haste, my
beloved, and be like to a Roe, or to a sawn of the Hearts, which when it
sleeth, looks behind, it, says the Chaldee Paraphrast there. She affects
not only an union, but an unity with him.

Verse 3. Peter therefore went forth.] He despaired not, though he had
grievously fallen. The Saints cannot fall so far, but that Gods supporting hand
is ever under them. They may be dowzed over head and ears in the waters of
iniquity, yea, sink twice to the bottom, yet shall rise again and recover; for
the Lord puts under his hand; yea, as he that stumbleth, and yet falls not,
gets ground by his stumbling: So it is here.

Verse 4. So they ran both together.] But the swifter of foot they were, the
slower in faith: for he that believes makes not haste, Isa. 28.16. They
believed not fully the refurrection: when they heard the news of it, and from
the Angels too, they stirred not, but rejected it as a fable. Now that they
hear (though but by a woman only) that the Lords body was removed to another
sepulcher (though that were but a rash report, and nothing so) they run amain.
Oh the dulnes that is found in the best!

Verse 5. Yet went he not in.] He durst not: so some fearful are afraid of
every step, saying, as Caesar at Rubicon, yet we may go back: Pelago se non
ita commissu^ us esser, quin quan do liberet pedem reserre posset
and as the King of Navar told Beza, That he would launch no further into the
sea, then he might be sure to return safe to the haven.

Verse 6. Following him, and went in] John came first, Peter entered first: Soft
and fair goes far: Soft fire makes sweet malt: Leap Christians are not much to
be liked; such as quickly step out of profaneness into profession. Hot at hand
seldom holds out. The stony ground immediately received the seed with joy,
(...). Mat. 13. Prove 4 2^. Prove. 4.18.
and started up suddenly: but the good ground brings forth fruit with patience
or tarriance. Walk deliberately, and ponder the paths of thy feet, as Solomon
bids. A Christians progress is as the sun, which shines more and more to the
perfect day: and as the Trumper in Mount Sion, Exodus 20. which sounded louder
and louder, till it was heard all the country over.

Verse 7. And the napkin that was about his head] These grave-cloaths were
evidences of our Saviors resurrection, and are therefore mentioned by the
Evangelist. But what shift made Paleottus Archbishop of Bonony for matter, who
wrote a great book of the shadow of Christ's dead body in the sindon or
linen-cloth, wherein it was wrapped? This book was also commented upon by the
Professor of Divinity there. Had not these men little to do? Did they not, as
one says, Magno conatu magnas nugas agere?

Tenet insanabile multos scribendi cacoethes.

Verse 8. And he saw and believed.] i.e. He believed his own eyes, that the
Lords body was not in the sepulcher; but, as Mary Magdalen had told them, so
they mis-believed, that it was taken away to some other place, further from
Calvary, for honors sake, that he might not lie buried with the wicked. Hence
it is that in the next verse it is added, that as yet they knew not the
Scripture.

Verse 9. For as yet they knew not the Scripture.] Which yet was clear enough
in this point, Ps. 16.10. and 110.1. Isa. 53.10, 11. The resurrection of our
Savior was not obscurely shadowed out in Adam, waking out of sleep, Isaac
received after a sort from the dead, Joseph drawn out of prison to be Lord of
Egypt, Samson bearing away the gates of Gaza, David advanced to the Kingdom,
when there was but a step betwixt him and death, Jonah preferved in the Whales
belly, etc.

Verse 10. Went again to their own home.] Waiting till God should further
enlighten both organ and object, as Mary also did, Luke 2.

Verse 11. Mary stood at the sepulcher, weeping.] Some think it was, because
she conceived that the Jews had gotten away our Saviors dead body to dishonor
it: as the Popish persecutours digd up Bucers, and many other good men's bones
to burn them. She wept, where she had no such cause: so do too many, women
especially, who should do well to keep their tears for better uses, and not
wash foul rooms with sweet waters. Needless tears must be unwept again.

Verse 12. And sees two Angels.] Sent for her sake, and the rest, to certify
them of the resurrection. It is their office (and they are glad of it) to
comfort and counsel the Saints still, as it were by speaking and doing after a
spiritual manner, though we see them not, as she here did. (...).
The Philosopher told his friends when they came into his little and low
cottage, The gods are here with me: sure it is, that God and his Angels are
ever with his people, when they are weeping especially.

Verse 13. Woman, why weepest thou?] Angels pity humane frailty still, and
secretly suggest comfort. But Mary had no such cause to cry, if she had known
all, but to rejoice rather: so has a Christian, in what condition soever, all
things reckoned. Had Elizabeth known she should have been Queen, she would not
have wished her self a milk-maid. Jam. 1.
Saints are heirs of the kingdom, says James, heads destinated to the diadem,
says Tertullian; what mean they then to be at any time in their dumps?

Verse 14. She turned her self back.] As not able to abide the brightness of
those glorious Angels any longer. To the Gardener therefore she addresseth her
self for further direction. See what a happiness it is to be taught by the
ministry of men, like our selves, and to have Angels about us, but invisible.

Verse 15. Woman, why weepest thou? whom seek thou?] Where the Angels left,
the Lord begins. God has, for our sakes, taken the preaching of the Gospel
from the Angels, and given it to Ministers, who have thenceforth also changed
names: for Ministers are called Angels Rev. 2.1. and Angels, Ministers, Heb.
1.14.

Verse 16. Jesus says unto her, Mary.] Christ is nearest to such, as, with
Mary cannot see him for their tears, if, with her, in humility they seek after
him. He calls her but by her name, and she acknowledges him. The ear, we say,
is first up in a morning: and nothing so soon awakes us, as to be called by our
names. How easily can Christ call up our drousie hearts, when he pleases: and
(when we are even turned away from him, as Mary here was) make us reciprocate
and cry Rabboni?

Verse 17. Touch me not, etc.] She had caught him by the feet (as the
Shunammite did Elisha, as the Shulamite did her Spouse) and there she would
have held him longer, Mat 28 ^. Cant. 3 4
out of inconsiderate zeal: but that he takes her off this corporal conceit,
that she may learn to live by faith, and not by sense: to be drawn after him to
heaven, Ne morare, sed ad perturoatos disciputos accurre, and quod vid
st^renuncia Pet. Martyr
whither he was now ascending, and to go tell his brethren what she had seen
and heard.

Verse 18. Mary Magdalen came and told] She had told them and troubled them
before with a conceit that they had (but to what end, or whether, she knew not)
removed the Lords body: fitly therefore is she sent to assure them of the
resurrection. And, though loath to depart, yet she bridles her affections though
never so impetuous, and brings them to be wholly at Christ's beck and check.

Verse 19. When the doors, etc. for fear of the Jews] The sheep had been
scattered, but now were by the great shepherd recollected (according to the
promise, Lech. 13.7. I will turn my hand upon the little ones) yet sensible of
their late fright, they show some trepidation. Afterward, when the Spirit came
down upon them, they not only set open the doors, but preached Christ boldly in
the Temple, without dread of danger. So did Basil; when the Emperor threatened
him with bonds, banishment, Pueris illa terriculamenta proponeuda.
etc. he wished him to affright babies with such bugbears: his life might be
taken away, but not this faith: his head, but not his crown. So Luther, at
first so fearful and faint-hearted, that in the year 1518. he wrote thus to
Pope Leo the tenth: I lay my self prostrate at your Holiness feet, Vivisica,
occide, voca, revoca, approba, reproba, vocem tua^, vocem Christi in te
praesidentis and loquentis agnoscam.
together with all that I am, and have: quicken me, kill me, call me, recall
me, approve me, reprove me, I shall acknowledge your voice to be the very voice
of Christ, ruling and speaking in you, etc. Yet afterward he took more
courage, witness among many other things, that brave answer of his to one that
told him, that both the Pope and the Emperor had threatened his ruin,
Contemptus est a me Romanus and favor and furor. And when Spalatinus had sent
unto him, to enquire whether he would go to Worms, and appear in the Gospels
cause, if Caesar summoned him? Go, said he, I am resolved to go, though I were
sure to encounter so many devils there, as are tiles upon the houses. Omnia de
me praesumas, Luth. Epist.
praeter fugam and palinodiam. Fugere nolo, multo minus recantare.

Verse 20, He showed unto them his hands, etc.] For their further confirmation:
so he does unto us every time we come to his table. But oh, how should our
hearts long to look for ever upon the humane nature of Christ, clothed with an
exuberancy of glory, at the right hand of his heavenly Father? And to consider
that every vein in that blessed body bled, to bring us to heaven? Augustine was
wont to wish that he might have the happiness to see these three things, Romam
in flore, Paulum in ore, and Christum in corpore. But I should take venerable
Bedes part rather, and say with him, Anima mea desiderat Christum regem meum
videre in decore suo: Let me see my King Christ in his heavenly beauty.

Verse 21. Then said Jesus to them again, Peace] The common salutation amongst
the Jews (the Turks at this day salute in like sort, Salaum aleck: the reply
is, Aleek salaum, that is, Blunts voy into Levant.
Peace be unto you) This our Savior purposely redoubleth, to persuade them of
pardon for their late shameful defection from him, and their backwardness to
believ his resurrection. Sin is soon committed, but not so easily remitted: or,
if in heaven, yet not in our own consciences, till which there is little comfort.
Christ, to confirm them, is pleased again to employ them, and to count them
faithful, putting them again into the ministry. 1 Timothy 1.13.
A calling not more honorable then comfortable: the very trust that God
commits to a man therein, seals up love and favor to him.

Verse 22. He breathed on them, and says, etc.] Otherwise, who had been
sufficient for these things? The Ministry is a burden to be trembled at by the
Angels themselves, On^^ ipsis etia^ Angel^s tremendum.
says Chrysostom. Father Latimer when at the coming in of the six Articles,
he, to keep a good conscience, resigned up his Bishopric, putting off his
rochet, he suddenly gave a skip in the floor for joy, feeling his shoulders so
light, Act. and Mon. fo. 1578. Romans 8.26. (...) Est manus proprium, ut at
Galenus.
and being discharged, as he said, of such an heavy burden. Now the Spirit
where he is bestowed by Christ heaves at one end (as S. Paul's word imports) and
takes off the brunt of the business from us. He oils our wheels, and makes us
drive merrily. He helps our infirmities, edgeth our spirits, steeleth our
faces, fills us with matter, furnishes us with words, does all our work for
us. When I first came into this City (said Calvin upon his deathbed, in his
speech to his fellow-Ministers) I found all out of frame, and met with many
malicious opposites. But our Lord Christ so settled and strengthened me, Melch.
Adam. in vita Calv.
who by nature (to speak truth) am easily daunted, Vt nullis illorum conatibus
cesserim, that I stoutly withstood them.

Verse 23. Whosoevers sins ye remit, etc.] Remission of sin is the chief
benefit of the Gospel: And for the Creed (which is the sum of the Gospel) All
the former Articles are perfected in that of Remission of sins: and all the
following Articles are effects of it. Rhem. Test.
Now none can remit sins, but God; to speak properly: Papists tell us of one
that could remove mountains: but to remit sins is peculiar to God alone. Man
may remit the trespass, but God only the transgression. Howbeit Ministers may,
and in some cases must declare unto man his righteousness; Job 33.23.
pronounce in Christ's name, the truly penitent righteous in Gods sight, by
Christ's righteousness freely imputed, and given unto them. They must also
retain, by the same authority, and bind upon impenitent sinners (so
continuing) their sins to destruction, 2 Cor 10.6.
Having in a readiness to revenge all disobedience. This we may do, as
Ministers, and more we claim not.

Verse 24. But Thomas one of the twelve.] A man cannot be wilfully absent from
the public Assemblies but once, without great danger and damage. Thomas was
absent, perhaps about some weighty cause. It may be he lurkt and lay close for
fear of the Jews: or it may be he was providing, and settling his own private
affairs, now his Master was slain: but what ever the cause was, the effect was
grievous; he was woefully hardened.

Verse 25. I will not believe.] Ah wilful Thomas (quoth Mr Bradford, Martyr) I
will not, says he: so adding to his incredulity, Sermon of Repent. 56.
obstinacy. But yet Christ appeared unto him, and would not leese him, etc.

Verse 26. The doors being shut.] Although it be said, that when Christ came to
his Disciples the doors were shut, Act. and Mon. fol. 1536.
yet have I as much to prove that the doors opened at his coming, as ye to
prove that he came through the door, said Robert Smith, Martyr, to the Doctor
that disputed with him.

Verse 27. Then says he to Thomas] Who was not excommunicated by the rest, but
gently born with, till Christ should cure him. Neither did he forsake their
meetings, though he believed not their relation. It is good to stand in Christ's
way, to be found at the foddering-place, Cant. 1.8. But some, like spiritual
vagabonds, as Cain, excommunicate themselves from Gods presence, in the use of
the means: we may write, Lord have mercy upon such, as utterly deplored.

Verse 28. My Lord, and my God.] This is true faith indeed, that individuates
God, and appropriates him to it self. (...). Chrysostom.
Were it not for this possessive (Mine) the devil might say the Creed to as
good purpose as we. He believes there is a God and a Christ: but that which
torments him, is, he can say (My) to never an Article of the faith.

Verse 29. Blessed are they that have not seen.] We see Christ in the flesh by
the eyes of the Apostles; like as the Israelites saw Canaan by the eyes of the
spies: and this is sufficient unto faith, as the Evangelist shows in the next
verses.

Verse 30. And many other signs, etc.] If Cicero could say of Socrates (whose
words Plato had recorded) and could request the like of his Readers, concerning
Lucius Crassus, that they would imagine much more good of them, then they found
written; De orat. l. 3.
how much more might S. John do the same concerning Christ?

Verse 31. These things are written.] He speaks this of the writ of the other
three Evangelists also. Matthew wrote his Gospel eight years after Christ. Mark
ten. Luke fifteen, and John forty two, in the days of Trajan. He died in the
101. year of his own age.

CHAP. XXI.
Verse 1. After these things Jesus showed himself.]
SOme have been of opinion that this Chapter was not written by John (because
he concluded his History in the end of the last Chapter) but added by some
other, as the last Chapter of Deuteronomy was to Moses his writings. These
should have observed that in the former Chapter those arguments only are set
down by the Evangelist, that fell out at Jerusalem for the manifestation of
Christ's resurrection: as in this Chapter those, whereby he approved the truth
of his resurrection in Galilee also, according to his promise, 2 Timothy 2 8.
Mat. 26.32. that they might believe and remember that Jesus Christ of the seed
of David was verily raised from the dead according to the Gospel: this being a
doctrine of greatest consequence and comfort, 1 Cor. 15.5, etc. Peter thought
himself sufficiently assured of it, and therefore said, I go a fishing; but he
was deceived, and needed further confirmation.

Verse 2. Cum boni, cum probi cocunt cu^ pij, oum casti congregantur, non est
fact to duenda sed. uria, and e contrario illis nomen factionis accommodandum,
etc. ^ert. Apos. a lver. gent. c. 39.
There were met together Simon, etc.] When good and godly men meet, when chaste
and honest people assemble together, it is not to be called a faction, but a
Court rather, says Tertullian. Those are a faction, that conspire against good
men: The society of such is like the flime and filth that is congealed, where
many toads and other vermin join together. God dwells in the Assembly of
Saints: shall we, like Stoics stie up our selves, and not daily run into
their company? He that comes, when o^ntmeats and sweet spices are stirring,
does carry away some of the sweet savor, though he think not of it: so here.
See Prove. 13.20.

Verse 3. I go a fishing, etc.] Being not yet employed in the public
ministry, Re^age^^utus gets. Ovid.
he would not be idle, and that he might not be chargable to the Church. This
life is in Isaiah called, The life of our hands, because it is to be maintained
by the labor of our hands. We are to earn ere we eat, 2 Thessalonians. 3.

And that night they caught nothing.] Labor we never so hard, unless God
bless it, and stop that hole in the bottom of the bag, Hag. 1.1. those secret
issues and drains of expense, at which men's estates run out, we shall be forced
to say with Severus the Emperor, Spartian.
Omnia fui, and nihil profuit.

Verse 4. Psul 30.5.
But when the morning.] Mourning lasts but till morning. Flebile principium
melior fortunaa sequetur, said Q. Elizabeth, Ovid.
when she was to be sent to the Tower.

Verse 5. Children, have ye any meat?] This he says, as seeming to be some
hous-keeper, who passing by fishermen, calls to them, as willing to buy their
fish, for the use of his family. Galeacius Caracciolus, His life by Croshaw.
Galeacius Caracciolus, that noble Marquis of Vico (that left all for Christ,
preferring the blessing of God before the worlds warm Sun) would go into the
market at Geneva and cater for his household; grieving for nothing more, then
that he had not wherewithal to keep a better house, for the relief of the
poor: And in that respect only, he wished himself as great a man at Geneva, as
he was in Italy.

Verse 6. Cast the net on the right side, etc.] This counsel he gives as a
stranger, who happily might see a confluence of fish there, being on the shore,
which they in the ship faw not. They obey him therefore, as content to lose one
labor more, if it must be sor they knew not what another draught might
produce. It is good to be doing in Gods way: sooner or later success will
ensue. Bind not the Lord to a day, wake not my beloved, till he please: he
will pay us for all our pains and patience. Consider but our 1. distance, 2.
dependence, and we will wait.

Verse 7. Therefore that Disciple, etc.] Now they see the cause why, till then,
they caught nothing, was, that they might the better know him to be the Lord.
God will one day let us see, that he in very faith fullness afflicts us; and
that however it seem so for a season, it is not in vain to have sought his
face. John knew not our Savior by sight here, but by the multitude of fishes
that came to hand, by his direction. The Rochellers might easily see as much,
when they were miraculously relieved by that shoal of shel-fish cast upon their
shore in a strait siege, Act and Mon.
whereby their City was miraculously preserved.

Verse 8. And the other Disciples came, etc.] They came all to Christ, but
Peter sooner: he cast away all care of his fish, having the Lord to go to. It
is best to be first and forwardest in a good matter; not only to make a shift
to get into heaven, but to have an abundant entrance thereinto, to come bravely
into the haven, 2 Pet 1, ^, 11.
by adding one grace to another, as Peter has it. It is a low and unworthy
strain in some (says One) to labor after no more grace, then will keep life
and soul together, that is, soul and hell asunder. But that man for heaven, and
heaven for him, that sets up for his mark, The resurrection of the dead, Phil.
3.11. that is, by a Metonymie of the subject for the adjunct, that perfection
of holiness that accompanies the state of the resurrection. Paul was,
Insatiabilis Dei cultor, faith Chrysostom.

Verse 9. And fish laid thereon, and bread.] A feast of Christ's own providing;
to assure them that they should never want necessaries: superfluities they may
want without prejudice. Nature is content with a little, grace with less.
Luther dined often with an herring, Junius with an egg; as knowing, that they
were not to live to eat, but to eat to live. Ill does it become a servant of
the highest, to be a slave to his palate. Epicurus dum palato quid sit optimum
judicat, coeli palatium non suspexit, says Ennius.

Verse 10. Which ye have now caught.] He says not, which I have caused you to
catch. God is pleased to say, for our encouragement, that we do such and such
good works, when it is he that does all our works in us, and for us. Certum est
nos facere quod facimus, sed ille facit ut faeciamus, Aug.
The bowls of the Candle-stick had no oil, but that which dropped from the
olive-branches.

Verse 11. Yet was not the net broke.] When God will bless a man, all second
causes shall cooperate and contribute their help. Postquam Deo re onciltatus me
ac mea regna (prob dolor) Romans subjeci ecciesiae, nulla mihi pro pera, sed
omnia contraria advenerunt, Joh. Rex.
As when he will cross us, the strongest sinew in the arms of flesh shall
crack, our likeliest projects miscarry: he will curse our blessings, blast our
proceedings, as King John confessed. Ever since I was assoyled, and subjected
to the sea of Rome, I never prospered. Oto, one of the Popes Muscipulatores,
Mice-catchers, as the Story calls them, sent hither by Gregory 9. after three
years raking together of money by most detestable arts, at last departing
hence, he left not so much money in the Kingdom, as he either carried with him,
or sent to Rome before him. Such notable fishers are Peter's pretended
successors: all is fish with them, that comes to net.

Verse 12. None of the Disciples durst ask him.] They were ashamed to move
further Question in that that was to them all so evident. Neither yet may we
imagine that they sat silent all dinner while in their Masters presence,
Turcae perpetua^ sitentium tene^t, ut muti. ^usp. de Caesario p. 475.
as Monks and Turks use to do; but that, although they were abashed to ask him
who he was, yet they both asked and answered many other more profitable
Questions. Our Savior never came to any man's table, but he besprinkled the
dishes with the salt of savoury discourse: So should we, but so (alas) we do
not. Plato and Xenophon thought it fit and profitable, that men's speeches at
meals, should be written. And if christians should so do, what kind of books
would they be?

Verse 13. Takes bread and gives them.] As his manner was before his death,
and with his usual form of Grace before meat, Luke 14.35.
by the which those two, that had his company to Emaus, knew him. Those that
receive not the creatures with thankesgiving, 1 Timothy 4.4.
are worse then Heathens. The Greek word for a dinner comes of another word
that signifies prayers, which they usually premised to their repasts. Hesiod
gives this precept, (...) a precibus quas praemitae. bant (...) 1 Samuel 9.13.
(...).
Eat not of a dish that has not first been offered in sacrifice. An elegant
and a pious precept, faith Melancthon, drawn no doubt from the holy Patriarchs.
The people would not taste of their good cheer, till Samuel had blessed it. And
Moses bad them, Eat and drink before the Lord. Mine Oxen and fatlings are
prepared, says that King, Mat. 22.4. It is in the original, are sacrificed.
So was Nebuchadnezzars good cheer, which therefore Daniel would not taste of.

Verse 14. This is now the third time, etc.] Adam died, and we hear no more of
him: not so the second Adam, If a man die, shall he live again? Job 14.14. Not
till the general resurrection surely. Many devices there are in the minds of
some, that there shall be a first resurrection of the Martyrs only, Iohnst. de
not. Constant.
and that they shall reign on earth a thousand years. Alsted says, this
thousand years shall begin in the year 1694. But these, says a Divine, Cotton
upon the seven viols.
are but the mistakes of some high expressions in Scripture; which describe the
judgments poured out upon Gods enemies, in making a way to the Jews
conversion, by the pattern of the last judgment.

Verse 15. Love thou me more then these?] As thou have not spared to profess
and promise (for when the rest said nothing, Peter said he would lay down his
life for him) and as thou now pretendest, by casting thy self into the sea, to
come first to me.

Thou know that I love thee.] Being asked of the measure, he only answers
of the truth, q. d. for the quantity I can say little, but for the truth I dare
affirm. The upright are perfect in Gods account. And Peter had now turned his
crowing into crying.

Feed my lambs.] These were his first care. The Syriack adds, (...) li, mihi,
feed them for me. And Drusius reckons this amongst the Eastern Apophthegmes,
Quicquid agas, propter Deum agas. Whatsoever thou do, do it for Gods sake.
Propter te Domine, propter te. was a godly man's motto, it should be every
Ministers especially.

Verse 16. Feed my sheep] That is, Supremum in Ecclesia Dominium tibi assere.
Lord it over the Church, says Baronius. Regio more impera, Reign as a King,
says Bellarmine. Christ on the contrary says, The kings of the nations
exercise dominion over them, 1 Pet. 5.2, 3.
but ye shall not do so. And Peter himself says to his fellow-Elders, Feed the
flock of God, not as lording it over Gods heritage, etc. Indeed (...) here
used, sometime signifies to govern (usually to feed) but (...), the other word,
twice used here in this text, always signifies to feed. But they catch at
government, let go feeding. It is as rare a thing to hear a Bishop preach
amongst them, said Dr B^ssinet, as to see an Ass flee. Fisco potius apud
multos consulitur quam Christo: attonsioni potius gregis quam attentioai.
Episc. Winton.


Verse 17. Jesus says unto him the third time.] To confirm him doubtless,
against the consciousnesse of his threefold denial, and to reauthorize him in
his Apostleship.

Love thou me?] A Minister had need have his heart enflamed with a most
ardent affection to Christ: for else he will never suffer that hardship, devour
those difficulties, and get over all those impediments, that he is sure to be
encombred with. The Ministry, believe it, is not an idle-mans occupation: he
must preach the word be instant in season, out of season, etc. cry in the
throat, (Clamare ut stentora vincat) lift up his voice like a trumpet, Isa.
58.1.
speak till he spet forth his lungs, and yet to no more purpose, many times,
then Bid did when he preached to an heap of stones. Now this he will never do,
unless the love of Christ constrain him, 2 Cor. 5.14. with 1 Cor. 16.22.

Peter was grieved.] Either in remembrance of his former false-play: or else,
as thinking our Savior somewhat distrusted his fidelity; or else surely, 1
^am. 6.8.
he was as much to blame to be grieved, as David was to be angry, when God had
made a breach upon Vzzah.

Feed my sheep] My sheep with golden fleeces, with precious souls: every soul
being more worth then a world, as our Savior reckons it, Mat. 16.6.
who only went to the price of it. Can that be wholesome meat then that is
sawced with the blood of souls? Will it not be bitterness in the end?

Verse 18. Another shall gird thee] That is, cord thee, manacle and pinion
thee, carry thee prisoner whither thou would not. Peter would, and he would
not suffer. Every new man is two men, has two contrary principles in him,
flesh and spirit. The spirit is willing, the flesh weak and way ward. This made
the Martyrs many of them, chide themselves, and crave prayers of others. B.
Ridly said to the Smith, as he was knocking in the staple, Good fellow, knock
it in hard, for the flesh will have it is course. So, Act. and Mon. fol. 1605.
Rawlins White, Martyr, going to the stake, and meeting with his wife and
children, the sudden sight of them so pierced his heart, that the very tears
trickled down his cheeks. But he soon after, as though he had misliked this
infirmity of his flesh, began to be, as it were angry with himself; insomuch
that in striking his breast with his hand, he used these words, Ah flesh,
staiest thou me so? Would thou fain prevail? Well, I tell thee, do what thou
can, thou shall not, Ibid 1415.
by Gods grace, have the victory. So Latimer in a letter to B. Ridley, Ibid
1565.
Pray for me, I say; pray for me, I say; for I am sometimes so fearful, that I
would creep into a Mouse-hole, sometimes God does visit me again with his
comforts: so he comes and goes, to teach me to feel and know mine infirmity.

Verse 19. By what death he should glorify God] Martyrdom is the lowest
subjection that can be to God, but the highest honor. Vere magnus est Deus
Christianorum, The God of the Christians is a great God indeed, said one
Calocerius a Heathen, beholding the patient sufferings of the Primitive
Martyrs. Justin Martyr confesses of himself, that seeing the piety of
Christians in their lives, and their patience in death, he gathered that that
was the truth that they so constantly professed and sealed up with their blood.
And of one Adrianus it is reported, that seeing the Martyrs suffer such
grievous things, he asked the cause? One of them named that text, Eye has not
seen, nor ear heard, etc. The naming of which words, and seeing of such
sufferings, so converted him, that afterward he became a Martyr. To account
Christ precious as a tree of life, though we be fastened to him as to a stake to
be burned at, this is the greatest honor we can do him upon earth. This is to
magnify Christ, as Paul did, Phil. 1.20. to follow Christ close at heels, as
Peter did here, who also had the manner of his death foretold him, 2 Pet.
1.14. As had likewise Bishop Hooper, Act. and Mon. fol. 1366.
when he had given him for his Arms, a Lamb in a fiery bush, and the Sunbeams
from heaven descending down upon the Lamb, righty purporting by what death he
should glorify God.

Verse 20. Then Peter turning about.] Peter, though restored and resetled in
his Apostleship, is not without his infirmities. Quisque aliquid satuitatis
habet adjunctum. Melanct.
They that are cured of a frenzy, are not without their mad tricks sometimes.
No pomgranate so sound, but has one rotten kernel in it. No book so well
printed, but has some errata's. David saw so many in himself, Psalm. 19.
that he cries out, Who can understand the errors of his life, oh purge me,
etc. They that dream of perfection here, suffer a merry madness.

Verse 21. And what shall this man do?] When Peter considered that John was
dearly beloved, and yet not alike forewarned of suffering death, as himself
was, he began to doubt whether Christ spoke this of love to him, or not.
Nothing is more ordinary with us, then to question Gods affection, when we are
in affliction: to conceive hard things of God, and heavy things of our selves,
as if no children, because chastized. Whereas we should learn to look through
the anger of Gods corrections, to the sweetness of his loving countenance, as
by a rain-bowe we see the beantifull image of the Suns light in the midst of a
dark and waterish cloud See my Love Tokens. Doct. 2. Use 1.

Verse 22. If I will that he tarry.] Si eum volo manner. This the vulgar
corruptly reads, Sic eum volo manner. Ambrose, Austin, Bid, Lyra, Rupert, etc.
retain this reading. Trapezantius defends it, Bessarion opposes it, the Greek
text refutes it. Yet is the vulgar translation so extolled and idolized by the
Papists, that if the Originals differ from it any where, they must be corrected
by it, and not it by the Originals. Sed Hebraei bibunt fontes, Graci rivos,
Latini paludes, says Reuchlin.

Verse 23. Among the brethren.] So are all Christians. Sanctior est copula
cordis quam corporis.

That that Disciple should not die.] Some to this day, deny that he is dead.
Beza tells us of a certain Impostour in his remembrance, that gave out at Paris
that he was John the Evangelist: and was afterward burnt at Toulouse. Museul
in loc.
Some have fabled that after he had commanded his grave to be made, and had
laid himself down in it, the next day it was found empty, and he rapt up alive
into paradise, whence he shall come together with Enoch and Elias at the last
day to confound Antichrist, O quantunt est in rebus inane! It is not for us to
follow cunningly devised fables, 2 Pet. 1.16. but to attend to that sure word
of truth, as unto a light shining, etc. v. 19. accounting every particle of it
precious, since the change of one letter may breed so much error, and cause so
much contention.

Verse 24. This is the Disciple.] Not the Doctor, the Master, as Magistri
nostri Parisienses. So the Sorbonists will needs be styled. Praesun 1. sent.
The Schoolmen have their Doctor Angelicus, Doctor Seraphicus, Doctor
resolutissimus: So Bacon the Carmelite was called, because he would endure no
guessing or maybe's. The Italian Friars, as they increase in their supposed
holiness, Sauds his Survey, etc.
so they proceed in their titles, from Padre Benedicto, to Padre Angelo, then
Archangelo, Cherubino, and lastly, Cerephino, which is the top of perfection.
Our Evangelist delights not in any of these swelling titles. He does not so
much as name himself in all this work of his, takes no other style then the
beloved Disciple, makes no more of himself then a witness to the truth, a
recorder of what he had heard and seen. The proud person speaks great swelling
words of vanity; he loves uppermost rooms, a Pet. 3.18. Mat. 23.6.
and to be called Rabbi, Rabbi, to be cried up and pointed at for a non-such. I
hear, says Tortullian (speaking of the Pope, who then began to peep out) that
there is a decree published in peremptory terms. Pontifex scilicet Maximus,
Episcopus episcoporum, Odi fastum illius ecclesiae, Hunc (...) appellare so
itus est.
etc. I ever hated the pride of that Roman Church, says Basil. Ambition, like
the Crocodile, grows while it lives; like the Ivy, which rising at the feet,
will over-peer the highest wall: Or, like the Marry-gold (a flower of no good
smell) which opens and shuts with the Sun. Humility, on the contrary, is like
the Lilly, says Bernard, or violet, which grows low to the ground, hangs the
head downward, and hides it self with it is own leaves. It preferres the Euge of
conscience, before the Hic est of the world: and were it not that it is fragrant
smell betrays it to the observation of others, would choose to live and dye in
its well contenting secrecy.

Verse 25. I suppose that even the world is self, etc.] Nec Christus, nec
Coelum patitur hyperbolen, says One. In speakking of Christ or his Kingdom, a
man can hardly hyperbolze. Much had S. John said of our Savior, yet nothing to
what he might have said. All that ever he did was divine, Nihil in vita nisi
laudandum aut fecit aut dixit, aut sensit. Velleius. Sozom. l. 6. c. 28.
and deserved to be chronicled. That commendation that Paterculus falsely gives
to Scipio, that he never to all his life did, spoke, or thought any thing, but
that was praiseworthy, is true only of Christ. That which the Ecclesiastical
History, relates of Bennus, that he was never seen or heard by any to swear,
lie, or be rashly angry, to speak or do any thing that beseemed not Gods
servant, is a praise proper to Christ, even as he was man. But, consider him,
as God, and then that of Gratian the Emperor is true, in his Epistle to S.
Loqu^mur de Deo, non quantum debemus, sed quantum possumus.
Ambrose, We speak of God, not so much as we ought, but so much as we can. Nemo
sapientiam Dei immensam in omnem aternitatem exhauriet. He is indeed like the
pool Polycritus writes of, which in compass, at the first, scarce seemed to
exceed the breadth of a shield; but if any went in to it to wash, it extended it
self more and more. Tantum recedit, quantum capitur, says Nazianzen. Citat. ab
Arist. de mirabil ause.
When therefore the Apostle says, That the world it self could not contain the
books that should be written. Hoc non vult, says Augustine, de mole librorum,
nec de locali capacitate, sed quod Spiritus sanctus nostri habuerit rationem,
and ea selegerit conscribenda, quae in hac infirmitate credentes capere possint.

FINIS.
A Table of such texts of Scripture, as occasionally are explicated and
unfolded in this Comment.
Genesis 48.22. Page. 20 Exodus 5.1. Page. 27 Lev. 19.23, etc. Page. 55 Numb.
22.3, 4. Page. 98 Joshua 7.19. Page. 50 1 Samuel 6.5. Page. 50 1 Kings 7.23.
Page. 89 Ezra 6.10. Page. 26 Job 2.4. Page. 55 Psalm 27.17. Page. 6 Psalm
42.3. Page. 104 Psalm 15.1, 8. Page. 96 Prove. 8.22. Page. 2 Cant. 5.10. Page.
19 Isai. 6.1, 2. Page. 56 Isai. 8.20. Page. 136 Isai. 27.11. Page. 99 Isai.
30.18. Page. 61 Isai. 53.11. Page. 109 Ier. 25.30. Page. 66 Dan. 12.2. Page. 31
Dan. 12.11. Page. 5 Hos. 6.3. Page. 80 Hos. 10.1. Amos 6.12. Page. 33 Nah.
1.10. Page. 95 Zeph. 3.9. Page. 125 Mat. 5.14. Page. 77 Mat. 12.20. Page. 102
Mat. 24.24. Page. 58 Acts. 20.30. Page. 58 1 Cor. 4.13. Page. 300 1 Cor. 6.11.
Page. 102 1 Cor. 11.28. Page. 82 Galat. 3.23. Page. 17 Ephesians. 3.10. Page. 8
Phil. 3.11. Page. 145 1 Timothy 1.14. Page. 22 Heb. 5.2. Page. 20 Heb. 8.10. Page.
28 Heb. 12.25, 26. Page. 15 Heb. 13.3. Page. 20 James 5.20. Page. 25 1 Pet.
1.5. Page. 56 1 Pet. 2.21. Page. 81 1 Pet. 3.1. Page. 25 1 John 5.10. Page. 75
1 John 5.13. Page. 11 Rev. 2.10. Page. 93 Rev. 2.23. Page. 44 Rev. 4.4. Page.
61 Rev. 4.6. Page. 89 Rev. 6.2. Page. 89 Rev. 11.2. Page. 56 Rev. 11.8. Page.
123
Errata's.
PAge 2. line 1. r. hammedabber. p. 2. l. 16. r. Cerinthus. p. 5, l. 23. for
dejected, r. difiected. p. 9. l. 6. dele that. p. 9. l. 17. for Prophecy, r.
Porphycy. p. 11. l. 27. for hominem, r. hominum. p. 16. l. 24. r. of a weak
says. p. 16. l. 27. for soul, r souls. p. 16 marg. for peltaris, r. Paris ut.
p. 29. l. 18. for Hence, r. Here p. 44. l. 19 for flying, r. high-flying. p.
47. l. 40. for never, r. ever. p. 54. l. 21. for reddi, r. read and for
fighting, r. fighing. p. 59. l. 10. for Placite, r. Placits. p. 66. l. 1. for
Ey, or Ay. p. 71. l. 16. for Reader hear, r. read or hear. p. 76. l. 24. r. an
for in. p. 80. l. ult. r. Jewish, for Jew. p. 87. l. 20. r. then, for the. p.
9. l. 1. marg. r. tenebrae, for enebrae. p. 94. l. 31. r. qut, for upon. p.
108. l. r. but set. p. 109. l. 30. dele in. p. 117. l. 13. r. interimi, for
interim, p. 128. l. 15. r. him, for them.


