A Thanksgiving Sermon. For the blessed RESTORATION Of His SACRED MAJESTY
Charles the II.

Preached at VPTON before Sir Richard Samwel, Knight, May 29. 1660.

By William Towers Bachelor in Divinity; eighteen years titular Prebendary of
Peterburgh; sixteen, titular Parson of Barnake.

Now (by the Friendly favor of Mr. Reynolds) continued Curate at Vpton in the
Diocese of PETERBVRGH.

With a short Apostrophe to the King.

LONDON, Printed by R. D. for Thomas Rooks, at the Holy Lamb at the East end of
S. Paul's, 1660.

To His most Sacred Majesty, Charles the II. By the special Grace of God, KING
of England, Scotland, France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc.
Most dread Sovereign,
THough your Court be now much fuller of Gratulations To You, than once your
Camp was with Bullets Against You; though your Royal Palace be as much beset
with the cheerful Duties of Men, as your Royal Oak was pitched about with the
Ministry of Angels, and the trembling Prayers of three Kingdoms: Yet I humbly
crave leave, that one Shrub amongst so many Cedars, may testify his joy, that
the Powder-fire has not come out of the Bramble to destroy those Cedars, nor
to do violence to the persecuted Defender of them, and of the helpless Shrubs
too. Nor do I much fear the repulse of my loyal Suit, since a good Prince will
be as accessible and exorable, as his great God; That God has humbled himself
to hear my constant Prayers for the King, and the King will stoop so low to
hear my Petition to the King; since it is no more, than that your Majesty may be
acquainted, that we who contributed to the dulling of the edge of the sword, to
the quenching of the Vollies of fire against you, with louder vollies of those
primitive weapons (the one fervent enough to melt the Sword, and the other
moist enough to extinguish the flame) Tertullian's Preces and Lachrymae, have
now changed our armor into Preces and Praeconia, Praises to God for your
Majesty's unbloudy Victory; Good will toward men, for that the same Voices,
and the same Guns, which before made a separation from amongst us, and breathed
out slaughter upon us, have now closed with us, in shouting out the common joy,
and vollying out the Triumphs of the King, His liege People and themselves; a
joy too big to be understood, and we that feel it, cannot tell all the joy we
feel; who, unless some Angel, will dare to recount the fullness af honor which
God has done to your Majesty beyond all the Princes in Christendom! To unite
two Kingdoms into one Britain, was a great and wise work of your Royal
Grandfather, for which he deservedly wears the Name of The wisest Monarch of
all before him; but this was brought to pass in his riper years, in his days
of Peace; what will not mature judgment and much plenty do, when the very lack
of judgment, the very desire of plenty has made one (with whom I would not
exchange my Curateship for all the Crowns he now has,

Aliter cineres mando jacere meos) wade through blood rebelliously shed,
through oaths, forsworn, all of them, some, in not being kept, the rest, in
being taken, till he climbed into a Throne, Ut lapsu graviore ruat?

But what greater wonders has God done by your Majesty? your tender years have
overcome so vast miseries which would kill him, whom the Devil tempted to
murder, and God suffered to Martyr the best of Kings: Your younger days have
reduced three States, and three Protectordoms into three Realms, and those
three Realms under one King, and that one King the lawful head of them all:
Come Angels and speak; we, over-master'd mortals, must sit down and wonder.
Nothing else is left for us, besides to pray, that God would continue to make
you wiser than your wisest Grandfather; to make you as holy (for our
conceptions cannot imagine any thing to have been (besides the Man Christ) or
to can be more holy) as your Royal Father; to bless your Majesty, and your
Kingdoms under you, with all the blessings which God has ever bestowed upon
good and suffering Kings, or will ever grant to reformed and penitent People.
The Prayer of

Your Majesty's humblest Votary, from the first famous 29. of May; and most
dutiful Subject twelve years before the second, when your Majesty entered the
Imperial City of London, WILLIAM TOWERS.

Psalm the XXI. The Title of the Psalm, The Text.
and the former part of the first verse.

To the Chief Musician. A Psalm of David. The Title.


The King shall joy in thy strength, O Lord. The Verse.



IT is a Thanksgiving day, and a rejoicing Text; what the Title does covertly,
(whose cover we shall pull off anon) the Text does, in open view, Rejoice.

It Is a Thanksgiving for the integrity, and Success of the General, in
preparing the way before the face of the Lord our King, to bring him in; to
make the King happy in a loyal and obedient people; to render the people
blessed, in a lawful and Religious King; A Lawful one these three ways: 1. By
the law of Nature; The Kingdom is his, and the King is our birthright;
besides, that he is our Legal King, by the most fundamental Law; he is our
Natural King too, by the loins out of which he came. 2. By the law of the Land;
that declares him our Sovereigne, and us his Subjects as our supreme; Not at
all subjects to our fellow subjects, unless under him, not, by the usurpation
of one, a wrong OR. or more of them, a wrong and mis-named Parliament (a Juncto
rather) but, to those set over us by his authority; by him, and for him; For
him, not, in a pretense, but really. 3. By the Law of God; it is by him Kings
Reign; Prove. 8.1^.
and for him ( not only for wrath but for conscience, Romans 13.5. for conscience
to him) that we obey.

We are to bless God for the General; The General means the King; and the
King means God.

The Text. (in the latter part of it) meets with all three, Strength with the
General; the King with the King; and, Thy strength, and, O Lord, with God.

Give we honor to whom honor is due; Romans 13.7.
to each, theirs; and in their right subordination; to the General, for the
good of the King; to the King, for the benefit of three Kingdoms; to the
Tri-Une God, for his blessing upon all: to the General, and to the King, as
instruments; (to the General as a less principal instrument than the King; and
yet as a more prinipal instrument than all the world besides; and yet, as the
most principal instrument, to help us to that Musical word, the King, which
makes our very eyes to dance, and our very hearts to leap) to the King, as the
most principal instrument of all, more immediately deriving blessings upon all;
to God as the Author, the Guider, the Finisher, the All in All.

In the General, have we due esteems of, and bear we deserved respects to the
inferior instruments under him, his Officers, and Soldiers: All the stars are
fine shining things, and shed good influences every one of them; If there
chance to be a few Mutineering stars in the Firmament, whose malignancy
threatens danger, yet their discord will be composed, and their very
Ominousnesse become fortunate, by a conjunction with stars of a kinder temper;
else, there is, yet, one remedy left; they must be disdanded, fallen stars;
every Officer and Soldier must have his share of praise, as well as of pay; but
the Morning star, Mart.
(of whom we bespeak the day, Phosphore, read diem) is the gayest, the
luckyest, and lovelyest of them all; The General, who brings in the King, is
that Star; The King is that Day; the light and cheerfulness of our faces,
Lament. 4.20.
as well as the breath and life of our Nostrils, of our Souls; That
Morning Star must not be courted beyond the Sun; the Sun shines brighter far
than he; the Sun, we see, shines upon him; and the Sun, we foresee, (as
glorious as his rays already are) will make him shine brighter yet: Genesis 1.16.
It Is that Sun, which must rule the day, which that star ushers in; the King
must be known to outshine the General; and the Generals Luster must be
acknowledged the Greater, for stooping down to his: And lastly, Jam. 1.17.
The Father of lights must be infinitely honored above the Sun; God above the
King.

I can look upon my County as an Epitome of the Kingdom (seated in the midst,
and heart of it.) I can honor the King in every Petty-Constable, one in a
Parish; (be the common Soldier he) in every High-Constable one in a Hundred;
(be the Captain over fifties, and over hundreds he) in a Sheriff one in shire;
(be the Lord General he) in a resembled Parliament too, a faint image of both
Houses of them, Peers, Knights, and Burgesses; (be the Lords, Knights, and
Gentry, Commissioners for the whole Shire they) I can honor all these, because
of the King for whom they serve; I can honor the King above all these, somewhat
of whose face I can see, (when he pleases to stamp his likeness upon them) in
every of these; and (that I may honor the King faithfully, and
unprejudicially, to the King himself) I can honor God above the King; That God
whose image of power, whose inscription of Sovereignty, the King bears above
all; and can say, (referring all these strenghs, and preparations of strength
and all the advantage hoped for by them, to the gift of God) as one King has
said in Scripture, and another King in his heart, before me, the King (and the
kingdom too) shall joy in thy strength, O Lord.

See we if we can discover all, or most of these and some particulars depending
upon these, out of the first part of the Text, the title of the Psalm, which
is equally the word of God, as the Psalm after it.

A Psalm (look we upon the title of it, and the several interpretations of that
Title; upon the contents of it; or upon the former part of the first verse; for
our Text reaches no further) every way apposite both to the occasion, and to
our hopes.

Method I must be forced to transgress, either in order to the blessings
received, or in order to the Text; in an orderly enumeration of blessings, we
ought to begin with Actual, rather then with hoped for blessings; and amongst
the actual, with the first which we receive; but my Text prompts me to another
course, to begin with the Church, and with blessings hoped for to that; that,
which is first in Nature considerable in the Text, is, that the Psalm has a
Title; and in that first considerable (as also, in the whole Title,) I shall
find occasion to espy out a Church, and may hope to be excuseable, not only as
I am a Churchman, but as I am a Christian, to begin with that: Have a little
patience with me, and anon I shall pay you all, in setting those blessings
before you, which concern your civil capacity, as you are men and subjects, as
well as those which relate to your Religious condition, as you are Christians,
and Disciples; the meanest of your selves have skill enough to love gold better
thau silver; give me leave to have as much judgment, in preferring the Soul of
man above his body, and to begin with the more than golden blessings of that.

First the Psalm has a Title; and that Title is the word of God; as sure as
the Psalm after it, or any part of the Bible, before it, and behind it: If so,
the close after the Epistles, as well as the entrance upon the Psalms, is the
word of God too: If so, Timothy was the first Bishop (not of one parish amongst
them, but) of the whole Church of the Ephesians; and Titus was ordained the
first Bishop of the Church of the Cretians; First, each of them, in regard to
seconds and thirds, etc. which were to succeed them, to follow after them: and,
if so, the Church of England ought still to have (as she always has had ever
since she was a Church) Bishops presiding in it, in conformity to the word of
God; ought to have them in the Church, even for the good of the state also;
for, I fear I may say it, he is no discerning Christian Statesman who does not
foresee, that if the Church, with the State be not delivered out of confusion
(if God, and the King be not both provided for) the State will, by the
displeasure and wrath of God, relaps into it; be it the care of every of us, in
our places and callings, to reconcile God to us all; tha'ts the surest way of
perpetuating the reconsiliation, of quenching the heart-burnings amongst our
selves.

But this, though it be a truth consequential out of the Text, is not so
visibly, and immediately the truth of the Prophet David, as of the Apostle Paul.

What says David himself, when he prophecies of the Christian Church? Instead
of thy Fathers, Psa. 45.16.
shall be thy children, whom thou may make Princes in all the Earth; in all
of it; Geneva's self not excepted, but by it self; ( England as little as any
part of the world, if we look upon the entire, full, untumultuary consent, both
of Church and of State too) S. Hierom's note upon it is the more considerable,
because he is a mistakenly pretended father against Episcopacy; These Fathers,
says he, were the Prophets, these Children the Apostles: Nunc, quia Apostoli a
munde recesserunt, habes, pro his, Episcopos Filios; sunt and hi Patris tui,
quia ab ipsis Regeris; He tells, and he comforts the Church, (I would none in a
contrary Anti-Ecclesiastical, as well as Anti-Episcoparian way, would more
disconsolate her, then St. Hierome did!) that now since the Apostles are gone
to heaven, She has their Sons, the Bishops in the midst of her; These, says
he, are to her in stead of Fathers, because by these she is, and ought to be
governed.

But this, though it be David's, is not David's in our Text, either in Title
orin verse, It Is David's in effect there too; in both of them.

The Greek Title is, A Psalm of David: David was the King: He is expressly so
called in the verse: Kings shall be thy nursing Fathers, Isa. 49.23. It Is a
prophecy of the Government of the Christian Church by Kings; not only legal
Kings are, but Evangelical Kings shall be thy nursing Fathers; The King has
two Sons, Church and State, The Church is his firstborn: as it is the privilege
of Fathers to convey down Titles to their Heirs. so, it is their indulgence, to
take care how to preserve those Titles.

Though we have not the Church, directly in the Greek Title of the Psalm, yet
we have the Kings person there, David. Such a King, a Charles, we have heard
of, and wept for, a long time; a King in Title at least: He, who was, before
but a King of hearts, is now owned a King of England, a real King; the Pulpits
ring of him, as well as the bells ring for him; and we dare now profess our
selves, what the most of us have always been, his loyal Subjects.

This suits with the day, the day is set apart for the King if not also by the
King; and we will no more scruple (as formerly we have done) to observe a day,
since it is for the honor of the King, out of a fear, least we keep the day
without the Kings consent, since we are sure we have his consent, (and more
than that God's too, and more then that, God's command) that we honor the
King, as we fear God, 1 Pet. 2.17.

See we Doway's Title next, and the interpretation of that Title! if these will
help us forward! The Title, a A Psalm of David. Unto the end; The
interpretation, it pertains principally to Christ; partly to godly and
victorious Kings. Deo principatum; the King, and that Church, which he owns and
defends, not unto themselves, but to his Name give all the honor; Him, in the
collect for defense against enemies, they acknowledge the only giver of all
victory; him they worship more than success; and more, because of success; and
not the less without success:

And for that godly Epithet, all his loyal subjects (who dare inquire after,
believe, and utter truth) may in his name (since his own humility will not do
it) Challenge the Christian world to match him, if they can, with another
Prince so knowingly, and devoutly holy as he: I should be glad to see such a
second Phoenix! but I despair.

Will Doway's contents advance us one step more? they are praise to God, for
Christ's exaltation after his passion. Christ signifies, King; The King has had
his passion, in being twelve years a forceably, not owned King, and half
twelve more, a suffering Prince; A deliverance out of all these, is, If any
thing, an exaltation; for which this is the day of Praise and Thanksgiving
unto God.

There is more yet in this day than so; Carthusiensis
will Ludolfus's contents help us to find it out? A Psalm; of the glory of
Christ, in the overthrow of his enemies. Christ, I told you, is King; the King
is Christ's Vicegerent; His (the Kings) glory is great in thy (in Christ's)
salvation, Honor and Majesty have thou laid upon him, (the King) in 5. v. of
this Psalm; The honor of the most glorious victory, His enemies being not
twice slain, not dead in their sins; not once slain, not dead at all, but so
mercifully overcome, that they may have leisure and Grace to repent of their
multiforme and broody sin, their rebellion against God and the King, and be
reconciled to the service and favor of both; No conquest like that, which,
instead of killing an enemy, makes him a friend.

Nor yet is this all neither, Ludolfus's title is the same with Doway's, but
his interpretation comes, (as I hope, the King does) more home to us. A Psalm
of David, Unto the end. That is, says he to Christ, who is the end of the Law,
of that Law, under which whoever were, were also under bondage. He goes on, It
has regard too unto the latter end, to the last time, in which these
foretellings were to come to pass: The Psalm, says he, declares what good the
Father will do to the King, the Son of the King, to Christ the Son of God,
Propter contantiam. This is that constant King, whom no wants of his own, no
temptations from abroad, no unkindnesse from subjects, no allurements from
foreigners, no offers of men, monyes, Kingdoms to boot, could either hire, or
provoke out of his steadfast setlednesse in religion: None, that are so true to
the Church of England as he is, will dare suspect him; for the rest, if they do
cavil for fear the fixed King should change his Religion (and O! may they never
cavil at him, even for this reason also, because he will not change his
Religion! Alas! What amends will they ever make to the King and Church, for
having really changed their own! None, but this, to return to that Religion, at
which the King stays; These are those times in which is fulfilled the
deliverance of King and people, Church and State, from the thraldom of that
one Law of Arbitrarinesse, from the slavery of that other sword-Law; which I
wonder, Those who have practiced it against the King and his liege people, have
not abhorrd it for being called by that Heathenish Idol-Name of Law Martial.

These are the general and public blessings, which this day minds us of; But,
may we not be induced to hope for some peculiar blessings, arising out of
these, and will not the extent of the title bear us out?

Junius, and Tremelius's Title is the same with ours; ours is the very English
of theirs; To the Chief Musician. A Psalm of David. Will not this deliverance,
which brings Melody to our hearts, restore Music to our Churches too? No
danger, (would men but rightly apprehend it) of too much cost in the house, and
decency in the worship of God; No posture too humble in our penitentials; No
Music too lofty in our gratulations and Praises: Talk men what they will of
the spirit, of an humble and grateful heart, yet I wish they could tell me, by
what surer token to judge of a proud heart, than by a covered head, and
unbended knee: of a thanklesse heart then by a tongue, which says that heart
loathes Church Music; I therefore wish it, because my self loathes to Judge so
hardly of the dissenters, whose lowly reverence to God and sober conformity to
the Church they live in, I so earnestly covet to witness and to extol; This
Music, of all the liberal Arts (says B^etius, and Venerable Bede) is the
principal, because this alone has the honor to enter into the Church of God;
and very fit it is, at this time to be reduced, on this day to be used too in
the Churches, if we will harken to the judgment of the wisest Heathen, or see
by the best light of Nature; The first, and loveliest office of Music (it is
Plutarch's in his book upon it) is, to employ it in a tune-full acknowledgement
of the blessings of God which blessings we, this day, celebrate; which
thankfulness we, this day, pay; and I could heartily wish, we paid it, with
some other Organs then those living ones of our body (even with livelesse,
though not with breathless Organs) which body of ours is but a kind of
instrument, a Corpus Organicum, and the Soul the Musician that tunes it; Most
certainly, Grace will not deprive God of any those honors which nature it
self affords him, but much rather explain, and exalt, and add unto them; If
therefore we be not beastially in love with slovenlynesse and profanation; If
we will not still seem to worship God in a more proud and saucy manner then we
dare to show our respects to man (for, thus only to show them, is to conceal
them the more; and there is a kind of Harmony in a submisse behavior, a kind
of Airs in a respectful deportment) so to worship God, as if some Heathen,
should chance to come in amongst us, he would rather think we were abasing of
God, we shall, then, all of us, with hands up to Haeven, and knees down to the
ground, cheerfully admit a chief Musician, a Chanter, (as cheerfully as him
self sings) at least in the Chapple-Royal, and in every Cathederal; In some I
hear, these glories are already restored to our now-Israel, which so long has
been an Egypt; could I see them too, and hear them themselves, as well as hear
of them, Sylv. 4.
I would exultingly ask that question of Statius, Aspicis, ut Templis alius
Nitor?

Conclude we upon the Title, with the note of that eminent (...), That great
King-lover, and (in the Kings absence) that stout Church-defender, the Loyal
and learned, the Holy and Judicious Dr. Hammond. This 21. Psalm was committed
by David to the prefect of his Music, to be sung by the Quire, in the assembly
of the people, as a form of thanksgiving to God (a very set form) upon
occasion of any victory, even an unbloody one. Upon the Kings recovery of his
Rights and Prerogatives, to Rule the people, and ours of our Rights and
Privileges, not only really, but, a vouchedly, unmolestedly to obey the King
((...), (...).
as S. Basil in another case, It may be our pitch of honor to be styled the
servants of so worthy a Master) upon these, do we right to God and his Church
too; serve we him as she has appointed; and be this it self no small part of
our joy and thanksgiving, that we may, all of us, praise thee again O God, we
may acknowledge thee to be the Lord, we may praise and acknowledge even as
heretofore: Were there nothing else said in the defense of set forms, of
Common Prayers, then what that late Martyr of Christ, and for his loyal people)
the now-King's Royal Father, of dear and blessed memory, has wrote, that
alone, were enough to prevail with any, in whom there is the least spark either
of devotion, or unpassionate reason to return (upon the call, of the Church of
England, and the counsel of the late nursing Father of it, who would nurse and
feed it with his own blood, rather than forsake it) to their Almighty and most
merciful Father, and to confess how much they have erred and strayed from his
ways, by their disacquaintance with such wholesome and intelligible prayers.

Review we what we have gained out of the Title; hopes of the establishment of
Bishops, in that there is a Title; a King, to be sure, out of the Greek Title;
A Holy King in his sufferings; and a victorious, after them, out of Doway: A
King constant to his Religion, by whom, and by which, his people are delivered
out of bondage, in the Carthusian; A King under whom we do already enjoy the
true worship of God by set forms, in St. Hammond, and hope to enjoy the
Ornamental and decent worship too, with Music and vestments, in the
Church-Bible, and in that of Junius and Tremelius; A King, for whose
restoration (and in him, for our own) we owe to the King of Kings, to the
great God, in Doway. If such an obscure title will afford us so much of
Appositenesse, such a clear Text as this, the King shall joy in thy strength O
Lord, will do it much more.

The King; we have him in the Text, and, we hope, in the Land too (patiently
blessing God, that, what was but Hope in the Pulpit, is Fruition at the Press)
in his own Land; In which, and the Heir of which he was born; in which, this
year he is, and of which these twelve years he has been King.

Look we in the Land, and we have him; look we on the Text, and up to that God
who Inspired it, and we have him, not from the Seas only, but from Heaven, The
King O Lord.

The King first, so we read it; but, the Lord before him, so we must construe
it, O Lord, the King shall joy in thy strength.

O Lord, the King! How sweet and orderly they sound! Deus and Rex! it is a
Methodical and Scholarly Title, a Book, in some degree (but without any
Blasphemy of comparison; nothing not Comparison it self so Odious as that)
Holy, like that of Gods; a Book (next to God's and the King's, the Bible, and
the (...)) fit to be in the hands eyes, and hearts of all Christian, Loyal and
intelligent Readers: The King; he is Our Lord; The Lord, Thy King, 1 Samuel
26.15. My Lord, the King. Dan. 1.10. He is the Lord of us All, both Thine and
Mine; Rex and Ego, will befit the mouth and pen of Any the biggest man under
the King; It will become the door of his lips, and be a more suitable Motto over
the Portal of his Buildings too; Ego and Rex meus must be laid aside by all
sorts of Subjects, the lofty Cardinal, and the more lofty Fanatic who, with a
Blood-Red Sword in his hand, sets himself higher above his King, than he with a
Blushing red Hat upon his head durst ever attempt to do; It Is the Style Of God,
and for God alone, of him, for whom the King himself, King David, in the
Grammar of my Text, says, O Lord the King.

The King indeed is the First word in our translation; but (that we may Give
unto Caesar, the things which are Cesars, and unto God the things which are
Gods; and give to both in their right place; First, to God his, and then to
Caesar his) in how many other translations read we God fore the King! (...) in
the Greek! Domine Rex in St. Hierome's! Jehovah Rex in the Protestants, Junius
and Tremelius! and, Lord the King, in the Papists, the College of Doway!

It Is well done by all, in placing God before the King; but, of all best by the
Elder, the Greek and St. Hierome, in setting God, and none but God, above the
King; I wish that, forever hereafter, both the rest would Go and do likewise!
that none of the former would unauthorizedly, join the People, nor any of the
latter Vnconciliarily put the Pope in Commission with God, to sit upon the
Honor, Power, and life of Kings, against Gospel and Law too! Sessions at home,
and Conclaves abroad, have no such authority either of these two ways, and
therefore Can have none at all, but Imaginary and Usurped! That neither of them
would go about to make Treason duty, by an arrogant and lame, King and Country,
and self-betraying distinction, either with a Vniversis Minor, or with an
Inordine ad Spiritualia.

To void the First.
As Knights and Burgesses are respectively, their representative Towns and
Countries, So the King is the Representative All; He is, Legally the whole
People; I am told so by the writing of an eminent Lawyer; the Author, and his
book had this Eulogy from aright reverend person of that Function, which, now
we are got into our wits again, is, as it ought to be, honored by all, that
God made the man to make this book, he did his work, and dyed; which I the more
boldly, and, I hope, the more unenviedly recount now, because both are expired,
the deserving Author, and his Loyal hearty Encomiast.

Livor post Fata Quiescit. Ovid.

If this be doubted for good Law, to make amends, I am sure it is sound
Scripture, the King is as much our selves, as our own life makes us our selves;
he is the very Breath of our Nostrils; Lam. 4.20.
Is it too much for the King to Represent the People! I tell you, (and I crave
no pardon from any of those, who believe him to be, what he is, God's
Vicegerent) He represents more, even God himself.

To evacuate the latter, (and thereby the more strongly, for the very Popery
sake of it, to render the former an abomination) If this Inordine may pass for
Authentic, how easily will Ambition and Covetousness be tempted to call,
Every Temporal (The Crown of the King, and the wealth of the People)
Interpretatively and by Reduction, Spiritual! When this is done, all
Christendom, and all Temporals therein, ( A Religious Mine, and a Spiritual
Cole-Pit too) will be the Popes; The Land and the Sea too will be his; the Sea
shall be Holy Water, and all shall be Fish that comes to his Net: the Gold and
Silver shall be Fish; and the Fish shall be Spiritual; When all this is done,
he may (next, do as another Pope we read of, did before him) Throw away his
fishing-Net, send the Distinction to the College from whence it came, call
himself Christ's Vicar, and every King his Curate to stand to his allowance, and
own himself Lord of Temporals in the very Name of them, and Quatenus such.

Which of the two, (the unlucky distinction (the lame member of it) of some who
call themselves Protestants, or of others amongst the Papists) is more
repugnant to Scripture, or more mischeivous to man, it is hard to tell, so like
they are the one to the other.

Non est tam similis Issae nec Ipsa, Mart.

(The very Reformer is, in this, what he loathes to be, a Papist; the Papist's
self is, This way (What no entreaties and disputes of ours can preswade him to
be the right way) a (Reformer) and therefore would be hated with a perfect
hatred, by all those who believe themselves bound by Either Table, by any one
command of God, who either love their neighbor, or their very God.

The King, we have him, (God bless him; be blessed by him; By us for him) from
the Lord we know, O Lord the King; his help, and Our help (his helping of the
King to us, and of us to the King; Psa. 121.2.
our help both by God and the King) stands in that Name.

But what means did the Lord honor by using, whereby to restore our King to
us? His Kingdoms to him! strength; an Army; Conquest by that strong Army;
Incruenta victoria the Best, the Noblest, the Royallest, the most Chistian, the
most Heavenly, an unbloody Conquest; a Wise as well as Valiant Army, an Army
whose Looks did conquer; a strength which overcame wiithout a Stroke; so
overcome, as that the Miracle of the Victory, the peaceablenesse of the War,
does evidence and demonstrate no less then the Kind power of God to be the
Conqueror; So that though we May look up to the Hills, to the strength, to the
Host, From whence comes our help, v. 1. yet we Must, in the very next verse
look beyond them, to the Heavens, to the Name of God, to the Lord of Hoasts, In
whom stands our help; In Man it was not the Sharpness of his Wit or Sword,
but a very Rumor of him, in God it was not the utmost, the non-sicut of his
Power and Love, but the very Name of Him, which has gotten for us, which has
Gotten to himself the victory. Nomini Tuo Gloriam Domine.

This is the sense of the Text, this is the story of the Times; And what can
the result of all this be but Joy, the Joy of all? The King and the Kingdom,
shall rejoice, The King is a Term Relative, and it would continue to be a wise
and happy Age, if we would all of us, be sober Arithmeticians, and as much
count the prosperity of the King to be the welfare of the Nations, as to call,
(somewhat, we some times know not what) the success of the Kingdom, the
honor of the King; Most bodily afflictions will the more easily be born, and
speedily remedied whilst the Head scapes the Blow, whereas a broken head
endangers, and a cut-off-head dis-livens every Member with it; The King is not
Himself, He is in some measure the Kingdom too; We are not Our selves, We are
Slaves without the King; There is a Reciprocalnesse of affection, betwixt King
and People; The only difference is, he has loved us more than we have regarded
him or our selves; His present joy is ours, as our past griefs have all along
been his; Here is joy, greater, sublimer than can be seen, unless by that
(...) as the Fathers that (...), as Homor calls him, that God which causes it;
All our Bone-Fires and Bells have been but Dark and Dumb representations of it;
our Drums and Trumpets, but still Music, our Heralds at-Armes mere Pageantry,
Pictures and Shadows; our Voices to the Ear, and our Languages to the Eye,
our Pulpits and Presses but Extempore silences, and at best but Studious ones;
our very Deliverance it self (till we look upon the face of the King) but a
pleasant Dream; When the Lord turned again the Captivity of England, we were,
Psa. 126.1.
(as those of Zion before us) Like them that Dream; When after the sighs of
our hearts and the Options of our Souls, O That the salvation of Israel were
come out of Zion) the Lord has been pleased to bring back the captivity of his
people, Psalm. 14.7.
though Jacob does rejoice, and Israel is Glad, yet our joy is louder and
brighter; more Harmonious and more Substantial, more Manly and Soully, more
Strenuous and inward, than can be uttered.

Res severa est Verum Gaudium. Senec.

All the rest are but the Poast and Sign, the outward pearance; The Heart is
the House where Joy Inns and dwells, Thou (O Lord) have granted him (the King)
his Hearts desire, as well as thou have not withheld the request of his
Lips; and the desire of his heart; is the joy of us all, we Joy that he has
his desire, and his desire it is, that we should joy.

Apostrophe To the King.
GReat King, Great to the most of us, in your sufferings, and to all of us upon
your Throne.

Whom we greet as the honest Heathens did their Jove, with a Mioa Thuris and a
Libamen Farris; as the devout Christians do their God with Men's Pia and Cor
Sincerum; may I crave your Royal pardon, that I purposely wave all the little
skill I have, and make choice to appear before your Majesty, rather in the
Graceful Nakedness of high Loyalty, than in the ornaments, either of a
Learned, or a Flourishing Style; I must have Time, well to Digest my Joy before
I can be able, well to pen it; and yet I lie under an other impotency, it being
impossible for me to Rule or stiefl my Joy; to esteem my self less than
Traitor, unless I am so bold to make even Irreverent have, and to tell to your
Royal Face, that I have always been almost more than Loyal; the Honor of my
Poverty bears me witness; and I would rather Perish still than to have been
rich; nor yet flies my Ambition beyond a Touch or a Glance; one Look from your
Eye, one Kiss of your hand, will out-value all Ecclesiastical preferment;
That, That Look may not be a Frowning one may I also Plead for my pardon, as He
did to another Caesar. -- Non Displicuisse meretur Mart.

Festinat, Caesar, qui placuisse Tibi.


All this is but a Proeme to a Sermon, as all the Title is but a Preface to the
Psalm; and in all this I serve my self more than my King, in desiring this, as
a means whereby to bless my Eyes in the Kings Face, and my Lips upon his hand;
If I may have command or leave to print the Sermon upon the verse, I shall
therein serve my King (and in doing that, serve my self again, so much is
Loyalty's self the great and conscientious reward of Loyalty) in showing those
who are my Superiors Equals, Inferiors, (and yet all of them my fellow
Subjects) how inseparable the authority of Majesty is from the person of the
King; what blessings the people have in Regal Government, especially under the
best of Monarchs.

My Dread Sovereigne I fall-down, with my very Soul at your Majesty's Feet, to
tell you, I am Your Majesty's most Alligeant Subject. William Towers.

FINIS.

