A Design About Disposing the BIBLE INTO AN HARMONY. OR, AN ESSAY, Concerning
the transposing the order of Books and Chapters of the holy Scriptures for the
reducing of all into a continued History.

The Benefits. Difficulty. Helps.


By SAMUEL TORSHEL.

LONDON, Printed by A. Miller, for John Bellamy at the three Golden-Lyons near
the Royall-Exchange. M.DC.XLVII.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE The LORDS and COMMONS assembled in PARLIAMENT.
THis that I now humbly offer to your hands, has been long in my thoughts; but
much more since in my attendance on his Majesty's Children, I have (under the
encouragements and particular favors of the Right Honorable my Lord the Earl
of Northumberland, to whose care You have entrusted those Royal pledges,) read
through the whole Bible in an expository way. I have high thoughts of the sacred
authority of Scripture, I admire the wisdom of the whole, and the admirable
concent of all the parts of it, and do firmly believe that the majesty of it
will triumph over the attempts of all Anti-Scripturists to the contrary, till
the time of our Lords coming again. It Is the glory of Christian States to
maintain and advance it, which was the meaning of those learned men, who have
lately enriched the world with that treasury of the King of France his Bible in
10. Volumes, where in one Frontispiece they have represented a Table of the
Portraicture of Cardinal Mazarine, supported and mounted by Angels, as being a
great Patron of that renowned labor. May your Names also be great unto
posterity, whilst you promote the glory of God, and the saving knowledge of
men, by works of this nature. The learned Licenser intimates the difficulty of
this, I also acknowledge it, but withal I nothing doubt, but under such an
influence as yours it may grow to a full maturity.

Your Honors most humble and most devoted servant SAM. TORSHEL.

A Design TO HARMONIZE THE BIBLE.
The authority of the Canon of Scripture. The liberty of Interpreting it. A
complaint against the abuse of it. The Remedy.
IT is a received principle even among the Turks themselves, That Gods
testimony suffices, (so the Alcoran speaks, cap. de Aranea, Sufficit Dei
testificatio,) and, That God has made known his will in Books. The Alcoran
gives witness to both the Testaments as we call them. And Philip Guadagnoli
the Arabic Professor at Rome, in his Apology for Christian Religion, against
Ahmed the Persian, has produced clear instances of some passages almost out of
every particular Book in the whole Bible, expressly quoted, or manifestly
alluded unto, in many Chapters of the Alcoran.

Much more therefore, in the entrance of this discourse or essay which I have
now undertaken, I will suppose it among Christians, to be a principle that
needs not proof, and a thing constantly granted, that the whole Scripture,
contained in the Canon or number of Books which we call Canonical, is the Word
of God, divinely inspired, and left unto us to be the Rule of Faith and
manners. Under that Title or Right, the Law and the Prophets were delivered
over from the Jews, the old and faithful keepers of them, to the Christians,
by whom both those, and the Evangelicall or Apostolical writings and
declarations, have been held in possession under the same Title in the several
ages since, even down to these days. There was never among the Ancients any
public quarrel about that; Only, (which adds also to the weight and strength
of the Scriptures Title) there have been not a few quarrels about the sense.

The Arts that have been used by the Romanists, for the settling and
establishing the Right of Interpretation upon the Bishop of Rome, have been
well known; whereby they have labored to make him the Oracle to the world, as
the Turkish Mufti is (by the relation of Busbequius,) in those parts, finding
it to be the most expedite way to gain the opinion of the public and autorized
Interpreter. But upon the experience of his own, and his fervants readiness,
to make advantage of every thing, that has any likelihood to advance them, and
to wrest and abuse Scriptures to the maintenance of their usurpations;
therefore so long as there are (at least) reasonable men in the world, it will
always prove a broken and entangled Title unto him.

Who then must be Judge? There are many that would give it to the Fathers, and
that we must receive their Sense. But that were to make them not Expounders,
but in a manner Lawgivers. I have spoken somewhat to this in my Exercitation
upon Malachy, and in my Historical Preface before Mr Stocks Commentary upon
that Prophet, from whence I shall transcribe a little: That we regard the
Fathers highly, but yield them not the Royalty of a Mint, as Morney speaks. In
the very Council of Trent, a saying of Cardinal Cajetan's, That a new sense of
Scripture is not to be rejected, though it be against the old Doctors, seeing
power is left now also to interpret: was by some much commended, who thought it
a Tyranny to forbid the faithful the use of their own proper Ingenie. Others
indeed opposed that saying, accounting License worse then Tyranny. Among
others, Richard of Man's a Franciscan Friar, went so far as to say, That the
doctrine of Faith is now so cleared, that we ought to learn it no more out of
the Scriptures, which were heretofore read in the Church for instruction, but
now only are read to pray by, not to study. There were not many that adhered to
him; the better part delivered themselves as Dominicke a Soto did, That it was
fit to keep every wit within limits for matters of faith and manners, but else
to leave them to their liberty for the sense. Others of them yet more plainly:
That it was not fit to restrain the understanding of the Scriptures to the
Fathers only, whose expositions were most part allegorical, seldom literal,
and those fitted to their own times. Seeing then the more learned and sober
party even among the Romanists themselves, have been tender of taking away the
liberty of the faithful to judge of what is written; far be it from us to be
worse then they, or to erect a tyranny by putting the key of knowledge into the
hands of any particular order of men.

But what way may be taken, to prevent, that this liberty, prove not a
mischief. Of late we have had too sad an experience, of the boldness of such
as pretend to the knowledge of Scriptures. Besides what we hear of, delivered
here and there in corners; there is too much witness in those weak, senseless
and triobolarie Pamphlets, which have wasted so much paper, and have unmannerly
intruded upon the leisures, yea the necessary business of all sorts of men of
late years; in which what childish and impertinent allegations of texts have we
found? what raw and indigested collections from them? what bandying up and down
of incoherent Scripture-words and sentences? many through a proud forwardness,
venture unripe and unexperienced upon the expounding of the Scriptures; that as
Eckius said, he chose the points of predestination, that upon them he might
exercere juveniles calores, make trial of his youthly heat; so these take the
sacred Oracles of God, upon which to make their raw and imperfect essays. And
ordinarily as the most learned men are scepticall and but little positive; so
the weakest men, are most magisteriall, and cry out like the Mathematician at
Athens, I have found, I have found it, when they light upon a notion which
seems new to them, but it may be might be had in twenty Authors which they know
not.

But the most of those that are unlearned and unstable, do wrest the
Scripture, as the Apostle speaks, thinking they find that in it, which is not
it. They bring an opinion with them, and with that they read the Bible all
along, imagining that they see it every where before them; like the man of whom
the Philosopher spoke, who thought he saw his own shape before his eyes at
every step he took. A strong imagination or fancy will persuade very much, and
beguile both the eye and the ear: As for instance, Some when they look up to
the rack or moving clouds, imagine them to have the form of Men, of Armies, of
Castles, Forests, Landskips, Lions, Bears, etc. where none else can see such
things, nor is there any true resemblance of such shapes. And for the ear, when
a man has somewhat that roules and tumbles in his thoughts, he will think,
that the ringing of bells, the beating of hammers, the report that is made by
great gunnes, or any other measured or intermitted noise, does articulately
sound and speak the same which is in his thoughts. In this same manner, many
persuade themselves, that the Scripture represents to them such and such formed
opinions, while they patch and lay things together, without any reason; like
children looking upon a wall, will fancy an armed man, or some other thing,
such a spot to be the bulk of the body, such another spot to be the head, some
other scratches or flawes to be the legs or arms with weapons; whiles another
perhaps at the same time, imagines the same spots to resemble a Dragon, and a
third that they resemble a Ship, or what else may indeed be most unlike a man.
We could not have thought what vanity there is in the imagination of men, if
somewhat had not been testified to us of old, by the Apostle, who tells us of
the Gentiles, How their foolish hearts were darkened, Romans 1. ver. 21. and by
the Ancients, Augustine, Philastrius and others, who have recorded the strange
and senseless dotages of many heretics; and of late in the ridiculous papers
that have flown about, and bring Scripture with them, but no sense; fancying
the holy word of God, to strike, to ring, or chime to their tunes. The
Apostles, Peter and Jude, speak of dreamers; sure there are many such now. A
man that is awake (we know,) may think of a golden house, the way to which
paved with rubies and Saphires, the wall plaistred with pearl, and the gate one
entire Diamond; but his external senses not being hindered with other witness
and information, his internal sense gives judgment aright; but when the
outward senses are locked up by sleep, then those vainest fancies are
entertained without control. Such danger is there, when (to use the Apostles
phrase, Heb. 5.14.) men have not their senses exercised to discern both good
and evil.

But yet a greater mischief arises out of a corrupt and depraved mind and
affection; according to that of St Paul, 1 Timothy 6.5. perverse disputings of men
of corrupt minds. When the Appetite or affection is eager, and stays not the
leisure of deliberation, but outruns it, so as not to be recalled, then the
mind is drawn to be of the same opinion with the appetite, and takes up what
is fancied, as true; and what is affected, as warrantable: that at length the
beguiled man believes himself. He that looks upon an unlovely thing, with the
eye of love, thinks it lovely; so that that is false, seems true to him that
strongly affects it. He that is extremely athirst, drinks down that with
pleasure, which if he were not so distemperd, would offend his taste, and very
much nauseate his stomach.

I might instance in many the like deceits and inconveniences, growing partly
from depravednesse of mind, partly from ignorance, partly from instability,
suddenness and haste, when men take a snatch, and run away, with that which
looks like the sense of Scripture, as if they had gotten somewhat that made
much for them, and weary themselves about them, like the Apes in the story, who
finding a glo-worm in a cold night, took it for a spark of fire, and heaped
sticks upon it, to warm themselves. So do they lose their labor, who are
busy about sounds of words, and incoherent-Scripture-sentences.

But I have not spoken all this with a mind to defraud the faithful of their
Right, even their Right to Judge of what is written. The sentence of the great
Apostle resolves and directs me in this, who applying himself to the Community
of Believers at Corinth, says even to all, I speak as to wise men, judge ye
what I say, 1 Cor. 10.15. And in after times, the Christians held themselves in
possession of it. Theodoret in the 4th book of his History, cap. 19. gives us a
notable testimony. When Euzoius the Governor of Alexandria, had thrust out
Peter the orthodox successor of Athanasius, and had placed Lucius an Arrian in
that Church; the people having been brought up under Athanasius doctrine,
perceiving contrary food provided for them, they would not hear, but forsook
the ecclesiastical meetings. That that God has given to the people, let none
presume to take from them. Let us rather renew the earnestness of Chrysostom
and others of the Ancients, to persuade and encourage them more to the reading
and examining of the Scriptures. Take not away the book, only spread it more
open. The ministry ecclesiastical was appointed to this end, and to this end
were gifts given unto men.

To this purpose many have profitably labored: The Ancients framed their
Commentaries, Enarrations, Scholies, Glosses, Metaphrases, Paraphrases,
Homilies. In the several ages there have been some or other (as I have
particularly mentioned in my forenamed Historical Preface to Malachy) that
have applied themselves to this work, but more abundantly in these later times.
Only, whereas the difficulty and obscurity of Scripture is in great part
because of the Anticipations, Transpositions, and Dislocations, of whole books,
or some parcels, of the sacred Canon; we are yet wanting to our selves and to
our clear understanding of the whole Scripture; that the whole has not been
digested into one continued History, according to the order of times, which
would make the work of Commenting and Interpreting much more easy, and the
whole Context altogether more clear. This therefore is it, which I have humbly
to offer:

1. To propose and open the Design, about the Harmonizing of the whole Bible,
or the bringing of both the Testaments into one continued History.

2. To show the usefullnesse, or benefit of such an Harmony.

3. To discover the Difficulty of such an under^aking.

4. To enquire into some Helps toward it.

5. To Commend it to the allowance and care of the Public State.

An Essay of the Design.
THe Design is to lay the whole Story together, in a continued connection, the
Books or parts of Books, and all the several parcels disposed and placed in
their proper order, as the continuance and Chronicall method of the
Scripture-history requires, so that no sentence nor word in the whole Bible be
omitted, nor any thing repeated, or any word inserted, but what is altogether
necessary for Transition. So as some whole Chapters or pieces, be put into
other places, yea great parts of some Books, and some whole Books to be woven
into the body of an other Book. For the illustration of my meaning, I shall
only offer at a general draught or imperfect Essay.

It must necessarily begin with the first Book of Moses which is Genesis, where
such anticipations as may be found, are to be referred to their own place. As
for example; To make up the 27th and 28th verse, of the first Chapter of
Genesis, with the 7th, the 18th, 19th, verse, etc. of the 2d Chapter, together
into one relation. Then to continue, Chap. 1. ver. 29, 30, etc. after the end
of the 2d Chapter. And to place the three first verses of the 2d Chapt. at the
ending of the third. And so throughout the Bible, where any thing is related by
prolepsis or Anticipation. And to place the whole Book of Job (digested also
particularly, if there be any anticipations in it) into the body of Genesis,
either after the history of Nahor; or next after the 33. verse of the 36th
Chapt. of Genesis, according as it shall be judged upon a learned examination,
that after the opinion of the Hebrew's, he was the Third from Nahor; or after
the opinion of the Greeks, and the Genealogy added in the LXX, at the end of
Job, he were the Fifth from Abraham, and Third from Esau, and so the same with
Jobab, mentioned, Genesis 26.33. Whether Moses wrote the History of Job, will not
be material now to question; but however, the Story is to be inserted into
that place that shall be found most unquestionably to agree to the history of
his time!

In this manner to digest the Books of Exodus, Numbers, Leviticus, Deuteronomy,
and to continue them to the story, placing the several exhortations of Moses
recorded in Deuteronomy, in their own proper times, when the occasions of
speaking them there were, if it may be found in Numbers the history of the
Removes, when they were spoken. And into the history of Moses, to insert the
90. Psalm, if it shall be concluded to be writ by him, and (as to me it seems
most likely) if it were penned upon occasion of that threatening, related Deuteronomy.
4.31. then in that story to be conveniently placed.

There are some particular Anticipations in Joshuah, and so in the Book of
Judges, but those being digested, they are to be continued successively to the
story. And for the whole Book of Ruth, it may seem fit to be put in the story
of Eli, in the beginning of Samuel, if she be found to have lived under the
time of his Judging Israel.

The Books of Samuel, Kings and Chronicles, will be next in their order, where
the History of the Kings of the whole people, and after, of the two Kingdoms of
Judah and Ephraim, being distinctly, and in one relation of their several
reigns made up of the circumstances in the several Books brought together;
here will be the greatest variety of transposition and inserting.

To distribute the Psalms (so many as are found to be David's, and whose
argument and occasion may be found,) into the Chapters in Samuel, according to
the several estates and passages of David's life, that in his continued history
we may hear him singing answerable to the emergencies of providence, whereby
we shall much better know his meaning. As for such Psalms as are thought his,
but no satisfaction (so much as conjecturall) concerning the occasion, those to
be set at the end of his life and reign. The other Psalms to be distributed to
the time and stories of their Authors, one to Heman, namely, Ps. 88. one to
Ethan, where we find him mentioned in the Kings, namely, Ps. 89. some to
Asaph; some happily to the Sons of Korah, that were of the Quire in David's
time, namely, Ps. 42, 43, etc. and happily some to King Solomon, at least one,
namely, Ps. 72. being thought to be of his composing.

The Books of Proverbs (so many of the Proverbs as may be judged to be spoken
or collected by Solomon,) Canticles, and Ecclesiastes, to be put into the body
of the second Book of Kings, according to the times of Solomon's reign: if the
opinion of some Rabbis be thought to be followed, that the Song was made when
he was young, at his marriage, the Proverbs collected in his maturity,
Ecclesiastes in his age. Those Proverbs, chapter 25. chapter 26. chapter 27. chapter 28. chapter
29. to be placed in the body of the Chronicles, at the end of the reign of
King Hezekiah.

The Sermons of the Prophets, to be disposed into the times of the reigns of
those Kings under whom they lived. So that if with industry and diligence the
particular times and occasions can be found out, so accordingly to refer them;
placing it may be a Chapter or Chapters of one, two or more Prophets
contemporary, and prophesying of the same subject, together. And so in order to
the times, without regard to the order of Books. And those Prophecies whose
occasions or time cannot be judged of, those to be placed at the ends of those
Kings under whom they lived.

Ezekiel, and Daniel, to be inserted about the end, or added after the end of
Chronicles, as shall be maturely considered.

Hagge, and Zachary, to be interwoven with the continued histories of Ezra and
Nehemiah, into which also the whole Book of Esther is to be wrought: And then
Malachy to be placed in the order of his own time.

As for the new Testament, the beginning of it, namely the History of our Lords
life and sufferings, recorded by four several Evangelists, is already brought
together, by many Learned men into an Harmony, but most diligently by
Chemnitius so far as he went, and then continued by Lyserus, and after by
Ge^hard.

Into the body of the History of the Apostles Acts, are to be distributed the
Epistles of James, Peter, and especially of Paul, in an other order then now
they lie, according to the times wherein they were writ, which will be applied
without much difficulty to his history within several Chapters of the Acts.
And the writings of John, will finish up the whole History.

And whereas it may be objected, That the order of Books and Chapters being so
altered and transposed, we shall not know where to find any thing.

That may be easily helped, by marginall Columns all along throughout with the
Context; and a Table or Index at the end of the whole. In most places there
will need but two Columns, for a great part none at all, where the History or
Book runs along without dislocation or insertion; and in no place above four,
as in the Evangelists, unless happily a fifth Column somewhere there, if it be
judged fit to insert Judes Epistle, into the History of the Evangelists,
concerning which for the present I Quaerie.

At the end may be an Index of two Columns, In the first, the Books, Chapters,
and verses in the order as they lie now in the Bible; And in the other the
Books and Chapters of the Harmony, it being divided into so many Books and
Chapters, as may be most for ease. Whereby may presently be found, in what part
of the Harmony, any Chapter, Verse, or Sentence of the whole Bible lies. As for
example: Genesis. Harmony. chapter ver. lib. chapter 1. 1. to 27. 1. 1.

The Harmony being thus framed throughout, there may be some marginall
directions where they are necessary, to give the reasons of the Transitions,
Insertions, Transpositions, and of the whole order.

The Benefits.
THe benefit of such an Harmony will be greater then we can fully comprehend
till we have the use of it. It will help much toward the making up an exacter
Scripture-Chronologie. It will serve abundantly to the clearing of the genuine
and historical meaning of the Text every where. As for instance; The Sermons
of the Prophets, though as they were laid up and preserved by the Sanhedrim,
are delivered unto us in a body as the learned Elders digested them, yet they
were applied at several times, in the several emergencies of affairs, of the
two Kingdoms of Judah and Israel, and upon several occasions, which being
found out, will make us, as it were present auditors of those Prophets, and in
the quality of those to whom they were directed. So the Psalms were written by
several men, at several times, and those of David not all at once. We shall
know the temper of their spirits, upon what motives, upon what rejoycings, upon
what fears, or distresses, or accidents they were composed. Take one example;
Psalm. 90.10. The anthour of that Psalm, passionately complains of the
shortness and misery of man's years. The days of our years are threescore
years and ten, etc. But it concerns not all men and times. Only Moses, who
seems to have been the author of that Psalm, complains upon an occasion
peculiar to that time, and that people whom he governed. It was the word of the
Lord concerning that generation, when they provoked him in the wilderness,
that none of them should enter into his rest, nor see the good land, but that
all their carcasses should fall in the desert, that occasioned this complaint.
A strange and and unusual thing, that of 600000. souls, men of able
constitutions, and lying under no epidemicall disease, none (except two
persons, Caleb and Iosuah,) should outlive threescore and ten years, or at
utmost but fourscore, that were twenty years of age at their coming forth of
Egypt. We may take another example; Psalm. 27.13. I had fainted unless I had
believed, to see the goodness of the Lord in the land of the living. What was
that land of the living, that David speaks of? When he made this Psalm, he was
forced from Jerusalem, where he was wont to live in society with men, and now
shifted up and down among grott's, and caves, and solitary holes, as if his
dwelling had been among the Sepulchers of the dead. The occasion then
enlightens the Psalm, if we insert it into that part of David's story. The
literal, historical sense of Scripture, we must first build upon, else in
mysteries and Allegories, we may sooner be fine and witty, then sound. Hierome
confesses his own youthly vanity, in interpreting Obadiah's Prophecy. When I
was young (says he) I interpreted the Prophet allegorically, because I was
ignorant of the History. I thought then I could read a sealed book. No man can
write so ill, but some will like it. Such an one praised it, but I blush't. I
now freely profess, that was the work of my childish wit, this of my mature
age. Many undertake Scripture as if they could read a sealed book, and perhaps
many praise them for lofty and raised notions, but where is their Authority,
when they lose the genuine and litterall meaning of the holy Penman? Isidore
Pelusiota has observed, That whereas the Manichees thought that no part of the
old Testament spoke of Christ; some in his time went to the other extreme,
thinking all to be spoken of him: and so brought a discredit upon the true
testimonies, when wrong ones were wrested. Weakness of proof, brings the
greatest prejudice against the truth.

Divines have given out some observations, for the understanding how Scripture
is fulfilled; either, 1. When the thing is done or comes to pass, which was
meant by the Prophet in his litterall and proper sense. Or, 2. When that comes
to pass which was fore-shadowed by the proper and immediate subject of the
Prophets speech. Or, 3. When the thing that happens, was not literally and
properly pointed at, nor fore-shadowed, but aptly and handsomely applied to,
and compared with somewhat like it. Or, 4. When that which was foretold or
fore-shadowed, though it have been already done in part, or have been begun to
be done, is afterward done more fully, or else more constantly: It being
possible that the same Scripture may be fulfilled often, yea in the same
litterall sense. Now an Harmonious historizing of the Psalms and the Prophets,
and the like, will lead us more clearly to know the immediate subject of what
was spoken, and give us hints to discern what was higher and further meant; yea
possibly more, then what themselves understood in the words that themselves
spoke. For the Scriptures being given for the instruction and use of all
succeeding ages; It may be that the Prophets knew not all that they delivered,
and which the sense of their words, might be afterward improved unto. Daniel
was a man full of the Spirit of God, and much traveled in Revelations, yet he
knew not the then approaching time of the Jews liberty, till that in the first
of Darius, he learned more then was immediately inspired unto him, by Books
that had been written by Prophets before him, Dan. 9.2. In the first year of
Darius reign, I Daniel understood by books the number of the years, whereof the
word of the Lord came to Jeremiah the Prophet. No doubt he diligently satisfied
himself, unto what year of Jeremies public Ministry those predictions, Chap.
25.11, 12. and chap. 29.10. were made. Some Prophets knew more, and some less.
They saw for after times, but often themselves saw but what concerned the
present times, places, and affairs. It was said to Daniel himself, Chap. 12.4.
O Daniel, shut up the words, and seal the book even to the time of the end.
These mysteries were to be shut up till these later times, concerning which it
follows in the same verse, Many shall run to and fro, and knowledge shall be
increased, Namely, by reading thy book, when the time of fulfilling comes.
There is a Manuscript that offers a pleasant Interpretation of these words;
That the opening of the world by trade and navigation, and the increase of
knowledge should meet in one age. The Lord Verulam embraced this sense, if
himself invented the Frontispiece to his Instauratio magna, where in a quiet
sea, a ship is pictured with full spread sails, and under it, this same
sentence out of Daniel, Multipertransibunt and augebitur scientia. Alittle
before Luther, when Columbus found out the Indies, there was also a general
reviving of all parts of learning. And surely, as our age has much advanced
above what Antiquity knew, so the Ages after us are likely to know more, even
out of the Scriptures concerning themselves, and their times. Had Moses,
Abraham (of whom Christ said, He saw his day and rejoiced,) David, Isaiah,
Micah, Malachy, etc. lived, and had they been ear-witnesses of Christ's words,
and spectatours of his doings, they would better have understood one another
words, yea and their own too. But this is the benefit which the designed
Harmony does promise, that it will bring them nearer together in fellowship
with themselves, nearer unto Christ and to his Apostles writings, whereby much
that we knew not what to think of, will be easy to us.

But I will not undertake a further commendation of the Benefit, which I do
not yet my self so fully understand, nor can apprehend, as when according to
the Design, the thing it self shall be done. They talk much of the glasses, of
those curious and excellent men, Galileus and Gassendus, etc. that will
rectify many of our errors about the Planets; but through this glass we shall
see into the heavens of the Scriptures, and every day enrich our selves with
new discoveries and observations.

The Difficulty.
AS I have commended the Benefit, so I may not deny or conceal the Difficulty
of the work. They that have labored in the lesser Harmony, namely, that of the
four Evangelists, have found it to be no mean labor, nor could they soon put
it out of their hands. The Attempts of many upon it, give testimony of this
difficulty. Jacob: D' Ausoles a Lapeyre, in anno 1610. reckoned up twenty known
Authors this way. Renhard Lutz (omitted in Lapeyres Catalogue) who compiled
his Harmony, 1560. confesses he was often at a stand in it. Calvin, who
compiled it, 1555. made his way the easier, by treading after Bucer, but yet
sometime was forced to part, and go another Tract. Indeed Andrew Osiander, was
willing to persuade himself he had overcome the difficulties of it: he says,
That John Schopper an Abbot had showed him two Compilers of it, one an
Anonymus; the other was Zacharias Chrysopolitanus, but they stuck, where
Ammonius of Alexandria, and after him, St Augustine had, namely at the cure of
Peter's wives mother, whether it were before or after the Sermon on the Mount.
And there he had stuck and staid too, but that our Cranmer (being at his house,
as he was on his way, being Ambassador from King Henry 8. to the Emperor)
desired him to go on. He did so, and says, he saw his scarecrows removed: but
some judge of it, that he had better have stuck, then plunged over. All that
did it met with censure. Vincentius Regius finds fault with Iansenius, others
with him. John de la Hay at Doway, and Francis de Roia at Toledo, find
defects in all before them: though some have professed more then ordinary
diligence, as particularly Tho: Beaux-amis a Carmelite, professes it was the
substance of twenty six years labor. It Is done at length, indeed to good
satisfaction, but not by one hand, but begun by Chemnitius, continued by
Polycarp Lyserus, and again continued by D. Gerhard. It cannot then be
expected, that this work now designed, should on a sudden be done, or done by
one hand, being so much more large and abundantly more difficult: for in many
things there will be need of an Elias, as the Jews are wont to speak concerning
knots that they cannot unty. As for example,

Not to speak of the two Psalms which Amadeus says, it was revealed to him
that they were composed by Adam, which are in the King of Spains Library of
Manuscripts in the Escuriall: It may notwithstanding perhaps deservedly be put
to the Question, whether the 92. Psalm be to be inserted into Adams History,
seeing many of the Jews thought it was his; and in the Chaldee, it has this
title, The praise and song which the first man spoke for the Sabbath day.

Then, as for the 90. Psalm, I have spoken to it, as composed by Moses, and so
the Chaldee Title speaks, The prayer which Moses the Prophet of the Lord
prated, when the people of the house of Israel sinned in the desert. But if we
should follow Hierom's rule, That all the Psalms which are without Title, are
to be ascribed to the same Author that is mentioned in the next foregoing;
then the 91. Psalm, and nine more that follow, should be inserted into Moses
his History. But that rule will justly deserve to come under Question.

Then, Whereas the Vatican Septuagint, do insert the Proverbs of Agur and
Lemuel, Prove. 30. and 31. between Chap. 24. and 25. It will require an
examination, 1. Whether Agur were some wise and godly man in Solomon's time or
before; or rather, whether he were not Solomon himself, called Agur; The
Collectour, the son of Iakeh, that is, David, The vomiter, because (as it was
said of the later Poets, That they licked up Homers vomit) so Solomon gathered
up, what David had let fall in many occasional sentences; or else, The son
of vomit, an Hebraisme (i.) so full, that he could not hold, but must needs
vent and utter what he had to say: according to that, Psalm. 45.1. My heart is
enditing, or boyleth and bubleth up a good matter: Or Agur (i.) Solomon the
Satyr, so the phrase is also used among the Latins, Evomere aliquid in
aliquem. The Character of a great part of that 30. Chapter being Satyricall,
may rather strengthen that conjecture. But it is left to the Question. 2.
Whether Lemuel, Chap. 31. be Solomon, who they said had eight names, or else
King Hezekiah, as it might seem, because the Proverbs of this Chapter, are
brought in, after, and in order, to those which his servants copied out, as is
noted, chap. 25.1. But these and an hundred more Queries, will require solution
to the framing of such a work.

The Professor of any faculty, besides Divinity, may without much skill in any
profession but his own, truly understand the genuine rules or precepts of it;
all his learning else, is but ornament to him: As a Physician needs not
History, Mathematics, etc. as necessarily to enable him to his faculty. But
the very litterall sense of much in Scripture (which is the Divines Canon)
cannot be rightly understood, without variety of reading and learning in other
faculties and sciences. And to the collating of Scriptures, and reducing
parcels to the order of History, there will need both much sagacity and
industry, and a competent knowledge in the Rites and customs civil of all the
neighbor Nations: together with humane histories, of those and the succeeding
times; as likewise an acquaintance with the Jewish Laws; and happily the time of
some of the Prophets will be known only by the Characterismes of language,
peculiar to such and such different ages.

The Helps.
THe helps toward this work, must be from such as have diligently written the
ecclesiastical Chronology, such as are versed in Rabbinicall and Talmudique
learning. Among others Plantavitius his Florilegium Rabbinicum, especially the
third Tome, where we have the Bibliotheca Rabbinica. Such as have studied the
Jewish laws and Rites; L'Empereur so far as he has gone, De legibus Hebraeorum
Forensibus, Corn. Bertram de Politcia Iudaica, Car. Sigonius de Republica
Hebraeorum, M. Seldom in many of his learned books, will be of much use. And
happily such as have confined themselves to particular arguments, tending to the
clearing of some Scripture Antiquities, may be of service. Peter Faber his
Agonisticon, about sports and Olympic games. Nicolaus Caussin of
Hieroglyphics and Aenigma's. Brissonius and Roa, for the customs of marriage,
etc. Ianus Cornarus, of things belonging to Vines, according to the Scripture.
Georg. Longus of Milain, concerning signatory Rings. Such as have writ of
stones and minerals, of weights and measures, of Treaties and Covenants, of the
Jewish Calendar, and of the Iubiles, and many such other arguments according to
the Scripture. Theodoret, Melanthon, and Moller have done somewhat by way of
cenjecture, about the occasion of diverse of the Psalms. Petrus Aureolus in his
Compendium Bibliorum, Georg. Ederus Counselor to the Emperors Ferdinand the
first, and Maximilian the second, in his Oeconomia Bibliorum; The Tigurine
Divines in the Preface to their Version: Solomon Glassius in his Tract de
methodo S. Scr. And Eusebius Nierembergius, de origin S. Scrip. especially in
his 9th and 10th books; and diverse authors of that kind, have somewhat
concerning the Penmen of holy writ, and their times. But whereas no man has
yet thought of the main design, much less attempted any thing in direct
tendency to it, it must be expected, that the way will be rough and uneven,
full of bracks and thickets, and in which the undertakers must be pardoned, if
happily they may sometimes lose their way.

The Recommendation.
BUt some helps there are, and if the State may please to look upon it with
favor and encouragement, somewhat may be done to the great service of the
Churches of Christ, not only for the ease of the Ministry, which O siander
says was the reason why he set upon the Harmony of the Evangelists, but for
the abundant increase of saving knowledge of all Christians, who will find the
benefit of it being done, which I doubt I am not so happy in my expressions as
to make it plain enough in the Design. And the very labor and search, will
yield comfort all along to such as may be employed in it, as George Wyrth
professes, that in his old age, when he had served as a Physician in Brussels,
and in King Philip the seconds Court many years, he applied himself to the
difficult collating of the Evangelists (being then turned Protestant) for his
last refreshments. Let the State only please to make it their care, after the
example of some Kings and Republics that have done such like works of general
use for the advance of learning and divine knowledge, and they will find some
men very learned of their own order; besides many in the profession of
Divinity, and others of private quality, that will contribute much assistance
to it.

Perhaps it may be thought a daring and bold design, I humbly submit it to the
judgment of men learned, and godly wise, who will pardon an error (if it be
any) of earnest affection to the advance of holy-Scripture-knowledge: which is
the greatest Treasury of heavenly wisdom and science, that the whole earth
has in keeping; and of which we cannot put too high a value. Let me by way of
Conclusion, add some just Characters of the whole Bible, and the particular
Books, some of which I have gathered from the Ancients and others, but many of
them holding out their own evidence.

The whole Bible. The souls food: so Athanasius. The common shop of soul
physic: so Basil. The invariable rule of truth: so Iraeneus. The Divines
balance: so Augustine.
1. In respect of the dictating of it; It is, The Library of the holy Ghost.
Christ's Aphorisms. The Acts and Statutes of the highest Parliament. Gods
Mint-house. The Signet of Gods right hand. The Epistle of God to the world. The
Court-roll of Gods Fines and Amercements.


2. In respect of it is worth; It is, A stately Palace. A fruitful field. The
true Hesperides. The inestimable Pearl.


3. In respect of it is use: It is, The Touchstone of error. The Key of the
Sheepfold. The Glass of Life. The Weather-glasse. The Christians Magazine.
The Armory.


Genesis. The Cabinet of greatest Antiquities. Exodus. The sacred Rule of Law
and Justice. Leviticus. The holy Ephemerides. Numbers. Gods Arithmetic.
Deuteronomy. The faithful Monitor. Joshuah. The holy War. Judges. The
Mirror of Magistrates and Tyrants. Ruth. The Picture of a pious Widow. Samuel.
Sacred Politics. Kings. Sacred Politics. Chronicles. The holy Annals. Ezra.
An Idea of Church and State Reformation. Nehemiah. An Idea of Church and State
Reformation. Hester. The great example of Gods providence. Job. The School of
Patience. Psalms. The Souls Soliloquies. Psalms. The little Bible. Psalms. The
Anatomy of Conscience. Psalms. The Rose-garden. Psalms. The Pearl-Island.
Proverbs. Divine Ethics, Politics, Oeconomicks. Ecclesiastes. Experience of
the Creatures Vanity. Canticles. The mystical Bride-song. Isaiah. The
Evangelicall Prophet. Jeremiah. The Patheticall Mourner. Lamentations. The
voice of the Turtle. Ezekiel. Urim and Thummim in Babylon. Daniel. The
Apocalypse of the old Testament. Hoseah. Sermons of Faith and Repentance. Joel.
The Thunderer. Amos. The plain dealing Reprover. Obadiah. Edoms whip. Jonah.
The Prophetical Apostle of the Gentiles. Micah, The Wise-mens Star. Nahum.
The Scourge of Assure. Habakkuk. The Comforter of Captives. Zephaniah.
Preparation for sad times. Hagge. Zeal for Gods house. Zachariah. Prophetic
Hieroglyphics. Malachy. The Bound-stone of the two Testaments. Matthew. The
four Trumpeters proclaiming the title of the great King. Mark. The four
Trumpeters proclaiming the title of the great King. Luke. The four Trumpeters
proclaiming the title of the great King. John. The four Trumpeters proclaiming
the title of the great King. Acts. The Treasury of Ecclesiastical Story.
Romans. The Principles of Christian Faith. The Catholic Catechism. 1.
Corinthians. Apostolical Reformation. 2. Corinthians. A pattern of just
Apologies. Galatians. The Epistle to the Romans epitomized. Ephesians. The
opening of the great mystery of salvation. Philippians. An Apostolical
Paraenesis. Colossians. A brief Rule of Faith and Manners. 1. Thessalonians.
Practick Theology. 2. Thessalonians. Polemick Theology. 1. Timothy. The sacred
Pastoral. 2. Timothy. The Title of the Scripture pleaded. Titus. Agenda, or
Church-orders. Philemon. The Rule of Relations. Hebrews. A Commentary upon
Leviticus. James. The golden Alphabet of a Christian. 1. Peter. A Theological
summary. 2. Peter. The Encouragement of a spiritual warrier. 1. John. The
Glass of Charity. 2. John. The pattern of a pious Matron. 3. John. The Mirror
of Hospitality. Jude. A picture of false Prophets. Revelation. Daniel
Redivivus. The opening of the Treasure of future events.
FINIS.
THis Essay I conceive is very well worthy the publishing, that if the
difficulties may be overcome, the whole design may be undertaken.

Charles Herle.




