Printed for Isaac Cleave at ye sign of ye Starr next to Searjants Jnn in
Chancery Lane
Engraved frontispiece showing the devil whispering into the ear of the Pope
and his Cardinals whilst a penitent buys absolution, handing over a bag of
coins in exchange for a Papal indulgence.

THE Pope's Cabinet UNLOCKED: OR, A CATALOGUE Of all the POPES INDULGENCES
Belonging to the Order of S. Mary, TOGETHER With a List of all the Indulgences
daily, yearly, and for ever, to be had at Rome, S. James of Galatia in
Compostella, Jerusalem, and all places in the Holy Land.

Written in Italian by Fr. Arcangelo Tortello, of the said Order of S. Mary:
And now Translated into English by John Sidway, late Seminary Priest, but now
of the Reformed Religion, and Vicar of Selling in Kent, and one of the
Discoverers of the horrid Popish Plot, with the Cause of his Conversion.

Whereunto is added an APPENDIX by the Translator, in which the grounds and
foundation of the said Indulgences being examined, are utterly overthrown, and
by consequence Indulgences themselves apparently proved to be mere Cheats. And
also showing that the Church of Rome does lay the chief Basis of their Religion
on Indulgences. Dedicated to the Right Honorable the Earl of Shaftsbury.

LONDON, Printed for Isaac Cleve at the Star next to Serjeants-Inn in
Chancery Lane. 1680.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE ANTHONY EARL of Shaftsbury, Baron Ashly of Winbourne
S. Giles, Lord Cooper of Pawlet, etc.
My Lord,
THE signal Favors received from your Honor, and the confidence I have of
your Lordships Endeavors to conserve Religion in its true purity, imboldeneth
me to present you with this worthless Present, designed for you ever since it
was in the confused Mass of my thoughts; which if your Lordship please to
peruse, and receive into Protection, and the pious Reader reap advantage by my
intendment, my Design has succeeded to my wish. The matter contained in the
Translation is a Catalogue of the Popes Indulgences, or Inventory of the Romish
Treasure; which Treasure, or Indulgences, being grounded upon mere Fictions,
and consequently at best but Cheats, I have in my Appendix endeavored to
destroy, overthrowing the very Ground-works, both by Scripture and Fathers,
whereupon they are founded. My Design herein is to unmask this grand Deceit of
the Romish Church, conceiving that they that trust to the said Indulgences,
rely on worse than Reeds, being thereby exposed to the greatest danger; and
merely guld, not only of their Money, but their Expectations. Thus humbly
craving your Lordships Pardon for this my boldness; beseeching God daily to
increase that ardent affection you bear to Religion; and that his Grace and
Goodness may always supply you with meet gifts and Privileges to do him
Service, and increase your Comforts here and hereafter, I adventure to
subscribe, and esteem my self happy, in the honor of being

My Lord, Your Lordships most humble and most devoted Servant, JOH. SIDWAY.

TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader,
WHatsoever thou art, great is the benefit that thou may receive by this
little Book. Art thou a Romanist, knowing thy Religion to be grounded in all
Controverted Points upon those Indulgences, thou may by the Grace of God
(seeing them here overthrown) be brought to relinquish thy Erroneous Opinions.
Art thou a Protestant, or any other dissenting from the Church of Rome, here
thou may discover a great part of the Roman Ecclesinstick Policy; and by
what means such absurd Tenants as are held in the Roman Church are introduced
into the good Opinion of the people, and admitted into their Faith,
nevertheless not to the end they may by thee be imitated, but abhored and
avoided. Would thou know by what means they came to so many Religious
Orders, and why so many enter (as they call it) into Religion? it is because of
the many and great Indulgences which they are possessed with a belief they obtain
thereby. Would thou know wherefore they invocate and adore Saints, the Host,
the Crucifix, Holy Relics and Images, it is because of Indulgences. Would
thou know the reason of their strict observance of these and other their
Churches Ceremonies, their prefering of one Church and Altar before another,
and of all their Pilgrimages? it is because of Indulgences. In fine, there is
nothing Controverted betwixt the Roman and other Churches, but, lest the same
should be utterly overthrown, they are some way underpropped by Indulgences:
which although but mere Cheats, and therefore at best but rotten Posts, yet
since the people are brought to have so good an Opinion of them, serve as most
itable and firm Pillars. In the overthrowing whereof, though I have used much
the Fathers, yet it is not with an Opinion they are more infallible than others,
or that we are to regard any more their Testimony, but because (dealing with
the Romanists) I deal with an unreasonable people, who believe no other, no not
so much as the holy Scriptures, unless as the Fathers expound them, I have here
produced them amongst other Testimonies. For my part I was brought up, and
continued until about three years since, in the Church of Rome, in which I was
of no small repute and esteem, but Conscience did so accuse and torment me,
being Conscious to my self of so many grand Absurdities, gross Idolatries, and
superstitious Practices, which I found I must of necessity be guilty of daily,
continuing therein, that utterly relinquishing that of Rome, I adjoined with
the Church of England; in my coming unto which, although I was put to beat out
the way as it were through Fire, and have been since by many thereof very
hardly dealt withal, which I pray God forgive, I have received the greatest joy
in Spirit and Consolation in Conscience imaginable; verily believing, That
amongst all established Churches in the whole Universe, which I have seen, and
blessed be God I have seen all, or most, that there is not any nearer to
Scripture and Primitive Practice, than is the Church of England; and rather
than I would return to the Church of Rome, admit my self, or condescend to
maintain any one point of the Romish peculiar Doctrine, there is not a Torment
so great, nor a Death so grievous, which I would not gladly suffer. The said
Indulgences amongst other things were one reason of my relinquishing of the
Church of Rome, having indeed been at most of the places where the said
Indulgences are obtained, and know the ensuing Catalogue to agree with the
Records and Reports of each place, and conceiving that those that are cured of
a dangerous Malady ought, not to conceal the means conducing thereunto, from
those that either are or may be sick of the same Disease, I have thought meet
to publish the same to the World, which if kindly accepted, may induce me to
many other Works of the like kind, and of showing my self

Thy very Well-wisher, Joh. Sidway.

THE AUTHOR'S EPISTLE DEDICATORY.
To my illustrious and venerable Brothers and Sisters of the Company of the
most glorious Virgin.
BY how much the more I know my self obliged in general, and in particular to
your most noble Country, and the more I go about accusing my self a Debtor for
so many Favors and Benefits in the same continually received, so much the less
I have always hitherto found my self in a Capacity to express that great and
inward desire I have to do some Act that may be grateful to you; and
considering with my self I ought to give you some little sign of my good Will,
and of my great regard and good Remembrance of you; and that the longer I defer
it, the more it ought to answer the debt I owe: Newly returned from his
Holiness's the Popes Palace, and fearing I might seem to be like the evil
Servant, in the Gospel, who hid the Talent received at the Courtesy of his
Patron, I here present you with a List, (I there obtained) of the public
Treasure, that although it be yet so much unknown in many other Cities, it may
be now known to you, who are the holy Company of our habit, given by the ever
Virgin, the Mother of the Son of God; the which you accepting, as I hope you
will, and Conjure you that ye so do, you have all the Indulgences, may be
gained by the Brothers and Sisters of our Company, in this little Book; which
giving to you, together I dedicate and consecrate to you, beseeching you to
place this laudable Inscription in our Church of the Servants, accompanying the
same to the Altar of the most holy Crucifix with your Society; to the end that
in Life and in Death you may obtain a double Treasure, and Patronage, and so
Precious as these two are; the which jointly in the dangerous Navigation of
this world, the one will be the Ship, and the other the Star, to the port of
Salvation. The gift is not small because it is a gift Spiritual; neither ought
the respect to be small that is had thereto, in regard of the great Benefit
that may accrue thereby. And for a Credit and truth of what is therein
contained, I have caused the same to be confirmed with the great Seal of our
Office, and have subscribed the same with mine own hand. Dated at Florence in
our Convent della Nonciata, the ninth day of February, 1599.

Fr. Arcangelo Tortello.

The Treasure of the Brothers and Sisters of the Holy Order of the Servants of
Saint Mary.
CLASS I. The Indulgences which they obtain by reason of the Habit of the
Servants of our LADY.
TO them that receive the Habit of the Servants, Innocent the Eighth granted
that the Prior General, or any other constituted by him, might absolve any,
whether He or She that should have that Habit, not only at his or her Entrance,
but at any time whenever there should be need, from any sin or Censure
whatsoever.

And Sisto the Fourth granted a Plenary Indulgence to any when they received
the Habit of the Servants.

To those invested with the Habit of the Servants, Innocent the Eighth,
Alexander the Fourth, Benedict the Eleventh, and other Popes their Successors,
granted, that once in their life time, and once in their death, they should
obtain a plenary Indulgence of all their sins.

And Sisto the Fourth said, that they should obtain a Plenary Indulgence when
they dyed and wanted a Confessor, because they dyed in the state of grace.

And Leo the Tenth granted to any one invested with the Habit of the Servants,
that should say the seven penitential Psalms once over, or five Pater-noster's
and five Ave Maria's before an Altar of the Church where he or she should
reside, that he or she that said the same, should thereby release any one Soul
out of Purgatory, what Soul the party that says the same pleases.

To those which to the honor of the blessed Virgin Mary shall devoutly kiss
the Habit of one of the Servants, John the twenty third has given five years,
and five Quarantenes (one of which is forty days space) of Indulgence.

To those which shall serve with the Habit under the Servants, Clement the
Fourth, Nicholas the Third, and Urban the Fifth, granted a forgiveness of the
third part of their sins; and Sisto the Fourth, and Leo the Tenth granted them
a plenary Indulgence.

To those invested with the Habit of the Servants, and shall say five
Pater-noster's, and five Ave-Maria's, Paul the second has granted all the
Indulgences which are at any time within or without Rome, as well as to those
that visit the Holy Churches, where they are to be obtained.

And Leo the Tenth has granted, that saying five Pater-noster's, and five
Ave-Maria's, and at the end of each Paternoster and Ave-Maria, one Gloria
Patri, all entire; and afterward another Paternoster and Ave-Maria singly,
with the Gloria Patri, etc. That is to say in the whole, six Pater-noster's,
six Ave-Maria's, and six Gloria Patri's; five whereof with an intention to gain
the Indulgence, and one for his Holiness the Pope, they gain and obtain all the
Indulgences in the Stations at Rome, at St. James of Galitia in Compostella,
and at Jerufalem, and other places in the Holy Land: And moreover this Pope
has said, that in whatsoever hour of the day or of the night they will, or in
whatsoever place they will, to wit, in the Choire, or in the Church, or in the
Cloister, or in the Cell, if any can say the said Pater-noster's, Ave-Maria's,
and Gloria Patri's, etc. they shall obtain the Indulgences.

CLASS II. The Indulgences at the Holy City of Rome, which are gained not only
by devout Pilgrims, and such others, as visit the sacred places where they are
to be obtained, but also by the Brothers and Sisters of the Servants of our
Lady.
IN the famous City of Rome where commonly resideth the Pope, the Vicar of
Jesus Christ, the place where so many Saints and Saintesses have been martyred,
and sanctified the ground with their most holy blood, there is not a Church in
which there is not any day most great Indulgences; but among the rest there are
seven called for their Excellency, The Seven Churches of Rome, the which are
every day very devoutly, with great adorations, by great numbers of people
visited; and as they have been, so they are daily by his Holiness the Pope,
privileged and benefitted.

The first of the Seven Churches is the Church of Saint John Lateran, the which
was built by the Emperor Constantine, and dedicated by St. Silvester the Pope,
who at its dedication gave so many Indulgences thereto, that is, to those that
devoutly visit the same, that none can number them, but only God.

First at the great Altar they gain an Indulgence of forty eight years, and of
forty eight times forty days space, and moreover a forgiveness of the third
part of their sins.

Saint Silvester gave to whosoever should come to visit this Church, at what
time of the year soever he came, a full remission of all his sins.

In this Church of S. John Lateran, where an Image visibly and miraculously
appeared when S. Silvester consecrated the same, there is full remission of all
their sins.

Pope Boniface has said, that whosoever comes for Devotion's sake to visit the
Church of S. John Lateran, shall be clean absolved from all manner of sin.

Within this Church there is a Chapel of S. John Baptist, into which no Woman
is permitted to enter, and there also they have full remission of all their
sins.

In the Chapel of S. Laurence, called Sancta Sanctorum, (wherein the Women
also are not permitted to enter) there is painted an Image of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ, at which they have an Indulgence of twelve years, and
full remission of all their sins.

Over the Altar Papal are reserved the Heads of S. Peter and S. Paul, and every
time they show them, to them that inhabit in and about Rome there are three
thousand years of Indulgenee; but to those that live a considerable distance
from Rome, as a days journey, six thousand years; and to those that come from a
far Country, there is given an Indulgence of twelve thousand years, and of
twelve thousand times forty days space, and moreover a forgiveness of the third
part of their sins.

In the Church of St. John Lateran there is a Chapel between the Oratory and
Baptistory, in which every day they have full remission of all their sins.

Moreover, near to this Chapel is the Ladder of Pilate's Palace, by the which
Christ our Lord was fastened to the Pillar; the Ladder has twenty eight steps
or rounds, and whosoever goes up the same, for every step he ascends thereof,
he has nine years, and nine times forty days space of Indulgence, and also the
forgiveness of the third part of his sins.

And in the Head of this Church is a Chapel in which are the Ark of the
Testament, the Rod of Moses and Aaron, and the Table upon which Christ supped
with the Disciples; and there are very many Indulgences.

In this Church of S. John Lateran, at the Creation of every Pope, there is (if
they show the holy Vault) a plenary Indulgence.

The second of the seven Churches, is the Church of Saint Peter, where at
present is the Seat Apostolic: At this Church any day they gain an Indulgence
of six thousand forty eight years, and likewise of six thousand forty eight
times forty days space, and moreover a forgiveness of the third part of their
sins.

Also in the Feast of the Annunciation of the blessed Virgin Mary, there is a
thousand years Indulgence.

Also from the said Feast until the first day of August, there is an Indulgence
of twelve thousand years, and of twelve thousand times forty days space; and
moreover, to those that gain the Indulgence a forgiveness of the third part of
all their sins.

Also whosoever devoutly ascends the steps or stairs of St. Peter, there are
granted him by Alexander the sixth, for every step or stair he ascends, seven
years Indulgence.

At every Altar also of the Church of S. Peter there is an Indulgence of
eighteen thousand years; and amongst the rest, the seven principal Altars are
privileged with greater Indulgences.

At the Feast of St. Peter, or the Feasts of any of the said Altars, or the
Feast of All Saints, or the Feast following, the Indulgences are all doubled.

In the said Church when they show the Holy Vault, which for the most part is
in the Holy Week, Easter Day, Ascension-day, and the Sunday before St. Anthony
Abbot; besides those that follow, there is an Indulgence to Strangers of twelve
thousand years; to those that live near Rome of six thousand years; and to
those that are Inhabitants in Rome of three thousand years, and moreover to
each, of as many times forty days space; and likewise all have the forgiveness
of the third part of their Sins.

Moreover in this Church of St. Peter, they have every day, from Ascension to
the end of the Calends of August, eighteen thousand years Indulgence; and from
the Annunciation to the end of the said Calends, they gain an Indulgence of
twelve thousand years, and also of twelve thousand times forty days space, and
moreover a forgiveness of the third part of their Sins.

And in the said Church at the Papal Chapel, they have every day a Plenary
Remission of their Sins.

The third of the seven Churches of Rome is the Church of St. Paul, in the
which any day they gain an Indulgence of six thousand forty eight years, and
likewise of six thousand forty eight Quarantenes, (every of which is forty days
space) and moreover the forgiveness of the third part of their Sins.

Also in the Solemnity of the Conversion of St. Paul, there is an Indulgence
therein of an hundred years, and of an hundred times forty days space.

Also in the Feast of the Holy Innocents, many of whose Bodies are buried in
this Church, there was formerly an Indulgence to be had of forty eight years,
and of as many times forty days space, but now there is a Plenary Indulgence.

Also in the Dedication of the said Church, which is the Octave of St. Martin,
they gain an Indulgence of a thousand years, and a thousand times forty days
space, and moreover the forgiveness of the third part of their Sins.

Also if any one enter into this Church of St. Paul upon a Sunday, he gains
thereby as many Indulgences, as if he went to the Holy Sepulcher in Jerusalem,
and to St. James in Galatia.

Also at this Church, amongst the many other Altars, there are seven particular
ones, as there are at St. Peter's, at every of which there are twenty eight
thousand years Indulgences.

Moreover in this Church of St. Paul are many Holy Relics, as an Arm of St.
Anne, the Mother of the Blessed Virgin Mary, the Chain wherewith St. Paul was
bound, etc. all which are most carefully preserved, and had in very great
veneration; and as often as they show the same, to those that live in Rome,
there is an Indulgence of three thousand, to those that live near Rome of six
thousand, and to those that come from any far Country of twelve thousand years;
and moreover to each, of as many times forty days space; and likewise to all
the forgivenesses of the third part of their Sins.

In this Church also is an Image of the Crucifix that spoke to St. Bridget, and
there is also a Plenary Indulgence.

The fourth of the seven Churches is the Church of St. Maria Maggiore, in which
they have any day six thousand forty eight years, and six thousand forty eight
times forty days space also of Indulgence, and moreover the Remission of the
third part of their Sins.

Also in the Solemnities of the Conception, Nativity, Annunciation,
Purification, and Assumption of our Lady, they have each day therein ten
thousand years Indulgence, and full Remission of all their Sins.

Also in this Church there are very many Altars, and at every Altar there are
eighteen thousand years Indulgence.

Near the High Altar also is an Image of the Blessed Virgin, painted by St
Luke, and there are infinite Indulgences.

Also in this Church there is a Vault under ground, in which is kept the Crib
or Manger wherein our Savior was laid at his Birth, and there they gain an
Indulgence of twelve thousand years, and of twelve thousand times forty days
space, and moreover a forgiveness of the third part of their Sins.

In this Church also is the Sepulcher of St. Girolame, and there they have
twelve years Indulgence, and full Remission of all their Sins.

The fifth of the seven Churches of Rome is the Church of St. Laurence, in the
which they have any day an Indulgence of six thousand forty eight years, and of
six thousand forty eight times forty days space; and moreover the forgiveness
of the third part of their Sins.

Also in this Church is the sacred Body of St. Stephen, and one of the Stones
with the which he was stoned, and there they have eight thousand years
Indulgence.

In the same also is the most holy Body of the said St. Laurence, and there
they have a Plenary Indulgence.

Here also is the Stone whereon that Blessed Virgin, being taken off the
Grid-Iron, yielded up the Ghost, and there they have full Remission of all
their Sins.

The sixth of the seven Churches of Rome is the Church of St. Fabian and
Sebastian, in the which they have any day an Indulgence of six thousand forty
eight years, and of as many Quarantenes, one of which is forty days space; and
also the forgiveness of the third part of their sins.

Also there is there in any day a thousand years Indulgence, granted by Pope
Pelagio.

In this Church also, near to the High Altar, is the place where at first
reposed the Holy Bodies of St. Peter and St. Paul, and there they have as many
Indulgences as they can have at the Churches both of St. Peter and St. Paul.

In the same also, who-ever causes a Mass to be said at the Altar of St.
Sebastian, delivers a Soul from Purgatory.

Also Silvester, Gregory, Honorio, Pelagio, Nicholas, and John, Popes, granted
to every one that should (at what time of the year soever) visit this Church, a
thousand years Indulgence.

Underneath this Church, within the Earth, is the Cemitery of Pope Calisto,
into the which whosoever enters confessed and contrite, by the Merits of the
same Saint, and of an hundred seventy four thousand Martyrs, and of forty six
other Holy Popes, who were there buried of which eighteen were Martyrs, gained
a Plenary Remission of all their sins.

There is another Cemitery in Rome, called the Cemitery of St. Calepodio,
Martyr, in which whosoever is buried has a plenary Remission of all his Sins.

The seventh of the seven Churches of Rome is called Santa Croce, in Jerusalem,
in the which there are any day six thousand forty eight years, and six forty
eight times forty days space of Indulgence, and moreover (to those that obtain
them) the forgiveness of the third part of their sins.

Also in the Dedication of this Church, made by St. Silvester, which is
celebrated the Vigil of St. Benedict Abbot in the Month of March, there is a
plenary Remission of all their sins.

Likewise in the Invention of the Title of Holy Cross, which was there found in
a Wall in the time of Alexander the Sixth, the twenty sixth day of January, and
more over any day in the Chapel of St. Elin, (wherein Women are not permitted
to enter, unless once in the year) there is a Plenary Indulgence.

Also in this Church, every Sunday in the year, they have three hundred years,
and three hundred times forty days space of Indulgence, and likewise the
forgiveness of the third part of their sins, and moreover every Friday in the
year there are very many Indulgences.

More-over in the same, any day throughout the year, they have a plenary
Remission of their sins.

Note also that in these the aforesaid seven Churches of Rome, which are the
seven Lamps of the Holy Roman Church, besides the abovesaid Indulgences, there
are others in great abundance, both plenary and not plenary, which they which
come thereunto from any place to gain, do obtain any Day, any Hour, and any
Minute; all which are also communicated to the Brothers and Sisters of the
Society of the Habit of the Servants.

And because that in this Holy City of Rome are found many other Churches,
where there are also granted most great Indulgences, appertaining as well also
to those invested with the Habit of the Servants of S. Mary, as to any others,
it is requisite in the next place I should put down them, which are as follow.

The Particular Indulgences at many Churches of Rome, besides the Seven before
mentioned, granted by diverse Popes, and are daily to be gained, not only by
Holy Pilgrims, and others, devoutly visiting the same Churches, but also by the
Brothers and Sisters of the Society of the Habit of the Servants of our Lady.
IN the Church of the Holy Ghost, any day, there are Six thousand years
Indulgence.

In the Church of S. Anastatio, any day, six thousand years.

At S. Vito and Marcello, any day, six thousand years.

At S. Anges, any day, six thousand years Indulgence.

At S. Prassede they have any day twelve thousand years, and twelve thousand
times forty days space, and the forgiveness of the third part of their sins.

At S. Maria Scala Coeli, where are buried ten thousand Martyrs, there are any
day 10000 years Indulgence.

At St. Bibiana, where are buried nine thousand Martyrs, besides Women and
Children, any day there are ninety thousand years Indulgence.

At St. Alessio, any day there are an hundred years, and one hundred times
forty days space.

At St. Balbina, any day there are seven years Indulgence.

At St. Gregory, any day forty years, and forty times forty days space, and
likewise the forgiveness of the third part of every ones sins.

At St. Matthew Apostle, in Merula, any day a thousand years, and a thousand
times forty days space, and the forgiveness of the seventh part of every ones
sins.

At the Chapel del Salvatore in San Luigi nel Rion di St. Sustachio, any day
they have a plenary Remission of their sins.

At St. Lucia della Chiavica del Rione di Ponte, there is any day a plenary
Indulgence granted by very many Popes.

At St. Cosmo and Damiano, any day as many times as they enter into the Church,
they have so many years Indulgence granted by Pope Gregory the First.

At St. Girolamo, near the Palace of Monsignor Illustrissimo Farnese, any day
there is a plenary Indulgence.

At St. Mario del Pianto, any day is a Plenary Indulgence.

At St. Catherine de Fornari, the Monastery delle Citelle, any day there is a
Pardon.

At St. Peter's, in Carcere Pulliano, any day they have a thousand two hundred
Indulgences, and the Remission of the third part of their sins, and in Festival
days they have twice as many.

At St. Clement, any day they have forty years, and forty times forty days
space of Indulgence, granted by Pope Gelasio, and Alexander the Third, and the
forgiveness of the third part of their sins, and in Lent they are all doubled.

At St. Rocco a Ripetta, any day there is a Plenary Indulgence granted by Pope
Pius the Fourth, and many other Popes.

At the place where St. Peter said Domine, quo vadis, any day there are many
Indulgences.

At St. Eusebio, any day there are seven thousand eight hundred years, and
seven thousand eight hundred times forty days space of Indulgence.

At St. Pudentiana there are more than three thousand Bodies of Holy Martyrs,
buried in the Cemitery of St. Priscilla; and there for each body, any day, is
one year, and once forty days space of Indulgence, and the Remission of the
third part of every ones sins, granted by blessed Simpliciano Pope.

At Madonna della Trinita in S. Salvatore, there is any day a great pardon.

At Madonna di Monferrato, near Corte Savella, there are any day infinite
Indulgences.

At S. Maria libera nos a poenis Inferni, S. Silvester the Pope granted any day
eight years Indulgence.

At the Chapel of S. Mary Imperatrice toward S. John Lateran, there is the
Image of S. Mary the Virgin, which spoke to S. Gregory, and he granted to each
one that should say there three Pater-noster's and three Ave-Maria's, for every
time they should say the same, seventeen years Indulgence.

At S. Maria del' Horto, near Ripa, is an Hospital for the sick, and there is a
plenary Indulgence.

At S. Maria de miracoli a canto le mura della Porta del Popolo, there is a
plenary Indulgence.

At S. James in Augusta every Saturday in the year they have the forgiveness of
the third part of their sins; and upon the day of the Annunciation, and the
first day of May, and the Anniversary of any one dead, they have a plenary
Remission, and many other Privileges.

At S. John Aino, near Corte Savella, every second Sunday in each Month, and
many other days in the year, is a plenary Indulgence.

M. S. Maria Liberatione which is in Fore Romano there are any day
eleven-thousand years Indulgence.

In the Church of the Order of the Minims, alias S. Francesco di Paula, called
the Trinity, from the twenty second day of Lent, until after the Octave of the
Resurrection, whosoever says three Pater-noster's and three Ave-Maria's to the
honor of the holy Trinity, does obtain any day a thousand years Indulgence,
granted by Pope Leo the Tenth.

And any Sunday of Lent, visiting the said Church, and saying three
Pater-noster's and three Ave-Maria's, they gain a plenary Indulgence, granted
by Leo the Tenth: And from Easter-Eve at night, until Sunrising the next
Morning, saying there Pater-noster's, and three Ave-Maria's, to the honor of
the holy Trinity, they obtain a plenary Indulgence granted by the same Pope
Leo: And from Whitson Eve at night until Whitsunday at night, and from the
Evening before Trinity-Sunday, until Trinity-Sunday at night, saying three
Pater-noster's and three Ave-Maria's in honor as aforesaid, they gain a
plenary Indulgence.

Moreover in the said Church, any second Sunday of the Month, every month
throughout the whole year, there is a plenary Indulgence granted by Pope Sisto
the Fourth.

In S. Maria de gli Angioli, there are granted by Pope Pio the Fourth, the same
Privileges, the same Stations, and the same Indulgences, which are to be had
at Santa Croce in Jerusalem: and moreover there is given to all that shall
visit the said Church, in the days of the Nativity and Resurrection of our
Lord, and the day of Pentecost, and the days of the Nativity, Purification and
Assumption of our Lady, and in the day of the Dedication of the same Church, a
plenary Indulgence.

Here follows a Summary of the Indulgences and Stations in the Churches
within and without Rome, besides the Indulgences of the Seven Churches, and of
the other before mentioned; the which Indulgences and Stations are appointed
from day to day, from month to month, and from time to time, according to the
Circle of the year: And the Indulgences are communicated, not only to devout
Pilgrims, and others visiting the Churches where the same are to be obtained,
but also to the Society of the Habit of the Servants of S. Mary.
JANVARY.
THE first day, to wit, the Solemnity of the Circumcision of our Savior Jesus
Christ, is a Station to the Church of St. Maria in Trastevere ad Fontes Olei,
and there they have twenty five thousand years Indulgences, and a plenary
Remission of their sins, granted by Pope Celestine the Second.

The same day there is a plenary Indulgence at these four Churches: to wit, The
Church of S. Maria Maggiore, The Church of S. Maria in Araceli, The Church of
S. Mark, And the Church of Saint John Lateran.


The day of the Epiphany of our Savior Jesus Christ, which is the sixth day,
there is a Station to the Church of S. Peter, and there they have twenty eight
thousand years, and twenty eight thousand times forty days space of
Indulgences, and the forgiveness of the third part of their sins: And thus it
continues during the Octave.

At the Church of S. Spirito in Sassia, are the same day ten thousand years
Indulgence: and thus it continues also during the Octave, granted by Pope
Boniface the Seventh.

At the Church of S. Maria Maggiore, the same day, there is a plenary
Indulgence.

The day of S. Giuliano Martyr, which is the seventh day, at his Church there
is a plenary Indulgence.

The day of the Octave of the Epiphany, which is the thirteenth day, is a
Station to S. Peter's, and there is a plenary Indulgence.

Also the same day is a Station to the Church of S. Mark, and there is a
plenary Indulgence, granted by Pope Paul the Second.

The day of S. Faelix Martyr, which is the fourteenth day, is a Station to the
Church of S. Sebastian; and there are ten thousand years Indulgence.

The day of S. Paul the first Eremite, which is the fifteenth day, is a Station
to the Church of S. Trinity, and there is a plenary Indulgence.

The day of the Feast of the five Holy Martyrs of the Order of the Minors, and
of S. Macello Pope and Martyr, which is the sixteenth day, there is at the
Church of S. Sebastian ten thousand years Indulgence; and moreover every one
has the remission of all his sins.

The day of S. Anthony Abbot, which is the seventeenth day, there is at his
Church a plenary Indulgence.

At S. Maria Maggiore, the same day, they have remission of all their sins.

The day of S. Peter's Chair, instituted by Pope Paul the Fourth, in the year
1557. which is the eighteenth day, is a Station to the Church of S. Peter, and
there is a plenary Indulgence, and they show the Chair, and the Holy Vault.

The same day, it being the day also of S. Prisca, is a Station to her Church,
and there is a plenary Indulgence.

The second Sunday after Epiphany is a Station to San Spirito in Sassia, and
there they have three thousand years Indulgence, and three thousand times forty
days space, and the forgiveness of the third part of their sins.

The day of S. Fabian and S. Sebastian, which is the twentieth day, is a
Station to their Church, and there is a plenary Indulgence.

The day of S. Agnes Virgin, which is the twenty-first day, is a Station to her
Church, and there is a plenary Indulgence.

At S. Maria Maggiore they have remission of all their sins.

The day of S. Vincenzo and S. Anastasio, which is the twenty second day, is a
Station to their Church, and there is a plenary Indulgence.

The day of the Conversion of S. Paul, which is the twenty-fifth is a Station
to his Church, and there they have an hundred years, and an hundred times forty
days space of Indulgence; and moreover a plenary Indulgence.

The day of S. John Chrisostom, which is the twenty sixth day, is a Station to
his Church, and there is a plenary Indulgence.

Moreover the same day in the Church of S. Maria scala Coeli is a plenary
Indulgence.

The day of the second Feast of S. Agnes, which is the twenty eighth day, at
the Church of S. John Lateran, is a plenary Indulgence.

The day of S. Ciro and S. John, which is the one and thirtieth day, at their
Church there is a plenary Indulgence.

Moreover the same day is a Station to the Church of Santa Croce in Jerusalem,
and there is a plenary Indulgence.

The last Sunday of the Month of January is a Station also to the same Church
in memory of the invention of the Title of the Holy Cross, and there is a
plenary Indulgence granted by Pope Alexander the Sixth.

At the Church of S. Maria de gli Angioli, the same day, is the like Indulgence.

FEBRVARY.
THE day of S. Bridgit, which is the first day, there is a Station to her
Church, where is a plenary Indulgence.

Also, the same day there is a Station to the Church of S. Clement, in which is
the Body of S. Ignatio, and there is a plenary Indulgence.

The day of the purification of the glorious Virgin Mary, which is the second
day, is a Station to S. Maria Maggiore, and and there they have a Thousand
years Indulgence, and a plenary Remission of all their Sins.

Moreover the same day, is an Indulgence in these four Churches, to wit, At S.
Maria de li Angioli granted by Pope Pio the third. At S. Maria in via Lata, At
S. Maria della Pace, and, At S. Maria del Popolo is a plenary Indulgence
granted by Pope Sisto the fourth; and thus there is daily during the Octave of
the Feast.


The day of S. Blase, which is the third day, at his Church there is a plenary
Indulgence.

The day of S. Agatha, which is the fift-day, at her Church there is a plenary
Indulgence.

Also the same day at Santa Croce is a plenary Indulgence.

The day of S. Apollonia, which is the ninth day, at the Church of S. Luigi, is
a plenary Indulgence.

The day of S. Peter's Chair at Antioch, which is the twenty-second day, in the
Church of S. Peter, there is a plenary Indulgence, also an Indulgence of a
thousand years, and moreover an Indulgence of five hundred fifty eight thousand
nine hundred sixty eight years, and two hundred eighty five days.

The day of S. Mathias Apostle, which is the twenty-fourth day, there is at his
Church a plenary Indulgence.

Moreover in the Church of S. Peter, and in the Church of S. James and Philip,
in all the feasts of the Apostles, there are full remission of every ones Sins.

The same day is a Station to S. Maria Maggiore, where is the Body of S.
Mathias, and there is a plenary Indulgence: And moreover an Indulgence of one
hundred fifty six thousand two hundred and sixty years, and two hundred sixty
five days.

The day of S. Costanza, which the twenty-sixth day, is a Station to the Church
of S. Agnes, and there is a plenary Indulgence.

MARCH.
EVERY Friday in the Month of March, is a Station to the Church of S. Peter,
and there is a plenary Indulgence.

The day of S. Thomas of Aquine, which is the seventh day, at his Church, there
is a plenary Indulgence.

Also the same day at the Church of S. Maria Sophra la Minerva, is a plenary
Indulgence.

The day of S. Gregory Pope, which is the twelfth day, is a Station to his
Church, and there is a plenary Indulgence.

The same day also, in S. Peter's Church, there is a plenary Indulgence.

The day of S. Joseph, which is the nineteenth day, at the Church of S. Maria
Maggiore, is a plenary of Indulgence.

The day of the Vigil of S. Benedict, which is the twentieth day is a Station
to the Chapel of S. (...) there is a plenary Indulgence.

Also the same day there is a Station to the Church of Santa Croce in
Jerusalem, and there is a plenary Indulgence.

Moreover the same day at the Church of S. Maria de gli Angioli is the like
Indulgence.

The day of S. Benedict Abbot, which is the twenty-first day, at the Church of
S. Peter there are an hundred years of Indulgence, and moreover an Indulgence
of one hundred fifty nine thousand one hundred sixty four years, and forty
days.

The Annunciation of the blessed Virgin Mary, which is the twenty-fifth day, at
her Church there are Infinite Indulgences; and moreover Stations with plenary
Indulgences during the whole Octave of the feast.

Also the same day there is a plenary Indulgence at these Churches following;
to wit, S. Maria della pace, S. Maria del popolo. And S. Giacomo in Augusta.


Also the said day of the Annunciation in the Church of S. Peter are a thousand
years Indulgence.

The Indulgences which are daily in Lent, and Easter-Week.
1. THE first day of Lent is a Station to Santa Sabina, and there is a plenary
Indulgence.

2. The second day is a Station to the Church of S. Gregorio, and there are a
thousand years Indulgence.

3. The third day, is a Station to the Church of S. John, and Paul, and there
is a plenary Indulgence.

4. The fourth day is a Station to S. Trisone, and there are eight thousand
years Indulgence.

5. The fifth day, which is the first Sunday in Lent, is a Station to S. John
Lateran, and there they have eighteen thousand years Indulgence, and full
remission of all their sins.

6. Upon Monday is a Station to the Church of S. Peter in Vincula, and there
they have a thousand years Indulgence, and moreover a plenary remission of
their sins.

7. Upon Tuesday is a Station to the Church of S. Anastasia, and there is an
Indulgence (...) years, and of as many times forty days space, and the
deliverance of a soul from Purgatory.

8. Upon Wednesday is a Station to the Church of S. Maria Maggiore, and there
they have an Indulgence of twenty-eight thousand years, and of twenty-eight
thousand times forty days space, and the remission of the third part of their
sins.

9. Upon Thursday is a Station to the Church of S. Lawrence in Palisperna,
which is the place where S. Laurence was broiled, and there they have ten years
Indulgence, and plenary remission of their sins.

10. Upon Friday is a Station to the Church of S. Apostolo, where inhabit the
Friars Minors, and there they have twelve thousand years Indulgence, and the
forgiveness of all their sins.

11. Upon Saturday is a Station to the Church of S. Peter, and there they have
an Indulgence of eighteen thousand years, and of eighteen thousand times forty
days space, and moreover a plenary remission of their sins.

The same day at the Church of S. Maria del Popolo, and at the Church of S.
Maria della Pace, there is a Plenary Indulgence, and the same there is every
Saturday in Lent.

12. The second Sunday in Lent, is a Station to the Church of S. Maria della
Navicella, and there they have eighteen thousand years, and eighteen thousand
times forty days space of Indulgence.

13. Upon Monday is a Station to the Church of S. Clement, and there they have
eleven thousand years Indulgence, and the forgiveness of the third part of
their sins.

14. Upon Tuesday is a Station to the Church of S. Balbina, and there are ten
thousand years Indulgence.

15. Upon Wednesday is a Station to the Church of S. Cecilia, and there are ten
thousand years Indulgence.

16. Upon Thursday is a Station to the Church of S. Maria in Transtevere, and
there are ten thousand years Indulgence.

17. Upon Friday is a Station to the Church of S. Vitale, and there are ten
thousand years Indulgence.

18. Upon Saturday is a Station to the Church of San Pietro, and Marcellino,
and there each has ten thousand years Indulgence, and the full remission of
his sins; and moreover, the delivering of a Soul from Purgatory.

19. The third Sunday in Lent is a Station to San Lorenzo, fuori della Mura,
and there is an Indulgence of nineteen thousand years, and of forty eight times
forty days space, and the deliverance of a Soul from Purgatory.

20. Upon Monday is a Station to the Church of S. Mark, and there are ten
thousand years Indulgence.

21. Upon Tuesday there is a Station to the Church of S. Potentiana, and there
are ten thousand years Indulgence.

22. Upon Wednesday is a Station to the Church of S. Sisto, and there are ten
thousand years Indulgence.

23. Upon Thursday is a Station to the Church of S. Cosmo and Damiano, and
there are ten thousand years Indulgence.

The same day at night, at the Church of S. Maria del Popolo, and S. Maria
della Pace, there is a Plenary Indulgence; and the like is there every day to
be had, until after the Octave of Easter.

At the Church of S. Maria del Pianto, upon the same day also is a Plenary
Indulgence, granted by Pope Julio the second.

Moreover, at the said Churches of San Maria del Popolo, and della Pace, Pope
Sisto the fourth granted, from the midst of Lent, until after the Octave of
Easter, any day, a thousand years, and a thousand times forty days space of
Indulgence.

24. Upon Friday is a Station to S. Laurence in Lucina, and there are ten
thousand years Indulgence.

25. Upon Saturday is a Station to S. Laurence in Santa Susana, and there are
ten thousand years Indulgence.

The same day at the Churches both of S. Maria del Popolo, and S. Maria della
Pace, is a Plenary Indulgence.

26. The fourth Sunday in Lent is a Station to the Church of Santa Croce in
Jerusalem, and there is a Plenary Indulgence; and moreover, they deliver a
Soul from the Pains of Purgatory.

Also the same day at the Church of S. Maria de gli Angioli, they have a
Plenary Indulgence, and likewise they deliver a Soul from Purgatory.

27. Upon Monday is a Station to the Church of the Quatri Santi Coronati, and
there are ten thousand years Indulgence.

28. Upon Tuesday is a Station to the Church of S. Laurence in Damaso, and
there are ten thousand years Indulgence; and moreover, the remission of the
third part of every ones sins.

29. Upon Wednesday is a Station to the Church of S. Paul, and there they have
ten thousand years Indulgence, and the forgiveness of the third part of their
sins.

30. Upon Thursday is a Station to the Church of S. Sylvester, and there are
ten thousand years Indulgence.

Also the same day at the Church of S. Martin in Monte, there are ten thousand
years Indulgence, granted by Pope Paul the fourth.

31. Upon Friday is a Station to the Church of S. Eusebio, and there are ten
thousand years Indulgence.

32. Upon Saturday is a Station to S. Nicholas in Carcere, and there they have
ten thousand years Indulgence, and a Plenary remission of their sins.

The same day both at the Church of S. Maria del Popolo, and at the Church of
S. Maria della Pace, there is a Plenary Indulgence.

33. The fifth Sunday in Lent, called Passion Sunday, is a Station to S.
Peter's, and there they have an Indulgence of twenty eight thousand years, and
of as many times forty days space, and the forgiveness of the third part of
their sins.

34. Upon Monday is a Station to the Church of S. Grisogon, and there are ten
thousand years Indulgence.

35. Upon Tuesday there is a Station to the Church of S. Ciriaco, and there are
ten thousand years Indulgence.

36. Upon Wednesday is a Station to the Church of S. Marcello, where are the
Brothers of the Servants, and there are ten thousand years Indulgence.

37. Upon Thursday is a Station to the Church of S. Apollinare, and there are
ten thousand years Indulgence.

38. Upon Friday is a Station to the Church of S. Stephen in Monte Celio, and
there is the deliverance of a Soul from the Pains of Purgatory.

39. Upon Saturday is a Station to S. John ante Portam Latinam, and there are
thirteen thousand years Indulgence, and the delivering of a Soul from Purgatory.

At the Church of S. Maria del Popolo, and at the Church of S. Maria della
Pace, there is the same day a Plenary Indulgence.

40. The sixth Sunday in Lent, called Palm Sunday, is a Station to the Church
of S. John Lateran, and there they have twenty five thousand years, and twenty
five thousand times forty days space of Indulgence; and moreover, a plenary
remission of their sins.

The same day at the Church of S. Bartholemew nell' Isola, there are two
hundred years Indulgence.

Also the same day at night, at the Church of our Lady de Araceli, every day
until after the Octave of Easter, there is a Plenary Indulgence.

41. Upon Holy Monday is a Station to the Church of S. Parassede, and there
they have fifteen thousand years Indulgence, and the forgiveness of the third
part of their sins, and moreover a Plenary Indulgence.

At the Church of S. Mark, from Holy Monday until after Easter Tuesday, any day
there is a Plenary Indulgence, granted by Pope Paul the second.

42. Upon Holy Tuesday is a Station to the Church of S. Prisca, and there they
have eighteen thousand years Indulgence, and a plenary remission of their sins.

43. Upon Holy Wednesday is a Station to S. Maria Maggiore, and there they have
twenty thousand years Indulgence, and likewise a plenary remission of their
sins.

The same day is the morning, after they have sang High-Mass in the Church of
S. Peter, they show the Holy Vault.

44. Upon Holy Thursday is a Station to the Church of S. John Lateran, and
there they have eleven thousand years, and eleven thousand times forty days
space of Indulgence; and moreover, twice a plenary remission of their sins.

The same day the Pope washes the Feet of twelve poor People, and there is
read the Bull concerning the Supper of our Lord.

45. Upon Holy Friday is a Station to the Church of Santa Croce in Jerusalem,
and there they have a plenary remission of their sins.

At the Church of S. Maria de gli Angioli, the same day there is the like
Indulgence.

46. Upon Holy Saturday is a Station to S. John Lateran, and there they have
twelve thousand years Indulgence, and forty eight Quarantines, each of which is
forty days space; and moreover, they have a plenary remission of all their sins.

The same day at S. Maria del Popolo, and at S. Maria della Pace, they have
plenary remission of all their sins.

Upon Easter Day is a Station to S. Maria Maggiore, and there they have an
Indulgence of twenty eight thousand years, and of twenty eight thousand times
forty days space; and moreover, a plenary remission of their sins.

At the Church of S. Maria de gli Angioli, the same day there is the like
Indulgence.

Moreover, the same day at the Church of S. Spirito in Sassia, there are two
thousand years Indulgence: And thus there are daily, until after the Octave of
Easter, granted by Pope Boniface the eighth.

Upon Easter Monday is a Station to the Church of S. Peter, and there they have
twenty eight thousand years Indulgence, and a plenary remission of their sins.

Upon Easter Tuesday there is a Station to the Church of S. Paul, and there
they have an Indulgence of twenty thousand years, and of twenty eight thousand
times forty days space, and a plenary remission of their sins.

Upon Easter Wednesday there is a Station to the Church of S. Laurence fuori le
Mura, and there is an Indulgence of eighteen thousand years, and of as many
times forty days space, and the deliverance of a Soul from Purgatory.

Upon Thursday is a Station to the Church of S. Apostolo, and there they have
fifteen thousand years Indulgence; and moreover, a plenary remission of their
sins.

Upon Friday is a Station to the Church of S. Maria Rotonda, and there are
fifteen thousand years Indulgence.

Upon Saturday is a Station to S. John Lateran, and there they have fifteen
thousand years Indulgence, and twice a plenary remission of their sins. And
this is the day in which the Pope blesses the Agnus Dei's made with white Wax.

Upon the Sunday of the Octave of Easter, is a Station to the Church of S.
Pancratio, and there they have fifteen thousand years Indulgence; and moreover,
twice a plenary remission of their sins.

Moreover, also the same day at the Church of S. John Lateran, there is a
Plenary Indulgence.

The Friday after the Octave of Easter, at the Church of S. Maria Rotonda,
there is a Plenary Indulgence.

The Sunday following, to wit, the second Sunday after Easter, at the Church of
S. Peter, is a Plenary Indulgence.

APRIL.
AT the Church of S. Peter, any day they have twelve thousand years Indulgence,
and twelve thousand times forty days space, and the remission of the third part
of their sins: And thus they have, until after the first of August.

At the Church della Nonciata, any day there are a thousand years Indulgence;
and thus it continues until after the first day of August.

The first day of April, which is the Octave of the Annunciation, at the same
Church there is a Plenary Indulgence.

At the Church of S. Maria del Popolo, the same day there is a Plenary
Indulgence.

The day of S. Maria Egittiaca, which is the second day, at her Church there is
a Plenary Indulgence.

The day of S. Pancratio Bishop, which is the third day, they have at his
Church a plenary remission of all their sins.

The day of S. Vicenzo Confessor, who was of the Order of the Dominican Friars,
at his Church, there is a Plenary Indulgence.

The day of S. George, which is the twenty third day, is a Station to his
Church, and there they have a plenary remission of their sins, and also a
thousand years Indulgence: and moreover, an hundred fifty four thousand nine
hundred and thirteen years, and two hundred and sixty days.

The same day at the Church of S. Peter, there is a Plenary Indulgence.

The day of S. Mark Evangelist, is a Station to his Church, and there is a
Plenary Indulgence.

Moreover, the same day, at the Church of S. Peter, is a Plenary Indulgence;
and also an Indulgence of an hundred fifty four thousand nine hundred and
ninety years, and of two hundred and nine days: And moreover, when the Priests
and Brothers go there the same day in Procession, there are twenty eight
thousand years, and twenty eight thousand times forty days space of Indulgence.

The day of S. Vitale, which is the twenty ninth day, is a Station to his
Church, and there is a Plenary Indulgence.

The day of S. Peter Martyr, which is the same day, at the Church of S. Maria
della Minerva, is a Plenary Indulgence.

Moreover, the same day is a Station to the Church of S. Mark, and there they
have a plenary remission of their sins.

MAY.
AT the Church Della Nonciata, any day, there are a thousand years Indulgence,
and it continues thus until after the first of August.

At the Church of S. Peter, any day, they have an Indulgence of twelve thousand
years, and of twelve thousand times forty days space, and the remission of the
third part of their sins: And thus they have, until after the first of August.

Every Sunday in the Month of May, at the Church of S. Sebastiano, is a Plenary
Indulgence.

The day of S. James, and Philip Apostles, which is the first day of May, at
their Church there is a plenary remission of all sin; and so there is in all
the Feasts of the Apostles.

At the Church of S. Peter is the like Indulgence.

Moreover, the same day is a Plenary Indulgence at these three Churches: to
wit, Santo Apostolo. Santa Maria Maggiore, and San Giacomo in Augusta.


The day of the Invention of the Holy Cross, which is the third day, there is a
Station to Santa Croce in Jerusalem, and there they have remission of all
their sins, and moreover infinite Indulgences, and it continues thus during
the Octave of the same Feast.

At the Church of S. Maria de gli Angioli is the like Indulgences; and at the
Church of S. Maria Rotonda is a plenary remission of every ones sins, it being
the day of the Consecration of the same Church.

Moreover, the same day at the most Holy Crucifix, in the Church of S.
Marcello, there is a Plenary Indulgence granted by Pope Gregory the thirteenth.

The day of S. Monica, Mother of S. Augustine, which is the fourth day, at the
Church of S. Augustine there is a Plenary Indulgence, and moreover also
infinite Indulgences.

The day of S. John ante Portam Latinam, which is the sixth day, they have in
his Church a plenary remission of their sins.

At S. Maria Maggiore, the same day there is a Plenary Indulgence, and the
deliverance of a Soul from Purgatory.

Moreover, the same day is a Station to S. John Lateran, and there every one
has a plenary remission of his sins, and delivers a Soul from Purgatory.

The day of the Apparition of S. Michael, at his Church they have a plenary
remission of their sins.

The same day at S. Maria Maggiore is a Plenary Indulgence.

Moreover, from this day to the end of the Calends of August, at the Church of
S. John Lateran, any day, there are three times a Plenary Indulgence.

The day of the Octave of the Feast of the Holy Cross, which is the tenth day,
at the Church of Santa Croce is a Plenary Indulgence.

The same day, at the Church of S. Maria de li Angioli, there is a Plenary
Indulgence.

The day of S. Nereo and Archileo, which is the twelfth day, at their Church
there is a Plenary Indulgence.

The same day also, at the Church of S. Paul, there is a Plenary Indulgence.

The day of S. Vittore and Corona, which is the fourteenth day, at their Church
there is a Plenary Indulgence.

The day of S. Potentiana, which is the nineteenth day, at her Church there is
a Plenary Indulgence.

The day of S. Bernardino, which is the twentieth day, is a Station to the
Church of S. Maria in Araceli, and there is a Plenary Indulgence.

The day of S. Helena, which is the twenty first day, at her Church is a
Plenary Indulgence.

The day of S. Petronilla Virgin, they have at S. Peter's a thousand years, and
a thousand times forty days space of Indulgence.

And note, that from the day of S. Bernardino aforesaid, until after the first
day of August, at the Church of S. John Lateran, they have any day a plenary
remission of their sins.

The Indulgences in Ascension and Whitsun-Week.
UPon Letany Monday, that is to say, the Monday before the Feast of the
Ascension of our Lord, they go in Procession to the Church of S. Peter, and
there they have twenty eight thousand years, and twenty eight thousand times
forty days space of Indulgence.

Upon Letany Tuesday, at the Church of S. John Lateran, there is an Indulgence
of twenty eight thousand years, and of twenty eight thousand times forty days
space.

Upon Letany Wednesday, at S. Maria Maggiore, they have an Indulgence of twenty
eight thousand years, and of twenty eight thousand times forty days space, and
the remission of all their sins, granted by Pope Pio the second, because that
upon that day they celebrate the Translation of S. Girolamo.

Upon Thursday, which is the day of the Ascension of our Lord, at the Church of
S. Peter, there is an Indulgence of twenty eight thousand years, and of twenty
eight thousand times forty days space; and moreover, a Plenary Indulgence.

Also the same day, at the Church of San Spirito in Sassia, there are twenty
eight thousand eight hundred years Indulgence, granted by Boniface the eighth.

Upon Whitsun-Eve is a Station to the Church of S. John Lateran, and there they
have fifteen thousand years Indulgence, and a plenary remission of their sins.

Upon Whit-Sunday is a Station to the Church of S. Peter, and there is a
plenary remission of their sins, and moreover infinite Indulgences.

At the Church of S. Maria de gli Angioli, the same day, they have a plenary
forgiveness of their sins.

Moreover, the same day, at the Church of San Spirito in Sassia, they have an
Indulgence of four thousand years, and of eight hundred times forty days space,
and the remission of the seventh part of their sins, granted by Pope Alexander
the fourth.

Upon Whitsun-Monday is a Station to the Church of S. Peter in Vincula, and
there they have a plenary remission of their sins.

Also the same day, at the Church of S. Maria de gli Angioli, is a Plenary
Indulgence.

Upon Whitsun-Tuesday is a Station to the Church of S. Anastasia, and there is
an Indulgence of eighteen thousand years, and moreover a Plenary Indulgence.

Upon Ember-Wednesday is a Station to S. Maria Maggiore, and there they have an
Indulgence of twenty eight thousand years, and of twenty eight thousand times
forty days space, and the remission of the third part of their sins; and
moreover, a Plenary Remission.

Upon Thursday is a Station to S. Laurence Juorile Mura, and there they have an
Indulgence of eighteen thousand years, and of eighteen thousand times forty
days space, and the remission of the third part of their sins; and moreover, a
plenary remission, and the delivering of a Soul from Purgatory.

Upon Ember-Friday is a Station to S. Apostolo, and there they have eighteen
thousand years Indulgence, and a plenary remission of their sins.

Upon Ember-Saturday is a Station to the Church of S. Peter, and there they
have an Indulgence of eighteen thousand years, and of eighteen thousand times
forty days space, and the forgiveness of the third part of their sins; and
moreover, a plenary remission, and the deliverance of a Soul from Purgatory.

Also the same day, at the Church of S. John Lateran, is a Plenary Indulgence.

Upon Corpus Christi-day is a Station to the Church of S. Peter, and there they
have a plenary remission of their sins, and it continues during the Octave of
the Feast: And moreover, they have other Indulgences granted by Pope Urban the
fourth to them, that then, and during the Octave, shall be found present at
Divine Offices.

Moreover, the same day is a Station to San Spirito in Sassia, and there they
have a thousand years Indulgence, and the remission of the seventh part of
their sins, and it continues during the Octave.

The day of the Octave of Corpus Christi is a Station to S. Mark, and there is
a Plenary Indulgence granted by Pope Paul the Second.

JUNE.
AT the Church della Nonciata, any day, there are a thousand years Indulgence;
and thus it continues until after the first of August.

At the Church of S. Peter, they have any day twelve thousand years, and twelve
thousand times forty days space of Indulgence, and the remission of third part
of their sins: And thus it continues also, until after the first day of August.

At the Church of S. John Lateran, any day, they have a plenary remission of
their sins: And thus it likewise continues until after the first of August.

The day of S. Marcellin, Peter, and Erasmo, which is the second day, is a
Station to S. Marcellino, and there is a Plenary Indulgence.

The same day at the Church of S. Peter, there are a thousand years Indulgence.

The second Sunday of June is a Statio ut S. Maria della Consolatione, and
there they have a plenary remission of their sins, granted by Pope Sisto the
fourth.

The day of S. Barnabas, which is the eleventh day, is a Station to his Church,
and there is a Plenary Indulgence.

The same day at S. Peter's there are six hundred years Indulgence.

The day of S. Anthony, Confessor of the Order of S. Francis, which is the
thirteenth day, is a Station to S. Maria in Araceli, and there they have a
plenary remission of their sins, granted by Pope Gregory the ninth.

The day of S. Vito, Modesto, and Crescentio, which is the fifteenth day, is a
Station to the Church of S. Vito in Macello, and there they have six thousand
years Indulgence.

The same day at the Church of S. Paul, they have an hundred years, and an
hundred times forty days space of Indulgence.

The day of S. Paulino, Bishop and Confessor, which is the twenty second day,
at the Church of S. John Lateran, there are seven thousand years Indulgence.

The day of the Nativity of S. John the Baptist, which is the twenty fourth
day, at the Church of S. John Lateran, they have a plenary remission of their
sins and an Indulgence of one hundred fifty four thousand nine hundred eighty
five years, and forty five days, and the delivering of a Soul from Purgatory,
granted by Leo the tenth: But the same Pope has willed, that whosoever gains
this Indulgence, shall say a Corona for his Holiness.

The same day at the Church of S. John de Fiorentini, is a Plenary Indulgence.

The day of S. John and Paul, which is the twenty sixth day, at the Church of
S. John Lateran, are a thousand years Indulgence.

The day of S. Leo Pope, which is the twenty eighth day, at S. Peter's they have
a thousand years, and a thousand times forty days space of Indulgence: And
moreover, it being the Vigil of S. Peter and Paul, they have a plenary
remission of their sins.

The day of S. Peter and Paul Apostles, which is the twenty ninth day, is a
Station to the Church of S. Peter, and there is a Plenary Indulgence; and so
likewise there is in all the Feasts of the Apostles.

Moreover, at the Church of the said two Apostles the same day, besides a
Plenary Indulgence, there are one hundred fifty nine thousand nine hundred
sixty three years, and forty five days of Indulgence.

At the Church of S. Philip and James, the same day, there is a Plenary
Indulgence.

The day of the Commemoration of S. Paul, which is the thirtieth day, is a
Station to the Church of S. Paul, and there they have a plenary remission of
their sins; and moreover, infinite Indulgences.

JVLY.
AT the Church della Nonciata, any day, there are a thousand years Indulgence;
and thus it continues until after the first of August.

At S. Peter's, any day, there are twelve thousand years Indulgence, and twelve
thousand times forty days space, and the forgiveness of the third part of their
sins: And thus also it continues until after the first day of August.

At S. John Lateran, any day, they have a Plenary remission of their sins; and
it continues, as aforesaid.

The Octave of S. John Baptist, which is the first day of July, at the Church
of S. John Lateran, there is a Plenary Indulgence.

The day of the Visitation of the blessed Virgin Mary, which is the second day,
is a Station to S. Maria del Popolo, and there they have a plenary remission of
their sins, granted by Pope Sisto the fourth; and it continues thus the whole
Octave of the Feast.

The same day, at the Church of S. Maria della Pace, they have a plenary
remission of their sins, and moreover innumerable Indulgences; and thus they
have, during the whole Octave of the same Feast.

Moreover also the same day, at the Church of S. Maria de gli Angioli, are the
like Indulgences.

The day of the Octave of S. Peter and Paul, which is the sixth day, at the
Church of S. Peter is a Plenary Indulgence.

The day of the Division of the Apostles, which is the ninth day, at S. Peter's
there are twelve thousand years Indulgence.

The day of S. Bonaventure, which is the fourteenth day, at the Church of S.
Peter is a Plenary Indulgence.

The day of S. Quirico, which is the fifteenth day, at his Church there is a
Plenary Indulgence.

The day of S. Alessio, which is the seventeenth day, is a Station to his
Church, and there they have a plenary remission of their sins.

Moreover, the same day, at the Church of S. John Lateran, is a Plenary
Indulgence.

The day of S. Simphorasa, which is the eighteenth day, at the Church of S.
Angelo in Pescaria, is a Plenary Indulgence.

The day of S. Margarita, which is the twentieth day, at her Church is a
Plenary Indulgence.

Moreover, the same day at Santa Croce are an hundred years Indulgence.

The day of S. Prassede Virgin, which is the twenty first day, at her Church
are six thousand years Indulgence.

The same day, at the Church of S. Peter, are two thousand years Indulgence.

Moreover, the same day also at the Church of S. Peter, it being the Octave of
S. Bonaventure, there is a Plenary Indulgence granted by Pope Sisto the fourth.

The day of S. Mary Magdalen, which is the twenty second day, is a Station to
her Church, and there they have a plenary remission of their sins, granted by
Clement the seventh, and Paul the fourth.

At the Church of S. Maria Maggiore, the same day they have a Plenary
Indulgence.

At the Church of S. Celso in Banchi, the same day also they have a plenary
remission of their sins, and moreover infinite Indulgences.

Moreover, the same day, at the Church of S. Lazarus, there are many Pardons.

The day of S. Apollinare Martyr, which is the twenty third day, at his Church
there is a Plenary Indulgence.

The same day, at the Church of S. John Lateran, are an hundred years
Indulgence.

The day of S. Crestina, Virgin and Martyr, which is the twenty fourth day, at
the Church of S. Maria Maggiore there are forty years Indulgence; and at the
Church of S. Mary Magdalen forty eight years.

The day of S. James Apostle, which is the twenty fifth day, is a Station to
his Church, and there they have a plenary remission of their sins.

At S. Maria Maggiore, the same day, there is a Plenary Indulgence.

Moreover, the same day, and in all the Feasts of the Apostles, there is at the
Church of S. Peter, and at the Church of S. Philip and James, a Plenary
Indulgence.

The day of S. Anne, which is the twenty sixth day, at her Church there is a
Plenary Indulgence.

The day of S. Pantaleone, which is the twenty seventy day, at his Church there
is a Plenary Indulgence.

The same day, at the Church of S. Maria Maggiore, there are forty years
Indulgence.

The day of S. Nazario and Celso, which is the twenty eighth day, at the Church
of Santa Croce, there are three hundred years Indulgence.

The same day, at S. Maria de gli Angioli, is the like Indulgence.

The day of S. Martha, which is the twenty ninth day, at her Church there is a
Plenary Indulgence.

The same day, at the Church of S. Sebastian, there are five thousand years
Indulgence.

The day of S. Abdon and Sennen, which is the thirtieth day, at the Church of
S. Mark, they have plenary remission of their sins.

AUGUST.
THe day of S. Peter in Vincula, which is the first day of August, is a Station
to his Church, and there they have a plenary remission of their sins for eight
days following.

The same day, at the Church of della Nonciata, they have a thousand years
Indulgence.

At the Church of S. Peter, the same day, they have an Indulgence of twelve
thousand years, and of as many times forty days space, and the forgiveness of
the third part of their sins.

Moreover, at S. John Lateran, the same day, they have a plenary remission of
their sins.

The day of the Dedication of S. Maria de gli Angioli, or della Portiuncula,
the which was the first Church of the Order of S. Francis, at the Church of S.
Maria Maggiore is a Plenary Indulgence.

The day of the finding out of S. Stephen, which is the third day of August, is
a Station to the Church of S. Laurence without the Wall, and there they have a
plenary remission of their sins.

The day of S. Domedico, which is the fourth day, is a Station to the Church of
Minerva, and there is a Plenary Indulgence.

The day of the Feast of S. Maria della Neve, which is the fifth day, at the
Church of S. Maria Maggiore is a Plenary Indulgence.

The same day, at the Church of S. Maria de gli Angioli, they have a plenary
remission of their sins.

Moreover also the same day, at S. Maria della Pace, they have a Plenary
Indulgence.

The day of the Transfiguration of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, which is
the sixth day, is a Station to S. John Lateran, and there is a Plenary
Indulgence.

The same day at Santa Croce in Jerusalem, it being also the Feast of S.
Sisto, there are very many Indulgences.

Also the same day, at S. Maria de gli Angioli, are the like Indulgences.

The day of S. Ciriaco, Largo, and Smaragdo, which is the eighth day, at the
Church of S. Ciriaco, they have a plenary remission of their sins.

The same day, at the Church of S. Sebastiano, are a thousand years Indulgence.

The day of S. Laurence, which is the tenth day, at the Church of S. Laurence
without the Wall, they have an Indulgence of an hundred years, and of as many
times forty days space, and a plenary remission of their sins; and it
continues thus during the Octave of the same Feast.

Moreover, in the said Church, they have daily, during the said Octave, one
hundred fifty eight thousand, and six hundred fifty eight years, and two
hundred eighty five days, and any day, a thousand years, and a Plenary
Indulgence, and the remission of the third part of their sins.

The day of S. Clare, of the Order of S. Francis, which is the twelfth day, is
a Station to the Church of S. Sylvester, and there they have plenary remission
of their sins.

The same day, at S. Maria Maggiore, is a Plenary Indulgence; and at Santa
Croce an hundred years Indulgence.

The day of S. Eusebio Confessor, which is the fourteenth day, at his Church
there are a thousand years Indulgence.

The same day, at S. Maria Maggiore, are a thousand years Indulgence.

The Vigil of the Assumption of our Lady, at S. Maria del Popolo, at Vespers,
is a Plenary Indulgence.

The day of the Feast of the said Assumption, which is the fifteenth day, is a
Station to S. Maria Maggiore, and there they have a thousand years Indulgence,
and a plenary remission of their sins; and thus it continues the whole Octave.

At S. Maria del Popolo is a Plenary Indulgence, and the same continues daily
as above, granted by Pope Sisto the fourth.

Moreover, the same day is a Plenary Indulgence at S. Maria Maggiore,

At S. Maria Araceli,

At S. Maria de gli Angioli,

And at S. Maria della Pace.

Moreover, at S. Spirito in Sassia, the same day, are two thousand years
Indulgence; and thus it continues, during the whole Octave, granted by Pope
Innocent the sixth.

Note also, that from the said Feast, until after the day of the Nativity of
our Lady, which is the eighth day of September, at S. Maria Maggiore they have
any day twelve years Indulgence, and the forgiveness of the third part of their
sins.

Moreover, at the Church of S. Peter, the day of the said Assumption, and every
day during the Octave, there are eight hundred fifty one thousand, one hundred
sixty two years, and an hundred days of Indulgence.

The day of S. Rocco, which is the sixteenth day, at his Church there is a
Plenary Indulgence.

The Sunday after the Octave of the Assumption is a Station to the Church of S.
Maria de Araceli, and there is a Plenary Indulgence.

The day of S. Lodovico Confessor, of the Order of S. Francis, which is the
nineteenth day, is a Station to S. Maria de Araceli, and there they have
remission of all their sins.

The day of S. Anastatio Martyr, which is the twenty first day, is a Station to
his Church, and there they have remission of all their sins.

The Octave of the Assumption of our Lady, which is the twenty second day, is a
Station to S. Maria in Transtevere, and there is a Plenary Indulgence.

The day of S. Bartholomew Apostle, which is the twenty fourth day, is a
Station to his Church, and there is a plenary remission.

The same day, at S. John Lateran, is the like Indulgence.

Moreover, at S. Paul's, and at S. Philip's and James's, they have a plenary
remission of their sins; and so they have in every of the Feasts of the
Apostles.

The day of S. Lodovico, King of France, which is the twenty fifth day, is a
Station to S. Luigi, belonging to the French, and there is a Plenary Indulgence.

The day of S. Augustine Bishop, which is the twenty eighth day, at his Church
there is a Plenary Indulgence.

The same day, at S. Maria Maggiore, are a thousand years Indulgence.

The day of the Decollation of S. John Baptist, which is the twenty ninth day,
is a Station to his Church, and there is a Plenary Indulgence.

The same day, at the Church of S. John Lateran, is the like Indulgence.

SEPTEMBER
THe day of S. Egidio Abbot, which is the first day of September, is a Station
to his Church, and there is a Plenary Indulgence.

The Vigil of the Nativity of our Lady, which is the seventh day, there is in
the Evening, at the Church of S. Maria del Popolo, a Plenary Indulgence.

The day of the Nativity of our Lady, which is the eighth day, is a Station to
the Church of S. Maria Maggiore, and there they have a thousand years
Indulgence, and a plenary remissio of their sins.

Moreover, the same day at S. Maria Rotonda, they have an Indulgence Plenary,
and an Indulgence of one hundred fifty nine thousand seven hundred and ninety
years, and of one hundred eighty five days.

Also there is an Indulgence Plenary the same day at S. Maria de Araceli.

At S. Maria in Via Lata.

At S. Maria della Pace.

At S. Maria de gli Angioli.

At S. Maria del Popolo: And thus there is also, during the Octave of the same
Feast, granted by Pope Sisto the fourth.

At S. Spirito in Sassia, the same day, there are eight thousand eight hundred
years Indulgence; and thus there is daily, during the said Octave.

Moreover, the same day is a Station to S. Maria di Loreto in Rome, where there
is a Plenary Indulgence, both for the Living and Dead.

The day of S. Adrian Martyr, which is the eighth day also, at the Church of S.
Maria Maggiore, there are two hundred years Indulgence.

The day of S. Nicholas da Tolentino, which is the tenth day, is a Station to
S. Maria del Popolo, and there they have plenary remission of their sins.

The same day, at the Church of S. Augustine, is the like Indulgence.

Moreover, the Sunday between the day of S. Nicholas da Tolentino, and its
Octave, at the Church of S. Augustine, is a Plenary Indulgence, granted by Pope
Boniface the seventh.

The Feast of the Exaltation of the Holy Cross, which is the fourteenth day, is
a Station to Santa Croce in Jerusalem, and there they have a thousand and forty
years, and the remission of the third part of their Sins, and one hundred fifty
six thousand sixty four years, and forty five days of Indulgence, and moreover
the forgiveness of their sins during the Octave of the same Feast.

The same day at S. Maria de gli Angioli, they have a plenary Remission of
their sins, and thus they have daily during the Octave.

Moreover the same day at the Church of S. John Lateran in the Oratory of Santa
Croce, is a plenary Indulgence.

Moreover the same day also, at the most holy crucifix in the Church of S.
Marcello, is a plenary Indulgence granted by Pope Gregory the thirteenth.

The day of S. Eufemia Lucia, and Geminiano, at the Church of S. John Lateran,
are a thousand years Indulgence.

The Wednesday after the Feast of the Holy Cross, which is Ember- Wednesday, is
a Station to the Church of S. Maria Maggiore; and there they have an Indulgence
of eighteen thousand years, and of eighteen thousand times forty days space,
and the forgiveness of the third part of their sins.

The Friday after the said Wednesday is a Station to S. Apostolo, and there
they have eighteen thousand years Indulgence, and a plenary Remission of their
sins.

The Saturday following is a Station to S. Peter's, and there they have an
Indulgence of twenty eight thousand years, and of twenty eight thousand times
forty days space, and the Remission of the third part their sins, and each
delivers a Soul from Purgatory.

The day of S. Eustachio and his company, which is the twentieth day, at his
Church there is a plenary Indulgence.

The same day at the Church of S. Sebastian are thirteen years Indulgence.

The day of S. Matthew Apostle and Evangelist, which is the twenty first day,
is a Station to his Church, and there they have a plenary Remission of their
sins.

The same day at the Church of S. Laurence they have an Indulgence plenary, and
an hundred and thirty years Indulgence.

Moreover the same day at the Church of S. Peter, and at the Church of S.
Philip and James, is a plenary Indulgence.

The day of S. Cosmo and Damiano, which is the twenty-seventh day, at their
Church there is a plenary Indulgence after the manner of Jubily granted by Pope
Leo the tenth.

The same day at the Church of S. Sebastian is an Indulgence of seven thousand
years.

The day of S. Michael, which is the twenty-ninth day, is a Station to his
Church, and there they have a plenary Remission of their sins.

At S. Angelo in Pescaria the same day they have also a plenary Remission of
their sins.

Moreover the same day at S. Maggiore they have an Indulgence plenary, and one
hundred fifty four thousand nine hundred ninety one years, and two hundred and
nine days of Indulgence.

The day of S. Girolamo, which is the thirtieth day, at the Church of S. Maria
Maggiore they have a plenary Remission of their sins, and two thousand years of
Indulgence; and moreover two hundred fifty eight thousand seven hundred and
ninety years, and two hundred eighty five days of Indulgence.

OCTOBER.
THe day of the Feast of the blessed Father Serafico a holy Franciscan, which
is the fourth day of October, is a Station to the Church of S. Francis in
Transtevere, and there they have a plenary Remission of their sins; and thus
they have daily during the Octave of the Feast.

At the Church of S. Paul the same day they have one hundred eighty-five
thousand nine-hundred sixty-eight years, and two hundred eightyfive days of
Indulgence; and thus they have daily as above said.

The day of S. Calisto Pope and Martyr, which is the fourteenth day, at the
Church of S. Sebastian, because of the Cemitery of the said Pope, where are
buried one-hundred seventy four thousand Martyrs, of which eighteen were Popes,
there is a plenary indulgence.

The first sunday after the Feast of the abovesaid S. Calisto, is a Station to
S. Maria in Transtevere.

The day of S. Luke Evangelist, which is the eighteenth day, is a Station to
his Church, and there they have a plenary remission of their sins.

The same day at S. Maria Maggiere are a thousand years indulgence.

The day of S. Theodore, which is the twenty-third day, at his Church there is
a plenary Indulgence.

The day of S. Simeon and Jude Apostles, which is the twenty-eight day, is a
Station to the Church of S. Peter, and there they have a plenary remission of
their sins, and the same they have in all the Feasts of the Apostles.

The day of S. Philip and James, is the like Indulgence.

NOVEMBER
THe day of the Commemoration of all Saints, which is the first day of
November, is a Station to S. Maria Rotonda, and there they have one hundred
fifty five thousand nine hundred ninety two years, and an hundred days
Indulgence, and moreover an Indulgence plenary; and thus they have daily during
the Octave of the same Feast.

The same day at S. Spirito in Sassia they have an Indulgence of three thousand
years, and of three thousand times forty days space, granted by Pope Boniface
the twelfth, and thus they have daily until after the day of S. Leonard, which
is the sixth day of this month.

Also the same day at the Church of S. Prassede they have an hundred and twenty
thousand years, and an hundred and twenty times forty days space, and the
Remission of the third part of their sins.

And moreover at S. Babiana there are sixty thousand years Indulgence.

The day of the Commemoration of all the dead, which is the second day, is a
Station to the Church of S. Gregory, and there every one has a plenary
Remission of his sins; and thus he has every day during the Octave of the
Commemoration, and moreover he delivers a Soul from Purgatory.

The same day also, and at the same Church, there are an hundred fifty four
thousand nine hundred ninety one years, and two hundred days of Indulgence; and
thus there is daily during the Octave.

Moreover the same day also at S. Maria Maggiore, is a plenary Indulgence, and
thus there is daily during the Octave; and moreover each one takes as
aforesaid a Soul from Purgatory.

The same day also at S. James in Augusta is a plenary Indulgence.

Upon the Octave of any S. There is at S. Peter's a plenary Remission of their
sins.

The day of the four Santi Coronati, which is the eight day, at their Church
there is a plenary Indulgence.

The day of the Dedication of S. Salvatore, which is the ninth day, is a
Station to S. John Lateran, and there they have a plenary Remission of their
sins; an hundred years, and three hundred days; and moreover one hundred fifty
four thousand six hundred eighty three years, and two hundred eighty five days
of Indulgence.

The day of S. Triphone, which is the tenth day, at his Church there is a
plenary Indulgence.

The same day also, they Celebrate the Feast of S. Respicio and Ninfa, in which
at the Church of S. Laurence there are very many Indulgences.

The day of S. Martin, which is the Eleventh day, at his Church there is a
plenary Indulgence.

The same day at S. Sebastian are three hundred years, and three-hundred times
forty days space, of Indulgence.

At the Church of S. Peter, the same day, they have a plenary Remission of
their sins.

The day of the Dedication of S. Peter and Paul, which is the eighteenth day,
is a Station to the Church of S. Peter, and there they have a plenary Remission
of their sins, and an Indulgence of an eleven thousand years, and of an eleven
thousand times forty days space, and the Remission of the third part of their
sins; and moreover one hundred fifty nine thousand nine hundred sixty four
years, and two hundred eighty five days of Indulgence.

The same day at the Church of S. Paul they have an Indulgence of a thousand
years, and of a thousand times forty days space, and a plenary Remission of
their sins.

The day of S. Elizabeth Daughter to the King of Hungary, at Santa Croce are
ten thousand one hundred years Indulgence.

The same day at S. Maria de gli Angioli are ten thousand years Indulgence.

The day of the presentation of the blessed Virgin Mary in the Temple, which is
the twenty first day, is a Station to S. Maria Maggiore, and there they have a
thousand years Indulgence, and moreover a plenary Indulgence.

At the Church of S. Maria della Pace the same day is a plenary Indulgence.

The day of S. Cecilia, which is the twenty second day, at her Church there is
a plenary Indulgence.

The same day at S. Maria in Araceli, are twenty years Indulgence, and moreover
an Indulgence of one hundred fifty nine thousand seven hundred and ninety
years, and two hundred eighty five days.

The day of S. Clement Pope, which is the twenty third day, is a Station to his
Church, and there is a plenary Indulgence.

The same day at S. Peter's are one hundred fifty eight thousand nine hundred
sixty six years, and two hundred and fifty days of Indulgence.

Also the same day being the day of S. Felicita Martyr, at Santa Croce are
forty years Indulgence.

The day of S. Crisogono, which is the twenty fourth day, is a Station to his
Church, and there they have plenary Remission of their sins.

The same day at S. Maria Maggiore are a thousand years indulgence.

The day of S. Saturnino, which is the twenty ninth day, at the Church of S.
Sebastian are an hundred years Indulgence.

The day of S. Andrew Apostle, which is the thirtieth day, is a Station to the
Church of S. Peter, and there is a plenary Indulgence, as there is also in all
the Feasts of the Apostles; and moreover they have there a thousand years
Indulgence, and the Remission of the third part of their sins, and also one
hundred fifty nine thousand nine hundred seventy nine years, and forty five
days of Indulgence.

At the Church of S. James and Philip the same day they have a plenary
Remission of their sins.

At S. Andrews without Porta del Popolo, a Church built by Pope Julio the
third, is a plenary Indulgence both for the Living and the Dead.

Moreover the same day at S. Catharine de Fornari there is a plenary Jubily
granted by Pope Julio the third.

The Indulgences in the four Sundays of Advent.
THe first Sunday of Advent, is a Station to S. Maria Maggiore, and there they
have twenty eight thousand years Indulgence, and moreover the forgiveness of
the third part of their sins.

The same day at S. Peter's they have a plenary Remission of their sins.

The second Sunday of Advent is a Station to Santa Croce in Jerusalem, and
there they have eleven thousand years Indulgence, and a plenary Remission of
their sins.

The same day at S. Maria de gli Angioli is the like Indulgence.

The third Sunday of Advent is a Station to S. Peter's, and there they have
twenty eight thousand years Indulgence, and twenty eight thousand times forty
days space, and a plenary Remission of their sins.

The fourth Sunday of Advent is also a Station to S. Peter's, and there they
have a plenary Indulgence.

The same day at S. Apostolo they have twenty eight thousand years Indulgence,
and a plenary Remission of their sins.

DECEMBER.
THe day of S. Babina Virgin and Martyr, which is the second day of December,
is a Station to her Church, and there they have a plenary remission of their
sins.

The same day at S. Maria Maggiore are nine thousand years Indulgence.

The day of S. Barbara Virgin and Martyr, which is the fourth day, at her
Church there are sixteen thousand years Indulgence.

At Santa Croce the same day there are a thousand years Indulgence.

The day of S. Saba Abbot, which is the first day, at his Church there is a
plenary Remission of every ones sins.

The same day at S. Peter's are an hundred years Indulgence.

The day of S. Nicholas Bishop, which is the sixth day, is a Station to S.
Nicholas delle Carceri, and there they have a plenary Remission of their sins,
and moreover three hundred years, and three hundred times forty days space of
Indulgence; and also an Indulgence plenary.

The same day at Santa Croce in Jerusalem is a plenary Indulgence.

The same day also at S. Maria de gli Angioli is the like Indulgence.

The day of S. Ambrose, which is the seventh day, at his Church there is a
plenary Indulgence.

The same day at S. Peter's are a thousand years Indulgence.

The day of the Conception of the blessed Virgin Mary which is the eight day,
is a Station to S. Maria Maggiore, and there they have a thousand years
Indulgence, and a plenary Remission of their sins.

The same day at S. Maria Rotonda, and also at S. Maria de gli Angioli, is a
plenary Indulgence.

Moreover likewise there is a plenary Indulgence the same day, and likewise
daily during the Octave of the same Feast, these at three ensuing Churches; to
wit,

S. Maria in Araceli.

S. Maria del Popolo, and

S. Maria della Pace.

The day of S. Lucia Virgin and Martyr, which is the thirteenth day, at her
Church they have a plenary Remission of their sins.

The Wednesday after S. Lucia being Ember Wednesday is a Station to S. Maria
Maggiore, and there they have twenty eight thousand years Indulgence, and
twenty eight thousand times forty days space, and the Remission of the third
part of their sins, and moreover a plenary Indulgence.

The Friday following the said Wednesday, is a Station to S. Apostolo, and
there they have ten thousand years Indulgence, and a plenary Remission of their
sins.

Upon Saturday in the same week, it being Ember Saturday, is a Station to S.
Peter's, and there they have twenty eight thousand years, and twenty eight
thousand times forty days space of Indulgence.

The day of S. Thomas Apostle which is the twenty first day, at his Church they
have a plenary Remission of their sins.

The same day at the Church of S. Paul is a plenary Indulgence.

The same day also at the Church of S. Peter, and also at the Church of S.
Philip and James, is a plenary Indulgence; and thus there is also in all the
Feasts of the Apostles.

The Vigil of the Nativity of our Lord Jesus Christ, which is the twenty fourth
day, is a Station to S. Maria Maggiore, and there they have twenty eight
thousand years, and twenty eight thousand times forty days space of Indulgence,
and the Remission of the third part of their sins.

The Night of Christ's Nativity is a Station to the Chapel of Presepio in the
Church of S. Maria Maggiore, and there at the singing of the first Mass, they
have a plenary Remission of their sins.

At S. Maria in Araceli the same Night they have a plenary Remission of their
sins.

Upon the day of the Nativity of Christ, which is the twenty fifth day, at the
second Mass, is a Station to S. Anastasia, and there they have an Indulgence of
twenty eight thousand years, and of twenty eight thousand times forty days
space, and a plenary Remission of their sins.

At the third Mass, upon the day of Christ's Nativity is a Station to S. Maria
Maggiore, and there they have one hundred fifty nine thousand seven hundred and
ninety years, and two hundred eighty five days of Indulgence.

Also upon the day of Christ's Nativity is a Station to the Chapel of Presepio
in S. Maria Maggiore, and there they have an Indulgence of twenty eight
thousand years, and of twenty eight thousand times forty days space, and a
plenary Remission of their sins.

In each of the three Masses upon the day of Christ's Nativity, at the Church of
S. Maria Maggiore, is an Indulgence plenary, and moreover a thousand years
Indulgence.

Also the same day at S. Maria in Araceli, are all the said Indulgences. And at
S. Maria de gli Angioli is a plenary Indulgence.

The day of S. Anastasia Martyr, which is also the day of Christ's Nativity, at
the Church of S. Maria Maggiore are a thousand years Indulgences.

The day of S. Stephen Proto-Martyr, which is the twenty sixth day, is a Station
to S. Laurence without the wall, where reposeth his holy Body, and there each
has a plenary Remission of his sins.

The same day at S. Stephen in Monte Celio, they have one hundred fifty four
thousand nine hundred ninety one years, and two hundred days of Indulgence, and
a plenary Remission of their sins.

Also the same day at the Church of the said S. Laurence, they have an
Indulgence of an hundred years, and of an hundred times forty days space, and
the Remission of the third part of their sins: and thus they have daily during
the Octave of the same Feast.

The day of S. John Apostle and Evangelist, which is the twenty seventh day, is
a Station to S. Maria Maggiore, and there is a plenary Remission of every ones
sins.

The same day also is a Station to the Church of S. John Lateran, and there
they have an Indulgence of twenty eight thousand years, and of twenty eight
thousand times forty days space, and a plenary Indulgence, and the delivering
of a Soul from Purgatory, and moreover Infinite Indulgences.

Moreover also the same day, both at the Church of S. Peter, and at the Church
of S. Philip and James, they have a plenary Remission of their sins. And at the
Church of S. Paul there are an hundred years Indulgence.

The day of the Holy Innocents, which is the twenty eight day, is a Station to
S. Paul's, and there they have an Indulgence of fifteen thousand years, and of
fifteen thousand times forty days space, and a plenary Remission of their sins;
and more over there are one hundred fifty five thousand two hundred ninety one
years, and two hundred days of Indnigence.

The day of S. Silvester, which is the thirty first day, is a Station to his
Church, and there is a plenary Indulgence.

The same day at the Church of S. John Lateran is an Indulgence plenary, and
moreover ten thousand years of Indulgence.

Also the same day at the Church of S. Maria in Transtevere, there are one
hundred fifty eight thousand nine hundred fifty eight years and two hundred
eighty five days of Indulgence.

Moreover there are many other great Indulgences any day in diverse places and
Churches of Rome, and in the Dedication of the Altars, and of the Churches, and
in diverse times, places, and Feasts of the Saints, which do greatly increase
the aforesaid Indulgences.

CLASS III. The Indulgences in the holy Land, which are gained not only by
devout Pilgrims, and such others as visit the sacred places where they are to
be obtained, but also by those invested with the habit of the holy order of the
Servants of our Lady.
The Indulgences at Mount Sion.
IN the place where Christ made his last Supper, is a plenary Indulgence.

In the Chapel of S. Thomas Apostle, where our Lord appeared to him, is a
plenary Indulgence.

In the Chapel where the Holy Ghost descended the Day of Pentecost, is a
plenary Indulgence.

In the place where our Lady died is a plenary Indulgence.

In the place where S. Matthias was elected Apostle, there are seven years and
seven times forty days space of Indulgence.

In the place where S. James the Apostle was chosen the first Bishop of
Jerusalem, there are seven years and seven times forty days space of Indulgence.

In the Chapel where S. John Evangelist said Mass to our Lady, are seven
years, and seven times forty days space of Indulgence.

In the place where the holy Apostles separated themselves for to go to Preach
the Gospel to the whole world, are seven years and seven times forty days space
of Indulgence.

In the place where was Translated the body of S. Stephen Protomartyr, are
seven years, and seven times forty days space of Indulgence.

In the Chapel, that formerly was the Kitchen in which the Paschal Lamb was
roasted for Christ, are seven years, and seven times forty days space of
Indulgence.

In the entrance of the house of Caiphas, where a Maid Portress said to Peter,
Thou wast with Jesus Christ of Galilee, are seven years and seven times forty
days space of Indulgence.

In the midst of the same House, where Peter denied Christ, are seven years,
and seven times forty days space of Indulgence.

Near to that House is a place where the Cock Crew, and there are seven years,
and seven times forty days space of Indulgence.

In a certain place in the said House of Caiphas, where Christ the night before
he suffered stood after he was taken till morning, are seven years, and seven
times forty days space of Indulgence.

Near to the said house is a place unto which our Lady came, and understanding
that her Son was taken, fainted; and there are seven years, and seven times
forty days space of Indulgence.

Near to the same House is a place where the Jews would have took the body of
our Lady, when she was carried to burial; and there are seven years and seven
times forty days space of Indulgence.

Upon the said Mount Sion is the place in which they beheaded S. James the
great, and there is a plenary Indulgence.

The Indulgences at Mount Calvary
AT the place where the Cross of Christ was planted, and where he was
crucified, is a plenary Indulgence.

At the place where Melchisedeck offered Bread and Wine, are seven years, and
seven times forty days space of Indulgence.

At the place where Abraham would have sacrificed his Son Isaac, are seven
years, and seven times forty days space of Indulgence.

At the place where our Lord was taken from the Cross and put into the Bosom of
our Lady, is a plenary Indulgence.

At the holy Sepulcher is a plenary Indulgence.

At a certain Chapel, near to the place where Christ was crucified, is a
certain Ladder, and there is a plenary Indulgence.

Under the Rock where our Lord was crucified, is a Chapel, in which S. Helena
found the Cross of Christ, and there is a plenary Indulgence.

In another Chapel is a certain pillar upon which Christ sat after he had been
Crowned with Thorns; and there are seven years and seven times forty days space
of Indulgence.

In another Chapel, where they did cast lots upon Christ's garment, are seven
years, and seven times forty days space of Indulgence.

In a certain Den, where Christ was put whilst his Crucifiers made ready his
Cross, are seven years, and seven times forty days space of Indulgence.

In the Garden where our Lord after his Resurrection appeared to S. Mary
Magdalen, are seven years, and seven times forty days space of Indulgence.

In the place where S. Mary Magdalen fainted in the Garden, are seven years,
and seven times forty days space of Indulgence.

In the same place is a certain Concavity, like to a Window, where is a part of
the Pillar at which Christ was whipped; and there are seven years, and seven
times forty days space of Indulgence.

In the Chapel where the Cross was found, is upon the Altar a part of the
Cross, and there are seven years, and seven times forty days space of
Indulgence.

In the said Chapel is a place, in which after they had found the holy Cross,
laying the same upon a Woman departed, it raised her from the dead; and there
are seven years and seven times forty days space of Indulgence.

Indulgences in the City of Jerusalem.
AT the entrance of the City of Jerusalem, the Pilgrims obtain forty years and
forty days space of Indulgence.

At the golden Gate, by which Christ entered upon Palm Sunday, is a plenary
Indulgence.

In a certain House where they say was born the blessed Virgin Mary, is a
plenary Indulgence.

In the House where S. John Evangelist was born, are seven years and seven
times forty days space of Indulgence.

In the House of the Woman called Veronica, are seven years, and seven times
forty days space of Indulgence.

In the House of Simeon the Prophet, are seven years, and seven times forty
days space of Indulgence.

In the Temple of Solomon, where our Lady presented Christ, is a plenarie
Indulgence.

In the place where the Angel descended and troubled the waters, are seven
years, and seven times forty days space of Indulgence.

In the place where our Lord had wont to preach, are seven years, and seven
times forty days space of Indulgence.

In the place where Christ illuminated the man born blind, are seven years, and
seven times forty days space of Indulgence.

Near to a certain Stone, where they say our Lord healed many sick People, are
seven years, and seven times forty days space of Indulgence.

In the Tower of David, Christ being of his Race, are seven years and seven
times forty days space of Indulgence.

In the Dining Room, where Christ washed the Feet of the Apostles, are seven
years, and seven times forty days space of Indulgence.

At the house of S. Lazarus and his Sisters, in the way by which they took
Christ to be crucified, are seven years, and seven times forty days space of
Indulgence.

In the place where they say our Lord fell down under the Cross, are seven
years, and seven times forty days space of Indulgence.

In the place where they forced Simon of Cirene to carry the Cross of Christ,
are seven years, and seven times forty days space of Indulgence.

In the place where are two white Stones, where Christ being wearied through
the weight of his Cross did make a little pause or rest; are seven years and
seven times forty days space of Indulgence.

In the place where our Lady, seeing Christ with the Cross, did fall down as
dead, are seven years, and seven times forty days space of Indulgence.

In the place where Christ appeared to his Mother Mary, after his Resurrection,
are seven years, and seven times forty days space of Indulgence.

In the place where Christ appeared to the three Mary's, and said All Hail, are
seven years, and seven times forty days space of Indulgence.

In a Church which was the House where the blessed Virgin inhabited after
Christ's Ascension, are seven years, and seven times forty days space of
Indulgence.

In the Oratory where our Lady had wont to do her Devotions, are seven years,
and seven times forty days space of Indulgence.

Indulgences in the Valley of Shiloe.
IN the place called Acheldemach, bought with the thirty pence with the which
Christ was sold, there are seven years, and seven times forty days space of
Indulgence.

In the place where Christ commanded the Clouds to depart thence, to the end he
might see, are seven Years, and seven times forty Days space of Indulgence.

In the place where S. Isaiah the Prophet was sawed a-sunder with a Wooden Saw,
are seven Years, and seven times forty Days space of Indulgence.

In the same Valley is a certain Den, in the which S. Peter wept when he had
denied Christ, and there are seven Years, and seven times forty Days space of
Indulgence.

In this Valley also is a certain Fountain in the which the Blessed Virgin
washed the Linnens of Jesus Christ, he being a little one, when she came with
him to the Temple; and there are seven Years, and seven times forty Days space
of Indulgence.

Indulgences at the Brook Cedron.
AT this Brook was the Wood for a certain time with the which was made the
Cross of Christ, and there are seven Years, and seven times forty Days space
of Indulgence.

In the Garden called Gethsemane, where Christ, the Night he was taken, left
eight of his Apostles the whilst he prayed, are seven years, and seven times
forty Days space of Indulgence.

In the place where Christ at the same time prayed thrice, and did sweat Blood,
are seven Years and seven times forty Days space of Indulgence.

In a certain Den, where S. James Alpheus wept after that Christ was taken,
vowing that he would neither eat nor drink until he saw him risen again from
the Dead, are seven Years, and seven times forty Days space of Indulgence.

Near to this Brook Cedron is the place where was born S. Zachary, the Father
of S. John the Baptist, and there are seven Years, and seven times forty Days
space of Indulgence.

Indulgences in the Valley of Jehosaphat.
IN the Valley of Jehosaphat is the Sepulcher of our Lady, and there is a
plenary Indulgence.

Between the said Sepulcher and the City of Jerusalem is the place where S.
Stephen was stoned, and there are seven Years, and seven times forty Days
space of Indulgence.

Indulgences at Mount Olivet.
AT the foot of Mount Olivet is a little Village called Bethphage, from which
Christ did ride upon an Ass to Jerusalem, and there are fifteen Years, and
fifteen times forty Days space of Indulgence.

At the other side of the Mount, near Jerusalem, is the place where Christ
beholding the City wept over it, and there are seven Years, and seven times
forty Days space of Indulgence.

Upon the said Mount, where our Lord taught the Apostles to pray, and Composed
the Pater Noster, are seven Years, and seven times forty Days space of
indulgence.

In the place where our Lord Preached the Beatitudes is the like Indulgence.

Upon the same Mount an Angel (they say) declared to the Blessed Virgin the
Passage of Christ, bearing a Palm, and there are seven Years, and seven times
forty Days space of indulgence.

In the place where Christ visibly ascended into Heaven, is a plenary
Indulgence.

Upon the same Mount is a place where the Apostles after the coming of the Holy
Ghost, composed the Creed, and there are seven Years, and seven times forty
Days space of indulgence.

The Indulgences at Bethany.
IN the House of Martha who lodged Christ, are seven Years, and seven times
forty Days space of indulgence.

In the House of Mary Magdalen, are seven Years, and seven times forty Days
space of indulgence.

In the midst of the same House is the place where Mary said to Christ, Lord,
if thou had been here, etc. and there are seven Years, and seven times forty
Days space of indulgence.

In the place where Lazarus was buried, and raised from the Dead, is a plenarie
indulgence.

In the House of Simon the Leper, where Mary Magdalen anointed the Head of
Christ, are seven Years, and seven times forty Days space of indulgence.

The Indulgences at Bethlehem.
AT the House where Christ was born, is a Plenary indulgence.

In the place where Christ being born was wrapped up in Swaddling Clothes is a
plenary indulgence.

At the Altar where Jesus Christ was Circumcised is a plenary indulgence.

In the House where the three Wisemen adored Christ, he being an Infant, are
seven Years, and seven times forty Days space of indulgence.

In the place where the Star vanished from the Wise men, which before they had
seen in the East, and which had conducted them to Bethlehem, are seven Years,
and seven times forty Days space of indulgence.

In a certain Chapel, where are the Sepulchers of the Holy Innocents, are
seven Years and seven times forty Days space of Indulgence.

Moreover in a certain Church, entitled, The Church of the Blessed Virgin,
where the Angels appeared to our Lady, showing her the way to Egypt, to the end
she might fly thither with her Infant Jesus, are seven Years, and seven times
forty Days space of indulgence.

In the place where the Angels appeared to the Shepherds singing Gloria in
Excelsis Deo, are seven Years, and seven times forty Days space of indulgence.

The Indulgences at Nazareth.
IN the place where the Blessed Virgin was saluted by the Angel, is a plenary
indulgence.

In the House of S. Joachim the Father of the Blessed Virgin Mary, at which is
a certain Monastery, are seven years, and seven times forty Days space of
indulgence.

At a certain Fountain, from which Christ, being a little one, had wont to
fetch Water and carry to his Mother, are seven Years, and seven times forty
Days space of indulgence.

In the the House to which our Lady, being a little one, went to School to
learn to read, are seven Years, and seven times forty Days space of indulgence.

In the House where were born S. James Thadeus, and S. John Evangelist, are ten
Years, and thirty times forty Days space of indulgence.

The Indulgences in the Mountainous Parts of Judea.
IN a Church which was formerly the House of Zachary, the Father of S. John the
Baptist, where the Blessed Virgin saluted Elizabeth, and in which was born S.
John the Baptist, are seven Years, and seven times forty Days space of
indulgence.

In the place where Zachary writ the name of his Son John, and said, Blessed be
the Lord God of Israel, etc. are seven years, and seven times forty days space
of indulgence.

The Indulgences in the Valley of Hebron.
IN the place where they say was buried Adam, our first Father, are seven
years, and seven times forty Days space of indulgence.

In the same Valley, in a certain Den, in which lies buried Abraham, Isaac,
and Jacob, are seven years, and seven times forty days space of indulgence.

Moreover in a certain place therein, where the Wood grew with which was made
the Cross of Christ, are twenty years, and twenty times forty days space of
indulgence.

The Indulgences at Galilee.
IN the Desert, wherein Christ fasted forty days, is a plenarie indulgence.

On the Mount upon which the Devil conducted Christ, are seven Years, and seven
times forty days space of indulgence.

In the desert, where S. John Baptist did Penance, are seven Years, and seven
times forty days space of indulgence.

In the River Jordan, where Christ was Baptized, is a plenary indulgence.

Beside the River Jordan is a certain Monastery, in which is a little piece of
the Cross of Christ, and there are seven Years, and seven times for tie days
space of indulgence.

There is also another Monastery of S. John the Baptist, and there are seven
years, and seven times forty days space of indulgence.

CLASS IV. The Indulgences at S. James of Galitia in Compostella, the which
are gained not only by holy Pilgrims, and such others devoutly visiting the
same Church, but also by those of the holy order of the Servants of S. Mary.
FIrst, whatsoever person shall at any time go to S. James of Galitia,
obtains the Remission of the third part of his sins.

2dly, Whosoever goes to visit the said Church, and going, returning, or in
his stay there, happens to die, so it be with true Contrition for his errors,
has a plenary Remission of his sins.

3dly, Every one that goes in the procession which they make upon Sunday in
the same Church, has for every procession and consecration forty days
Indulgence, and the same he has each day in the Week, until the next Sunday
ensuing, and moreover he has an Indulgence of three hundred days, and the
forgiveness of the third part of his sins.

4thly, In the Feast of the Dedication of the same Church, and in the Vigil and
Feast of S. James, they have six hundred days Indulgence, and a Remission of
the third part of their sins.

5thly, Every one that hearkeneth to the Mass of an Archbishop, or of a
Cardinal, at the Altar of S. James, has six hundred days of Indulgence, and
the Remission of the third part of his sins.

6thly, Calisto the Pope has granted, that when the Feast of S. James
happens to be celebrated upon a Sunday, all the same year, whosoever goes on
Pilgrimage, truly penitent and confessed, shall be absolved from all his sins.

CLASS V. The Indulgences granted by diverse Popes to those that shall use
certain devotions; all which, as well as to others, appertain to the Brothers
and Sisters of the holy order of the Servants of S. Mary.
TO those that shall say the Divine Office, and the Cannonical hours, for any
time they shall say the same, Leo the eleventh has granted the forgiveness of
the third part of their sins, and Martin the fifth has granted an hundred
days Indulgence.

To those that shall say the Office for the Dead, or the seven Psalms, or the
Gradual, Leo the tenth has granted a plenarie Indulgence.

To those that shall say the Psalms of the passion, the which are ten, the
first whereof begineth with Deus Deus meus respice in me, and the last with In
te Domine speravi; Leo the tenth has granted a ^ plenary Indulgence.

They are called the Psalms of the Passion, because it is believed that Christ
said the same in his mind upon the Cross, for the first speech of the seven he
then uttered, he spoke the beginning of the first of the said Psalms, saying,
Deus, Deus meus: and the last speech which he made, which was, In manus tuas
Domine commendo spiritum meum, is found in the last of the said Psalms, In te
Domine speravi.

To those that say the Psalms, the Antiphon, the Versicle, and the Prayer of
the name of Jesus, Leo the tenth has granted a plenarie Indulgence.

They are called the Psalms of the name of Jesus, because the letters
wherewith they begin, answer to the name of Jesus; the first beginning with an
J, the second with an E, the third with an S, etc. In saying whereof, first
they say the Antiphon, to wit, In nomine Jesu. Afterward they say the first of
the said Psalms, viz. Jubilate Deo omnis Terra; next they say the second of
the said Psalms, namely, Exaudiat te Dominus; then they say the third of the
said Psalms; to wit, Salvum me fac Deus; then the fourth, which is, Vsquequo
Domine Oblivisceris me; Next the fifth, namely, Saepe Expugnaverunt me a
juventute mea. After the Psalms they say the Antiphon, In Nomine Jesu omne
genu flectatur, Coelestium, Terrestrium, and Infernorum, quia Dominus Jesus
Christus in gloria est Dei Patris. Then they say the versicle, Sit nomen Domini
Benedictum, afterward they Answer, Ante solemn permanet nomen ejus. Then they
say, Oremus, and lastly they say, Omnipotens sempiterne Deus, dirige Actus
nostros in Beneplacito tuo, ut in nomine Dilecti filii tui mereamur bonis
operibus abundare. Per eundem Christum Dominum nostrum, Amen.

To those that shall say one Miserere before an Altar, Sisto the fourth has
granted all the Indulgences that are that day in Rome.

And Julio the second has adjoined, that saying every day one Miserere with
the prayer for the Pope, Deus omnium fidelium Pastor and Rector, etc. shall
obtain all the Indulgences that are to be had in the whole world.

To those that shall say fifteen Pater-Nosters, and fifteen Ave-Maria's, in
memory of the Wounds of Christ, Leo the Tenth has granted fifteen thousand
years Indulgence.

To those that shall say fifteen Pater-Noster's, and fifteen Ave-Maria's, for
those that are in mortal sin, Leo the Tenth has granted for any time they
shall say the same, the Remission of the third part of their sins.

To those that shall say five Pater-Noster's and five Ave Maria's, praying for
the happy Estate of the Holy Church, Leo the Tenth has granted all the
Indulgences that are that day in Rome.

To those that shall say five Pater-Noster's and five Ave-Maria's, in honor
and memory of the five Wounds of Christ, Leo the Tenth has granted ten
thousand years, and ten thousand days of Indulgence.

To those that shall say once in the day one Paternoster, and at the end
thereof three times Jesu, Leo the Tenth has granted three thousand years
Indulgence.

To those that shall say an Ave-Maria when they FART, John the Twenty Second
has granted forty days Indulgence.

To those that shall say the Crown of our Lord, which contains thirty three
Pater-Noster's and thirty three Ave-Maria's, in memory of the years of Jesus
Christ, Julio the Second, and Leo the Tenth, have granted a plenary Indulgence.

To those that shall say the Crown of our Lady, the which contains sixty
three Ave-Maria's and seven Pater-Nosters, Leo the Tenth has granted a plenary
Indulgence. This Crown they are wont to say all over Italy, but out of Italy
they use to say for the Crown of our Lady seventy three Ave-Maria's, and eight
Pater Noster's, and John the Twenty Second, has granted to those that shall
say this Crown, a plenary Indulgence.

To those that shall say the Crown of our Lady the day of S. John ante Portam
Latinam, which is the sixth day of May, Leo the Tenth has granted they shall
thereby deliver a Soul from Purgatory, and the like he has granted they shall
do, saying the said Crown the day of S. John Evangelist, which is the twenty
seventh day of December.

To those that shall say the Rosary of the Blessed Virgin, Sisto the Fourth
has granted for every fiftieth, five years and five times forty days space of
Indulgence.

To those that shall say the Mass of the most holy Rosary, or hearken to one of
the said Masses, Paul the Third has granted, as many Indulgences as if they
should say the Rosary a whole Week, which would come to eighty eight years,
twenty two times forty days space, and an hundred and fifty days; and Pope
Gregory the Thirteenth has granted them a plenary Indulgence, and the
deliverance of a Soul from Purgatory.

To those that shall say or hear the Mass of the Conception, Leo the Tenth has
granted a plenary Indulgence.

To those that shall say in honor of the Blessed Virgin some one of these
Hims, to wit, Quem Terra Pontus, or, O Gloriosa Domina, or the Versicle Maria
Matter gratiae, Alexander the Sixth has granted for every time they say the
same, ten years Indulgence.

To those that bow at the name of Jesus, and at the Versicle Gloria Patri, and
Filio, and Spiritui Sancto, John the Twenty Second has granted for any time
they do the same, forty days Indulgence.

To those that shall kneel, or bow the knee, when they say, Te ergo Quaesumus
famulis tuis subveni, etc. Benedict the Thirteenth has granted three times
forty days space of Indulgence; and to those that shall bow the Head at the
Speech of the Preface in the Mass, Gratias agamus Domino Deo nostro, an hundred
days Indulgence.

To those that Communicate, Innocent the Eighth, and Leo the Tenth, have
granted a plenary Indulgence.

To those that by reason of Sickness, or other just Impediment cannot say the
Canonical Hours, or the Ave-Maria's, or the Pater-Noster's belonging to their
Rule, Leo the Tenth has granted that saying a Hymn, or a Paternoster, or any
other thing, according to the judgment of their Prelate or Corrector, they
shall satisfy as if they had said the Hours Canonical. And the same Pope has
granted that if any one, saying his Office in the Quire, or in the Passage, or
any other place, did not, by reason of Idleness, Negligence, Malice, or a
wandering mind, speak his words entirely out, or entirely utter them, saying a
Paternoster, or an Hymn, or a Salva Regina, or other thing imposed by his
Prelate and Superior, he shall make satisfaction.

To those that are sick and infirm and cannot Fast, Sista the Fourth has
granted that they are not bound. And Innocent the Eighth has granted they may
gain any Indulgence in the Infirmacy, in the Cell, or in Bed, saying five
Pater-Noster's, and five Ave-Maria's, with an Intention to gain the same
Indulgence. And Leo the Tenth has granted, that saying a Psalm, or an Hymn of
the Blessed Virgin, or of our Lord, they shall have the Indulgence of the Crown
of our Lord, or of our Lady; and likewise Leo the Tenth has granted, that if
any one be troubled with a Fever or other Malady at the time of the Canonical
Hour, so that he cannot observe it, saying the Psalms, the Hymns, the
Pater-Nosters, or any other thing, at the judgment of the Superior, he shall
make satisfaction. And Eugenio the Fourth, and Martin the Fifth, have confirmed
the same, and moreover communicated it to the old and impotent.

CLASS VI. The Indulgences granted to the Parents, Founders, Protectors,
Favorites, and Benefactors of the Holy Order of the Servants of S. Mary.
TO the Father and Mother of each Religious Person of this Holy Order of the
Servants, Calisto the Third has granted a plenary Indulgence in their life
time, and after their death, the same in Purgatory, by way of suffrage.

To the Tutors and Defenders of the Order of the Servants, Nicholas the Fourth
has granted an Indulgence of forty years, Honorio the Third of twenty five
years and twenty days; Clement the Fourth of twenty five years and 120 days;
Boniface the Eighth of twenty five years, and an hundred and twenty days;
Innocent the Fourth of twenty five years, and an hundred and twenty days; Urban
the Fifth of twenty five years, and an hundred and twenty days; and Leo the
Fourth of seven years, and twelve times forty days space.

To all that are to this Holy Order of the Servants either Advocates,
Procurators, Physicians, or their Substitutes, Martin the Fourth has granted
for every year they are thus, an hundred years Indulgence: And Innocent the
Eighth has granted to them, their Children, their Brothers, their Sisters,
their Wives, and their Parents, saying five Pater-Noster's, and five
Ave-Maria's for the happy Estate of the Holy Church, the Indulgences in all the
Stations, and all other Indulgences granted to the Brothers and Sisters of this
Holy Order.

To all of the Order of the servants that are Priests, or are in any other of
the seven holy orders, John the twenty third has granted the Ommission and
neglect of the Canonical hours, and Divine Offices.

Also John the twenty third has communicated all the good works and suffrages
of the Brothers and Sisters of this Order to the Souls of their dead
Benefactors.

CLASS VII. The Indulgences granted to all that are Faithful and devout to the
Brothers and Sisters of the Holy Order of the Servants of S. Mary.
TO those that hear the Divine Offices in the Church of the Servants, Honorio
the Third has given an Indulgence of eighty days; Boniface the Eighth of
eighty days; Clement the Fifth of eighty days; Alexander the Fourth of three
hundred and twenty days; Innocent the Fourth of two days; and Gregory the Fifth
of two days; all which make one year and twenty days.

To those that shall hear a Sermon of a Priest of the Servants, Honorius the
Third, Boniface the Eighth, Alexander the Third, Gregory the Ninth, Innocent
the Fourth, Boniface the Second, Clement the Third, John the Twenty second,
Clement the Fourth, Benedict the Eleventh, Alexander the Fourth, and Martin the
Fifth, have granted (amongst them) forty years and nine Months of Indulgence.
And John the Twenty Second has granted an Indulgence to them of ten years and
nine Months, and of twice forty days space.

To those that shall hear the Mass of one of the Order of the Servants newly
made Priest, Clement the Fourth has granted an Indulgence of twice forty days
space; Innocent the Fourth of an hundred days; Gregory the Third of twice forty
days space; Honorio the Third of twice forty days space; Urban the Fifth of two
hundred days; Boniface the Eighth of forty days; and Alexander the Fourth of an
hundred days, the which make in all one year, eighty days, and eight times
forty days space

To those that stand and hearken to the Salve Regina, or any other Laud that is
said before the Altar of the Servants of our Lady Andromaco the Cardinal,
(Entituted by St. Eustachio) and Legate Apostolic of Italy, has granted forty
days Indulgence. And the like Indulgence is granted to those that visit the
Altar of the Blessed Virgin in the Church of the Brothers of the Servants.

To those that shall any day visit the Churches of the order of the Servants,
Adrian the second, Stephen the first, Sergio the third, John the tenth, John
the eleventh, and Innocent the fourth, have each one granted them the Remission
of the third part of their sins. And moreover Honorio the third has given them
twenty years and one hundred and eighty Days of Indulgence. Clement the
Third, ten years, and forty days. Clement the fourth, thirty years, and forty
days. Boniface the eighth, twenty years, and forty days. Boniface the ninth,
two years. Alexander the fourth, twenty years, and an hundred and eighty days.
Lucio four years. Boniface the second, thirty years, and an hundred and twenty
days. John the second, ten years, and eighty days. Gregory the ninth, twenty
years, and an hundred and twenty days. Alexander the fourth, eighteen years,
and eighty days. And Innocent the fourth has given forty days.

To those that shall say a Paternoster and an Ave-Maria for the living and the
dead, Innocent the fourth has granted forty days; Gregory the ninth forty
days, Honorio the eighth, forty days; Benedict the eleventh an hundred days;
Benedict the seventh an hundred days; and Latino Cardinal, and Legate of
Toscana, forty days indulgence.

To those that shall visit the Churches of the order of the Servants in the
Solemnity of the Nativity, Circumcision, Ephiphanie, and Ascension of Christ,
and upon Corpus Christi day, Gregory the ninth has granted an indulgence of an
hundred years, and of an hundred times forty days space; Martin the fifth of
forty years, and of ten times forty days space. John the twenty second of
forty years, and of twelve times forty days space. Nicholas the third of forty
years, and the Remission of the third part of their sins. Clement the fourth of
forth years; Sisto the fourth of forty years; and Gregory the ninth of seven
hundred years, and of seven hundred times forty days space.

And moreover to those that shall visit the same in the Feast of the Ascension,
Inoncent the ninth has granted an hundred years, and hundred times forty days
space of indulgence Martin the fifth, forty years, and twelve times forty days
space. Gregory the tenth, forty years. And Leo the fourth, seven years, and ten
times forty days space. Also Adrian the second, Stephen the fifth, Sergio the
third, John the tenth, John the eleventh, Sergio the fifth, and Innocent the
fourth, have each one granted a Remission to them of the third part of their
sins; and this they have done not only for the day of the Feast, but also
daily during the Octave. The which do amount in all to two thousand years, one
hundred seventie four days, nine hundred and forty times forty days space,
and seven times the Remission of the third part of their sins.

To those that shall visit the Churches of the order of the Servants, in the
Festivals of the blessed Virgin, to wit, the Assumption, Nativity, Conception,
Visitation, Presentation, Purification, and Annunciation from the first Vespers
of each Feast, until after Sun Rising the next morning; Sisto the fourth has
granted a plenary Indulgence. Honorio the eighth, forty years. Nicholas the
fifth, eighty-years, and eighty times forty days space. Leo the fourth, seven
years, and seven times forty days space. Boniface the fourth, forty years.
Innocent the fourth, a thousand years. Innocent the eighth three years, and an
hundred times forty days space. Gregory the ninth, eight hundred years, and
eighty times forty days space. Martin the fourth, forty six years and twelve
days. Martin the fifth, forty years and an hundred days. John the twenty
second, forty years, and an hundred days. Benedict the eleventh, seven years.
Nicholas the third, three hundred and eighty days. Innocent the fourth, forty
years. Boniface the eighth, forty years. Nicholas the fourth, forty nine years,
and forty days. Gregory the eleventh, forty years, and forty days. Gregory
the tenth, forty years. Clement the fourth, ten years, and forty days. Gregory
the ninth, twenty years and forty days. And Alexander the fourth, twenty
years, and 40 days. Which do amount in all to one plenary indulgence, and one
thousand eight hundred eight years forty days, and a thousand and four times
forty days space of Indulgence.

To those that shall visit the Churches of the order of the Servants, in the
Feasts of the twelve Apostles, Benedict the eleventh has granted seven years
Indulgence. Gregory the ninth, an hundred years, and an hundred days. Martin
the fourth forty years, and forty days. Gregory the eleventh forty years, and
forty days. And Innocent the eighth, three years, and an hundred times forty
days space; which amount in all to a thousand three hundred and eighty years,
an hundred and forty days, and an hundred times forty days space.

Those that shall visit the Churches belonging to the order of the Servants in
the day of their Consecration of the same; Clement the fifth has granted
seventeen years, and seventeen times forty days space of Indulgence. Benedict
the eleventh, thirty seven years, and three times forty days space of
Indulgence. Alexander the fifth, eight years, and twice forty days space.
Gregory the ninth, twenty years, and two days. Nicholas the third, thirty
years, and thirty times forty days space: and Clement the fourth, ten years,
and ten times forty days space. Which make in the whole an hundred twenty two
years, and sixty two times forty days space.

To those that shall visit the Churches appertaining to the order of the
Servants in all the Sundays of the year, Benedict the eleventh has granted
seven years Indulgence. And by (...) they obtain the Indulgences which are at
the holy Sepulcher, and at S. James of Galitia; and also an Indulgence of three
thousand years and of three thousand times forty days space, granted by S.
Silvester Pope.

To those that shall visit the Churches belonging to the order of the Brothers
and Sisters of the Order of the Servants in the days of Lent, Alexander the
fourth, Nicholas the third, Innocent the fourth and Benedict the eleventh have
granted, from Ash Wednesday until the end of the Resurrection inclusively, any
day, an hundred twenty two years, and five hundred seventy six days; and to
those that upon Wednesdays, Frydays, and Saturday, shall go and hear a Sermon,
he has joined thereto, for any time they shall do thus, six years, and twenty
six days of Indulgence. And Urban the fourth has granted forty years
Indulgence. And Innocent the eighth, beginning from Septuagesima Sunday, and
ending at Easter, has granted a thousand years, and a thousand times forty
days space, and upon Wednesday Thursday, and Friday, in the holy Week, a
plenarie Indulgence. And Sisto the fourth, from the sixth Feriae after the
third Sunday, through the whole Octave of Easter, any day, has granted an
Indulgence of three thousand seven hundred and eighteen years and one hundred
and thirty days. And Benedict the tenth has granted any day eighty years,
and eighty times forty days space, and twice the Remission of the third part
of their sins; and by going to a Church dedicated to S. Salvatore, any day,
they obtain a plenary Indulgence.

To those that shall visit the Churches of the holy order of the Servants in
the Feasts ensueing, have been granted by diverse Popes these Indulgences
following; to wit,

The day of S. Anthony, by Gregory the ninth, and Innocent the fourth, a
thousand years and an hundred days Indulgence.

The day of S. Fabian, and Sebastian, by Leo the fourth, and Innocent the
fourth, a thousand years, and seven times forty days space of Indulgence.

The day of S. Thomas of Aquine, by John the twenty second, Alexander the
fifth, and Urban the fifth, an hundred and forty years.

The day of S. Peter and Paul by Innocent the Eighth, Martin the Fifth, and Leo
the Fourth, a thousand two hundred and forty seven years, and two hundred
thirty two times forty days space of Indulgence. And by Sisto the Fourth the
Remission of the third part of their sins.

The day of S. John the Baptist, by Gregory the Ninth, Innocent the Eighth, Leo
the Fourth, and Martin the Fifth, a thousand two hundred forty seven years, and
two hundred thirty two times forty days space of Indulgence.

The day of S. Dominick, by Clement the Fourth, Gregory the Ninth, Boniface the
Eighth, Nicholas the Fourth, Innocent the Fourth, Alexander the Fourth,
Boniface the Second, John the Twenty Second, Alexander the Fifth, and Sisto the
Fourth, seventy seven hundred thousand years Indulgence.

The day of S. Philip our Brother, by Martin the Fourth, and Innocent the
Fourth, forty hundred years, and twelve times forty days space.

The day of the Apparition of S. Michael Archangel by Leo the Fourth, seven
years, and seven times forty days space, and by Nicholas the Fourth, the like
Indulgence.

The day of S. Francis, by Gregory the Ninth, and Martin the Fourth, an hundred
and forty Years, and twelve times forty days space of Indulgence.

The day of all Saints, by Leo the Fourth, and Innocent the Fourth a thousand
and seven Years, and seven times forty days space of Indulgence.

The day of S. Nicholas, by Leo the Fourth, seven years, and seven times forty
days space of Indulgence.

THE TRANSLATOR'S APPENDIX.
Wherein the very Grounds and Foundations of the said Indulgences are utterly
overthrown, and consequently the Indulgences themselves apparently proved to be
a mere Cheat.
CHAP. I. Wherein is showed what the Indulgences before mentioned are, and upon
what they are grounded.
THE said Indulgences, according to the Doctrine of the Roman Church, are
certain Distributions made by the Pope, of certain penal and fatisfactory
Works, taken by him out of the Churches Treasury, and bequeathed to such
persons, as although dying in the state of grace, yet having not first here in
this world fully satisfied the Justice of God for their sins, are after their
death cast into Purgatory, where they are burnt and tormented in the fire
thereof, until such time the same be fully satisfied

They are grounded upon certain false and pernicious Tenants, whereby she
holds; First, that there lies a necessity upon all the Faithful
(notwithstanding their Redemption by Christ) to satisfy and content the
Justice of God for their sins; which satisfaction the Catechism of the Council
of Trent defines thus: Cap. de Sacramento Penitentia.
Satisfactio est rei debitae integra solutio: Est compensatio, cum homo pro
peccatis commissis Deo aliquid persolvi. Satisfaction is an entire Payment of
that thing which is due, and a recompense which a man makes to God for his
sins. And it is made (they say) here in this life, by fasting, whipping,
Pilgrimages, giving something to the Church, and such like works of Penance;
and after this life, by being imprisoned, involved, and tormented in a fire
called Purgatory.

2. That many in this life do not only satisfy the Divine Justice for their
sins, but exceed the same for them, in their satisfactions; for there be many,
say they, that have sinned but little, yet have satisfied very much; and
consequently have undergone more Punishments than their sins have deserved, or
Gods Justice for the same required; and this excess or superfluity, which they
call Superabundant Satisfaction: That is to say, the overplus that these men
have paid to God, more than they needed to have done, may be given to others
that want the same.

And, thirdly, That the Church has a certain Treasury, in which are reserved
inestimable Treasures; that is to say, the said superabundant satisfactions; to
wit, the superabundant satisfactions of the Saints, Martyrs, Monks, Nuns,
Friars, Eremites, and such like others, as have satisfied beyond Gods Justice,
or the desert of their sins: Of which Treasury the Pope having the Keys, and
being thereof Guardian, turns the said Treasures into pay for others, and
bequeaths them out by Indulgences, to those that are wanting in satisfactory
Works.

These Indulgences, (although they are now, and have been of late years,
(through the great resort of Pilgrims to the places unto whom they are given,
and the great and splendid Solemnities of the Jubilees at Rome) had in great
veneration and esteem among the Romanists) were never known in the Churches
Infancy, nor for a long time afterward, Alph. congr. bares. 8. verb
Indulgentia. Durand. Sontent. 4. did. 20. quae. 3. ^den, Sess 25. Decretum de
Indulg.
but as Alphonsus a Castro confesses, harum usus in Ecclesia videtur stro
receptus, their use is seen to have been received but lately in the Church: and
moreover Durand (another of their own Writers) tells us, De Indulgentiis
pauca dici possunt per certitudiuem; quia nec scriptura express de iis
loquitur: Sancti etiam Ambrosius, Hilarious, etc. minime loquuntur de
Indulgentiis. Little can be said of any certainty of Indulgences, or of their
being undoubtedly true, seeing the Scriptures speak not expressly of them: and
S. Hilary, S. Ambrose, and other Fathers, speak not at all of them. And yet the
Council of Trent does not only teach and command them to be retained in the
Church, but also condemns all them with a Curse, which either term them
unprofitable, or deny the Churches Authority to grant them.

Now, what a bold presumption was it for a Council to determine a new and
uncertain Doctrine for a Point of Faith? And what a senseless and weak Faith
must it needs be, which wants Antiquity, Authority of Scriptures, and consent
of Fathers? But I will not stand to argue this, in regard it makes not much to
our present purpose; neither will I altogether deny, but the said Indulgences
are to some profitable: For indeed (since many are come to have so good an
opinion as they have of them) they are not only profitable, but very profitable
to the Roman Church. For, first, hereby she establishes, confirms, and
upholdeth all her wicked, newfangled, Idolatrous, and absurd Doctrines, and
does easily impose them upon the Faith of those, that perhaps otherwise might
doubt of them; and the People are thereby (as it were) allured and enticed into
a belief of that which before, it may be, they never heard of, or once thought
of, nay peradventure not only doubted, but altogether disliked of. And
therefore when the Pope would establish any new Opinion, or confirm it when
called in question, he presently contriveth the doing thereof by some
Indulgence that may conduce thereunto. As for Example, tending to the Adoration
of Images, and Prayer to Saints departed, whosoever (being in the state of
Grace) shall say seven Prayers before the Crucifix, and seven Pater-nosters,
and seven Ave Maria's, shall obtain six and fifty thousand years of Indulgence;
to wit, fourteen thousand granted by S. Gregory, fourteen thousand by Nicholas
the first, and twenty eight thousand by Sixtus the Fourth. Thesau. Indulg.
Tending to the Adoration of Saints Relics, and other like things, belonging
to their Altars, to whosoever, before an Altar, shall say Miserere, Sisto the
Fourth has granted all the Indulgences that are that day in Rome. (...).
Indulg.
Tending to Prayer for the dead, to whosoever shall say the Office for the
dead, Leo the Tenth has granted a Plenary Indulgence, and to such as shall say
one Pater noster, and one Ave Maria for them, Innocent the Fourth has granted
forty days Indulgence: Gregory the Ninth, forty days: Honorius the Eighth,
forty days: Benedict the Elerenth, an hundred days: and Lotino Cardinal, forty
days: and in the same manner tending to all such like Doctrines. Secondly, By
the same she makes her self fat, gets good store of Coin, and accumulateth
to her self whole heaps of Money, whereby she is able to erect most sumptuous
Palaces, build most famous Monasteries, manage and maintain Wars, and carry on
all her wicked and self-ended Designs. Mod. Exam. Sat. Ord Cand. de Indulg. In
the Book called Defensio Parisien. cure pro Liberate, page 77.
For you must know that these Indulgences (although the Romanists would fain
have them to be heretofore called Donationes, to wit, Gifts: to the end that
thereby, if it be possible, they may find out some way whereby to found them
upon the Holy Scriptures,) do not at all, when they are bequeathed, come
gratis, but must be well paid for: Insomuch, that only the Indulgences, with
the Letters of Pardon, and the Reservationes, Pectorales, M^tales, Regressor,
Gomeles, and Speciales access^, with other such like Trifles, are adjudged to
be worth to the Pope of Rome, in France only, above two hundred thousand Crowns
a year; and in all Christendom to be worth above ten Millions of Crowns yearly;
which indeed is a pretty Sum.

But that they are, in the least, profitable to the persons who are supposed to
obtain them, and to whom they are granted as Indulgences, I deny utterly. For a
Man can by no means redeem his Brother, or pay a Ransom to God for him; (no not
for the Body, and therefore much less for the Soul) for the Redemption of the
Souls precious, and it cease for ever, Psalm. 49.7, 8. And the dead have not
any more Reward, neither have they any more Portion for ever, in any thing that
is done under the Sun, Eccles. 9.5, 6.

These and the like Testimonies are so plain and manifest against the validity
of the said Indulgences, that several of the Romanists (by the Relation of
Thomas Aquinas) have been of Opinion, (as Greg. de valent. affirms, The Aqu.
in suppl. 3. Part. 4. Qu. 25. Art. 5. Greg. de val. de Indulg. Cap. 2
) That Ecclesiastical Indulgence of it self could remit no Punishment, Nec in
fore Ecclesiae, neque in fore Dei; neither in the judgment of the Church, nor
in the judgment of God; but that it was a pious kind of Fraud, whereby the
Church by promising such Remission might allure men to the devout performance
of those pious works which were required in the Form of the Indulgence; even as
when a Mother to move her Child to run does Promise him an Apple, yet
notwithstanding afterward she does not give it him.

Thus you see that diverse of the Romanists themselves (as it is here
acknowledged) have held Indulgences to be given only to allure and entice men
to a devout Performance of what is required in the Form of the Indulgence:
(which is according to what I have here before showed; and that they are not at
all profitable as Indulgences, but are in themselves mere cheats.

Nevertheless this is not all, they are not only mere cheats, and altogether
unprofitable as Indulgences, but also Damnable; and the Persons are accursed
that broach and maintain them: For although they concern Christ and his Church,
and appertain (as the Papists tell us) to our Faith and Life, yet they are not
received in the Legal and Evangelical Scriptures.

That they are not received in the Legal and Evangelical Scriptures, is a truth
so manifest that it is even confessed and acknowledged by the Romanists
themselves; for besides Duranaus, Anto. Part. 1. Tit. 10 c. 3. Prier. Contr.
Luth pro Indulg.
of whom I have before spoken, Antenint says, De Indulgentiis nil express
habemns in Sacra Scriptura, etc. Concerning Indulgences we have nothing
expressly in the Holy Scriptures, etc. And Silvester Pierias says, Indulgentiae
Authoritate Scripturae non innotuere nobis, sed Authoritate Ecclesiae Romana,
and Romanerum Pontificum, quae major est Authoritas. Indulgences are not known
to us by the Authority of the Scripture, but by the Authority of the Roman
Church, and of the Roman Popes, which is greater than the Authority of the
Scripture.

And that they are therefore damnable, and the persons are accursed that broach
and maintain them, Aug. Contr. lit. Petil. l. 3. cap. 6. Tom. 7.
is also manifest; for S. Augustine says, Sive de Christo, sive de Ecclesia,
sibe de quatanque alia re, que pertinet ad fidem vitamque nostram, non dream
nos, nequaquam comparandi ei qui dixit, sed si Angelus de caelo vobis
annunciaverit praeterquam quod in Scripturis Legalibus and Evangelicis
accepistis, Anathema sit. Whether concerning Christ, or his Church, or any
other thing appertaining to our Faith and Life, I will not say if we (who are
no way to be compared to him that so spare) but if an Angel from Heaven shall
preach unto you any thing but what you have received in the Legal and
Evangelical Scriptures, let him be accursed. And S. Basil says, Edit. Basil.
pa. 437.
(...). all that which is without the Scripture, Divinely inspired, not being
of Faith, is sin; for (says he) Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the
word of God, and all that is not of Faith is Sin.

CHAP. II. Wherein is showed, That Christ has fully and perfectly made
satisfaction to God for our sins, and that the Doctrine of our satisfaction
overthrows our Faith and Devotion, and is manifestly false, is injurious to
Christ, blasphemous against God, teaches men to be disloyal and revengeful,
implies an impossibility, and is also needless.
I Renaeus, writing against Valentinus, and other like Heretics, says,
Scripturis Divinis uiti, quae certa and indubitata veritas est, in firma and
valida Petra est Domum suam aedificare; hac vero derelista aliis niti quibusdam
Doctrinis effusa arenae (unde facilis eversio) est Domum suam adificare. To
lean upon the holy Scriptures, which are the sure and undoubted truth, is for a
man to build his house upon a sure and strong Rock; but if leaving it (that is,
the truth of the Scriptures) he sticks to some other Doctrine, the same is to
build his house upon the unstedfast Sand, from whence it is easily overthrown.

Now that our Lord Jesus Christ has fully and perfectly satisfied God for our
sins, and has wholly and only wrought our Redemption, Purgation, and
Reconciliation, is a Doctrine grounded upon the holy Scriptures, for the holy
Scriptures attribute the same wholly and only to him, affirming, that Jesus
Christ has washed us from our sins in his own blood, Rev. 1.5. That he his own
self bare our sins in his own Body on the Tree, by whose stripes we are healed,
1 Pet. 2.24. That through him we have peace with God, Romans 5.1. That he is the
Reconciliation for our sins, and not for ours only, but also for the sins of
the whole world, 1 John 2.2. That be was wounded for our transgressions,
bruised for our iniquities, had the chastisement of our Peace laid upon him,
and with his stripes we are healed, Isa. 53.5. That he has obtained eternal
redemption for us, Heb. 9.12. That by one Offering he has perfected for ever
them that are sanctified, Heb. 10.14. That he it able to save them to the
uttermost that come to God by him, Heb. 7.25. That it pleased the Father by him
to reconcile all things to himself, both which are in Earth, and which are in
Heaven, Col. 1.19, 20. That there is no Salvation in any other, nor other Name
under Heaven whereby we must be saved, Act. 4.12. And to be short, it is the
whole scope of the Gospel.

And yet the Papists (neither regarding Scripture, Gospel, Irenous, nor any
other thing that may make against their pretended satisfactions) will have a
necessity lie upon us to pay and satisfy God for our sins.

But this their Doctrine, first, overthrows our Faith, destroys our
Devotion, and is manifestly false; for we are taught to believe the forgiveness
of our sins, and to pray for the forgiveness of our sins, and God forgiveth us
our sins, and that freely: whereas God could not be said to forgive us our
sins, did he either here in this life, or hereafter in the other, require
satisfaction.

Secondly, It is injurious to Christ, for it defaceth the sufficiency of his
Death.

Thirdly, It is blasphemous against God; for first, it makes him like a very
unjust and hard Landlord, who having granted an Estate in a Bargain to a
younger Brother, upon a sufficient Fine tendered by the Elder, yet will not let
the younger enjoy it, unless he Fine for it again himself.

Secondly, It makes him like a cruel Creditor, who having the Debt discharged
to the uttermost, by a Friend, yet casts the poor Debtor himself into Prison,
until he there also in part make satisfaction.

Thirdly, It makes him like a merciless Judge, who having punished an effence
with condign punishment, yet will have the Offender punished again, as if he
delighted in the torments of the miserable.

Fourthly, It makes men disloyal and revengeful, and ministers matter to
malicious persons, to the fully satisfying their malicious humors, seeing as
God does pardon us, so we ought to deal with others; and therefore if God does
so forgive us our sins in Christ, as that we must still either here afflict our
selves with the rigorous works of Penance, or else hereafter be cast into the
extreme torments of Purgatory; then we may also so forgive our Brother, as that
we may yet procure his most grievous punishment; and say, it is true, I have
pardoned him, but I will not yet cease extremely to punish him; for will you
have me to be more patient and merciful than God himself, that deals thus
with us? who after having declared that all our faults are forgiven, either
cease not here to torment us by our Fasting, Whipping, Pilgrimaging, and such
like Penal Works, or hereafter to burn us for I know not how many thousand
years in a scorching Fire.

Fifthly, It implies an impossibility, for satisfactions for sins ought to be
according to the quality of the Person thereby offended, and God and the Divine
Justice being altogether Infinite, require therefore an infinite satisfaction,
which no sinite Creature can possibly make. But suppose there were a
possibility of our making a recompense to God, and satisfying the Divine
Justice for them, which there is not, yet.

Sixthly, It is altogether needless, for Jesus Christ by one offering has
perfected for ver them that are sanctified, Heb. 10.14. And what Estate is
there beyond that of Perfection? And what Perfection greater than that which
abides and continues for ever?

Now the Papists (to avoid those gross absurdities and horrid consequences,
which otherwise they see must of necessity attend this their Doctrine) first
will have that in sin are two things; Malum Culpae, and Poenam Culpae, the
fault, and the punishment; the fault, they say, is taken away, and satisfied
for by Jesus Christ; but the punishment is left behind, and is to be satisfied
for by us. (Thus to take away the sufficiency of Christ's satisfaction, to the
end they may imply a necessity of ours, they make up sin into a certain
Hodg-podge, containing both the fault, and the punishment, as if the sin were
not the fault only; whereas the punishment is not in the least any part of sin,
but the reward of sin, Romans 6.23.) But this Fetch being altogether defective,
is easily defeated, and will not in the least serve their turn. For the cause
which only produces an effect being taken away, by necessity the effect
cease. Now the fault is the cause which only produces satisfying punishment;
therefore the fault being taken away, necessarily satisfying punishment is
taken away. This is affirmed by Tertullian; Exempto (says he) reatu,
remittitur and Paena, the fault being taken away, the punishment is omitted:
And the same also is manifested by our Savior Christ, who no sooner had
forgiven the sick of the Palsy his sins, but his Palsy left him, Mar. 2. The
Prophet Isaiah also speaking of Christ in the work of our Redemption, says, He
has born our griefs, and carried our sorrows, Esa. 53.4. which are not the
guilt, but the punishment of our sins. And S. Augustius says, Suscipiendo
Christus Poenam, and non suscipiendo culpam, and culpam delevit and Poenam.
Christ taking upon him the punishment, and not the fault, has abolished both
the fault and punishment.

When they see therefore that this fails them, and that Christ has satisfied
not only for the fault, but the punishment of sin, then they begin to insist
upon the kinds of punishment: And secondly will have, that Christ has
satisfied for the Eternal punishment, but not for the Temporal. As for the
Temporal punishment, they say it remains, and is to be satisfied for by us
(as if the Temporal punishment were not contained in the Eternal, or that God
through Christ should forgive us an Eternal punishment, but not a Temporal:)
But this also is a mere deceit, is altogether as defective as the former, and
will not stand them in any stead at all: For S. Paul says, There is no
condemnation to them that are in Christ Josus, Romans 8.1. and if none, then
neither Eternal nor Temporal. God himself says of his People, I will forgive
their iniquity, and I will remember their sin no more, Jer. 31.34. And if God
forgiveth our iniquity, and in such sort as that he will remember our sin no
more, it follows that he will not be satisfied for the same with temporal
punishment. God is said also freely to forgive us our Trespasses, Col. 2.13.
and if freely, then without requiring in the least our satisfaction. Moreover,
he is said to forgive us all our Debt, Matthew. 18.32. and if all our Debt, then
not only the sin, but also the punishment; and not only the Eternal punishment,
but also the Temporal: And S. Paul again also (speaking of Christ says, It
plensed the Father that in him should all Fullness dwell, Col. 1.19. and if all
Fullness, then Fullness of satisfaction.

When they see therefore that this Wile also fails them, and that Christ has
fully satisfied for our sins, then they begin to insist upon the tim of the
sins being committed; and thirdly, they will have that Christ has fully
satisfied for sins committed before Baptism, but not for sins committed after
Baptism. As for sins committed after Baptism, they say they are left to us, and
we ought to satisfy, pay, and make recompense to God for them (as if that God
would be more favorable to those that sin before Baptism, than to those that
sin after Baptism; especially when the one oftentimes sin through malice, and
the other through infirmity.) But this Wile also is altogether deficient, and
serves to help them no more than the others beforementioned: For S. John
says, The Blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us from all sin, 1 John 1.7. and if
from all sin, then as well from sin committed after Baptism, as sin committed
before Baptism: And S. Paul says, That by Jesus Christ God pardons all our
offenses, Col. 2.13. and if God by Christ forgiveth all our offenses, then
again as well those committed after, as before Baptism.

When they see that all those Wiles and Subtilties fail them, and that none
will procure them so much as room for our satisfactions, (rather than their
Church should be put to a Nonplus) some will have that Christ's satisfactions
serve only to make ours available: (as if Christ died to make our sufferings of
worth before God, and to the end we might suffer a Divine Vengeance.) But this
helps them not at all, and is manifestly false; for Christ died not to make
our sufferings of any worth before God, but to free and exempt us from
suffering.

The benefit of his Passion consisted not in enabling of us to pay, but in
paying and satisfying to God for us. He gave us not the virtue to pay our own
Ransom, but (as S. Paul says) He gave himself a Ransom for us, 1 Timothy 2.6.
And the Son of God has by himself purged our sins, Heb. 1.3. and if by
himself, then not at all by our satisfactions.

Others (perceiving it is in vain to imply a necessity of ours, by lessening of
Christ's Satisfactions) will have the remission of sins to be altogether a
peculiar benefit of Christ's Passion; but withal, that the same ought to be
applied to us by our satisfactions; (as if forgiveness were to be applied by
payment, and pardon by punishment:) But this will not help them neither; for
our Penal Works are not the means whereby to apply to us the benefits of
Christ's Passion. The benefits of Christ's Passion are not applied to us by a
Monks Coul, or a Hair Shirt, or the yerks of a Whip, or the Fire of Purgatory,
or by going on Pilgrimage, etc. These are but weak and beggarly Elements, and
yokes of Bondage, from which God has sent his Son to redeem us, Gal. 4.3, 4.
Christ has freed us, and the Scriptures have warned and admonished us, Gal.
5.1. but the benefits of Christ's Passion are applied to us by Faith in Christ:
For the end of our Redemption was, that we might receive the Adoption of Sons,
Gal. 4.5. for being Sons, we are Heirs of God through Christ, Gal. 4.7. And we
are the Sons of God by Faith in Christ Jesus, Gal. 3.26.

Others (again) bring in certain places of holy Scripture, whereby to prove
their pretended satisfactions; viz. first they produce the punishments of the
Prophet David, 2 Samuel Chap. 12. ver 13. Chap. 13. ver. 28. Chap. 16. ver. 22.
and how that God inflicted the same upon him for certain sins, 2 Samuel 12.10,
11, 14. which before were forgiven him, 2 Samuel 12.13 But this makes nothing
for their purpose; for the Question is of Satisfactory Punishments: whereas
those inflicted upon the Prophet David were only Castigatory.

There is a great disterence betwixt punishments Satisfactory, and punishments
Castigatory; for the one (as they say) are brought to pay and make recompense
to God, and satisfy his Divine Justice, but the other are brought to correct
and amend the sinner, to humble and exercise him, lest he fall any more into
the like sin, and to keep others from the like offenses. Now that these of the
Prophet David were such, is affirmed by S. Augustine, who (speaking of those,
and other like punishments of the godly) says; Non manent ut Plagae peccatis,
sed ut exercitationes piorum; they remain not as punishments for sins, but as
exercises of just men.

Secondly, They allege the counsel given by Daniel to Nebuchadnezzar, to wit,
Redeem thy sins by Alms, and thy iniquities by showing mercy to the poor, Dan.
4.27. But this serves not their turn neither: For Daniel speaks here of
redeeming and satisfying before men, (exhorting the King to recompense by
liberality all such persons as he had any way wronged or injured) and not of
redeeming, in respect of God; besides, Alms are good works, and not
punishments, or Penances: And which is more, the Papists would have that Alms
and other satisfactions serve not to satisfy for sins, but for the punishments
due to sins. Moreover, this King was a Pagan uncircumcised, and therefore
(according to the Doctrine of the Romanists) not only liable to eternal
punishments, whereas they would have satisfactions to be only for Temporol, but
his satisfactions were of no worth.

CHAP. III. Wherein is showed, that the Papists Doctrine of Purgatory
overthrows the Faith of the Gospel, is against the Authority of Christ,
destroys the Testimony of the Fathers, condemns the Practice of all
Christian Churches, robs God of his Justice, makes him a Mocker, and is
contradicted by the Romanists own Tenants.
BIshop Fisher says, Ex Purgatorio p^det omnis Indulgentiatum estimatio; The
whole price of Indulgences hangs on Purgatory. Purgatory again hangs
altogether upon the necessity pretended to lie upon the faithful, of their
fully satisfying (through their payment to God) the Divine Justice for their
sins.

As for the necessity lying upon the faithful, of their satisfying (through
payment to God) the Divine Justice for their sins, the same is overthrown
already, and by consequence also Purgatory; nevertheless I have not said (for
the doing thereof) so much against the Doctrine of the one, but as much may be
said also against that of the other; for that the faithful go after this life
into a place of fire and torments, and there remain till they are purged with
satisfactory punishments, which is the Papists Doctrine of Purgatory; first
overthrows the Faith of the Gospel. It is heavy news, not glad tidings, that
they which believe in Christ, shall besides their manifold crosses and
punishments in this life, go afterward to a place of far greater grief and
sorrow. The glad tidings of our Savior Christ are quite contrary, who says,
Verily, verily, I say unto you, he that hears my words, and believes in him
that sent me, has everlasting life, and shall not come into condemnation, but
has passed from death to life, Joh. 5.24. And yet none can deny, but this is
the Faith of the Gospel, this is the glad tidings to all true Christians and
Believers in Christ; and the same is confirmed by a double Oath, that they
which hear his Word, and believe in God his Father, have everlasting life; that
is, are as sure of it, as if they had it already, and shall not come into
condemnation, either of temporal punishment after this life, or of eternal, but
have passed from death to life; that is, from hence, to joy and felicity.

Moreover, the Prophet David says unto God, If thou Lord wilt be extreme to
mark what is done a miss, who is able to abide it? Psalm. 130.3. intimating to
us, that God will not call his to a strict account. Christ will not be ashamed
of those that are his, before God and the holy Angels, Luke 9.16. There shall
be no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, Romans 8.1.

Almighty God having completed in six days the Creation of the World, the
seventh day rested from all his Works; even so, Christ having wrought our
Redemption, all that do here truly believe in him, and are careful to perform
good works, at their departure hence, shall enter into rest. They shall not
need to fear Purgatory; but as God rested from all his labors, so they shall
rest from all their troubles. This was declared to S. John from Heaven; I heard
a voice (says he) from Heaven, saying unto me, write, blessed are the dead
which die in the Lord; from henceforth, even so says the Spirit, for they rest
from their labors, and their works follow them, Rev. 14.13.

The like is testified by the Prophet Isaiah, who speaking of the death of the
Righteous, says, The righteous is taken away from the evil to come; he shall
enter into pence, they shall rest in their Beds, each one walking in his
uprightness, Esa 57.1.2.

Poor Lazaries was no sooner departed this life, but was carried by Angels into
Abraham's bosom, where he was comforted and refreshed, Luke 16.22. Jesus Christ
said to the good Thief at his death, This day thou shall be with me in
Paradise, Luke 23.43. And good old Simeon made no account but to enter into
rest after his death, saying, Lord, now let test thou thy servant depart in
peace, Luke 2.26.29.

S. Paul says. If God be with us, who can be against us? He that spared not
his own Son, but delivered him up for us all, how shall he not also with him
freely give us all things? Romans 8.31, 32. Here is the Riches of all good
Christians, God so loved them, that he gave them his Son; how much more will he
not give them all things else? But they are sinners, they are unprofitable
servants, they are Prodigal Children, this will turn away Gods favor from
them: but against this heavy news here is comfort, who will lay any thing to
the charge of Gods Chosen? It is God that justifies, who shall condemn? it is
Christ which is dead, yea or rather which is risen again, who is also at the
right hand of God, and makes request for us. Romans 8.33, 34. Though we often
displease God, even daily, yet we know Christ is his beloved Son, in whom the
Father is well pleased, and for whose sake we are accepted. And those whom he
accounts his, it is in vain for Satan to strive against; for they appear
before God clad in the righteousness of Jesus Christ.

Since this therefore is the glad tidings of the Gospel, (to wit, That he that
hears the word of Christ, and believes in him that sent him, has
everlasting life, and shall not come into condemnation, but has passed from
death to life; and is confirmed also by all the aforesaid Testimonies) let the
Deaf Papists, and all Counterfeit Catholics, which will neither hear his Word,
nor think they are bound to know and understand it; take heed, lest by this
their obstinacy and stopping their ears, to go, not into Purgatory, but into
Hell; for S. Paul says (and no doubt he said it not in vain, but it shall have
its force in some, and therefore mark it well) The Lord Jesus shall come
himself from Heaven, with his mighty Angels, in flaming fire, rendering
vengeance to them that know not God, and obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus
Christ, 1 These. 1.8. And how can they obey the Gospel, when they know it not,
and refuse to hear it? neither shall their Ignorance, the blind Mother of their
Devotion, excuse them, for Christ shall render vengeance to them that know not
God.

Secondly, The Doctrine of Purgatory is against the Authority of Christ; for he
says, Father, I will that they which thou bast given me be with me, even where
I am, that they may behold my glory which thou have given me; for thou lovedst
me before the foundation of the World Joh. 17.24. This is Christ's Will: And
what Pope, what Devil can withstand it? and he excepteth none. All his shall be
with him; all good Christians, as well great as small; all his Members, as well
weak as strong, he will not suffer the least of them to endure a moment the
Fire of Purgatory: And when this shall be, that they shall be with him, S. Paul
plainly expounds, at the hour of their deaths; and therefore (no doubt) upon
the Gospel grounding his Faith, he says, I desire to be loosed, and to be with
Christ. This was the cause he desired to be loosed out of the bonds of this
sinful flesh, that he might be with Christ, as our Savior here has promised;
and not to him only, but to all that his Father has given him, to all his. And
in another place, S. Paul, speaking of all true Christians, says, We know that
if our Earthly House of this Tabernacle were dissolved, we have a building of
God, a House not made with hands, eternal in the Heavens, 2 Cor. 5.1. So that
all the faithful have but two houses or dwellings, the one Earthly, the other
Heavenly; they have none at all in Purgatory. And he adds further, God has
given us the earnest of his Spirit; and therefore we always are of good
courage, knowing this, that being at home in the body, we are absent from the
Lord (for we walk by Faith, not by Sight,) yet we are of good courage, and we
desire rather to go out of the body, and to be at home with the Lord, 2 Cor.
5.5, 6, 7, 8. Behold here are but two Estates of the faithful, of those that
are Jesus Christ's, that have received the earnest of his Spirit, either to be
at home here in the body, and to be Strangers with the Lord, to walk by faith,
not by sight; or else to go out of the body, and to see his glorious Majesty,
there shall be no middle place to stay them in the way. And here this their
assurance, this their good courage, and (...), is twice repeated; they fear not
the performance of his promise, they fear no Purgatory, no torment in the way:
let their Adversary, the Devil, do what he can against them in this life,
hereafter they are sure he cannot hurt them: Behold, says S. John (speaking of
this life) the Devil shall cast some of you into prison, that ye may be tried,
and ye shall have tribulation ten days: Be thou faithful unto death, and I will
give thee a Crown of Life, Rev. 2.10.

Thirdly, The Doctrine of Purgatory destroveth the Testimony of the Fathers;
for the Fathers (both Greek and Latin) testify the quite and clean contrary:
Gregory Nazianzen says; (...). I believe the words and sayings of the wise,
that is, that every good soul fearing God, being delivered from the body (which
here it has on Earth) and separated from it, is presently admitted to the
enjoyment and contemplation of the good which is reserved for it, and
possesses admirable pleasures. Justin Martyr in the 75. Question of the Book
of Questions and Answers to the Orthodox, at the end of his works says, (...).
After the soul is departed out of the body, presently a separation is made of
the good from the bad, for they are carried by Angels to the places fit for
them; the souls of the good into Paradise, where the Angels resort, and are
conversant, but the souls of the wicked into hell. Chrysostom in his fourth
Homily upon the Epistle to the Hebrews, speaking of Hymns and Prayers that in
his time were used at the Burials of the Dead, says; (...). What signify
these burning Tapers, but that we bury the Champions of Christ? and these
Hymns, but that we glorify God, and give him thanks, because he has crowned
the Dead, and delivered him from all pain and grief. And in his second Homily
upon Lazarus, he says; (...). While we are here on Earth, we have fair hopes,
but as soon as we have left this world, it is no more in our power to do
Penance, or to undo or amend that which we have committed and done upon Earth.
And the same is affirmed by Epiphanius, in his second Book of Heresies, in the
39. Heresy, which is the Heresy of the Novatians; and moreover he there
adds, that when the Soul has left the body, (...). The Barns are shut up,
the time is accomplished, the Combat is ended, the place of Lists is empty, and
the Crowns are given. S. Ambrose in his Book of the benefit of Death, Chap. 2.
speaking of the day of Death, says; Cum dies advenerit, intrepide ad Abraham
Patrem nostrum proficiscamur, intrepide pergamus ad illum caetum justorumque
conventum, ibimus enim ad Patres nostros, ibimus ad illos nostrae fidei
praeceptores, ut etiamsi opera desint, fides opituletur, defendatur hareditas.
When that day comes, we go assuredly to our Father Abraham, to the Assembly
and company of the Just: For we shall go to our Fathers, we shall go to the
Teachers of our Faith, to the end, that although our works fail us, our Faith
may secure us, and the Inheritance be kept for us. And again, in the same Book,
Chap. 8. he says: Insipientes mortem quasi summum malum, Supientes quasi
requiem post labores, and finem malorum expetunt: Fools fear Death as the
chiefest evil, but wise men desire it, as a rest after their Travels, and the
end of their evils. S. Cyprian in his first Treatise against Demetrian, says;
Aevi temporalis fine completo, ad aeterna vel mortis vel immortalitatis
hospitia dividimur: This temporal life being ended, we are sequestered into the
habitation either of eternal death, or eternal life. And toward the end of the
same Treatise, he says; Quando istinc excessum fuerit, nullus jam locus
paenitentiae est, nullus satisfactionis effectus. Hic vita aut amittitur aut
tenetur, hic saluti aeternae cultu Dei, and fructu fidei providetur: When we
are gone from hence, there is no more place of Penance, no effect of
satisfaction, life is here either lost or won; Everlasting Life (by the worship
of God, and the fruits of Faith) is here provided for: And moreover in his Book
of Mortality, he says; Deus tibi de hoc munde recedenti, immortalitatem
pollicetur atque aeternitatem, and tu dubitas? hoc est Deum omnino non nosse:
God at thy going out of this world, promises thee immortality and eternal
life, and do thou doubt hereof? this is not to know God at all as thou
should. S. Augustine in his 54. Epistle to Macedonius, says; Morum porro
corrigendorum nullus alius quam in hac vita locus, nam post hanc vitam quisque
id habebit, quod in hac sibimet conquisierit: There is no other place to
correct our manners and conditions, but only in this life; for after this life
every man shall have that which he has purchased to himself here in this
world. In his 13th Book of the City of God, Chap. 9. he says; In requie sunt
animae piorum a corporibus separata: impiorum autem paenas luunt, donec istarum
ad aeternam vitam, illarum vero ad aeternam mortem quae secunda dicitur,
corpora reviviscant: The soul of the godly being separated from their bodies,
are in rest; but the souls of the ungodly suffer punishment, until the bodies
of them do rise again unto everlasting life, and the bodies of these to eternal
death, which is called the second death. In his Book of the Vanity of the
World, Tom. 9. Chap. 1. he says; Scitote quod cum anima a corpore evellitur,
aut in Paradiso pro meritis bonis collocatur, aut certe pro peccatis in inferni
tartara praecipitatur: Know, that when the soul departs out of the body, it
is presently placed in Paradise, because of her good works, or is thrown down
headlong into the Pit of Hell, because of her sins. And in the second Sermon
of the Consolation of the Dead, which is in the ninth Tome of his works, he
says; Recedens anima ab Angelis suscipitur and collocatur aut-in sinu Abrahae,
si fidelis est, aut in carceris inferni custodia, si peccatrix est: The soul
going out of the body, is received and placed in Abraham's Bosom, if it be
faithful; or in the Infernal Prison of Hell, if it be sinful. And moreover in
his 232. Sermon against Drunkenness, he says; Nemo se decipiat, Fratres, duo
enim loca sunt, and tertius non est ullus: Qui cumt Christo regnare non
meruerit, cum Diabolo absque dubitutione ulla Peribit: Let no man deceive
himself, my Brethren, there are but two places, and a third there is not any:
He that shall not merit to reign with Christ shall without doubt perish with
the Devil. S. Hierome upon the ninth of the Prophet Amos says; Quando anima
vinculis larata-corporit, volandi quo velit sive quo ire compellitur propter
tenuitatem substantiae habuerit libertatem, aut ad inferna Ducetur, aut certe
ad Coelestia sublevabitur: When the soul loosed from the bonds of the body
shall be at liberty, because of the lightness of its substance, to fly whither
it will, or whither it is constrained to go, it shall either be carried to
Hell, or without fail be lifted up to Heaven. And Gregory Nyssen in the Book of
those that sleep, says; Per mortem soluto Bello quod in nobis est, pacem men's
agitat: The War that is in us being ended by death, our souls rest.

Yea, the Fathers were so far from believing that faithful souls are tormented
in fire until the-Resurrection, (as the Papists would make men believe) that
very many of them held, that the soul separated from the body could not suffer
any torment. Chrysostom in his 39. Homily upon the first Epistle to the
Corinthiane says; (...). Although the soul remains, although it were ten
thousand times immortal, as in truth it is, it shall not without the body
receive those unspeakable blessings, nor suffer any punishment. Gregory Nissen
in his third Oration upon the Resurrection of Christ, says; Animam per se
separatim ignis nunquam attigerit, nec tenebrae quidem ei molestae fuerint,
utpote quae oculis caret, etc. Fire can never touch the soul separated from the
body, neither can darkness be troublesome to it, because it wants eyes, etc.
Tertullian in his Apology, Chap. 48. says; Neque pati quicquam potest anima
sola sine stabili materia, id est, Carne: The soul alone cannot suffer any
thing without solid matter, that is, the Flesh: Another affirms, that it is
injustice to punish the soul for sin before the Resurrection, in regard the
body has been partaker with her; but he will have the body and soul, as they
have sinned both together, to be punished both together; saying, If sins shall
be punished before the Resurrection, God shall not deal justly with the soul,
for she alone would be put to suffer the punishment of those things which she
offended in the life, at the porturbation of the body, drawing her to these
appetites and motions. And according to S. Ambrose (in his tenth Chapter of the
Book of the benefit of death) all the punishment that souls suffer, being
separated from their bodies, is, that they remain in great fear and
disquietness, attending the punishment that is prepared for them at the latter
day.

Fourthly, The Doctrine of Purgatory condemns the practice of all Christian
Churches: For it cannot be but an exceeding great breach of duty in them all
(but especially in those that believe the souls of the dead may be benefitted
by the prayers of the living) if they do not pray for the souls therein: for
this is not to do by others, as they would have others to do by them; and
therefore is against both the Law and Prophets, and directly opposite to the
Command of Christ.

And that this is the continual practice of all Christian Churches, is
manifest; for the Greek, and all other Eastern Churches, notwithstanding they
daily pray for the dead, yet they never pray for the souls in Purgatory, for
indeed they believe there is no Purgatory; but the prayers they offer up for
the dead, are, that they may be saved at the Resurrection.

Likewise the Church of Rome, although it pray daily for the souls departed,
yet it never prays for the souls in Purgatory, nor once craveth their
deliverance thence.

And although this may seem strange, in regard of the many Masses she daily (by
her Priests) undertaketh to say for the souls therein, yet if we consider the
reason, it is no wonder at all: for when the prayers used in her said Masses
were first hatched, she did not believe of her now Purgatory, but the belief
thereof (through the great profit she perceived might thereby accrue to her
Pope and Clergy) has been infused into her fancy since. And to the end the
same may appear truth, to wit, that she prays not at all for the souls in
Purgatory, I shall here give you an account of the prayers she at any time
uses for the souls departed.

The first of which is a very foolish prayer, in the Canon of her common Mass,
the which is this; Memento etiam, Domine, Famulorum and Famularum tuarum (here
is made a particular mention of certain particular dead Folks, whom it pleases
the Priest to name, and after is added) qui nos praecesserunt cum signo fidei,
and dormiunt in somno pacis, etc. Remember, O Lord, thy Servants and Handmaids
that have gone before us with the sign of Faith, and sleep in the sleep of
Peace. To these, O Lord, and to all those that rest in Christ, we pray thee
that thou will grant place of comfort, of light and peace, through the same
Christ our Lord, Amen. I call this prayer foolish, because it speaks against
it self: For first it confesses, that the dead do sleep in the sleep of Peace,
and that they rest in Christ; and yet notwithstanding afterward it desires
that God would give them place of comfort, of light and peace; For if they
sleep in the sleep of Peace, and rest in Christ, have they not the place of
peace? What need is there to ask that those that sleep in peace, should have
the place of peace? Is it not all one to sleep in peace, and to have the place
of peace? to rest in Christ, and to have the place of comfort? If souls be
tormented in Purgatory, yet they are not dead in their torment there; how
therefore can they be said to rest: Peradventure the Defenders of the Canon of
the Mass will answer, that this prayer speaks of the body, when it says,
that the dead sleep, and not of the soul. Well, suppose it do; for the soul
indeed sleeps not, but only the body: but it says also, that they have
quietness and rest; which speech cannot well be understood of the body, but of
that part that may be troubled; for what rest can it be, to rest in that part
that can feel no manner of thing without the soul; and to be troubled in that
part which, indeed, feels and lives? When they say in their service for the
dead, Requiescant in pace, let them rest in peace, doubtless they mean to speak
of the soul, and not of the body; forasmuch as there is no need to pray that
the body of the dead should rest, because that of necessity it does rest; but
the soul may (as they think) have trouble and pain in Purgatory; and therefore
they pray that they may have rest, as concerning the foul. S. John in the
Apocalypse, when he says, Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord: Why does
the Spirit say, that from henceforth they rest from their labors? Will we say,
that he speaks there of the rest of the body, and not of the soul? If he
speak of the body; what Prerogative have the bodies of the Just until the day
of Judgment, more than the bodies of the Wicked, since the one and other would
rest equally, and there would be no difference in this point? And yet S. John
makes a difference between them, for he calls them the Dead in the Lord;
that is to say, the Just blessed. And why blessed? because that from henceforth
they shall rest from their labor, and be in quiet; giving to understand, that
the other do not rest from their labor, but have more than ever they had,
because they be damned to everlasting pain. So that when the rest of the Just
is spoken of, there is meant the rest of the soul, and not of the body. Being
then thus, that this prayer in the one part affirms that the Just sleep in
peace, and rest in Christ, and in the other part desires that God would give
them a place of peace and comfort, it plainly appears, that this prayer
speaks against it self, and is absurd and foolish. But to return to the
matter in hand in the said prayer, you see, is no mention at all of the souls
that broil in Purgatory, but of the souls that sleep in peace, and rest in
Christ.

The second prayer by which she prays for the souls departed, is a prayer in
her Mass for the dead; and the same desires, that the soul of the Man or Woman
departed (to wit, for whom it prays) may not be given into the hands of the
Enemy, but be received by the holy Angels, and carried into the Country of
Paradise; to the end that having believed and hoped it may not suffer
everlasting pain, but possess everlasting joys.

But here she neither speaks of the pains of Purgatory, nor prays for the
souls in Purgatory, for such a request does not agree with the pains of
Purgatory; for the pains of Purgatory (they say) are temporal, but the pains
mentioned in this prayer are eternal? Neither does it agree with the souls in
Purgatory, for the souls in Purgatory she will have to be such as departed this
World in the state of Grace, which (as she grants her self) are neither in
peril, nor possibility of suffering eternal pain; whereas the souls prayed for
here (as the prayer it self gives us to understand) are such as are subject
and liable to eternal damnation, for it prays they may not be given into the
hands of the Enemy, nor suffer everlasting pain.

The third prayer with which she prays for the souls departed, is also in her
Mass for the Dead, and is commonly called the Offertory, the which is as
follows: Domine Jesu Christ, Rex gloriae, libera animas omnium fidelium
defunctorum, de manu inferni, and de profundo lacu, libera eas de ore leonis,
ne absorbeat eas tartarus, sed signifer S. Michael repraesentet eas in lucem
sanctam, etc. O Lord Jesus Christ, King of Glory, deliver the souls of all
faithful dead, from the pains of Hell, and from the deep Lake, deliver them
from the mouth of the Lion, that Hell may not swallow them up, but that thy
Standard Bearer S. Michael may present them in the holy Light, the which in
time past thou did promise to Abraham and his Seed.

But in this Offertory, you see, there is not a word spoke of Purgatory, but of
Hell, and the deep Lake, and the Mouth of the Lion; all which cannot agree with
Purgatory, but with the place of the damned. Likewise the souls here spoke of,
cannot be the souls in Purgatory, for they (as she holds her self) are not in
the least danger of being swallowed up into Hell; however so far therein, but
that S Michael their Standard Bearer (as she calls him) may be able to
present them (when it shall please God) into the holy light: but this prayer
desires, that the souls it prays for, may not be swallowed up into Hell, and
in such sort, but that S. Michael their Standard Bearer may present them into
the holy light.

Her other prayers for the Souls departed, are certain Ejaculations; to wit,
Fidelium animae per misericordiam Dei requiescant in Pace. Let the faithful
Souls by the mercy of God rest in peace. Requiem aeternam dona eis domine. Give
them, O Lord, eternal rest. A Porta inferi erue Domine animas little. Deliver
their Souls, O Lord, from the gates of Hell.

But in these Ejaculations also, there is no mention at all, either of
Purgatory, or of the Souls in Purgatory; and besides the Ejaculations also are
needless: For as for the rest here spoke of, (She acknowledges in the
aforesaid Prayer in the Canon of her common Mass) they have the same already;
and as for the Gates of Hell they never enter them. But suppose they did enter
them, out of Hell there is no redemption, and so she prays in vain. This
latter also, and moreover the two prayers before mentioned in the Mass for the
dead, are no better than blasphemous; for they give us to understand, that the
Souls of the Faithful departed this life, may be damned in Hell; and that, to
all Eternity.

15ly. The Doctrine of Purgatory robs God of his Justice. For since the sins
of the Faithful are sufficiently satisfied for by the Death of Christ, since
God in him forgiveth them; and since all such Souls as the Church of Rome would
have in Purgatory, are (as she affirms her self) void of fault; having (as
she faith) all their guiltiness first taken away, and the same forgiven them
here in this world: It follows necessarily, that if God punish them, (and
Purgatory the Papists say is a place for that purpose) he punishes Souls that
are no longer guilty, takes vengeance of sins that are already pardoned, and
exacts debts that are already paid, taking two payments for one and the self
same debt, and two satisfactions for one and the self same sin, to wit, the
Passion of Christ, and the pains of Purgatory, and this notwithstanding the
first was entire. 'Twould be very unjust for us, to deal thus with our enemies;
how much more then for God to deal thus with his Children.

6ly. The Doctrine of Purgatory makes God a mocker; for God would absolutely
mock us, did he but sa to us as the Doctrine of Purgatory would have him; to
wit, I will forgive thee, but yet I will punish thee. I forgive thee thy debt,
but thou shall pay me. For our sins are debts, the payment whereof is the
punishment.

In fine, we need not go any further to confute the Doctrine of Purgatory, than
to the Romanists own Tenants. For if the Pope be infallible, as the Romanists
hold and affirm he is. Pope Gregory the first, in his 13. Book upon Job, Chap.
20. tells us plainly, that Quia authoris nostri gratia redempti sumus, hoc
jam coelestis muneris habemus, ut cum de carnis nostra habitatione subtrahimur,
mox ad coelestia premia ducamur. Because we are redeemed by the grace of our
Creator, we have this heavenly gift, that when our Souls depart out of this
fleshly habitation, we are presently carried to the heavenly rewards. Likewise,
if the Book of Wisdom be Canonical, as they hold it is, and the Souls in
Purgatory be the Souls of the Righteous, as they also hold; the same is as
clear and as evident a testimony against it as may be. For it is said there, The
Souls of the Righteous are in the hands of God, there shall no Torment touch
them, Wis. 3.6.

The Papists allege certain places of holy Scripture, to prove their pretended
Purgatory, but against their true sense.

First they allege Mat. 12.32. where Christ speaking of the sin against the
Holy Ghost, says; It shall nor be forgiven in this world, nor in the world to
come. And thereby they would imply, that some sins shall be forgiven in the
world to come, which they say is, Purgatory.

But Purgatory cannot be said to be the world to come, because (as they say)
it is already in being. Besides Purgatory (they say is) is a place of torment
and Punishment, and not of pardon: And moreover (according to their own
Doctrine) sin is pardoned before the Souls enter into Purgatory. The sense of
this place is as clear as may be. Not to pardon sin, is to punish it. And Jesus
Christ declares, that God will punish the sin against the holy Ghost, both in
this life, and at the day of Judgment, which in Luke 20.35. is called the other
world.

2ly. They allege Luke 12.58, 59 where it is said, Whilst thou go with thine
Adversary to the Magistrate, as thou art in the way, give diligence that thou
may be delivered from him, lest he draw thee to the Judge, and the Judge
deliver thee to the Officer, and the Officer cast thee into Prison. I tell
thee, thou shall not come out thence, till thou have paid the very utmost Mite.

The Way they would have to signify Life the Magistrate God, the Prison the
Fire of Purgatory, the Officer they know not who, and the Adversary the Devil;
and so by consequence they would have us to agree with the Devil: And that we
are in the way with the Devil; For S. Matthew speaking of this same passage,
rendereth it thus, Agree with thine Adversary quickly, whilst thou art in the
way with him, Mat. 5.25. For these very reasons, some of them would have the
Devil to be the Sergeant and the Law the Adversary; but this mendeth not the
matter at all but makes it worse. For does the Devil draw the faithful into
Purgatory? are we in the way with the Law? Is the Law of God our Enemy? are we
to seek means to deliver our selves from it, and to shake off its yoke? for
it is said here, that we must give diligence in the way, that we may be
delivered from the Adversary. And if this Prison be Purgatory, and Souls must
stay therein till such times they have paid the very utmost mite, how comes it
to pass that the Pope by Indulgences may deliver them out from thence before.

But this their comment is a mere Fiction, and is not the sense of this place
of Scripture. Christ here exhorts us to peace and Unity, and would not have
us to strive and contend one with another in law This is affirmed by S Ambrose,
who in his exposition hereupon, says; that Christ speaks here, De
reconciliand a pace dissidentium Fratrum. Of making peace between Brethren at
strife.

3ly. They Allege 1 Cor. 3.11, 12, 13, 14, 15. where it is said no other
Foundation can any man say than that which is laid, which is Jesus Christ. And
if any man build on this Foundation, Gold, Silver, precious stones, Timber,
Hay, or Stubble; every man's work shall be made manifest, for the day shall
discover it, because it shall be revealed by fire; and the fire shall try every
man's work of what sort it is; if any man's work abide which he has built
thereupon, he shall receive wages; if any man's work burn, he shall suffer loss;
but he shall be saved himself, yet so as it were by fire.

The fire that is here spoke of, they would have to be the fire of Purgatory:
but this cannot be for the fire mentioned here, does not agree with the fire of
Purgatory. For the fire of Purgatory (they say) burns and punishes the Soul,
but this burns and tries the works. The fire of Purgatory (they say) is
real, but this is only comparative for it is said here, he shall be saved, yet so
as it were by fire. Moreover from the fire of Purgatory (they say) are exempted
Martyrs; but from this are exempted none, for it is said ^wise here, it shall
try every man's works.

As for the sense of this place of Scripture, the day that is here spoke of, is
the course of time we have to spend here in this life: Of which S. Paul
speaking, 2 Cor. 6.2. says, Behold, now is the accepted time: Behold now is
the day of Salvation. And the fire that is here mentioned, is the heat of
affliction, Persecution, and trouble we suffer in which course of time; of
which S. Peter speaking, 1 Pet. 1.5, 6, 7. says, We are kept by the Power of
God through Faith unto Salvation, ready to be revealed in the last time:
wherein we greatly rejoice, though now for a season (if need be) we are in
heaviness through manifold temptations; that the trial of our Faith being much
more precious than of gold that perishes, though it be tried by fire, might be
found unto praise, and honor, and glory, at the appearing of Jesus Christ. And
again, 1 Pet. 4.12, 13. My beloved, account not your fiery trial as though it
were some strange thing happened to you, but as you are partakers of Christ's
sufferings rejoice, that in the Revelation of his Glory you may triumphing be
glad And Christ speaking of the same, compares their heat to the scorching
heat of the Sun. This place of S. Paul is thus also understood by S. Augustine
in his Manual to Laurentius, Chap. 68.

Fourthly, They allege, Rev. 21.27. where the Spirit of God speaking of the
Heavenly Jerusalem, says, There shall enter into it no unclean thing. From
whence they infer, there must needs be a Purgatory. But this makes nothing at
all for them; for he speaks here (as the words following declare) of the
profane and wicked, such as are not written in the Book of Life, but shall be
cast into Hell: Besides, as for others, they may not be said unclean, for they
are purged and cleansed in the Blood of Christ, Rev. 1.5. 1 John 1.7.

Fifthly, They allege 2 Mac. 1^. where Judas Macchabeus caused Sacrifices to
be offered for the dead: but this makes rather against Purgatory, than for it;
for the Author of the Book testifies, that what Judas therein did, had respect
to the Resurrection, and was that they might rise again to Salvation, and not
that they might be taken out from the sire of Purgatory. Moreover, this Book is
Apocrypha, for it is not found in the Original of the Old Testament, which is
the Hebrew Bible; wherefore neither Jesus Christ, nor any of his Apostles, did
ever quote the Books of the Macchabees, or any other of the Apocrypha: The
Author himself says, that his intention in this Book is to make an abridgment
of the History of Jason the Cyrenian: And shall the abridgment of a History be
accounted Canonical, when the History it self was not Canonical? How therefore
can it be sufficient whereupon to ground any point of Doctrine appertaining to
our Faith? Also the Author, toward the end of his Book, doubts whether he
has said well or no, and says, by way of excuse, that he has done it as well
as he could. This cannot be the Language of the Spirit of God, for it neither
doubts of its well doing, nor excuses its self to men; and therefore the
Doctrine of Purgatory may not be grounded upon this place. Besides, the Greeks
do as much as what is mentioned here, and yet they utterly deny Purgatory. And
S. Augustine in his Book of the care for the Dead, approves prayer for the
Dead, and yet in all that Book speaks not one word of Purgatory.

Lastly, Rather than they will have Purgatory utterly overthrown, they bring in
S. Augustine, lib. 21. cap. 26. de Civitate Dei, doubting whether or no, after
this life, there be any such thing as a purging fire; and thereby they imply,
that there may be such a place as Purgatory. But this makes nothing for them
neither; for the fire that S. Augustine there doubts of, is the fire that was
held by most of the Fathers should be immediately after the Resurrection, when
Christ comes to judge the World, Lactan. l. 2. c. 21.
in which they believed that every man's works should be tried, which they call
a Baptism of Fire, from which they exempt no man, no not so much as the Ambros.
Sermon. 20. sup. Psalm. 118.
Apostles, or the Virgin Hilar. sup Psalm. 119. in Par. 3.
Mary; but the Purgatory which the Papist dream of, they say is now in being,
and ends at the day of Judgment; and moreover, is not for all, but for
certain persons which they by have not here fully satisfied Gods Justice for
their sins; which Purgatory S. Augustine puts us out of doubt of, (though he
doubts of the other) saying; Aug. l. ^. c. 16. de Civit. Dei.
Purgatorias autem panas nullas futures opinatur, nisi ante illud ultimum
tremendumque judicium. Unless, as it is thought at the last Judgment, after this
life there are no purging pains.

CHAP. IV. Wherein is showed, that could a man satisfy (as the Papists say)
beyond Gods Justice, or the desert of his sins, yet those satisfactions
superabounding, may not be given (as they pretend) to others.
NOne but Christ could ever satisfy (through payment and recompense to God)
the Divine Justice for sins: As for others, the best of us all are unable (as I
have showed before) thus to satisfy for them, yea for our own sins, much less
also for the sins of others. The Doctrine of the Papists, which teaches that a
man may thus satisfy, not only for himself, but withal have an overplus
wherewith to accommodate and satisfy for others, and which the Pope may apply
to others, is a mere Prodigy, a benefit which has never yet accrewed to us, or
ever hereafter shall accrue to us, by any (even the greatest) of Christ's
Saints: For if any of them should satisfy thus for others, it would follow,
that Christ is not alone our Savior, and this is manifestly false, for there
is no Salvation in any other, neither is there any other Name given under
Heaven whereby we must be saved, Act. 4.12. Nevertheless should or could they
do it, and did they undertake it, 'twould not be accepted of; for every man (as
the Scripture says) shall bear his own burden, Gal. 6.5. Every man shall
receive his own reward according to his own labor, 1 Cor. 3.8. And a man can
by no means redeem his Brother, or pay a Ransom to God for him, Psalm. 49.7 What
a bold presumption is it therefore for the Papists to go about to persuade us,
that God will accept the Fastings, Whippings, and Pilgrimages of S. Bennet, or
S. Francis, in payment of the punishment due to the sins of others: Besides it
is needless, for the satisfaction of Jesus Christ is sufficient for us, without
an addition of the Whippings of the Saints. It is likewise to accuse God of
injustice, to think that he has sent any one more sufferings than his sins
have deserved; and is also to take the height of sin amiss, not knowing how
great punishments are due to it, since our Savior Christ says, Whosoever
shall say unto his Brother, thou Fool, shall be in danger of Hell Fire.
Moreover, it is a mere mocking of the Saints, to set them to do that which is
already done.

As for the Pope, he need not so much concern himself, to take souls from
Purgatory which are not there: But suppose they were there, since they are the
souls of the faithful, for which Christ intercedeth with his Father, and that
continually, how comes it to pass that they come not out from thence at
Christ's Intercessions, and yet come out at the Popes Pardons? Besides, what
does the Pope in this his taking out of souls from Purgatory, but exalt himself
above God? for if it be Gods Will to punish his Children in a fire, why will
not the Pope suffer him to punish them as it pleases him? Moreover, it is
plain, that if the Pope will needlessly take souls from Purgatory, he does it
without Authority, for the Power of the Keys (by which he pretends to do the
same) extends not to the Dead; for if Christ thereby gave him power to unbind
and unloose upon Earth, yet he gave him not the power of loosing under the
Earth. If also (according to the Romanists own Doctrine) satisfactions be
meritorious, and a man must first merit here on Earth what he afterward has
in Heaven, and cannot merit here so much, but he may have a reward there to
equalize it; what an unjust thing is it for the Pope, when a Monk or Friar
having watched, fasted, whipped, trotted to Rome, yea it may be to Jerusalem,
on Pilgrimage, and this to obtain a more than a common reward in Heaven, is no
sooner got to Heaven, but he is divested of all his superabundant Merits, and
is forced to take up there with what place the Pope (though on Earth) is
pleased to leave and appoint him, and to admit a stranger (in some respects it
may be to God himself) to enjoy the fruits of his travel. Moreover, what an
unjust thing (if he have such power) is it in him, to tie the remission of sins
to certain places? So that although a man should do ten times the Devotion
elsewhere, yet he should not have the same Pardon. I would fain know of the
Romanists, who has put the Saints superabundant sufferings into their Churches
Tressury? who gave the same into the Popes Custody? when and where this
distribution did first begin ^ how we shall be assured that God will take the
same for current payment? wherefore the Chief Prelates, mentioned in the Old
Testament, had not such Treasuries wherein ^ the sufferings of Noah, Abraham,
and Moses? wherefore Christ and his Apostles did forget to speak of this
Treasure? and why they suffered such surplusage to be lost by ill Husbandry? or
what shall become of the many thousand years Indulgences which a man may obtain
more than he has need of? Certainly these Indulgences are most horrible
Pollutions, whereby the Church of Rome is most nastily corrupted.

FINIS.

