A Bosom opened TO THE JEWS: Holding forth to others Some Reasons for our
receiving of them into our Nation.
TO me the receiving of them is acceptable, and my spirit embraces them with
gladness, for they are to me beloved for the Fathers sakes, Abraham, Isaac,
Jacob, Joseph, Moses, Joshua, Samuel, David, Daniel, and all the Worthyes, and
righteous men, and Prophets of the Lord, which have sprung up among them; whose
breasts, some of them, we suck to this day; and who stand as worthy ensamples
to us, upon whom the ends of the world are come: of whom also our Lord came,
that has brought life and immortality to light to us Gentiles; who has taken
down the partition wall, that was between the Jews and us Gentiles, so to take
away the enmity, and of twain to make one. Though they yet see not this, yet my
heart is enlarged toward them to place them in its love; and not mine only,
but many others.

Again, We look that they shall come in and believe, and that the time of
their restoring is very nigh: Why should we not then desire to have them with
us, that when God opens their eyes to see him whom they have pierced, they and
we may rejoice together, after the mourning, Zech. 12.

Again, Why should we not be desirous of their coming in (if there be any
love in us toward them) that so if it be possible we may become instruments of
their Conversion; holding forth before them a Heavenly conversation to convince
them; and that they may come to see that Christ Jesus has followers that are
innocent and blameless in the world; for this Nation does afford such. And so
that great stumbling block of the wickedness of the lives of seeming
Christians, who have got the name; and that other great stumbling block of the
superstition and Idolatry of their worships, may be taken out of their way: for
God has among us such as bear testimony against both these.

Again, They are to obtain mercy through our mercy, Romans 11. 31. If then our
mercy be shut up against them, how shall they obtain mercy through ours? what
manner of spirit is this, that shuts them out from mercy, or hardens their
hearts, by shutting up their own bowels of mercy against them, through which
their mercy is to spring: as on the contrary, our mercy sprang up to us through
their unbelief, Romans 11. 30. How unthankful, how unkind is such a spirit.

Again, Its said, Romans 11. 12. If their fall be the riches of the world, and
their diminishing be the riches of the Gentiles, how much more their fullness;
now we looking for this, why should we not desire the furtherance of their
conversion, even for our own sakes.

Again, It is agreeable to the Spirit and precepts of Jesus Christ, to give to
him that asks, and not to be forgetful to entertain strangers: Now why
should we not put in practice these precepts toward the Jews, seeing they are
strangers, scattered in the Earth, and peaceably ask and entreat for a
habitation among us: except we can show reason why they are to be excluded in
this case, and not comprehended in those precepts.

Again, lastly, The Jews being scattered from their Country, and lying under
the severity of the Lord; this is a time for us to show mercy, and not to help
forward the affliction, Zech. 1. 15.

These things I am moved to publish, as out of love to the Nation of the Jews;
so also out of love to my own Country, which I would not have to be found a
rejecter of them being strangers in the time of their calamity, they seeking to
come in and live peaceably among us. But chiefly, that they may not return and
say, They have prayed for us but they will not receive us; and so the name of
Christ be blasphemed and evil reported of by them. Let that lying-prayer lie
upon the heads of those only, in whom all other lying-prayers are found; that
the name of Christ may not be blasphemed with it abroad; as it is with all the
rest of their abominations: For there are many in this Nation whose bowels are
as well enlarged to receive them, as they have been to pray for them.

W. Tomlinson.

LONDON: Printed for Giles Calvert, at the Black-spread-Eagle, at the West end
of Paul's. 16^6.


