FERMENTVM PHARISAEORVM, OR, The Leaven of Pharisaicall WILL WORSHIP: Declared
in A SERMON On Matthew. 15. 9. November. 24. 1641. at Lemster in Herefordshire.

By JOHN TOMBS, B. D.

It is this nineteenth day of April Anno Dom. 1643. Ordered by the Committee
of the House of Commons in Parliament, concerning Printing, that this Book
entitled (The Leaven of Pharisaicall Will Worship) be Printed.

John White.

LONDON, Printed by Richard Cotes, for Andrew Crook, and are to be sold at his
shop at the sign of the Green Dragon in Paul's Churchyard. 1643.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL Richard Aldworth Esquire, Mayor, the Aldermen,
Sheriffs, and the rest of the Inhabitants of the City of BRISTOLL.
HOw tenacious the heart of man is of superstition, as former ages, so the
present generation do abundantly declare. No age can yield a more horrid
instance of a people taught so much as this Nation has been concerning the
true Worship of God, admonished so often* that God is not pleased by humane
rites, and yet still place their Religion in them, oppugn the representative
Body of the Commonwealth, for seeking to remove them, fight for them tanquam
pro aris and focis, spoil their own Country, with such cruel despite drive
away their faithful teachers, and unspotted neighbors from their dwellings,
wives and children, and think it a good work to destroy them for not yielding
to practice things never appointed by God and notoriously tending to
superstition, and for their faithful dealing with their souls in laboring to
draw them from their vain confidence in the flesh to worship God in the
spirit, and to rejoice in Christ Jesus. Hope somewhat to abate this fire of
rage, moved me at first to cast this bucket of water to quench it. But as it
happens often, that when water quenches not a fire, it flames out the more by
casting water on it: so it be fell me: the barbarous rage and impetuous
violence of people so increased, that I could have no safety in my proper
station, but was enforced to remove my self, Wife and Children, and since have
suffered the spoiling of my goods, of my dwelling house, with many other
injuries. After much tossing up and down, J have in Your City cast anchor,
till either a greater storm enforce me to commit my self to the Maine again,
or a favorable gale bring me into a Harbor. And that J may testify my love
to this City, and gratitude for my present entertainment, and withal aiming at
your edification, J have presumed in publishing this Sermon, to prefixe your
Names, to whom J humbly present it for your use and acceptance, and do
profess my self

Yours, in the service of Christ Jesus, JOHN TOMBS.

The Leaven of Pharisaicall Will Worship.
Matthew 15. 9. But in vain they do worship me, teaching for doctrines the
Commandments of men.
OF all the opposers of Christ none were more malicious, Sect. 1.
nor more dangerous then the Scribes and Pharisees: None more malicious,
because none did so clearly apprehend the glory of Christ, as they that saw
the rays of his divinity shining in his miracles, the evidence of his
acquaintance with God in his divine doctrine; yet they hated him extremely as
shadowing and eclipsing their repute, and power with the people, whose praise
they sought more then the praise of God: Now as no poison is stronger then that
of the hottest Countries, so no malice greater then that of the most enlightened
breasts; Nor any more dangerous, because none covered their enmity with such
shows of gravity and devotion as they did, whereby their example and
persuasions took with many to the great hinderance of the efficacy of Christ's
Preaching: For formal hypocrisy is more mischievous to men's souls, then open
ungodliness, in as much as it is less discernible, even as a viper lurking
under green leaves is more dangerous, then a dog that runs on a man with
open mouth. Fallit vitium specie virtutis et umbra: which thing caused our Lord
Christ to have more encounters with this generation of vipers, then with all
other adversaries. Among which, that which is related in this Chapter is
remarkable: For it may seem that they came down from Jerusalem of purpose to
quarrel with Christ, and therefore our Savior deals with them most plainly
and sharply in his reply.

The occasion they take was his disciples omission of their ancient Custom of
washing before meals, the neglect of which they conceived a great crime, as
violating the tradition of the Elders: Concerning which they expostulate with
Christ for his disciples supposed fault: v. 2. Why do thy disciples
transgress the tradition of the Elders? Had the people of this generation
been to make answer to this question, they would have fallen on Christ's
disciples, and checked them for their indiscretion at least in giving offense
in a matter indifferent, of novelty in not observing old customs. They should
have heard, What harm is it to wash ones hands before meals? why should not
men for peace sake do as others do? Are you wiser then the Rabbines? then
your Elders? will you be singular and different from all others? Smooth words
should have been given to the Pharisees, to entreat them to be contented,
order should be taken to teach the disciples better manners; But our Savior
carries the business in another way, what his disciples neglected to do, he
himself gave them example to neglect, Luke 11. 38. And when the Pharisees
excepted against them, he does in plain words endite them of hypocrisy, and
charge them home by a proof from the Prophet Esaias, which he applies to
them as forespoken of them. Sect. 2.
verse. 7, 8* 9.

So that the words of my text are a passage cited out of the prophecy of
Isaiah 29. 13. wherein our Savior makes use of the Septuagints translation,
which is somewhat different in words, though not in sense, from the Hebrew, for
whereas in the Hebrew the words are, And their fear toward me is taught from,
or by the precepts of men, the Septuagint read, But in vain do they worship
me, teaching for doctrines the Commandments of men. In which there is a sin
charged upon these Pharisees, to wit, the teaching doctrines the commandments
of men, that is, as Piscator in his Scholies paraphraseth the words, tales
doctrinas, quae nihil aliud sunt quam mandata hominum, such doctrines as are
nothing else but men's commandments, which being taught by those that were to
be teachers of the law, and seemed to be such in stead of Gods precepts, were
therefore accounted as Gods worship, or his fear. 2. There is a censure passed
on this practice [In vain do they worship me] which words are not in the
Hebrew, yet may be collected from the woe threatened to such teachers, Isa. 29.
14. whereby God disclaimes such teaching and practice as being no service of
his, though the teachers and practisers of such Commands of men, imagined they
honored God thereby. So that the plain truth that this enunciation of our Lord
Christ affords is this: That however they think of their actions they do is
vain worship God, who teach for doctrines men's precepts. The self same truth
is seconded by Saint Paul, who in his Epistle to the Colassians chapter 2. v. 20,
21, 23. speaks thus; why as though living in the world are ye subject to
ordinances; after the commandments and doctrines of men? which things have
indeed a show of wisdom in will worship. In which you may clearly see that
the Apostle condemns dogmatizing, that is, either teaching* urging, or
submitting to (...), orders and rites, as the word signifies, Col. 2. 14.
Ephesians. 2. 15. Luke 2. 1. which are after the commandments and doctrines of
men, which he says have a show of wisdom in will worship, which has no true
wisdom, nor pleases God.

That I may the more clearly and fully open the truth in this point, Sect. 3.
I shall distinctly endeavor to declare, what these doctrines commandments of
men were, and how the Pharisees taught them. 2. How they did worship God in
vain. 3. Why they did in vain worship God. Concerning the first of these, It
is plain that these Pharisees and Scribes did many ways teach contrary to the
Law of God, to wit, in expounding the laws of God as if they did only
prohibit the gross external act, Matthew. 5. 21, 27, 33, 38, 43. they urged the
smaller matters of the law, as tithing of mint, and neglected the greater,
Matthew. 23. 23. But in this place that which our Savior objects to them is that
they sought to establish the traditions of men, though Gods commands were
thereby rejected, or neglected. Particularly that a man was not to regard the
honoring of his father and mother, if he had taken on him the rash and impious
vow of Corban, which was directly contra legem, against the law, to allow men
for an unjust oaths sake to break Gods plain precept. But chiefly that they
taught men to observe things praeter legem, besides the law, instead of Gods
law, as the washing hands before meals, the washing of cups and pots, brazen
vessels and tables, with many such like traditions invented by men: These
things they strictly urged on the people, excepting much at the omission of
them, conniving at, yea countenancing the transgression of God precepts: They
ascribed so much authority to the traditions of the Elders that they made it a
great crime to transgress them; they conceived and taught that the not
observing of them made men unholy and unclean, else they would not have been
offended with Christ, when he taught that the eating with unwashen hands
defiles not a man; they conceived their observation of them did please God as
if he were thereby honored.

Now this teaching for doctrines men's precepts is worshipping God in vain,
Sect. 4.
because it does not please God.

Frusta fit quod non attingit finem, That is done in vain which attaines not
its end, wherefore since such commandments of men are observed that God may be
pleased, and God is not thereby pleased, they must needs be in vain. And
indeed God is not pleased with such service, since he counts it no service to
him, yea he is much displeased with it, as appears by the threatening, Isa. 29.
14. Because their fear toward me is taught by the precepts of men, therefore
behold I will proceed to do a mavelous work among this people, even a
marvailous work and a wonder, for the wisdom of their wise men shall perish,
and the understanding of their prudent men shall be hid. All which came to
pass when the Pharisees and Scribes who were accounted the only (...) or wise
men, Doctors of the Laws, Rabbis and Masters in Israel, by reason of their
placing religion in traditions of men, washings, long robes, phylacteries and
such like, were delivered over to such blindness and sottishness of spirit as
to be ignorant of their Messiah, and his Kingdom, the true righteousness of
the Gospel, spiritual new birth, and other heavenly truths of Gods profound
Counsel in Christ. A most heavy, but most just judgment of God, that like as
when the heathens knowing God by his works they held the truth in
unrighteousness, so these knowing him by his law, but loving unrighteousness,
should become vain in their imaginations, and their foolish heart be darkened,
professing themselves to be wise they should become fools, Romans 1. 21, 22. For
what more foolish then to think that the only wise God who is an immortal
Spirit should be pleased with such toys, as washings, phylacteries and such
like observances, when there is no Philosopher that is given to contemplation,
but thinks such things to be rather babies for children to play with, then
books for men to read?

Of this censure and judgment there may be many reasons given. Sect. 5.
As first, It is vain to worship or to think to please God by the doctrines
which are Commandments of men: for God is not pleased with man's devices, what
is devised by man comes from a corrupt and foolish heart, and such a corrupt
fountain must needs send forth but puddle water. And this is true of the best
of men in the things of God: The Lord knows the thoughts of the wise that
they are vain, 1 Cor. 3. 20. Whence the Apostle, Col. 2. 23. when he speaks
of the things devised by men who introduced (...), a will worship, says of them
that they had a show of wisdom, they seemed to be wise inventions to beget
reverence to God, and humility in men's spirits, but it was far otherwise in
truth. For as children do count many things wise which understanding men do
laugh at: so carnal hearts of men esteemed as wise among men do count many
things to be wise, as duckings, bowings, washings, whippings, creepings,
pilgrimages, and such like gestures, usages, and rites invented by men to
express humility, devotion and reverence to God, which the Almighty, who is a
most holy Spirit, contemnes as childish, apish, theatrical and ridiculous:
Besides; we may consider the vanity of such inventions for Gods worship by the
event. For whereas many things have been invented and used by men out of a
supposed good intent to further devotion experience has sufficiently proved
that they have corrupted the Church with superstition and Idolatry.

Thus Images thought fit by Gregory to be made Laymens books became in time
Laymens and Clergy men's, Gods too, the sign of the Cross invented to testify
their faith in Christ before heathens, became the object of faith and adoration
instead of Christ among Christians, the praying at the Tombs of Martyrs
proceeded to the invocation of Martyrs, monastical orders and vows highly
commended for the promoting of chastity and piety became the chiefest means to
further superstition, ignorance, sensuality and uncleanness, that ever the
devil invented: The like might be said of reserving the Eucharist, keeping of
festivals, of fasting days, preserving of relics, pilgrimages, and
innumerable other devices, which in process of time, though at first invented
for a good use, turned to the great detriment of religion, and corrupting of
the Gospel: I think an instance cannot be given of a device of man pretending
to advance piety, and to edify the Church, when God has provided other means
to that end, which has not in the conclusion hindered piety; and more or
less, destroyed the purity of Religion. So sottish and blind is the wisdom
of man in appointing and directing the service of God.

Secondly, Sect. 6.
in vain is Gods fear taught by men's precepts, because God is not pleased
with Carnal observances and bodily exercises: Bodily exercise, says the
Apostle 1 Timothy 4. 8. profits little, but godliness is profitable to all
things, where the Apostle opposes godliness to bodily exercise, and thereby
shows that bodily exercise is not godliness, and therefore profits but a
little, to wit among men, getting esteem with them, but nothing with God,
whose promises only are made to true Godliness which is a spiritual
exercise. For God is a Spirit, and they that worship him, must worship him in
Spirit and in truth, says our Savior, John. 4. 23, 24. Now men's precepts are
altogether about bodily things, as washings, gestures, garments, fastings,
feastings, processions, buildings, and such like; All which reach no further
then the body, cannot rectify or amend the Soul: and make it more like to God.

Thirdly, Sect. 7.
this teaching for doctrines men's precepts displeases God, as being injurious
to him, and that in a double respect: first, teaching and urging men's commands
in stead of doctrines, whereby Gods worship should be taught, intrencheth on
Gods Prerogative, who is the only Lawgiver to his Church, Jam. 4. 12. for his
worship. For as it is a prerogative of a King to appoint the ways of his own
service and honor, and he should be taken to be very presumptuous and arrogant
that should take upon him to prescribe a fashion of attendance, suite, and
service to his Prince without his consent, when he has otherwise declared his
will; so is it much more intolerable pride, and presumption in a mortal man,
to appoint a way of service to God, which he never consented to, but has
otherwise directed his own service. And for the same reason it is a
transferring of Gods prerogative on a man, when he does servilly consent by
subjecting his conscience to such usurpation. Secondly, God is injured by the
thoughts that such superstitious persons have of God, when they conceive God to
be such a one as will be pleased with humane Ceremonies, to be so childish or
simple as to be affected with pompes, Sir Fran. Bacons essays of superstition.
and shows, and gestures, and carnal rites, which he never appointed. I
remember the saying of a man of great wit to this effect: That superstition
alike injures God, as Atheism. For as Plutarch says, I had as liefe men
should say there is no such man as Plutarch, as to say Plutarch is a fool; so
says the Author it is as injurious to God to say he is so childish, as to be
taken with superstition, as to deny his being.

Fourthly, Sect. 8.
this teaching for doctrines men's precepts produces many other evil effects.
First, it opposes Gods word, his Law, his Gospel sundry ways. First, Because
it brings in another rule of worship then Gods Law, to wit tradition of Elders,
custom, example, or opinion of seeming grave, wise and pious men, of affected
teachers. For these are the rules by which superstitious persons are guided,
not by Gods word. Now it is a high crime against God to follow any other rule
of our worship and obedience to him, since he has enjoined Deuteronomy. 4. 2. Ye shall
not add unto the word which I command you, neither shall you diminish ought
from it, that ye may keep the commandments of the Lord your God, which I
command you. Prove. 30. 6. Add not thou unto his words, lest he reprove thee
and thou be found a lier.

Secondly, Because it opposes the manifestation of the clear light of the
Gospel. As shadows darken the light of the Sun that shines in the air, so
carnal rites invented by men obscure the spiritual beauty, and splendor of
the Gospel, so that by reason of such rites the Gospel is either not
considered, or understood carnally: Thus the Ceremonies of Moses law were as a
veil before the eyes of the Jews, that they could not look to the end of
that which is abolished, 2 Cor. 3. 13. And the popish ceremonies darkened the
true light of the Gospel. And let any man look into those places in which
there is so much preaching of ceremonies, and Church orders, and such a regular
observation of them, as in places where the Cathedral and Canonical
Preachers, and officiating Priests do bear sway, he shall find little
spiritual understanding, and lively feeling of the doctrine and grace of
Christ; the highest pitch that they bring men to, (and there are but few that
are brought by them so far) is some moral civility, some outward regularity
in the outward forms of devotion, which yet is accompanied, as it was in the
Pharisees, with bitter and virulent enmity against holy and ardent zeal for
Christ, and shows it self to be but Pharisaicall hypocrisy when it is
brought to trial. It is usually alleged that such Ceremonies are appointed
for edification, and that the text 1 Cor. 14. 26. Let all things be done unto
edifying, allows men, specially Prelates in a Synod, to ordain what they
conceive may be for edifying. But the occasion of these words plainly shows
that the Apostle means not every arbitrary devise which is conceited by men,
though the wisest, most grave and pious, to be for edifying, must be done, for
then the text would impose a necessity of subjection to such humane devices.
But the text is plainly meant of such things as are necessary to edification,
as speaking in a known tongue, and without confusion. And although I know
Ceremonies invented by men are pretented to serve for edification, yet I must
profess that I never found in my reading, or experience, that ever any person
by such rites, or observances was won to the profession of Christ, or brought
to any spiritual knowledge of Christ, any true faith or sincere obedience to
him. Possibly they may beget some kind of raptures of carnal delight, through
melodious soundes or pleasant sights, some kind of womanish pity, and tears,
such as the acting of a stage play will draw from some persons: but that ever
they begat sanctifying knowledge, sound repentance, holy mortification of
sin, lively faith, fruitful living to God, I assure my self cannot be
showed: But it is certain on the contrary that the teaching for doctrines
commandments of men has occasioned men to oppose the principal point of the
Gospel of Christ, to wit, justification by faith in him, and contrary to the
covenant of grace in Christ to conceive a righteousness in themselves by the
observation of men's commands, as in the Pharisees and Papists, and al sorts of
superstitious persons it does abundantly appear.

Thirdly, because the teachers of precepts of men for doctrines do still
oppose the fruitful and faithful Preaching of Gods word. Thus it was in the
Pharisees, thus in Papists, and thus it appears still by experience. They that
urge or affect humane religious rites are disaffected and adversaries to Godly
Preaching: where the one is set up, the other goes down. And this shows a
malignity in them when they are so inconsistent with that, of which our Savior
said, One thing is necessary, Luke 10. 42. Even as weeds though never so
pleasant to the eyes are judged to be hurtful when they destroy good Corn,
which should preserve men's lives. And for this reason should be weeded out when
they have this effect, what ever pretense of antiquity or esteem they have.

Lastly, It opposes Gods word in that it introduces an obedience, which
always diminishes or annihilates the obedience due to Gods Law: were there no
more instances to prove this, then what we find of the Pharisees charged upon
them by our Lord Christ, Mark. 7. 8. that laying aside the Commandment of God
they held the tradition of men, v. 9. ye reject the Commandment of God that ye
may keep your own tradition, ver. 13. making the word of God of none effect
through your tradition, this were enough to make it appear that as Pharaohs
lean kine devoured the fat ones, so this superstitious devotion to men's
precepts devoures the true obedience that is due to Gods Commands: But it is
also manifest that such is the effect of observing humane traditions by the
practices of Papists, and ignorant superstitious people in all Countries: For
as for Papists it is notorious how zealous they are for the traditions, as they
call them, of the Church, Dr. Hall quo vadis or censure of travail.
but how careless they are of Gods commands: I had rather express it in the
words of another then mine own. What Papist in all Christendom has ever
been heard to pray daily with his family, or sing but a Psalm at home? Look
into the universal course of the Catholic life, Sect. 20.
there you shall find the Decalogue professedly broken, besides the ordinary
practice of Idolatry, and frequency of oaths: Who ever saw Gods day duly kept
in any City, village or household under the Jurisdiction of Rome? Every obscure
holy day takes the wall of it and thrusts it into the Channel: Who sees not
obedience to authority so slighted, that it stands only to the mercy of humane
dispensation? And in the rest of Gods Laws who sees not how foul sins pass
for venial? and how easily venial sins pass their satisfaction: for which a
cross or drop of holy water is sufficient amends? Who sees not how no place
can be left for truth, where there is full room given to equivocation? And how
true the like is of the late prelaticall party, and their superstitious
adherents, who have so zealously and industriously promoted humane Ceremonies,
it is abundantly manifest, by their opening a gap for licentiousness in
profaning the Lords day, by their discountenancing and suppressing the
diligent preaching of Gods word, by their countenancing drinking of healths,
common swearing, gaming and other practices of sensuality, either practicing
them or not reproving them, but speaking favorably of such as use them, and by
their continual disquieting of those that have sought to promote the knowledge
and worship of God by praying in their families, repeating Gods word, and
praising of God together, and chiefly by their devilish practices whereby they
endeavor to hinder the reformation of the ignorance, ungodliness, and
profaneness that has overspread the Land by reason of an unworthy ministry
and corrupt discipline. And indeed this is the genuine effect that follows
this sin, that it makes men averse from, and negligent of Gods Commands.
Saint Augustines observation in his 119. Epistle to Januarius of the men of his
time is well known, that those who made conscience to touch the ground with
their bare feet in their Octaves, made no scruple of conscience to be drunken.
And the like is still found true, that those that are scrupulous to omit a
Church order, an old tradition, an humane rite, scarce ever make scruple of
being drunk; of officious, and jesting lies, of charming, or going to such as
say prayers to help Cattle, of entertaining people in riotous manner, of
hearing and spreading lies of Godly persons, of faithful preachers: but are
rather so besotted as to think some of these to be good works, or at least
that there is no harm in them. In a word, there is such a venom in this
practice of teaching and observing of doctrines men's precepts, that it
strangeth the minds of people and Ministers from learning, and studying Gods
word, and inclines them to heed and invent and be led by tales and legends of
lies framed to get credit to superstitious usages that have no strength of them
selves.

Another evil effect by this sin is against Gods worship bringing men to an
hypocritical image of devotion without life, Sect. 9.
a form of godliness without power: This might easily be verified by
instancing in the Pharisees and Papists praying and fasting, being but a mere
semblance and shell of those duties. And thus it is with those people among our
selves that place their Religion in their rites, and think they shall have a
new Religion when any old custom or rite is left; they think they have kept a
fast well, if they have forborne eating, though there have been no examination
of Conscience, humiliation of soul, or repentance from sin: they think they
pray well if they be present when the Service book is read, and say after the
Minister, though without knowledge, attention of mind, faith in Gods promises,
or fervency of desire: they think they receive the Lords supper well, if
without any godly preparation, spiritual meditation, they do with empty
stomachs and fair deportment eat the bread and drink the wine of solemn
seasons: they think they use baptism well, if they get some to stand at the
font as sureties, for the Child's faith, (which I think to be proper to Christ,
Heb. 7. 22.) the Child to be sprinkled with water, and crossed on the
forehead, though there be no sense of the guilt and defilement of sin, utter
ignorance of the excellency and necessity of spiritual new birth. And the like
is their carriage in hearing the word read and preached, in singing of Psalms,
etc. In all there is the Popish conceit of apus operatum, that the work done
pleases God, that if they have fair service and their rites they are well,
though they are no whit changed, enlightened, awakened in their consciences, or
altered and quickened in their conversation.

Add hereunto that this will worship puffs men up with spiritual pride; Sect.
10.
Thus the Pharisees were proud of their often fastings, and the Friars are
lifted up in great conceits of their holiness by their observing the rules of
their orders, and formal Protestants in the observatition of there customs
and traditions. True Religion humbles men: but empty* Ceremonies like wind in
a bladder puff up the soul.

Finally, Sect. 11.
this will worship and teaching for doctrines men's precepts, is opposite to true
charity, in that it begets hatred against true and zealous worshippers of God,
and this hatred shows it self not only in evil thoughts, and believing all
false reports, and hard censures of them, but also in bitter invectives against
them for not affecting and liking their superstitious and virulent persecution
of those that conform not to their practice, though it be only because of
tenderness of conscience. Hence it was that the Pharisees could better comply
with such wicked men as Caiaphas, Pilate, Herod, then with Christ, his
Disciples, and John Baptist; the Papists with Jews, Turks, Sodomits, then
with the godly Divines of the reformed Churches; the formal Prelatists among
Prote^tants with the most profane Libertines, or Idolatrous Papists, then with
a zealous preacher of the Gospel; yea the most strict Pharisees have been
still the most incessant persecutors of Christ, the most devout Friars, the
most eager and bloody inquisitors, the most zealous for Church Canons and
Rites, the most heavy and unrelenting deprivers, censurers and vexers of
reverend Ministers and unspotted Christians, whom they have confessed to agree
with them in the same faith, and to dissent only from them in discipline and
Ceremonies.

Secondly, It causes contentions, Schisms, and divisions in the Church,
witness the great contentions between the Eastern and Western, Saxon and
British Churches, about Easter, Monks and Friars, about the rules of their
orders conformists and non-conformists, about Ceremonies, which the defenders
acknowledge but trifles, yet promote with as much bitter zeal, as if Salus
eccles ae verteretur in istis, the safety of the Church, faith and Religion
depended on them.

Thirdly, By it Christian liberty is impaired, which being a precious thing to
a Christian soul cannot be taken away without injury; All will worship at first
conception has pretense of order and decency* perhaps the things in which it
is placed are taken but as indifferent, which yet in process of time gain
opinion of holiness and necessity to that end, and so bring the conscience
into bondage.

Fourthly, To conclude, this evil tends to the detriment of men's goods, the
pillaging of their purses, for no benefit to the owners, much hinderance to the
poor, laboring Ministers, and Commonwealth on which it should be bestowed.
Many a pound is given in Legacies and Contributions, is extorted by Courts, for
maintaining vestments, organs, processions, windows, buildings, and other
things unnecessary, when the poor want, painful Preachers live on a small
stipend, the Commonwealth is brought to straights: For superstition is costly,
and supers^^tious persons are either lavishly profuse, or slavisbly ready to
bestow their goods for very vanities which do them no good, when by a right
bestowing of their goods they might make them friends of the unrighteous Mammon
and be re^eived into everlasting habitations.

For application of this truth. Sect. 12.
That which has been said may help us to take the right dimensions of this
sin: as in all other things pertaining to God, man's reason judges very
corruptly, so in particular about censuring of sins: sins which injure men,
and harm them in their bodies, goods or name, are accounted heinous, and the
acting of them stirs up men's Spirits to rage and fury against the Authors.
But sins against Gods excellency and glory, though they be indeed Camells,
yet are swallowed down as gnats. They that cry out against theft, and murder,
and slander, are very favorable in censuring Idolatry, blasphemy and
profaneness. Hence it is that superstition is conceived harmless, and
superstitious persons, though most injurious to God, yet counted harmless by
men; it is hard to convince men that this is a sin, or to bring them to any
serious repentance for it. But would men seriously lay to heart that which has
been said, and judge righteous judgment, it would be found that will worship
is a sin of a deep dye, estranging the heart far from God, and stirring up
his soul against men, wherefore it concerns especially two sorts of persons
to lay this to heart. First, the Papists, both Clergy and people, who are
horribly guilty of this point of Pharisaisme in teaching and observing
innumerable doctrines and usages of rites, customs, ceremonies after the
Commandment of men without Gods word. It were an infinite business to reckon
up all their humane religious devices in their fastings, Sacraments, burialls,
festivalls, Churches, religious orders, and the like. They pretend that the
Churches orders are Gods orders, and for that purpose allege, Luke 10. 16. He
that hears you, hears me: and be that despises you, despises me. But
this is absurdly alleged. For this extends not to every thing that the seventy
disciples (to whom those words were spoken) should devise of themselves: but
only to what they should teach according to that injunction Matthew. 28. 20.
given to the Apostles, that they should teach all nations to observe al things
whatsoever he commanded them. And in this limitation he that hears the least
minister of the Gospel hears Christ, as well as he that hears the Pope or
a Synod of Prelates, whom they ridiculously call the Church. They tell us that
their traditions are not contra legem, against the law, but praeter legem,
besides the law. To which we reply. The same might have been said for the
Pharisees washings, for which nevertheless our Savior charge them with
hypocris^e. And indeed though the things themselves were not plainly contra
legem against Gods Law, yet the practice of teaching and n^ng such things for
or instead of Gods fear is directly against Gods Law, which forbids us to add
or diminish from Gods commandments.

Secondly, The late Prelaticall prevailing party of this Kingdom may be
charged as guilty of the same sin of which our Savior indicted these
Pharisees in whose steps they tread, I say the late Prelaticall party, that I
may not be thought to lay this imputation on the first reformers, and their
reverend successors, who were constant and zealous Preachers of the Gospel of
Christ, and many of them confirmed it by their sufferings. I say the late
prevailing Prelaticall party, because I conceive that some of the Prelates of
this Land have beenemore considerate then to urge and teach Commandments of
men in that manner that the prevailing party has done. I mean in their
teaching and practice about Images, Crucifixes, Altars, Rayles, Tapers, bowing
to or toward Altars, praying toward the East, bowing at the naming of the
word Jesus, consecrating Churches, Confirmation, Copes, Organes, Surplisses,
Crossing at the solemnity of Baptism, and the like.

All which have been urged and used of late with a Pharisaicall and Popish
Spirit as if by the using them men were made more holy, God served, and the not
conforming to them a crime of want of devotion and reverence to God. And yet
the same party show themselves adversaries to the constant and fruitful
preaching of Gods word, sanctifying of the Lords day, exercising of the duties
of Religion in private houses, as prayer, repeating of Gods word, praising of
God, Godly conference of Scripture, reformation of profane swearing, excessive
drinking, gaming, sporting, and the like palpable sins; they inveigh much
against the Sacrilege of keeping back tithes, and other Ecclesiastical dues
from Ministers, and yet wink at it as if it were no sacrilege in Ministers to
pervert holy things to maintain pomp and riot, without doing the work for
which the wages is due, to wit the laborious preaching of the Gospel: turning
the Ministry of the word into an officiating Priesthood to observe rites
enjoined by Canons of men. The exception I conceive may be taken to this charge
is, That they are not urged as if they were necessary, but as things
indifferent, for order and decency. Whereto I reply.

First, That for some of them it cannot be conceived that they are indifferent,
but plainly evil, as the setting up of Images in Temples, Crucifixes, etc.
For some of them it is not denied but that they are indifferent in se, of
themselves, and of their own nature: For my part I conceive that it is
indifferent in it self to wear a white linen garment or a black gown, to
pray with the face toward the East or the West: If any say they are simply in
themselves unlawful, I cannot excuse them from negative superstition, in
denying the use of that to be lawful, which God has not forbidden to be used.
For most of them there can hardly be a color of appointing them in their use
prescribed and urged for order and decency only, since any man may easily
perceive that they tend only to bring in a gay sense affecting spendour in
Gods service, and serve to breed Jewish and Popish conceits in the minds of
people. It is granted that many things are left to the disposing of the
governors of the Church pertaining to order and decency, 1 Cor. 14. 40.
though it is to be considered that how far that permission extends, it is not
without difficulty to determine, and oftentimes under pretext of that speech
many things are appointed that pertain not to mere order and decency. I add
further, that some of them were intended in their institution by the reformers
to be used only for decency and orders sake, though perhaps erroneously. But
as for the late urging and practicing of them, by the late prevailing
Prelaticall party, Archbishop. Laud Epist. Dedic. before the relat* of his
conference with Fisher Heylin coal from the Altar. Bishop White Answer to
Burton of the Sab. p. 20. Reeve in his expos. of the Cat.
they have been urged for a further end then order and decency, yea with a
Pharisaicall mind, as has been said: And this may appear from their
writings, sayings, and actions. From their writings, which tell us, that those
Church Ceremonies are the great witness to the world, that men may see our
devotion and glorify our Father which is in heaven; that the promoting them is
the settlement of Gods external worship; that this business of promoting
Church Ceremonies is the piety of the times, the good work in hand: which
speak excessively of the authority of the Church, that with like reverence men
are to obey the conmands of Bishops as Gods, when they command not things
contrary to God, that what is decreed in the holy Counsels of Bishops is all
to be attributed to Gods will: that Church orders are to be obeyed without
examining the reasons: in which writings we find that text, Phil. 2. 10.
Bishop Andrews Sermon in locum: Widows Lawles kneeles puritan.
brought to bind Christians to a Ceremony of bowing at the naming of Jesus, in
the Church here, which is most clearly meant of universal subjection of all
persons to Christ, will they nill they, at the day of Judgment, as appears by
comparing it with the text, Romans 14 10, 11, 12. And that text Heb. 13. 10. is
produced for a material Altar, Bishop Andrews Answer to the 18. ch of
Cardinal Perrouns reply. Heylin Antid. Lincoln.
which the whole context shows to be meant metaphorically.

From their sayings, as that frequent speech, No Ceremony no Bishop, and yet
Bishops avouched to be jure divino, these impious yet frequent speeches,
wherein to their own inexcusable shame, they stick not to profess that they
love a Papist though an Idolater, better then a Puritan, whom they acknowledge
not to differ from them in matters of faith and religion, but only in
discipline and Ceremonies, that they had rather join with the former then the
latter.

From their doings, as their conniving at, yea and favoring of Popery, but
extreme severity to those that conformed not to their Ceremonies, their
censuring men for the mere omission of them, suspending, depriving,
excommunicating, imprisoning, fining those that could ot yield to them though
charged with no other crime, when al sort of erroneous teachers, and licentious
livers, were tolerated and greatly favored, from their discountenancing
preaching of the Gospel, and promoting a bare officiating ministry without
preaching: from their violent endeavors to obtrude on Scotland their rites,
from their practices in contriving the oath of the late Synod, and in a word,
from the whole course of their proceedings tending to superstition, formality
and Popery, as the Remonstrance of the State of the Kingdom by the House of
Commons in this present Parliament does declare.

Secondly, Sect. 13.
From hence some Apology may be framed for defense of them that of late have
disused those Ceremonies which heretofore they used: Great outcries are made in
some places against such, as refractary to Government, changeable with the
times. The former imputation is easily answered, if the conscience conceive
upon reason that the continuing of the use of them would be sinful. For no man
will say that in the use of unnecessary Ceremonies, which the conscience
thinks upon probable grounds out of Gods word to be unlawful, a Christian is
bound to do that which authority commands. As for the other imputation,
although it cannot be called a fault for a man to change his mind upon reasons
not known or not considered so well before, specially in such disputable
points; (For what judicious Divine is there who has not in some things altered
his opinion? or what mere man is he that may not by after thoughts correct the
former?) Yet the truth is, in point of Ceremony, and things indifferent, that
some things may be unlawful at one time, which are not unlawful at another:
For in such things the differing circumstances, intentions and ends in using
and imposing them, may make them lawful at one time and unlawful at another,
without any lightness or inconstancy in the judgment: Who knows not that
Saint Paul one while used the Ceremonies of Moses Law, which he would by no
means suffer to be used at another time? And in this present matter I conceive
they who have changed their opinion and practice may be justified by four
reasons.

First, Because as has been proved the Ceremonies heretofore declared and
appointed as indifferent for order and decency only, have been urged of late
as needful offices of holiness, as if they were necessary evidences and
means of devotion, of more moment then the preaching of Gods word. Now it is
the plain doctrine of the Apostle Col. 2. 20. when Ceremonies are obtruded as
necessary, we are not to submit to them. If ye be dead with Christ, says the
Apostle, from the rudiments of the world, why as though living in the world are
ye subject to ordinances. Peccant igitur says Bishop Davenant on those words,
non modo qui nova decreta fabricantur in religione, sed qui iisdem se
subj^ciunt, and libertatem Christi sanguine partam patiuntur sibi eripi: Quid
ritibus oneramini? inquit Apostolus: quasi diceret, vestrum est hoc jugum
recusare, and in li^erate qua Christus vos liberavit perstare, ut Paulus m^net,
Gal. 5. 1. That is, they therefore sin not only who make new decrees in
Religion, but who subject themselves to the same, and suffer the liberty gotten
by the blood of Christ to be taken from them. Why are ye burdened with rites?
says the Apostle, as if he should say, It belongs to you to refuse this yoke,
and to persist in the liberty in which Christ has freed you, as Paul
admonishes, Gal. 5. 1.

Secondly, Because it is apparent by many proofs, and declared in the
Remonstrance of the State of the Kingdom, that they have been urged and used
for the reduction of Superstition and Popery, and for the hindering of true
godliness. Papists themselves boasted of it that we were coming near to
them, and they gathered it from the outward face of this Church, as was of late
in the urging and use of Ceremonies. Besides they began to corrupt the doctrine
of Religion, specially that point of the free grace of God, as the book called
the Cumerb^rtant self -Conviction proves from their writings. And it is the
rule of Master Francis Mason in his book of the authority of the Church on 1
Cor. 14. 40. that when the Doctrine declineth, the Ceremony is perverted. Now
the Apostles practice is a sure rule, who having circumcised Timothy would not
yield to have Titus circumcised, when he saw that by yielding, the preservation
of Christian liberty and of the truth of the Gospel, was endangered: Gal. 2.
3, 4, 5.

Thirdly, Because they are found to foment Ignorance and superstition in the
people. And this by innumerable experiments is manifest, that by reason of the
constant continuance of them Religion is placed in them, yea the omitting of a
Ceremony is conceived an alteration of Religion, they are zealous for them as
if all their Religion were placed in them. Nor is this only in places where
there has been no Preacher to show their error: but also where they have
been often and fully taught the contrary. And indeed where humane Ceremonies
are p^ecisely used, the word of God is little minded: Now in this case though
the things be indifferent in themselves, yet are they not to be used to the
scandal of men's souls. It is the speech of the second part of the Sermon of
fasting in the second Tome of Homilies, that Gods Church ought not, neither may
it be so tied to that or any other order now made or hereafter to be made and
devised by the authority of man, but that it may lawfully and for just causes,
alter, change or mitigate those ecclesiastical decrees and orders, yea recede
wholly from them and break them, when they tend either to superstition, or to
impiety, when they draw the people from God, rather then work any edisication
in them.

Fourthly, Because they have found them to increase more and more, and the
yielding to some gives encouragement to add more. Now it is a rule agreed that
Ceremonies if many are an intolerable burden. It makes the case of the Church
Christian worse then that of the Jews, if as Saint Augustine observes Epist.
119. ad Januarium, the Christian Church being freed from legal ordinances of
God be burdened with humane presumptions. Now as he that will bear a little
burden, will throw off all if more be added to over burden him, so may that
man that would bear a few Ceremonies* justly throw off all when the burden is
increased without measure: especially since multitude of Ceremonies shadow the
Gospel, making the Religion rather carnal, like the Jewish, then spiritual,
like the Christian; and hindering the fruit thereof from ripening, as too many
leaves do a few grapes that are covered by them.

Thirdly, Sect. 14.
from hence we may take occasion to admonish ministers that they avoid the way
of these Pharisees, who taught for doctrines men's precepts. Con^ider I beseech
you whereto you are called, to be Ministers of Christ and Stewards of the
mysteries of God, 1 Cor. 4. 1. not observers of Ceremonies and teachers of
Church orders: Give me leave to expostulate with you. Are ye called to
maintain men's traditions? or Gods word? the Ceremonies of men? or the Gospel
of Christ? How will you then give your account to Christ when you are so
zealous for men's traditions, so cold for his Gospel? When ye exclaim against
them that omit an humane Ceremony, favor and commend them that teach not the
way of salvation? When ye foment the hatred of the people against those that
disuse Ceremonies of men, favor them that neglect the Commands of God? when ye
cherish the ignorance and superstition of the common people which ye should
labor to weed out of their hearts? Is it not enough for you to worship God in
vain but that ye teach men so to do? I beseech you consider that threatening
before alleged, Isa. 29. 14. that for this cause the wisdom of the wise men
shall perish, and the understanding of the prudent shall be hid. Remember the
threatening, Mal. 2. 9. Therefore have I also made you contemptible and base
before all the people, according as ye have not kept my ways, but have been
partial in the law.

Fourthly, Sect. 15.
From hence we may take occasion to admonish the people to take heed of such
Pharisaicall teachers, as teach for Doctrines Commandments of men: our Savior
Christ having manifested the hypocrisy of the Scribes and Pharisees in this
thing, bids his Disciples let them alone, telling them that they were blind
leaders of the blind; and if the blind lead the blind, both fall into the
ditch, Matthew. 15. 14. And elsewhere, Beware of the leaven of the Pharisees,
which is hypocrisy, Luke 12. 1. And surely people have need to take heed of
such teachers, since superstition, as it is a pernicious evil, so it easily
insinuates into peoples minds, and sticks fast in them under show of
antiquity, decency and gravity. I know this will be interpreted as if it were
a heinous thing to persuade people to withdraw themselves from the Ministers of
their Parish though never so negligent or corrupt. But let Bishop Bilson answer
for me, Imo populus ipse deficiente Magistratu Christiano deserere falsos and
improbos pastores jure Divino potest, Libro de perp. eul. gubernat. c. 10.
coercere vero minime. Declinare and derelinquere eos possunt, cogere aut
punire non possunt. Vis et vindicta gladio alligatae, extra privatorum sortem
ac caetum collocatae sunt. Vnde Paulus Romans 16. Observate eos qui dissidia and
scandala contra doctrinam quam edocti estis faciunt, et declinate ab iis. Oves
meae, inquit Dominus noster Johan. 10. vocem meam audiunt, and sequuntur me.
Alienum autem nequaquam sequentur, sed fugient ab eo. Idem Cyprianus et reliqui
Episcopi consulti rescripserunt Epist. Lib. 1. Ep. 4. Separemini, inquit
Dominus, a tabernaculis hominum istorum durissimorum, et nolite tangere ea quae
ad eos pertinent, ne simul pereatis in peccatis eorum* Propter quod plebs
obsequens praeceptis Domini, et Deum metuens, a peccatore praeposito separare
se debet, nec se ad sacrilegi Sacerdotis sacrificia miscere: quando ipsa
(defectu fidelis magistratus) maxim^ habeat potestatem vel eligendi dignos
sacerdotes, vel recusandi indignos.

FINIS.

