AN ANTIDOTE Against the Venom of a Passage, in the 5th. direction of the
Epistle Dedicatory to the whole Book of Mr. Richard Baxter Teacher at
KEDERMINSTER in Worcestershire, entitled, The Saints everlasting Rest,
containing a Satyricall invective against Anabaptists

By JOHN TOMBS B. D.

Lately Teacher at BEWDLEY in the same COUNTY.

LONDON, Printed by Charles Sumptner for Thomas Brewster and Greg. Moule at the
three Bibles near the West End of Paul's, 1650.

To my dearly beloved Auditors, Magistrates, and People of the Borough of
BEWDLEY in WORCESTERSHIRE.
BELOVED,
IT was not a little refreshing to me after my frequent flittings, and much
toil, through which my bodily strength and outward estate were impaired, that
being hindered from returning to my former station, I was invited to sit down in
the place of my nativity, and to employ my talent among my kindred and
acquaintance, who have known me from my Childhood, with hope to be there
gathered to my Fathers, where they yielded their spirits to God. Nor was it a
little content to me, that J should speak to so well affected an Auditory, and
enjoy the neighborhood and assistance in the Lords work of so precious a man
as Mr. Baxter was, and is still accounted by me. It is therefore a grievance
to me that I remove from you and that jarres have happened between me and Mr.
Baxter, the occasion whereof was this, Mr. Baxters dissent from me about
Infant Baptism being known, there was an endeavor to gain his arguments in
writing, which he declining and provoking me to a public dispute,
notwithstanding many reasons given of the inconveniences thereof, yet it being
deemed my declining of it to have comen from distrust of my cause, after an
answer made to the arguments, I knew urged by any for infant baptism in
certain Sermons, I yielded to the dispute with him Ian. 1. A fortnight after
or less, even while I earnestly solicited him to let me have his arguments
in writing, that I might examine them, he writes the Epistle, in which the
passage is, to which I here answer. It Is told me he intends a larger Treatise
of this matter, though before and since the dispute he seemed to be very averse
from writing. I conceive by his dispute, that he averres a visible
Church-member-ship in infants of godly parents before circumcision was
instituted, and from thence he would infer infant baptism. What is visible
is discernible by some note; a purpose or promise of God makes not a visible
Churchmember, if it did many infidels elect should be visible members, while
infidels: the birth and actings of believers infants is like to other infants;
what then should make or show them visible members circumcision set apart, I
know not. If it be only to live in a holy family, this visibility (if it may be
so called) may be granted to remain, yet as no initial seal (as it is called)
did belong to them till Abraham's time, so neither does it now by virtue of such
visibility without institution. If baptism be a new Testament Ordinance and a
mere positive rite no good proof can be made for it, but from precept or
practice in the New Testament, positive rites having no reason, but the
appointers will, as a rule to us. And for the institution of Christ Math. 28.
19. Mr. Baxter in his Treatise of the Saints rest page 222. 549. paraphraseth
Christ's words as J do, and in his Appendix. page 104. he speaks thus, Does not
the Scripture bid us repent, believe and be baptized for the remission of
sins? The institution then is plain according to my judgment, and so is the
practice, yea Mr. Baxter in his Appendix page 32. speaks as if he disliked it,
that Persons are baptized into they know not what; which must needs be true of
infants when baptized, and page 56. he has these words; neither are the seals
useful till the accepting, and entering of the Covenant, how then can they be
useful to infants? One thing more J desire you to take notice of, that in his
Treatiss of the Saints rest page 651. He has these words. And their being
baptized persons, or members of the universal visible Church (into which it is
that they are baptized) is sufficient evidence of their interest to the supper,
till they by Heresy or scandal blot that evidence. J assume by Mr. Baxters
Doctrine, Infants are rightly baptized and are visible members of the
universal Church, therefore by his Doctrine there is sufficient evidence of
their interest to the supper. Besides if these reasons be good, infants of
believers are in the Covenant, they are federally holy, therefore are to have
the seal of the Covenant, it will follow they are to have the Communion as well
as baptism. And if it be good arguing infants were circumcised, our Children
a^e to have no less privilege then the Jews Children, baptism comes in the
room of circumcition, the Lords Supper of the Passover, it being certain
that little ones among the Jews had the passover, it will follow according to
these suppositions of paedobaptists, little ones of Christians must have the
Lords Supper, as they had in former ages for 600. years together from Cyprians
time to Charles the Great For denying which Mr. Baxter others may as well be
termed unthankful, as Anabaptists so called are by him inconsideratly styled
in his Treatise of the saints rest, page 534. As for him and others of his
judgment, I pray the Lord to open their eyes to see how they have profaned and
perverted holy Baptism, by changing it into sprinkling contrary to the use in
Scripture, and ages after, and administering it to infants, whereby is
occasioned abundance of ignorance and carnal presumption in the generality of
reputed Christians, and is more necessarily to be reformed then Episcopal
Ceremonies, against which though much more excusable there have been so great
contendings. As for your selves, my love to you continues the same in my
absence as in my presence, and my jealousy over you is, least your averseness
from the Doctrine, J taught you occasion your adhering to mere formal
teachers, who may extinguish that power of godliness that is among you. I
never moved you to entertain my tenet for my sake: but if it be according to
Christ's institution, and the Apostles practice (as if I understand any thing it
is) beware, that disobedience to Christ the great Prophet you be not cut off
from his people. Now the God of peace, who brought from the dead the Lord
Christ, the great Shepheerd of the sheep, by the blood of the everlasting
Covenant, make you perfect to do his will, and stablish and comfort you
therein. Thus prays

Your truly loving Country man and late Teacher John Tombs.
London May 22. 1650.
The CONTENTS.
SEct. 1. page 1. Of Anabaptists accusing their own Children Sect. 2. page 3.
Of Auabaptists disputing their Children out of the Church and covenant of
Christ. Sect. 3. page 4. Of Anabaptists affirming their children to be no
Disciples, no servants of God, nor holy as separated to God. Sect. 4. page 6.
Of the Text Levit. 25. 41. 42. Alleged to prove our children Gods servants.
Sect. 5. page 7. Of the Text Deuteronomy. 29. 10. 11. 12. Alleged to prove our
Infants to be visible church members. Sect. 6. page 9. Of the Text Acts 15, 10.
Alleged to prove our Infants Disciples of Christ. Sect. 7. page 11. Of the
Text 1 Cor. 7. 14. Alleged to prove our Infants holy as separated to God.
Sect. 8. page 20. Of Gods speaking by judgments from Heaven against
Anabaptists. Sect. 9. page 24. Of the Anabaptists evil lives. Sect. 10. page
28. Of the Anabaptists confident expressions, weakness upon trial and dispute
at Bewdley: Jan. 1. 1649.
ERRATA.
Add to the margin page 2 at line 15. these words. See Salmas. apparat. ad
libr de primatu Papae page 192. Voss. These. 6 de Baptismo page 4 l. 14 r and in
page 7 l 14 blot out (it) page 7 l 34 ye r yet, page 8 l 21 r on v 15 in the
margin r before Christ's coming page 9 l 29 tencher r teacher page 10 l 1 if r
is, l 11 business r business l 15 circumtion r circumcision page 13 l 34 thu
r thus page 16 l 18 mani r manifestly page 24 l 6 7 how near it is, r is near.

AN ANTIDOTE AGAINST Mr. BAXTERS Invective against Anabaptists:
SECT. 1. Of Anabaptists accusing their own Children.
THere came newly to my hands this following passage, which because it does
mainly reflect on my self, I conceive my self necessitated to answer it.

Anabaptists, says Mr. Baxter, play the Devils part in accusing their own
Children and disputing them out of the Church and Covenant of Christ, and
affirming them to be no Disciples, no servants of God, nor holy as separated to
him; when God says the contrary, Levit. 25. 41. 42. Deuteronomy. 29. 10. 11. 12. etc.
Acts 15. 10. 1 Cor. 7. 14.

Answ. Though Mr. Baxter speaks of Anabaptists in the plural, yet the passage
it self, and the circumstances of it, well known in these parts, evidence it
to be directed either solely, or mainly against my self. The term [
Anabaptists] I own not, any more, then my Infant sprinkling, The Faith I own,
but not the Ceremony They are unjustly called Anabaptists who have been
Baptized after their own profession of the faith of Christ, though they had
water sprinkled or poured on their faces by an Officiating Priest when they
were Infants. Sprinkling is not Baptizing, nor Infants the Subjects of the
Baptism of Water appointed by Christ, or practiced by the Apostles. Mr. Baxter
offered to prove, In the beginning of the Dispute after mentioned, that dipping
in cold water is murder and Adultery. It seems he dare undertake to prove, the
snow black, he is so confident of his nimble wit, and ready tongue. Thousands
in the primitive times, (in which Baptizing was by dipping until Hieroms time
at least in the 4th. Century) Thousands in these days are so baptized without
murder or adultery. And therefore Mr. Baxters assertion is contrary to sense
and experience. He may do much I believe, but will never be able to prove
Infant Baptism, or sprinkling instead of it, to be the duty ordained by
Christ, Math. 28. 19. Mark. 16. 16. The seven Churches under Baptism about
London disclaim the Title of Anabaptists, in the Preface to their Confession
of faith, under that term all the Pelagian and Arminian errors, all those
pestilent errors of Community of Goods, denying civil Magistracy,
lawfullnesse of taking an Oath to end strife and sundry other are charged on
them, that deny Infant Baptism, I may well say] in a Divelish manner, by many
Preachers; to make them odious to the people; that they might drive them away
out of the Land; if not destroy them: and therefore if Mr. Baxter, who knows
how odious the term is, had minded equity or peace he had chosen rather to
style us Antipaedobaptists, then Anabaptists. But what says he of us?
Anabaptists play the Devils part in accusing their own Children. A most
virulent charge, which shows Mr. Baxter kept no moderation of spirit, nor
heeded what he wrote. The Devils part in accusing, is either by himself, or
his Instruments, before God, or before men, or in their own conscience. Mr.
Baxter may as soon bring water out of a pumice stone, as prove we do, any of
these ways, play the Devils part. But perhaps it will be said we accuse them
however. To accuse, is to charge with a fault or crime. I know no fault or
crime we charge our Children with meaning onr infant Children, but their birth
sin; of which Mr. Baxter has been heard to charge them, as deep as any of us.
But it is unnatural in us, to accuse our own Children perhaps. I bless God he
has given me Children, to whom I bear a natural affection, as tender as
another. If Mr. Baxter mean, denying Baptism to belong to them in infancy, to
be the playing the Devils part in accusing them, he must give me leave to
think, that he himself plays the Devils part in asserting, that it belongs
to them till he prove it appointed by Christ, or used by his Apostles (which I
expect to be done by him, ad Graecas Calendas) and so much the rather do I
think he plays the Devils part therein, because experience proves, that
Thousands are hardened in carnal presumption, to their perdition by conceiving
their Infant Baptism to make them Christians, and so heirs of heaven.

SECT. 2. Of Anabaptists disputing their Children out of the Church and
Covenant of Christ.
ANother thing wherein Mr. Baxter says we play the Devils part is in disputing
our Children out of the Church and Covenant of Christ. I answer. The Church of
Christ is either visible or invisible: the Covenant of Christ may be meant
either of Christ's Covenant to them, or theirs to Christ: by disputing them out
of the Church may be meant either that by our disputing, we keep them out of
the Church and Covenant of Christ, or cast them out being admitted. It is true
I have asserted in disputation that according to the constitution of the
visible Church of Christians Infants are not visible Church Members and I still
assert it. For the visible Church of Christians is a company of believers art.
19 of the Church of England; and therefore till a person is a believer he is
not a visible Church member according to the frame of the Christian Church,
which is not a whole Nation joined together in one Community by the civil
Magistrate, as the Jewish Church was, but a company of believers made such by
the preaching of the Gospel. And this definition of the visible Church was
formerly received among Protestants without the addition which the Assembly
lately put to it in their Confession of Faith chapter 25 is avouched in disputes
against Papists concerning the notes of the Church: As for the invisible Church
or Covenant of Christ to them I have often showed in my examen of Mr. Marshalls
Sermon and elsewhere that I do say as much concerning their interest in them as
Mr. Marshall speaking consideratly will avouch. I thank God by my preaching and
disputing. Sundry have been brought into the Church and Covenant of Christ,
none do I know that have been kept, or cast out by my disputing, and therefore
in this accusation of me, Mr. Baxter may be more truly said to play the Divils
part then my self.

SECT. 3. Of Anabaptists affirming their Children to be no Disciples, no
servants of God nor holy as separated to God.
BUt however perhaps I play the Devils part in the third thing Mr. Baxter says
Anabaptists do, affiirming them to be no Disciples, no Servants of God, nor
holy as separated to God.

This I am sure alludes to the dispute between me and Mr. Baxter, in which Mr.
Baxter would have proved Infants might be baptized, because Disci^les of Christ
which he would prove out of Acts. 15. 10. And because they are called servants
of God, which he would prove from Levit. 25, 41. 42. and holy as separated to
God from 1 Cor. 7. 14. And members of the visible Church, because of their
entering into Covenant. Deuteronomy. 29. 10. 11, 12. And this was the maine of his
dispute of which he so much crakes in this passage of his preface to his book,
in which he urged no more Texts, that I remember, out of which he concluded
Infant Baptism, excepting that of Romans 11. 19. 20. The thing that I affirmed
in the dispute was, that Infants are not servants of God as it is equipolent to
Disciples of Christ, for one that actively and willingly serves God, such
service of God always requiring the use of reason, which Infants have not. In
which sense also I denied them to be Disciples, that is such as being taught
the Gospel of Christ by preaching of it, do embrace it, which sort of
Disciples only are appointed to be baptized Math. 28. 19. compared with Mark
16. 15. Mr. Baxter The Saints everl. rest, Page 549. He gave them authority to
send forth others on the same message, and to baptize and gather Churches. As
for the term [ holy as separated to God] the thing I said in the dispute was
conc^rning the Text 1 Cor. 7. 14. whether there [holy] be as much as separated
to God, which I denied. But for the thing it self, could I have had liberty to
express my self without checking, (which all that were present know I could
not have in the disputation) I would have distinguished of a state of
separation unto God either by election, as separation is taken: Gal. 1. 13. or
by calling, in the former sense, I deny not but our children are or may be
holy, as the Jews yet unborne are said to be Romans 11. 16. which thing I also
in my Exercitation page 10. had heretofore showed in my answer to the argument
for Infants baptism out of 1 Cor. 7. 14. but in the latter I deny it. If Mr.
Baxter understand it in a third sense I shall give an answer about it, when I
understand what way he affirms, our children are separated to God.

SECT. 4. Of the Text Levit. 25. 41. 42. alleged to prove our Children Gods
servants.
BUt Mr. Baxter says, God says the contrary to my affirmation Levit. 25. 41.
42. Deuteronomy. 29. 10. 11. 12. act 15. 10. 1 Cor. 7. 14. The text Lev. 25. 41. 42.
says the Hebrew servant shall not be held in bondage, but till the year of
Iubilee, then he shall depart both he and his Children, for they are Gods
servants, But this Text speaks only of the Israelites Children whom God brought
out of the Land of Egypt, and the reason of their being his servants, is taken
merely from that, and to show the privilege they had above other servants and
their Children, and distinguishingly v 55. unto me the Children of Israel are
servants what is this to our Children? God says, the children of the
Israelites are Gods servants, I say our Children are not, is there any
contrariety in these speeches where the subjects of the propofitions are not
the same? Besides when I said our Children, that is our Infant Children are not
Gods servants, I meant actually, but that which God says, Levit. 25. 42: that
they are his servants, is meant only of what they are de jure of right, and
then the predicates of the Propositions are different, and therefore no
contrariety, yet again, servants of God are either actively such or passively,
as the Heavens: Psalm. 119. 91. are called Gods servants: Nebuchadnez^zer is
called, Gods servant, Ierem. 43. 10. were the Heavens and Nebuchadnezar
Disciples of Christ and to be baptized?

SECT. 5. Of the Text Deuteronomy. 29. 10. 11. 12. Alleged to prove our Infants to be
visible Church Members.
THe next Text Deuteronomy. 29. 10, 11. 12. was alleged to prove that our Children
are visible Church members. because the little ones of the Israelites entered
into Covenant with God, that he might establish them to be his people, and this
a Gospel Covenant Deuteronomy. 30. 6. 11. 12, 13. 14. To this I answered 1 that
[thou] v. 12. does not necessarly comprehend the little ones. This Mr. Baxter
in the disputation turning himself to the people told them was to contradict
the Text expressly, and he sought to suggest to them as if it were my
impudence, and said; that if it the Papists had as plain express Scripture as
Deuteronomy. 29. 12. was to prove that all even little ones did enter into Covenant,
he would turn Papist. But for all Mr. Baxters have, I presume he would be
better advised, if he did consider, v. 14. [you] are distinguished from them
that stand there before the Lord etc. v. 12. [thou] only is said to enter into
Covenant, and therefore though all v. 10. are said to stand, yet it is not
without some likely hood that [thou] v. 12. notes only some that entered into
Covenant in the behalf of the rest. And if the passing into Covenant were as
Piscator in his Scholie, that thou may pass through the parts of the
divided living creatures in testimony of the Covenant, (to which Ainsworth
notes the phrase to allude, surely, neither the little ones, nor all the rest
did pass between the parts of the beasts divided, but some instead of the
rest. 2. But were it granted that the little ones are said to enter into
Covenant, yet this does not prove them to be visible members. For. v. 15. it is
said that Moses made that Covenant and Oath with him that was not there with
them that day, that is their posterity not ye borne, as lackson, Piscator,
Ainsworth, Grotius the new Annot: etc, shall it therefore be said that the
posterity unborne were visible members of the Jewish Church in the wilderness?
3. It must be and was granted by Mr. Baxter in the dispute, that this entering
into Covenant was not by their own act but by their Parents for them. But such
an entering into Covenant does not make a viable Church member in the Christian
Church, however it did in the Jewish Church, there being a different Church
state or frame in the Christian Church which was gathered by the preaching of
the Gospel from the Israelites Church state and frame made by the Authority of
Abraham and Moses without teaching of the persons gathred. Mr. Baxter in the
Se^- everlasting rest page 224. He sent out Ministers and not Magistrates to
bring in the world. And page 3 he says, the Nation of the Jews, and all
proselyted Gentiles were holy before
4. Be it that the Covenant were to establish them to be a people to God and
that he may be a God to them, yet this does not prove the Covenant to be a pure
Gospel Covenant, not including peculiar benefits to the Jewish Nation: For
there is a plain restriction in the words, as he has said unto thee, and as
he has sworn unto thy Fathers to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob, which
undoubtedly comprehended their settling in Canaan, which was proper only to
them as Israelites, which may be proved out of many passages following, as
Deuteronomy, 29, 21. 28. Deuteronomy. 30. 1. 4. 5. 9, etc. Yea Ainsworth v. 15. notes that
the Covenant was made with their posterity, with exception of the new Covenant
in Christ, so that by him this Covenant and the Covenant in Christ are not all
one. As for that which is alleged out of Deuteronomy. 30. 14. that it is the Gospel
Covenant, because it is said Romans 10. 8. This is the word of faith which we
preach, I Answer, the words v. 8. 10. 11. speak expressly of the word of
Command and v. 14. the word is nigh to thee that thou may do it, which is not
meant of a promise but a command of the Law: nor will it prove that then the
Appostle allegeth it inpertinently: for it is frequent with the Apostle to
accommodate words to his purpose, that have a different sense in the places
whence they are taken from that, to which the Apostle applies them, as Romans
10. 18. etc. Lastly if it did contain promises purely Evangelical, yet the
Covenant in respect of them cannot be meant of all and every of the Israelites
that God would be a God to them, that is sanctify, justify, adopt them to be
Heirs of eternal life. For then Gods promise to them should not be true, For
with many of them God was not well pleased 1 Cor. 10. 5. Heb. 3. 17 19. but
only of the elect. As for that Deuteronomy. 30. 6. I confess it is a promise of
spiritual grace, but to the Jews after their captivity upon condition of
obedience, and to them indefinitely, which was never performed to all their
seed, but only to the elect among them, and therefore must be so limited, as
the promise, Isai. 54. 13. is by our Lord Christ, John 6. 45. and the promise
Genesis 17. 7. is by the Apostle Romans 9. 6. 7. 8.

SECT. 6. Of the text Acts 15. 10. alleged to prove our Infants Disciples of
Christ.
THe next Text alleged by Mr. Baxter is Acts 15. 10. where he would have it
thought, that God says that our Infant Children are Disciples, and therefore
to be baptized according to the institution, Math. 28. 19. To which I answer.
1. By putting Mr. Baxter in mind of his own objection against my interpretation
of the words, 1 Cor 7. 14. [ but now are they holy] that it is more likely the
word should be taken in a sense in which it is 600. times taken for [ separated
to God] then in my sense, in which it is no where else taken signifying [
legitimate.] For if this reason be good, it holds against himself, who takes
the word [ Disciples] in a sense applicable to Infants, in which sense it is no
where else taken, though it be used for one that is a follower of a Tencher
300. times in the Evangelists, and the Acts of the Apostles, of which either
100. or very near it is used by Luke 2. Mr. Baxters interpretation will
apaeare to be manifestly wrested to any that will but consider that the putting
the yoke on the necks of the Disciples, is the same with that which is
mentioned v. 1. they taught the brethren, and v. 5. they said that it was
needful to circumcise them, and to command them to keep the Law of Moses, and
v. 24. certain which went out from us, have troubled you with words,
subverting your soulis saying, ye must be circumcised and keep the Law. Now if
any man so senseless as to think they did these things to Infants? 3. The Text
v. 1. 23. calls them brethren, says v. 9. their hearts were purified by faith
upon the hearing of the word which none but those that are resolved to outface
a plain truth would aver to be meant of Infants. 4. Lastly Mr. Baxter
confessed in private conference with me, that the putting the yoke was by
teaching, and indeed it may easily be evinced that their act was not to take a
knife or sharp stone and therewith in their own persons cut off the little
skin of male Infants, but that they made it their bufinesse to subvert the
souls of converted Gentiles to hold it necessary that they should be
circumcised themselves: if the putting the yoke had been actual circumcision,
it had not been put on their necks, but elsewhere. Besides actual circum^tion
that is, the loss of a little skin was and might be borne, and is at this day
by many people whereas it is said, the Yoke they put was such as neither the
present Jews, nor their Fathers were able to bear. From all which I infer
that none are there meant by the term [ Disciples] but they that were taught
by the false Teachers, nor the yoke any other then the Doctrine or opinion of
the necessity of circumcision, and keeping of Moses his Law. In like manner
Christ's Doctrine is called his yoke Math. 11. 29. 30. Pisc. in his Scholie on
Acts 15, 10. Iugum (...) nempe legem Mosis ex collatione v. 5. Grot. amot. ad
Actor 15. 10. Rabbini usurpant de doctrina quae aliquid omnino faciendum
inculcat, And in like manner the yoke of bondage Gal. 5. 1. is the Law Gal. 4.
21. And is generally by Divines handling the Doctrine of Christian liberty made
to be the teaching and holding circumcision and Moses Law as the necessary way
to justification and salvation, and that the Habassine Christians who are
circumcised yet are not entangled with the yoke of bondage, because their
consciences are free, and so it is to be understood v. 2. whosoever is
circumcised that is, who is circumcised willingly out of the opinion of its
necessity, and sufficiency to salvation Christ shall profit you nothing, yea
but says Mr. Baxter it is circumcision as obliging to Moses Law, and if it be
not meant of circumcision circumcision is not condemned in that Council. I
answer, All the Color Mr. Baxter has from this Text to prove Infants
disciples is by conceiving the yoke to note barely and precisely the cutting
off a little skin: but to say it is circumcision as obliging to Moses Law is to
say the samewhich I say that it is not circumcision as acted, but as taught,
since the Doctrine or command obliged to Moses Law, not the bare cutting away the
little skin. And yet circumcision is in that council taken away, since he that
by teaching, shows the command to cease, does thereby take away the practice,
as with us they that deny Ordinances do binddo take away the use of them yet
further if it were granted Mr. Baxter, that the yoke were the taking away of
the little skin the term Disciples would not necessarily comprehend Infants,
though the false Teachers aims were also to have Infants circumcised, yet they
would first have the Bre-sthren of years circumcised and so the term [
Disciples] note only them, although Infants should be by that means
circumcised, yet not meant by the term [ Disciples] Lastly were it granted
that the term [ Discples] did note Infants, yet it could note no other then
males according to Mr. Baxters own explication, for they only were to be
circumcised, and therefore femall Infants should not be thence proved
Disciples, nor to be Baptized.

From all which the Reader may perceive how sleighly these arguments of Mr.
Baxter are, and how superficially he has handled this business.

SECT. 7. Of the Text 1 Cor. 7. 14. alleged to prove our Infants holy as
separated to God.
THe other Text that remains has more show for his purpose then all the rest,
Mr. Baxter says; Anabaptists affirm their own Children not to be holy as
separated to God; when God says the contrary 1 Cor. 7. 14 I Answer, what
others whom he calls Anabaptists affirm in this thing, I am not engaged to
inquire: I believe if Mr. Baxter were required to set down who those
Anabaptists are, and where they affirm it, he would be hard put to it to free
himself from overlashing. But I am assured Mr. Baxter wrote this passage in
have, and inconsideratly not well weighing what he said, and that however he
name Anabaptists in the plural, yet his only instance would be my self
affirming in the disputation after mentioned. But the thing I affirmed in the
disputation was not so rawly expressed as Mr. Baxter does, I said this, that
every child of a believer is not, because a believers child holy as separated
to God, nor does holy 1 Cor. 7. 14. signify as much as separated to God. To
conceive of which it is to be noted that a person may be said to be separated
to God, either in Gods purpose by his election, or in promise by his Covenant,
or in his present condition either by Gods calling to the knowledge of Christ,
or special employment for God, or by his own profession, or by vow of
parents, or by some special gift or privilege or if there be any other way
whereby a person may be said to be separated to God.

I never affirmed that none of these ways my children, or other believers
children are holy as separated to God: I only said that every child of a
believer is not because a believers child holy as separated to God.

If Mr. Baxter had told me in what manner he meant believers children to be
holy as separated to God, I should have told him in the disputation more fully
what I affirm or deny in this thing. But all that were Auditors of the dispute
might, and many did take notice how Mr. Baxter checked me, when I did but
desire him to explain the term of visible Church member, and to show by what
note he meant some Infants were visible Church Members, saying it was to
catechize him, and when I told him it was necessary the people should be
satisfied, he told me, his coming was to dispute with me, not to satisfy
them. and all along the dispute how magisterially, scornfully, and unbrotherly
he carried himself, not as one that minded clearing of truth, but to diminish
my esteem, and to gain an opinion to himself as having the better I think the
Auditors will testisie; and for this reason I obtained not from him to show in
what manner, and by what means he asserted every believers infant to be holy as
separated to God, so that in fine the dispute was only about the meaning of the
term [ holy] 1 Cor. 7. 14. whether it signify a state of separation to God as
Mr. Baxter conceived, or legitimation as I conceived. In which business though
I should be mistaken in the meaning which I give, yet it does not follow Mr.
Baxter is in the right: possibly both may be mistaken, and then however it
serves not Mr. Baxters purpose, which is as much as J need demonstrate, yet
because J desire truth may be discovered, J shall by answering what Mr. Baxter
brought either for his own sense or against mine, show how little cause of
triumph there was in any thing he brought at the disputation about this Text.

Jf Mr. Baxter say J do not truly set down his reasons or meaning, the fault
is in himself, who though often requested would never communicate to me his
arguments in writing, but left me to gather what J could from mine own memory
and others notes.

That which Mr. Baxter said of the meaning of this Text was to this effect.
Holiness 1 Cor. 7. 14. signifies a state of separation to God: for so the word
is constantly taken near 600. times, and no where for legitimate. And the
Apostles meaning is, the unbelieving wife is sanctified to the husband, that is
to his use, passively, though not actively, remotely, though not immediately, as
it is said 1 Timothy 4. 5. every creature is sanctified by the word of God and
prayer, and Tit. 1. 15. to the pure all things are pure, else were your
children unclean, that is were it not the unbelieving wife were sanctified
thus to the believers use, your children, the infant children of you believers;
having unbelieving wives were unclean, that is not separated to God, but now,
that is this being determined that the unbelieving wife is thus sanctified to
the believing Husbands use your children, that is the children of you believing
Corinthians, who have unbelieving wives are holy, that is are separated to God.
The same is the sense mutat is mutandis of that which is said concerning the
believing wife and unbelieving Husband.

To which J say: Holiness it is true notes a state of separation to God: and yet
it is apparent that 1 These. 4. 3. 4. 7. it signifies barely chastity of the
body without fornication, to which sense the use of [ holy] for [legitimate] is
near. And when holy notes a state of separation to God, that separation is
many ways, as by election, Covenant, calling vowing, offering, anointing,
prayer, Ordinance, apparition etc. and to many purposes or uses as to glorify
God, do service at the Temple, execute judgment etc. If Mr. Baxter would
distinctly tell me, what way, and to what use he would have the children of
believers holy as separated to God in the Text, 1 Cor. 7. 14. J conceive he
would not find one of all his 600. places, in which it is taken just in his
sense, so as that it may be verified of the infants he means. It is true God
says, the Corinthians children were holy, but he does not say they were holy
as separated to God as Mr. Baxter would have it. Jn what sense it is there
taken, J conceive can be gathered no way but by analyzing the Apostles words
and finding out of what holiness his speech can be true, which J have already
in my Examen of Mr. Marshalls sermon and my Apology and post script proved to
be only legitimation and may yet more fully prove in my review of the dispute
about infant baptism if ever it be published, against all that Mr. Marshall,
Mr. Geree, Mr. Blake, Mr. Cobbet, Mr. Church or any other I have met with reply
to my examen: Nor is it unusual with interpreters to take a word in a sense in
which it is used no where else, when the matter' scope, and other circumstances
of the Text lead to that sense as in that Epistle, 1 Cor. 11. 10. (...) which
every where else signifies power or authority there confessedly signifies a
veil, and the phrase of due benevolence is used 1 Cor. 7. 3. in a sense in
which it is used no where else, and the like may be said of the word [ forme]
Phil. 1. 6, of the word [ Church] Math. 18. 17. and many more. As for Mr.
Baxters exposition I conceive it not right. 1 Because if the sanctification be
understood as Mr. Baxter would have it in that sense the unbeliever is said to
be sanctified only to the true real believer before God, who by prayer does
sanctify the other party to his or her use, for of such only it is true, to
them every thing is sanctified by Prayer, since they only can pray, and to them
only all things are pure, not to them, who though they profess they know God,
yet in works deny him Tit 1. 16. This then is Mr. Baxters sense, For the
unbelieving Husband is sanctified to the use of a believing wife, who is truly
and really a believer before God, and not only by profession before men, unto
whom by virtue of her true faith and prayer her Husband is sanctified to her
use and pure to her. But if this were the sense then the reason of the Apostle
had reached only to the resolution of such to live with their unbelieving
yoke-fellowes the rest were not to continue with them, because they were not
sanctified to them, whereas the doubt was concerning any visible believer or
brother, and accordingly the Apostles resolution. Besides supposing any true
real believers doubted of the truth of their own faith, they would be
deterred by the Apostles reason so understood from living with their
unbelieving yok-fellowes as being not sanctified to them. Again the Apostle
had resolved them of the lawfullnesse of their continuing together by a reason
taken from a thing only known to God, and their own conscience, whereas his
intent was to resolve all concerning the lawfullnesse of living together, with
their yoke-fellowes in disparity of Religion by a reason taken from a thing
obvious to them all. 2. Mr. Baxters sense supposes that the cause of the
sanctification of the unbeliever is the faith of the believer, but if so then
doubtless the Apostles would have expressed it thus [ to or in the believing
wife or husband] whereas it is only said [ in or to the husbnnd or wife]
without adding the term [ believing] which manifestly shows the Apostle placed
not the Emphasis in it. For who will leave out the word in which the Emphasis
is put and not rather express it remarkably? 3. If the sense be as Mr. Baxttr
would have it, then this proposition is true* as being included in the Apostles
reasoning: The Children whereof one of the Parents is not a real true believer
before God are none of them holy as separated to God. But it is false, take the
separation to God what way and to what use he will, the child of professed
unbelievers, much more the child of professed believers, though not really such
before God may be, and perhaps is separated to God. Now that these Propositions
[ All the Children whereof one parent is not sanctified to the other are
unclean, none of the children whereof one of the Parents is not sanctified to
the other are clean or holy] are included in the Apostles consequence is
confessed by Chamier, Mr. Blake and others as I show in my Examen, Postscript
and other writings, nor do I know any that deny it, and if they should it might
easily be evinced to any that is acquainted with the rules of reasoniug, and
therefore according to Mr. Baxters explication, the Apostle must assert [ that
all the Children whereof one of the Parents is not sanctified to the others
use, being a true real believer before God are unclean, none holy as separated
to God,] which being manifalse Mr. Baxters exposition is apparently erroneous.

Lastly if his sense were allowed him, then the baptizing any Infant but such
whereof one of the next parents is a real believer before God would be
unlawful, for such only are holy in his sense, and the rest unclean: But it
being known only to God that one of the Parents is a true real believer
before God, it will follow no Ministers ought to baptize any infant at all
without revelation from God, that one of the Parents is a true real believer,
otherwise we shall baptize the unclean, or unholy who have not a right to be
baptized. To tell, us as Mr. Baxter did in private conference with me, that by
a judgment of Charity, a professed believer is to be taken to be a real
believer, I answer be it granted, yet that is not sufficient to justify the
baptizing the child of such a one according to Mr. Baxters exposition, since as
he expounds the Apostle it is requisite that the parent be a true believer
before God, or else the child is unclean, that is in his sense unbaptizable.

Besides the judgment of Charity is not that by which persons are to proceed
in Baptizing, but the certain judgment of Verity arising from Ministerial
Skill and Prudence, to know what is the true Profession, and from sense, that
the Person to be Baptized makes such Profession. Mr. Baxter himself in his
Appendix to his Aphorisms Page 58. dare not you to dispense Gods Seals upon
your conjectures of the probability or improbability of Men's sincerity.

These things being true, though I should be mistaken in my sense, yet Mr.
Baxters arguments were answered: yet ex abundanti I shall answer Mr. Baxters
Exceptions against my interpretation, which according to my memory, and the
Notes which I could procure of the Disputation between us were these. The sense
is not right which thus interprets the Apostles Speech. The Unbelieving Wife
is sanctified to the Husband, that is, in respect of lawful use of Marriage is
as if he were Sanctified; else were your Children unclean, that is bastards,
but now they are holy, that is legitimate. For 1. The word Sanctified signifies
somewhat more then lawfully used. Pagans actions may be said to be lawful, not
Sanctified. 2. It is no good consequence, your Marriage continues lawful in
the use in opposition to Fornication; therefore you may dwell together lawfully
in opposition to Piety. 3. The argument is taken a notiori: but it could not be
more known to them that their Children were legitimate, then that their
Marriage was lawful. 4. If it were better known that their Children were
legitimate then that their Marriage were lawful, because of the change of
Religion, then they should doubt of their Childrens legitimation, who were
borne since their conversion, and not of those that were borne before, which
were an irrational Fancy.

To this I answer. 1. It is not said the Unbelievers action is sanctified, but
the Unbeliever, and Unbelieveing Medes are said to be Gods Sanctified ones,
Isai. 14 3. But be the word taken so as not to be applied to a Pagan in its
proper acception, yet the sense I give alters not the usual sense, only it
supposes the meaning of the word to be taken with some diminution by a
Catachresis, or acytology, that is abuse or impropriety of speech, which is a
very frequent thing, as 1 Cor. 10. 2. were Baptized, that is, quasi baptizati
sunt (as Grotius rightly notes on that place) they were as if they had been
baptized: the Cloud and Sea were to them as baptism to us. And so here the
unbelieving Husband has been Sanctified: that is, to his Wife in respect of
the use of him, as if he had been Sanctified: which is a plain and easy
Exposition. 2. The Corinthians doubted of the lawfulness of living with the
Unbelieving yokefellow, by reason of the unholiness of the Unbeliever, which
they questioned whether it did not necessitate a divorce or departure, though
they doubted not of their Childrens legitimation, either borne before or after
their conversion, they yet living with the Unbeliever. The Apostles answer I
conceive to be thus. You may lawfully continue together notwithstanding the
unbelief of the yokefellow? for he being a Husband though an Unbeliever is, as
if he were Sanctified in respect of Marriage use, else were your Children you
have borne in this estate unclean, that is illegitimate which you do not
conceive. Though the occasion of the doubt were the Impiety of the one party,
yet the doubt was only whether divorce were necessary; which is rightly
answered by telling them they might lawfully continue in Marriage use. As in
like case if a Papist doubt whether she must not be divorced from her Lutheran
Husband lately converted to it, the answer is right by telling her no, for the
Marriage relation continues though her Husband be an Heretic; else should her
Children borne since he was made a Lutheran be illegitimate, of which she
doubts not. 3. It might be more known to them that their Children were
legitimate, then that living with the Unbeliever continued lawful, because
there was not such occasion of doubt concerning the Children, as of the
Professed Unbeliever, and for some other reasons, perhaps through mere
incogitancy of the connection, between the unlawfulness of their living
together and the illegitimation of their Children, as it happened to them, 1
Cor. 15. 12. and is incident to men, and women as rational as they. 4.
According to the interpretation I give, there is no intimation of doubt
concerning the Childrens legitimacy, either borne before or after conversion;
nor needs there be to make good the Exposition I give. As for [ else were your
Children unclean] the consequence of the Apostle might be good in my sense if
it be meant either of the Children borne before, or after conversion of the one
party; it is true of either, that if the Unbelieving husband were not as if he
had been sanctified to his Wife, in respect of lawful conjugall use, their
Children were illegitimate, but I think upon mature consideration, it is the
most clear Exposition to understand it of those borne since the conversion of
one Party. Upon this Answer to Mr. Baxter, I presume the Reader will perceive
my Exposition no irrational fancy, which is the interpretation of Ambrose,
Hierome, Anselme, Aquinas, Melanchthon, Camerarius, Osiander, Gagnaeus,
Musculus, Suarez, Mariana, and many others, who have been conceived men able to
discern between reason and irrational fancies as actuely as Mr. Baxter,
though I conceive of his abilities as excellent. However still the Christian
that would not delude his conscience, me thinks should fear to go against the
plain Institution of Christ, and Practice of the Apostles, and first Ages of
the Church; in which Infant Baptism was neither appointed nor Practiced, upon
such uncertain Expositions and Consequences, as Mr. Baxter has brought, and I
may now freely say however they seemed somewhat at the first hearing, yet now
upon exact consideration, for the consequences from his three first Scriptures
here brought frivolous, and I doubt urged more like a Sophister then a lover of
truth. The rest of Mr. Baxters Passage has with it a manifest tincture of
reviling, little of reason: yet because such speeches too easily take with
People, who are of all others most prejudiced against those they call
Anabaptists, and who I think are as unequally dealt with as any men, I will
make an answer to it.

SECT. 8 Of Gods speaking by judgments from Heaven against Anabaptists.
MAster Baxter goes on thus: I cannot digress to fortify you against these
Sects: you have seen God speak against them by judgments from Heaven; what
were the two monsters in new England but miracles?

Ans. He is pleased to style, Antinomians, Socinians, Arminians, Separatists,
Independents, Anabaptists, (falsely so called) Sects. Those whom he calls
Independents, disclaim the Title, and deny themselves to be a Sect, and so do
Antipaedobaptists. Let reason be heard; why should men be any more called a
Sect, for denying that it is of Divine appointment, that a Synod of many
Churches should have power to excommunicate, Mr Baxter himself in this his Book
of the Saints everlasting rest, Part. 2. chapter 6. Sect. 1. p. 2^2 expresses
Christ's charge to his Apostles thus go, Preach and make me Disciple of all
Nations.
then others called Presbyterians for holding it? why should Antipaedobaptists
be called a Sect for denying that Infants are appointed by Christ to be
Baptized rather then Paedobaptists for affirming it? If for their Tenet they
are called a Sect, surely they that so plainly turn aside from the express
institution, Mat. 28. 19, 20. Mark. 16. 5. 16. which almost all Expositors, and
not a few Paedobaptists even in their writings for Paedobaptisme do acknowledge
to appoint only the Baptizing of Disciples made by Preaching, and from the
manifest Practice of the Apostles, are more worthy the Name of a Sect, or
Sectaries; if for non-Communion wi^h others of a contrary judgment I wish each
man would lay his hand on his heart, and examine whether he has not been the
maker of the breach: For my own part I am assured, I can better aquit my self
from it then the chief of my Antagonists. Surely Mr. Baxter in this his
Invective, chiefly in his rash and hasty reckoning me among Heretics, even
then when I made earnest suite to him to have his Arguments in writing that I
might examine them (which I cannot any way obtain as yet) has more manifestly
showed himself resolved to break with Me, and to renounce Me as one unfit for
communion with him, then any action I ever did showed the like disposition in
Me toward him, Mr. Baxter says I cannot digress to fortify you against
these Sects. I confess a Discourse against those Sects, as he calls them, had
been a Digression from the subject of his Treatise, but not from the matter of
his Epistle, and the fifth Direction he gives to his Neighbors of
Kederminster. But why can he not digress? I can guess no other reason but his
haste: willing he was in his Epistle before that Book which was likely to sell,
to blast my reputation by Name, and other dissenters from him without naming
them; whether to ease his stomach or to what other end he knows best, though
he little considered what he wrote. He goes on: you have seen God speak
against them by judgments from Heaven; what were the two monsters in New
England, but miracles? I Answer, what judgments from heaven by which God spak
against the Sects he mentions, they had seen, I could never yet learn of his
Neighbors, though I have lived very near them, have often conversed with them,
and had them my auditors till (I imagine) M. Baxters opposition to Me took them
off. Nor do I think if Mr. Baxter were put to name the judgments by which God
spoke from Heaven against the Sects he names, would he mention any other then
the two Monsters in New England, which I am confident neither Mr. Baxter, nor
any of his Neighbors of Kederminster saw. These two Monsters are mentioned in
the Margin of his book Page 232. to be the most hideous monstrous births of
Mistress Hutchinson, and Mistress Dier. In Mr. Welds story of the Antinomians; I
find mention in the Preface of thirty monstrous births or thereabouts brought
forth by Mistress Hutchinson at once; some of them bigger, some of them lesser,
some of one shape some of another, few of any perfect shape, none at all of
them (so far as he could learn) of humane shape. And of Mistress Dyer that she
brought forth her birth of a woeman child, a Fish, a beast, and a foul, all
woven together in one, and without an head, which he describes page 44. of his
Story. The truth of the Relation I question not: but that they were Miracles as
Mr. Baxter takes the word [ Miracle] in his second part, Chapter 4. Sect. 1. etc.
in which he distinguishes between Wonders and Miracles, I think cannot be made
good. If we find not the like story in every point, yet we read of many
monstrous births, as that of the Earl of Hollands daughter and many other: yet
neither Divines, nor Philosophers, nor Physicians that I know do reckon them
among Miracles. Nor do I think it a very safe way to take such Accidents as
Arguments for, or against any Tenet. Camden in his Britannia describing
Wiltshire, makes mention of a Synod in Calne, whereat upon the falling of the
room, and preservation of Dunstan it was judged, that God had determined for
Monkery. Many more such strange accidents do both Heathen, and Ecclesiastical
Histories mention for confirmation of superstition and errors, which Mr. Baxter
himself takes notice of Page 240. by which People have been lead to errors. And
therefore I think Mr. Baxter does ill to direct his Neigbhours of Kederminster,
to such accidents to fortify them against Sects. And I have ever judged it a
very unsafe, and I think an evil course that many Preachers have taken to
affright their People with relations of accidents, befalling Men whom they
judge erroneous, thereby to deter them from so much as examining their Tenet;
as being contrary to Paul's admonition of trying all things, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 21. and
directing to another way of discerning between truth and error, then the holy
Scripture contrary to John 5. 39. Mark. 12. 24. 2 Timothy 3. 16. Deuteronomy. 13. 1, 2.
and Isai. 8. 20. etc. which is derogatory to the Scriptures use, and directing
them by judgments from heaven to judge of Doctrines, of which many Relations
are not true, as I am sure for one instance in the relations of Gods Judgment
upon Sabbath breakers, to which Mr. Baxter referrs Page 230. concerning Mr.
Powle of Lemster in my time of being there, and not far off from the place when
it happened, in the relation of which there are sundry mistakes and untruths,
nor did the circumstances show the accident to be Gods Voice, to that end the
compiler of that Book applies it. But if the relations of the accidents be
true, yet it is uncertain whether the Devil do not speak by them, until it
appear first that the Tenet they are applied to confirm be of God, which may
be known by the Scriptures without relying on such accidents. And it is well
known that Papists use them as well as the Orthodox, and make them a note of
their Church and Doctrine, which is rejected by Protestants. But were it
granted a safe way to judge of Doctrines by such judgments of God; yet in all
the story of Mr. Weld forementioned, I find not a word of Mistress Hutchinson,
or Mistress Dyer, or any other of these whose errors are taken to be condemned
by those accidents, as holding Antipaedobaptisme. I find Mistress Dyer and her
Husband to have been taken for Familists, Page 44. Mistress Hutchinson to have
held 29 errors, Page 60. but none of them against Infant baptism. Mr. Baxter
himself in the Margin of his book Page 232. bids ask them in New England,
whether they were not convincing providence against their Antinomian
Antiscripturall heresies. Why then does Mr. Baxter tell his Neigbours of these
judgments speaking against the Sects he mentions indefinitely, when it was but
against one of them in his own construction, and place his speech where it
might be, and is commonly taken, and was alleged upon Mr. Baxters credit in
Pulpit, in the Parish in which I taught, as spoken against Antipaedobaptists,
but that it is most likely Mr. Baxter in that passage chiefly intended to make
Me in particular, and other opposers of Infant Baptism odious, and the truth
we hold, though he did thereby misleade Men, for which the Lord forgive Him.
Yet I will add thus much, that I find among the 82 errors condemned in New
England, in that story the 21 to be this. To be justified by Faith is to be
justified by Works: which how near it is to Mr. Baxters Doctrine in his
Aphorisms of justification, These. 20. 70. 72, 73, 74, 75, 76. in this Treatise
Page 11. Doubtless the Gospel takes Faith for our obedience to all Gospel
Precepts, which he teaches in his Aphorisms, These. 76. and expounds James 2.
24. of justification before God by works in a proper sense, and those were
giving food, or clothing to a brother, Verse. 16. offering Isaac on the Altar,
which is rather a work of the Law then the Gospel, Ver. 21. Rahabs receiving
the Messengers and sending them out another way.

SECT. 9. Of the Anabaptists evil Lives.
MAster Baxter proceeds, Christ has told you, by their Fruits ye shall know
them; we mis-interpret, when we say he means by Fruit, their falls Doctrine;
that were but idem per idem. Heretics may seem holy for a little while, but at
last all false Doctrines likely end in wicked lives. Where has there been
known a Society of Anabaptists, since the World first knew them that have not
proved wicked? How many of these or Antinomians, etc. have you known, who have
not proved palpably guilty of lying, perfidivusnesse, covetousness, malice,
contempt of their godly brethren, licentiousness, or seared consciences?

Answ. Interpreters differ about the fruits, Mat. 7. 16. some by Fruits
understand evil life, some false doctrine, some both, some add their want of
calling: I for my part think both an evil life and a false Doctrine do
discover false Prophets, but chiefly their false Doctrine, and so do Piscator,
Pareus, Perkins, etc. because that seems to be Gods note Deuteronomy. 13. 2. And in
reason since a false Prophet is so named from his false Doctrine, the false-hood
of his Doctrines best discovers that he is a false Prophet. As for evil life
by it self, (which M. Baxter seems to hold) it cannot be the note whereby to
know a false Prophet as such, both because evil Men may be true Prophets, as
Judas for example, who was a true Apostle, yet a Theif, and on the other side
Mr. Baxter confesses Heretics may seem holy for a little while, and therefore
during that time they cannot be known by their evil life: yea, many erroneous
Persons have continued in appearance, holy to their end. Mr. Baxter dares say
no more but that all false Doctrine likely end in wicked lives. Augustine
commends Pelagius Epist. 120. Bertius Arminius; yea many of those who have bin
reputed Heretics, have been eminent for holiness in appearance even to their
end, and thereby have prevailed. And indeed it is the common Tenent of
Protestant Divines, answering Bellarmine and other Papists, See Field of the
Church 3. Book Chapter 52. Morton Apol. Cath part. 1. l. 2. c. 6. Alsted supplem.
Cham. de Eccles. l. 2. c. 13 Sect 3.
who deny Profession of the true Faith to be a note of the true Church, and
among other notes make the holiness of their Teachers one note, that true
Faith is a sufficient note of a visible Church and true Teacher, and that
holiness of life is not the note of a true Prophet, or the want of it of a
false Prophet. If it were it would follow no true Ministers who are vicious in
life, nor to be heard, nor to be owned as Pastors. And therefore Mr. Baxter
unadvisedly perhaps in heat, or spleen, directs his Neighbors to know false
Prophets by this note, which would if retorted prove Presbyterians, Heretics
as well as Anabaptists. But to say by their false Doctrine ye shall know false
Prophets, were idem per idem, the same by the same. Answ. In Mr. Baxters Logic
then false Doctrine, and false Prophet are the same. It is true, false Doctrine
is the form denominating a false Teacher or false Prophet: but to make the
form denominating, and the subject denominated the same, is to Me false
Doctrine in Logic. Are the whiteness and the thing white, the heat and thing
hot, all one? or does a Man that knows hot water by heat, cold water by its
cold, know idem per idem, the same by the same? But Mr. Baxter applies his rule
generally against Anabaptists, and says, where has there been known a Society
of Anabaptists, since the World first knew them, that proved not wicked? Answ.
Were this question propounded dubitatively it would the less move, but no Man
will I think take his interrogation for any other then a most peremptory
determination, wherein like a right English Mastive, he flies in the face not
of one, or two Men, or one or two Societies of Men, but on all the Societies of
Anabaptists since the World first knew them, and asserts them to have proved
wicked. An accusation that I should not have dared to make against the Papists
themselves. And for it, if there were no other thing, I may boldly say Mr.
Baxter has played the Devils part with a witness. But you will say is it not
true? Answ. Were not Cyprian and his Colleagues, Hemerobaptists in Epiphanius,
the Picards who rebaptized, as the Preface to the Bohemian Confession of the
year 1535 shows, Anabaptists; that is, baptizers again? And yet who doubts
but they had many Societies who proved not wicked? But you will say they were
rebaptists on another ground then the Anabaptists, Mr. Baxter means, who deny
Infant Baptism? Be it so: yet it is a most bold calumny to damn all their
societies as in conclusion wicked. But that Mr. Baxter may learn to order his
pen better hereafter, he may take notice that besides the probabilities that
Berengarius opposed the Baptizing of little ones, notwithstanding what Mr.
Marshall alleges, it is more then probable by Bernards 204 Epistle, his 66.
Sermon on the Canticles, Petrus Cluniacensis his Epistle against Peter de
Bruis, and Henricus, Eckbertus Schonaugiensis his Sermon 7. adversus Catharos
in the Auctarium of the Biblioth: Patxum Tom. 2. and others, that there were
many hundreds of years sithence, a very great number of godly Societies, that
did deny Infant Baptism, and in Gaul and Germany were Baptized after
Infant Baptism. But perhaps Mr. Baxter imagines no Anabaptists (as he calls
them) till Luthers days. There have been many of those Societies in high and
low Germany. Will Mr. Baxter, a young Man that I believe never travailed out of
England, fall into such exorbitant censoriousnesse as to condemn them all as
in fine proving wicked? sure I am Alstedius in his sapplement to Chamier de
Eccl. l. 2. c. 13. Sect. 3. puts the Anabaptists among those that had the
garment of a good life: Cassander in his Epistle to the Duke of Gulick, and
Cleve cited by me in my Examen part. 2. Sect. 6. says, in quibus magna ex
part pii cujusdam animi argumenta cernas. Sundry other writings I have read
even of those that have written against them, who either by their ingenuous
Confessions of some of them, or their readiness to except against them for
small infirmities, give me occasion to conceive there have been in the Low
Countries, and elsewhere godly Societies of them, and not such as in conclusion
proved wicked. But perhaps Mr. Baxter pronounces so of all those in England,
that have been called Anabaptists. If so, let him know that there have been in
London Churches of those called Anabaptists, and are still, whose Confession of
Faith may compare either with Mr. Baxter, or perhaps the Assembly, for
soundness of Doctrine; and not a few of whose Teachers and Members have lead a
godly life to the end, and whose living members yet hold forth the Faith in a
godly life. And this the rather I am induced to conceive not only from mine own
knowledge, and the credible testimony of others, but also from their Petition
to the Parliament April. 2. 1649. and the Parliaments answer to them, and their
late heart-bleedings for Professors abominations in their faithful general
Epistle Printed for the same man, for whom Mr. Baxters published Books have
been Printed. But I perceive Mr. Baxter was willing to let his pen have the
reins, and therefore adds; How many of these, etc. May I not as well ask the
parishioners of Kederminster, how many have they known that have proved so
palpably guilty of the soul sins he names? How many Anabaptists or Antinomists
they have known, I cannot tell. Mr. Baxter names me for one, and I confess his
parishioners of Kederminster have had means to know me from my Cradle, as
being borne and bred up, and lived a good part of my life near them: if they
know me so palpably guilty of the sins Mr. Baxter speaks of, they show but
little love, in that they rebuke me not, but suffer sin on me, contrary to what
Mr. Baxter has taught them. I would have trod this passage under my foot as
dirt, were it not that the Devil by this and such like passages breeds such
hatred, and nourishes such fury in men's breasts, that were it not for the
mighty over-awing power of God, and the magistrates Justice, they would quickly
fall on us to destroy us. I add no more, but the Lord rebuke them.

SECT. 10. Of the Anabaptists confident expressions, and weakness upon trial,
and the dispute at Bewdley, Jan. 1. 1649.
YEt Mr. Baxter has not done with us. They have confident expressions, says
he, to shake poor ignorant Souls, whom God will have discovered in the day of
trial: But when they meet with any that can search out their fallacies, how
little have they to say? you know I have had as much opportunity to try their
strength as most: and I never yet met with any in Garrison, or Army, that could
say any thing which might stagger a solid Man.

Answ. For other men I cannot make answer: my own expressions in my Books and
Sermons have no more confidence then strength of proof, or answer, as there
was occasion. As solid men as Mr. Baxter have met with that which not only has
staggered, but also has brought them to assent to my Tenet. Me thinks the
institution, Mat. 28. 19. the practice of John Baptist, the Apostles, and first
Churches, who did Baptize no Infants that can be found, might stagger as solid
a man as Mr. Baxter, and it is very likely, Mr. Baxter met with some in Garrison
or Army that alleged these, or some of these to him. For my part I cannot tell
how to construe it any other then a Judgment of God on men that hold so
earnestly against Papists, and Prelates, and Presbyterians too, that in Gods
Worship humane Inventions are to be left as Will Worship, and yet contend so
much for Infant Baptism so clearly proved, and so frequently confessed, not
only by learned Papists, but also many of the more ingenuous of the Prelatical
party, and others, to be only a Church Tradition. Yea, the Oxford Divines in
their late Reasons of the present Judgment of the University of Oxford about
the Solemn Covenant, etc. Approved by general consent in a full Convocation,
June 1. 1647. do Sect. 4. Page 9. say, that without the consentient Judgment
and Practice of the Universal Church, (which they are not able to prove) they
should be at a loss, when they are called upon for proof in the Point of
baptizing Infants.

But there yet remains that which it seems was first in his intention, though
last in execution; to wit, the blazing abroad his Dispute with me Ianua. 1. at
Bewdley, of which he speaks thus. You heard in my late public Dispute at
Bewdley January 1. With Mr. Tombs, who is taken to be the ablest of them in
the Land, and one of the most Moderate, how little they can say even in the
hardest point of baptism; what gross absurdities they are driven to, and how
little tender conscientious fear of erring is left among the best.

Ans. Mr Baxter not content to be cried up by his party, has thought good to
glory in his imagined victory, and to crow over me in print, for that which I
am assured the most considerate and godly Auditors of that Dispute have thought
meet to mourn, as perceiving it to have been his hour of temptation: and God I
hope will yet open his eyes, to see how he has been abused, to become an
Instrument to hinder the receiving of Truth, and the Ringleader to a party of
men, who neither mind the things of Christ, nor regard Mr Baxter, saving
wherein they make use of the keenness of his spirit, and abilities, to oppose
the Truth, and to uphold their repute. But to the matter, Mr Baxter reckons me
among the Heretics he had before described, yet with difference. In an
Accusation of Heresy, Jerome says, a man is not to be patient. Mr Baxters
Opinions about Justification, Universal Grace in Amyralds middle way avowed by
him in this place of his Epistle, his Tenet about the Magistrates being an
Officer under Christ as Mediator in his Aphorisms of Justification, Vide Dr
Chaloners Credo Ecclesiam Catholicam. Davenant Exhort. to Peace.
page 273. may and are taken to savor more of Heresy then any Tenet I hold;
yea sure, as our Protestant Divines are wont to answer Papists, that the Tenets
of the Protestants denying their additions, when otherwise the same Faith is
avouched, cannot be justly charged as Heresy; so neither can I be justly
charged with Heresy, who do avouch the Baptism appointed by Christ, and
practiced by his Apostles, and only deny that the Consequences from the Old
Testament are convincing to prove Infant Baptism: They that alter Christ's way,
and introduce another way, from Circumcision, or the Jewish Church State, as Mr
Baxter does, are more justly chargeable with Heresy. His conceits of me I
regard not: His Neighbors of Kederminster might hear how little I did say, but
surely they could not hear in that Dispute how little I could say, much less
how little Anabaptists so called can say in the hardest point of Baptism: His
Neighbors and others may know by this, and my other Writings and Sermon^ that I
can say more then I said then; and I know other learned men who can say more in
the point then disputed, though I then said enough in answer to Mr Baxters
Arguments then produced, notwithstanding my care to speak no more then was
necessary, and my natural hesitancy in answering an Argument at the first
hearing. And how ever the business was packed, to cry up a Baxter, as if they
had been a company of Boys at a game, yet the whole Auditory might know, and
many did, that Mr Baxter gave no sufficient Answer to that which I alleged,
That no good Argument could be drawn from the Infants of the lews visible
Church membership to our Infants visible Church Membership, because the visible
Church of the Jews was the whole Nation brought into Covenant together by
Abraham and Moses without previous instruction; but the Christian visible
Church had another state and constitution, being gathered by Apostles and other
Preachers, by teaching them the Gospel, and thereby making them Disciples, some
in one Country, City, Family, some in another; no one Country, or City, or
Tribe together, but so many of all as the Lord vouchsafed to call by his Word
and Spirit. Which was enough to answer the main Argument Mr Baxter brought from
Deuteronomy. 29. 10, 11, 12. Romans 11. 19, 20. The grossest of absurdities he conceived
I was driven to, I take it was that I conceived [thou] Deuteronomy. 29. 12. not to
comprehend little ones, of which I have given account above: What other gross
absurdities I was driven to, when Mr Baxter will show them, I shall then make
an Answer: He neither did charge me with any such gross absurdities, nor could
drive me to any, when he and I had a whole Afternoons Conference at
Kederminster in his Chamber with him alone, Ianua. 25. after that he knew my
Answers to his Arguments, delivered in a Sermon at Bewdly Chapel, Ianua. 20.
And for his last censure, as if there were little tender conscientious fear of
erring left in me, it shows a very great height of pride in him, to take on him
to judge my spirit, and uncharitableness or malignity toward me, who would thus
censure me, when if he had any spark of charity to me, he might have perceived
a very great and conscientious fear of erring in me, who, before I did publish
any thing, did first try what the London Ministers could say for Infant
Baptism, in six days private dispute, and after applied my self to a Committee
of the Assembly, and particularly to Mr Marshal, and waited nineteen months
before I published my Writings about Infants Baptism, as may be seen in my
Examen and Apology, not unknown to Mr Baxter: Yea, my proceedings with Mr
Baxter showed the same fear of erring, having, before I would adventure to
preach at Bewdly, first endeavored to get his Animadversions in writing on some
part of my Review, not yet printed, which he would not yield: and after that
many months endeavored to get his Arguments in writing, that my Neighbors and
my self might be satisfied, and I desist from preaching what I intended, or
else might go more surely to work in asserting my Tenet. But it seems Mr Baxter
was resolved to lie close, till he could by provocations draw me to a public
Dispute, presuming he should carry the fame of a victory, which would serve his
and the rest of his parties turn, to lessen my esteem, and to hold the people
in the superstition of Infant Baptism.

And for himself, I leave it to his own Conscience and understanding men to
judge, how little conscientions fear, of erring he had, who would not, though
so often requested, communicate his Arguments in Writing to me, to be examined
before he vented them so openly; and how little Brotherly care he had to keep
me from error, by giving me his Arguments to stay me from Preaching that which
his Speeches provoked me to, and he knew as I am assured that I did intend. To
conclude I am enforced to express it as a grievance, that I have neither found
that love of Truth, Candor, nor love to me, either before, or in the Dispute,
or since, which I expected in Mr. Baxter, and which encouraged me to yield to
the Dispute mentioned by him. As for the two flings he has at me in the sixth
direction of his Epistle, where he mentions some that say, no truth must be
concealed for Peace, and says, they have usually as little of the one as the
other, I had hoped I had satisfied Mr. Baxter in a Letter, by acquainting him
with what limitation I meant, if not expressed my position thereof, which if he
had been willing to deal fairly with me, he should have mentioned. As for Mr.
Baxters ways, how far they are from Truth or Peace, may easily be discerned,
by his managing the business between him and me: My friendly and ready coming
to him, Ianua. 25. showed my desire of both. The other is in those words,
Temptations are now come near your doors, which I imagine he spoke because of
my Vicinity to them: His Neighbors I think will bear me witness I taught them
many Truths when they did hear me, which formerly was very frequent, and I
still tender their good so far, as to be unwilling to mislead them, how ever
they may think of me by Mr Baxters descriptions of me. And were I fit to give
them Counsel, I would warn them to take heed of the Temptations that are indeed
now come near their doors, in the high esteem they have of Mr Baxter, which may
cause them to drink in his Errors, of which I have said before he seems to me
not to be free; and others in all parts, as his own words in a Letter to me do
import, do charge him with more largely then I do. Other things in his Treatise
I let them pass: But for the point in dispute between him and me, if he add any
thing more, as I am told he intends, if the Lord assist I shall examine it when
I have it in writing: and in the mean time do wish him mentem sanam in corpore
sano.

FINIS.

