THE SCRIPTURES Proved to be the Word of God, And the only foundation of Faith,
and Rule for our obedience. OR, A CLEAR CONVICTION Of the Errors of those that
are called QUAKERS. Who blasphemously affirm, That the Scriptures are not the
Word of God, nor the foundation of Faith, nor the only rule for our Obedience.
Against which Errors, these two Propositions are maintained. I. That the
Scriptures contained in the Books of the Old and New Testament, commonly called
the Bible, is the revealed Will and Word of God. II. That the Scriptures which
is the Word of God, is the only foundation for our faith, and the only rule for
our obedience.


By SAMPSON TOVNESEND, Minister of the Gospel, and Pastor of S. Austins, and
Saviors Parish in Norwich.

Prove. 13.13. Who so despises the Word of God shall be destroyed.

Jer. 8.9. Lo, they have rejected the Word of the Lord, and what wisdom is in
them?

Exodus 32.16. And the Tables were the work of God, and the writing was the
writing of God, graven upon the Tables.

2 Pet 1.21. For the prophecy came not in old time by the will of man, but
holy men spoke as they were moved by the holy Ghost.

Isa. 8.20. To the Law and to the Testimony, If they speak not according to
this Word, it is, because there is no light in them.

London, Printed by S.G. for R. Tomlins at the Sun and Bible in Pye-Corner.
1654.

TO CHRISTOPHER ADKINSON, JAMES LANCASTER, GEORGE WHITEHEAD, and THOMAS
SIMONDS: Now in Norwich Gaol, for their blasphemy and miscariages.
IF ever the truth of God were turned into a lie, Romans 1.25
It is by you that deny the Scriptures to be the truth of God, and pretend
immediate revelations to be the rule for your actions. I shall mind you of a
passage of a reverend minister now with God: Mr. Buroughs on Hosea 8.12 page
91.
he says, There is a generation of men, rising now, if not risen, that begin
to have vile thoughts of the written word of God, and think to understand the
mind of God otherwise, etc. But (says he) when they are rotten, and it may be
when their souls are perished in hell, the written word of God shall stand, and
be honorable in the eyes of all his Saints. You acknowledge the Scriptures to
be the trnth, and yet deny them to be the word of God. A strange paradox; As if
the scriptures, which are called the truth of God, And God, which is the God of
truth, should not be the author of the truth: 1 King. 17.24. Rom 3.7. Deuteronomy.
32.4 Psalm. 31.5.
Or as if man, which is vanity, yea a ly, should yet be the only author of the
truth. Upon this your error depend your other errors of denying the scriptures
to be the only ground of your faith, and the only rule for your obedience: for
did you believe the scriptures to be the word of God, they would clearly
convince you of the errors of your judgment and practice in many things. Let
me reason with you a little; you acknowledge the scripture to be the truth, you
must of necessity also grant that whatsoever is contrary to truth is an error:
And having granted this, see what will follow upon it by way of trial of your
judgment and practice. It is your judgment, that you are perfect and free
from all sin: see this to be an error, contrary to the truth, in Eccle. 7.20. 1
John 1.8, 10. You deny the power of the Magistrate in the matters of God,
contrary to the truth in Romans 13.1. to 6. Joh. 31.11, 28. You not only speak
evil of governers, but of government also, contrary to the truth in Tit. 3.2.
2 Pet. 2.10. Jude 8. You condemn the ministers of the Church of England, and
despise them as false teachers, and say, they know nothing of the true light:
although they speak nothing but what is according to the Law and testimony of
God in his word, which is the rule to try all teachers by, Isa. 8.20. This your
judgment is an error, it being contrary to Tit. 2.15. and know, that in thus
doing, ye do not only despise man, but God. I shall not foul paper, 1 These.
4.8. Luke 10.16.
in mentioning your judging, censuring, and condemning, of both Magistrates and
Ministers; only see how contrary this your practice is to truth, Mat. 7.1, 2.
Romans 14.10, 13. Jam. 4.11. You condemn the ministers of the Church of England
for preaching for hire; whereas ye do not know their ends in preaching; and
thus you are become judges of evil thoughts; Jam. 2.4.
Contrary to the truth in 1 Cor. 4.5. -- Judge nothing before the time. And you
deny that ministers should take any wages for their work: But your error herein
you may easily perceive, If you consider that Christ and the Apostle give
strong reasons for their maintenance, Mat. 10.10. Luke 10.7. 1 Timothy 5.18. 1
Cor. 9.13, 14. note it. Likewise the Apostle himself took wages of the
Churches, to do service in the ministry, 2 Cor. 11.8. and laid an injunction
upon the people to give him wages, Gal. 6.6. Let him that is taught in the word
communicate unto him that teaches, in all good things. Mark, he does not say,
let him contribute (as an alms) but communicate, as a right, as wages: And in
the next verse, Gal. 6.7.
he intimates, that God is mocked, when his Ministers are not maintained. But
God will not be mocked, neither will he be robbed, but they shall hear ye are
Cursed. Mal. 3.8.9 Jer. 12.13
I shall mention no more of your errors, My design (according to promise) is,
To prove the Scriptures to be the word of God; the only ground of faith, and
rule for our obedience: which I have here presented you with. Read it, examine
it: if it be not truth, witness by truth against it. If it be truth (as
undoubtedly you will find it so) then submit to it, be ruled by it; And
doubtless your bodies shall be freed from your deserved imprisonment, and your
souls from the threatened damnation against false Prophets, 2 Pet. 2.1, 2, 3. 1 Timothy 5:12.
and such as cast off their first faith. I rest an enemy to error, and

A friend to truth, Sampson Tounesend.
From my study January 29. 1654/5
THE EPISTLE To the READER.
READER,
IF thy heart be not grieved to hear the blasphemy of those that deny Gods
truth, his messengers, his ordinances, thou have much cause to suspect thy love
to God, his truth, or ordinances. The first step to error, is, to have our
love abated toward the truth. You need not marveil, if those that receive not
the truth in the love of it, that they may be saved, but deny God to be the
author of the truth, 2 These. 2.10, 11, 12.
that they are carried on by strong delusions to believe a lie, that they might
be damned: the judgment is long since threatened. When men forsake the right
way, they must needs go astray. When men forsake the fountain of living water,
2 Pet. 2.15
then do they dig to themselves broken cisterns that can hold no water. When
sound doctrine will not be endured, 2 Timothy 4.3, 4.
then such as turn away from the truth are regarded. Those that deny the
scriptures to be the word of God, turn to be filthy dreamers, despising
dominion, and speaking evil of dignities, Jude 8.
(as Jude speaks) they tell their dreams and pretended revelations to the
people, and would persuade men, they are the word of God; Jer. 23.25, 26, 27.
but as the prophet Jeremiah says, The Lord is against them that prophecy
false dreams, Jer. 23.31, 32.
that use their tongues, and say, he says. Beloved, these are the latter times
(prophesied of long since) in which some shall depart from the faith, giving
heed unto seducing spirits, and Doctrines of Devils: For if ever there were a
Doctrine of Devils, 1 Timothy 4.
or a Devilish Doctrine vented on earth, this is one; To persuade men the
scriptures are not the word of God, and that they must be guided only by the
light within them. If the Devil can but persuade men to believe this doctrine;
it will be easy to persuade them, to deny the use of all means of grace, and
all principles of religion, and to be led altogether by the suggestions of
Satan, while he persuades them it is the light within them, by which only
they must be guided: contrary to Isa. 8.20. Yet these men that teach this
Devilish Doctrine, with many more, would persuade the world (although they
justly suffer for their ungodly practice) that they are persecuted, and suffer
for the cause of God. But we know, it is not the suffering, but the cause, that
makes the Martyr: and sure I am, Mat. 5.10.
they suffer not for righteousness sake; and therefore not for the cause of
God: 2 Cor. 4.4.
Unless it be the God of this world, who has blinded their miuds etc. Shall
such as poysen men's bodies be punished with death? And must those that poison
men's souls with Damnable doctrines go unpunished? You may read at your
leisure, how severe God is against seducers, in Deuteronomy. 13. To conclude, art thou
one that stand firm in the faith? pray to God, thou may keep thy standing;
art thou one that art wavering minded? then adhere to and follow after those
teachers that are sound in the faith, whom God has set over you; And know, 2
Pet. 2.2.14.
that unstable souls are they that are beguiled by false teachers: Wherefore
hearken not to them, and as Christ commands you, Luke 17.23.
go not after them, nor follow them: And make use of his following antidote
against them. And art thou one that art already seduced into the error of
denying the scriptures to be the word of God, Let me tell thee, that what is
written in this book, shall either convince thee, or be a witness against
thee. And if any one receive any benefit by these my labors: all that I desire
is, they would bless God for it; and let him have a share in your prayers, who
is willing to be

Your Servant, in and for the truth, Sampson Tounesend.

THE SCRIPTVRES Proved to be the Word of God.
DAN. 10.21. I will show thee that which is noted in the Scripture of Truth.


HAving undertaken to maintain against the Quakers these two Propositions: I.
That the Scriptures contained in the Books of the Old and New Testament,
commonly called the Bible, is the revealed Will and Word of God. II. That the
Scriptures, which is the Word of God, is the only foundation for our faith, and
the only rule for our obedience.


I begin with the first: And I shall prove, that the Scriptures is the Word of
God; First, by Scripture it self; Secondly, by Reason: He that will not believe
the Scriptures, is an Infidel; That will not hear the voice of Reason, is a
Beast. The Scriptures ought to convince us as Christians; Reason, as rational
men. And I doubt not but by both to clear up to every one (that resolves not to
be wilfully blind) that the Scriptures are the revealed Will of God.

1. I shall prove, that the Scriptures are the Word of God, by the testimony of
the Scriptures. We find throughout the Scriptures in several places, that God
is said, 1. To speak them. 2. To write them: or, 3. To cause them to be
written. 4. They bear Gods name and title upon them. Lastly, by the titles that
are given to the Ministers that declare them. I shall give you several
instances in Scripture for all these.

1. The Scriptures declare in a multitude of places, That God said the words
that are therein written; I shall give you some few for all: Genesis 1.3. God
said, etc. and in several places in that Chapter, and throughout the Book it is
often written, God said, and the Lord said; and in Exodus 3.14. And God said
unto Moses, I am that I am. And in many places it is said, The Lord spoke to
Moses, and it is written what God said to him. Exodus 20.1. God spoke all these
words, saying, etc. Lev. 10.3. This is that the Lord spoke, saying, I will be
sanctified in them that come nigh me. Number. 11.25. And the Lord came down in a
Cloud and spoke unto him. Deuteronomy. 5.22. These words the Lord spoke unto all your
assembly. Josh. 24.2. And Joshua said unto all the people, Thus says the Lord
God of Israel. Josh. 7.13. Thus says the Lord, There is an accursed thing in
the midst of thee O Israel. 1 Samuel 2.30. Wherefore the Lord God of Israel
says, I said indeed, etc. 1 Samuel 15.2. Thus says the Lord of Hosts. 1 Kin.
8.15. Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, which spoke with his mouth unto David
my Father, and has with his hand fulfilled it, saying, etc. 1 Chronicles. 21.9. And
the Lord spoke unto David's Seer, saying, etc. Job 1.7, 8. And the Lord said
unto Satan. Psalm. 50.1. The mighty God, the Lord has spoken, etc. Psalm. 12.5.
Now will I arise, says the Lord. Isa. 24.3. The Lord has spoken this word.
And in many places he says, Thus says the Lord. Ier. 1.1, 2, 4, 9. The words
of Jeremiah, etc. to whom the word of the Lord came, etc. The Lord says unto
me, Behold, I have put my words in thy mouth; and in many places in that Book
he says, Thus says the Lord. Ezekiel. 7.1. The word of the Lord came unto me,
saying; and in many places also he says, Thus says the Lord. Hos. 1.1. The
word of the Lord that came unto Hosea. Joel 1.1. The word of the Lord that came
to Joel. Amos 3.1. Hear the Word that the Lord has spoken; and Ver. 8. The
Lord has spoken, who can but prophecy? And in many places he says, Thus
says the Lord. Obad. 1. The vision of Obadiah, Thus says the Lord. Jonah 1.1.
Now the Word of the Lord came to Jonab. Micah 1.1. The Word of the Lord that
came to Micah. Nabum 1.12. Thus says the Lord. Zepha. 1.1. The Word of the
Lord which came unto Zephaniah. Hag. 2.1. The Word of the Lord by the Prophet
Haggai, saying. Zach. 1.1. The Word of the Lord came unto Zachariah. Mal. 1.1.
The burden of the Word of the Lord to Israel by Malachi. Thus have I noted some
few of a multitude of Scriptures in the Old Testament, that declare, What is
written in the Scriptures, is no other but what God said, and therefore his
Word. I shall now also mention a few of the many Scriptures in the New
Testament, that declare it to be the Word of God, because the Lord did speak
it. Luke 12.20. But God said, Thou fool, etc. Heb. 1.1, 2. God, who at sundry
times, and in diverse manners spoke in time past unto the Fathers by the
Prophets, has in these last days spoken unto us by his Son. And in every
place almost throughout the 4 Evangelists, the very words of our Savior
Christ the Son of God, God and Man, are mentioned, Mat. 4.4, 7.10. In all which
places, Jesus Christ repels the Devils temptations, by telling him what God
has written in the Old Testament. I shall not need to mention the sayings and
doings of our Savior Jesus Christ, which are frequently recorded in the New
Testament. And hence it is, that it is called the Word of Christ. Col. 3.16.
Let the Word of Christ dwell in you. And the Gospel is called the Gospel of
Christ. Mark 1.1. The beginning of the Gospel of Jesus Christ the Son of God.
Romans 1.16. I am not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ. I shall not need to
multiply more Texts of Scripture. It is called the Word of the truth of the
Gospel. Col. 1.5. Because Jesus Christ that is the Truth, ( John 14 6.) is the
Author of it. And thus it appears the Scriptures are the Word of God, because
as the Prophet Micah says, Micah 4.4. The mouth of the Lord of Hosts has
spoken it. For it is all one to say the Scripture says, and God says. Heb.
13.5. He (that is God) has said, I will never leave thee nor forsake thee. And
where says he it? In the Scripture, Josh. 1.5. The word Scripture is put for
God speaking in the Scripture. Gal. 3.22. The Scripture has concluded all
under sin, that the promise by faith of Jesus Christ might be given to them
that believe. And in Romans 11.32. (it is said) God has concluded them all in
unbelief, that he might have mercy upon all. And thus it clearly appears, that
the Scriptures are the Word of God, because God has spoken them.

2. I shall prove, that the Scriptures are the Word of God, because God writ
them. The two Tables of stone delivered unto Moses, were written with the
finger of God. Exodus 31.18. Deuteronomy. 9.10. Exodus 32.16. And the Tables were the
work of God, and the writing was the writing of God, graven upon the Tables.
Hos. 8.12. I have written to them the great things of my Law. And thus it
appears the Scriptures are the Word of God, because they are written by God.
But here arises an Objection, that I must needs resolve before I go any
farther, and that is this.

Object. How can the Scriptures be the Word of God, when we know the Prophets
and Apostles writ much of them?

Answ. To which I answer, God is said to have written the Scriptures in these
two respects:

First, because the Ten Commandments were undoubtedly written by God himself,
(as before was proved) and all the rest that is written in the Volume of the
Book, is but as it were a Comment or Exposition of those ten Precepts.

Secondly, God is said to have written the Scriptures, (though men were the
instruments) because that what they writ was by the appointment of God, and by
the help and assistance of God; God appointed them to write it, Exodus 17.14.
And the Lord said unto Moses, Write this for a memorial in a Book. Isa. 8.1.
Moreover, the Lord said unto me, Take thee a great Roll, and write it with a
man's pen, etc. Jer. 30.2. Thus speaks the Lord God of Israel, saying, Write
thee all the words that I have spoken to thee in a Book. Jer. 36.1, 2. This is
the word that came unto Jeremiah from the Lord saying, Take unto thee a Roll of
a Book, and write therein all the words that I have spoken unto thee, etc. Hab.
2.2. And the Lord answered me, and said, Write the Vision, and make it plain
upon Tables, that he may run that reads it. And John in the Revelations, is
commanded by Christ, to write the things which he had seen, and the things
which are, and things which shall be hereafter, Rev. 1.19. And in Rev. 14.13. I
heard a voice from Heaven, saying unto me, Write Blessed, etc. And thus it
appears the Scriptures are the written Word of God, because God himself writ
them, and caused them be written.

3. I come now in the third place to prove by Scripture, that they are the Word
of God, because what the Prophets and Apostles writ, it was written as from the
mouth of the Lord, by the help and aslistance of the Spirit of God. Hence it is
said, That God spoke by their mouths. Luke 1.70. As he spoke by the mouth of
his holy Prophets which have bin since the world began. Acts 1.16. This
Scripture must needs have been fulfilled, which the Holy Ghost by the mouth of
David spoke. And Acts 3.18, 21. But those things, etc. which God has spoken by
the mouth of all his holy Prophets since the world began. Isa. 51.16. I have
put my words in thy mouth, Ier. 1.9. And says David, 2 Samuel 23.2. The Spirit
of the Lord spoke by me, and his Word was in my tongue; By all which Scriptures
it clearly appears, that God helped them to speak, he gave them a mouth, and
wisdom to declare his mind. And we find that they spoke by the help of the
Spirit of God. Neh. 9 30. Yet many years did thou forbear them, and testified
against them, by thy Spirit in thy Prophets. 2 Pet. 1.21. For the prophecy
came not in old time by the will of man, but holy men of God spoke as they were
moved by the Holy Ghost. 2 Timothy 3.16. All Scripture is given by inspiration of
God. And thus you see the Pen men of the Scriptures were inspired by the Holy
Ghost to write them. And they were so assisted by God in that work, as God is
said to speak by their mouths; and therefore the Scriptures must needs be the
Word of God.

4. I come in the fourth place to prove by Scripture, that it is the Word of
God, by the several Epithets or Titles that are given to the Scripture. I shall
instance in some few of the many that are throughout the Scriptures. They are
called the Law of the Lord, Psa. 1.2. And often in the 119 Psa. David
acknowledges it to be Gods Law; and Ps. 81.4. The Law of the God of Jacob. They
are called the Oracles of God Rom 3.2. 1 Pet. 4.11. The Counsel of God, Act.
20.27. Psa. 33.11. Prove. 19.21. The Will of the Lord, Ephesians. 5.17. the Mystery of
Gods will, Ephesians. 1.9. the Gospel of God, 1 Thessalonians. 2.9. the glorious Gospel of
the blessed God, 1 Timothy 1.11. the Gospel of Christ, Romans 1.16. Romans 15.19. the
words of the Lord, Ier. 36.8. the words of the living God, Ier. 23.36. the
words of the Lord Jesus, Acts 20.35. and very frequently they are called the
Word of God, Isa. 40.8. Mark 7.13. Romans 10.17. and very remarkable is that
place in 1 Thessalonians. 2.13. For this cause thank we God without ceasing, because
when ye received the Word of God which ye heard of us, ye received it not as
the word of men, but as it is in truth the Word of God. And to conclude this,
God himself calls the Scriptures his Word. Zach. 1.6. My Word and my Statutes.
Micah 2.7. Does not my Word do good to him that walks uprightly? And Ezekiel.
2.7. Thou shall speak my words unto them. And says Christ, Mark 8.38.
Whosoever shall be ashamed of me and of my words. By all which places it
clearly appears, that the Scriptures are the Word of God, because they bear the
title and name of God upon them, and God himself acknowledges them to be his
words.

Lastly, in the fifth and last place, I come to prove, that the Scriptures are
the Word of God, by the titles that are given to the Ministers that declare the
Scriptures: they are called the Messengers of the Lord, Hag. 1.13. then spoke
Haggai the Lords Messenger in the Lords Message unto the people. Mal. 2.7. The
Priests lips should preserve knowledge, and they should seek the Law at his
mouth, for he is the Messenger of the Lord of Hosts. And 2 Chronicles. 36.15, 16.
The Lord God of their Fathers sent to them by his Messengers, etc. But they
mocked the Messengers of God, and despised his words. And they are called the
Lords Ministers, Joel 1.9. and Isa. 61.6. Ye shall be named the Priests of the
Lord; men shall call you the Ministers of our God. And the Apostle calls them,
Ministers of the New Testament. 2 Cor. 3.6. Ministers of Christ, and stewards
of the mysteries of God, 1 Cor. 4.1. Ambassadors for Christ, 2 Cor. 5.20. Now
if the Scriptures be not the Word of God, how can those that declare them, be
truly called the Messengers of God, and the Ministers of God and of Christ, and
the stewards of the Mysteries of God, and Ambassadors for Christ? but they are
thus called in the Scripture; therefore the Scriptures are the Word of God,
else the Messengers thereof could not be the Lords Messengers. And thus have I
done with the first thing propounded, To prove by the testimony of Scripture it
self, that they are the Word of God; and that because God spoke them, writ
them, or caused them to be written: And they are frequently in Scripture
called the Word of God; and the Messengers that declare them are called the
Messengers and Ministers of God, and Ambassadors for Christ, and therefore they
must needs be the Word of God.

2. I come now in the second place, to show by Reasons that the Scriptures are
the Word of God. I shall lay down several Reasons.

Reason 1. The Antiquity of the Scriptures do clearly prove them to be of God:
For man could not write of things done before ever he had a being. But the
works of the five first days Creation are mentioned in Scripture, and man was
not made till the sixth day, Genesis 1. therefore they must needs be the Word of
God.

Reason 2. They discover those things man could not declare: As that the world
was made of nothing; that man was at the first made of the dust of the Earth;
that there is but one God in essence, and yet that in this one essence there
should be three Persons; that a Virgin should bring forth a Son; that God
should take the nature of man upon him, and suffer, etc. these things cannot
come into the thoughts of man; but the Scriptures declare these things;
therefore they are the Word of God.

Reason 3. No word of man can distinguish the true God from the false; but this
does the Scriptures, Isa. 41.20. to 24. therefore they are the Word of God.

Reason 4. No word of man can work a change in his heart, and make the stoutest
heart to tremble at the hearing thereof: But the Scriptures convert the soul,
and work grace, Psalm. 19.7. John 15.3. James 4.5.6. and the opening thereof
will make the heart burn and tremble, Luke 24.32. Acts 24.25. therefore they
are the Word of God.

Reason 5. No word of man is able to make a man wise unto salvation. But the
holy Scriptures are able to make a man wise unto salvation, 2 Timothy 3.15.
therefore they are the Word of God.

Reason 6. No man, only by his own writings, can discover Jesus Christ. But the
Scriptures discover Jesus Christ, Acts. 18.28. John 1.45. Therefore they are
the Word of God.

Reason 7. No man can make Laws for men's thoughts: But the Scriptures discover
men's thoughts, and make Laws for them, Heb. 4.12. Eccles. 10.20. Therefore they
are the Word of God.

Reason 8. Men make Laws to bind those that are under them. But the Scriptures
make Laws to bind the greatest Rulers upon the Earth. Therefore they are the
Word of God.

Reason 9. It speaks in a lofty style, to the King, and the subject, and to all
men alike. But thus does not the word of man; for that puts a distinction
between persons. Therefore the Scriptures are the Word of God.

Reason 10. No writings of man can procure eternal life to them that observe
and do them. But to believe and to do what the Scriptures require, will bring
eternal life; John 5.24, 29. Deuteronomy. 32.46, 47. Ezekiel. 20.11. John 6.68. John
20.31. Therefore they are the Word of God.

Reason 11. No word of man can be truly called righteous, pure, or holy; For
who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean? Job 14.4. But the Scriptures are
righteous, pure, and holy, Ps. 19.8, 9. Ps. 119 151, 172. Romans 7.12. Therefore
it is the Word of God.

Reason 12. If the Scriptures be not the Word of God, but of man, then
Ministers ought to teach nothing contained in the Scriptures, for Doctrines or
Rules for Gods worship, Mat. 15.9. In vain do they worship me, teaching for
doctrines the commandments of men, Isa. 29.13. Col. 2.22. But Ministers ought
to teach no other doctrine, but what is contained in the Law and in the Gospel,
Isa. 8.20. 1 Timothy 1.3, 10, 11. And if any man bring any other Gospel then what
is already received, he is accursed, Gal. 1.9. Or any that shall add or
diminish from the prophecy of the Book of the Scriptures, Rev. 22.18. Deuteronomy.
4.2. Prove. 30.6. And the Scriptures also teach us an holy life, 1 Pet. 1.16.
Lev. 11.44. and how we are to worship God, Acts 24.14. Therefore they must
needs be the Word of God.

Reason 13. The sweet Harmony of the Scriptures prove them to be the Word of
God; for no writings of man do so debase man, exalt God, and press men to
obedience. But the Penmen of the Scriptures do all agree together in these
things; and although there were many Penmen, yet there is no contradiction in
their writings, but the Old Testament witnesses to the New, and the New to the
Old. It is not thus in the writings of men. Therefore they must needs be the
Writings of God.

Reason 14. If they were written by man, they were written either by good men
or bad men. But they were not written by bad men, for they hate the purity of
the Scriptures; and to be sure they were not written by good men, (as the
Authors thereof) for they abhor to lie, and say The Lord says, if the Lord
has not said the Word. Therefore they must needs be the written Word of God.

Reason 15. The wonderful calling of Moses, the Prophets, and Apostles, to make
known the Scriptures, do manifestly prove them to be the Word of God; see for
Moses, how he was called, Exodus 2.7, 10. and 3.2. Acts 7.20, 21. and Amos, and
diverse of the Apostles were unlearned men, which had not been brought up in the
schools of men, Amos 7 14, 15. Mark 1.16. And yet these declared the
Scriptures, which manifest more wisdom then all the wise men in the world can
declare; yea, the Apostles that were unlearned and ignorant men, spoke in
several tongues the wonderful works of God, to the admiration of the hearers,
Acts 2.11. and 4.13. this could not come from man. Therefore it must needs be
the Word of God.

Reason 16. No writings of man could declare the heavy wrath of God against
sin, and the remedy how to get rid of that wrath. But this does the Scriptures,
Psa. 9.17. Romans 5.9. 1 Thessalonians. 5.9 Luke 21.36. therefore they are the Word of
God.

Reason 17. If the Scriptures were not the Word of God, but of man, then
certainly God would not have wrought so many miracles to confirm the truth of
man's sayings. But there are many miracles both in the Old and New Testament, to
confirm the truth of the Scriptures. Therefore they are the Word of God.

Reason 18. No creature, Angels, men or Devils, if all were put together, could
ever be able to declare before hand, what particular persons should be born,
and what should be their names, and what they should do, some thousand and
hundred years before their parents were born. But this do the Scriptures, as we
read of the Messiah Genesis 3.15. Isa. 9.6, 7. and Josiah, 1 Kings 13.2. 2 Kings
23.16, 17. Therefore it is the Word of God.

Reason 19. No man will write and declare to the world their own failings and
infirmities. But many of the Penmen of the Scriptures do declare their own
failings and infirmities, which they would never have done, had they not been
moved thereunto by the Spirit of God. Therefore the Scriptures must be the Word
of God.

Reason 20. All the prophecies of the Scripture from time to time have been
punctually performed and fulfilled. But so are not all man's prophecies.
Therefore they are the Word of God.

Reason 21. The word of man is often broken. But the Scripture cannot be
broken, John 10.35. Therefore it is the Word of God.

Reason 22. If the Scriptures were not the Word of God, the Churches of God
would long before this time have found them out to be only the word of man; as
Jeremiah found out Hannaniah, Jer. 28.15, 16. and as the Church of Ephesus
found out the false Apostles, Rev. 2.2. But the truth of Gods Word in the
Scriptures has ever been held forth by the Churches of God, as a Proclamation
upon a pillar, 1 Timothy 3.15. Now as a Proclamation receives not its authority
from the pillar, nor the light from the Candlestick that bears it: So neither
do the truths of the Scriptures receive their authority from the Church, or any
member thereof, but from God which is the only Author thereof, and so all
Christian Churches acknowledge. And thus you see, that the Scriptures are the
Word of God, 1. Reason shows it. 2. The Spirit of God persuades it, Isa. 59.21.
3. The Scriptures themselves affirm it; and 4. The Churches of God have ever
received it as the Word of God. Therefore it must needs be the Word of God.

To conclude this: If the Scriptures be not the Word of God, but of man only;
then 1. Man should teach himself his duty toward God. 2. We should have no
certain rule for our Faith and Religion. 3. There should be no necessity of
reading and hearing the Scriptures. 4. If we deny the Scriptures to be the
Word of God, we cast off all means which God has appointed for eternal life,
John 5.39. And lastly, doubting of this, exposes us to all Atheism, and
contempt of Religion and Justice. Therefore, seeing (as has been fully proved)
the Scriptures themselves, and Reason also make it apparent, that the
Scriptures are the Word of God, let us believe they are so; And as the Apostle
exhorts, Phil. 3.16. Let us walk by the same rule, and mind the same thing. And
thus have I done with the first Proposition, That the Scriptures contained in
the Books of the Old and New Testament, commonly called the Bible, is the
revealed Will and Word of God.

Prop. II. I come now to the second Proposition; That the Scriptures which is
the Word of God, is the only foundation for our faith, and the only rule for
our obedience.

This Proposition falls into these two parts: 1. That the Scriptures is the
only foundation for our faith. 2. That it is the only rule for our obedience. I
shall very briefly speak to both these things.

First, That the Scriptures is the only foundation of our faith.

1. The Scriptures are the means by which faith is wrought, Romans 10.17. Faith
comes by hearing, and hearing by the Word of God, Ephesians. 1.13. In whom ye also
trusted, after that ye heard the word of truth, the Gospel of your salvation.
And says Christ, John 5.24. He that hears my word, and believes on him that
sent me, has everlasting life. And the Word is called the word of Faith, Romans
10.8. The mystery of Faith, 1 Timothy 3.9. The faith of the Gospel, Phil. 1.27.
And all this to teach us, that all true faith is wrought by and founded upon
the Word of God.

2. It is the very end why the Scriptures are written, John 20.31. That we
might make them the foundation of our faith and hope in God, 1 John 5.13. These
things have I written, etc. that ye may believe on the name of the Son of God.
Romans 15.4. Whatsoever things were written before time, were written for our
learning, that we through patience and comfort of the Scriptures, might have
hope.

3. The Scriptures must needs be the only foundation to build faith on, because
we find the faithful in Scripture did ever make it the only foundation of their
faith. Abraham the father of the faithful, he believed according to that which
was spoken, Romans 4.18. and David, Psalm. 119.42. I trust in thy Word. And the
Disciples, John 2.22. they believed the Scriptures, and the Word which Jesus
had said. And observe S. Paul's Confession, Acts 24.14, 15. I confess unto thee,
that after the way which they call Heresy, so worship. I the God of my
Fathers, believing all things which are written in the Law and the Prophets,
and have hope toward God, etc. And the Bereans, Acts 17.11, 12. searched the
Scriptures, whether those things were so; therefore many of them believed. And
thus you see, they made the Scriptures the only foundation for their faith.

4. They cannot have faith in Christ, that believe not the Scriptures; this is
clearly proved by these Scriptures, Ioh. 5.46, 47. For had ye believed Moses,
ye would have believed me, for he wrote of me; But if ye believe not his
writings, how shall ye believe my words? Luke 16 31. If they hear not Moses and
the Prophets, neither will they be persuaded, though one rise from the dead.
And says Christ, Ioh. 5.39 Search the Scriptures, for in them ye look to have
eternal life, and they are they which testify of me. By these Scriptures it is
clear, that those that believe not the Scriptures, cannot have faith in Christ
by any other means. And therefore the Scriptures must needs be the only
foundation of faith.

5. It is only faith in the written Word of God, that will fill the soul with
spiritual joy, Romans 15 12.13. and hence it is, that David says, Psalm. 119.162.
I rejoice in thy Word, as one that finds great spoil; and says the Apostle,
1 John 1.4 These things have I written unto you, that your joy may be full.
There can be no spiritual joy in those that build not their faith in the
written Word and promises of God. It is by faith in the Word, that believers of
old (and at all times) obtained promises, Heb. 11.33. And Christ, when he was
upon the Earth, prayed for such as should believe on him through the Word
(written by the Apostles and Evangelists) John 17.20. Therefore the written
Word of God must needs be the only foundation of faith.

Lastly, we are commanded to make the Word of God the ground of our faith; and
it is condemned as a sin, not to believe the Word of God, 2 Chro. 20.20.
Believe in the Lord your God, so shall you be established; Believe his
Prophets, so shall ye prosper. Ps. 106.24. They believed not his Word. Heb.
4.2. The Word preached did not profit them, not being mixed with faith in them
that heard it. And thus you see God commands we should build our faith upon the
Scriptures: therefore they must needs be the only foundation of faith. Before I
conclude this, take this Caution: Although the Word of God be the only
foundation for us to build our faith on; Caution.
yet the Word as it consists of letters and syllables, has no strength to
beget faith in men's hearts, for many hear, but do not believe, Isa. 6.9, 10 And
therefore it is only from the Spirits working, together with the Word, that
faith is wrought, 1 Thessalonians. 1.5. Our Gospel came not in word only, but also in
power and in the Holy Ghost. The Word works not faith without the Spirit,
neither does the Spirit work faith without the Word; but the Spirit by the
Word, works sanctification, and a lively faith founded upon the Word, as ye may
see in these Scriptures, John 17.17. John 6.63. Isa. 59.21. Hag. 2.5. And thus
have I proved the first part of the Proposition, That the Scriptures is the
only foundation of faith.

Secondly, I come now to the second; That the Scriptures which are the Word of
God, are the only rule for our obedience. I might for proof of this give you
many testimonies of Scripture; but I shall name a few for all. Deuteronomy. 5.32, 33.
Ye shall observe to do therefore, as the Lord has commanded you; ye shall not
turn aside to the right hand nor to the left; ye shall walk in all the ways
which the Lord your God has commanded you. Deuteronomy. 6.25. And it shall be our
righteousness, if we observe to do all these Commandments before the Lord, as
he has commanded us. Josh. 23.6. Keep and do all that is written in the Book
of the Law of Moses. The Word of God in the Old and New Testament, is a perfect
Law, Ps. 19.7. James 1.25. Romans 8.2. And hence it is the Scriptures are said to
be able to make the man of God perfect, 2 Timothy 3.17. And it must needs be so,
because where there is no transgression of the Law of God, there is no sin; for
all sin is the transgression of the Law of God, 1 Ioh. 3.4. And therefore God
promises to all those he enters into Covenant with, To write his Law in their
hearts, Ier. 31.33. Heb. 8.10. And of every righteous man it is said, The Law
of God is in his heart, Ps. 37.31. By all which, it appears the Word of God is
the only rule for our obedience. It may also yet farther appear, if ye
consider, 1. The Lord is the only Lawgiver, Iam. 4.12. and his Word is the
only right rule for our obedience, Ps. 33.4. and therefore it is called the
sure Word, 2 Pet. 1.19. it will never fail. 2. It is an everlasting rule so
long as we live on Earth, 1 Pet. 1.25 The Word of the Lord endures for ever.
3. No man can be blameless in his life, unless his conversation be ordered
according to the Word of God, Psalm. 119. 9 Luke 1.6. Titus 2.5. 4. Every man
shall be judged according to what is written in the Book of Gods Word, John
12.48. Rev. 20.12.


Lastly, there are many promises made to the keeping of Gods Word, and many
threatenings denounced against such as walk contrary to the rules of Gods Word,
Gal. 6.16. Rev. 22.14. Luke 11.28. And for threatenings read Deuteronomy. 28.15. etc.
Before I conclude, take these two Cautions:

Caution 1. Although the written Word of God be a perfect rule of
righteousness, and the only rule for our obedience; yet know, that no man can,
or does perfectly fulfill the Law of God, for, James 3.2. In many things we
offend all; and Prove. 20.9. Who can say, I have made my heart clean, I am pure
from sin? The most eminent believer sins in many things; but the unbeliever
sins in all things, Heb. 11.6. Yet every godly man has respect to all, and
desires and endeavors to keep all the Commandments of God, Ps. 119.5, 6. and do
not willingly allow himself in any constant violation of Gods Law, but delights
in it in the inward man, Romans 7.15, 16. and the 22 verse.

Caution 2. Take this Caution; although believers are freed from the condemning
power of the Law, yet are they not freed from the commanding or directing power
thereof, 1 Cor. 9.21. 1 Timothy 1.8. To conclude, they that make not the Word of
God the rule for their actions, are led either by their own fancies, or the
Devils temptations, or both.

FINIS.

