Touching the Fundamental Laws, Or Politic Constitution of this Kingdom,
The KINGS Negative Voice, and The Power of PARLIAMENTS.

To which is annexed, The privilege and power of the Parliament touching The
MILITIA.

LONDON Printed for Thomas Underhill, and are to be sold at the sign of the
Bible in Woodstreet. M.DC.XLIII.

TOUCHING FVNDAMENTALL LAWS, AND The KINGS Negative Voice.
FVndamentall Laws are not (or at least need not be) any written agreement like
Meare-stones between King and People, the King himself being a part (not
party) in those Laws, and the Commonwealth not being like a Corporation
treated by Charter, but treating it self. But the fundamental Law or Laws is
a settling of the laws of nature and common equity (by common consent) in such a
form of Polity and Government, as that they may be administered amongst us with
honor and safety. For the first of which therefore, we are governed by a King:
and for the second, by a Parliament, to oversee and take order that that
honorable trust that is put into the hands of the King for the dignity of the
Kingdom, be rightly executed, and not abused to the alteration of the
Politic Constitution taken up and approved, or to the destruction of that,
for whose preservation it was ordered and intended. A principal part of which
honor, is that royal assent he is to give for the enacting of such good Laws
as the people shall choose, for they are first to consult their own safety and
welfare, and then he who is to be entrusted with it, is to give an honorable
confirmation to it, and so to put an Impresse of Majesty and Royal authority
upon it.

Fundamental Laws then are not things of capitulation between King and people,
as if they were Forrainers and Strangers one to another, (nor ought they or any
other Laws so to be, for then the King should govern for himself, not for his
people) but they are things of constitution, treating such a relation, and
giving such an existence and being by an external polity to King and Subjects,
as Head and Members, which constitution in the very being of it is a Law held
forth with more evidence, and written in the very heart of the Republique,
sarre firmlyer then can be by pen and paper, and in which sense we owe our
Allegiance to the King as Head, (not only by power, but in^uence) and so part
of the constitution, not as a party capitulating for a prerogative against or
contrary to it, which whosoever seeks to set up, or side with, do break their
Allegiance, and rebel against the State, going about to deprive the King of
his juridicall and lawful authority, conferred upon him by the constitution of
this State, under the pretense of investing him with an illegal and
unconstitutive power, whereupon may follow this grand inconvenience, The
withdrawment of His peoples Allegiance, which, as a Body connexed with the Head
by the constitution of this Kingdom, is owing to him; his person in relation
to the body, as the enlivening and quickening head thereof, being sacred and
taken notice of by the laws in that capacity, and under that notion is made
inviolate.

And if it be conceived that Fundamental Laws must needs be only extant in
writing, this is the next way to bring all to confusion, for then by the same
rule the King bids the Parliament produce those Laws that fundamentally give
them their being, privileges and power, (Which by the way is not like the
power of inferior Courts, that are springs of the Parliament, dealing between
party and party, but is answerable to their trust, this Court being it self
Fundamental and Paramount, comprehending Law and Equity, and being entrusted
by the whole for the whole, is not therefore to be circumscribed by any other
Laws which have their being from it, not it from them, but only by that Law
which at first gave it its being, to wit, Salus populi) By the same rule I say
the Parliament may also entreat the King to produce those Laws that
Fundamentally give him his being, power and honor. Both which must therefore
be determined, not by laws, for they themselves are laws, yea the most supreme
and fundamental law, giving law to laws themselves, but by the received
constitution or policy, which they themselves are; and the end of their
constitution is the law or rule of their power, to wit, An honorable and safe
Regiment of the Commonwealth, which two whosoever goes about to divide the
one of them from the other, breaks the fundamental constitutive law or laws
polity of this kingdom, that ordinance of man which we are to submit unto; nor
can or ought any statute or written law whatsoever, which is of later Edition
and inferior Condition, being but an offspring of this root, be interpreted
or brought in Plea, against this primary and radical constitution, without
guilt of the highest Treason and destructive enmity to the Public weal and
polity, because by the very ^onstitution of this Kingdom, all laws or
interpretation of laws tending to confusion or dissolution, are ipso facto
void. In this case we may allude and say, That the Covenant which was 400.
years before the Law, an after-Act cannot disanull it.

Ob. It may be objected, that this discourse seems to make our Government to be
founded in Equity, not in Law, or upon that common rule of Salus populi, which
is alike common to all Nations, as well as any: and so what difference:

Ans. The Fundamental laws of England are nothing but the Common laws of
Equity and Nature reduced into a particular way of policy, which policy is the
ground of our title to them, and interest in them: For though it is true, that
Nature has invested all Nations in an equal right to the laws of Nature and
Equity by a common bounty, without respect of persons, yet the several models
of external Government and Policy renders them more or less capable of this
their common right: For though they have an equal right in Nature to all the
Laws of Nature and Equity, yet having fundamentally subjected themselves by
their politic Constitutions unto a Regal servitude, by Barbarism or the
like, they have thereby much disabled and disvested themselves of that common
benefit. But on the contrary, where the outward constitution or polity of a
Republic is purposely framed for the confirming and better conserving this
common right of Nature and Equity, (as in ours) there is not only a common
right, but also a particular and lawful power joined with this right for its
maintenance and supportion. For whereas other people are without all supreme
power, either of making laws or raising moneys, both these bodies of supremacy
being in the arbitrary hands only of the Sovereign Magistrate amongst many
Nations, these with us are in the hands of the supreme Government, (not
Governor) or Court of Judicature, to wit, the King and Parliament; here the
people (like Freemen) give money to the King, he does not take it; and offers
Laws to be enacted, does not receive them so: Now in such a constituted
Kingdom, where the very Constitution its self is the fundamental law of its
own preservation, as is this mixed Regiment of ours, consisting of King and
Parliament, as Head and Body, comprehending Monarchy, Aristocracie, and
Democracie; there the fundamental laws are like fundamental truths in these
two properties: First, they are comprehended in a very little room, to wit,
honor and safety; and secondly, they have their influence into to all other
inferior Laws which are to be subjected to them, and correspondent with them,
as lawful children and natural branches.

Ob. But in process of time there are many written Laws which seem at least to
contradict this Fundamental Constitution, and are not they binding
notwithstanding it?

Ans. The Constitution of this Kingdom which gave it its being, and which is
the radical and fundamental law thereof, ought therefore to command in
chief, for that it never yields up its authority to those inferior laws,
which have their being from it, nor ought they which spring from it tend to the
destruction of it, but on the contrary, it is to derive its radical virtue and
influence into all succeeding laws, and they like branches are to make the root
flourish, from whence they spring, with exhibiting the lively and structifying
virtue thereof, according to the nature and seasons of succeeding times; things
incident in after-ages not being able to be foreseen, and particularly
provided for at the beginning, saving in the fundamental law of Salus populi,
politiquely established; nor can any laws growing out of that root, bear any
other fruit, then such as the nature thereof dictates; for, for a particular
branch to ruin the whole foundation by a seeming sense contrary to it, or
differing from it, is very absurd; for then how can it be said, Thou bear
not the root, but the root thee? Laws must always relish of, and drink in the
constitution or polity where they are made; and therefore with us, the laws
wherein the King is nominated, and so seems to put an absolute authority into
his hands, must never so be construed, for that were with a breath to blow
down all the building at once; but the King is there comprehended and meant
under a twofold notion; First, as trusted, being the Head, with that power the
Law conferd upon him, for a Legal, and not an absolute purpose, tending to an
honorable preservation, not an unnatural dissolution. Secondly, as meaning
him juridically, not abstractly or personally, for so only the Law takes
notice of the King as a juridicall person: for till the Legislative power be
absolutely in the King, so that laws come down from him to his people, and go
not up from them to him, they must ever be so interpreted: for as they have a
juridicall being and beginning, to wit, in Parliament, so must they have a
suitable execution and administration, to wit, by the Courts, and legal
Ministers, under the Kings authority, which according to the constitution of
this Kingdom, he can no more suspend for the good of his people, then the
Courts can theirs; or if he do, to the public hazard, then have the Courts
this advantage, that for public preservation they may and must provide upon
that principle, The King can do no wrong, neither in withholding justice, nor
protection from his people. So that then Salus populi being so principally
respected and provided for, according to the nature of our constitution and
polity, and so being Lex legum, or the rule of all laws branching thence, Then
if any law do by variation of times, violence of tyranny, or misprision of
Interpreters, vary therefrom, it is a bastard, and not a son, and is by the
lawful parents either to be reduced or cast out, as gendring unto bondage and
ruin of the inheritance, by attempting to erect an absolute and arbitrary
Government. Nor can this equitable exposition of particular Statutes taken from
the scope of the politic constitution be denied without overthrow of just and
legal Monarchy, (which ever tends to public good and preservation) and the
setting up of an unjust and illegal tyranny, ruling, if not without law, yet
by abused laws, turning them as conquered ordnance upon the people. The very
Scripture it self must borrow from its scope and principles for explanation of
particular places, else it will be abused (as it is through that default) unto
Heresies. See we not how falsely Satan quoted true Scripture to Christ when he
tempted him, only by urging the letter without the equity, or true intention
and meaning? We are to know and do things verum vere, justum just, else we
neither judge with righteous judgment, nor obey with just obedience.

Ob. But is not the Parliament guilty of exercising an arbitrary power, if
their proceedings be not regulated by written laws, but by Salus populi?

Ans. For the Parliament to be bound up by written laws, is both destructive
and absurd.

First, it is destructive, it being the Fundamental Court and Law, or the very
Salus populi of England, and ordained, as to make laws, and see them executed,
so to supply their deficiencie according to the present exigencie of things for
public preservation by the prerogative of Salus populi, which is universally
in them, and but particularly in particular laws and statutes, which cannot
provide against all future exigents, which the law of Parliaments does, and
therefore are not they to be limits to this. And it would yet be further
destructive, by ^utting the Parliament short of half its power at once, for it
being a Court both of Law and Equity (as appears by the power of making laws,
which is nothing but Equity reduced by common consent into Polity) when ever it
is ci^cumseribed by written laws, (which only is the property of inferior
Courts) it cease to be supreme, and divests it self of that inherent and
uncircumseribed power which Salus populi comprehends.

Secondly, as it is destructive, so also it is absurd; for the Legislative
power which gives laws, is not to receive laws, saving from the nat^re and end
of its own constitution, which as they give it a being, so they endow it with
l^ws of preservation both of it self and the whole, which it represents.

I would not herein be mis-understood, as if the Parliament, when as it only
does the office of inferior Courts, judging between party and party, were not
limited by written laws: there I grant it is, because therein it only deals
between meum and tuum, which particular written laws, can and ought to
determine: so that its superlative and uncircumseribed power I intend only as
relating to the Universe and the affairs thereof, wherein it is to walk by
its fundamental principles, not by particular precepts or Statutes, which are
made by the Parliament, between King and people, not between people and
Parliament: they are ordained to be rules of Government to the King, agreeing
with the liberty and property of the people, and rules of Obedience to the
people without detainment of their freedom by the exercise of an illegal,
usurped, and unconsented power, whereunto Kings (especially in hereditary
Monarchies) are very prone, which cannot be suspected by a Parliament, which is
representatively the Public, entrusted for it, and which is like to partake
and share with the Public, being but so many private men put into authority
protempore, by common consent, for common good.

Nor is the Parliament hereby guilty of an Arbitrary Government, or is it
destructive to the Petition of Right, when as in providing for public weal,
it observes not the letter of the law; first, because as aforesaid, that law
was not made between Parliament and people, but by the people in Parliament
between the King and them, as appears by the whole ten^ur of it, both in the
complaining and praying parts, which wholly relate to the King. Secondly,
because of the common consent, that in the representative Body (the Parliament)
is given thereunto, wherein England in her Polity imitates Nature in her
Instincts, who is wont to violate particular principles for public
preservation, as when light things descend, and heavy ascend, to prevent a
vacuum: and thirdly, because of the equitable power which is inherent in a
Parliament, and for public good is to be acted above and against any
particular Statute, or all of them: and fourthly, because the end of making
that Law, to wit, the public preservation, is sulfild in the breaking of it,
which is lawful in a Parliament that is chosen by the whole for the whole, and
are themselves also of the body, though not in a king, for therein the Law
says, Better a mischeife then an inconvenience. But it may be objected, though
it be not Arbitrary for the Parliament to go against written law, yet is it
not so when they go against the Kings consent, which the law, even the
fundamental law, supposes in Parliamentary proceedings; This has been
answered, that the King is juridically and according to the intention of the
law in his Courts, so that what the Parliament consults for the public good,
That by oath, and the duty of his office, and nature of this polity he is to
consent unto, and in case he do deny it, yet in the construction of the
fundamental law and constitution of this Kingdom, he is conceived to grant it,
supprosing the head not to be so unnatural to the body that has chosen it for
good and not for evil.

But it will be answered, where is the Kings Negative Voice if the Parliament
may proceed without his consent? I answer. That there is no known nor written
law that gives him any; and things of that nature are willingly believed till
they be abused, or with too much violence claimed. That his Majesty has
fundamentally a right of consent to the enacting of laws is true, which (as
aforesaid) is part of that honorable trust constituted in him: And that this
royal ascent is an act of honoer and not of absolute and negative power
orprerogative, appears by these following reasons.

First, by his oath at the Coronation mentioned in one of the Parliaments
Declarations where he does or should swear to confirm and grant all such good
laws as his people shall choose to be observed, not has chosen, for first,
The word concedis in that oath were then unnecessary, the laws formerly
enacted being already granted by foregoing Kings, and so they need no more
concession or confirmation, else we must run upon this shelfe that all our laws
die with the old King, and receive their being a new, by the new Kings consent.
Secondly, Hereby the first and second clause in that interrogatory, viz.
Concedis iustas leges and permittas prot^gendas, are confounded and do but
idem repetere; Thirdly, Quas vulgus elegerit implies only the act of the
people in a disjunctive sense from the act or consent of the King, but laws
already made have more then quas vulgus elegerit, they have also the royal
consent too, so that that phrase cannot mean them wherein the act or consent
of the King is already involved.

Secondly, by the practice of requiring the royal ascent even unto those very
acts of subsidies which are granted to himself and for his own use, which it
is supposed he will accept of, and yet Honoris gratia is his royal ascent
craved and contributed thereunto.

Thirdly, by the Kings not sitting in Parliament to debate and consult laws,
nor are they at all offered him by the Parliament to consider of, but to
consent to, which yet are transmitted from one house to another, as well to
consult as consent to, showing thereby he has no part in the consultory part
of them (for that it belongs only to the people in Parliament to discern and
consult their own good,) but he comes only at the time of enacting, bringing
his Royal Authority with him, as it were to set the seal thereof to the
Indenture already prepared by the people, for the King is head of the
Parliament in regard of his authority, not in regard of his reason or
judgment, as if it were to be opposed to the reason or judgment of both
houses (which is the reason both of King and Kingdom) and therefore do they as
consult so also interpret laws without him, supposing him to be a person
replenished with honor and royal authority not skilled in laws, nor to
receive information either of law or council in Parliamentary affairs from
any, saving from that supreme court and highest council of the King and
Kingdom, which admits no counterpoize, being entrusted both as the wisest
Council and justest judicature.

Fourthly, either the choice of the people in Parliament is to be the ground
and rule of the Kings assent, or nothing but his pleasure, and so all Bills
though never so necessary for public good and preservation, and after never
so much pains and consultation of both houses may be rejected, and so they
made mere ciphers, and we brought to that pass, as either to have no laws,
or such only as come immediately from the King (who often is a man of pleasure,
and little seen in public affairs, to be able to judge) and so the
Kingdoms great council must be subordinated either to his mere will, and
then what difference between a free Monarchy, and an absolvte, saving that the
one rules without Council, and the other against it, or at the best but to a
cabinet council consisting commonly of men of private interests, but certainly
of no public trust.

Ob. But if the King must consent to such laws as the Parliament shall choose eo
nomine, they may then propound unreasonable things to him, as to consent to his
own deposing, or to the lessning his own revenew, etc.

Ans. So that the issue is, whether it be fitter to trust the wisdom and
integrity of our Parliament, or the will and pleasure of the King in this case
of so great and public concernment. In a word, the King being made the
fountain of justice and protection to his people by the fundementall laws or
constitution of this Kingdom, he is therefore to give life to such acts and
things as tend thereunto, which acts depend not upon his pleasure, but though
they are to receive their greater vigor from him, yet are they not to be
suspended at pleasure by him, for that which at first was intended by the
kingdom: for an honorable way of subsistence and administration must not be
wrested contrary to the nature of this Polity, (which is a free and mixed
Monarchy and not an absolute) to its destruction and confusion, so that in case
the King in his person should decline his duty, the King in his courts are
bound to perform it, where his authority properly resides, for if he refuse
that honor which the republicke by its fundamental constitution has
conferred upon him, and will not put forth the acts of it, for the end it was
given him, viz. for the justice and safety of his people, this hinders not but
that they who have as fundamentally reserved a power of being and wellbeing in
their own hands by the concurrence of Parliamentary authority to the royal
dignity, may thereby provide for their own subsistence, wherein is acted the
Kings juridicall authority though his personal pleasure be withheld, for his
legal and juridicall power is included and supposed in the very being, and
consequently in the acts of Courts of justice, whose being he may as well
suspend as their power of acting, for that without this is but a cipher, and
therefore neither their being nor their acting so depend upon him, as not to be
able to act and execute common justice and protection without him, in case he
deny to act with them, and yet both so depend upon him, as that he is bound
both in duty and honor, by the constitution of this polity to act in them and
they from him, so that (according to that axiom in law) the King can do no
wrong, because his iuridicall power and authority is always to control his
personal miscarriages.

Se Defendendo.
GOd and nature has ordained Government for the preservation of the governed.
This is a truth so undeniable, as that none will gainsay it, saving in
practice, which therefore being taken for granted, it must needs follow that to
what end Government was ordained, it must be maintained, for that it is not in
the power of particular persons or communities of men to depart with self
preservation by any covenant whatsoever, nor ought it to be exacted by any
superiors from their inferiors, either by oath or edict, because neither
oaths nor statutes are obligatory further then they agree with the righteous
Laws of God and nature; further then so they ought neither to be made nor kept.

Let it be supposed then for argument sake, that the Militia of the Kingdom, is
in the power of the King, yet now as the case stands it is lawful for the
Parliament to reassume it, because though they passed it into his hands, for
the peoples preservation, yet it was never intended that by it he might
compass their destruction, contrary to the Law of nature; whereby every man,
yea every thing is bound to preserve it self. And thusmuch in effect is
confessed at unawares, by the Author of the Reply to the Answer of the London
Petition: who affirms, saying The King is invested with the sole power of
Training, Arraying, and Mustering, and then gives the reason, because it is
most consonant to reason, as well as grounded on Law, That he which is bound to
protect, should be able to compass that end. Which reason overthrows both his
position and intention. 1. His position, for this is no reason why the sole
power of the Militia should be in the hands of the King; because he is bound to
protect, except he were bound solely to protect, that is, without the counsel
and advice of Parliament: but it has been resolved that He is not sole judge
of necessity, and therefore not sole protector against it, but together with
His Parliament, who consequently shares in the power of the Militia. 2. It
overthrows His intention, which is so to put the power of the Militia into the
hands of the King, as to enable him to do what he will with it, whenas yet he
himself cannot but affirm, it is his to protect withal, for hat when he
cease to use it to its end, it cease to be in his power, or else let the
man speak plain, and say, it is His to destroy as well as to protect.


Ob. But the Militia is passed to the King, absolutely without any condition of
revocation expressed, or of limitation to circumscribe the use whereunto it
ought to be employed.

1. Ans. Laws of God and nature, neither are nor need to be expressed in
contracts or edicts, for they are ever supposed to be supreme to humane
ordinances, and to challenge obedience in the first place, and other Laws so far
only as they are consonant to them, though these laws be further backed with
Oaths and Protestations: As for instance, I give a man a sword, and swear I
will never take it from him; yet if he actually assault me, or it manifestly
appear he intends to cut my throat, or take my purse with it, I may lawfully
possess my self of it again if opportunity serve, because in such agreements
betwixt man and man, the laws of nature neither are nor can be exempted, but
are necessarily employed, still to be of force, because no bonds can lawfully
invalid them, and id solum possumus quod jure possumus. But it may be asked how
it appears that the King intends to employ the Militia to the destruction of
his people. Why first because He has refused to hearken to the wholesome
counsel of His Parliament, the representative body, and the highest Court and
Counsel of the Kingdom. 2 Because, e contrario, he hearkens to the councels of
notorious Papists and Malignants, men engaged against the public good and
welfare of this Kingdom, in a diametrall opposition, so that if they perish it
prospers, and if it prosper they perish. 3. Because he has had a deep hand
in contriving and plotting the ruin and extirpation of the Parliament, by
secret and open violence, and in them of the whole Kingdom of whom they are
the Epitome, and as the King is the head, so they are the heart. But further it
may be replied, that the King has promised to maintain Parliaments and govern
by Law. Ans. That is so far as he knows his own heart, and as he can be master
of himself: He swear the same at His Coronation, and promised as much when he
granted the Petition of Right, but how they have been kept God knows, and we
are not ignorant. It may be His Majesty may mean as he speaks, but 1.
Temptations may change his mind, as it has done too often, and as it did his
that said to the Prophet, Is thy servant a dog that he should do such things?
and yet did them. The welfare of Kingdoms is not to be founded upon bare
spontaneous promises, but real contracts. 2. He himself says, he himself is
not skild in the Laws, and we have found it true, so that he must take
information of them from some body from his Parliament (that is his people that
made them) he will not, and are any fitter to be Judges of the Law, then the
highest Court; if they may be Judges that are delinquents to the Law, and
Malignants against it, and have been grievous oppressors of the People, even
against the known Laws (so much cried up) we are like to have just Judges and
righteous Lawyers.


2. Ans. If the Militia be so absolutely the Kings, as that all power of
defense and preservation of our selves and our rights be taken from us, to what
purpose do we strive for liberty and property, and laws to confirm them? these
are but imaginary things, if they have no hedge to fence them; If the Militia be
for the King, let us burn the Statutes we have already, and save a labor of
making more. No man would think it a good purchase to buy land, and when he
has paid his money to have it in the power of the seller, to take it from him
by his sword.

Ob. It is true that Kings are tied by oath, and legal contracts, to govern
by Laws, and to maintain liberty and property to their people, which puts them
under an obligation of conscience to God, so that they are responsible to him
for the breach of fidelity and duty, but not to the people who may mind them
of their duty, but not compel them to it.

Ans. This Objection has two parts, First, That Kings are only responsible to
God. 2. That Subjects must suffer, wrong, but not by force maintain their
right. To the first I answer. That if Kings be solely answerable to God, then
contracts are in vain, for they shall answer for all their arbitrary and
unjust tyranny over their people, though there were no contracts. That which
makes us happier then other Nations, sure is not this, that the King for the
breach of his duty has more to answer at the day of judgment then other Kings
have, if that be all we have small cause to joy in our privileges, they are
neither worth the blood that has been shed for them, nor the money that has
been paid for them. Secondly, Government must be considered under a twofold
notion, divine and humane. The Genus which is government it self is divine, so
that people are absolutely bound to have government, but not bound to have an
absolute government, for the species or the modus gubernandi is humane, and
therefore the Apostle says, Be subject to every ordinance of man, that is, to
every such kind of Government as your lot falls to be under, by the
constitution of the Commonwealth you live in. Now Government being thus of a
mixed nature, the Ordinance both of God and man, it is not only subject to God
but also to men, to be regulated, amended, and maintained by the people: for as
it is Gods Ordinance for their good, so does he give them liberty to provide it
be not abused to their hurt, so that when God shall put an opportunity into
their hands, they ought to improve it to the setting of government up right, or
the keeping of it so from apparent violations. There was a time when both
Government and the manner of governing belonged to God, to wit, amongst the
Israelites, for to that people he was both a God of moralls and politiks, and
therefore he took it so ill for them to usurp upon his right, as to desire to
change their government from Judges to Kings, but this was a peculiar right he
assumed over that particular people only. To the second I answer thus. Every
Subject taken divisim, and apart from the whole, is to suffer under abused
authority, and to obey passively, rather then to break union or cause
confusion, but no Subject is bound to suffer by that which is not authority, as
is the will of the Magistrate: If a Court of Justice should unjustly condemn a
man, he is patiently to undergo it, but if a Judge or the King himself should
violently set upon him to kill him, he may defend himself; for the Ordinance
of God and man both, is affixed to the office, and not unto the person, to the
authority and not unto the will, so that the person acting out of office, and
by his will may be resisted, though the ordinance may not. But the
representative body of the Commonwealth, (which is all men conjunctim) they
may not only oppose the person and his will, but even the office and authority
it self when abused, and are bound to it both in conscience to God when he
gives them opportunity, and in discharging of their trust to them that employed
them. For first God calls to have the wicked removed from the Throne, and whom
does he call upon to do it but upon the people (in case the King will not) or
their trustees, for as he has originally founded all authority in the people,
so he expects a discharge of it from them for his glory, and the public weal,
which are the ends of Government, from which God and nature has ordained it.
Secondly, In discharge of their trust for the whole, for order sake, making
them their representative actors, and putting that universal and popular
authority, that is in the body of the people, and which (for the public good
and preservation) is above every man and all Laws, into their hands, they may
expect and challenge them by virtue of their stewardship, to provide for their
safety and well being, against whomsoever shall oppose it, no one being above
all, and therefore ought not that universal power, which by way of trust is
conveyed over to the Parliament, be betrayed into the hands of any by admitting
or allowing any authority to be superior, by tollerating abuses and
usurpations, as if they had not power to regulate them.

FINIS.

