An Inspective FOR Spiritual Ingrossures; BEING Presented to a Presbyterian
PLURALIST, and FORMALIST.

By THOMAS TOOKEY M. A. Substituted Pastor at Thornhaw in Northamptonshire.

ISAI 5.20. Woe be to them that join House to House, and lay Field to Field,
till there be no place; that they may be placed alone in the midst of the earth!

ROMANS 2.22. Thou that abhorrest Idols, do thou commit Sacrilege?

2 TIMOTHY 6.9. They that will be rich fall into temptation and a snare, and
foolish and hurtful lusts which drown men in destruction and perdition.





LONDON, Printed for Giles Calvert, at the Black Spread-Eagle at the West end
of PAUL'S. 1646.

The Presentation; To Mr JOHN YAXLEY Minister to the Church in Cunnington in
Cambridg-shire, Parson of Thornhaugh, Vicar of Wainsford, etc.
SIR,
IT is richly known unto your self (and I could have desired no other might
have known) how that you have covenanted with me to resign up the reserve upon
the sight of farther reason. I had thought you could not but have seen how
favorably you was looked upon, when disposed to a stately Parsonage, double the
value of that you left. You might have seen how nobly the Earl of Manchester
encouraged your first admission with the Estimate of fifty pounds out of the
sequestration, upon supposure of your dispoyled condition, when as in truth you
robbed the people of the summer riches, and sought for me to tend your fleeced
sheep, during the stormy winter. And when you sought after me (not I you)
though you could not see into my successful labors in the ministry to Sir
John Gell in Derby-shire, nor my sufferings by severe imprisonment in Titbury
Castle, and my other losses both before and since I did withdraw from thence;
Yet you might have looked behind you, and have seen the house you left so often
battered, robbed, dispoyled: Yea, you might have washed the cruel Cataracts
from off your eyes, with streams of blood distilling from my wounds. Yet
notwithstanding infinite of such representives to induce a sight of better
reason; nothing will please you (till this very day) but a sight of forty
pounds per annum, Tax-free; And such violent and frandulent courses taken by
you too enjoy the same, as the Sun in its Meridian Altitude of rigid
Episcopacy, never saw the like. Neither yet may I injure you so far as to
make the world believe you look upon Pluralities as less then sinful in
themselves, strictly considered: No, you have held forth that light to others
with much vehemence. Nor that in exacting the worldly sweet of two distinct
congregations, (to one of which you had not for above two years together
appeared in the performance of the least ministerial duties) you have sinned
against your own light. No, I would willingly judge more indifferently of your
self, and some others involved in the like condition. That having crept so
near Cambridge, you have peept into so much Logic, got so much Sophistry, as
in some distinct, and diverse considerations, and various acceptations,
Temporaliter, Localiter, Conditionaliter, Respective, secundum gradum
compossibilitatis, and non secundum gradum incompossibilitatis, not when you
could not, but now you can, account both non-residency, and sacred Theevery,
dearly l^wfull, gainful, hopeful, needful. Sir, This Inspective instrument
was therefore composed (on purpose) to help you see better into those unfound
mysterious chinks, and unsound curious crannies, through which some late
metamorphised Ministers got safely into new, and kept closely to the profits of
their old livinge. It is for your turn, I would not for forty pounds a year
but you should make good use of it.

It will help your concave Luminaries to discern better through the motes you
espied in Bishops eyes, which are grown to beams in you own. To conclude, if
this paper hold forth further reason, you must see it though from

Your poor, SIR, -- yet, Fellow Laborer; THOMAS TOOKEY.

The Inspective serving to better Discovering of Spiritual INGROSSURES.
THat any Minister of the Gospel should at one time gripe in to both his hands
the wordly sweet of two or more Distinct Congregations, his ministry being
exercised but upon one of them; is so far from the Judgment and Practice of
Protestant well-reformed Churches, that we cannot easily find those so much
corrupted Prelates retaining to Rome to allow it as absolutely lawful in
themselves: But that chiefly for Diverse pretended Causes and Confiderations,
they suspense with it, as with many other Sins under Dawbing Notions, and
Qualifications, subtle mysteries of these Iniquities.

It is therefore strictly to be considered, whether those circumstantiall
Respects, both Old and New fashioned Spiritual Ingrossures thereon Depending,
may not be both alike unfound.

We shall find no End of those many Accidents which are drawn in to encourage
Pluralities. Yet, most (if not all) of them will fall in, as appertaining
either first to the Parties between whom, secondly the Places whereat, or
thirdly the Times wherein those Ingrossures are Acted. And in this Order may
the Inspection be Disposed.

Inspection to the subjective Respects.
REspects appertain to the Parties, as Super-intendents, or Substistutes. For
the first, the Prelate; Arguments are drawn either from his Excellencies, or
his Deficiencies.

If Respect being had to the Minister's Excellencies, or Deservings, would
justify his Ingrossings; Then from the chiefest of all attainable: ( viz: the
great and large Indowments of Gods Spirit inabling him to the work of the
ministry, (between which and the Dignities of humane Sciences, or the Honors
and Qualifications of Earthly Potentates, there is no more Competition then
between Michahs Annual Pittance to his mercenary Idol Priest, and the double
Portion of the Spirit derived from Eliah upon Elishah) yet this more gracious
Qualification, extended even to a Paul's Proportion, leaves the Minister
insufficient for a full Discharge of Duties to the meanest Church in the
christian world. 2 Cor. 2.16.

Much less shall he be in a capacity of any other Considerates, to
supererrogate for himself, or derrogate from the fruits of others labors.

Secondly, Respects being rightly had to the Ministers deficiencies, may
properly diminish, not multiply Beneficencies: yet a Minister having sown much
spiritual seed upon a People and grows deficient (through Age. or sickness,
to continue the same) He may surely Reap (as of the fruits of former labors)
means for his subsisting from those People; in case he be wholly Destitute,
and have not wherewith to live. But Debts, Necessities, and such like
Indigencies, must receive an orderly reparation by propitious fruits arising
from that Church where Gods Providence has set him down to labor. The
spiritual warrier must expect costs from them for whom he goes the warfarfare.
1 Cor. 9.7.8, 9, 10. He had safer cast himself into any extremity through
which the pressures of want will drive him, then to fall upon the rock of the
sanctuary. He had better surely join any house to house (which also is woeful,
Isai 5.20.) then to ingrosse Gods Temples. It was certainly a great distrust of
Gods sufficiency that drew both Ananias and his wife Saphyrah into that
Reserving, which occasioned their lying, and thence their punishing. A profane
Es^^ may as deeply sin, in reaching to himself more then his own, as in
selling of his own. They that will be rich (so they that will free themselves
of poverty too hastily) fall into temptation and a snare, and into many foolish
noisome lusts which drown men in Destruction and Perdition. 1 Timothy 6.9, 10.

But the party substituted is unworthy; who shall judge of that? If the
Prelate, then none shall be worthy but himself, though happily the most
unworthy. But if the substitute be unworthy, why should he have any thing to
do there? But the substitute is an able godly minister; The more right to the
entire means. Why is such a one wronged? we should not rob from a rogue, much
less from a good man. Why is that good man so ill rewarded, discouraged,
tempted to half it with the peoples soul? unto whom he through want of means
and power must needs be in great measure subjected. Notwithstanding the
liveliest encouragements, and swe^^est quicknings the best and forwardest
Ministers too soon grow dull, and fagge in their spiritual duties; so
needless and graceless are those reservings that break the bruised Reed, and
quench the flaming Flax, and damp the high aspiring sparks of burning Zeal.

Inspection to the Local Respects.
THe circumstantiall disposition of Places in regard of the Propinquity or near
adjoining distance of Parishes is next considerable. For where two parishes are
so near together, as the labor of one Minister may with much conveniencie
extend unto them both; and the rather where the sweet compliance of a truly
willing people addressing themselves so each unto other, that the exercises of
the ministry may be as powerful and effectual, as if but one. It may be with
these as with the two branches, Ezechiel 37.16.17.

Particular Churches being parishes in great Britain, were very strangely cut
into unequal shreds (some think) by the mangling shears of Popish shavelings,
and no less unevenly torn into pieces and splinters by our first Reformers;
so that were they permitted to shed and congregate themselves, there could not
easily be less equality in proportions. For some parishes are so small, and in
many respects so inconsiderable, that as they say of Vicaridges in
Lincolnshire, they are such nimble ones, that two or three might be borne upon
one man's back, without danges of breaking; and others again are so vast, and so
remotely (...), that though but one parish, yet the Minister thereto will
necessarily fall into the sins and deficiencies of a Non-resident, or
Pluralist. For where people live at that distance, that the Minister (having
but one soul, one body, and that limited) cannot infinitely extend his labors
unto all of them, nor the people with respect to the spiritual rest in
sanctifying the Lords day (especially the aged, lame, and sickly) cannot
possibly, profitably, reap the benefit of his labors, those people though
accounted one parish, cannot rightly at one and the same time be the sheep of
that one shepherd.

Inspection to the Temporal Respects.
THe accidental condition of the times is the most prevalent Respect with the
novell Pluralists of our times. The constitution of times is either meanly or
extremely disposed. For the first the indifferency of times has little
influence as to alter or to take any thing valuable from the nature of that
act, which in it self is merely sinful.

Extremity of times is either to good, or evil; too true it is that times
extremely flattering, Haleyon calmes, and Sunshine gleames operate with wanton
stirring wits, as with full-fed beasts, makes them gad up and down in their
own, and often out of their own into others Pastures: But to speak strictly,
those times are not therein accounted prosperous.

Times extremely evil, tempestuous days, may indeed force silence upon the
prudent, Amos 5.13. and so for a time admit the absence of a Minister from his
people; and yet nevertheless receive fruits from those people, in relation to
what he has sown formerly, and in regard of what he stands cordially ready to
perform, he being not engaged to another people; but keeps at distance only for
safety, hovering still about the forsaken (like the bird about the nest of us
young) and would lives fain come near, but dares not for fear of the vermin,
whose prey they are become.

But to take the advantage of the distemperature of the present times, with
some inferior respect to security, but greater regard to profits (which
over-poyzing respects will easily be discovered by the value of the Ingot)
then to mount himself upon the Backs of a people deserted by their former
Minister, and to exact from them the fruits of that living, together with all
or any of the sweet of his former place arising since his forsaking them, he
being no otherwise authorized to this ingrossure, but by the temporary
distemper. The evil of those times are so far from salving the evil of such
Sacrilegious Acts, as that both the Acts and the Times, are made worse thereby.
Yea more, were the act not sinful in it self; yet the design of promotion and
advancement diametrically cross to Gods proceedings in humbling times, would
taint with impious impurity; such like was urged with vehemence against Baruch
in his secular aspiring. Jer. 45.

1. In whipping times we should be graciously careful to keep pure from all
sins as they expose to the lash; but especially from those sins, for which the
rod was brought forth.

2. In reforming times we should take special heed that we neither retain old
sins, nor fall into new ones.

3. As our timely readiness to engage and vow reforming, may be admitted in
the way of withholding judgments due to our former offendings; so the breach
or slow performings of those vows may even force those judgments both for our
former fallings and latter failings.

4. In times when many are running, others going, some but creeping to
perfection, we should not block the way by so huge a scandal.

5. At that very time to hold in Prelacy and Superintendency, when God is
visibly fighting them out, (to them that see any thing clearly) is no less
then to fight against God, his word, his sword.

FINIS.

