The Palace OF JUSTICE OPENED AND SET TO VEIW, IN A SERMON At Margarets
Westminster before the Honorable House of COMMONS Assembled in PARLIAMENT, upon
the 12th of May, 1646. Being the day of their Solemn Thanksgiving, for
Regaining and taking in the several Garrisons, of The City of Exeter.
Barnstable. Michaels Mount in Cornwall Ruthen Castle. Ilford-Combe. Aberystwyth
in Wales. Dunster Castle. Titbury Castle. Woodstock Manor. Castle of
Bridgnorth. Banbury Castle. Newarke.


By SAM. TORSHEL.

Prove. 14.13. Righteousness exalts a Nation. LONDON, Printed by T.R. and
E.M. for John Bellamy at the three golden Lions in Cornhill. 1646.

TO THE HONORABLE HOUSE OF COMMONS Assembled in PARLIAMENT.
AS most men have censured the Florentine, to be Not honest, So I could hardly
allow him (So much as in the vulgar notion) the name of A Christian, when I met
with these passages in ^m. One, in his Second Book, De Republica, cap. 29. Si
rerum vicissitudinem Contemplemur, comperiemas multa accidere ex fato ita
urgente, ut iis obviam ire nemo possit, quamvis in promptu remedia fuerint.
Another to the same purpose, in his Book De principe, cap. 25. Haud illud mihi
obscurum est, ejus Sententia complures esse, ac olim fuisse, itae rerum
humanarum procurationem a fortuna omnino, ab ipsoque dec teneri, ut ab hominum
prudentia nulla ratione corrigi queat: immo nullo posse occurri remedia. Ob id
existimeri posset, in iis rebus non multum laborandum esse, sed qua fortuna
impellit, co se ferri permittendum. Haec opinio majori persuasione his nostris
temporibus, propter rerum multiplicem conversionem, recepta est: quod nunquam
non visae sint, quotidieque videantur mutationes, extra omnem humanam, quae
possit capi, conjecturam. Hoc ego nonnunquam animo cum cogitassem, aliqua ex
part co inclinaveram sententiae. Sed ne arbitrium nostrum extinguatur, eam
opinionem sequor, ut alteram nostrarum rerum partem fortunae arbitratu judicem
procurari, alteram vel paulo minus administrandam relinqui. Fortunam enim
montano flumini omnia prosternenti comparare soleo, quod cum praeceps fertur,
inagros effunditur, arbores sternit, convellitque domos; hinc terrae multum
abripiens, alio idem illud regerit, omnia item prae se agit, omnia ejus
conspectum fugitant, omnia illius furori cedunt, sublata omni, qua possit
ratione reprimi: nihilominus cum tali feratur ingenio, nihil impedit, quo minus
homines pacatioribus temporibus possint objicibus, aggeribusque prospicere, ut
iterum exundans canalibus destuat, aut impetu. represso, tam effuse
pernicioseque non feratur. Idem accidit de fortuna, quae vim suam exerit, ubi
nulla adest ad resistendum instructa virtus: eo suos impetus convertit, ubi
nullos aggeres, nulla impedimenta, quibus sibi obviam iri possit, novit esse
extructa. He afterward propounds the troubles of Italy a little before, and
about his time, as an instance of this discourse, in which he gives more to
Fate; and yet to Divine ordination, less; then becomes one that is in
profession a Christian. And there are others who speak of the alterations and
period's of Kingdoms, as if they did believe a Mathematical or Chaldaick
necessity, or a Stoick-fate, both of which do subject even God himself, one to
the Stars, the other to the connection of second Causes. And there are some
men, (whatsoever their faith be in this,) that yet are busy enough, to work by
this advantage, upon weak and jealous apprehensions, which are sufficient to
give countenance in the world to pretended and artificial prophesies, which
have their greatest authority from superstitious fear. Guicciardin gives us a
notable instance of this. There were some that had given out many
Prognostications which were purposely made in favor of Charles the Emperor,
and in prejudice of the French King and Nation. These wrought so far upon the
Marquess of Saluzze, that notwithstanding his deep engagements to Francis the
first, and contrary to his own greatest interesse, yea and to his proper
inclination and affection, he fell off from his Master to the Emperor, after
he had showed his affrightment to his private friends to whom he had complained
of the inevitable Miseries which the Fates had prepared against France. But we
have a clear rule in Scripture by which to order our selves, and suppress our
weak fears. There we learn, that all things are indeed under a Sentence, which
carries, not a necessity of coaction, but of Infallibility. We subscribe to
that of David, 1 Chronicles. 29.11. Thine O Lord is the greatness, and the power,
and the glory, and the victory, and the majesty; for all that is in the heaven,
and in the earth is thine: thine is the Kingdom, O Lord, and thou art exalted
as head above all. Both riches and honor come of thee, and thou reighnest over
all, and in thine hand is power, and might, and in thine hand it is to make
great. We find there also the course that this great and absolute Sovereign
takes, and constantly keeps in the advancing and ruining of Kingdoms, which
is that which Jeremiah tells the King and Princes of Judah of; cap. 22.2.3, 4,
etc. Hear the word of the Lord, O King of Judah, that sit upon the Throne
of David, thou and thy servants, and thy people that enter in by these gates.
Thus says the Lord, execute ye Judgment and Righteousness, and deliver the
spoiled out of the hand of the oppressor, and do no wrong, do no violence to
the stranger, the fatherless, nor the widow, neither shed innocent blood in
this place. For if you do this thing indeed, then shall there enter by the
gates of this house, Kings sitting upon the Throne of David, riding in Charets,
and on horses, he, and his servants, and his people. But if ye will not hear
these words, I swear by my self, says the Lord, that this house shall become a
desolation.

According to the tenor of these words, I have preached righteousness unto
you, that you may be established, and that all your late Victories may be
confirmed unto your posterity. I might speak something of these present
joy^^^^^ of things, in a conjecturall and prudentiall way, I am a Protestant in
the principles that distinguish both from Romanisus and Schism, and in my
Interesse I am a very Englishman. Be just in all things, and ye shall not need
to fear, either Stars, or Prophecies, or men. Let me speak as a Divine, in
the words of the son of Oded, Hear ye me in this, The Lord is with you, while
ye be with him, But if ye forsake him, he will forsake you.

Your faithful, and most humble servant SAM. TORSHEL.

THE PALACE OF JUSTICE.
The TEXT.
DEUTERONOMY. 16.20. Justice, Justice, or, That which is altogether just shall thou
follow, that thou may live, and inherit the land which the Lord thy God
gives thee.
Me thinks I may use to you this day ( Honored and Beloved) the last words
which this great man Moses spoke publicly to Israel, which are mentioned in
the 33. Chapter of this Book, ver. 29. Happy art thou, O Israel; who is like
unto thee, O people saved by the Lord, the shield of thy help, and who is the
sword of thine excellency? thine enemies shall be found liars unto thee, and
thou shall tread upon their high places. You are a people saved this day, your
enemies crouch, flatter, and lie unto you, you have trod upon their high and
fortified places. Besides all heretofore regained, now of late you have trod
upon their high place, the fortified Mount in Cornwall, upon the strong City
of Exeter, upon Barnstable her neighbor, upon the Fort of Ilford-Comb, upon
the Castles of Ruthein, Aberistwith, Dunster, Titbury, and Bridgnorth, upon the
garrisoned Manner of Woodstoock, specified in the first Order of your Honorable
House for calling this Assembly together, besides what is in your Additionall
Order of yesterday; you have trod upon the strong Castle of Banbury, and the
most considerable in land Garrison of Newark.

And that I may reflect upon my Text, You live; and God be praised that you do
live, after so many attempts against you; and at last it may now be rightly
said, Ye inherit the land. May I have liberty (if not to express my conceit
upon the place, which yet I know some wise and learned men do, that it is in a
sense literally to be applied to these times, the wars of which they think
do tend toward the preparing of the Kingdom of the Saints here on earth; yet
at least) to allude to that Text, Luke 22.28, 29. and to apply to you that have
been faithful in this great cause in hand, what our Lord said, Ye are they
which have continued with me in my tentations; and I appoint unto you a
kingdom. This kingdom, possessed in great part of late by the sons of
violence, now is in your hand, and lies before you in a free view. Let me have
the honor in your happy company, as one of the meanest in your train, to go
up with you this day to the top of Pisgah, that from thence we may look over
All the land of Gilead unto Dan, and all Naphtali, and the land of Ephraim and
Manasseh, and all the land of Judah unto the utmost sea, and the South, and the
plain of the valley of Jericho, the City of palm trees, unto Zoar: You know
the story from whence I borrow the description, Deuteronomy. 34.1, 2, 3. You may this
day see all in a manner yours; from the Mount in Cornwall, even unto Berwick,
the utmost English limit. May we with thankful hearts a little survey the
Land which the Lord our God has given us (as it were this day) to inherit.
Michaels Mount brings you in the riches of the Tinne-mines in Cormwall. Great
Exeter, neat Barnstable, and the Comb restore and secure unto you the
Cloth-trade of well-affected Devonshire. Dunster Castle, the last pawn of the
enemy in Somersetshire, delivers you the quiet possession of that temperate and
fertile County. If from thence over the stately Severn you look into Wales,
there Aberystwyth in Cardigan, and Ruthin Castle in the rich and pleasant Vale
of Cluyd, do this day present you with service of that mountanous Country and
courageous people. Shall we thence pass through the pleasures of Shropshire to
Bridgenorth, and so to Titbury, the lock of two Shires, Stafford and Derby; and
to Newarke, the darling of the enemies hope? we may see all in a manner yours:
and Oxford almost desolated, like a lodge in a wilderness, having lost the
prospect of Woodstock Manor; and Banbury Castle, her left arm being now cut
off.

But take heed that you forfeit not all this mercy, and yet lose that good land
which is given you to inherit. Receive therefore the words of this exhortation:
Justice, justice, or, That which is altogether just shall thou follow, that
thou may live, and inherit the land which the Lord thy God gives thee.

I read the words so, Justice, justice, The Text opened.
because in the Original Text, the word is doubled, Tsedek, Tsedek; and in the
Chalde likewise, Kushtha, Kushtha. Tremellius renders it, Justissimam
justitiam. The Greek Translation of the Septuagint reads it (...), and the
Vulgar Latin follows them, Just quod justum est, Thou shall follow that
which is just justly. Our learned Interpreters in our last English, have given
us the full sense, That which is altogether just; all manner of justice, and
nothing but justice, thou shall follow exactly, carefully, constantly.

That thou may live: that is, safely, comfortably, for so the phrase is used
ordinarily. I know not whether I need to observe it, that the Vt in the Text is
to be taken not causaliter, but consecutive: the meaning is, that the following
of justice is not the cause of this comfortable life; but only that this
comfortable life is the consequence of the following of justice. There is
nothing difficult in these or the next words: And I chose a plain Text, that I
might not need to spend time upon explication, but employ it more usefully. I
shall therefore only consider these two parts.

I. An Exhortation, Justice, justice, or, That which is altogether just shall
thou follow.

II. Two arguments of persuasion: 1. That thou may live. 2. That thou may
inherit the land.

I shall not so much as name those Propositions into which this Text might be
resolved; but only attend the main drift that Moses had, who having much
conversed with this people, and knowing them to be perverse and injurious, (as
they had many principles of injustice among them; which a Professor of Jewish
Controversies at Leiden (namely, Constantin l' Emperor) has observed, and
has given instance of in his learned piece De Legibus Ebraeorum Forensibus,
upon the First Code, cap. 9. sect. 11. to whom I refer the learned Reader,)
he having now conducted them to the borders of the land of Canaan, which they
were shortly to possess, that they might happily enjoy it in a secled and
secure state, he leaves with them this advice, Justice, justice thou shall
follow, etc. And from this, as the full scope of the words, I shall draw forth
and insist upon this one Doctrine;

Public Justice is the foundation of Public welfare. The Doctr.


Moses himself had been a notable and good Justicer among the people of the
Jews, and they were so far convinced of the benefit of his administrations,
that at that time when he was forty days absent from them to receive the Law
from God, me thinks the people speak in Exodus 32.1. as if they thought the want
of a wise and good Magistrate could not be supplied but by having God in his
stead: Up, say they to Aaron, Make us gods which shall go before us; for as
for this Moses, that man that brought us up out of the land of Egypt, we wot
not what is become of him. Implying, that now they mist him, they wanted the
gods, who only could supply his want. God has given his name to such as you,
Psalm. 82.1. And the wise Heathen so esteemed you. Hence it was that the
Babylonians built the palace where Judgments were given, in the form of
Heaven, the stone-work of skie-coloured Sapphires, and the ceiling like clouds.
Princes, or sovereign States (such as you are in your whole Body of Three
Estates) do fit as the public Arbiters of justice, to whom, as to a most
sacred Altar the oppressed do fly, and by whom men even in the times of
securest peace are regulated.

But the point that I have undertaken that I may pursue it with advantage, I
shall 1. Explicate so much of it as is needful. 2. Offer something by way of
proof. 3. That I may then make my application to you.

1. 1. The explication of the point.
As for explication; It will be needful to enquire what this Justice is of
which we speak: It is taken, 1. Generally, for all virtue, it being an
Adequation to the whole rule of Gods will, a complexion of all virtues, and so
Chrysostom descibes it to be a full keeping of all the Commandments of God.
Thus unrighteousness is taken for all sin; so, Romans 1.18. men are said to hold
the truth in unrighteousness. 2. Particularly, it is taken only for that
(...), the virtue which renders to every one his due. And they describe it to
be Constans and perpetua volunt as jus f^um cuique reddendi, A constant and
firm propensity of will to give every one his right. It is either 1.
Distributive, according to a Geometrical praportion, not a mere equalitle, but
dispensing favors and punishments not alike, but according to the quality of
the persons, and of their merit or demerit. Or, 2. Commutative, according to
Arithmeticall proportion, as in trade, etc. For I will not entertain so wise an
Auditory, nor the rest of the Congregation, to whom I fear, it would be
unusefull, with those subtilties of an Arithmeticall, Geometrical, and
Harmonicall proportion, in which Bodin has finely handled the nature of
Justice, which the Reader shall find in his sixth Book, the last Chapter De
Republica.

But plainly, This Justice which I am commending, is a beautiful pleasant
Virgin-princesse attended upon by seven maids of Honor: Or let me rather use
another similitude; It is a goodly built palace, supported upon seven pillars.

1. The first pillar has inscribed upon it 'EYSEEIA, Religiousnesse.

2. The second pillar has inscribed upon it 'APPOSOPOAPSIL, Impartiality.

3. On the third, TON PATHON TAEIS, An ordinate Rule of passions.

4. On the fourth, OYLEYSIS, Mature Consultation.

5. On the fifth, PHILALTHEIA, Love of Truth.

6. On the sixth, 'ADIAPHTHOPIA, Incorruptnesse.

7. On the seventh, SOPHPOSYN, Sobriety.

1. 1. Pillar, Religion.
The first pillar supporting the Palace of Justice is inscribed (...),
Godliness, or Religiousnesse: Which is according to Jethro's advice to Moses,
Exodus 18.21. to choose men fearing God. And Jehoshaphat excellently to his
Judges, 2 Chronicles. 19.6, 7. Take heed what ye do, for ye judge not for man,
but for the Lord, who is with you in the judgment; wherefore now let the fear
of the Lord be upon you, take heed and do it. He will easily be led from the
course of Justice, whose heart departs from Gods fea^: There must be an
awfulnesse of his presence maineained. The Rabbis have a saying, That the
Angels attend in all Judicatories. And it appears that the Aethiopians had such
a like apprehension, who, as Franc. Alvarez relates of them, left twelve chairs
empty in the Judgment place, which they said were the seats of the Angels.

2. 2. Pill. Impartiality.
The second pillar is called (...), Impartiality. Jehoshaphat sets God himself
as a pattern of this, 2 Chronicles. 19.7. There is no iniquity with the Lord, nor
respect of persons. And accordingly God provided by a law, Levit. 19.15. Ye
shall do no unrighteousness in judgment, thou shall not respect the person
of the poor, nor honor the person of the mighty, but in righteousness shall
thou judge thy neighbor. You must know no parents nor kindred in the cause of
Justice, as that brave Spartan said, that now he was Patriae and Legibus
datus, he had bestowed himself upon his Country and the Laws. It was a
gallant return which Rutilius in the Roman story made to an intimate of his:
his friend having requested somewhat of him which he counld not honestly
grant, and passionately saying unto him, Quid tua mihi opus est amicitia, si
non impetro quod rogo? I had as good be without tsuch a friend as have him,
when I cannot obtain of him what I request. He replied, Imo, quid mihi tua, si
tua causa aliquid inhoneste facturus sum? I can want such a friend, if for his
sake I must do that which is not honest. We find an Oath in the ninth Novel
of Justinians Institutions, against addicting to either party, and he that is
in office, not only swears, but lays himself under a deep curse in that
case, Let me have my part with Judas, and let the leprosy of Gehezi, and the
trembling of Cain come upon me.

3. 3. Pill. The rule of passions.
The third pillar is called (...), An ordinate Rule of affections. Anger,
hatred, love, envy, revenge must be left without in the porch, when a man goes
in to the palace of Justice; but chiefly partial favor and fear. It is among
the characters of a Ruler, Exodus 18.21. They must be men of courage. A coward
(we say) cannot be an honest man: frowns or threats will byasse him. I
remember sometime to have taken notice of it, in the diligent and curious
Collection which Anselm de Boodt has made of the Symbols of Princes and other
eminent men, that Nicolas the Third, Marquis of Este and Ferrara had in his, A
pillar (representing Fortitude) erected and standing firm in the midst of the
flowing waves, but embraced with a Key, (the emblem of faithfulness, The key
keeps Treasures safely, and locks up Records:) and a sword, (signifying
Justice) and the word was, In fide and justitia Fortitudo; implying, that a man
that has not courage cannot be faithful and just, and that no man is
courageous but he that also is honest.

4. 4. Pill. Deliberation.
The fourth pillar is called (...), Mature Deliberation. This Virgin-lady
Justice has not a giddy running haste, but a sober, matronlike grave pace;
indeed she delays not unnecessarily: Those Judges deserved the punishment
which Theodorick inflicted on them, who having put off the suit of a poor widow
diverse years, but upon her petition to Theodorick, and his command to them,
having dispatched it in two days, when they came to him with expectation of
thanks for their speed, he censured them deeply: because seeing it appeared
that they could, yet they had not dispatched it sooner. But in cases especially
of punishment, it much becomes Justice to be mature, advised, and wary. See
that one notable place, Deuteronomy. 17.4. in case of Information about false worship,
how Moses speaks for directing the sentence that is to be given; If it be told
thee, and thou have heard of it, and enquired diligently, and behold it be
true, and the thing certain, -- Then shall thou bring forth that man, etc. See
how many words are here heaped up together to prevent a rash judgment upon a
false suggestion. It was that which much commended the integrity of Job, who
professes, Job 29.16. The cause which I knew not I searched out. And even
Festus himself, though an Heathen, proceeded upon this principle, when he
said, ( Acts 25.16.) It is not the manner of the Romans to deliver any man to
die, before that he which is accused have the accusers face to face, and have
license to answer for himself concerning the crime laid against him. Agreeable
to this, it was a memorable sentence of Seneca the Tragoedian in his Medea; Qui
statuit aliquid, part inaudita altera, aequum licet statuerit, haud aequus
fuit: That though a man's sentence be right, yet he is not right in giving it,
if he give it before either party be heard.

5. 5. Pill. The love of Truth.
The fifth pillar is (...), The love of Truth. This was also Jethro's advice,
Exodus 18.21. to choose (...), men of truth. And of this the Prophet speaks,
Zech. 8.16. Execute the judgment of truth and peace in your gates. Of the
preservation of which, some of the wiser Heathens were so tender, that it was a
Law in the great Court of the Axcopagitae, that he that was to plead before
them, was to plead (...), without either passion or preface, lest the minds of
the Judges might be inflamed into an unjust indignation, or softened into too
much pity.

6. Pill. Incorruptnesse.
The sixth pillar is (...), Incorruptnesse, in the hatred of Bribes: which is
required in that place of Scripture which I have often commended unto you, Exed.
18.21. Men hating covetonsnesse. The Theban Greeks had this meaning, among whom
the Statues of their Judges were erected without hands. But the evidence of the
Scripture is much stronger, and fuller of authority against the corruption of
gifts, as that of Solomon, Prove. 15.27. He that is greedy of gain troubles
his own house: but he that hates gifts shall live. And Job 15.34. Fire shall
consume the Tabernacles of Bribery. Besides much that might be insisted upon to
that purpose.

7. 7. Pill. Sobriety.
The last pillar has this inscription upon it, (...), Sobriety; which is also
very necessary, seeing the Prophet says, Hos. 4.11. Whoredom, and wine, and
new wine take away the heart. And therefore among those prudent instructions
which the Mother of Lemuel gave him, this was one, Prove. 31.4, 5. It is not for
Kings, O Lemuel, it is not for Kings to drink wine, nor for Princes strong
drink, lest they drink and forget the Law, and pervert the judgment of any of
the afflicted. But I remember to whom I am speaking, a Society of grave and
wise men, whose constant and almost hourly attendance upon the public
exigents, will not give them leisure to be intemperate.

This is the Palace of Justice thus supported: Acts of Justice.
Let us only for a short time enter into the Great Court to observe the
transactions there; which are principally the Dispensations of Rewards and
Punishments: these are the two great engines of a State. The Roman
Commonwealth, before it changed into a Monarchy, grew illustrious this way,
requiring a severe account according to the Laws, and according to men's
demerits, and giving praises, triumphs, and places of gain or trust to
well-deservers. I find all Law Books full of penalties, but little published
concerning rewards: whether it be, 1. Because good men are scarce: Or, 7.
Because States find it more profitable and cheap, to restrain by fear, then
encourage by reward, because Virtue is it self a reward to the good and wise.
Or, 3. Because Princes and Sovereign States think it best to keep the liberty
in their own breasts to reward, that it may appear more free, that it may more
bind, that penalties may seem only to flow from the Laws, and rewards from
Bounty. But both are necessary.

1. 1. Punishments.
There must be a zeal of justice against public demerits. It was an Aphorism
of Lewis the 12th of France, That a Prince who punishes not a crime where he
may do it, is no less guilty then he that perpetrated it. The guilty must be
condemned, though it be done (as Bias professed of himself) weeping. To which
that of Solomon answers, Prove. 20.8. A King that sits on the throne of
judgment, scatters away all evil with his eyes. The eyes of Justice as
lovely and as pleasant as they are, are yet red fiery eyes toward them that
deserve ill; for God set up Magistracy to be a terror to evil doers, and that
as the Apostle speaks, Romans 13. he should not bear the Sword in vain. But I
confess, that it is not so proper for a Preacher of the Gospel of Christ's
Kingdom of peace, to call for the drawing of the Sword; but the people from all
parts of the Country, who have bin plundered, wasted, oppressed, do, and may
cry aloud, Justice, Justice, as they have done also formerly with good
success. But it is enough to have given an intimation. Verbum sapienti sat est.

2. 2. Rewards.
Rewards are also to be thought on. Honor bestowed upon unworthy men is made
cheap and despised. When Flavius a freeman was without merit made an Aedile,
the Patricians and Nobles cast off their Ensigns of their orders with
indignation. You have been sensible in some of your Votes who has been faulty
in this, even unto prodigality. But the wiser of the Heathen were tender even
of the very honor of punishments. You know the custom which they had at
Athens of banishing brave men by Ostracisme, when by reason of their power or
the reputation of their virtue, the City had reason, or seemed to have reason
to fear them, so that the very banishment. of these men was to their honor.
This custom was abrogated on this occasion, when one Hyperbolus an infamous
and vile person was so banished. But I speak to them who are able to judge of
merits, and are just in the owning of them. It is indeed the observation of
political men, that weak and jealous Princes, and corrupt and suspicious
Times, cannot endure the luster of Reputation in others, which themselves want.
Hence Domitian sought to ruin all that were brave and well esteemed. But you
have so much luster in regard of your public engagement, your diligence
wisdom and faithfulness in it, that you need not to fear, to honor and
reward others, who are the servants of your just and honorable commands.

But it is time I proceed to the second thing that I proposed, 2. The proof of
the point.
The proof of this point which we have in hand. And it may be made good, that
Justice, (that public justice which we have described) is the foundation of
the public welfare;

1. By the direct evidences of other Scriptures.

2. By some particular Reasons.

3. By an illustration from the contrary.

1. 1. By the Script.
The Scriptures are clear in the proof of it. If we had but that one Text,
Prove. 14.34. it were enough, a Text worthy to be written upon the door of a
Parliament House in letters of gold, Righteousness exalts a Nation, but
sin (the sin of injustice he means) is a reproach to any people. As that
other to be written over the Kings State, in the House of Peers, Prove. 16.12.
The Throne is established by righteousness. But I add also two other
Aphorisms of that wise King, Prove. 4.18. The path of the just is as the
shining light, that shines more and more unto the perfect day, Prove. 12.7. The
wicked are overthrown and are not: but the house of the righteous shall stand.
I may add those expressions of the Prophet Isaiah, Is. 54.14. In
righteousness shall thou be established: thou shall be far from oppression,
for thou shall not fear: and from terror, for it shall not come near thee. And
Is. 33.15.16. He that walks righteously, and speaks uprightly, he that
despises the gain of oppressions, that shakes hie hands from holding of
bribes, that stops his ears from hearing of blood, and shuts his eyes
from seeing evil: He shall dwell on high, his place of defense shall be the
munition of rocks, bread shall be given him, his waters shall be sure. I shall
conclude these testimonies with that application which is made in the Prophet
Jeremiah, unto Shallum, Jer. 22.15, 16. Shall thou reign because thou closest
thy self in Cedar? Did not thy father eat and drink, and do judgment and
justice, and then it was well with him? He judged the cause of the poor and
needy, then it was well with him.

2. 2. By Reasons.
But besides these direct evidences, we may see the truth of the point, in some
particular grounds of it. I will instance in four of them.

1. 1. Because Justice makes acceptable to God.
Justice is the foundation of welfare, because it makes men and States
acceptable to God on whose pleasure, we do all acknowledge, that public
welfare depends. He it is, who has wisdom and might, as Daniel tells the
great King, Dan. 2.20, 21. He changes the times and the seasons, he removes
Kings, and sets up Kings. This great God that rules the Nations, takes a
special care for them that are just: of which we have an ancient example, Genesis
7.1. where God says unto Noah, Come thou and all thy house into the Arc, for
thee have I seen righteous before me in this generation. And the Prophet Esaiah
gives another notable example, of one to whose posterity God subdued the people
of Canaan, Es. 41.2. He raised up the righteous man (meaning Abraham) from the
East, called him to his foct, gave the Nations before him, (understand it of
his posterity,) and made him Ruler over Kings: he gave them as the dust to his
sword, and as driven stubble to his bow. So true is that of the Apostle, which
hitheto may be applied, Romans 14.17, 18. The Kingdom of God is inrighteousnesse
and peace; he that in these things serves Christ, is acceptable to God, and
approved of men.

2. 2. Because Justice is the Nurse of Peace.
Public prosperity is nursed up by peace, and peace is procured and preserved
by Justice: according to that of the Psalmist, Psalm. 85.10. Righteousness and
peace have kissed each other. And in another Psalm, Psalm. 72.2. The mountains
shall bring peace to the people, and the little hills by righteousness. Are
there any assaults against the settled peace? Justice it is that fortifies
against them. The righteous shall hold on his way, and he that has clean hands
shall be stronger and stronger, Job. 17.9. Does any side lie open to danger?
Justice does surround us. Thou Lord wilt bless the righteous (says David,
Psalm. 5.12.) with favor will thou compass him as with a shield. Is there any
thing that may annoy, likely to come in by the back door? Justice also keeps
that. For which the Prophet is express, Esa. 58.8. Thy righteousness shall go
before thee, the glory of the Lord shall be thy Rere-ward; or as the Margin
there has well rendered it according to the Hebrew, It shall gather thee up, So
to bring thee off safely. In a word, what does more threaten the public quiet,
then a public discontent by reason of oppressions? when as it is, Esa. 5.7.
The Lord looks for judgment, but behold oppression; for righteousness, but
behold a cry. But that very Text does intimate the safety of a State, where
there is no oppression, but judgment and righteousness, there is no cry, no
discontent.

3. 3. Because Justice maintains Reputation.
The quiet management of Authority and Power is maintained by Reputation; how
else should such huge vaste Bodies of people, be led and ruled by a few? But
Justice it is that gives and keeps up Reputation and an Awe in the differing
minds of multitudes. This is it that steals the hearts of men. That Ambitious
young Prince, Absalom, knew that it was the most taking argument, when he had a
design to transfer the government from the old King upon himself, O (said
he) that I were made Judge in the Land, that every man which had any suite or
cause, might come unto me, and I would do him Justice! 2 Samuel 15.4. And it is
said in the sixth verse, So Absalom stole the hearts of the men of Israel. For
as in the place before mentioned, Romans 14.17, 18. He that does this, is not
only acceptable to God, but approved of men. It is among the highest blessings
which God promises to a reformed State, when he has purged away the dross,
and taken away all the tin; when he has restored the Judges as at the first,
and the Counselors as at the beginning, that then they shall have the
reputation of being a just State, Es. 1.26. Thou shall be called, The City of
righteousness, The faithful City. And it is preserved also by the same means;
for says Solomon, Prev. 10.7. The memory of the just is blessed.

4. 4. Because Justice builds up families
A Kingdom is a combination of families; and they are built up, and kept
together by just dealing. The wise King had observed it, Prove. 20.7. The just
man walks in his intergrity, his children are blessed after him. And in
another place, Prove. 3.33. The curse of the Lord is in the house of the wicked:
but he blesses the habitation of the just. To this purpose we have a rich and
sure promise, Es. 32.17, 18, 19. The work of righteousness shall be peace, and
the effect of righteousness quietness and assurance for ever. And my people
shall dwell in a peaceable habitation, and in sure dwellings, and in quiet
resting places: when it shall hayle, coming down on the forest; and the City
shall be low in a low place. Nay, and beyond this, sometimes a few families,
yea a few persons that are righteous, are the public security. Abraham knew
that it was far from God to slay the righteous with the wicked: and God
confirms him by his word, If I find in Sodom, fifty righteous within the City,
then I will spare all the place for their sakes. Genesis 18.26. He comes, v. 28.
to forty sive, v. 29. to forty, v. 30. to thirty, v. 31. to twenty, v. 32. to
ten. Then Abraham could go no lower. But God does, in the case of Jerusalem,
even to one, Jer. 5.1. See, if ye can find a man, if there be any that
executes judgment, that seeks the truth, and I will pardon it.

3. 3. By the contrary, That Injustice ruins a State.
There is yet one other proof which I shall offer of this point, namely the
illustration of it from the contrary, That Injustice undermines the public
prosperity, and makes a State vile and weak. For the confirmation of this,
among many Scriptures that might be alleged, I would commend the serious
reading of that whole period, Jer. 22. from v. 1. to v. 10. which I shall spare
to recite; It is the Prophets grave and wholesome application of himself in the
Lords name, to the King of Judah and his Princes. Only give me leave to make
use of one passage of the Psalmist's, Psalm. 75.2, 3. When I shall receive the
Congregation, I will judge uprightly. The earth and all the Inhabitants thereof
are dissolved: I bear up the pillars of it. I know not whether David made this
Psalm, but the speech is very like his, and it was a Princelike and just
resolution what course to take, when he should receive the government, of which
he had the expectation; and the times he describes were much like the times of
Saul, when All was dissolved, or, as it is in the Hebrew, Melted. Without
Justice all things melt, and fall asunder. The Similitude is from the melting
of things heterogeneous, as when little sticks, straws, feathers, are frozen up
together with the water into one Cake of Ice, when it melts, they all are
loosened from each other, and go their several ways: as a mixed body also made
up of lead, tin, silver, etc. But that which is homogeneous though it be
loosened, is not dissolved, as gold when it is melted, all the parts still are
gold. But a State is a mixed body, when it is melted, and the bands loosened, it
is lost: the members of it are made unserviceable and to one another a burden:
All this disorder is brought in by injustice. Nothing ruins a people sooner.
The Macedonian Empire had a speedy erection, but it had also a very speedy
dissolution; and Pausanias by a natural light could discern the cause of it,
Because the foundation of it was said in Perjurie. We have seen the Palace, or
the Tower rather of Justice, a strong built and steady fabric. But the City of
Violence, as one has described it to us, is nothing but a heap of ruins,
cemented with blood; a place where Earthquakes and out-ragious winds are very
frequent: where the water is poisonous, the air infectious: the inhabitants
clothed in the skins of Lions, Wolves, Tigers, Foxes, or in the spotted skins
of Panthers. He tells us pleasantly that some of them being dissected were
found to have two hearts, whereby a Judgment might be made of all the rest of
the Inhabitants. Nothing worshipped there, but those tria numina, honor, gain,
and lust. The Trade they drive, only Boxes of Smoke, Vizards, counterfeit ware,
or poisons, racks, halters, or false Evidences, pretended Patents, etc. He
tells us also, that about the houses were heard nothing but Ravens and
shreich-Owles; and in the streets were observed diverse standing pooles, filled
up with the tears of poor widows, young wronged Orphan's, and poor men
oppressed by the rich and mighty.

But this confused building cannot stand. Such a structure weighs down it self;
and all the Pillars upon which it is propped, are rotten.

May you please now after you have seen the beauty and strength of those seven
Pillars supporting the Palace of Justice, to take a short view of those unfound
props of the ruinous building of Injustice.

1. 1. For a man to live to himself, an unsound principle.
One is, That principle of worldly yea and divellish wisdom, that I may borrow
a Character from the Apostle James, which is this: That a man should do all
for himself, and make his own Interest the god whom he serves. This is the
Trojan horse that being let into the world, bears in the belly of it fire,
sword, facriledge, plunder, desolation. That man that serves himself, cares not
to ruin all the world besides. Self-love, when it overflowes its channel,
overthrowes all things that stand in its way, and bears down all respects of
duty, honesty, and relation. These men are they that turn the world upside
down. We have known such men make no conscience to sacrifice the blood of such
as have served them with the greatest devotion and passion, upon the Altar of
self-Interesse.

2. 2. To live by fiction, anunfound principle.
Another, is this principle. Namely, That it is best, easiest, and safest, for
men to govern themselves by fiction, because there are few wise men who will
attend those drifts, but the greater part of people, such as cannot discover
those masqueries, and are willing to be deceived. But we that believe the
Scriptures, know what an unsound bottom this is, where we learn, that it is
most safe to be sincere, and that the honest man is upon the surest terms for
his standing: for as for them, who as the Prophet speaks, Esa. 15.16. Seek deep
to hide their council, and whose works are in the dark, and say, Who sees us?
and, Who knows us? Surely their turning of things upside down, shall be
esteemed as the Potters clay. And that memorable sentence of Solomon's, Prove.
26.27. is an absolute truth; Who so diggeth a pit, shall fall therein: and he
that rolleth a stone, it will return upon him.

3. 3. To pursue revenge, an unsound principle.
A third, is this principle. That it is good to reign like Lions, to keep them
down whom you have once got under, to pursue all advantages, and never to be
reconciled, or to forgive. Truly a very desperate maxim of such as do
endeavor even to eternise their revenge, as if they had taken such an Oath as
Hanibals father gave him when he was young, never to be at peace with the
Romans. Some there are that take even a dying pleasure in revenge. I have read
a very remarkable story to this purpose in Zonaras, of one of the Greek
Emperors the inhumane Theophilus, who having a prime and eminent man of a
party contrary to him, then in his power, one Theophobus, when he perceived he
could not live, for the approaches of death were now upon him, being loath to
let him survive him, he sent for the head of his prisoner, and taking pleasure
with his eyes now almost settled by death to behold it, with his trembling weak
arm he takes and handles that pale bloody head, and wraps his fingers in the
locks of it, and with a triumphing delight speaks to it, It Is true, I shall be
no longer Theophilus, nor art thou any more Theophobus. And often repeating
over these words, his last words, his revengfull angry unquiet soul expired,
and with a bloody smile he died. But I hope I speak to no men that are of such
a Character. Let that one only place be remembered instead of many, Jam. 2.13.
He shall have judgment without mercy, that has showed no mercy.

4. 4. To be wise for this life only, an unsound principle.
A fourth Pillar, (and I will present to your view no more,) is this principle.
That it is wisdom to take care that we be well here, and to venture for
hereafter; seeing that we cannot be miserable when we are no more. Ah wretched
Atheists, how is it possible that you can resist the contrary testimony of your
own breasts within you, the working of your own Consciences? But we who know
and believe, that respect to eternity is the greatest wisdom, need not be
informed of the unsoundnesse of this bottom. And being unwilling to detain you
any longer upon such an heap, for as it is not safe to walk among ruins, so
the very thinking upon these principles may be dangerous, some happily may
stumble, or some may get dust in their eyes, I do therefore hasten out of this
discourse, that I may pass on to the Use and Application of the point.

Use. 3. The Application.
Honorable and beloved, I have presented Justice to you, a Virgin Princess,
but in a plain dress that nothing might commend her to you, so much as her own
native beauty and luster, only with this advantage I have presented her, that
you might see the handmaids of her family, and I have set by her the
unpleasing and unsightly face of Injury or Violence, as a spot to commend her
whiteness; I have no design upon the point, but this one to persuade you to
love her. Justice, Justice shall thou follow, etc. Let me speak to this.

1. 1. A general exhortation to Justice.
In general, in the words of the Prophet, Hos. 10.12. Sow to your selves in
righteousness, reap in mercy. Consider the notable patterns that are before
you in the Scripture. Among many others I would commend two. The example of Job
cap. 29. He delivered the poor that cried, the fatherless, and him that had
none to help him; he caused the widows heart to sing for joy; He put on
righteousness, and it clothed him, and his judgment was as a Robe and a
Diadem: He was eyes to the blind, and feet to the lame: A father to the poor,
and the cause that he knew not, he searched out: He brake the jaws of the
wicked, and pluket the spoil out of his teeth. And the example of Nehemiah,
cap. 5. He being the Kings Commissioner or the Tirshatha, as he is called
according to the Persian Language, Ezra 2.63. when a great cry of the people
and their wives came unto him by reason of oppressors, he was moved with it,
( Nehem. 5.6.) and having advised with himself, he improves his authority
for their relief, rebuking even the Nobles with much courage, ver. 7, 8, 9.
and gives not over till he had purchased the content of the poor who were
wronged by the rich and potent men. Besides his great equity and condescension
mentioned, verse. 14, 15, 16, 17, 18. Write after such fair copies: I might
abound in examples. Let Justice set the bounds to your power, as Pompey
answered to Phraartes the King of Parthia, who desiring by his Ambassadors whom
he sent to the Roman General, That Euphrates might be made the period of the
Roman Empire: He replied, That neither Seas nor Mountains, but Justice only
should set a Term to them; and though they had power, yet they would go no
farther then justly they might go. And let Justice have influence upon your
public Councels: Nothing is more lovely to my soul then the power of Christ's
grace manifested in the lives of Christians; yet I cannot but commend that
natural honesty planted in the minds of the wiser and braver Heathens: It is
related in Plutarch, That in the midst of some great streights wherein Athens
then was, Themistocles said he had somewhat wherein to give his opinion for
the behoof of the State, but that he thought not fit to deliver himself
publicly: The City appointed Aristides, a man in whom they might repose the
greatest trust, to hear him, and as he should think fit, to give an account
of it: When he came to make his report, he told them, That the advice of
Themistocles was indeed very profitable, but not honest: Whereupon the People
would not so much as hear it. I need not make application of these Stories to
such wise men. In stead of enlarging this general Exhortation, let me pray,
and let us together pray in the words of the Prophet, Isa. 45.8. Drop down, ye
heavens from above, and let the skies power downs righteousness, let the earth
open, and let them bring forth salvation, and let righteousness spring up
together.

Secondly, 2. Particular Exhortations.
I descend to some particulars:

1. 1. To be just to God.
Be just unto God your Deliverer, who has crowned your endeavors with all
those successes which in the beginning of my Sermon I mentioned according to
your Order for the duty of the day. Put all your strength to this Cause: Settle
Religion with your first care. I spare to be particular, because you have a
godly and learned Assembly to advise you.

2. (...) to (...).
Be just to your public promises, to the National Covenant into which you
have solemnly entered, in which you have lifted up your hands to the High God. I
know that many come hither to these Sermons, to gather up angry passages from
the Preachers before you: there is a generation of ill-affected men that would
have it so. But I have nothing wherein to chide, nor if I had, were this a day
for it; This day is made up of nothing but joys.

3. 3. To be just to the Commonwealth. 1. In preserving the liberty.
Be just to the Commonwealth:

1. Preserve the public Liberty (the inheritance of the people of the Land) so
far as honestly you may. Your Ancestors, who sat under that roof where you
daily sit, purchased the Magna Charta, and you preserve their memory with
honor: We owe to your Time The Petition of Right, and diverse other
Relaxations, and for them Posterity will honor your memory.

2. 2. In preferring the public interesse.
Prefer the public Interesse: Be willing to be rather nothing in reputation,
then that the Nation should lose hers. The brave Policratidas of Lacedemon who
was sent to the enemy with some others, and having made some Propositions,
being demanded if they came privately, or were sent; he answered, Si
impetramus, public Sin minus, privatim. If we obtain, we were sent; if
otherwise, we only came. Let me add, Build up the house of the Kingdom,
rather then ciele your own: Set up no private houses upon the Common waste:
Hearken not to the inticements of opportunity to do wrong. Frederick the
Emperor educated in his Court the young Ladislaus, the infant-King of Hungary
and Bohemia; some that were about him persuaded him to lay hold on that
advantage to join those two Kingdoms to his; But said he, Quid ergo, Divitem
potius, quam justum Regem vulcis? What? Would you rather have a rich King, then
a just one? Implying, that they must also expect the same from him in dealing
with them, rather to fill his coffers out of their estates, then to yield them
the benefit of just administrations. Nothing good can be expected from a man
that is only good to himself.

3. 3. In securing the future peace.
Be careful of the succeeding times, to secure the peace of them. Admit them
not to trust, who have betrayed the Public trust: Put not the Commonwealth
into their hands, who have deceived or oppressed it. Suffer me to apply my self
(as I am wont) by a Story: There was one Septimius Arabinus, a man very
infamous for many oppressions, who being acquitted under Heliogabalus, and
readmitted into the Senate, (the great Parliament of Rome) when upon the
choice of Alexander Severus to the Empire, the Senators entertained him with a
public Salutation and Congratulations, he espying Arabinus among them, cried
out, O numina? Arabinus non solum vivit, sed in Senatum venit. Ah, what times
are these? What do I see? Arabinus not only lives, but sits in Senate also.
Through a just indignation he would not endure to see him.

4. 4. To be just to friends.
I have yet one particular more to exhort you unto: Be just to your friends.

1. 1. To Ministers.
To the Ministers who are godly, zealous, and conscionable in their function:
Suffer them not to be exposed to contempt, or want; both of which are the
designs of such as are enemies to the honor and success of your present
Councels. And I the rather speak of the later, because of the Petition which a
few days since came unto your hands, but (to the praise of your Equity and
Wisdom) not entertained.

2. 2. To the honest party.
To the faithful and honest party of the Land, who have spent their estates,
lost their livelihoods, ventured upon the frowns of their Prince, to serve the
Public and You, with all sincerity and diligence. Let not enemies eat their
bread, or take their trade out of their hands. Reward them, cherish them employ
them. It was a wise and just provision which we find in Plato, in his sixth
Book De Legibus: No man that serves the Public, must suffer in his private
estate, but care is to be had of him.

3. 3. To the Scots.
To our Brethren of Scotland, who are your friends by many obligations: Be just
in what is due to them in the agreement. I pretend not to the knowledge of any
thing in this matter, beyond what you are pleased to let every man know in
public Instruments and Scripts, and think it enough only to have intimated
this among other Exhortations.

And now upon the whole, Motives of the Use.
what shall I say by way of enforcement of this point? What Motives shall I
need to use?

1. 1. Justice saves from Reproach.
Hereby ye shall be kept safe from reproach: for righteousness is a breast
plate, Ephesians. 6.14. yea, you shall be clothed with honor. I proposed the 29.
Chapter of Job as an example: see also in the same place the reward of his
integrity. He was so respected, that when he went out to the gate (of
judgment,) the young men saw him, and hid themselves, and the aged arose, and
stood up: The Princes refrained talking, and laid their hand on their mouth:
The Nobles held their peace, and their tongue cleaved to the roof of their
mouth. When the ear heard him, it blessed him, and when the eye saw him, it
gave witness to him: (as when the Orator in Athens was declaming in praise of
Justice, all the eyes of the people were instantly fastened upon Aristides, who
sat among the Auditors:) It follows, verse. 21, 22, 23. Unto him men gave ear,
and waited, and kept silence at his Council: After his words they spoke not
again, and his speech dropped upon them: They waited for him as the rain, and
opened their mouth wide as for the later rain.

2. 2. Justice fortifies against attempts.
Hereby ye shall be kept safe from attempts. The righteous may be as bold as a
Lion: He needs not fear any thing, that fears only to be corrupt. Some men
talk of the Constellations, and what the Heavens threaten; But the Stars are
no enemies to just men. It was a conceit which much pleased me, when I
observed it among the Symbols which I formerly mentioned, of Cosmus the first,
Duke of Tuscany: his device was, A Diana with a Serpent at her foot, (the
meaning seems to be, Pureness of conversation walking with wisdom) She held
in her hand the figure of the Constellation of Capricorn (which it seems was
the Sign under which he was born, and as the Astrologers would persuade him,
threatened some evil to him,) The word was, Integer vitae, scelerisque purus:
Implying, that he that is wise and just needs not stand in doubt of any thing.
It is the most assured protection to be honest, and the most quick-sighted
providence to have a sincere eye to God. Many great fishes that tumble in the
waves, and devour the shoales of the lesser fish, notwithstanding their
strength and quick eyes, do many times crush themselves against the rocks, and
perish. But the Naturalists tell us of one fish, which they call the
Vranoscope, which has but one eye, and that in a vertical point, on the top
of the head, directly upward: by which it yet avoids all rocks and dangers.
It Is much better to have but one eye, so it be to heaven, in a sincere respect
to justice, then two of the best and sharpest eyes of corrupt and worldly
policy.

3. 3. Justice better then a Thanksgiving.
Let me take another Motive from the day, a Day of Thanksgiving: We are met
together to offer our praises unto God, and we have a large field of matter,
Ten several mercies that I have mentioned in your first, and in your
additionall Order. We have reason to be joyful, and you have done well to
appoint a Feast, and a solemn Assembly. But let me tell you, that the
dispensing of justice is a more acceptable service to God, then a public
Thanksgiving. To which purpose let me only commend unto you that place of the
Prophet, Amos 5.21, 22, 23, 24. I hate, I despise your Feast-dayes, and I will
not smell (speaking of the Sacrifices that were offered) in your solemn
Assemblies. Though ye offer me burnt-offerings, and your meat offerings, I
will not accept them, neither will I regard the peace offerings of your fat
beasts. Take thou away from me the noise of thy songs: For I will not hear the
melody of thy viols. But let judgment run down (or roll) as waters, and
righteousness as a mighty stream.

4. 4. The neglect of justice will make the soul tremble.
Lastly, I will make bold to add this, that if any man be guilty, and his
conscience come once to be opened and convinced of injustice, that man's soul
will tremble; which effect Paul's discourse had upon Felix: the Text says, Acts
24.25. As he reasoned of righteousness, temperance, and judgment to come,
Felix trembled. For it seems his own sin came to his remembrance.

I have now delivered unto you that which was in my thoughts, and in my vows.
For if I were to give a present account unto God, what I had made choice of to
speak, having an opportunity to speak to the high Court of the Parliament of
England; I would say, I had preached to them of righteousness and equity. And
for you Honorable and Renowned, I know nothing more proper: I have read of an
old Counselor of France, who having spent many years of service in the Court,
desiring to retire himself into the Country to enjoy the privacie that was
fit for his age, and having obtained leave, before he went, the King his Master
required him to set down and leave some advices of Government behind him: he
being unwilling, and out of his modest opinion of himself declining it, the
King would not be denied, but left with him pen and ink, and a sheet of paper:
He being alone, after some thoughts, wrote in fair legible Characters on the
top of the sheet MODVS, and toward the middle of it also MODVS, and at the
bottom of the sheet, in like-manner MODVS, nothing but Modus, Modus, Modus,
and so wrapped it up, and delivered it to the King; meaning, that the best
council he could give, was, that he should keep a Temper in all things. If I
were thought worthy to offer an advice to so learned and wise a Body, I would
write on the top of my leaf Justice, in the middle Justice, and at the bottom
Justice: According to my Text, in the reading of it which I have preferred,
Justice, Justice, thou shall follow, etc.

Honored Fathers, Renowned Patriots, I have done, when I have only summed my
Discourse in a few words: Be just,

1. To your Covenant, in which ye are solemnly engaged.

2. To the public interesse, the honor and prosperity of the Nation.

3. To the Distinguishing principles of Protestancy, which you know, but I have
not time to mention.

4. To the Ministers that have assisted with advice, with prayer, with much
zeal.

5. To our Brethren, and to the honest party of the Land, who have faithfully
served you, and suffered much for you.

Then,

1. You shall live, comfortably, and in our hearts; yea, and hereafter in Story.

2. You shall possess and inherit your good land.

3. You shall rejoice in the firm and pleasant amity of your neighbor Kingdom.

4. Your enemies shall lie unto you, and lick the dust.

5. Rome shall shake, and that Antichrist shall become a trembling prophet to
himself of his own approaching ruin. Justice, Justice shall thou follow, that
thou may live, and inherit the Land, etc.

FINIS.

