Tom NASH his Ghost. To the three scurvy Fellows of the upstart Family of the
Snufflers, Rufflers and Shufflers; the thrice Treble-troublesome Scufflers in
the Church and State, the only Lay Ecclesi-Ass, I call GENERALLISSIMO'S. Being
like Jobs 3. Comforters, or the Churches 3. Anti-Disciples, the Clergies 3.
Persecuters, the States 3. Hors-leeches, the Devils 3. Chaplains; namely, the
Anabaptist, the Libertine, and the Brownist. Written by Thomas Nash his Ghost,
with Pap with a Hatchet, a little revived since the 30. Year of the late Qu.
Elizabeth's Reign, when Martin Mar-Prelate was as mad as any of his Tub-men are
now.



Printed first at York, and since reprinted at London. 1642.

Tom NASH his Ghost.
I Am a Ghost, and Ghosts do fear no Laws;
I Nor do they care for popular Applause:
I lived a Poet poor, long time ago;
And (living a poor Poet) I died so.
The thirtieth year of blessed Eliza's Reign
I had a yerking, sirking, jerking vein;
In those days, we had desperate madmen here,
Who did the Queen, State, Church and Kingdom jeere*
And now a Crew are up as wise as those
Who do all Rule and Government oppose.
In those days I did bring those men in frame;
And now my Ghost is come to do the same.
Their Leaders were called Martins; but I call
These fellows Swallows, they would swallow all.
I then did gall their Galls, and spite their spite,
I made the Nests of Martins take their flight;
But first they had dispersed their fond opinions,
In sundry places of the Queens Dominions,
Which (like Impostumes) not well cured at first,
Corrupted ever since, does now out-burst.
Wherefore my ayery Ghost shall undertake
Once more to try a perfect Cure to make;
For (being now iuvisible, a Spirit)
I cut through the Air, and in the Earth can ferrit,
And in an Augure hole my self can hide,
And hear their knaveries and spy unspide.
My Lines are sharp, but charitie's my ground,
My aim is to conform not to confound,
But if my labor prove to be in vain,
My Ghost shall (whence it came) return again.
TOM NASH HIS GHOST. APPEARING To the Anabaptist, the Libertin^, and the
BROWNIST.
IT were a troublesome and tedious Business for a general Counsel (with the
help of all the Universities) to give these whom I write to, corresponden^
Epithetes, Names, Titles, and Tittle-tattles that may be suitable to their
Educations and continual practice; for as when Monopolies and Projects did
oppress and molest this Kingdom like swarms of Caterpillars; in which unjust
designs too many crafty companions did abuse the Kings name, in playing the
Knaves, to the mighty and intolerable general injury of his Majesty, and all
his Subjects: so these Locusts are crawled out of the bottomless Pit, an^
under the blessed name of God they do play the Devils incarnate.

It is to be wondered at, what wondrous pains they take to do wickedly; how
their unholy and crooked imaginations have pumped into their impious fancies
the false conceptions of some virtuous matter; then are they in extreme pain
and travel till they are delivered from the abortive Issue of their addle
Brains: for which (although they have no acceptance from God, nor thanks from
good men (but rather hatred from all) yet out their stinking stuff must, or
the musty Verse must break or crack all the hoopes, or the Devil perhaps may
want his due if authority be not reviled against, and a long scismaticall
Oration hyppocratically stretched out to the Rabble of their disobedient and
unlick'd Auditors, who out of their deep ignorance, do extol the vapourous
matter, with a wine-drawne speech and lowting courtesy, bless them for that
days exercise, in inveighing so vehemently and bitterly against all Rule and
Government, in Church and State; when indeed his admired mouth better deserved
the help of Doctor Executioner, that he might wipe it with a hempen wispe.

Their Tongues have been the Wedges their Heads the Beetles, and their Pens the
Axes that have split, rent and cloven all our blessed peace, content and
happiness which we lately inioyed: their Books have been shot (like Bolts)
whereby this Kingdoms disgrace is not only overspread over it self; but also
our dishonor is scattered over the face of all Christendom; and though they
be so ignorant that they cannot dispute with a Sexton; yet they will take upon
them to displace Bishops and learned Divines, and place in their rooms Weavers
and Wyer-drawers.

But the wisdoms of these Martinists, will answer, that Bishops have been
erroneous, negligent proud, contentious, covetous, uncharitable, ambitious,
etc. all which is granted, but it is not granted that all Bishops have been so
(nor at least) so bad as these fellows would make them) as men are men, so men
are subject to error and failings: if some great men in high and eminent places
have done amiss, does it stand with your witless reasons quite to overthrow
and cast down their high Callings, Functions and necessary Offices: some
Judges perhaps have done corruptly; ergo, we will have no more Judges: you may
better argue, that many Separatists are malicious or ignorant Knaves, and
therefore we would have no more Separatists. This were to be as wise, as he
that pulled down his house, because there was one old rotten post in it, or
that all your Tribe should have no easier cure for the Toothache, but by
knocking out your brains: No, no, my friends (a far off) there is no doubt
but if the State were settled, (which by your Sectaries have too much
disturbed) there are (under God) Parliamentall Chyrurgions and Physicians that
with his Royal Majesty's most humble, hearty, loyal and all desired
assistance and protection, would soon recover this almost gangrean'd Church
and Commonweal to its former health, and most renowned reputation and
dignity.

I would wish these shuttle-heads that desire to rake in the embers of
Rebellion, to give over blowing the Coals too much, lest the sparks flee in
their faces, or the ashes choke them: some of them have made such hot work
already with tutoring their Tutors; that their own lips are burnt: It is well
known that their magnified Teachers have three several times in the presence
of God taken their Oaths, wherein they have vowed all Canonical obedience, and
they ought to observe the said oaths, till such time as the wisdom of that
power and authority which ordained these oaths do alter or ^brogate the same
as occasions may requi^e. But though they seemed constantly to swear obedience
to those venerable Edicts of the Church; yet it is found that their humble
submission was but dissembling intrusion; and now they are possessed of their
Pulpits, they take great care that no learned conformable Preacher shall come
there at any time, for fear that if truth come once to light, then their Cake
will be dough, and they being once discovered to their Auditors (especially
their good Dames) may happen to want their pudding, Bacon, with other good
cheer, besides some other courtesies at Conveticles,

Thus, when these extraordinary qualified Theologues are mounted in their
Thrones, a Popish Priest can hardly outdoe him in strange postures, as in
lifting up the pureness of the whitest whiteness of his eyes; then mark how
he displayes his arms as if he were swimming; also the terrible assault and
battery that the poor cushion endures, the haukings, hemmings, hummings,
coughings, spittings (with other Parenthesis while there is more matter a
pumping) besides the terble thundering voice against our Church-Lyturgie,
although they do know that they lie, and that that Book was approved of by
the learned Calvin and all the reverend Fathers of the blessed Reformation in
King Edwards Reign. That five martyred Bishops, (namely, Archbishop Cranmer,
Bishop Ridley, Bishop Latimer, Bishop Hooper, Bishop Farrar, with many more
godly men and glorious Martyrs, (whom the Papists most cruelly burnt and
persecuted; yet they all at their very deaths did acknowledge our
Church-Liturgie, or Common Prayer Book, and sealed their faiths with their
bloods, by the Papist Tyranny; and is it possible that any should be so
shameless as to say that Book is Popish now

The said Book was suppressed in Q. Mary's Reign because it was not Popish: The
said Book was not Popish in all the happy Reign of Q. Elizabeth, nor was it
esteemed either Popish or Romish in all the Reign of King James: in both the
times of these three mighty Princes (of ever-blessed memory) and till within
these three or four years, there has scarce^y been heard of any learned or
Religious minded Protestant that did ever hold that Book to be stuffed with
Romish Rags of Popery, although some things in it may be amended, and
somethings quite omitted.

But you have such nice stomachs that nothing will down with you except it be
sawc'd with disobedience and contention; you being such odd sellowes whom
Learning, Wit, sense or Reason can by no means satisfy. Whips are for slaves
and not swords, and it is fit that such as wisdom cannot satisfy, should
have their mouths bung'd up with ieeres, will nothing agree with your
appetites, or relish well in your pallates, but the bald-rib of a Bishop, or
the iole of a Judge? truly I hold it better that some of you were taken away
with Gregory's Voyder; the Reason is, there are Caps with four corners, and
those you distaste; there are creatures to be met in one corner, hold there;
and there is a Tree near Paddington with three corners; but no more of that (I
pray) though it is necessary that some of you should escape no worse.

I am so cleare-sighted that I can see through the very veins and sinnewes of
your Consciences; for your Religions you may (many of you) cast Cross and
Pile, and for your just dealing you may play at my Sow has Pigg'd. Therefore
it is wholesome for the times that such Cocks as you should be let blood in the
Comb.

It is a marvel that most of your perverse Sects have not wry mouths, for
very few of you do speak right at any time; but out of the concupiscence of
your Consciences, and the Learning you are endued withal in Crooked-Lane
Lattin, has got you with child with Rebellion; and being with child you long
to swallow Churches, and devour Authority, but you will be told one time or
other that there is some odds betwixt Learning and Libelling.

I know some that will do their ill-good will to outlaw my Soul for writing
this, and they will serve an execution of damnation upon me, but if I be aware
of their coming I will meet them with such a powder that shall make their
bones to rattle in their Skins like 3. blew beans in a blew bladder rattle
bladder rattle.

And for a conclusion, It is as lawful, for honnest men by either speaking or
writing to make the malicious Facts and Acts of Knaves known, as it is for
Knaves to slander and abuse honest men; and most certain it is that the
Leaders of these Factions do know they are out of the way, and would be glad
to return again (were it not for some worldly respect) for which causes they
must impudently go on, according to the old Proverb, over-shooes, over Boots.

FINIS.

