A HELP TO Christian Fellowship: OR, A Discourse tending to the advancement
and spiritual improvement of holy Society.

WHEREIN The practice of it is commended, 1. In the communicating or imparting
of their gifts and graces. 2. In their walking together in the ordinances of
Christ. 3. In a mutual serviceablenesse to one another.


The particular Graces necessary to the qualifying of Christians for it, are
propounded.

And an Invitation unto it is urged by some motives from the benefit and
pleasantness thereof.

Applied to these times for the strengthening of men's hands in the happy work
of Reformation.

By SAMUEL TORSHELL.

ROMANS 1.11, 12. For I long to see you, that I may impart unto you some
spiritual gift, to the end you may be established. Verse. 12. That is, that I
may be comforted together with you, by the mutual faith both of you and me.
Imprimatur,

Charles Herle.



London, Printed by G. M. for John Bellamy at the Sign of the three
golden-Lyons near the Royall-Exchange, 1644.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL. Mris JANE DONE OF Vtkinton in Cheshire.
THis which I have digested into the form of a small Treatise, was the
substance of two Sermons, which I preached, both at Istleworth, and at
Christ-Church, London; upon, Act. 2.42. They continued steadfastly in the
Apostles doctrine and in fellowship. Where I observed the effect of St Peter's
Sermon, the conversion of many, who gladly receiving the word, and being
baptized, were added to the Church: And the conversation of believers in those
holy primitive times, that they maintained a sweet and happy fellowship each
with other.

Diverse godly friends judged those notes to be of use, and fit to be
communicated in these unquiet and quarrelling times, wherein we are in danger
to lose holiness as well as peace. And I have published them, partly to
satisfy their desire and frequent demanding of them to the press; and in part
to answer a dept that I saw my self in, being engaged by a promise I made upon
occasion of relating the fruitful society of some select and judicious
private Christians, whom I mention in the end of the fourteenth Chapter of the
first Book of my Hypocrite. I had it in my thoughts, to have examined and made
a judgment upon a design of Isaac Comenius' (as I take it) for an universal
Christian College, but doubting lest that would appear like Sir Thomas More's
Vtopia, or my Lord Verulam's Atlantis, I laid aside that business, and have
fitted this in a plain way and in plain language, to the apprehension and for
the use even of the meanest capacities. I have not illustrated it with
Histories and examples, as I might have done, and as I have done my Hypocrite,
but only laid out the general rules for practice, without ornament.

But such as it is, I have inscribed it to your Name, for two reasons.

1. Because you are and have been long an eminent example of that which the
Treatise commends. I know you will neither be afraid nor ashamed to own that
course of Religion and Society now, which you were not afraid to practice, nor
ashamed to countenance heretofore, when the times were suspicious of all the
meetings of godly professors, and threatened and raged against them. The honor
of your zeal, courage, constancy and diligence in this way, shall remain
upon you, beyond that of your extraction from so ancient and well known a
family. It is your praise, that you have in great part learned, what I am
teaching unto others.

2. But seeing I could have sound out many other Names, of men yea and women,
of mean and of Noble quality too, that are very eminent, and shine in the
holiness and usefulness of their lives; I have therefore another reason why I
inscribe this to yours; Namely to leave a testimony of the sincere and great
respect, I bear and have ever borne to you, since I had the happiness to have
acquaintance with your gifts and graces. That storm which has forced you from
your habitation, having driven me also to seek refuge in these more safe
coverts, I know not how it may please God to dispose of me, or where my poor
service may be employed. Wheresoever therefore I sit down, (if a sitting down
may be expected in so great a commotion and hurl of things) I resolved to
leave a public testimony in your hand, how dear my Bunburie (ah desolated
Bunburie, often, often warned,) How dear your Cheshire, (mine too I may call
it in some respect, as having spent a full third part of my life in it.) And
how dear your religious family and all our Christian neighborhood, are unto
my thoughts.

S. T.

The Contents.
CHAP. I. THE entrance into the Discourse, The Subject propounded and
commended, The necessity, usefulness and antiquity of Christian fellowship.
Chap. 2. The main point confirmed, the relations of Believers, The description
of holy fellowship, the subject of it. Chap. 3. The other part of the
description, The exercise of Christian fellowship, in the mutual exchange of
gifts and graces. Chap. 4. Another Exercise of Christian fellowship, in walking
together in the ordinances of Christ. Chap. 5. A third exercise of Christian
fellowship, in the mutual serviceablenesse to the souls, and to the bodies of
the Saints. Chap. 6. The requisites unto this Christian fellowship, 1. A
renouncing of all sinful and wicked society. Chap. 7. Other Requisites unto
Christian fellowship. viz. The graces necessary for entering into, and
maintaining of it, as 1. Humility, 2. Ingenuitie, 3. Self-denial. Chap. 8.
Other graces requisite unto this fellowship, as 4. Love, 5. Affability, 6.
Sobriety, 7. Innocence, 8. Holy emulation, 9. Wisdom. Chap. 9. An exhortation
to the entering into this fellowship, Some motives thereunto, as 1. Christians
strengthened against temptations, 2. God better served thereby, 3. The mutual
benefit of this Christian fellowship. Chap. 10. The exhortation further urged,
A fourth motive, viz. The comeliness of this fellowship. The Conclusion.
A HELP TO Christian Fellowship.
CHAP. I. The entrance into the discourse. The Subject propounded and
commended. The necessity, usefulness and antiquity of Fellowship.
THE wonderful advantage which might be made of Fellowship in gifts and
graces, The necessity of Christian Fellowship.
is greatly neglected by unwise and improvident Christians; so that the
comfort, use and gain of Society, as it might respect soul-trade and
thriving, is lost. In other things men have been wise to lesser and inferior
purposes, and have improved that natural quality of sociablenesse, to the
mutual strengthening, assistance and help of one another. Hence Countries have
drawn themselves into Associations for security and common defense; Cities and
Towns have procured themselves to be made Corporations, for the better and
more orderly managing of their public affairs; Mysteries of Trades and
Manufactures have distinguished themselves into Companies. And those cunning
Merchants of Rome who put a cheat upon the world under pretense of Religion,
have notably maintained and kept up their Trade by devising so many several
Orders, Fraternities or Brotherhoods, as that they might share among themselves
the gains and profits arising out of blind and seduced people.

In all ages, The usefulness of it.
men have understood the usefulness of these Combinations; which I take to be
the meaning of that observation of the ancient Sages, Vnus bomo nullus homo:
omnes homines u number hominem constable ituunt. Romans 12 5. 1 Cor. 12 12, 13, 14.
That one man is no man, and, That, all men make up but one man. Which agrees
with that of the Apostle, We being many are one body in Christ, and every one
members one of another: And with that which he speaks more expressly in
another place; As the body is one, and has many members, and all the members
of that one body, being many, are one body, so also is Christ: for by one
Spirit we are all baptized into one body, and have been all made to drink into
one Spirit: for the body is not one member, but many. He does not say, All the
members are of one body, but more significantly and fully to our purpose, that
they are one body. And such a body, Believers, not only are by union with
Christ, but also ought to be by communion and fellowship with Christ, The
Antiquity of it.
and with one another. Which fellowship, the primitive Christians did
excellently maintain; Concerning which St Luke gives a clear testimony, That
such who gladly received the word, and being baptized, were added to the
Church, Continued steadfastly in the Apostles doctrine, Acts 2.41.
and in fellowship, and in breaking of bread, and in prayers. For so I read
the words, (not as the Syriac, Ambrose, and the vulgar Latin render them, That
they continued in the Apostles doctrine and in the communion of breaking bread;
but) as the parts are distinct in the Greek Text, (...).
They continued with much patience, resolution and care, and with much fervor
and courage; 1. In the Apostles doctrine; in the profession of that faith which
they had received from the preaching and ministry of the Apostles. (...).
2. And in fellowship, being all begorten by the same word, and kept together
by the power of it, closing with it, and finding the sweetness and use of it
walking by it. 3. And in the breaking of bread, keeping up the constant and
daily use of that ordinance which Christ had made for a memorial of himself
till his coming again. 4. And in prayer, weekly, daily, solemnly, occasionally
meeting together before God with their supplications.

This was the conversation of believers at Jerusalem, they sweetly conversed
together, cheerfully and friendly entertained one another, and walked
fruitfully in all the ordinances of Christ. Neither was the conversation of
other Churches, unlike to theirs, for to instance this point in the believers
of Thessalanica, it seems they preserved so sweet and so holy a correspondency,
that as touching brotherly love, St Paul says, he need not write unto them. 1
These. 4.9.


Oh, that among the Christians of this age there were no need to write of this
thing! but now, when the path which the old believers trod, is so overgrown,
that the track and print of their footsteps is almost worn out; Now, when
scarce a shadow of Communion is left among professors, it is needful to write
of such a subject.

This then is the point, which I would a little pursue, That Believers (as they
have, so they ought to) have followship one with another.

CHAP. II. The main point confirmed. The Relations of Believers. The
Description of Holy fellowship. The Subject of it.
THat Believers ought to have fellowship one with another; The Relations of
Believers. Exodus 26.3, 6. Ephesians. 2.21, 22.
has a full proof thorough the Scripture. Such are the Curtains of the
Tabernacle, that must be coupled together. They are the costly stones of the
Temple, which must hold up one another, as in an arched building fitly framed
together. Gal. 6.10. Ephesians 4.16. (...). Hebr. 2.11.
They are the holy Hicrusalem, a City compact together. Or if we respect closer
expressions; They are all of a family, The Household of faith. They are all of
a body. A body fitly joined together, and compacted by that which every joint
supplieth. They are all of a blood and kindred, Brethren and sisters; for
Christ is not ashamed to call them brethren. It was a part, and is a fruit of
Christ's prayer, I pray for them which shall believe on me thorough the word,
Joh. 17.20, 21, 22.
That they all may be one, as thou Father, art in me, and I in thee; that they
may be one, even as we are one. It was the delight and longing of such as had
the Spirit of Christ. St Paul professes so much to the Romans: Romans 1.11, 2
I long to see you, that I may impart unto you some spiritual gift, to the end
you may be established, and I may be comforted together with you, by the
mutual faith both of you and me. And why else was it, that he so abundantly
endeavored to see the faces of the Thessalonians, 1 These. 2.17, 19.
with so great desire; but that he might joy and rejoice in them, and with
them, as his crown in the fruit of his ministry? In a word, let me name those
arguments, Ephesians. 4.3, 4, 5, 6.
which the Apostle has laid up in one heap: There is one body, and one
spirit, and one hope, one Lord, one faith, one baptism, one God and Father of
all: All having a joint influence upon our endeavor to keep the unity of the
spirit in the bond of peace.

I will not insist farther upon the proof, the point being practical and
undeniable, it will be rather necessary to clear and open what this fellowship
is; and what is requisite unto it.

I speak not here of the fellowship which we have with the Father, 1 John 1.3.
and with his son Jesais Christ; Nor of that communion which is had with the
Spirit of the Father. But of the fellowship which Believers ought to have among
themselves. And of this also, in a general consideration only: not applying it
to the controversy now under debate about the fellowship of Churches; nor
limiting it to that Communion and Relation between Pastors and their
Congregations. But intending to open what that trade of commerce is, which
Christians of all sorts and conditions ought to maintain and drive.

Give me leave therefore, The D^scription of Christian tellowship.
according to the Notion in which I use it, to propound this Description. That
The fellowship of Believers, is a mutual serviceablenesse, and an exchanging
of the gifts and graces, of such as are joined together in heart mind and
affection, holding hands, and walking together in the ordinances of Christ.

I consider in this description, the Subject of this fellowship, and the
exercising of it. The Subject of it.


1. The Subject of it. Such as are of the body of Christ, one with the Father
and with Christ; of the multitude of them that believe, of the household of
faith, or, according to the terms of the description, such as are joined
together in heart, mind and affection, being made one with Christ, are at an
agreement among themselves, being borne of the same immortal seed, nourished
by the same breasts, called by the same word, gladly receiving it, and
continuing steadfastly in it, interessed in the like precious faith, and ruled
and guided by the same Spirit. These are the subject of this fellowship, none
else are truly capable of it: Profane spirited men, no nor hypocrites neither,
though they crowd in sometimes and take up room, cannot, may not be acquainted
with these joys. Such Canaanites are Merchants of this world, they have
nothing to do in the house of the Lord of Hosts. Zach. 14 2^. Isa. 26.2. Isa.
35.8.
These gates are to be open only, to the righteous nation which keeps the
truth, that they may enter in: for this way, is called the way of holiness,
the unclean shall not pass over it. No bastard, no Gibeonite, no stranger, no
blemished one, is capable of entrance into this sacred Temple of believing
fellowship. None but sons and daughters of the Almighty, citizens of the new
Jerusalem, free denizons of the glorious corporation of Believers, are the
right subject; for such only have the spirit of Communion, which unites the
members of the Church, as the Philosophers say, There is a soul of the world
which holds together the parts of it. The same spirit, the same faith, the same
heart mind and affections, are the sinews, muscles and ligaments, which keep
this body from loosening and falling asunder. I commended the Primitive times,
and they had this spirit of communion; the hundred and twenty, that were at
Jerusalem, Acts 1.14.
continued with one accord in prayer and supplication. And I commended St Paul's
longing after such society, and he had the spirit of communion, Who is weak,
says he, 2 Cor. 11.29.
and I am not weak? who is offended, and I burn not? And this mind he would
have to be in all Christians, Romans 12.
Rejoice with them that do rejoice, and weep with them that weep, be of the
same mind one toward another.

CHAP. III. The other part of the Description. The exercising of Christian
fellowship. The mutual exchange of gifts and graces.
MEN being thus qualified for fellowship, The exercise of it.
The exercising of it, is in these three things.

1. A mutual exchange and imparting of gifts and graces.

2. A mutual walking, and holding hands, in the Ordinances of Christ.

3. A mutual serviceablenesse to the bodies and fowls of one another.

1. A mutual exchange of gifts and graces.
In the exercise of holy fellowship, there must be a mutual exchange and
imparting of gifts and graces. God has dispensed variety of gifts unto his
people; all are not qualified alike. There are some eminent graces that make
the countenances of some Saints to shine. Job 1.8.
Job was exemplary for singleness and plainness of heart; Numb. 12.3. 2
King. 22.19.23, 25. Phil. 2.20.
Moses for faithfulness and meekness; Josiah for tenderness and a melting
spirit; and for activity in the cause of Reformation; Timothy for ministerial
diligence, and a natural care of the state of the flock. Athanasius was
prudent and active, Cyprian zealous and vigilant, Basil heavenly and of a fair
sweet spirit, Chrysostom laborious and without affectation, Ambros resolved and
grave, etc. The gift of Christ is grace according to measure. He measures to
such a one, such gifts, to another such, to a third, such and such, as he
pleases. This I take to be the meaning of the Apostle, Ephesians. 4.7.
when he says, Unto every one of us is given grace, according to the measure
of the gift of Christ. God gave the Spirit without measure unto Christ, Joh.
3.34.
considered in his humane nature, when he was sent forth, as himself speaks;
But we have it according to our scantling, 1 Cor. 12.8, 9, 10.
and as he pleases to honor and entrust us. To one is given the word of
wisdom, to another the word of knowledge, to another faith, to another
prophecy, to another the discerning of spirits, to another diverse kinds of
tongues, 1 Cor. 1.7.
etc. Thus, every man has his proper gift of God, one after this manner, and
another after that. One has quickness of parts, but not so solid a judgment,
another is solid, but not ready and presentiall, one has a good wit, another a
good memory, a third good utterance. One is zealous but ungrounded, another
well principled but timorous, one is wary and prudent, another open and plain
hearted, one is trembling and melting, another is cheerful and full of joys.
God is a free giver, and a most wise disposer; that we may be engaged to use
his bounty to each others help. The knowing Christian is to impart unto him
that is weak in gifts, and the other that it may be has fewer notions but
more warmth, and fuller of love to those truths that he knows, 1 Cor. 12.21.
is to impart of his heat to his knowing friend; for the eye, the knowing man,
cannot say to the hand, the active man in Gods cause, I have no need of thee.
The members must have care one of another; the knowing men of the ignorant;
ver. 25.
yea the knowing men are to care for one another, not envying the communicating
of their notions; for some truths may be more cleared and revealed to one, then
to another who is otherwise every way his equal in habitual knowledge. The
Christian that has collected experiences, or found out methods for the
advancement of holiness, must not deny such knowledge to the body. We must
like it well that others may thrive as well as we, God makes no Patentees, nor
will he endure any Monopolies. Christians must drive an open and free trade.
They must teach one another the mystery. He that grows rich in notions or in
graces, must let others know the thriving way. Tell your experiences, and tell
your conflicts, and tell your comforts. Make all that thou have, the bodies,
and all that the body has, thine. Some say the Art of Medicine was thus
perfected; as any one met with an herb and discovered the virtue of it by any
accident, he would post it up in some public place; and if any were sick or
diseased, he was laid in some beaten passage, that every one might communicate
the best receipt; and so the Physicians skill was perfected by a collection of
those posted experiments and receipts. Of all things take heed of the napkin,
wrap not up the talent thorough envy, for then thou art not fit for our great
masters family. 1 Pet. 4.10.
But as every one has received the gift, even so must we minister the same one
to another, as good stewards of the manifold grace of God. We are stewards for
the use of our brethren, and are accountable unto God, how we have laid out our
knowledge, our utterance, our spirit of prayer, our ability of discerning, our
experiences of God, our taste of the promises, our enlargements after prayer,
our improvement by conserence, our comforts after private humiliation, our
strengthening by the Sacraments, or what else might be instanced in, for use of
others. How we got rid of such a lust, how we mastered another temptation, how
we attained to such a facility in this or that duty. There must be this
commerce among them, that are in this heavenly partnership. Ephesians. 4.16.
In this body fitly joined and compacted, every joint must supply, and there
must be an effectual working in the measure of every part to the increase of
the body. According to this rule, ver. 29.
the Apostle speaking in the same chapter of discourse and conserence,
admonishes the Ephesians, not to suffer any corrupt communication to proceed
out of their mouths, but that which is good to the use of edifying, that it
may minister grace unto the hearers. We must lay out our gift of discourse, or
any other gift, profitably with respect unto the welfare of the whole.

CHAP. IV. Another exercise of Christian fellowship. Walking together in the
ordinances of Christ.
AS this fellowship is exercised in the commerce of gifts, so, there must be,

2. Mutual walking in the ordinances of Christ. Mich. 4, 5.
A mutual walking, and holding hands in the ordinances of Christ. There ought
to be a joint assistance for the confirming of one another, in such a
resolution as this to be taken up, All people will walk every one in the name
of this god, and we will walk in the name of the LORD our God, for ever and
ever. For this I presuppose as a thing granted by all such whom the Lord
avoucheth to be his peculiar people, Deuteronomy. 26.17, 18.
that it lies upon them to avouch the Lord to be their God, and to walk in his
ways, and to keep his statutes, and his Commandments, and his judgments, and
to hearken to his voice. This is our covenant with God, who has entered into
covenant with us, which covenant we are unfaithful in, through the neglect of
that help we might have from one another, by mutual watching, remembrancing
and exhortation. I remember what a faithful and experienced Divine, Rich.
Rogers, 7. Treat.
has related of the practice of some private men, but able and godly
professors, who in the sense of their unanswerablenesse to the means, made a
covenant among themselves, of watching over one another for their better
walking together with God. This is no novelpractise, for besides the many
presidents of the Ancients, this was not of yesterday, for it was well near
threescore years since, in the year 1588, if I remember right, for I have not
the Book by me; but the reader may there see, the heads, the rules, and the
form of their agreement.

But to pursue the point in hand, There may be a fellowship; 1. In the hearing
of the word, quickening one another unto it, helping the negligent to apply it,
taking forth the several portions belonging to the different conditions and
necessities of each, praying for one another that it may be useful and
seasonable.

2. In prayer, for and with each other. The Athenians sacrificed for none but
themselves and their neighbors of Chios, but Christians know a greater
latitude of relations; and do also well know the great-benefit of putting
their stock together. See how St Paul speaks, Ephesians. 6.18, 19.
Pray always with all prayer and supplication in the Spirit, and watching
thereunto with all perseverance, and supplication for all Saints and for me.
And it seems he had communicated his condition and present case unto them by
Tychicus, that he was in expectation to come before some great Tribunal in the
cause of the Gospel. In those times it appears they used to transact one
another affairs in the Court of heaven by prayer. But there is one particular
instance that I will not omit; That fallings out, and differences and jarrings,
may be healed by prayer; which it may be is the meaning of that place in James;
Confess your faults one to another, and pray one for another, Jam. 5.16.
that ye may be healed. Let not the heart rankle when it is wounded by an
offense, but meet together, and humbly acknowledge where the fault lies, and
make up the matter before God, as a witness of your mutual sincerenesse, and
only able to search the bottom of the wound and to cure it. I have known some
blessed experiments of this, and can tell when a probatum est, was written upon
it.

3. Ezra 8.23. Esth 4.16.
In fasting, for the afflicting and humbling of the soul. 60 Ezra and his men;
and Esther and her maids maintained communion together. I have known some that
for many years have strictly and duly obferved this course, to the wonderful
improvement of their gifts, and of their acquaintance with God. Such fasting
days, Mar. 9.29.
are soul-feeding days, and soul-curing days. Some diseases, some lusts will
go out no other way.

4. In mutual bemoanings, confessions, and openings of our sores and our
wounds. It may be when the Apostle says, Confess your faults one to another,
Jam. 5.16.
he means more then the acknowledgement of offenses, whereby a man has sinned
against his brother (though that be a necessary and most useful part of this
fellowship; and without which the heart will rankle, and the sin will remain
upon it unpardoned:) but also that Christians should bewail their failings,
infirmities, deadness, unsavourinesse, coldness, narrowness, unfruit
fullness, or what ever the malady be, to one another, to see whether others
have been in the same case, and what course they took, and what remedy they
procured. Many perish through too much modesty and reservednesse.

5. In the Sacraments, joying in one another, beholding their order and
steadfastness of faith in Christ; rejoicing together in the love of God,
feeding at the same table as those that shall meet and sit down with Christ
for ever in his Fathers house; taking occasion to renew the covenant of love
among themselves, and laying down all grudges, rancor, prejudice, uncharitable
surmises, etc. for Christ's sake, and giving the right hand of fellowship
cordially and unfainedly, as those that find themselves to be all retainers to
the same Master, provided for with the same care, purchased by the price of the
same blood.

6. Lastly, (to name no more, though other particulars might be instanced,) In
holy conference. This, this indeed is it that might much improve the meeting of
Christians, to whet upon one another the knowledge of the holy Scriptures, to
obferve among themselves and speak of, the remarkable passages of providence,
the great and holy ways of God, the things that he does gloriously in their
eyes. In the Prophets time, when proud scorners and profane spirited men, talked
vainly, and did even what they list, then they that feared the Lord, Mal. 3.16.
met, and spoke often one to another. No doubt they spoke of God, and his
counsels, of Gods works and ways, of his providence and goodness; of the
baseness of Atheistical thoughts concerning God. What I have apprehended
farther upon this place, I have expressed in my Exercitation upon Malachy. This
exchanging of words and notions, make them thrive and grow rich that use it; of
which I gave a full example, Hypoorite discovered. etc. l. 1 chapter 15.
in my Hypocrite, where I promised this Treatise. Truly the benefit of
conference must needs be great, for thereby Christians do build up one
another, as the Apostle uses the word: 1 These. 5.11. (...). Luke 24.32.
and do heat and inflame one another, as it was in the case of Christ's
conferring with the two Disciples; and do strengthen and encourage one
another, as it seems those brethren did St Paul, Acts 28.15.
who met him at the three Tavernes in his way to Rome. There should be a law of
grace in the lips of friends, when either occasionally or purposely they meet;
to confer wisely, without bitterness, meekely, humbly, always endeavoring
either to do or receive some good.

CHAP. V. A third exercise of Christian fellowship -- Mutual serviceablenesse.
To the souls. To the bodies of the Saints.
3. THE last exercise of this fellowship that I propounded, is, A mutual
serviceablenesse unto one another.

1. Christians are to be serviceable to each others souls, Mutual
serviceablenesse of Christians.
for advancement of spiritual welfare.

1. In watching over one another. Take heed of that profane speech, Am I my
brothers keeper? Enemies, they many times (like Jeremies familiars) do
maliciously watch for our haltings; Jer. 20.10.
but sincere friends may do it very profitably. We had need have either prying
enenties, or faithful friends to make us know our selves.

2. In admonishing and reproving those that fall; meekely and seasonably,
mourning and melting with them. Bolt. Quat. Noviss. p. 163.
This is a great duty but much neglected. Reverend Mr Bolton professed, He was
grieved at his heart that he had done no more in that kind. And indeed it will
be a cause of grief to any that omit this duty, for what sins they rebuke
not (where they may) they commit. Oh count not admonition, an unnecessary
meddling. Through a foolish humor to be esteemed peaceable and quiet, we suffer
many to miscarry and be lost; Lev. 19.17.
and by suffering sin upon our brother, we show that we hate him. The truest
friendship is maintained by the faithfulness of mutual admonitions. He was a
wise man and an experienced Christian that said, He was never acquainted
thoroughly with any one, but first he displeased him by admonishing him of some
failing.

3. In recovering those that are fallen, thorough a spirit of meekness. This
is according to the rule of the great Apostle, Brethren if any man be overtaken
in a fault, Gal. 6.1, 2.
ye which are spiritual, restore such an one in the spirit of meekness,
considering thy self, lest thou also be tempted. Bear ye one another
burdens. This is to be weak with them that are weak, 2 Cor. 11.29. Romans 15.1.
in St Paul's sense; and being strong, to bear the infirmities of the weak,
and not to please our selves; Not to triumph over them that are upon the
ground, and thrown down by a temptation; but to sit by them upon the same flat,
and mourn with them and for them, and to feel some of the weight. An
excellent temper, specially for a Pastor. Ambros of whom a great Commander
under Theodosius was wont to say, That he knew no other man worthy the name of
a Bishop, He had such a pastorall-spirit, he would weep as plentifully as the
sinning party that was to be admonished, or excommunicated, or reconciled. Your
lofty knowers and popular orators, many of them understand not what belongs to
this fellowship in mourning.

4. In instructing the ignorant, dull, and less capeable; being willinger to
keep a slow pace, then to out-goe the young and tender lambs. We shall have
their company in Heaven, that while they were here, never knew criticismes upon
the Texts, nor had quickness enough to discern of Arminian notions, nor could
ever spare leisure to understand and enquire Socinian subtilties. All that they
could reach unto was to know God in Jesus Christ, and to understand the
principles without which they could not have been safe. Oh let us not despise
them here, with whom we shall have eternal company. Be not too high for their
fellowship, if they know and can say any thing of God, or if they would feign
hear of him. Be willing to lay out your gifts and leisure and patience. Strive
with their infirmity and unfitness. St Augustine would speak false latin if
the people understood false latin better then true. Lay the mouth close to the
ear that is deaf. Be content to strike the third, fourth and fifth blow upon
the wedge that enters with difficulty. Neglect not the rere of the Christian
Army.

5. In encouraging weak beginners. Bid them welcome that stand upon the
threshold, that linger in the portch of the Temple of fellowship, and would be
glad to sit down among the Disciples of Christ. Quench not smoking flax,
encourage it rather unto a flame. If you perceive a poor soul to listen after
Christ, and hearken if some word of comfort may be let fall, open your selves
to him, and if he cast a wondering and pleasing-eye, as he is in transitu, let
him into the pleasures and ravishments of the Kings chambers. Take heed of
making any one go back, or grow out of love with the order and government of
Christ's family.

6. In stirring up the spirits and gifts of one another. Heb. 10.24, 25.
Consider one another to provoke unto love and to good works; not forsaking the
assembling of our selves together, but exhorting one another. A mean, an
inferior person, by propounding a question, may lay the first stone, whereupon
a goodly frame of excellent and rich discourse may be reared. Quicken one
another in the ways of godliness. As the iron sharpens iron, and as the
rubbing of the hands makes both warm; and as live-coales make the reft burn;
so let the fruit of our society, be mutual sharpening, warming and enflaming.

7. In raising, chearing, comforting the dejected, Job 4.3, 4.
dismayed and sad spirit. Strengthen the weak hands, and the feeble knees. How
did the Martyrs in their prisons, set one another at liberty from the bondage
of fears? How did holy Bradfords sweet and cheerful company, make the very
dungeons lightsome and pallace-like to his fellow prisoners, as themselves
professed. An unbelieving heart oppressed many times with foolish cares and
fears, feels the load quite taken of, sometimes by a word duly spoken, or a
promise applied in the season of it. Luther and Melancthon it seems maintaind a
brotherly communion, and Melancthon was much the better, even for a few poor
lines of consolation, from his dear and holy friend, when his heart was full
of thoughts, what would be the issue of all that rage of Charles the fifth, and
the German Princes against the Gospel. These are some instances of that
service which Christians owe to each others soul.

2. In this fellowship, there must also be a serviceablenesse unto the bodies
of the faithful, and to their outward necessities. The primitive Christians
excelled in this care, for in regard of the extraordinary condition of those
times, when they were in continual expectation to be removed from Jerusalem,
they that dwelt there or thereabouts did by a voluntary act put their estates
together into a common stock; that all, even the poor that in those hard and
uncertain times gave their names to Christianity, might be tended and looked
upon with equal care and respect. I know some have stretched this too far; to
make it a leading case and a binding example. There were Heretics anciently,
that urged it, they were those that called themselves Apostolicalls, and they
held, That sin brought in propriety of estates and goods, and that grace
brings in community. An unsafe opinion, and unwarrantable as being against the
Scriptures. Yet some of the Ancients that were of the best name, have spoken
too liberally that way, in praise of community. Yea even Chrysostom so
expresses himself, as if meum and tuum were removed by the Gospel. But
generally Christians knew their liberty, for unless it were the Church at
Syracuse mentioned by Hilarie, I know not any Church of the Ancients that
entertained or taught that community. But thus far it holds, that if the
necessities of the faithful call for it, even all that we have must be
serviceable. And for this, to set aside that extraordinary president, we have
the ordinary and usual practices of the Churches, to be our patterns. It is
truly an acceptable service unto God, and a glorious ministry, to tend the
Lords poor and sick. The great Apostle, even he takes upon him the fellowship
of the ministering to the Saints, 2 Cor. 8.4, 5, 6, etc.
as himself speaks, writing to the Corinthians, a rich people, whom he
notably plyeth with effectual and strong arguments to that purpose; as he did
also the Romans, Romans 15.25.
to whom he also mentioned his employment that he had undertaken, upon the
desire of the Christians in Achaia. I cannot but honor the name and memory of
the learned Paul Fagius; a man much like St Paul in this (...), who at Isna
where he was Pastor before he came into England in K. Edwards days, took
exceeding much care, that the poor and diseased might be plentifully provided
for, as Crucius has related of him.

CHAP. VI. The Requisites unto this Christian fellowship. First a renouncing of
all sinful and wicked fellowship.
HAving opened what the fellowship is, the next thing I propounded, is to
consider what is requisite unto it. I will only speak to two heads.

1. A renouncing of all fellowship which is destructive of this.

2. The graces that are necessary for the entering into, and maintaining of it.

1. There must be a renouncing and disclaiming of all wicked society, Wicked
society to be renounced. 2 Cor. 6.14, 15, 16.
which is destructive to that holy fellowship which has been set up; for what
fellowship has righteousness with unrighteousness? and what communion has
light with darkness? And what concord has Christ with Belial? or what part
has he that believes with an Infidel? And what agreement has the Temple of
God with Idols? We may not consent with the thief, Psalm. 50.18. Pro. 1.14, 15.
Pro. 23.20.
nor be partakers with adulterers: nor cast in our lot with sinners, to walk
with them in their way: We may not be among winebibbers, among riotous eaters
of flesh: Nor have fellowship with any unfruitful works of darkness, but
rather reprove them. Ephesians. 5.11.
We cannot be rid of their company; for then we must go out of the world, but
we may not make them our consorts. God covenanted with the Jews that they
should make no league with the Canaanites. Exo. 34.27. ver. 12.
After the tenor of these words (says the Lord) I have made a covenant with
thee and with Israel. Take heed to thy self lest thou make a covenant with the
inhabitants of the land, lest it be a snare in the midst of thee. There is the
ground of it, because a people are corrupted and perverted by evil company.
Such pitch will defile our g^^ments. Such Delilahs will bind and betray us, and
blind and undo us. Psalm. 16.3.
The Saints that are in the earth, they are the excellent ones, in whom we may
delight, among whom we may be safe. But who ever came sasely off from a company
of thieves, and without loss from among cheaters and juglers? Who can escape
infection that haunt such houses as are pestilentially diseased? The Physicians
themselves when they visit such persons are feign to use some pills, and take
antidotes preservative. It Is a great presumption that some men have, who
without choice will venture themselves upon all acquaintance and friends. I
remember what Plutarch says of Antithenes, That he wondered men observed their
dishes whether they had any flaw, and yet had no regard in the choice of
friends. Nothing more dangerous then to converse ordinarily and frequently with
such as are enemies to God, and strangers to his ways. The Israelites were
mingled among the heathen, Psalm. 106.35, 36.
and learned their works, and they served their Idols which were a snare unto
them. We may observe therefore that when St Peter gathers a people by the
Gospel, he admonishes them vehemently, to come off from their old interesses,
and to secure themselves at a safe distance from ungodly and perverse men. Acts
2.40.
With many other words, (says the text,) did he testify and exhort, saying,
Save your selves from this untoward generation. It appears, it was of no small
concernment, because he interposed Gods authority, and charged them in Gods
name, as Beza observes upon the word, (...).
that they would save, or guard themselves from ill company. St John was upon
this guard, as it is in the Ecclesiastical history, when he took an alarm as
it were, when he had notice that Cerinthus a wicked and corrupt man was in the
same bath: He thought he could not stay without danger under the same roof,
and therefore cried out, properemus hinc, let us be gonc, let us be gone. That
grace and powerful word, which melts the heart, and fits it for union with the
body of believers, does separate it from that which is heterogeneous and
disagreeing. Melted gold will unite it self with the substance of gold, and
not incorporate with dross. He that waits for an entrance into Heaven, and
dwells here in the portch of it, Psalm. 15.1, 4.
Gods holy hill, In his eyes (as David tells us,) a vile person is contemned.
He will not deny him courtesies and civil behavior, he will eat and drink,
and buy and sell, and show kindness, and pity, and pray for him, and help and
relieve him, and will carry himself with all wisdom toward him though he be
without: but as for holy communion he will say, Acts 8.21.
as Peter said to Simon Magus, Thou have neither part nor fellowship in this
body: and as Nehemiah said to Sanballat, Tobiah and Geshem, Neh. 2.20.
You have no portion, nor right, nor memorial in Jerusalem. For this is
according to the rule of the Scripture, 2 Timothy 3.3, 4, 5.
Such as are despisers of those that are good, traitors, heady, high-minded,
lovers of pleasures more then lovers of God, having a form of godliness, but
denying the power thereof; from such turn away. And it will be justified
before God to do so, for what have we to do with them, that have nothing to
do with God? We have a president to plead, in the Prophet, O Lord, we are
thine, Isa. 63.19.
thou never barest rule over these, they are not called by thy name. Let Israel
take heed, he do not marry with Ashdod. The late times of prelaticall tyranny,
were so jealous of Christian fellowship, and suspicious of conventicling, and
made such matches of protestancie with the daughters of Rome and Ashdod,
superstition and profanation, that we the children of those matches, spoke half
in the speech of protestancie, and half in the speech of Rome and Ashdod, and
could not speak in the Jews language, but according to the language of each
people, or as the Hebrew has it, of a people and a people. Neh. 13.24.
If ye will marry into this honorable family, the glory of whose line and
descent I have described, ye must first give a bill of divorce to these wives.
Rebekah must leave her fathers and her brothers house, to go to be joined with
Isaac. Psa. 45.10, 11.
And when Christ takes a Spouse, he says to her, Hearken O daughter, and
consider, and incline thine ear, forget also thine own people and thy fathers
house; so shall the King greatly desire thy beauty, for he is thy Lord and
worship thou him.

Let no man misinterpret, as if I laid grounds of separation from our Church,
my thoughts have not the least acquaintance with such a conceit. He must be
sure his grounds are such as will bear a sufficient plea when he comes to
answer the matter before Christ, that dares presume to condemn and forsake a
Church where the bread of life, the word of the Gospel is preached sincerely.
I only intend an alienation and estrangement from wicked men, in their unclean
and infectious conversation; for thus, If men walk contrary to God, We, (as
the Oracle in Plutarch testified of Phocion the Just,) must walk contrary to
all men. You must leave the worlds way, if you will come into Gods.

CHAP. VII. Other Requisites unto Christian fellowship. The graces necessary
for entering into, and maintaining of it. Humility. Ingenuitie. Self-denial.
2. THE graces that are necessary for entering into this holy fellowship, Graces
necessary for Christian fellowship. Humility.
and for the maintaining of it, are diverse, I will name and insist upon some of
them.

1. Humility. I will begin low, at the bottom-step. In my Heraldry, this
lovely grace deserves the pre-eminence to lead on the rest. Proud Nimrod, the
man who first disliked it to see men in a level, would be alone, looked upon
at a distance from the rest. He it was that first began to be a Lion and a
Tiger, but the humble sheep are they that love to be together in a flock.
Humble men have all the fitnesses for society, They contend not, they censure
nor, they quarrel not, they do not disdain: They can meet with unequal
respects, of age, sex, state and parts. Some will reverence the wisdom that
lodges under silver hayros, but despise the youth even of a Timothy. Some will
entertain discourse with men, the most vive resemblances of the Divine
Sovereignty, but neglect that other sex, as if they were not heirs together of
the same grace of life. Some will salute religion and take acquaintance of her
when they meet her in good company with such as wear good clothes, and are of
good place and respect, but will forget they ever saw her, when they see her
entertained by poor tradesmen, and russet countrymen. Some will glory in their
acquaintance with the men that are talked off, that are rich in parts and
eminency, but think no good can be got from those that are without a crowd and
a name. But the humble can correspond with all these inequalities. They can
endure to hear what young Elihu can say in the controversy. They can discern
even in women too what is to be honored, if not always so profound a
judgment, yet many times more holy and more sweet affections. Jam. 2.1, 3, 5.
They have not the faith of our Lord Jesus, with respect of persons, but say
even to the poor man in vile raiment, sit thou here in a good place, if he be
of the poor whom God has chosen, rich in grace, and heirs of the kingdom.
They can prefer grace before parts, and delight in the sweet sent of creeping
violets, and stammer and lispe with the rude in speech, so as to understand one
another meaning well enough. This humility fits men, to make use and improve
all other men's gifts; for in honor they prefer one another, Romans 12.10.
and so come to be kindly affectioned one to another with brotherly love, as
the Apostle observes. The proud get little in communion. We give not relief to
such as wear good clothes, and brag what provision they have at home: and who
is it that will offer advice to such as glory in their parts and abilities. But
the humble have all the advantages that proud men lose. The proud are seldom
learners, or if at any time they condescend, it is only to sit at the feet of
some Gamaliel: If they write, it must be only after the copies written by him
that won the golden pen, they propose none to imitate, but such as are the
excelling men. But the humble can spy out graces of all sorts, in all sorts
and ranks of people; Sweet affability, courtesy and gentleness in men of
great quality and Ladies of high birth; Silent contentedness, honest
diligence, and the daily exercise of patience and faith, in many Christians of
an obscure rank, that are forced to struggle with necessity and poverty to get
bread. Blushing modesty, and ignorance of the shining of their own faces, from
many godly that are solidly learned: and warmenesse, and activity and
cheerfulness in Gods worship, from many godly, that have no learning, little
understanding, that cannot it may be maintain Christ's Godhead by arguments
against a witty Socinian, but they are sure their hearts love him in sincerity.
Several sorts of men have several lustres, The humble learn of all, write
after every copy, and so receive much benefit in communion even from all.

2. There is a grace that does much resemble humility, Acknowledgement of
others gifts.
at a blush one would take it to be the same, for they are sisters, and that is
the acknowledgement and the prizing of others gifts. It Is envy and sullenness
of spirit, that either denies or debaseth the worth that is in others. They
were sick (as it seems) of this disease, who met Peter at Jerusalem, and
censured him for joining himself to Cornelius his family, Acts. 11.17.
but Peter pleades his excuse, Forasmuch as God gave them the like gifts as he
did unto us, what was I that I could withstand God; that I should do
otherwise. And at another time St Peter, (together with James and John) gave a
notable testimony of their sincerity, that whereas the people glorified God in
Paul, Gal. 1.24.
who of a persecutor was now become a preacher of the faith, these men not
being jealous of an eclipse, perceiving the grace that was given unto him,
Gal. 2.9.
gave him the right hand of fellowship. Oh what a sweet agreement might there
be among the Ministers of the word, and what progress might they make in their
joint service for the gaining of souls; if they would learn to acknowledge
and rejoice in the grace of God in one another: some excelling in a dexterity
in opening of Scriptures; some in profoundnesse and solidnesse of judgment for
the right stating of controversies; some in readiness of speech for the
working upon the affections. Oh let not brethren either in the ministry or in
other relations, envy and grudge at one another. Esau hated Jacob because he
had obtained a better blessing; Saul maligned David because he had gained more
respect. But Esau and Saul, were in Simon Magus his condition, Men that had no
part nor lot in this fellowship. But oh the candidnesse and ingenuity that
beautified the soul of young Apollos, Acts 18.24, 25, 26.
who though he were an cloquent man and mighty in the Scriptures, yet so far
acknowledged and honored the graces of God and the gifts that were in Aquila
and Priscilla, a plain couple, an handicrafts-man and his wife, that he was
content to learn of them. A famous pulpitman, yet learnes divinity from two
aprons. I wonder how the Mountagues, and Wrens, and Cousins, and the rest of
that lofty generation, who would have frighted and rayled all Scripture
knowledge, and conference, out of private families, could ever read that text
and history without glowing and indignation, without startling and conviction.
But those fellows, have names not worth a mention, in a treatise of holy
fellowship.

3. Self denial.
Self-denial is the third of these graces. I set those graces together, that
have the same lines of proportion in their countenances. Such as seek their
own esteem, their own profit, their own ends, these are Patentees, unfit for
the Commonwealth of christianity or godliness. But what is the rule of the
Scripture? we have it in the words of St Paul. Phil. 2.4, 5.
Let nothing be done through strife or vainglory, but in lowliness of mind,
let each esteem other better then themselves; Look not every man on his own
things, but every man also on the things of others. 1 Cor. 10.33.
And St Paul himself followed the same rule, he did please all men in all
things, not seeking his own profit, but the profit of many.

CHAP. VIII. Other graces requisite unto this fellowship. Love. Affability.
Sobriety. Innocence. Holy emulation. Wisdom.
4. LOve shall bring up the rest of the graces. Love.
A grace of such use and influence, that without it there can be no fellowship.
This is it that joins hands, and hearts, whereby souls are knit together; as
it was said of David and Jonathan, 1 Samuel 18.1.
that the soul of Jonathan was knit with the soul of David, and Jonathan loved
him as his own soul. This ties a perfect knot, for so the Apostle speaks, Put
on bowels of mercies, kindness, humbleness of mind, Col 3.12, 14.
meekness, long-suffering, and above all these things put on charity, which is
the bond of perfectness, that is, the most perfect bond. All combinations of
men are tied of a sliding knot, a little artifice or a little stresse will
sever them, nay they will undo of themselves, if their proper interesses may
be better obtained by being loose, as we have seen in the case of leagues and
politic corresponcies among Princes: only they are firm, whom unfaigned love
makes so. Partiality, inconstancy, injudiciousnesse, weak suspicion,
straightness of spirit, squint-eyed-respects, pride, censoriousnesse,
dissimulation, all which are destructive of society, are all cured and remedied
by love. Love disposes and fitteth men to all spiritual offices: To pray
together, 1 Timothy 2.8.
I will that men pray every where (says the Apostle) lifting up holy hands
without wrath. To hear the word; Jam. 1.19. Mat. 5.24.
St James implies it, that such are swift to hear who are slow to wrath. To
communicate in holy worship; First (says Christ) be reconciled to thy brother,
and then come and offer thy gift. No dwarf might be present at the sacrifice
of Hercules. So none that want love are admittable into the Temple of
Fellowship.

5. Amability.
Sweet amiablenesse, facility or condescension, which grace though we cannot
agree about her name, is a sister of love. Rugged stones, unhewen and
unsquared, cannot fitly join and lie together in a building. Sour, harsh,
sullen spirits are not for society. Nabal, who is such a son of Belial, that
no man can speak to him, he may not, is not fit to be entertained. I know
there are some good men, of a tetricall and stoicall disposition, whose
harshnesse and rigid gravity, makes a poor Christian startle back, though he
came with a resolution to consult and learn something of them. But these good
men, live it may be to themselves, but not with so much comfort, as they might
have in being publicly beneficial. But there is an alluring facility in some
Christians, that does call in the modest and blushing that otherwise would step
back, and it may be perish in the concealing of some spiritual malady. Mat.
11.28. Mat. 9.10.
Our Lord Jesus did not only invite the weary and heavy laden, but admitted
into his company, the Publicans that were invited by Levi to be his
fellow-guests. I intend not this for a patronage for those
good-fellow-ministers and others (as they call them) who pervert this and such
like examples, to color and cover their tiplings and bowsings with all sorts
of companions, under a pretense of insinuating into them to do them good; but
to propose a fair and excellent copy of debonaire and sweet behavior, for
gaining of souls into the liking and relishing of the good ways of God.

6. There is another grace, Sobriety of spirit.
which keeps constantly in the company of the two former, and that is,
sobriety of spirit in the suspending of all rashness of censure, and a patient
bearing with some errors and offenses, Col. 3.13. (...). It is Nonnus his
words; Querul^, a busy find-fault.
which unavoideably will sometimes fall out. The Apostle had respect unto this,
when he admonished the Colossians who were in Christian Communion, to forbear
one another, forgiving one another, if any man have a quarrel against any, or
a matter of complaint, as the word signifies. Alas how querulous are some men,
how loud and shrill and thunderstormie in their complaints. Men that are too
tender and apprehensive of injuries, are weak, and of weak stomachs that can
digest nothing: and they are proud and big. Proud men that are aptest to give
affronts, will receive none. But heavenly souls, resolve to do good, and
suffer evil. This is indeed, a ray of divinity, as Cyprian calls it in a book
that he wrote of Patience; and a profound wisdom, as Ambros commends it,
speaking of David's carriage toward Shimei. Cosroes the Persian King, caused a
throne to be made like heaven, with the sun and moon and stars
artificially placed above it; and under his feet, thick and black clouds,
raging temposts and boystrous winds. He that enjoyes God, and lives in a sweet
and even temper, dwells in such a palace, and has all the noyses, and
clamours, and tumults, and complaints, that the world vexes it self with, under
his feet.

7. I have ranked together those graces that have a resemblance to each other;
Three and three. I will only add another three. Innocence.
The seventh is, Innocence, harmelesnesse and inoffensivenesse of
conversation. Friendship and amity is best maintained, where there is a mutual
and common study of, and walking by the same rule. Oh that Christians would
learn to walk by Scripturerule, and all labor to be thoroughly acquainted
with it. Not as it is in humane affairs, where it may be not above one man in
a great town, in a whole town, buys the large book of the Statutes and
consults it, and acquaints himself with it, and alone knows what Nusances
are, and what are trespasses and what will bear an action, but let all study
the same rule, and search out the mind of God, for the ordering of conversation
aright. Oh let us not consult with our own Oracle, with felse; for then we
shall be uneven, and prefer our own respects, and presently fall asunder if any
thing cross them. Among other things, I would here especially commend unto
Christians, the government and taming of the tongue, an unruly member, and
oftentimes occasion of much mischief and discord. Eyes, flatteries,
whisperings, scoffs, calumnies and invented slanders, do destroy all society.
This fire, sets on fire the course of nature: Jam. 3.6.
as St James observes. Unless this unruly evil, full of deadly poison, be
tamed, All religion is in vain, and so consequently all religious fellowship;
for so says the same Apostle, Jam. 1.26.
If any man among you seem to be religious, and brideleth not his tongue, this
man's religion is in vain.

8. Desire of the best gifts. (...), Hesiod.
The next is an holy coveting of excellent gifts. Emulation ordinarily
ingenders strife, and so overthrowes fellowship. But there is again, a good
contention, an holy ambition, a spiritual emulation, a zealousuesse after more
perfection of gifts and graces. Affect, emulate, be zealous after, or as our
Translation renders it, 1 Cor. 12.31. (...).
Covet earnestly the best gifts. One that desires growth and improvement, will
need no invitation to frequent such company by which he may be bettered. Strike
me, so that you teach me, said the Cynick to his master, he would not leave him
though the staff were threatened. So they that know the benefit of communion,
will not leave, though happily they meet with some incoveniencies for it, if not
in it.

9. Wisdom.
The last that I commend, is, wisdom, both to discern where the rich treasure
lies, and to be able to draw it forth. There lies a great deal of wealth in
some obscure and neglected Christians. They do not more ordinarily tread upon
and walk over the unknown veins of gold in America, then many supercilious
and conceited-professors do pass by and neglect golden and very precious
spirits. One would not think, what dexterity in the Scriptures, what judgment
in controversies, what ability to settle and comfort a disturbed conscience,
what fervency and expressions in prayer, what acquaintance with God and his
providence, what strength of faith, what patience, meekness, moderation,
contentedness, heavenly mindedness, and what not, may be now and then found
out and discovered, in plain people, men and women that wear plain clothes,
that have plain carriage and plain speech. And besides, there may happily be
more, where grace is expected, then we look for: more in a Saint, then a bare
sentence or action will or can express. The golden vein is broader and
thicker then sometimes we guess it to be. Here then is the necessary use of
Wisdom, to be able to see further then the russet. Not to be cousened with
reverend beardes, and grave furs, and demure countenances, (like the
Councillors to the Muscovian that I spoke of in my Hypocrite,) as if graces
and gifts dwelt only at those signs. And when we find a vein, there must be
skill to dig it. Oh how did the old Patriarks remove their habitations for the
benefit of water-springs; how did they rejoice when they found a well? And we,
when we have met with these wells of living water, how shall we fetch it up?
Counsel in the heart of a man, is like deep water, Prove. 20.5.
Solomon, and a man of understanding will draw it out. Is he of great dexterity
in the Scriptures, acquainted with the secrets and depths of the text; propound
some place you have met with in your ordinary course of reading the Scriptures,
where you were fain to make a stand, and could get no further. Is he one that
is studied in controversies, desire him to untie a knot, where you have a great
while been looking for an end. Is he acquainted with cases of desertion, and
soul clouds, learn of him what experiments he has collected, and which is the
way out of the mist. Is he able in council, desire him to advise you, and set
you methods and rules. Is he powerful in prayer, get him to commend your
suites with you unto God. All men would be dealt with in the proper way wherein
they are versed, and wherein they excel.

CHAP. IX. An exhortation to the entering into this fellowship. Some motives.
Christians strengthened against tentations. God better served. The mutual
benefit of it.
HAving thus set up the structure, it now only remains, An Invitation into
Christian fellowship.
that I open the portal of this Temple of Divine fellowship, and invite the
passers-by to come in. Here is place for such as are already in a
marriage-fellowship, if they be heirs together of the grace of life. 1 Pet. 3
7.
Let them consider they are in a state that shadoweth out the mystical and
heavenly communion betwixt Christ and his Church. Ephesians. 5.
Let them worship God together, help one another forward toward Heaven, pray
together, be acquainted with one another bosoms and spiritual estates,
submit to each others advice, yet let Manoah not disdain the words of his wife
if she have made a better observation of God in his proceedings and the course
of his providence. Jud. 13.23.
But chiefly let not Job omit to reprove his wife, Job 2.
if she speak like one of the foolish women. Here widows may recover and make
up abundantly all the comfort and much more then they lost in their husbands,
caring for the things of the Lord, being holy both in body and in spirit. Here
brothers, and sisters, and kindred, may find themselves by the same name in an
other and better relation. 1 Cor. 7.12. Phile. v. 16.
Here servants also are in some sense made the Lords freemen, being not as
servants, but above servants, as brethren beloved, as St Paul would have
Philemon to account Onesimus who was converted to the faith. I cannot but
mention it unto the honor of that famous man, Mr Bruen of Stapleford, who, to
use the phrase of Scripture, had a Church in his house, what respect he gave
even to his servants that feared God, counting and calling them brethren,
praying often with them, and they also with him. Here also, friends,
acquainrance, neighbors, partners, fellow-collegiates, brothers of companies,
and in a word, all that in any respect do relate unto one another, may have
place, and an occasion of a more close and holy correspondency.

But what shall I say, how shall I invite men into this society. If there were
no other motives, the very condition of the present times, might be one. How
do the times rage against all that are godly. Lions, and wolves, and Tigers,
and Foxes, do affociate themselves, and are assembled into bodies, into
Armies. Papists, Prelaticall spirits, Atheists, profane scoffers, rusting
Cavaliers, bloody Inish, are in bands together, and in an agreement to root
out, if not the name of protestancie, yet the power of godliness. Let even
this make them that fear the Lord, meet, keep, pray, and humble themselves
together. But we have also other motives.

1. Tentations best resisted by fellowship.
We have other enemies besides evil men, namely spiritual wickednesses, whose
temptations we shall be the better enabled to resist, when our forces are
united. In respect of this order, the Church is said to be, Cant. 6.10.
Terrible as an Army with banners. Straglers, and those that go alone, are
often snatched up, They were scattered, says the Prophet, Eze. 34.6.
and they became meat to all the beasts of the field, when they were
scattered. How easy is it, to pervert one to Popery, Familisme, or any other
dangerous error, who neglects the benefit of others help. But the knowing head,
and the honest heart, may agree in this way to succor one another when tempted
and assailed. 2 Samuel 10.11.
As Joab said to Abishai. If the Syrians be too strong for me, then thou shall
help me; but if the children of Ammon be too strong for thee then I will come
and help thee. So if pride be too strong, for the knowing head, let the plain
heart admonish him; and if the cunning seducer be too strong for the honest
heart, let the knowing head clearly inform him. So shall there be a
sufficient defense against the temptations both of lusts and errors.

2. Hereby, and in this way God shall be the better served: God better served
in fellowship. Zeph. 3.9. Jer. 32.39.
when a people of a pure language, do all call upon the name of the Lord, to
serve him with one consent; or, with one shoulder. Therefore God has
covenanted, to give his people one heart, and one way, that they may fear him.
And as if God could not be glorified, where there is not an agreement among
them that worship, he thus prays for the Romans, The God of patience and
consolation, Romans 15.5, 6.
grant you to be like minded toward one another, that ye may with one mind,
and one mouth glorify God, the father of our Lord Jesus Christ.

3. The Saints are hereby mutually benefited. Saints much benefited in
fellowship. Pro. 27.17.
Iron sharpeneth iron: so a man sharpeneth the countenance of his friend: It
may be Solomon meant it, of angry, words and passionate speeches; but we may
apply the phrases and language of the Aphorism, to a mutual whetting of
parts, stirring up of gifts, and enkindling of graces. For in society, all do
enjoy the good of all, the foot has the eyes light, and the eye has the
service of the foot to walk. Two are better then one, because they have a good
reward, Eccl. 4.9, 10, 11, 12.
(that is good fruit) of their labor, for if they fall, the one will lift up
his fellow. Such as are spiritual will restore them that are fallen, in the
spirit of meekness. But woe to him that is alone when he falls, either into
temptation, or after it into a desertion, for he has not another to help him
up. Again, if two lie together, then they have heat. Did not Christ warm
those in whose company he went toward Emaus? But how can one be warm alone?
We grow cold and dull under the best helps. But how did Joash go back from
all his shows and forwardness, when Jehojada was dead? We have yet one other
instance in that place of Solomon. If one prevail against him, (says he) two
shall with stand him, and a three fold cord is not quickly broken. A
proverbiall speech, usually applied in the commendation of society. Moses,
Aaron and Hur made up together such a threefold cord, Ex. 17.1^.
which was not easily broken thorough faintness and weariness in prayer. The
story is this, when Israel fought against Amalek, while Joshua with the Army
were below in the battle, Moses, Aaron and Hur went to the top of the hill,
where Moses was to hold up the rod of God as a signal, and to pray. At length
when through continuance all day, Moses fainted, Aaron and Hur helped to
sustain him and hold up his hands, not only to hold forth the rod, but in all
probability joining with him in prayer, assisting his fervency, and as it is
likely now and then suggesting matter of prayer and arguments. So that with
their help, he continued all the day, till the going down of the Sun, holding
up the rod in the sight of the Army, and lifting up his hands in prayer, till
Amalck was quite discomfited. And into such a threefold cord, Daniel also
twisted himself in prayer: for when by the commandment of Nebuchadnezzar, all
the wisemen or Chaldeans about the Court were to be put to death, because they
could not tell to the King his dream and the meaning of it. Daniel being
educated in one of their colleges, fearing lest he should suffer under the
same cruel sentence, undertook the matter, to reveal unto the King his
dream; but he undertook it not in his own strength, but trusting in God, and
being to obtain that secret from Heaven, he wisely makes use of his three
friends to improve their strength with him and their acquaintance with God.
Dan. 1.17, 18.
The text is express; Then Daniel went to his house, and made the thing (that
is, the business that he had undertaken) known to Hananiah, Mishael and
Azzariah, his companions, that they would desire mercies of the God of Heaven
concerning this secret. Daniel himself sought those mercies from before God,
but behold he calls in others also to assist, with whom no doubt he had been
wont at other times to meet in prayer. And now, whether he together with them,
or he apart, and they apart, we are uncertain, but their peritions met at the
same threshold before God, and were neturned with success. It were easy here
to multiply instances and bistories of great things done and obtained by people
joining together in prayer and humiliation; there is scarce any man that has
been acquainted with this course, but has somewhat or other upon the file, and
upon record in his own memory and thoughts. And how many examples also might be
remembered, of brave courage, magnanimity and resolution, that Christians have
fiered one another breasts withal. Many times the very society of a prison,
and of lying together in the stocks and in chains, has rendered some fainting
and otherwise drooping spirit, thorough the blessing of God, invincible. The
Acts and Monuments collected by Mr Fox, is full of proofs of this. It was so
at the first in that society which the Apostles had with with our Lord and
Master and theirs. It Is said, when the rulers saw the boldness of Peter and
John, and perceived that they were unlearned and ignorant men, they mervailed;
(as well they might, for poor fishermen, unacquainted with Courts and
Tribunals, to plead the cause of Christ with so much bravenesse and spirit, but
it follows in the same text, which indeed takes away all the wonder, that)
they took knowledge of them, that they had been with Jesus. Acts 4.13.
And lastly how does society sometimes alter the very temper and frame of whole
conversation. Saul had a new spirit put upon him, when he was appointed by God
to be King. For though I understand that place in, 1 Samuel 18.10. where it is
said, He prophesied in the midst of the house, that he was in a frantic fit,
and behaved himself madly and furiously, like one in a rapture. And though I
know not what to say, to what we read, 1 Samuel 19.20, 21, 22, 23. that Saul's
Messengers and himself prophesied, when they came into the company of the
Prophets; unless they were rapt, and miraculously stricken with astonishment
and admiration, so that whereas they came with a purpose to apprehend David,
they could not do it, and as for Saul, he was forced to lay off his military
habit and Arms, and therefore said to lie down naked. Yet, 1 Samuel 10.6. seems
otherwise to be understood, that God meant to fit Saul for the government, by
tempering and forming his spirit in the company of the Prophets: for so Samuel
said unto him, Thou shall meet a company of Prophets, and the Spirit of the
Lord will come upon thee, and thou shall prophecy with them, and shall be
turned into another man. Behold the wonderful effect and power of society.

CHAP. X. The Exhortation further urged. A fourth Motive, The comeliness of
this fellowship. The conclusion.
4. I Have reserved one other motive, Christian fellowship is comely.
wherewith to shut up this Exhortation, and that is, the pleasantness and
comeliness of this fellowship. Psa. 133 1, etc.
They are the words of the Psalmist. How good and how pleasant is it for
brethren to dwell together in unity. How good it is, has appeared by the
former motives, and it is so pleasant, that he invites men's eyes unto it, Behold
how pleasant is it. It is like the precious ointment upon the head, that ran
down upon the beard, even Aarons beard, that went down to the skirts of his
garment. That ointment was precious and fragrant and yielded, a most pleasant
sent. The balsame of Hiericho which was the chiefest ingredient of that
ointment, is counted to be the richest in the world. Nothing more delicate and
sweet then the communion of Saints. It is that, that becomes the Gospel, as
the Apostle speaks to the Philippians, Phil. 1.27.
Only let your conversation be as becomes the Gospel of Christ, that whether
I come and see you, or else be absent. I may hear of your affairs, that ye
stand fast in one spirit, with one mind, striving together for the faith of the
Gospel. The Queen of Sheba when she beheld the order of Salomons family; she
was so taken with delight and admiration, that there was no spirit left in her,
1 King. 10.8.
but cried out, happy are thy men, happy are these thy servants, which stand
continually before thee. But behold a more beautiful order is here. What a
comely thing is it for Christians so to converse, as that they enrich each
other, and maintain such a watch, that no discord can arise, but if any
difference be occasioned and begin but to appear between any, it is presently
observed, and gravely, prudently, seasonably quashed and laid. It seems it
was the care of Jacob in his great family, and it was the glory of it, which
even hi^ heathen neighbors took notice of, and commended, That they lived
peaceably. The comeliness of this sweet agreement will the better appear if
it be set off with a foil: If we cast our eye upon the unhandsome yea ugly
face of discord, notably described by that great Italian, to be clothed with a
garment of sundry colors, made up of patches, and yet those also rent, cut and
torn, her lap full of Writs, Citations, Processes, Arrests, attended only with
Scriveners, Clerks, Lawyers and Atturneyes, and followed with loud clamours,
bawlings and confiesed shouts. And even thus the Apostle describes the
condition and conversation of carnal and unregenerate men, Tit. 3.3.
that they live in malice and envy, hateful and ha^ing one another. A course
of life so unbeseeming the profession of Christianity, that the Apostle not
only says it would be to the shame of the Church at Corinth, 1 Cor. 6.1, 5.
if their differences were not taken up by brethren, but demandes of them how
they dared to do otherwise.

I have writ these things to be pined upon the front of the entrance or porch
of this Temple, The Application.
that as Themistocles when he had an house to let, caused the crier to
proclaim that it had good neighbors; so I may invite men to come in, assuring
them of pleasant accommodations and good company: Which if any heed may be
given to the resolution of one of the Rabbinicall Schools, is the best
advantage we can meet with in our present journey. The story is in Pirke Aboth,
that when the scholars of Rabbi Johannas disputed and contended which is the
most disireable thing in this life, the sentence of Rabbi Jose was preferred and
most commended, who said, The best way is a good neighbor. Hence the
Naturalists do observe, that the Pismires which are reckoned among the most
sagacious creatures, and the Bees which are among the most useful, and the
Elephants among the most potent, are for communion, and do gather and keep
together. And the excellency of other creatures is in their communication of
themselves, the Sun raying out his warm and cherishing beams, the Fountain
bubling out his purling streams, the Earth yiedling forth sovereign herbs and
plants: And Christians are then in their excellency when they are communicative
and useful; nay they increase by communicating, and gain by giving away and
imparting of their gifts. There is a story in Peter Martyrs History of the West
Indies, of some Mountains of Salt in Cumana which never diminished though
carried away in abundance by the Merchants, but when a Monopoly was made of it,
being exposed to sale, and men being prohibited otherwise from taking of it
away, then it decreased, till afterward that all were again allowed to take of
it, it had a new access and increase. I know not whether this relation of his
be true, but sure I am, I am right in my application, He that envies unto
others the use of his gifts, decays them, but he thrives most, that is most
diffusive.

FINIS.

