THE TRIAL OF THE PRETENDED JUDGES, That signed the Warrant, for the Murder of
KING CHARLES the I. Of Ever BLESSED MEMORY, At the Sessions House in the
Old Bailey October 10. 1660.

Numb. 35.31. Moreover, ye shall take no satisfaction for the life of a
Murderer, which is guilty of death, but he shall be surely put to death.

LONDON Printed in the year 1660.

The Trial of the Judges, that signed the Warrant for the murder of King
CHARLES the first.
Wednesday October the 9th. 1660: being appointed for the Trial of them which
signed the Warrant for the horrid murder of his late serene Majesty, CHARLES
the first, of ever blessed memory. In order whereunto, Warrants being signed,
for the Lieuctenant of the Tower's delivery of the prisoners unto the Sheriffs
of London, the Sheriffs accordingly repaired to the Tower, with a strong guard
of their own Servants, and part of the Lieutenant of the Tower's own Regiment;
where the prisoners being put into several Coaches, with two of the Sheriffs
own Servants in each Coach, and a party of Musketeers on each side of the
Coach: the rest of the said Regiment making a Lane in Newgate-market, to keep
them from the fury of the people; a Troup of the Army Horse before, and another
following after the Coaches: they were about eight or nine of the clock brought
to the Presse-yard at Newgate, and after a survey of them taken by the
Master-keeper, they were (by a passage made for that purpose) carried into the
Sessions yard to Justice-Hall in the Old Bailey; where the Court being ready to
receive them, they were by turns brought to the Bar, by four and six at a time,
where they had their Indictments publicly read to them severally, to this
effect.

The Indictment read by the Crier to the first three, and so in order to the
rest.
That whereas you Hardress Waller Knight, Thomas Harrinson, Henry Heveningham
Esquire Isaac Pennington, Henry Martin, Gilbert Millington, Robert Tichburn Esqrs;
Owen Row, Robert Lilburn, Adrian Scroop, Augustine Garland Gregory Clement,
Peter Temple, John Jones, James Temple, John Cook, John Carew, Thomas Scot,
John Downs, Henry Smith, Vincent Potter, Hugh Peter's, Simon Meyne, George Fleet
wood, Francis Hacker, Daniel Axtell, Edmund Harvy Esqrs; Having not the fear of
God before your eyes, and being instigated by the Devil did maliciously
treasonably and feloniously contrary to your due allegiance and bounden duty
did set upon and condemn your late Sovereign Lord Charles the first of ever
blessed memory, and also did upon the thirty of January 1648 sighe and seal a
Warrant for the execution of his late Sacred, and Serene Majesty of blessed
^^^n^^y, where also the aforesaid Hardress Waller, Knight* Thomas Harrison,
Henry Heveningham Esquire together with some other person unknown did appear for
the rest upon the Scaffold, at the execution of his late Sacred, and Serene
Majesty of blessed memory, which said person yet unknown, being disguised by a
Frock over his body and a Vizor on his face, did then and their Sever the head
of his most Sacred Majesty of blessed memory from his body, and you the said
Hurdress Walter Knight, Thomas Harrison, and the rest of the Traitors did
afterward most traitorously and seloniously assume the Government of the
Kingdoms contrary to all right, and justice, and the known Laws of the Land,
and against the person of our now Sovereign Lord Charles the second his right
and Title, Crown and Dignity.

Crier. Hardresse Waller Knight. hold up thy hand, what say thou, art thou
guilty of this horrid act of Treason, whereof thou stand indicted or not
guilty?


Sir H. W. My Lord, I cannot say I am not guilty.


Clerk. Then you plead you are guilty.


H. W, Yes my Lord, I am guilty.


Clerk. Set him aside.


Thomas Harrison, Hold up thy hand, art thou guilty of this horrid act of
Treason or not guilty?


Har. If I should say not guilty I should wrong my own conscience, yet in
matter and form as it is laid in the Indictment I am not guilty,


Clerk. Then you plead not guity?


Har. My Lord I desire I may have counsel assigned me and time for to make my
defense, for I have been kept a close prisoner in a back chamber, and had no
notice of my Trial till five a clock this morning, so that I am altogether
unprepared.


Judge, You are to plead guilty or not guilty, for in cases of Treason counsel
is not to be assigned, for that would make it Justifiable, and then it were not
Treason, and you would be quit, but if it be Treason, then it is not
justifiable.


Har. I am not guilty.


Cler. How will thou be tried?


Har. By the Lords laws and the good and wholesome laws of the land,


Cler. Will thou be tried by God and the Country.


Har. That is a profane word.


Judge. Then you shall beturn'd over to God and the Country.


Har. No sir, I will be tried by God and the Country.


Clerk, God send thee a good deliverance.


Clerk. Henry Heveningham hold up thy hand, what say thou, guilty of this
horrid act of treason, or not guilty.


H. H. Not guilty.


Cl. How will thou be tried?


H. H. I will present an humble Petition to his Majesty and the Parliament, and
desire your Lordship to let me return to my lodging at the Tower again, for I
have some infirmities upon me.


Judge. We can give no answer to that.


Cl. How will thou be tried?


H. H. By God and the Country.


Cl. God send thee a good deliverance.


Clerk, Set them by.

Bring Isaac Pennington, H. Martin, Gilbert Millington, Robert Titchburn,
Robert Lilburn to the Bar,


Cler. Henry Martin, hold up thy hand, what say thou? art thou guilty of
this horrid act of Treason whereof thou stand indicted or not guilty?


Mar. My Lord, I desire the benefit of the act of Indemnity,


Judge. First you are to plead, before you can have the benefit of any thing and
for your pleading the act of Indemnity, that makes you guilty.


Mar. My Lord, If I plead, I lose the benefit of that Act.


Judge. Your name is in that Act.


Mar. My name is not there my Lord, my name is Harry Marte^, not Martin.


Judge. There is no difference between Martin and Marten in law, the difference
is very little in the sound.


Cler. Art thou guilty or not guilty?


Judge, Sir, Be advised, this makes no difference, if there were two names of
the like form, the difference is betwixt the Sir-names; this will make you but
a Mute in Law, and to be a Mute in matter of Treason you must have judgment
passed upon you.


Cler. Are you guilty, or not guilty?


Mart. I desire Counsel my Lord in that which is matter of Law.


Judge, What do you desire Counsel for, you are indicted for matter of Treason,
for contriving and compassing the King's Death: you have justification to
plead, if it be Treason, it is not justifiable: if it be justifiable, it is not
Treason?


Mart. Then my Lord I plead not guilty.


Cler. How will you be tried?


Mart. By God and the Country.


Cler. God send thee a good deliverance.


Judge, You may give any evidence, but in a case of this nature you can give no
evidence to --


Cler. Gilbert Millington, Hold up thy hand, what say thou, art thou guilty
of this horrid Act of Treason, or not guilty?


Mill. I humbly crave you Lordships pardon to hear me a few words.


Judge, Sir, we must do in this as in all other Cases. Either you must plead
guilty, or not; if you plead not guilty you shall is heard hereafter: but you
must plead guilty or not guilty;


Mill. There is something in that Indictment that I am not guilty of.


Judge, Then plead not guilty.


Mill. I am not guilty my Lord.


Cler. How will thou be tried.


Mill. By God and the Country.


Cler. God send thee a good delivery.


Rob. Titchborn, Hold up thy hand: Art thou guilty of this horrid act of
Treason, or art thou not guilty.


Titch. My Lord, I have been for some space kept close prisoner, and I am
altogether unable in the Law to speak for my self.


Judge, You must plead either guilty or not guilty.


Titch. spare me one word if the Trial be matter of Law, give leave for Counsel
to plead for me; If I should plead my own Case in Law, I might be over-powred,
since there are many persons of great eminency and honor will plead against
me.


Titch. I will not trouble you long, if this be the Case in matter and form as
I am here indicted, I am not guilty.


Cler. How will you be tried?


Titch. By God and the Country,


Cler. God send thee a good delivery,


Cler. Owen Roe, Hold up thy hand, what say thou, Art thou guilty of this
horrid act of high Treason, or art thou not guilty?


O. Roe. My Lord I will rest upon the judgment of the Court in matter and
form, as I stand indicted I am not guilty.


Clerk. How will thou be tried.


Roe. By God and the Country.


Clerk. God send thee a good delivery.

Robert Lilburn Hold up thy hand, art thou guilty of this horrid act of high
Treason whereof thou stands indicted, or art thou not guilty?


Lilb. I have been close Prisoner my Lord this twenty days, and none allowed
to come to me, and I am told I ought to have Counsel before I plead.


Judge, You are misinformed, you cannot have it; you must plead either guilty
or not guilty; for if this be your argument, and this answer be returned,
Judgment will be given against you, for the rule is set before us.


Lil. My Lord if you overruled me, I cannot help it.


Judge, Sir pray let not such words fall from you.


Lil. My Lord I must say in matter and form, as I stand here indicted I am not
guilty.


Cler. How will thou be tried?


Lilb, By God and the Country.


Cler. God send thee a good delivery.


Cler. Call Adrian Scroop, Augustine Garland, Gregory Clement, Peter Temple,
John Jones, James Temple, John Cook, John Carew.


Cler. Adrian Scroop, Hold up thy hand,

How say thou, art thou guilty of this horrid act of high Treason or art
thou not guilty?


Ad. Scroop. My Lord, I am not guilty.


Cler. How will thou be tried?


Ad. Scroop. By God and the Country.


Cler. God send thee a good delivery.


John Carew, Hold up thy hand, how say thou, art thou guilty of this horrid
act of high Treason, or art thou not guilty?


Carew. My Lord, there is matter in the Indictment as I humbly conceive, that
is not under the reach of any inferior Court of Judicature.


Judge. That is not to the matter, you must plead guilty or not guilty.


Carew. Not guilty.


Cler. How will thou be tried?


Carew By God and the Country.


Cler. God send thee a good delivery.


Cler. John Jones hold up thy hand, what say thou art thou guilty of this
horid Treason, whereof thou stand indicted or not guilty?


John Jones Not guilty.


Cler. How will thou be tried?


John Jones By God and the Country.


Cler. God send the a good delivery.

Thomas Scot hold up thy hand, art thou Guilty of this horid Act of high
Treason, or art thou not Guilty.


Scot. My Lord I would offer a few words,


Judge The Law give this liberty as your birth right, either to plead Guilty or
not Guilty one of them you must do.


Scot. The law I hope my Lord in some time or other, does give men leave to
plead for themselves.


Judge In what would you plead, you cannot (I have told you) justify it, if it
be Treason.


Scot. My Lord I cannot call it treason.


Cler. Are you Guilty or not Guilty?


Scot. Not Guilty.


Cler. How will thou be tried?


Scot. By God and the Country.


Cler. God send thee a good delivery.


Cler. Gregory Clement hold up thy hand, what say thou art thou Guilty of
the horrid treason whereof thou stand indicted or not Guilty.


Clem. Not Guilty.


Cler. How will thou be tried.


Clem. By God and the Country.


Cler. God send the a safe delivery.


Cler. John Cook hold up thy hand, what say thou art thou Guilty of the
horrid treason whereof thou stand indicted or not Guilty.


Cook. My Lord I beg to have counsel to plead for me.


Judge. You most answer are you Guilty or not.


Cook. My Lord not guilty.


Cler. How will thou be tried.


Cook. By God and the Country.


Cler. God send you a good delivery.


Cler. Col. Edmund Harvy, John Downs, Henry Smith, Vincent Potter, and
Augustine Garland to the Bar.


Cler, Edmond Harvy hold up thy hand, what say thou art thou guilty of this
horrid Act of high Treason or not guilty.


Har. I am not guilty.


Cler. How will thou be tried.


Har. By God and the Country.


Cler. God send the a good delivery.


Cler. Henry Smith hold up thy hand, what say thou art thou guilty of this
horrid Act of high Treason or not guilty


Smith. Not guilty.


Cler. How will thou be tried.


Smith. By God and the Country.


Cler. God send the a good delivery.


Clerk. John Downs hold up thy hand, what say thou, art thou guilty of this
horrid treason whereof stands indicted, or not guilty?


Downs, Not guilty.


Clerk. How will thou be tried?


Downs. By God and the Country.


Clerk. God send thee a good delivery.

Vincent Potter hold up thy hand, what say thou, art thou guilty of this
horrid act of high Treason whereof thou stand indicted, or not guilty?


Pot. Not guilty.


Cler. How will thou be tried?


Pot. By God and the Country.


Cler. God send thee a good delivery.


Cler. Augustine Garland hold up thy hand, what say thou, art thou guilty of
this horrid act of treason whereof thou stand indicted, or not guilty?


Garl. Not guilty.


Clerk, How will thou be tried?


Garl. By God and the Country.


Cler. God send thee a good delivery.

Set to the Bar George Fleetwood, James Temple, Hugh Peter's, Simon Meyn,
Francis Hacker, Daniel Axtell.

George Fleetwood what say thou, art thou guilty of this horrid treason
whereof thou stand indicted, or not guilty?


Fleet. I came in (my Lord) upon his Majesty's Proclamation.


Cler. Art thou guilty or not guilty?


Fleet. I confess I am guilty, and withal he delivered a Petition into the
Court.


Cler. Set him aside.

Simon Meyn hold up thy hand, what say thou, art thou guilty of the horrid
treason whereof thou stand indicted or not guilty?


Meyn. Not guilty, for I came in upon his Majesty's Proclamation.


Cler. How will thou be tried?


Meyn. By God and the Country.


Clerk. God send thee a good delivery.


Cler. James Temple, Hold up thy hand, what say thou, art thou guilty of the
horrid Treason whereof thou stand indicted or not guilty.


John Temple. Not guilty.


Cler. How will thou be tried?


John Temple. By God and the Country.


Cler. God send thee a good delivery.


Cler. Pet. Temple, Hold up thy hand, what say thou art thou guilty of the
horrid Treason whereof thou standst indicted or not guilty.


Pet. Temple. Not guilty.


Cler. How will thou be tried?


Pet. Temple. By God and the Country.


Cler. God send thee a good delivery.


Cler. Thomas Wait, Hold up thy hand, what say thou, art thou guilty of this
horrid Act of high Treason, or art thou not guilty?


Thomas Wait. I humbly desire of you my Lord that I may speak a word or two.


Judge. When you do plead, if you plead not guilty, you may speak what you will,


Tho. Wait. My Lord, one word. I am not willing to misspend your time, for I
know you have much business for to do, it will not become me to do it.


Judge. Well, but do not preface, let us hear what you will say.


Tho. Wait. My case my Lord is different from other men's.


Judge. What you have to say speak afterward.


Tho. Wait. My Lord, there was a Peer of this Nation that was indicted for
killing a man.


Judge. Sir, you must answer guilty or not guilty, for we do not intend to
anticipate you, what you have to say you may speak afterward.


Cler. are you guilty or not guilty?


Wait, I am not Guilty.


Cler. Who will you be tried by?


Wait. By God and the Country.


Cler. God send you a good deliverance.

Hugh Peter's, hold up thy hand, art thou Guilty of this horrid Act of high
Treason of which thou stand indicted, or art thou not guilty?


Peter's. I cannot say I am guilty, my Lord I would not be guilty of the Murder
for ten thousand worlds.


Cler. How will you be tried?


Peter's, By the word of God. At this the Court seemed to smile.


Cler. Art thou guilty or not guilty.


Pet. not guilty.


Cler. How will thou be tried.


Pet. By God and the Country.


Cler. God send thee a good delivery.


Cler. Daniel Axtell hold up thy hand, what say thou, art thou guilty of the
horrid high Treason whereof thou stand indicted or not guilty.


Axt. My Lord, let me have the freedom of an Englishman, that which is my
right by Law, I will not take up much of your time, the matter of the
indictment runs upon the Kings death, therefore I desire to be tried by Oyer
and Terminer, for it is a great point in Law, that no inferior Court ought to
judge of things that were done by Act of Parliament.


Judge. If the matter be treason, it is not to be justified, if it be not
treason, it is justifiable, as I said several times before, and as I laid it is
the birthright to plead guilty or not; there is no other plea but this.


Axt. Judge Heath had counsel upon the same case, but if the Court overrule me,
I cannot help it.


Several of the Court, It was not such a case as this.


Council. My Lord, It may be this Gentleman does not know the Law, which is,
that he that stands mute in case of high Treason, proclaims himself guilty.


Judge, True, he that does not put himself upon the Country is a mute in Law.


Clerk. Art thou guilty or not guilty?


Axt. Not guilty.


Cler. How will thou be tried?


Axt. I will be tried by Twelve honest men.


Officer. Sir you must say by God and the country.


Axt. Nay, but God is not locally here to be tried by.


He having taken some notes of the Indictment, it was taken from him with other
papers, the notes being torn out his paper was returned him. Judge. When your
Indictment is read the second time, you may take what notes you will, but not
the first time,


Cler. How will you be tried.


Axt. By God and the Country.


Cler. God send you a good delivery.


So the Court adjourned for this day. FINIS.

