This is for any of that generation that are looking for the Kingdom with
their own observations, but desernes not the signs of the coming Son of Man.
And especially for them that meet to worship in the old Mass in Aldermanbury.
Darkness has covered the earth, and gross darkness the people, so you
cannot see nor perceive his workin^ that is come to overturn the proud, and
confound the wise and thongh your ears be not bored to be^ his voice, nor your
eyes opened to see the signs that have been in the midst of you, but are
despising and wandrin^ ^ut of the fear, out of the dread of the living God
whom we serve, and know to be angry with the wicked every day, and your
offerings stink before him, and your prayers are an abomination unto him, whose
flight shall come upon you in the Winter, and on the Sabbath day: A horrible
tempest is round about him, and a devouring fire goes before him, who will
plead with all the earth in righteousness, and will tear in pieces those that
forget him: are not you without the remembrance of him? Who have despised his
Messengers evilly entreated, and cast in^ son, him who in obedience to the
maker of heaven, and earth, was sent among you, as a sign unto you, of your
poor, naked, lean, starved souls, of your filthy unclean coverings and
righteousness and the dung of your solemn assemblys which as excrements has
an ill savor, and as a menstrus clo^th, before him who is just, and will not
acquit the guilty: for the woe is gone forth even against all that are covered,
and not with my Spirit, says the Lord, which spirit reproves you of your sin,
of your righteousness, and your judgments, which are all out of the truth,
false and wicked, and you not beleiving, nor obeying that which reproves you
wax worse and worse, speaking evil of things you know not, calling good,
evil, and evil, good, c^ndemning Gods works justifying your own works,
punishing the innocent and acquitting the guilty: is not this your state? That
are in the practices of pride, wantonness, covetousness, licentious,
feasting, rioting, and sporting, and then in your vain minds, and words, in
which you can do nothing else but sin, you say it is sin and wickedness, for
any to appear before you without clothing, naked as they were brought into
the world, but where will you prove that such have broken any Law of God: but
you that are in the immaginations, which are vain and greive the Lord God ^
fully say that it is wickedness to work on the first day of the week; though
it be written six days shall thou wo^ yet are not you ashamed to persecute and
cast in prison, those that love the commands of God, and for the perf^mance
thereof are sufferers by your unrighteous Laws, for as ever it was so it is
they that slay the holy one and the^ break the commands of God, and are zealous
for the traditions of men, O ye Sellers and Buyers of the Scripture would not
you have judged Isaiah if he should have gone three years naked in your City,
as you may read h^ Isaiah the 20. the 2. and the 3. verse. And would not this
generation have accounted Ezekiel, if they had ^ in his days as mad as the
Quakers, if they had seen him bake his bread with dung, and shave his head ^
beard, and burn part of the hair, and throw part in the wind, as is written in
the 4. chap. of Ezekiel the 12. and the 15. Ezekiel the 5. 6. 3. and 4. verses.
Surely the Scriptures wherein you trust does condemn you, and shall one pay
witness against you, and then in vain may you cry for Hills, and Mountains to
fall, and hide you from the presence of the lamb, whose coming is at hand,
who is this day deviding the sheep from the Goats and gathering his elect into
the arm of his power the defense of the righteous, and will break to pieces
all the ungodly, which have a name to live but are dead: but the Trumpet is
sounded, and the Alarm is heard, and the dead shall arise and come to judgment
before the Lamb: where will you hide who hate to be reformed and professing
will not cover you, Christ's, nor the Apostles words, will not save you: all the
workers of iniquity must depart, the lake is prepared, the Kingdom of
darkness is fitted for all that hate the light, and when you are stripped, and
set naked, all your glory stained, haughtynesse debased, then shall you know
that it was in the long-suffering, and everlasting mercy of God, that you have
been visited, and warned by dreadful words, and signs, that you might have
seized from provoking him, that we know assuredly can deliver from all your
cruel oppressing, and whether he will do it sudingly or no, we are not
careful: for we have his presence who makes rich in want, and gives peace and
joy in all our sufferings, yea, that passes your understanding, and the assured
hope of our reward, is sure, and steadfast, fixed in God whose works are
wrought, in, and by them, who into his will are gathered, out of man's will
which cannot work Gods righteousness: but this is a mystery to you who are
establishing your own righteousness, which will sudingly, and horribly come to
an end, for our salvation is nigh, and our deliverance near and in what
appearance soever we are sent unto you, our testimony is true, for it is
against all unrighteouss ^ practices, and worships, which God is casting down,
even he that is come to finish sin, and to put an end to t^ gression, and to
bring in everlasting righteousness, and his power, and kingdom which shall
never have ^ felt and known, among the despised Quakers, and this is from one
of them that long and much followed, ^ places you call your Churches, and them
you call your teachers, and never left them till I saw God was de^ from them:
for while Joseph was in Egypt, there was some food for Jacobs seed, but he not
there the seed ^ pressed, for the deliverance of which the Lord is risen, and
the oppressors shall be tormented, and thou^ believe not, yet when he that will
come, shall come to take vengance on you for their wrongs, who have a^ suffer
for the testimony of a pure conscience, you shall confess unto him whose ways
are righteous, and whose j^ ments are past finding out, by the disobedient, but
shall be felt by the dispises thereof; that loves darkness ^ then light, and
of this you have been warned, and now are by me that pittyes all your souls
that lies in Ca^ under the bondage of Corruption.

R. T.

Printed for Mary Westwood in the 11th month. 1659.


