TREASON Discovered: OR THE IMPEACHMENT Of Daniel Oneale Sergeant Major, one of
the Commanders in the last expedition against Scotland, and now Prisoner in the
Gate House.

Wherein is expressed all his treacherous endeavors to bring the Army in dislike
of the proceedings of the Houses of Parliament.

With all the Articles exhibited against him, and his Answer to every Article.

Likewise his Accusations proved by these Honorable persons. Sir Jacob Asbley
Sir John Connyers Sir Fulk Hunkes Captain Leg.


LONDON, Printed for John Greensmith, 1641.

Falsities in DANIEL ONEALES last Examination.
Mr. Oneales Examination to the 2. Interg.
THat he delivered to Sir Jacob Ashely in complement from the King to this
effect, That he knew him and Sir John Conniers to be so gallant men, that he
never intended to place above them any man that was then under their command,
and more this he said not to him of any thing that concerned the King.

Disproved by Sir Jacob Ashley Jnt. 2. n.
Contrary to this see Sir Jacob Ashelys Examination Interg. 2. that at Mr.
Oneales coming down, he told him, that things being not so well between the
King and the Parliament, he thought a Petition from the Army would do much
good, and asked him if a draft of such a Petition were brought to him whether
he would set his hand to it.

Mr. Oneale.
2. That he had no discourse with Sir Jacob Ashley for bringing up the Army to
London.

Disproved by Sir Jacob Ashly, Int. 7. a.
Contrary to this see Sir Jacob Ashleys Examination Int. 7. a. That Mr. Oneale
telling him of the dislikes between the King and the Parliament, and of those
things which were done to the disadvantage of the King. I replied, I wondered
that Councels above should be so said as had bin spoken of, of marching of the
Army to the South, for they must fight with the Scots first and beat them
before they could move Southward, and that done, they must spoil the Country
all along as they go, and when they come to London they would find resistance
by the Parliament, and the Scots might rally and follow them.

Mr. Oneale.
3. That he delivered the like Message to Sir John Conniers as he had done to
Sir Jacob Ashley, with this addition that the King had sent him word that he
would have particlu^r care of his fortunes and other Speech, then this he had
not with him of any thing that concerned the King, nor delivered him, nor Sir
Jacob Ashley any other message or Letter from the King.

Disproved by Sir John Conniers 1 Examination, Int. 4.
Contrary to this see Sir John Conniers 1 Examination, Int. 4. That Mr. Oneale
used persuasions to this Examinant, that he would serve the King, and that if
he did not he should be left alone, and would but ruin himself, for that all
the Troopers under him, were that way inclined, That therefore he should
adhere to the King, and go those ways that the King would have him.

Sir John Conniers 2. Examination, int. 4.
See likewise Sir John Conniers in his 2. Examination, int. 4. That Mr. Oneale
said unto him, that if he this examinant had bin well known to the King would
have written, nnto him, and that therefore he conceived that this Examinant
should do well to write to the King. To which he replied, That he could not
serve the King in that point, and therefore thought it would be of no use to
trouble the King with this Letter.

Mr. Oneale.
5. That he never heard of any motion or intention to bring up the Army to
London.

See this disproved before Sir Jacob Ashley Jnt. 7. a.

See Sir Fulk Hunkes Jnt. 2. a. That Oneale dealt with him to have the Troops
move.

Mr. Oneale.
That he never had Communication with any about the procuring a Newtrallity
from the Scottish Army, nor ever heard of such a Proposition.

Disproved by Sr. Jacob Ashley Jnt. 7.
7. Contrary to this, See Sir Jacob Ashleys Examination, Int. 7. That Sir Jacob
saying that he wondered that Councels above should be so laid as had bin spoken
of, of the marching of the Army to the South, for they must fight with the
Scots first and beat them, before they could move Southward, and the Scots
might ralley and follow them; To which Oneale replied, what if the Scots could
be made Newtrals. Sir Jacob said, That the Scots would lay him by the heels
if he should come to move such a thing, for they would never break with the
Parliament.

For the time of Mr. Oneales return to the Army.
Sir Jacob Ashley Jnt. 1. William Leg. Jnt. 1. Sir Charles Lucas. Jnt. 1.
That Mr. Oneale went from the Army about the time that the King came from the
North and returned not till June or July, and stayed there about a fortnight or
3. weeks.

Sir Fulkes Hunks. Int. 1.
That Oneale returned not till about the time that Mr. Wilmot and the other
Soldiers were committed by the Parliament.

Mr. Oneales Examination.
That the same day he was examined the last Summer, he went out of this Town,
toward York, being on Wednesday as he remembers, and came to York on Friday
or Saturday.

The day of Mr. Oneales first Examination was the 9. of June, as appears by
the Examination it self.

The time shows that this was no part of the former design for which, Wilmot,
Ashpurnam, and Pollard were committed, but for the design to bring up the Army
against the Parliament.

To prove Oneale guilty of the second, the Heads arising out of the proofs are
these.
1 That he published false Rumors in the army to the chief Officers, That
there were dislikes between the King and Parliament, and that things were
there done to the Kings disadvantage.

See Sir Jacob Ashleys Examination, Int. 2. ^t 7.

2. That thereupon he persuaded some of the Principal Officers of the Armv to
take part with the King, against the Parliament.

Vide. Sir Fulk Hunks Int. 2.

Sir John Conniers his ^xamination, Int. 4. and his 2. Examination, Int. 4.

3. That he labored to procure a Petition from the Army, to the Parliament,
containing in it diverse Scandalous, and Seditious matters against the
Parliament, and to get the hands of some of the chief officers thereunto.

Read Sir Jacob Ashley. Int. 2. Sir Fulk Hunks. Jnt. 2 totum Sir John
Connyers. 1 Examination Int. 2.
4. That he endeavored to make the Scottish Army Newtrals,

Read Sir Jacob Ashley. Int. 7. Sir John Connyers, Examination Int. 7. Sir John
Connyers 2. Examination Int. 7. Sir Fulk Hunks Jnt. 7.
To prove that there was a direction for a second Petition, or declaration, to
be sent up from the Army to the Parliament, and the contents thereof
dangerous, and the time was about July last, which directions Captain Leg
received here, and carried down to the Army.

Read Captain William Leg Int. 10. totum Sir Jacob Ashley Jat. 5. Sir John
Connyers his 1. Examination Int. 5. and his 2. Examination Int. 5.
That it is sufficiently proved,
That Mr. Oneale upon a second design did go down to the Army, and publish
false Rumors to the chief Officors of the Army of differences between the
King and Parliament, and about the months of June and July did end eavour,
plot, and practice to bring up the Army against the Parliament, to awe the
Parliament, and interrupt the proceedings thereof.

FINIS.

