A TRUE RELATION OF Certain Nevvs from the West of IRELAND.

CONTAINING, 1 The Treasonable intents of the Irish Rebels, to Crown Sir
Philome Oneale King of Ireland. And how his Crown is taken and carried to the
Parliament, this 9 of June. 2 The taking and demolishing of the Lord
Barramoore's house, called Castle Lion, by the three arch Rebels the Lord
Roach, the Lord Musgrave, and Mac: Donah. 3 An Alarm given at the walls at
Bandonbridge, by Macharta The, and 10000 Rebels, how they were repulsed, what
numbers were slain and what pillage was taken. With other remarkable things.


Sent in a Letter by Sir Robert Trevers, from Bandonbridge, the third of June
1642, to Lieutenant James Finch, in London.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Marsh, 1642.

A True Relation of certain News from the West of Ireland.
Worthy Sir,
We are here in dryly troubles, and housely fears; the strength and numbers
of the Rebels daily incresing, who are mightily encouraged by the dissentions
which is amongst you in England; and contrariwise, it does much disharten us:
for your dissentions are our ruins, and your intestine b^oyles will be the
utter loss of this State and Kingdom. No question it is for our sins that
God does thus afflict us, and in his good time he will also release us from
this miserable calamity. We wonder we have no supplies from England, which were
expected here, a great while since, but whilst we look for aid (for any thing
I can see) this Kingdom will be irrecoverably lost; for we wan^ men, money,
and in some sort victuals, which God has hitherto provided for us; the Rebels
are grown so insolent now, that they dare bouldly vent the rankor of their
hearts, which they have hitherto concealed: Their intents are absolutely to
throw off the English Government, and do intend to Crown a King of their own
(as it is commonly talked here) and they are not afraid to name him, which is
Sir Philome Oneale; he is that Perkin Warbeck that must wear the Royal Diadem
of this Kingdom, and King CHARLES shall be quite rejected, and all
Protestants quite expelled out of Ireland: But we hope that High and Honorable
Court of Parliament are sensible of that deluge of blood that has been shed,
from the sides of miserable Protestants: and will hasten the aides and succors
which they intend for us. I hope the King has so many Frinds and loyal
Subjects in England and other places, that they will not suffer so fair a
Jewel to be ravished from His Regal Crown, to the King's great loss and
dishonor of His other Kingdoms.

The Rebels are mightily animated and encouraged by Letters, Bulls and Messages
from the Pope, and that Baalitica Conclave of Cardinals at Rome, who does daily
exasperate the over desperate minds of these bloody minded Rebels, who do
absolutely believe that now they shall shake off the English yoke (as they
term it) and recover their long lost Freedom; but God I trust will prevent
their wicked Counsels, and bring them and those wicked Ahitophels their
Counselors, to the end that Ahitophel had for his treason, for counselling
against his anointed Sovereign.

Macharta The keeps his Rendesvous at Timilage, six or seven miles from us, but
by the care and watchfulness of the Lords of Kenelmeke and Droughull, he has
often times retreated with loss of men and Munition, and yet he seaseth not to
sally out against us in Bandonbridge, which is all the Towns that hold firm
for the English, betwixt it and Cork. Castle Lion, one of my Lo^y Barramoore's
m^nnour houses, being new built, and a stately house, about the 16 or 17 (...)
this instant May, was assaulted by the Lord Roach, the Lord Musgrave, and Mac.
Donah, who took it, and my Lord Barramoore in it, who was not able to defend
it, they made pillage of all that was in the house, and then beat it down,
utterly ruinating and burning all the matterials of the same, not leaving any
thing that was good for ought; the Rebels swore and vowed to kill him, unless
he would turn to them (which they do ordinarily to every one they take) but he
absolutely bearing the same, these three arch-Rebels consulted what they should
do, and concluded not to kill him, but taking every thing that was worth their
carrying away, they left his Lordship with only one horse, on which he rod to
his Father the Earl of Cork.

The 24 of this May, there was an Alarm given at the walls in the night, by
Macharta The, and some 10000 men, but to their shame and our comfort, we had of
them a happy victory; for the Soldiers in the Town, being ready upon all
occasions (as knowing the Rebels had some design in hand) was not slow in
receiving them, but issued out against them (it being the dawn of the day) and
gave them battle; and the courage and forwardness of our men, being so
great, that there was no need to provoke them on (as knowing that they had made
them fly when they were a far greater number) they rowted them, and killed them
a pace: and those miserable men, being most (...) them unarmed, and having bu^
small store of powder, which is the he^rt of war, and being still t^rrifie^
with the last bickering they had with the English, they fell to an absolute
flight, which is still their use, for they will not stand a battle: My Lord
of Kenelmeke was come to Bandonbridge the day before with 500 men, and the
Town Soldiers were 2000, beside the Inhabitants, so that the enemies were
almost four for one, yet by the help of God there were slain of the Rebels
250 men, and we lost but seven men in all, one of which the Rebels
(notwithstanding their flight) hurried away with them to Time-lage, where they
put him to tortures, thinking to make him confess the strength of the Town, but
when they could not make him confess, they hanged him. We took in this
bickering 140 M^skets, 100 Pikes, Swords, Skeen^s, and Pistols a great many,
three Cullers, some provision of Victuals and Powder, but not much: besides the
native Rebels here, who in great multitudes are assembled against His Majesty,
and His people; they have hope daily of aid from the Pope, or some Prince whom
the Pope can persw^de to aid them in this Catholic Cause, for the Pope has
promised to aid them by any means tha^ ^^e can; but we hope that God will
disappoint his Counsels, and bring his intentions to naught, and bring them and
the Authors of his m^schiefe to confusion, to whom be praise and glory now and
for ever.

You Father in Law (since my last Letter) is sick, but we hope of his sudd^in
recovery; Your wife and children are all in good health, God be praised, Your
brother in Law is gone to Dublin, and we have not heard from him since he
went, but do daily expect to hear from him. We look for your return daily,
with a supply of men and money, which if it be a while neglected, the lives of
100000 men will not recover that which their negligence will lose. So trusting
that God will strike our brethrens hearts in England, with a feeling of our
misery, not knowing how soon the same may be theirs, if not in time preven^ed
by the hearing of this Kingdom. I commit you to Gods protection, and rest.

Your ever loving friend, Robert Trevers.


