A DIRECTORY OF Church Government. Anciently contended for, and as far as the
Times would suffer, practiced by the first Non-conformists in the days of
Queen ELIZABETH. Found in the study of the most accomplished Divine, Mr. Thomas
Cartwright, after his decease; and reserved to be published for such a time as
this.

Published by Authority.

LONDON, Printed for John Wright in the Old Bailey. 1644.

THE SACRED DISCIPLINE of the CHURCH, described in the Word of God.
THe Discipline of Christ's Church that is necessary for all times is delivered
by Christ, and set down in the holy Scriptures. Therefore the true and lawful
Discipline is to be fetched from thence, and from thence alone. And that which
rests upon any other foundation ought to be esteemed unlawful and
counterfeit.

Of all particular Churches there is one and the same right order and form:
Therefore also no one may challenge to it self any power over others; nor any
right which does not alike agree to others.

The Ministers of public charges in every particular Church ought to be
called and appointed to their charges by a lawful Ecclesiastical calling,
such as hereafter is set down.

All these for the diverse regard of their several kinds are of equal power
amongst themselves.

No man can be lawfully called to public charge in any Church, but he that is
fit to discharge the same. And none is to be accounted fit, but he that is
endued with the common gifts of all the godly; that is, with faith, and a
blameless life: And further also, with those that are proper to that Ministry
wherein he is to be used, and necessary for the executing of the same;
whereupon for trial of those gifts some convenient way and examination is to
be used.

The party to be called must first be elected, then he is to be ordained to
that charge whereunto he is chosen, by the prayers of that Church whereunto he
is to be admitted; the mutual duties of him and of the Church being before
laid open.

The Ministers of the Church are, first they that are Ministers of the word. In
their examination it is specially to be taken heed unto, that they be apt to
teach, and tried men, not utterly unlearned, nor newly planted and converted to
the Faith.

Now these Ministers of the word are, first Pastors, which do administer the
Word and Sacraments, then Teachers, which are occupied in wholesome doctrine.

Besides there are also Elders, which watch over the life and behavior of
every man, and Deacons, which have care over the poor.

Further, in every particular Church there ought to be a Presbytery, which is a
Consistory, and as it were a Senate of Elders. Under the name of Elders here
are contained they who in the Church minister doctrine, and they who are
properly called Elders.

By the common Counsel of the Eldership all things are directed that belong to
the state of their Church. First, such as belong to the guidance of the whole
body of it in the holy and common assembly gathered together in the name of the
Lord, that all things may be done in them duly, orderly, and to edification.
2. Then also such as pertain to particular persons. First, to all the members
of that Church, that the good may enjoy all the privileges that belong unto
them, that the wicked may be corrected with Ecclesiastical censures according
to the quality of the fault, private and public, by admonishing and by
remooving either from the Lords Supper by suspension (as it is commonly called)
or out of the Church by Excommunication. The which belong specially to the
Ministers of public charge in the Church to their calling either to be begun
or ended, and ended either by relieving or punishing them, and that for a time
by suspension or altogether by deposition.

For directing of the Eldership let the Pastors be set over it, or if there be
no Pastors then one in the same Church, let the Pastors do it in their turns.

But yet in all the greater affairs of the Church, as in Excommunicating of
any, and in choosing* and deposing of Church Ministers, nothing may be
concluded without the knowledge and consent of the Church.

Particular Churches ought to yield mutual help one to another, for which
cause they are to communicate amongst themselves.

The end of this communicating together is, that all things in them may be so
directed both in regard of Doctrine and also of Discipline, as by the Word of
God they ought to be.

Therefore the things that belong hereunto are determined by the common opinion
of those who meet so to communicate together, and whatsoever is to be amended*
furthered or procured in any of those several Churches that belong to that
assembly. Wherein, albeit no particular Church has power over another, yet
every particular Church of the same resort, meeting and counsel, ought to obey
the opinion of more Churches with whom they communicate.

For holding of these meetings and assemblies there are to be chosen by every
Church belonging to that assembly, principal men from among the Elders, who
are to have their instructions from them, and so to be sent to the Assembly.
There must be also a care had, that the things they shall return to have been
godly agreed on by the meetings, be diligently observed by the Churches.

Further in such assemblies there is also to be chosen one that may be set over
the assemblies, who may moderate and direct them. His duty is to see, that the
assemblies be held godly, quiet and comely. Therefore it belongs unto him to
begin and end the conference with prayer, to know every man's instructions, to
propound in order the things that are to be handled, to gather their opinions,
and to propound what is the opinion of the greater part. It is also the part of
the rest of the assembly to speak their opinions of the things propounded godly
and quietly.

The Synodicall Discipline gathered out of the Synods and use of the Churches
which have restored it according to the Word of God, and out of sundry books
that are written of the same, and referred unto certain Heads.
Of the necessity of a Calling.
LEt no man thrust himself into the executing of any part of public charge
in the administration of the Word, Sacraments, Discipline or care over the
poor. Neither let any such sue or seek for any public charge of the Church,
but let every one tarry until he be lawfully called.

The manner of entering and determining of a Calling and against a Ministry of
no certain place; and the desertion of a Church.
LEt none be called but unto some certain charge ordained of God, and to the
exercising of the same in some particular Congregation. And he that is so
called let him be so bound to that -- Church that he may not after be of any
other, or depart from it without the consent thereof. Let none be called, but
they that have first subscribed the confession of Doctrine and Discipline.
Whereof let them be admonished to have copies with themselves.

In the examination of Ministers the testimony of the place from whence they
come is to be demanded, whereby it may be understood what life and
conversation he has been of, and whether he has been addicted to any
Heresy, or to the reading of any heretical books, or to curious and strange
questions and idle speculations; or rather whether he be accounted sound and
consenting in all things to the Doctrine received in the Church. Whereunto if
he agree, he is also to expound some part of the holy Scriptures twice or
oftener, as it shall seem meet to the examiners, and that before the Conference,
and that Church which is interessed. Let him also be demanded of the principal
heads of Divinity. And whether he will diligently execute and discharge his
Ministry, and in the execution thereof propound unto himself not his own
desires and commodities, but the glory of God and edification of the Church.
Lastly, whether he will be studious and careful to maintain and preserve
wholesome Doctrine, and Ecclesiastical Discipline. Thus let the Minister be
examined not only by one Eldership, but also by some greater meeting and
assembly.

Of Election.
BEfore the Election of a Minister and the deliberation of the Conference
concerning the same, let there be a day of Fast kept in the Church interessed.

Of the place of exercising this Calling.
ALbeit it be lawful for a Minister upon just occasion to Preach in another
Church then that whereof he is Minister, yet none may exercise any ordinary
Ministry elsewhere, but for a certain time upon great occasion, and by the
consent of his Church and Conference.

Of the Office of the Ministers of the word, and first of the order of Liturgy,
or Common Prayer.
LEt the Minister that is to Preach name a Psalm or a part of a Psalm
(beginning with the first, and so proceeding) that may be sung by the Church,
noting to them the end of their singing (to wit) the glory of God and their own
edification. After the Psalm let a short admonition to the people follow of
preparing themselves to pray duly unto God. Then let there be made a Prayer
containing a general confession. First of the guilt of sin both original and
actual, and of the punishment which is due by the Law for them both. Then also
of the promise of the Gospel, and in respect of it supplication of pardon for
the said guilt and punishment, and petition of grace promised, as for the
duties of the whole life, so especially for the godly expounding and receiving
of the Word. Let this petition be concluded with the Lords Prayer. After the
Sermon, let Prayer be made again, First for grace to profit by the doctrine
delivered, the principal heads thereof being remembered; then for all men, but
chiefly for the universal Church and for all estates and degrees of the
people; which is likewise to be ended with the Lords Prayer and the singing of
a Psalm as before. Last of all let the Congregation be dismissed, with some
convenient form of blessing taken out of the Scripture, such as is Number. 6. 24.
2 Cor. 13. 13.

Of Preaching.
LEt him that shall Preach choose some part of the Canonical Scripture to
expound, and not of the Apocrypha. Further in his ordinary Ministry, let him
not take Postills (as they are called) but some whole book of the holy
Scripture, especially of the new Testament, to expound in order. In choice
whereof regard is to be had both of the Ministers ability, and of the
edification of the Church.

He that Preaches must perform two things, the first that his speech be
incorrupt, which is to be considered both in regard of the Doctrine, that it be
holy, sound, wholesome and profitable to edification, not divelish, heretical,
leavened, corrupt, fabulous, curious, or contentious; and also in respect of
the manner of it, that it be proper to the place which is handled, that is,
which either is contained plainly in the very words; or if it be gathered by
consequent, that the same be fit and clear and such as may rise upon the
property of the word, grace of speech and suit of the matter, and not be
allegorical, strange, wrested or far fetched. Now let that which is such, and
chiefly which is fittest for the times and occasions of the Church, be
delivered. Further let the explication, confirmation, enlargement and
application, and the whole Treatise and handling of it be in the vulgar tongue,
and let the whole confirmation and proof be made by arguments, testimonies and
examples taken only out of the holy Scriptures, applied fitly and according to
the natural meaning of the places that are alleged.

The second thing to be performed by him that preaches is a reverend gravity;
This is considered first in the style, phrase and manner of speech, that it be
spiritual, pure, proper, simple and applied to the capacity of the people, not
such as humane wisdom teaches, nor savoring of new fanglednesse, nor either
so affectate as it may serve for pomp and ostentation, or so careless, and
base, as becomes not Ministers of the Word of God. Secondly, it is also to be
regarded as well in ordering the voice, in which a care must be had that
(avoiding the keeping always of one tune) it may be equal, and both rise and
fall by degrees; as also in ordering the gesture wherein (the body being
upright) the guiding and ordering the whole body is to follow the voice, there
being avoided in it all unseemely gestures of the head or other parts and often
turning of the body to diverse sides. Finally let the gesture be grave, modest
and seemly, not utterly none, nor too much neither like the gestures of Plays
or Fencers.

These things are to be performed by him that Preaches, whereby when need
requires they may be examined who are trained and exercised to be made fit to
Preach: Let there be, if it may be, every Sabbath day two Sermons, and let them
that preach always endeavor to keep themselves within one hour, especially
on the weekdayes. The use of preaching at Burialls is to be left as it may be
done conveniently, because there is danger that they may nourish the
superstition of some, or be abused to pomp and vanity.

Of the Catechism.
LEt the Catechism be taught in every Church. Let there be two sorts. One
more large applied to the delivering of the sum of Religion by a suit and order
of certain places of the Scriptures, according to which some point of the holy
Doctrine may be expounded every week. Another of the same sort but shorter, fit
for the exammation of the rude and ignorant before they be admitted to the
Lords Supper.

Of the other parts of Liturgy or Divine Service.
ALL the rest of the Liturgy or Divine Service consists in the administration
of the Sacraments and by the custom of the Church in the blessing of Marriage.
The most commodious form thereof is that which is used by the Churches that
have reformed their -- Discipline according to the Word of God.

Of Sacraments.
LEt only a Minister of the Word that is a Preacher minister the Sacraments,
and that after the preaching of the Word, and not in any other place then in
the public assemblies of the Church.

Of Baptism.
WOmen only may not offer unto Baptism those that are to be baptized, but the
Father if it may be, or in his name some other. They which present unto
Baptism ought to be persuaded not to give those that are Baptized the names of
God or of Christ, or of Angels or of holy Offices, as of Baptist, Evangelist,
etc. nor such as savor of Paganism or Popery; but chiefly such whereof there
are examples in the holy Scriptures in the names of those who are reported in
them to have been godly and virtuous.

Of the Communion.
LEt the time of celebrating the Communion be made known eight days before,
that the Congregation may prepare themselves, and that the Elders may do their
duty in going to and visiting whom they ought.

Of Signifying their names that are to communicate.
LEt them which before have not been received to the Lords Table when they
first desire to come to it, give their names to the Minister seven days
before the Communion that care of enquiring of them may be committed to the
Elders, that if there be any cause of hindrance there may be stay made betime;
but if there be no such thing let them proceed (where need may be) to the
examining of their faith before some of the Elders and Ministers every month
before the Communion. Let this whole Treatise of Discipline be read in the
consistory, and let the Ministers, Elders and Deacons be censured one after an
other; yet so that the Minister concerning Doctrine be censured of Ministers
only.

Let them only be admitted to the Communion that have made confession of their
faith, and submitted themselves to the Discipline: unless they shall bring
letters testimonial of good credit from some other place, or shall approve
themselves by some other sufficient testimony

Children are not to be admitted to the Communion before they be of the age of
14 years except the consistory shall otherwise determine.

On the Sabbath day next before the Communion, let mention be made in the
Sermon of the examination, whereunto the Apostle exhorts, and of the peace
that is by faith, in the day of the Communion, let there be speech of the
Doctrine of the Sacraments, and especially of the Lords Supper.

Of Fasting.
LEt the day of Fasting be published by the Pastor according to the advice of
the consistory, either for supplication, for turning away of calamities present
or threatened; or for petition of some special grace. Let the Sermons upon the
same day before and after noone (as on the Lords day) be such as may be fit
for the present occasion

Of Holidaies.
HOlidaies are conveniently to be abolished.

Of Marriage.
LEt espousing go before marriage. Let the words of espousing be of the
present time, and without condition, and before sufficient witnesses on both
sides. It is to be wished that the Minister or an Elder be present at the
espousals who having called upon God may admonish both parties of their duties.
First, may have care of avoiding the degrees forbidden both by the Law of God
and man: and then they may demand of them, whether they be free from any bond
of Marriage, which if they profess and be strangers, he may also require
sufficient testimony. Further also they are to be demanded, whether they have
been married before, and of the death of the party with whom they were married,
which if they acknowledge and be strangers he may demand convenient testimony
of the death of the other party. Finally, let them be asked if they be under
the government of any; whether they whom it concerns have consented.

The Espousals being done in due order, let them not be dissolved though both
parties should consent. Let the marriage be solemnized within two months
after. Before the marriage let the promise be published three several Sabbath
days; but first, let the parties espoused, with their parents or governors
desire the publishing thereof of the Minister and two Elders at the least, that
they may be demanded of those things that are needful, and let thom require to
see the instrument of the covenant of the Marriage, or atleast sufficient
testimony of the Espousals. Marriage may be solemnized and blessed upon any
ordinary day of public prayer, saving upon a day of Fast.

Of Schools.
LEt children be instructed in Schools; both in other learning, and especially
in the Catechism; that they may repeat it by heart, and understand it; when
they are so instructed, let them be brought to the Lords Supper, after they
have been examined by the Minister, and allowed by him.

Of Students of Divinity, and their Exercises.
IN every Church where it may conveniently be done, care is to be had that some
poor Scholars studious of Divinity being fit for Theological exercises, and
especially for expounding of holy Scripture, may by the liberality of the godly
rich be taught and trained up to preach.

Let that exposition as often as it shall be convenient to be had be in the
presence at least of one Minister, by whose presence they may be kept in order,
and in the same sort, (as touching the manner of preaching) that public
Sermons are made. Which being ended, let the other students (he being put a
part that was Speaker) note wherein he has failed in any of those things that
are to be performed by him that preaches publicly, as is set down before. Of
whose opinion let the Minister that is present and is moderator of their
exercise, judge and admonish the speaker, as he shall think meet.

Of Elders.
LEt the Elders know every particular house and person of the Church, that they
may inform the Minister of the condition of every one, and the Deacons of the
sick, and poor, that they may take care to provide for them: they are not to
be perpetual, neither yet easily to be changed.

Of Consistories.
IN the Consistory the most voices are to be yielded unto. In it only
Ecclesiastical things are to be handled. Of them; first they are to be dealt
with such as belong to the common direction of the public assembly, in the
order of Liturgy or divine Service, Sermon, Prayers, Sacraments, Marriages, and
Burials. Then with such also as pertain to the oversight of every one, and
their particular deeds. Further, they are to cause such things as shall be
thought meet to be registered and written in a book. They are also to cause to
be written in another book the names of them that are baptized, with the names
of their parents and sureties. Likewise of the Communicants. Further also are
to be noted their names that are married, that die, and to whom Letters
testimonial are given.

Of the Censures.
NOne is to be complained of unto the Consistory unless first the matter being
uttered with silencing the parties name, if it seem meet so to be done by the
judgment of the Consistory.

In private and less faults the precept of Christ, Mat. 18. is to be kept.

Greater and public offenses are to be handled by the Consistory. Further
public offenses are to be esteemed, first, such as are done openly before
all, or whomsoever, the whole Church knowing of it. Secondly, such as be done
in a public place, albeit few know it. Thirdly, that are made such by
pertinacy and contempt. Fourthly, that for the helnousnesse of the offense are
to be punished with some grievous civil punishment.

They that are to be excommunicated being in public charge in the Church, are
to be deposed also from their charges. They also are to be discharged that are
unfit for the Ministry by reason of their ignorance, or of some incurable
disease, or by any other such cause, are disabled to perform their Ministry.
But in the rooms of such as are disabled by means of sickness or age, let
another be placed without the reproach of him that is discharged; and further,
so as the reverence of the Ministry may remain unto him, and he may be
provided for liberally and in good order.

When there is question concerning an heretic, complained of to the
Consistory, straight let two or three neighbor Ministers be called, men godly
and learned, and free from that suspicion, by whose opinion he may be suspended
till such time as the Conference may take knowledge of his cause.

The obstinate after admonition by the Consistory, though the fault have not
been so great, are to be suspended from the Communion; and if they continue in
their obstinacy, this shall be the order to proceed to their Excommunication.
Three several Sabbath days after the Sermon publicly let be declared the
offense committed by the offender. The first Sabbath let not the offenders name
be published. The second let it be declared, and withal a certain day of the
week named, to be kept for that cause in fasting and prayer. The third let
warning be given of his Excommunicating to follow the next Sabbath after,
except there may be showed some sufficient cause to the contrary: so upon the
fourth Sabbath day let the sentence of Excommunication be pronounced against
him, that his spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord.

He that has committed great offenses, opprobrious to the Church, and to be
grievously punished by the Magistrates authority, albeit he profess his
repentance in words, yet for the trial thereof, and to take away the offense,
let him for a time be kept from the Communion. Which how often, and how long it
is to be done, let the Consistory according to their discretion determine.
After which, if the party repent, he is brotherly to be received again; but
not until he have openly professed his repentance before the Church, by
consent whereof he should have been Excommunicated.

If the Ministers of any public charge of the Church commit any such thing,
they are to be deposed from their charge.

Of the assemblies of the Church.
PArticular Churches are to communicate one with another by common meetings and
resorts. In them only Ecclesiastical matters are to be handled, and of those,
only such as pertain to the Churches of that resort; concerning other
Churches, unless they be desired, they are to determine nothing further then
to refer such matters to their next common and great meeting.

Let the Order of proceeding in them be this: First, let the survey be taken of
those that are present, and the names of those that are absent, and should be
there, be noted that they may give a reason at their next meeting of their
absence, or be censured by the judgment of the assembly next. Let the acts of
the last assembly of that kind be read, that if any of the same remain
unfinished they may be dispatched. Then let those things be dealt in that are
properly belonging to the present assembly. Where first the instructions sent
from the Churches are to be delivered by every one in order, as they sit
together, with their Letters of credence. Secondly, let the state of the
Churches of that resort be considered, to wit, how they are instructed and
guided. Whether the holy Doctrine and Discipline be taught and exercised in
them, and whether the Ministers of public charges do their duty, and such
like. Further more they shall determine of those things that do appertain to
the common state of all the Churches of that resort, or unto any of the same,
which way may be sufficient for the oversight of the Churches. Lastly, if it
seem meet, the Delegates present may be censured.

They that are to meet in such assemblies are to be chosen by the consent of
the Churches of that assembly and conference to whom it may appertain.

Let such only be chosen that exercise public function in the Church of
Ministry or Eldership, and which have subscribed to the Doctrine and
Discipline, and have promised to behave themselves according to the Word of
God. Notwithstanding it may be lawful also to be present for other Elders and
other Ministers, and likewise (if the Assembly think it meet) for Deacons and
for Students in Divinity, especially those that exercise themselves in
expounding the holy Scriptures in the Conferences, and be asked their opinion.
Which in students is to this end, that their judgments in handling matters
Ecclesiastical may be both tried and sharpened. But they only are to give
voice which are chosen by the Churches, and have brought their instructions
signed from them.

If there fall out any very weighty matter to be consulted of, let notice of it
be given to the Moderator of the Assembly next going before, or to the Minister
of that Church where the next meeting is to be. The same is to send word of it
in due time to the Minister of every Church of that Assembly, that they may
communicate it aforehand with those to whom it appertains, that the
Delegates resorting to the next meeting may understand and report their
judgments.

In appointing of the place for the Assembly regard must be had of the
convenient distance, and other commodities that no part may justly complain
that they are burdened above others.

In every such Ecclesiastical Assembly it is meet there be a Moderator. He is
to have charge of the Assembly, to see it kept in good order. He is always,
if it may be conveniently, to be changed. The choice is to be in this manner:

The Moderator of the former Assembly of that kind, or in his absence the
Minister of the Church where they meet, having first prayed fitly to that
purpose, is to move the Assembly to choose a Moderator. He being chosen is to
provide that the things done in the Assembly may be written, that the Delegates
of every Church may write them out and communicate them with the Conferences
from whence they came.

The Moderator is also by the order and judgment of the Assembly, to give
answer either by speech or by Letters, to such as desire any answer, and to
execute censures if any be to be executed. Further, he is to procure all things
to be done in it godly and quietly, exhorting to meekness, moderation of
spirit, and forbearing one of another where need shall be, and referring it to
the Assembly to take order for such as are obstinate and contentious. Lastly,
he is to remember them of the next meeting following, with thanks for their
pains, and exhortation to proceed cheerfully in their Callings, and so
courteously to dismiss the Assembly. Before such time none may depart without
leave of the Assembly.

Those Assemblies, according to their kinds have great authority, if they be
greater; and less, if they be less. Therefore (unless it be a plain act,
and manifest unto all) if any think himself injured by the less meeting, he
may appeal still unto a greater, till he come to a general Council, so that
he ascend orderly from the less to the next greater. But it is to be
understood, that the sentence of the Assemblies be holden firm until it be
otherwise judged by an Assembly of greater authority.

Assemblies or meetings are either Conferences or Synods.
COnferences are the meetings of the Elders of a few Churches, as for example,
of twelve. There are to meet in a Conference chosen by the Eldership of every
particular Church, one Minister, and one Elder. The Conferences are to be kept
once in six weeks.

They are specially to look into the state of the Churches of that resort and
Conference: Examining particularly these several points. Whether all things be
done in them according to the holy Doctrine and Discipline of the Gospel, (to
wit) whether any questions be moved concerning any point of Doctrine. Whether
the Ecclesiastical Discipline be duly observed. Whether any Minister be
wanting in any of those Churches, that a sufficient one in due time may be
procured. Whether the other Ministers of public charge in the Church be
appointed in every Congregation. Whether care be had of Schools, and for the
poor. Finally, they are to be demanded wherein any of them needs the advice
of the Conference, for the advancement of the Gospel amongst them.

Before the end of the meeting, if it shall be so thought good by them, let one
of the Ministers assembled in Conference either chosen by voice, or taking it
by turn, Preach publicly. Of his Speech let the rest judge among themselves
(the Elders being put apart) and admonish him brotherly, if there be any cause,
examining all things according to those Rules that are before declared in the
Chapter, concerning the things that are to be performed by those that preach.

Of Synods.
A Synod is the meeting of chosen men of many Conferences. In them let the
whole Treatise of Discipline be read. In them also (other things first being
finished as was said before) let all those that are present be censured (if it
may be done conveniently) and let them also have a communion in, and with the
Church where they were called.

There are two sorts of Synods, the first is particular, which comprehends
both the Provincial and National Synod. A Provincial Synod is the meeting of
the chosen Men of every Conference, within the Province. A Province contains
four and twenty conferences.

A fit way to call a provincial council may be this, The care thereof (except
themselves will determine of it) may be committed to the particular Eldership
of some conference within the Province, which by advise of the same conference
may appoint the place and time for the meeting of the Provincial Synod.

To that Church or Eldership are to be sent the matters that seemed to the
particular conferences more difficult for them to take order in, and such as
belong to the Churches of the whole Province, which is to be done diligently,
and in good time, that the same may in due season give notice of the place and
time of the Synod, and of the matters to be debated therein, that they which
shall be sent may come the better prepared and judge of them according to the advice of the Conferences.

Two Ministers and as many Elders are to be sent from every Conference unto the
Provincial Synod: The same is to be held every half year or oftener till the
Discipline be settled. It is to be held three months before every national
Synod, that they may prepare and make ready those things that pertain to the
National. The acts of the Provincial Synod are to be sent unto the National,
by the Eldership of that Church in which it was holden, and every Minister is
to be furnished with a Copy of them, and with the reasons of the same. A
National Synod or convocation is a meeting of the chosen men of every
Province, within the Dominion of the same Nation and civil government. The way
to call it (unless it shall determine otherwise) may be the same with the
Provincial, that is, by the Eldership of some particular Church, which shall
appoint the time and place of the next National Convocation; but not otherwise
then by the advice of their Provincial Synod.

Out of every Provincial Synod there are to be chosen three Ministers, and as
many Elders to be sent to the National. They are to handle the things
pertaining to the Churches of the whole Nation or Kingdom, as the Doctrine,
Discipline, Ceremonies, things not decided by inferior meetings, appeals and
such like. By the order of the same, one is to be appointed which may gather
into one book the Notes of every particular Church.

Thus much for particular meetings, the universal follows, which is called a
general, or oecomenicall council, which is a meeting of the chosen men of
every National Synod. The acts of all such counsels are to be registered and
reported in a book.

The Discipline entitled the Discipline of the Church' described in the Word
of God, as far as we can judge, is taken, and drawn from the most pure
Fountain of the Word of God, and contains in it the Discipline of the Church
that is necessary, essential and common to all ages of the Church.

The Synodicall also adjoined as it rests upon the same foundations is
likewise necessary and perpetual, But as far as it is not expressly,
confirmed by Authority of the holy Scripture, but is applied to the use and
times of the Church as their diverse states may require, according to the
Analogy and general Rules of the same Scripture, is to be judged profitable
for the Churches that receive it, but may be changed in such things as belong
not to the essence of the Discipline upon a like godly reason, as the diverse
estates of the Church may require.

The form of the Subscription.
THe Brethren of the conference of N. whose names are here under written have
subscribed this discipline after this manner. This Discipline we allow as a
godly Discipline, and agreeable to the Word of God, (yet so as we may be first
satisfied in the things hereunder noted) and desire the same so acknowledged by
us, to be furthered by all lawful means, that by public authority of the
Magistrate, and of our Church it may be established.

Which thing, if it may be obtained of Her right Excellent Majesty, and other
the Magistrates of this Kingdom, we promise that we will do nothing against
it whereby the public peace of the Church may be troubled. In the mean time
we promise to observe it so far as it may be lawful for us so to do, by the
public Laws of this Kingdom, and by the Peace of our Church.

FINIS.

