TRIPLE EPISCOPACIE: OR, A THREEFOLD ORDER OF BISHOPS: One of GOD, another of
MEN, and another of the DEVIL; the two later must be plucked up, the former
only must continue, and the Reasons why.

With a declaration of certain other weighty points concerning the Discipline
and Government of the Church:

Matthew. 15. 13. Every plant which mine heavenly Father has not planted should
be rooted up. three men holding books Of God,
bible

Of Man,
Service book

Of the Devil.
Sup^^sticion

Lo, here are three men, standing in degree,
The least of these, the greatest ought to be.
The other two, of men and of the Devil.
Ought to be rooted out for ere as evil.


Printed, and are to be sold by SAMVEL SATTERTHVVAIT at his house (...)

A threefold Episcopacie. We must needs make three Bishops: 1. Of God. 2. Of
MAN. 3. Of the DEVIL.

BIshops ordained of God, or set up by the Law of God, does declare nothing
else but their calling, which by another more special name, are called
Pastors, whom (says Luke) the holy Ghost has appointed Bishops to feed the
Church of God. And either of these names of Pastor or of Bishop, is proper to
them in the new Testament, whereby the Apostle does distinguish them from
Apostles, Prophets, and Evangelists, which were callings to endure for a time,
Ephesians. 4. 11. and from Deacons, 1 Timothy 3. and Phil. 1. 1. for otherwise they
are every where called Elders; and Paul does call his Apostleship a Deaconship,
Romans 11. 13. But they are called Bishops in regard of the sheep committed unto
them, as though a man should call them Watchmen of overseers.

These now were one alone, as where any Church but one Pastor, or more, if the
Church had more than one. And the meeting of them together jointly with their
Elders, whom Paul calls Governors, of the other common name called, was the
eldership. Their duty was to attend on the Word and Prayer, both publicly and
privately, and in common to govern the Church, as appears by many places of
Scripture.

That the same were subject to Magistrates, though profane, appears not
only by the example of Christ the high Priest, and of the Apostles, but also
by the express words of Paul, 1 Timothy 2. and Luke 12. 13.

Of the Bishop that is of Men.
THe Bishop that is of Men, that is to say, brought into the Church by the
alone wisdom of man, besides the express Word of God, is a certain power
given to one certain Pastor above his other fellows, yet limited with
certain orders or rules provided against tyranny. They which did bear this
office of Bishop, are called Bishops in regard of their fellow Elders, and the
whole Clergy, as watchmen set over the Clergy.

That this calling was not brought in by the Word, it is manifest by that, that
there is not to be found in the new Testament, so much as one syllable, whereby
there may be the least surmise of any such thing: For although we doubt not,
but all things ought to be done orderly in the Lords house, and therefore, that
some one should be president in every assembly, whom John in the Revelation
seems to call the Angel of the Churches, And Austin calls the moderator
Proestota, yet this moderator of actions of the Church, saving this one thing,
that he was the first in order in the company, had no authority over his
fellows, neither did he exercise any higher office. Therefore the author of
the Epistle to the Hebrews, as Hierome notes, does call the whole company of
the Elders, Governors; not any one certain man. Such a one was Peter many
times in the very assembly of the Apostles, of a great authority surely amongst
the Apostles, who were all otherwise equal, and yet he himself one of the
company of the Apostles, sent by his companions to Samaria with John, Acts. 8.
14. and in the assembly giving an account of his Ministry, to those that were
of the Circumcision, Acts 11. 2. But if any such Bishop like authority of any
one above the rest, as there was afterward, had been then, surely the Apostles
would have set down their names even at that time, in their letters which they
sent from one to another, especially seeing Paul in his Epist. to the
Philippians does name Bishops in the plural number, and Deacons: or there
should have been at least some peculiar mention made of them. Which, seeing it
is not done, it appears that amongst these Governors, there was none in
degree above their companions and fellow Bishops: but as occasion served, the
Churches were governed by a fellow-like and equal authority, among the fellow
Elders in their Elder-ships, he only going before the rest, whose godliness
and authority, the company did most allow of.

Epiphanius against the Arrians, defending the contrary opinion: namely, the
Bishop ordained by man, as ordained by God, does bring forth three Reasons to
the contrary. Two, as it were, out of the Word of God: the third out of the
History of those times. The first place is, 1 Timothy 5. 1. Rebuke not an Elder,
etc. whereby he gathers, that Timothy had some authority over the Elders,
that is, the Pastors of the Church of Ephesus. But (be it spoken with the
favor of so worthy a man) he should have marked, that here an Elder is called,
he that is such by age, not he that is a Pastor, which is declared by the
opposition next following of young men.

Another place is out of the same Epistle, Receive not an occusation against an
Elder, 1 Timothy 5. 19. Whereby he gathers, that the Elders were subject to the
Bishops and tribunal seat. But who will grant him that Timothy was Bishop of
Ephesus? For the history will easily refell that, which the Fathers do report
as certain; for no man can deny that Timothy was one that accompanied Paul,
and therefore no Bishop assigned to any one certain place, who was sent one
while to this place, another while to that, for the establishing of the
Churches. And finally, that he was an Evangelist, and not a Bishop of any one
certain flock. I have desired thee (says he) to abide at Ephesus, whilst I
went into Macedonia. And why so? namely, to look to the Church which he had
begun to establish, until he were called for again, which he does in the
other Epistle. What? and did the Apostle rob the Ephesians of their Bishop
without asking their Church at the least? Surely, when he went last to
Jerusalem, never minding to return to Ephesians either he would have restored
Timothy unto them, or the Ephesians would have required him again of the
Apostle, when he put them in mind of so great danger at hand: or if any other
were to be put into his room, he would have made express mention in that his
divine Sermon. But he is said to have sent for the Elders only, and to have
warned them of the duty belonging to them all. Yet it need not seem strange to
any that the Evangelist Timothy, a man endued with so many and so great gifts
remaining at Ephesus, did govern all things by his direction, as one in degree
above the Elders, and by the Apostles authority appointed there for a time.

But let us grant Epiphanius more than this, that Timothy had the authority of
the laying on of hands out of these words of the Apostle, Lay not hands
suddenly upon any: Let us grant this too, that these duties belonged to the
Governors, yet we deny that Timothy could have had any authority therefore
over the Elders of Ephesus, except he had been an Evangelist. For Paul
himself, Tim. 4. 14. does show sufficiently, that the laying on of the hands
was done in the name of the Eldership it self, not by the authority of any
superior. Now the Reasons of the same Epiphanius are these: Bishops (says he)
beget the Fathers of the Church, but Elders the sons, in as much as Bishops,
and not Elders ordained Bishops. But what is this else, than to ask to have
that which is in question: for it may be, and ought to be answered, that the
Bishops took that authority upon them, without warrant of the Word of God, and
that the rule is false, which concerning this matter, does attribute it to the
Apostles, which may be showed by the ordaining of Timothy by the Eldership.
Again, for as much as election is the chief ground of Church-offices, which
depends of the voices of the whole company, and not of the laying on of
hands, which made not Bishops, but sent them into their possessions after they
had made them: we may more truly affirm with the Apostle, that the holy Ghost
by the voices of the childrem themselves, made the Fathers, and not the Bishops.

Another of his Reasons is, a depraving of places alleged out of Paul, that the
Church being newborn, Bishops could not be so established every where at the
first, as is to be seen in the election of Deacons. Whom yet can Epiphanius
persuade, that it was for want of fit men only, that there were many Bishops in
every Church? For that which not only Hierome, but Epiphanius against the
Miletians also reports, concerning them of Alexandria: that is, Alexandria
never had two Bishops, as the other cities, upon what ground the men of
Alexandria did it, and followed not the examples of other Churches, let them
see to it.

Finally, that this kind of Bishop, which who so bears it, is not the first
in order amongst his fellow-Elders, but in degree above them, being the only
man in his diocese, is not ordained by the Word of God, but by custom amongst
the Fathers, Hierome witnesses, as very many others long since have observed:
For these are his words in his Epistle to Euagrius.

The Apostle (says he) does teach plainly, that Elders and Bishops are all
one, etc. And whereas one after was chosen to be set over the rest, that (says
he) was a remedy found out for a remedy of schism, that every one drawing
Christ unto himself, might not rend the Church in sunder. For at Alexandria
also, from the time of Mark the Evangelist, to the time of Heraclea and
Dionyfius the Bishop, the Elders placed one in a high degree or place, chosen
by themselves, whom they called a Bishop. Moreover, upon the first to Titus. An
Elder, and a Bishop (says he) is all one, and before by the instigation of the
Devil, there was partaking in Religion, it was said amongst the people: I am
of Paul, of Apollos, and of Cephas: the Churches were governed by the common
advice of the Elders. But after that every one imagined, that those whom he
baptized were his own, and not Christ's: it was decreed throughout the whole
world, that one chosen of the Elders, should be set above the rest; unto whom
all the care of the Church might appertain to the taking away of the seeds of
contentions. And a little after, as the Elders know, that they are subject by
the custom of the Church to the Bishop that is set over them: so let the
Bishops know, that they are greater than the Elders, rather by custom, then by
any virtue of the Lords appointment. Yea, and Augustine also in his 19. Epistle
says, that according to the titles of honor, which the use of the Church has
gotten, the office of a Bishop is greater than the office of an Elder.

Chrysostom also witnesses, upon 1 Timothy cap. 3. that the Bishops differ from
the Elders only in ordination, that is (as Theophylact speaks more plainly) in
the only Ceremony of consecration. Theodoret writing upon the same place,
says, That in the old time they called the same men Elders and Bishops, as
though, for sooth, the thing it self had then been only called by another
name, and goes about to prove that, because Paul calls Epaphroditus the
Apostle of the Philippians. This is of no weight at all. The names which are
given of fellow laborer, and fellow-soldier do declare, that he was no
Bishop in this kind of Bishop, but an Evangelist, tied to no one City, much
less to a Diocese, of the number of those whom the Apostles did keep, to
send to and fro, at the motion of the Spirit of God. The Council of Nice also,
disputing about the degrees of Bishops, allegeth ancient customs, whereof we
mind to speak anon. And whereas Cyprian not in one place, calls the Bishops
successors of the Apostle, whose authority is from God; and if we take it so,
as though by the very commandment of God, these Bishops are the same, that in
time past the Apostles; the thing it self does refute that, seeing there was
always a certain portion assigned to every Bishop. But the Apostles, by
direction of the Spirit of God, though not confusedly, did exercise their
Ministry throughout the whole world. But if this be true, there should have
been more Bishops in the Church of Rome it self, namely, Peter and Paul,
which yet afterward was accounted peculiar to one. And surely, there cannot be
more, the chief in one and the same company at one time. And whereas the name
of Bishops is said of the Apostleship, Acts 1. 20. It makes nothing to the
matter, except a man by a like reason would have the Deacons to have been
Apostles, because Paul calls his Apostleship a Deaconship or Ministry. But
we are to look into that also, that Hierome might seem to be of the mind,
that this kind of Bishop begun then, when as schisms arose up in the Church.
That this is not so, we may gather out of Paul himself, who of purpose writing
to the Corinthians about the same matter, does not only pass over this
remedy, but also as foreseeing such a matter, does in the title of the Epistle,
join unto himself Sosthenes, to teach by his example how carefully this
Primacie is to be avoided in assemblies of the Church, who (it is evident were
not only the first in order next unto Chist, but also highest in degree) did
execute their Ministry in common. Wherefore, no not the same Paul alone would
excommunicate the incestuous persons by his Apostolical authority, but by the
authority of the whole Eldership, neither does Peter doubt to call himself
fellow Elder.

Nay, this is so far off from being any good remedy, from staying of
schisms, that contrariwise there was never more bitter contention in the
Church, than about this Primacy which had never come to pass, if this
pre-eminence above their fellows had been forbidden, or rather, if men had
never brought it in. Whereupon we conclude, that this kind of Bishop which is
not of order, but of superiority, was brought in of man, and as Hierome says,
Tit. 1. by little and little, and that so as he is indeed thought, that the
plants of dissension might be thereby plucked up, all the care was committed to
one man.

And whereas he says in the same place, that it was decreed throughout all
the world: We are to understand it no otherwise, than of a privy custom,
brought in by little and little. And whatsoever is found in Ignatius, or other
ancient Writers, when the Bishop of Satan was not yet found out, touching the
authority of the Bishops or Overseers (as Justin speaks) is to be understood
of this kind of Bishop.

The Bishop of the Devil.
THus also we describe the Bishop of the Devil; that even as that kind of
Bishop ordained of God, degenerated by little and little into an humane
ordinance, whereof we entreated in the second place: so this of the Devil,
against which we now labor, is sprouted forth of the corruption of the Bishop
brought in by man. Of this intolerable corruption there are foul, most
manifest, and undoubted marks. Some of this kind of Bishops have wholly singled
themselves from the Elderships, so that they have nothing to do with them:
Some have wholly abolished them. And that they have challenged unto themselves,
and I know not to what Officials, the whole guidance of the Church, and chiefly
the authority to elect, to depose, and to excommunicate: so as they not only
are above others, but as it were alone do exercise Lordship over Gods
inheritance, contrary to the express inhibition of Peter.

That also they have invaded upon temporal dominions contrary to the flat
commandment of Christ. And that they will not only be present, but also
president in causes of this life, and affairs of the Commonwealth, the
commandment of the Apostle to the contrary notwithstanding, 2 Timothy 2. 1. Cor.
6. yea, and that of Christ himself, Luke 13. 14.

That also they waste in riot and stateliness against conscience and all
shame, the goods consecrated to holy uses.

That also they have tied the Spirit of God to certain places and persons, as
though the Bishop of the more noble place, must needs have necessary gifts
above the rest: or, as though he, who now is most fit, must needs be so always.

And last of all, that they are the Image of that beast which is described,
Apoc 13. as Pope Anacletus himself witnesses, Epist. 2. in as much as they
are distinguished among themselves, by those their thrones and degrees,
according to the pattern of the Roman Empire The Apostle, Act. 20. 19. foretold
of this Hierarchy, as they term it, of the false Bishop, which in time became
an Antichristian primacy. And in the 3. John 9. it is most manifest, that Satan
begun even then to lay the foundation of this mystery.

Now, out of the History of the Nicene Council, which otherwise touching
doctrine, was every where received, it is clear how foul dissentions were
even then, of ordering the bonds between the Bishops, the fountains whereof
they were so far from damming up, that pretending ancient customs, they
confirmed the Patriarchship, and made a way for the horrible Papacy of Rome
then sliding on, and underlaid the seat for the Harlot that sits upon seven
mountains. But far be it off, that these things, although they have their
ancient and great authority, should be prejudicial to the divine and
Apostolical writings, according to the rule whereof, there is no wise man will
doubt, that the councels themselves are to be squared.

And to what purpose should I confute that agreement between the Priesthood of
the Levites, and of Christ, which some old writers allege to prove this
divellish oligarchy, and at the length even plain tyranny. Indeed, it is
evident, that the high Priest was a figure of Christ himself, whose second
Image, if we grant that the Bishops are, it will follow, that there are as
many images of Christ as there be Bishops, in as much as there is none above
him. But contrariwise, no Bishop has been the Image of Christ. Besides,
Bishops are not heads of the universal Church, but of their own particular:
Nay, no heads at all, in as much as the Bishops are under Archbish. the
Archbishops under the Patriarchs, and they again under the Pope, that is not
under the true figure, but the counter seit figure of Christ. Now, seeing that
our only head is taken up into heaven, a successor for whom living for ever, we
are not to seek; who sees not, that the Elders ordained by the Law of God,
come in theroome of the Priests of the Law, and the Deacons to answer to the
Levites?

The first Question.
Seeing that there are ordained in several Churches, several Pastors and
Ministers, and the authority of all Christ's Ministers in the Church seem to be
equal: Whether the office of the Bishops be necessary in the Church to procure
meetings when occasion ser^^^^ (...) on just causes: or whether all the
Ministers having equal authority, and not under the authority of any superior
Bishop, ought to choose fit men with the consent of the Patron who enjoys the
benefice, and the people themselves, as also to correct and remove from the
charge. And the manners of the people themselves, who can hardly, or not at
all, be kept in obedience without the bridle of the Bishops authority, which
may run through in visiting of the Churches of the Province, may put us in
mind to retain such Bishops. Again, so often as there shall be dealing in
matters touching the safety of the common wealth in the solemn assemblies of
the Land, according to the Laws which the kingdom has of a long use and
custom received, there can be nothing established without the Bishops, who
have the third room and place in the kingdom, which to take away, or wholly
to put down, would be very dangerous to the Commonwealth.

The Answer to the first Question.
Whereas Satan's Bishop has been the overthrow of the Church and all the
Christian kingdoms, whose head is the Roman Antichrist, it is to be looked
unto of all hands, especially of all godly Princes, that they at once abolish
it, if they mind the reformation of the Church, and their own safety. As for
the Bishop ordained by man, and brought into the Church by little and little,
whereby Satan made him a way for greater things, it had been tolerable, so
that with all the ancient good Laws providing for the resisting of the
governing by some few, had been in their former force again. But besides, that
the state of the world being quite changed, experience of so many ages does
teach us too well, that unless this root also be plucked up, it will come to
pass, that the same fruit will sprout and bud forth again. Finally, seeing
the Lord has so often decided this controversy of superiority among his own
Disciples, that he shut it clean out, seeing the rule both for doctrine and
good order of the Church, is to be sought for out of the very writings of the
Apostles: and it is manifested, the Churches then prospered, when all this
authority of one man over the rest, yet was not, but as that grew up, so all
things fell to decay. Finally, seeing where the rem. nants of this government
by a few, are not clean taken away, the work of the Lord, is openly hindered:
Our judgment is, that after the chasing away of this device of man, the
Churches shall be well provided for, if they may be repaired according to the
writings of the Apostles. And the reformation, as it seems to us, consists
herein; that first the whole kingdom is to be divided into regions. Again,
the regions into parishes, either of cities or country towns; that in places
most fit, and of greatest assembly, be placed Pastors, being lawfully
propounded by the company of their own Elders, to the Kings Christian
Majesty, or the deputies thereof, and allowed of all. Lastly, being received
of their own people, over whom they are to be set, they be placed,
promulgation having gone before: and that in every parish the Pastor may have
with him sit men to assist him, who also may, being watchful, salve up the
offenses not so weighty, leaving the other of greater importance, to the whole
Eldership. Also, that Eldership made of the Pastors of parishes, both of City
and country, and a sufficient number of men approved for their godliness and
wisdom, lawfully also chosen, as is aforesaid, be placed in most fit places,
who assembling at a certain time and place, may determine of the Church
affairs, of their own government, according to the prescript laws, first set
down in a general Council, and afterward confirmed by the authority of the
sovereign Majesty.

In this company let there be chosen by common voices, one first in order, not
superior in authority, who shall be thought most fit, and that without making
choice of any certain place, and but for a certain time. After the expiring
whereof, either let another be chosen, or else the same man is to be established
again for another time by a new consent: whose office is to make report of the
common affairs to the company, to demand their judgments, and to give
sentence by the judgment of the Eldership, having no authority given him over
his fellows, to whom rather he is most subject. In this assembly let nothing
be debated of besides matters of conscience, and that by the Word of God, and
the laws of Church discipline established, drawn out of the Word of God, not
one whit meddling with the authority of the civil Magistrate. And let the
sovereign Majesty and the lawful Magistrate thereby appointed, be keepers of
this order, and the punisher of those that seditiously rage against it. But if
any shall imagine that this sudden abolishing of both these Bishops will
minister occasion of new stirs, although we see not with what conscience the
Bishops may so challenge to themselves the goods of the Church, or else call
themselves Bishops, and live like Princes of this world: yet for to keep the
common peace, the sovereign Majesty may leave unto them, which are now
Bishops, their revenues whole for their life time, so they trouble not the well
made order of the Church, with providing there be none chosen into their place,
when they be dead. As for the frowardness of the people, it may be kept down
better a great deal by other reins, than by the authority of a false named
Bishop; as by preaching of the Word of God, by censures of the Church, and the
authority of the Magistrate of the country, against the open troubles of the
public state, either Ecclesiastical or civil. The Churches may very well be
visited at set times without any great cost and Bishoplike pride, by them whom
every Eldership has chosen under the Kings Majesty's authority, which will not
be always necessary, if the Elders do rightly execute their office. This
sitting of the Bishops with the authority of the voice in the public estates
of the kingdom, came in with a manifest abuse, contrary to the Word, and
therefore in our mind is to be utterly abolished. For the Bishop has nothing
to do in ordering of mere civil affairs: yet forasmuch as in such assemblies,
especially some things many times happen, belonging to the establishing of the
estate and order of the Churches: the keepers whereof the godly Magistrates
ought to be, and not the over-turners, as we are taught by the example of holy
Kings. It is very necessary, that as often as the meetings of the land are
proclaimed, intelligence thereof be given to the chief Elders, who may be
present in the behalf of their seigniories, yet not sitting as Judges, but
dealing about matters of the Church only with the estates of the land, as
their Elderships have given them in charge, except the states think good upon
extraordinary occasion, that they ask counsel of God about some other
affairs also. If also the Kings Majesty think good to admit into counsel
amongst the Pastors, or Elders, one, who shall be thought to be wise and
experienced in things, he may admt him, though not as a Pastor or Elder, yet as
a citizen. And it were injurious to remove from their office in the Church, the
Pastors, and much less the Elders and Deacons, otherwise Laymen from that
degree, which they hold as Citizens, either in the common wealth, or in the
assemblies. But the Kings Majesty, and all the Princes and Lords, are to be
exceeding wary, that they make not courtlike governors of their Pastors, to
the great indamaging of the Church, as we have a fair example in Eusebius of
Nicomedia in the Court of Constantine. As for the right of the patronage, lest
some man should say, that it was gotten for himself; Our judgment is, that it
may be concealed, but not without some conditions: namely, that he which shall
be chosen by the free voices of the Eldership, should be offered by the Patron
to the Kings Majesty, being also to set upon his charge, after the consenting
of his flock.

The second Question.
After that religion is reformed, it has been a received custom that the
Bishops, and of the Ministers, Pastors and Elders, so many as should be sent of
the Bishops, should assemble themselves, that they, together with the chief
Barons and Nobles which profess the true Religion, might make inquiry after
the doctrine and manners of every one. But seeing the Prince himself is a
lover of the true Religion, it is a question whether there may be such an
assembly without the consent or commandment of the Prince. Whether the
Ministers alone may meet as often as they will. Last of all, whether the Nobles
and other godly men and Elders (which are yearly chosen with us out of the
people and nobility together) may lawfully or expediently come without the
commandment of the King to such assemblies. Which assembly of the nobles and
people, seems to some altogether needless under a godly Prince, either
because it has not long since been received by a mere custom without any
Law, and that under a Prince, who then resisted the Religion, whereby such
assemblies might have the greater authority: or else because it may seem
dangerous, if so many nobles assemble so often without the consent of the King,
they may sometimes consult of something else besides Religion.

Others think that this assembly is in no case to be refused, but rather that
it is very needful, that the Nobles and other Religious men be present as
helpers to their Ministers in the assembly bearing witness of their life and
the peoples behavior, otherwise it will after come to pass, that if an impious
Prince reign afterward, that neither Ministers may safely assemble, neither
can the determination be put in execution, without the consent, help and aid
of the nobles.

To the second Question.
Councels are necessary in the Church for many causes, both to the retaining of
agreement, and also to the seeking of remedies by common advice for the dangers
which fall out. And last of all, to take order for those that rest not in the
judgment of particular seigniories, if they think they have any injury done
them. And these Councels are either of a whole nation, or of some one Region or
Province or Diocese (as they have begun to speak after the description of the
Provinces of Rome) divided into many Seigniories.

It is necessary that the Councels of the Provinces be divided for many causes,
and except there be other urgent causes, they would be appointed rather every
halse year then quarterly, lest in discoursing of matters, they spend the time
in vain. And it will be best for the avoiding of Ambition, that the Council
be not always assembled in the same place of every Province: but as soon as
one half years Synod is discussed, it may be determined by common consent,
where shall be the place of the next following. It will be very well that two
of every seigniory of the Province, chosen by common voices, and sent with some
commission, be present at these Councels: one a Pastor, and the other an Elder
or a Deacon, Neither would we have any strife about sitting, who should sit
first or last, but every one to sit, as it shall fall out without any
contention, and the judgment to be given as any one shall sit.

Now, he that shall govern the whole action, who was chosen for this one
thing by common consent of voice, the chief Pastor of the place, being in the
beginning President, which office shall end, when the Council shall be ended.
There are no matters in question to be propounded to these Councels to take
knowledge of, but such as are more spiritual and belong to that Province,
where they are to be decided without appeal by the Word of God, and the rules
there set down, without any brabling or disturbance of the company. Yet if any
great private controversy shall fall out in the Provincial Synod, where some
may think that he has cause to complain of injury done unto him, he may put
up his complaint to be decided in a general Council; when it shall be thought
good to assemble it.

Furthermore, it is chiefly required, that if all the Laws of the Church be
established of the Kings Christian Majesty: It follows, that the Councels
are to be assembled by his commandment and direction, and not otherwise.
Neither yet is there a new commission every time to be sought for of the King
for that purpose, seeing his Majesty has once established a Law touching the
set times of ordinary Synods. But yet if there arise just cause of suspicion of
handling in these meetings, other matters besides mere Ecclesiastical, it
shall be safe for the Kings Majesty to send one of his Subjects whom he will,
to grace by his presence the meeting of the Synodes: where yet he is not to be
as a Judge, except some thing fall out where it is necessary that the authority
of the civil Magistrate be put between.

A general Council of the Land is not to be assembled, but upon great causes,
which seeing they agree not with set times, it follows, that they are not to
be standing neither; but as often as something shall seem to fall out of so
great weight, either in doctrine or in government of the Church, as cannot well
be decided but in a general meeting, that Province is to be careful, to put
other Provinces in mind concerning that matter, in these half years Synodes:
that with the consent of all, or the greater part, they go unto the Kings
Majesty, who (as being a Christian Prince, is to desire nothing more, than the
peace of the Churches) ought without any stay or doubting, at the suit of the
Churches, to appoint a place and time for a general meeting, as the need of
the Churches shall require. And the same order may seem to be kept in the
general councels, which is in the Provincial, whether before the Kings Majesty
himself, as in some general Councels, the Emperors of Rome have been
present, or before the honorable Lords of the Kings Majesty. And last of all,
whatsoever shall be allowed by the common consent of the Synod, shall be
confirmed by the Kings Majesty's express authority, after the example of the
godly Emperors.

FINIS.

