THE TRIAL OF JVDGE JENGINS At the House of COMMONS BAR: UPON An Impeachment
of High Treason, on Monday last, Februa. 21. 1647.

WITH Heads of the Charge read against him. And his ANSWER.

ALSO The Votes of the House of Commons thereupon.

Printed at London by Robert Ibbitson in Smithfield, near the Queens-head
Tavern. 1647.

Feb. 21:
Imprimatur,

Gilb. Mabbot.

THE Trial of Judge JENKINS at the House of Commons Bar, upon an Impeachment
of High Treason.
Die Lunae 21 Februa. 1647.
MR. Wollaston, the Keeper of Newgate, brought Mr. David Jenkins, formerly a
Judge in Wales, now a Prisoner in that Jail, committed for High Treason, by
the House of Commons, to the Commons Bar, according to an Order of the House
sent to him on Saturday last, Feb 19. 1647.

The House being acquainted that he was at the door, appointed the Sergeant at
Arms to call him in, and according he was brought to the Bar, with the Mace
before him.

Mr. Speaker (according to the Order of the House, he being a Delinquent,
brought upon his Trial) commanded him to kneel down but he refused, only put
off his hat, and looked round about the House: and being told that he ought to
kneel, yet (although he has been a Judge himself, and knew the Laws, and that
he ought to kneel and submit to the House in a Parliamentary way) he still
continued obstinate, and would not kneel at all.

The House proceeded to the reading of a Charge of High Treason, and other
high-Misdemeanors against him, (diverse witnesses being then ready at the door,
if occasion was, for them, or any of them, to be called in, some of the
Collections of the Charge are to this effect, Viz.

Heads of a particular Charge of High Treason, and other high misdemeanors,
against Mr. David Jenkins, read in the House of Commons on Monday the 21 of
Feb. 1647. He being then at the Bar.
1 That the said David Jinkins, to the betraying of the trust reposed in him,
he being a Judge in Wales.) did condemn several innocent men to suffer death,
for ayding and assisting the Parliament.

2 That he did himself in person take up arms actually against the
Parliament, contrary to the known Laws of the Land, to destroy them.

3 That, in a Traitors manner, the said David Jinkins, did stir up, and
combine Forces to the disturbance of the peace of the Kingdom, and actually
levy war against the Parliament.

4 That the said David Jenkins has (traitorously against the Parliament and
the peace of the Kingdom) charged the Parliament, and the Commissioners of the
Great Seal, with counterfeitting of a Great Seal. And opposed the power of
the great Seal, as illegal, because it was not delivered to them by his
Majesty, and in a seditious manner, charged the Commissioners of the said Great
Seal, to have neither Court, Seal, or Commission, and therefore not to be
submitted to.

These (with other particulars) were at large charged against him, at the Bar
in the House of Commons, being drawn up upon the examining of witnesses, were
read unto him.

After which M. Speaker by Order of the House asked him what he had to say for
himself?

David Jenkins said, that they had no power to try him, and at the Bar in the
open House, gave very contemptuous words, and reproaches against the Houses,
and the power of Parliaments. And by a seditious construction quoted diverse
Authors, to traduce the power, and proceedings of the Parliament, with much
venom and spleen.

He was called in twice but went on in obstinancy in opposition to the House
he spoke much, and still in contempt of the Power of Parliament.

He said that six years since the difference between the King and the
Parliament was about the Militia, pleading for the King to have it, both by sea
and land and (whereby it is manifect he seeks to ruin the Public weal) He
said that Kings formerly did not enter into covenant with the people to
maintain the Law of the Land, but only to be merciful to the people.

He threatened the Parliament with the Kings numerous issue, of the many
persons in Scotland, of the Blood-Royall, and that during their life England
shall have neither peace nor profit.

With diverse other Reproachful words, such as the like were never offered in
the face of a Parliament.

After that he came out of the House, he put off his hat, and spoke to this
effect, before the Soldiers of the Guard, and diverse Gentlemen at the door.
Gentlemen, God bless you all, Protect the Laws of the Kingdom,

He pleaded still that there can be no Law without the King, nor repeal of
Laws without him, and speaking disgracefully of the power of the Parliament.

But when he was asked what obedience should be given to a King, that should be
distracted, or not capable to Govern, or that, in malice, against his people
went about to destroy them, and whether the Parliament ought not in such a case
to protect the people this and some other arguments alleged to him, did much
puzzle him to answer them.

In the mean time the house of Commons went upon a debate concerning him, and
made several Votes, viz.

i That the carriage of the said David Jenkins in opposition to the House, is
an high contempt and misdemeanour.

2 That the said contempt is a breach of the Privileges of Parliament.

3 That for the said contempt against the House he shall be fined a thousand
pound.

4 That he be carried back to the prison of Newgate.

Then the House proceeded upon an Ordinance against him, which has been twice
read, but before it pass, he is to receive a full trial.

And for that purpose, all the witnesses are to be summoned in, and examined
before the whole House; and they are also to be sworn, and examined before the
Lords.

The said Mr. David Jenkens, is to be present at the examinations of the
witnesses, and to give in his Answers, and in this method the Houses are to
proceed to his Trial, and so to Judgment.

And in the mean time he is Ordered to be kept prisoner in Newgate

FINIS.
Feb 21.. 1647.
Imprimatur

Gil. Mabbot.


