SAINTS IN ENGLAND under a CLOUD; And their GLORY eclipsed in this Life. OR,
The case of Desertion briefly stated in a few considerations with several
Symptoms of the Saints decreasing and declining in Spirituals. Very useful in
these times, wherein there is much of notion, and little of the power of
godliness manifested. Published for the Edification of the Faithful, By W. T.
M. G.

LONDON, Printed by Matthew Simmons for Hannah Allen at the Crown in Pope's Head
Alley. 1648.

THe Saints are clothed with the Sun, yet often under a Cloud. Their path is
like the morning light, shining more and more unto the perfect day, yet they
often decline. Cloudings are their affliction, and Declinings are their sin.
To prevent or remedy either, is a great work. Both are aimed at in this little
Treatise: wherein the case of a Spiritual declension is distinctly stated, and
the symptoms of it clearly represented. So that the Christian Reader comparing
his heart and life with this discourse, may either praise God for his growth,
or pray away his decays in grace. Soul-declinings are too visible among the
Saints in England: And therefore I judge it seasonable to make this or any
faithful Discovery and cure of them legible.

June 9. 1648. Joseph Caril.

To his Excellency the Lord Fairfax, General of the Parliaments forces.
Noble Sir;
THE God of Armies has done great things by you as an instrument, for the
peace and security of his people in this bleeding Kingdom; I may speak it
(without flattery) that you are the glory of England, and so you will be ever
esteemed by all true Englishmen; your place is honorable; your birth is
noble: but much more your spirit which God has raised and fitted for great and
honorable acheivements. When Saul was made King of Israel the Lord gave him a
royal spirit fit for Kingly government; and surely when your EXCELLENCY was
appointed General of the Parliaments Army; a fourefold portion of the spirit
of wisdom, courage, and meeknes, was poured out upon you; that you might be as
bold as a lion, and yet as meek as a lamb; which two excellent virtues have
shined forth in your conversation.

The Lord has given large testimony to your faithfulness by many unparelled
successes, so that the Army under your EXCELLENCIES command since they were
first modelt'd have not been frustrated in any warlike attempt; and however
some discontented spirits that are engaged to a faction) censure your
proceedings, yet I am confident there is no man that has a drop of true
English blood running in his veins, or that has a right understanding of the
privileges of the subjects of England but will bless God for you, and make an
honorable mention of the very name of the Lord Farfax, and the army under his
command.

You are yet on the stage, and many eyes are upon you; he that has hitherto
enabled you to play your part wisely for the preservation of three bleeding
Kingdoms, will (I doubt not) in his own good time bring you off honorably, and
all those under your command that are acted by the same principles of public
interest.

It Is true (dear Sir) there are diverse members of your Army (as there will be
in such a numerous body) that are slight-spirited and hold many heterodox and
unsound opinions, which no sober Christian can approve of; yet this I can
speak (upon mine own certain knowledge) That there is a precious public
spirited people in your army; a people that mourn for the divisions of the
times; a people that seek the glory of Christ and not their own honor; a
people that walk much with God and have a close communion with him; and who
recount continually (with much thankfulness) the sweet providence and
dispensations of God toward them and the whole Kingdom by them.

As for your Excellency. It has pleased the Lord to try you several ways not
only by the malicious slanders of open adversaries, and by your own bodily
weaknesses; but also the unChristian and ungratful censurings of pretended
friends: and of these their are two sorts (i) those that are riged in their
opinions and practice touching, Church government, and (2) another sort who are
or were lately menbers of your army that pretend to be above forms, and to
have an extraordinary knowledge of divine mysteries but to speak the truth,
they are low and carnal and disobedient to lawful authority both civil and
martial: and indeed the power of our good God has wonderfully appeared, in
carrying you through these great temptations and difficulties with much
settlenesse and chearfullnesse of spirit: If the Lord had not been on your side
(may you say) you bad been swallowed up ere this; and the prosperity, and
happiness of three Kingdoms in you: Let the Lord have the glory of this, as
he has had of his other mercies from your Excellency.

Sir, I am bold to tender this little treatise to your Excellency: if I did not
look on you as humble and spiritual, I should not present it to you, for it is
not suitable to the wisdom and greatness of the world, but to the experience
of humble Saints; with whose hidden privileges and comforts (I doubt not) you
are well acquainted. Now the Lord stablish you in the truth, and bless you and
yours with all spiritual and heavenly blessings in Christ.

Your EXCEL. humbl: and faithful servant W. T.

To the Reader;
Christian Reader,
I Have observed (of late) that the Saints generally through out this Kingdom
have loft much of the power, and vitalls of Religion, since they entered on
needless disputes; and while some pretend to live above Ordinances and Forms,
they live below God and Christ, in and upon the world; and although they offer
liberty to others, yet they themselves (as the Apostle speaks) are the
bondslaves of corruption, being lulled asleep by Satan's delufions, and so made
insensible of the want of those real enjoyments of God which they have had in
his Ordinances. See the Epistle of 12. Ministers to the Reader, before the Book
entitled, The clear Sunshine of the Gospel breaking forth upon the Indions in
new England, lately set forth by T.S.
I have therefore thought it my christian duty to publish this small Treatise
(as that which may be useful for such Professors, if God give a spirit of
humility and self-denial) which though it be dressed in a simple and homely
phrase, without the varnish of humane elocution, yet it discovers some
spiritual experience of the work of Gods spirit which infinitely surpasses
all humane and acquired abilities. The poor Indians in New England, may shame
the Professors in Old Enland.


Others have treated on this Subject in printed books: but as I humbly
conceive (with due regard to their elaborate discourses) they speak not fully
to the present condition of the Saints, and to these times of confusion,
wherein the mystery of iniquity works in a high measure under gilded and
specious pretenses, and Satan himself is transformed into an Angel of light.
What shall we say of this age? it is neither wholly night, nor wholly day with
us: but we expect a glorious evening; we look for a time when truth shall
vanquish error, and light shall swallow up darkness. And those that have a
name they live and yet are dead, shall be plainly discovered, and that mask
and vizard pulled off, where with they have blinded many precious Saints, (I
mean) their pretenses of high and glorious discoveries, without relation to
the blood of a crucified Christ, which is not only slighted and undervalued by
Papists and others that live under a Covenant of works: but also by another
sort of Professors, who have much of the Spirit of divine light, and dying to
the flesh and carnal created things in their mouths, (the Lord Jesus in the
sufferings of his humane nature is laid aside as an Almanac out of date, or an
old administration or fleshly appearance out of which they are passed) And this
is that spirit of Antichrist which began to work in John's time, and appeared
much in Luthers time in Zwenkfeld and his followers, who judged Luther and
other faithful Christians to be men of a very low strain, that lived under a
carnal administration upon the letter and history, not knowing God in Spirit
and in mystery: which is the very language of the manifestarians, in these
days concerning many precious Saints.

I shall be far from stirring up the civil Magistrate against those that err
in judgment about spiritual things (so they submit to lawful Authority in
civil things) for this were to thwart the strain of Christ's Gospel, which
exhorts us to love and forbearance, if peradventure the Lord will give them
repentance, to the acknowledgment of the truth Heb. 10.2
our weapons (says the Apostle) are not carnal but spiritual 2 Cor 10 4.
and my Kingdom (says our Savior) is not of this world, if it were my
disciples would fight. Ioh. 18.36.
Howbeit it concerns every Christian soul to mourn before the Lord, and to be
earnest with him in prayer, that he would consume the man of sin with the
breath of his nostrills and that he would throw down the strong holds of Satan,
(namely) those horrid errors, and blasphemies which are crept into the Churches
of Christ. I shall desire thee (Christian Reader) to read this little book
without prejudice, and to avoid jangling and strife, and mind the things that
tend to peace and edification. Now the Lord give thee and me a seeing eye, a
hearing ear, and an understanding heart; Farewell.

To the Christian READER.
HIgh seize, and choice Communion with God, are a great Happiness: such
as many Saints come not up to, nor all that pretend they have them, do enjoy.
Some judge themselves on the top of Mount Sion, when they are at the foot
thereof, they are without sin, perfect, live in the Essence of God; neither
Christ, nor any of his institutions are considerable with them. The Ministry
is a delusion, the Ordinances of the Gospel, low administrations, empt,
Clouds, fleshly appearances, and dead forms, righteousness, holiness,
faith, are to them of little account. Immediate revelations are only looked
at, the holy Scriptures laid aside. Whereupon Satan's delusions are often taken
for the Spirits discoveries; and these conceit themselves all Spirit, manifest
much flesh. Is it not fleshly wisdom to put down what the infinite wisdom of
God has set up? to seek out inventions of out own, and not to be content with
the Gosspel, which is the power of God to man's salvation. Reader, art thou
beyond others in knowledge, holiness, high seize? let not thy tongue,
but life, declare it. Christ had the Spirit not by measure, John 3.34. he was
anointed above his fellows, Heb. 1.9. filled with all the fullness of God,
Colos. 2.9. yet he conversed with sinners, Matthew. 9.11. prayed with others,
Luke 9.28. frequented the Assemblies, Luke 4.16. preached to mixed multitudes,
Mark 6.33, 34. prayed before meat, Matthew. 19.19. 15.36. Communicated with his
disciples, Mat. 26.29. made use of the Scriptures, Luke 4.17, 18, 19, 20, 21.
and directed others to do so. John 5.39. How is it then that any should cast
off such duties? Have they more of the Spirit than Christ? Are they richer than
he? If such thoughts lodge in them, the Lord teach them to know themselves, to
be lowly minded, and to esteem other better than themselves, Phil. 2.3. What
heights soever such speak of, they are in a bottom greatly benighted and
clouded, decayed, rather than grown Christians. Declinings are dangerous,
growth is comfortable. It Is matter not only of observation, but of complaint,
that the power of godliness is much abated in most Saints. Many in England
have lost their first love, it is time for them to remember former days, and to
do their first works, lest severe judgments divorce them from their sweetest
comforts. This little Treatise, very savoury and seasonable, written with a
Dovelike Spirit, will discover to thee thy declensions, and direct thee to the
ready way of recovery. Read it with a single heart, and the Lord make it a
blessing to thee.

W. G.

Saints in England under a Cloud.
THat such as are spiritual, and have tasted of the specially love and grace
of God, may yet (for ends best known to him) be cast into a sleepy, and
languishing condition, and brought to a low ebb in their own sense and
feeling, is an experimented and undeniable truth; and hereof we have diverse
instances in holy writ: Job was a godly man there was none like unto him; and
yet the Lord hid his countenance from him, and writ bitter things against him:
Job 13.26.
and David and Heman were filled with horror and amazement in the apprehension
of the Lords withdrawing his comforts, and the light of his countenance from
them: and the Church of Christ was once put upon this sad and dismal
conclusion, That the Lord had forsaken her, yea her Lord had forgotten her Isa.
49.14 Cant. 5.6.
: Nay in this we have the Lord Jesus himself for an example, who (as touching
his humane nature) wanted those sensible feelings and enjoyments of God which
he was wont to have: in so much that this blessed Savior of mankind cried out
in the bitterness of his soul; My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me Mat.
27.48.
? And again, My soul is exceeding sorrowful, even unto the death Mat. 26.38.
.

For our better understanding of this truth, Two sorts of desertions.
and that we may have a distinct knowledge of it according to the Scriptures;
we are to consider two sorts of desertion, which differ much the one from the
other.

First, 1. A real desertion.
there is a total real desertion and rejection by God; and this is when the
Lord hardens the heart of a man (as he hardened the heart of Pharaoh Exo. 4.21
) and wholly withdrew the influence and beams of divine grace from him; the
Lord will call him no more, he will breath on him no longer by the breathings of
his Spirit; now this kind of desertion true Saints are not capable of, nor
subject unto; For although there is oftentimes a withholding from them,
comforts and inlargements, yet never a total withdrawing of grace Isa. 54.10.
: for it is grace, and grace only that supports them, and bears up their
spirits in a drooping and disconsolate condition; it is the power of the Lords
grace upon their souls, that prevents sad disasters, and desperate attempts
which otherwise Satan and their flesh would put them upon.

Secondly, 2. A suspension of comfort.
there is another kind of desertion, which cannot properly be called a
desertion, but rather a Suspension of those soul refreshing manifestations,
influences, and consolations of the Spirit, which a Saint has formerly
enjoyed: neither is this total and universal, but partial and graduall in
respect of measure and degree; a true Christian is never so forsaken of God,
but he partakes (in some measure) of the influences, and opperations of the
Spirit of grace (though there may not be such heatings and warmings as there
have been.) The Sun (you know) shines upon the earth in Winter as well as in
Summer, yet the earth is not so warmed and heated, nor the trees made so
fruitful by the influence of the Sun in Winter, as in Summer; just so it is
with a Christian: he has his Winter as well as his Summer seasons, his nights
as well as his days, his complainings as well as his consolations; but yet
observe, that this kind of desertion (if it may be so called) which a Saint is
capable of, is rather in his apprehension than real; The soul-ravishing object
(which is God in Christ) is not darkened, or eclipsed in it self, God is
perfect light and in him is no darkness at all 1 John 1.5.
: But the darkness is in the understanding, or apprehensive faculty, which is
but renewed in part; the flesh (as a thick mist, or cloud) interposes it self
betwixt the object and our understandings (as betwixt the Sun and our
corporal eyes) so that we cannot clearly see into the things that are
revealed, or comprehend fully the glory of the spiritual object.

The Saints may be considered under a twofold notion, Saints considered in a
twofold relation.
or relation, and this will help much to the clearing of the matter in hand.

First, 1. In justification.
as they are in a state of Justification and union with God in Christ; and this
admits of no change, diminution, or increase; the weak Christian is as much
justified, as much united to God; he has as much interest and propriety in
Christ (though he cannot make so much advantage and improvement of it) as the
strong Christian, who has a greater degree of faith: the ground and matter of
justification (which is) the free grace of God in and by the blood of Christ as
Mediator Ephesians. 1.6, 7. To 3.24 25.
remains sure, steadfast, and unmovable, (notwithstanding the daily sinnings
and backslidings of saints) the Covenant which they are under, is an
everlasting Covenant of free grace, which cannot be disanulled Jer. 32.40.
and the bond of their spiritual union (which is) the Spirit of grace and love
is an eternal bond that can never be broken, or dissolved, (as the bond of
temporal Marriage may be) God has betrothed his Saints to him for ever, and
has given them his Spirit to be a Seal Ephesians. 1.13.
and a pledge of his everlasting love to them.

Secondly, 2. In Sanctification.
the Saints may be considered in their Sanctification and communion with God,
which is an effect, or product of their justification and union Gal. 4.6.
: now in this the Saints have experience of great changes, and alterations; of
ebbings and flowings (as in the Sea) of increasings and decreasings (as in the
Moon;) Their communion with God, and enjoyment of him, is sometimes greater,
sometimes lesser, as God manifests himself to them, and the Sun of
righteousness shines on them; you shall have a Christian high in communion
with God, when he meets with a ful-tide and fresh-gale of the Spirit The
Spirit is compared to wind Cant. 4.6.
, he goes on merrily in his way, and passes over the Red sea of temptations,
(as it were) with a fore-right wind; but when the wind blows not at all, or
else blows but softly, either he cannot hoiz sail, or at the best heeds
forced (having but a side wind) to tacke often about, and make many boords,
before he get to shore.

Here you may ask me why Saints now under the new Testament administration,
Quest.
are less surprised with spiritual languishings, and swoonings than Saints
(were) under the old Testament administration?

The old administration ingendered bondage, Answ.
and terror in those who lived under it; although they were sons, yet were
they dealt with as servants; though they were heirs, yet were they used as
children in nonage Gal. 4.1, 2, 3. Gal. 5.1.
: but the new administration brings peace and liberty to Saints: This the
Apostle handels excellently (as in other places,) so especially in the 2 to the
Cor. 3 Chap. Therefore those Christians that act much from a spirit of bondage,
and yield to slavish fears, and terrors (though they may be right in the
maine) yet doubtless their carriage and demeanor is not answerable to the new
Testament administration; Now the reason (as I conceive) why Job and David, and
other eminent believers in the old Testament, had so much horror upon their
spirits, is, because they lived under a typical administration, and were types
of Christ; God exhibited spiritual things to believers under the old Testament
in Types and shadows, Heb. 10.1.
not only in their bodily sufferings: but also in their spiritual agonies, and
temptations; in the one they shaddowed forth the sufferings of his body; Vide
Calv. Institu. lib. 2. Cap. 11. Sect. 3. ad finem.
and in the other the sufferings of his soul; And now the old administration
being abolished, and a new one taking place; we do not read, that the Saints
who lived since Christ's ascension, have had so much horror and bondage upon
their spirits, as Job and David had.

Nevertheless (it cannot be denied, but) the Saints have their ebbings, and
languishings under the new Testament more, or less: Paul that chosen vessel
of God had conflicts within, as well as terrors without; he was not always
carried up into the third heaven (as he writes of himself) 2 Cor. 12
, but had sometimes experience of sad qualmes, and aguish fits; and in John's
time, which (according to the opinion of some) was a time of more light, The
Angels of the Church of Ephesus Rev. 2.4, 5.
, (who were faithful, and so acknowledged by Christ himself, in the 2, and 3,
verses) had lost their first love, and were fallen from their former zeal; and
therefore Christ bids them remember from whence they were fallen, and repent,
and do their first works; So that in the purest times the Saints have had
their cold fits, their retrogradations and goings back in spiritualls.

Thus much for the proof of the premises; now that the weak ones may not be
offended at this discourse, for I would not willingly offend, or stumble any
that profess the name of Christ, it will be necessary to premise a few
cautions, 4. Considerations by way of caution.
for preventing mistakes, and informing the judgment a right, before I come to
the Symptoms; and in order there unto, I shall lay down these following
considerations.

First, as Satan (that lying spirit) may delude thee, 1. Consi. Satan will
tempt you to think worse of your spiritual condition than it is.
by flattering thee into a belief that thy soul is in a flourishing and
growing condition (by reason of some gifts and enlargements) when it is
otherwise, and thus he deals with hypocrites, and temporary believers; so may
he likewise accomplish his wicked design, by persuading thee, that thou art in
a languishing condition when thou art not; by the one he would puff thee up,
and make thee glory in the flesh, and by the other he would expose thee to such
discouragements, that thou should not serve God comfortably in thy calling:
as he will tempt thee to think better of thy condition than it is; so likewise
to think worse of it than it is; by presenting before thee false mediums, and
glasses, and putting thee upon consulting with flesh and blood, which is no
competent judge in spiritualls, for the flesh savoureth not the things of God
Mat. 16.23.
.

Now this latter temptation of Satan commonly surprizeth a Christian, when he
has a deep sense of his own vileness, and is much abased in himself, and his
heart in an humble and contrite frame; for then it is most probable such a
temptation may take a deep impression; therefore at such times, take heed you
deny not the work of grace, and the operation of the Spirit of God upon your
souls; acknowledge your own nothingness, but with all be sensible of the love
of God toward you, in changing and renewing your hearts.

Secondly, 2. Consi. The keenness of a corruption does not infallibly preupose
a declension in spiritualls.
it cannot be safe for a Christian to judge of his spiritual condition by the
keenness, or activeness of this, or that corruption in him for the soul may
have intimate converse and familiarity with God; and be filled with that peace
which passes understanding, when (yet) it is buffetted, and exercised with the
bublings up, and stirrings of corruption; and this was Paul's case in the 7th to
the Romans, 1 Romans 7.
where after a great conflict with the flesh, he comes off a conqueror by the
consideration of the victories of Christ: and in another placer he tells us
that he had a thorn, or prick in the flesh (which was some notable corruption
or other) and though he had prayed thrice against it, yet still it continued
vexing the good man, to the end that his faith and patience might be exercised,
and therefore the Lord tells him for his comfort, that his grace was sufficient
for him (notwithstanding the malice of Satan, and the daringness of his lusts)
and that the Lords strength was made perfect in his weakness 2 Cor. 12.
. Here Paul was not in a spiritual consumption, because he was exercised with
the stirrings of corruption: but (therefore) God permitted it that he might not
trust in himself: but in the Lord; so neither should thou presently conclude
(upon the stirring of every corruption) that thou art run behind hand in true
mortification; for as some Patients that are nigh unto death make a great
bustling, and are so strong when they are giving up their last breath, that
two, or three men can scarce hold them; or as the body of a man after he has
received his deaths wound, will leap, and move from place, to place; even so
it is with the lusts and corruptions of believers; for though they are knocked
in the head, and have received their deaths wound by the death of Christ, yet
will they bustle and make a stir, so long as we remain in this Tabernacle,
and until the flesh be perfectly subdued in us by the Spirit. 3. Cons. The
distemperature of the body hinders internal actings


Thirdly, the constitution of the body (if distempered with melancholy, and
other ill humors) may and does cloud the understanding, and interrupt the
internal motions and operations of the renewed soul; So that a Christian
cannot clearly apprehend them in himself, or make out the same to others.
Melancholic Christians are as full of divine experiences, as heavenly and
spiritual as any; yet when this duskish humor, and black distemper of
melancholy (which may well be called the devils cushion) is prevalent upon
them; oh what false conclusions! what gross mistakes and carnal reasonings!
what closing in with Satan's suggestions, and fighting under his colors, do
these bewray at such times; how shameless are they in denying what Christ has
done for them, and what the Spirit has wrought in them, and evidenced to them;
which they will thankfully acknowledge, when the sky is clear and the weather
fair, when the cloud of melancholy is dispelled, and the foggy mists of
temptations scattered; and therefore it behooves Saints not to judge of their
spiritual condition, in melancholic and pettish fits, for the Satan and their
own lying hearts (joining together) will deceive them.

Fourthly, 4. Cons. Saints differ in the measure of their spiritual growth.
as some trees grow taller and shoot forth more than others; so is it with
Saints in their spiritual growth: there are Saints of several degrees, and
measures, as there are several gifts and dispensations, and but one Spirit 1
Cor. 12.
so there are several degrees of faith, love joy, humility, and all (even the
least) of them streaming from that one Spirit; Unto every one of us is given
grace according to the measure of the gift of Christ Ephesians. 4.7.
. Some have more, and others less, according to the wise dispensation of the
Father; perhaps thou art not so high in communion with God as others are; thou
have not high seize, but art low and dead hearted, comparing thy self
with others, will thou therefore conclude, that thou have no communion with God
at all, or that there is a decrease of thy communion with him? that thou art no
member at all because thou art not the most eminent member? or that thou art a
languishing dying member, because thou art not so nimble and active in
spiritual performances as others? These are false conclusions, and show forth
a great deal of pride and unthankfulness.

Thus much by way of caution, now I come to the Symptoms of a Christians
abatement in spiritualls; in the handling whereof I shall be somewhat large.

First, 1. Symtome If there be a decay of love, humility and self-denial.
if there be a decrease, and abatement of spiritual love, humilty, and
self-denial; so that you grow slight and envious, and high minded, truly it
is a sad Symptom: it may be, you have great gifts, and excel in outward
performances, and high and lofty expressions, of more than ordinary enjoyments
of God, as if ye only did reign, and none were comparable to you, and yet
(all this while) you walk proudly, and vainly, and whilst you boast of high
seize, you live much below God; Thus it was with some in the Church of
Corinth, 1 Cor. 4.7, 8.
who looked on Paul and the other Apostles, as not worthy to be compared with
them in spiritual enjoyments, and here upon the Apostle makes use of that
ironicall expression (which we may take up in our days) Now ye are full; now
ye are rich, ye have reigned as Kings without us, and I would to God that ye
did reign, that we also might reign with you. [I would it were so indeed,
(as you say) that we might bear you company and share with you in your
enjoyments] But these very Corinthians were so far from excelling the Apostl
(in a spiritual way,) that they were much below him, and walked carnally; Are
ye not carnal (says the Apostle) for as much as there are divisions among
you, and I could not speak to you as unto spiritual, but as unto carnal even
as unto babes in Christ 1 Cor. 3.1
.

Now in this there may be great mistakes, and therefore take these rules.

First, if you have greater enjoyments of God than your brethren, Rule 1. The
clearer apprehensions you have of God, the viler you will be in your own eyes.
you will then see more into the evil of your own hearts and bewail the same;
doubtless the more you see of God the viler you will be in your own eyes; if
God appear unto you in his glorious perfections; you cannot but lie in the
dust, in the sense of your own filthiness, and imperfections: and for this we
have diverse instances in scripture: when the Lord had invailed his glory to
Job: how did it humble and abase him? Behold (said he) Job. 40.4 5.
I am vile, what shall I answer thee? I will lay my hand upon my mouth, once I
have spoken but I will not answer, yea twice but I will proceed no further. [I
will expostulate the case with God no longer, neither will I plead mine own
righteousness with him.] And again, Chap. 42. verse 5, 6.
I have heard of thee by the bearing of the ear, (that would not move him) but
nowmine eye sees thee [now I come to see thy glorious Attributes and
perfections, thou having opened mine eyes by thine own Spirit] wherefore I
abborre my self in dust and ashes. And so Ezekiel, when he saw the appearance
of the likeness of the glory of God, Ezekiel. 1.28.
he fell on his face; in token of humility, and self abasement. And the Prophet
Isaiah when he saw that glorious vision Chap. 6.5. cried out in the sense of
his own vileness, We is me for I am undone, because I am a man of unclean
lips, mine eyes have seen the King the Lord of hosts. If you have seen the Lord
in his glorious appearances, oh your hearts will be humble, your consciences
tender, your spirits full of self deny all; the visions of God and Christ will
(above all other things) throw down the pride of the flesh, and cause the
soul to have a high esteem of the Lord Jesus, as the chiefest of ten thousand.

Secondly, 2. Rule The more precious will the Ordinances of the Gospel be to you
the more precious and beautiful will the word and Ordinances of the new
Testament be to you, (as Preaching, Prayer, Sacraments, Communion of Saints) I
dare say, if you enjoy much of God (as you say you do) you will be so far from
sleighting the Ordinances of God (under the notion of carnal and fleshly
dispensations) as that you will have higher thoughts of them than you have had
the Lord Jesus pouring out his comforts upon you in and by these as
conduitpipes) you will remember that you have had sweet meetings with God,
heavenly breathings and warmings, unspeakable comforts, and refrshings from
him; and that God has unvailed, and uncovered his face, and appeared
gloriously unto you in these administrations; and therefore the word and
Ordinances of Christ will be precious to you as gold and sweeter unto you than
honey, and the honey comb Psa 19.10
. And indeed it does not a little amaze me, that any who profess the name of
Christ and union and fellowship with him, should abandon the Ordinances of
Christ (now under the new Testament) seeing David speaks Prophetically (in
reference to this latter administration Psalm. 84.1, 2, 3, 4. and the Prophet
Mica. chap. 4. verse. 1, 2.
) of the amiablenesse of Gods Tabernacles, and the Saints longing after God in
the use of his Ordinances. Has not the Lord refreshed your souls in Prayer,
and ravished your hearts, while you have communicated with the Saints in a
Sacrament? and have ye not by an eye of faith (in the use of an Ordinance)
seen Jesus Christ crucified for your sins, and sitting at the right hand of his
Father making intercession for you? such as have experience of the
Communications of God can set to their seals that this is true, and therefore
take heed of sleighting those administrations, wherein you have found God so
abundantly.

Thirdly, 3. Rule The conversation will be more holy i, in general.
if you have high enjoyments of God in the Spirit, your conversation will
excel in spirtualnesse, and holiness, by the irradiations of God upon you,
yea, there will be such Christian care, and watchfulnes, that you will fly
from the very appearance of evil, from the garment spotted with the flesh, from
fleshly tamperings, lacivious gestures, and unprofitable discourses; where the
Spirit of God works most there will be the greatest conformity to God (who is
holiness it self:) But to descend to particulars. 2. More particularly.


First, 1. You will be in a good measure crucified to the world.
your affections will be in a high degree crucified to the creature: true
mortification consists not in a few good words; and fine expressions, for there
are many that speak much of dying to the flesh, and carnal things, who yet
live much in the flesh and upon the world; really therefore to be crucified to
the world, is to have the heart and affections alienated from it, and set upon
God and heavenly objects; our conversation is in Heaven (says the Apostle)
Phil. 3.20.
and we sit together with Christ in heavenly places, and I am crucified to the
world and the world to me Gal. 6.14.
. (That is) I am so dead to the world that it is indifferent to me, whether the
world smile or frown upon me; for I care no more for it, than it cares for me;
and again, They that are Christ's have crucified the flesh with the affections
and lusts Gal. 5.24
.

Secondly, 2. You will be tenderhearted to the lambs of Christ.
you will exercise abundance of Christian love, meekness and tendernese of
spirit toward the Saints, even the weak ones, that scruple the lawfulnes of
some things (which you are resolved in:) you will bear with them, and be
exceeding loath to offend them; Paul was a very high Saint, he came behind
none in spiritualls nay, he excelled all his contemporaries; and yet how
compassionate and tender hearted was he to the weak ones? in so much, that he
writ a whole chapter to the Romans upon this subject Romans 14.
; and truly this was that frame of spirit which appeared in Christ himself; in
all his transactions on earth, he gave a strict charge to Peter to feed his
lambs (his little ones) and puts the evidence of Peter's love upon this; And how
full is that expression of his to our purpose, I have yet many things to say
unto you, but you cannot bear them now Io. 16.12.
. Intimating, that he would speak to them as they were able to bear; he had
milk for babes, and strong meat for strong men: And that other saying of our
Savior shows his exceeding great and tender care of his little ones Mat. 28.6
whosoever shall offend one of these little ones which believe in me, it were
better for him that a millstone were hanged about his neck, and that he were
drowned in the depth of the sea. Surely these Christian affections, and tender
bowels are much wanting in some Professors, who care not how much nor how often
they offend and stumble their weak brethren (as they tear me them) by their
unsavory words, and scandalous walkings.

Thirdly, 3. There will be more patience and cheerfulness in your sufferings
for truth.
it will appear further in your sufferings for truth; if you have a high
communion with God there will be much divine power, heavenly wisdom, and self
denial, expressed in your sufferings and persecutions: for, according to the
measure of your communion with God, and conformity to Christ your head, so will
your carriage and demeanor be in time; of suffering: If therefore you manifest
much pride, and turbulency of spirit, and consult much with flesh and blood at
such times; it seems you are but low in your apprehensions of God, and your
seize are not so great as you would make the world believe.

Secondly, 2. Symptom.
another Symptom may be this; If you rest much in the streams, and seldom
go to the fountain.
If you can content your selves and rest satisfied with the streams, without
going to the fountain, and wellhead: perhaps you look further than the bare
outside, and shell of an Ordinance (as praying hearing, etc.) to those
refreshings and communications which you meet with in Ordinances, but yet you
live below the author and fountain of them, in as much as you live and feed
on that which is dispensed and communicated in an Ordinance, and not on the
Lord himself who is the dispenser of it, and the fountain form whence it
flows and is derived unto you; and this is to live on something below God, who
is the only soul satisfying good: Now hypocrites and carnal Gospellers may
have some kind of joy, refreshing and delight in Prayer, and hearing, as those
in Isaiah Isa. 58.2.
, and the stoney ground, which for want of root withered away; As we ought not
to live on our own actings, or apprehensions, so neither ought we to
terminate our joy on those quickenings, and enlivenings which we meet with in
Ordinances; but on him who is the God of Ordinances, and the God of all
consolation: If therefore you can warm your selves at the fire of inlargments
and elevations of spirit (kindled in the performance of duties) its a Symptom
you rather decrease, than grow in spiritualls: for a woman to content her self
with the gifts, and love tokens of her husband, or bridgroome, and to let out
the stream of her affections on these, without minding the person of her
husband, its no good argument, that she has strong affections to her husband,
so neither does it argue that you have an intimate communion with God, if you
can satiate, and glut your selves, in a few love tokens; (namely) those
heatings and meltings of spirit, which you have experience of in your
performances. 3. sad Effects, flow from this.


Now this produces three sad effects;

First, 1. Self exalting and carnal boasting
it produces vain carnal boasting, and self exalting (if not in words yet)
the frame and bent of the heart runs in that channel; there is a secret inward
stroking, and admiring of self; and applauding of gifts, instead of the rich
love of God (which only puts the difference between you and others. Amat deus
non aliunde hoc habet sed ipse est unde amat Aug.
)

Secondly, 2. Slight nes of spirit.
from hence proceeds that rugged, slight, and superficial frame of spirit,
(when the heart hangs loose from God and is indisposed to spiritual things)
and of this the Saints are very sensible, and do exceedingly bewail it; for
whilst their hearts remain in this frame every temptation, and every carnal
object seizes upon them.

Thirdly, 3. Sad qualmes and pressures of heart.
this also produces sad qualmes, and soule-oppressing distempers: if you will
be setting up Idols instead of God, and give that honor to them which is due
only to God, I can assure you (from mine own experience) you will meet with
sad-after claps: there will be a great and ponderous weight (I mean) much
guilt upon your souls, your consciences will misgive you, and accuse you,
though your Idols may be sweet in the mouth, yet will they be bitter in the
belly; the end will be bitterness, and you will lie down in sorrow Isa. 50.
last.
: God will put water into your fire, and extinguish it; such joys as arise
from false grounds (are but like the crakling of thorns under a pot) and will
not long endure.

Thirdly, 3. Symptom. If the applause of men transport you.
if you be deeply affected and transported, and that constantly with the
applause of men (and namely) such as are in some measure spiritual; ye wait
for it, and when it comes, ye can swallow it down (as a sweet morsel) and
glory (in this) that you are counted more eminent than others; and on the
contrary, you greive as much when other Professors are in more credit, and in
greater repute for their spiritual gifts, and endowments, than your selves:
We read that the other Disciples were highly offended, with that motion of
prefetring John and James before them, and that they contended (among
themselves) which of them should be the greatest; and John's Disciples Joh. 3.
were angry, that Christ and his Disciples, should have more followers and
admirers than their Master, whereby they intimated that they were but babes in
the knowledge of Christ: but as for the Baptist himself, it seems he had much
of God in him, for he ingenously acknowledged, that Christ must increase and
himself decrease, neither did he repine, but rejoice, and was glad that Christ
the Bridgroome was exalted, whose messenger and servant he was. This seeking
honor of men was the great let, and obstacle in the way of the Jews, so that
they could not believe in Christ; How can ye believe which receive honor one
of another, and seek not the honor that comes from God only Joh. 5.44.
? and indeed this was the break-neck sin of Diotrephes, for the Apostle writes
of him, that he affected the pre-eminence (that is) to be counted more
excellent, then the Apostles and their followers; that so, he might make a
worldly gain of his spiritual gifts: and if it be thus with you, that you are
taken with the applause of men, and love to have the pre-eminence, it is a
Symptom that you are in a sleepy condition, and want that spiritual sense of
your own nothingness, which you have formerly had.

Fourthly, 4. Symptom. If you kick a^ reproof.
if your hearts be haughty and stubborn, so that you will not take a reproof
kindly, and meltingly, but kick against it, and your brethren that admonish
you; and instead of an ingenious acknowledgment of your fault, ye frame
excuses, and your spirits swell, and grow big upon it; I'ts evident (in this
case) that God has hid his face from you, and thus it was with Peter that holy
man, who (when the Damsel charged him home with truth) he grew outrageous,
and passionate, and no marvel, if he took it no better from her, for the good
man was left to himself, that he might have experience of his own weakness,
and learn to put his confidence in the Lord. After Christ's ascension (when
there was a greater effusion of the Spirit upon him, and the mystery of faith
was more clearly revealed to him) we do not read that he was so vain, and
passionate, under a reproof (when Paul withstood him to the face for his
double dealing Gal. 2.11.
:) We may therefore conclude, that those Professors who spurn at their
brethren for giving them a seasonable reproof, and admonition, and (upon this
account) grow strange to them, and refrain their society, are much under a
cloud, and in a great measure carnal, for otherwise the reproof of a Saint
would be as oil powered out on their heads, and it would be entertained as a
messenger from God.

Fifthly, when there is a neglect, 5. Symptom. When you are formal in your
duties.
(or superficial use) of Christian duties, and services; I have observed two
extremes in Professors: some do idolize the means, and set up Ministers and
duties in the place of Christ, (as if these were crucified for them:) and
others slight duties, and Ordinances, as dead forms, beggarly rudiments,
carnal administrations, fleshly appearances; and thus it was in the Church of
Corinth, 1 Cor. 1.12.
one said he was of Paul, another of Apolle, another of Cephas; here was
idolizing men, and means, but then there was another sort, that said they were
of Christ, that is (as I conceive) in opposition to men, and means; they were
so for Christ, and his imediate teachings, and discoveries, that they sleighred
the faithful dispensers of the Gospel, and neglected all means, and Ordinances
as the teachings only of man, and not of God. Ordinances neglected from a
twofold consideration.


I shall only mention a double consideration from which some Professors neglect
Ordinances.

First, 1. Consi. That there is a going out to the world which is distinct from
the Church of Christ.
because there is: going out to the world, and dispensing the Word, and Prayer
to the world; therefore Saints may not communicate therein; This is a gross
mistake and (I hope) there are not many of this judgment; for,

First, 1. No difference of places under the new Testament.
there is no difference of places, neither are we tied more to one place than
to another (now under the new Testament) since that typical holiness that was
in the Temple is abolished, and thus much in effect our Savior told the woman
of Samaria Ioh. 4.21.
. Truth is truth, and the Gospel is the Gospel wheresoever it is dispensed; as
one place is not more holy than another, so neither is one place more unholy
than another, in the days of the New Testament.

Secondly, 2. Christ preached to the world and Saints did accompany him.
Christ preached to the world, to the Scribes and Pharisees, to all sorts of
men, and embraced all places, occasions, and opportunities, to declare the will
of his Father, and his Disciples (who were Saints) were with him, and heard
him, and Paul and the other Apostles preached often in the ships to the rude
Seamen, and donbtlesse, some of the Saints did accompany them, and were
present at their exercise.

Thirdly, 3. Saints may hereupon praise the Lord, who has deliveredthem out of
the world.
by that doctrine which is delivered to the world; ye that are Saints (who me
the Lord has taken out of the world) may have occasion ministered to praise the
Lord, and to magnify the riches of his grace, (who has put a difference
between you and the world, and has translated you out of the kingdom of
darkness, into the kingdom of his dear Son:) ye have no excellency which
you have not received, and therefore why should ye boast as if ye had not
received it? why should ye insult over those that are in a natural conditin
and have not yet attained to the knowledge of the mystery of Christ? I am sure
the Gospel teaches you another lesson, and if ye obey the voice thereof, ye
will be tender hearted, and compassionate toward such as are without, seeing
they cannot help themselnes till grace over power their hearts: the same power
that raised Christ from the grave enables a poor soul to believe in Christ.
Epehs. 1.19.20.


Fourthly, some truths which are dispensed to the world, are in a special
manner useful for saints; as the doctrine of redemption and reconciliation by
the blood of Christ, and the doctrine which holds forth the evil, and
sinfulness of sin; the saints are not come to such a perfect knowledge of
these truths, they do not so fully see into the mystery of sin, and the glory
of their redemption by Christ, neither do they so distinctly and clearly
aprehend the offices and relations of Christ, but much more may be added to
their knowledge of these particulars.

Secondly, 2. Consi. That the Scriptures hold forth a perfect vision of God in
this life. Isa. 60.19. Reve. 21.
this slighting of ordinances and duties proceeds from a misaplication, and
misinterpretation of some scriptures (which hint at the cessation of
ordinances) as Isaiah 60.19. and Revel: 21. The sun and moon (which some
conceive to be the Ordinances of Christ) shall shine no longer but the Lord
will be an everlasting light to his church; now if these scriptures be
appliable to the Church earth (which I rather think ought to be referred to
the saitns when glorified and triumphant in heaven) it must be when he church
is made perfect, not only by imputation, but inherently when she sees God face
to face, and there is no flesh nor corruption in her; till then, they ought not
to plead for an exemption from Ordinances; and if Ordinances cease in this
life, much more eating and drinking, and the duties of matrimonial relation; if
there shall be so much glory revealed, as to swallow up the former (which are
of a higher nature) that fulness of glory, will (much more) put an end to the
latter, which are lower, and more perishing: and therefore those that say, they
need use Ordinances no longer, let them also refrain from eating and drinking,
and conversing in the world. Praesens haec vita, vita est fidei, quae non est
praesentum ac fruentium sed absentium, sperantium and expectantium.


Sixthly, if ye constantly attend the purest Ordinances, and the most
spiritual and evangelicall Ministry, and hear truths that are most suitable to
your condition, and corespond most with your experiences, and yet bring forth
little or no spiritual fruit, but are still dead-hearted indisposed, and
unprofitable under these thriving dispensations: its a Symptom that you are
under a spiritual distemper Non progredi estregredi.
Christians often times blame the men, and the means, and quarrel with the
truths of God, either as too high or too low for them, when they oght rather to
blame the carnality, sleightnes and unbelief of their own hearts; for
herefore the word profits not becanse it is not mixed with faith in them that
hear it. Heb. 4.2.
(yet I deny not) but there may be and often is, Sermo auditus fine fide vel
fide non mixtus ta abest ut prositaudienti, ut magis eum damnet. Muscul.
a great failing in him that dispenses the word, for he may deliver it so
generally, and confusedly (having little or no experience of the work of Gods
Spirit) that an experienced Saint cannot profit by it. If there be not bodily
motion, and stirring, you may conclude the party is in a swound, or trance, and
again, if he eat good victuals and thrive not by them, but rather grow lank
and lean, you may well say he has an ill concoction, by reason of some bodily
distemper or other; So if the word be purely preached, and the truths of the
Gospel distinctly handled, and you attend the means from day to day, and ug
continually with your hearts, in Ordinances, and yet (notwithstanding) you
find little or no spiritual sap, and moisture, but are lean and dry (in
this case) it is evident enough that your spiritual digestion is in a great
measure gone from you, and that your inward man is under a distemper: Now this
may be, when (yet there is as frequent an use of Ordinances, as much praying,
hearing, conferring, in the letter and form as ever: but there wants that
spiritual life, and vigor, that holy familiarity, and boldness with God in
your performances, which was wont to be, nay your performances (by the
breathings of the Spirit) may be lively and spiritual to others, and yet your
selves (in the mean while) dead-hearted, and laboring under the burden of
your Iusts: the great crop of gifts, and fluent expressions which you have
usually had in Prayer, etc.) may still remain, and yet that which is the life
of Prayer (Gospel faith and assurance may decay, and this many Christians can
tell you by experience. 7 Symtome. when saints shark much after creature
comforts.


Seventhly, this may be another Syptome, if ye dote so far on creature
enjoyments, that in dallying with these, you spend and squander away many
precious hours, and days, without serious thoughts of God, and heavenly
intercourses between him and you, and so commit Idolarries with the creature,
and run a whoreing after the world and earthly things; Forsaking (him who is)
the fountain of living water, and digging to our selves broken cisternes that
will hold no water. xJer. 2.13.
If you set your hearts on creature beauty, and sacrifice your affections, to
wanton dalliances igh apparel, diet, buil dings, and other creature
excellencies, spending the very stream, and cream; and quintessence of your
affections, on these perishing objects, so that when you come to rejoice in
God, and love God, and spiritual things, ye have no heart to it, but are
altogether dead and indisposed (as to this) having spent your affections upon
other objects, and tired out your selves in the things of the world, and
further, if you can rejoice exceedingly in the possession of these outward
things, and forrow as much in the want of them, (be it a husband, a wife a
child, or any other creature that is dear to your) as if your life and
happiness were bound up in these temporal enjoyments, Its aparent to me, that
you converse not much with God, but (rahter) that his countenance is hid from
you: and surely the Prophet David was much under a cloud, and not sensible of
the consolations of his God, when his affections were so captivated and
ensnared with the beauty of Bersheba: and good Ezekiah was in the like
condition, when he made show of his gold and silve (in a vain glorious manner)
to the King of Babylon. And for those Christians that are easily transported,
and surprised with every temptation, and drink much of the perishing waters, it
appears their spirits hang loose from God: they have but little spiritual
joy, and therefore they run out to creature comforts, and so spena their money
for tht which is not bread, and their labor for that which satisfies not. If.
55.2.8 Symptom, If there be an abatement in point of assurance.


Eighty, if your assurance of salvation be weakened, your evidences blurred, and
your souls brought into bondage, so that you fall (as it were) under a
covenant of works, by poreing too much on your selves, and creatures, and not
eyeing Christ's blood and righteousness in the Spirit: Now the souls that has
been acquainted with Christ the true spiritual seed, may yet go back to a
Covenant of works, (as Abraham hankered after Ismael, who was a type of the
Covenant of works, even when Isaac that typified the Covenant of grace was
borne) and that two ways.

First, 1. In depending on eternal acts.
in depending on the external acts of Prayer, etc. and deriving your peace and
comfort from the work done; Ex opere operato, which is mere Popery.
and hence it is that you are lifted up, and cast down according to the
outward performance; thus the Pharisees builded their hopes, and comforts upon
their doings and performances, and so do many Professors in these days, 2. Of
the internal motion in stead of Christ.
who (whilst they depend on their own righteousness) are the greatest
enemies to the righteousness of Christ

Secondly, in a more refined mysterious way, attributing that to frames of
spirit and to the acts of faith, love, joy, (which some falsely call God in
them) which should be attributed only to the righteousness and bloodshed of the
Lord Jesus; If you fall on any thing for life and salvation (though never so
spetious) besides the righteousness of Christ, as Mediator, or if you look on
any thing either external without you, or internal within you, as a ground of
your peace, apart from or without relation to the blood of Christ (whereby the
same is rendered acceptable in the sight of God) this is to fall under a
Covenant of works, and oh that this were but rightly considered by those who
count, the knowledge of Christ in his Mediatorship, and Preist-hood, to be no
other than a knowledge of him after the flesh.

Object. Romans 8.14. Ye have not received the spirit of bondage again to
fear; how then can the Saints be brought into bondage, and under a Covenant of
works?

Answ.
It Is true, the Spirit of God having once spoken peace to a believer, he does
not afterward bring him into bondage, by telling him that he is under wrath,
and in chains of darkness; for this were a plain contradiction, which is far
from the Spirit of God (who is truth and is no lie) 1 John 2. c 7.
nevertheless the Saints may be brought into bondage after they have received
the Seal of the Spirit, (as they may also be deluded with errors) which we
must not impute to the Spirit of God, but to Satan and the flesh, for these two
join together to rob God of the glory of his grace. The Spirit (who is free in
his operation) causes terror, and slavish fear in the believing soul, no
other ways than the Sun causes darkness by suspending his beams and
irradiations, doubtless so far as we hearken to the suggestions, and language
of the Spirit of God, we shall be conducted into the way of truth, peace, and
comfort: but we often give credit to Satan that lying spirit and so are led
from Christ, the true way into dangerous paths; Suppose ye take counsel both
of an honest-man, and a deceiver so far as you follow the advice of the
honest-man, ye prosper well in your business, but if you will be tampering
with the advice of the deceiver, (which is our case then we have to do with
Satan, who is the great Jugler) ye will be cozened and deluded.

Ninthly, 9 Symptom, If ye slight the communion of Saints.
if the society and communion of Saints especially such as keep close in their
judgments to the simplicity of the Gospel, and are most spiritual, holy, and
watchful in their conversations, be tedious and burdensome unto you, so that
you forsake their assemblies, and meetings, as it was the manner of some in the
Apostles days,. Heb. 10.25.
And though ye are convinced that they have much of the Image of God upon
them, and your hearts have been wonderfully expatiated, and enlarged, whilst
you frequented their assemblies, (God having unbosomed his love to you, in the
communication of their experiences) yet now your spirits swell and rise up
against them, as too strick, and too watchful for you: not long since their
company and discourse was delightsome and precious unto you; oh you could not
be absent from them an hour; you were never in your right element but when you
were conversing with them: I appeal to you; did not your hearts often burn,
and were not your affections raised heaven wards in communicating with them?
where then is your former zeal and love, seeing now ye are as much or more
affected with the company of mere worldings, or lukewarm Gospellers, or
slight spirited Opinionists, than with the Society of these precious saints?
certainly they have but could affections to Christ, who look on the
communiion of saints, as an arbitrary, indifferent thing; And as this is a
symptom of decaying in spiritualls, so it argues much vanity and slightness
of spirit, if you be taken up in your meetings with circumstanciall and
trisling things, and so fall to jangling and strif, 1 Timothy 1. 4, 5, 6, 7.
neglecting those blessed truths wherein the Saints concur, and agree, as
(namely) the Doctrine of Justification by Christ, of assurance by the spirit,
and liveing upon God by says in our several callings and relations: and
herein professiors do as children use to do who look more on the outside than
on that which is with in, and prize bables and toys more than Preclous things.

Religion (which consists in a conformity of the heart to God) is now turned
into a dispure, and made use of only as a head notion; [a sad thing]: he that
is the greatest disputant, and can utter bigg swelling, words is counted the
most excellent Christian; whereas many dispute much of religion, that manifest
but little of the power of it: and those that are spiritual and walk
circumspectly, can tell you from experience, that they have seldom (or never)
met with the comforts of God in disputes, but have come away from them with
sad hearts, and drooping spirits and how can it be otherwise, since men exalt
their own notions and gifts more than Christ, and strive more for victory than
for truth in contending for their opinions.

Thirdly when men are let loose to a spirit of bitterness, 10 Symptom, If
there be much bitterness against dissenting brethren.
invie, and parsecution So that they stuff and fill their books, sermons, and
discourses, with gall and wormeword, and rake up all the dunghills they can
meet with, that so they might find a matter against brethren, (who in some
things oiffer from them) looking on that which is true Christian charity
(according to the Apostls description) 1 Cor. 13.
as want of true zeal: such a spirit as this has acted much of late in
professors (that live under several forms) and indeed ye that have a close
commuinon with God and a clear judgment in the things of God, may see these
angry bitter men (that would violently obtrude upon their brethren every
opinion they hold though but Circumstanciall under a penalty) notwithstanding
their heat of spirit, grow exceeding cold in the practical part of
Godliness, and in the duties of Christian Charity; while they continually cry
out errors errors etc. without excerciseing bowels of compassion toward their
brethren, they themselves loose much of their Communion with God: for whereas
they ought (in tenderness of heart) to pray and mourn for their brethren (if
fallen into any error either of doctrine or practice) and endeavor (by meekness
of spirit to set them in joint againt: So the word fignifies, Gal. 6.1. in the
Greek. (...). Quemadmodum incolumitati naturae diligentia medicorum servit ita
Christiana Charitas sanitati mentium and cordium tam restanra^dae quam
retinendae subservire debet.
they rather revile them, and rail at them in a public way; and it is very
observable, that diverse ministers, and others whose faces have formerly shined
with the glimpses and rays of Gods countenance upon them) and whose discourses
have been exceeding savory, and spiritual: since they fell upon this violent
and railing stormy, and promoted selfintrest, their spirits have been flat and
dull, their discourses general and confused, and their society uncomfortable:
neither is there that spiritual life, and vigor in them that was wont to be:
If the vital parts of a man's body be weakened you will say he is in a
consumption: it is so in spiritualls when there is not that life, of faith,
love, joy, etc. in the saints, which they have manifested in times past. 11
Symptom, If there be a^ departing from the simplicity of the Gospel.


Again if ye depart from the simplicity of a Crucified Christ, and cry up
every new notion, every vain opinion, as a glorious discovery of God and are
unstabied, and unsettled, (like so many wandering stars, and waves of the sea)
being tossed to and from with every wind of Doctrine, and ready to change your
Religion and principles every day, (according to the judgments of men with whom
ye converse) Its a symptom that ye are but babes and infants in the Knowledge
of Christ for it is the Property of children to be much affected with new
things for a little while, and then to cast them away again for other toys:
Thus it was with some members of the churches at Corinth and Galatia, who (it
seems) were unstable Christians, and much given to novelties, (and therefore a
great trouble and vexation to the Apostle) for no sooner was he departed from
them, but they were taken with new doctrines, and run after the false Apostles,
disrelishing both the person and Doctrine of Paul, in so much that he breaks out
into that vehement interrogation to the Galathians Gal. 3.1.
Oh foolish Galathians who has bewiched you that you should not obey the
truth, as if he had said; I left you in a good condition; when I was last with
you, you did obey the gospel of Christ; but since my depature, ravening wolves
[Satan and his instruments] have been among you, and they have bewitched you,
with their false doctrines. And again, have ye begun in the spirit and will
you end in the flesh? with many other passages to this purpose in his epistle
to the Churches: So that it was not the least work which Paul had to do, to
settle and stablish Christians in the Doctrine of Christ; after they had
submitted to it; nor was it the least of his sufferings (nay it was a heavy
affliction to him, as it is to every faithful dispenser of the Gople) that
after all this pains, and care and trouble and sufferings in there behalf,
they should depart from the simplicity of that Gospel, which he had boldly
preached and contended for Nostra bac aetate inven as inuumeros, qui came
Evangelium Dei, audivissent mirabili quodam zele, and ardo-respiritus in amorem
illuis exarserint, postea vero per falsos featres circumventi consummat. onem
salutis suae non amplius in fide ac spiritu Christi, sed in justitus carnis
quarere coepermt.
, the mother after she is delivered of her child, is put to as much trouble in
nurfing and educating it, as she was in bringing it forth; So was Paul in a
spiritual sense, he had many throws and panges after he had begotten them to
Christ: nay he falls in travail with them again my little children (says he)
of whom I travail in birth again till Christ be formed in you.

I wonder not that professors in these days are cold and dead hearted, and
that they ly open to the violence of every storm and every temptation for how
can it be other wise with them so long as they play fast and loose with truth
and depart from the true rock and foundation.

But for your better information in this point I shall here lay down two
cautions.

First (notwithstanding what has been said) ye ought not to content your
selves with this or that measure and degree of faith, Two cautions. 1. Rest not
in the measure you have attained to.
and knowledge it the mystery of the Gospel, as some professors do; who
(fearing they should fall into error, and be deluded with new lights as it is
called Learned Zanchy calls it a new and heavenly light.
) remain still in their old forms, Si igitur sentimus in animis nostris novu^
and celestem lucem accensam, etc In explicat. ad Ephesians. fol. 47.
and measures; as if nothing could be added to their knowledge in spiritual
things; we ought (nevertheless) to take heed of laying new foundations, and
taking up new Gospels; for no other foundation can any man Lay then that which
is Laid 1 Cor. 3
and if an Angel from heaven preach any other Gospel let him be accused Gal.
1.8.
every faithful Christian holds to the true foundation; though he cannot
argue against every thing that crosses the foundation, or vindicate every truth
which he is convinced of, yet he closes with that heavenly Martyr that said,
though he could not despute for Christ, yet he could die for Christ. 2 Caution.
Censure not thy brother upon every alteration.


Secondly neither ought ye to censure Christians as Apostats, for rejecting
some things which they formerly embraced, for this they may do and yet not
change the foundation or cry up another Christ, but it may be they have more
light, and knowledge, and a clear judgment concerning, the foundation, and
the superstructure, or matter to be builded thereon: that whereas they have
formerly builded hay and stubble, and such like combustible matter (which shall
be consumed by the fire of the spirit of God 1 Cor. 3.12.
) they now build Gold and silver and precious stones (that is) true Doctrine,
and faithful works upon the true foundation.

Twelfthly, 12 Symptom. If ye live more on the acts than on the object of
faith, love, joy.
if you cast your eye more on that which is inherent in you, as your faith in
Christ, your love to God, your knowledge of spiritual things, which are weak,
and imperfect (for ye know but in part ye believe but in part, ye love but
in part) then on the righteousness of Christ, which the Lord in his infinite
love, and grace has imputed unto you, It appears that you are not much
acquainted with the mystery of the Gospel, neither do ye give that honor to
Christ (the object of faith) which is due to him; for should these graces (or
rather effects of grace) have a greater train, more attendants, and a fuller
Court then that glorious righteousness, (which is laid up for you in Christ)
should these which are but hand-maides and servants) have greater respects, and
be more honored in point of assurance, then the righteousness of Christ which
is the Queen and mistress of them all? this were to give more honor to Hagar
the handmaide, then to Sarah her mistress. If you should do thus in outward
things, it would be counted one of the greatest incivilities; how much more
intolerable is it in heavenly and spiritual things: Faith and love are but
hand-maides, and should be subservient to Christ who maintains the court, and
is at all the cost and charge: therefore for you to aply your selves to these
and neglect Christ, (which is a course that many poor souls take) shows you
to be but young Courtiers in the palace of heaven, and to have little
familiarity with the King of glory.

Again this may be another Symptom of your declining in spiritualls, if you
rest in a few tears, 13 Symptom. If ye rest in your complaints and sorrows.
and complaints (which some falsely conceive to be true sorrow and repentance
for sin,) we have many professors that will be proud in complaining of their
pride, hypocrisy and hardness of heart; and yet they adore and worship this
under the notion of true humility, and self denial, and ground and bottom
their peace and happiness upon it; having made their complaints and expressed
a few sorrowful words, that they want faith, and have hard hearts, etc. they
repose themselves on this rotten staff, and have continual recourse to it, as
an evidence of their good estate: but what says our Savior, not every one
that says, Lord Lord Mat. 7.21, 22.
[I am so, and so, I have a hard heart, a hypocritical heart, a proud heart,]
shall enter into the Kingdom of heaven but he that does the will of my father:
(that is) he that believes in God, through Christ; for that is the great
Commandment: and to believe in God is to do the will of God, and work the
works of God Ioh. 6.29.
. If you have tasted of the love and bounty of the father, and of his dainty
dishes, and soul satisfying delights, and can now feed on these low things,
(I mean) a few tears, and complants; its a Symptom ye are run behind hand
in Spiritualls. A beggar that has had good cheeare at a gentleman's house, will
not sit down satisfied with a few empty words, and bare complements, but he
must have bread and bread he will have before he departs: The promise is not
made to him that compla neth but to him that comes Ioh. 6.37
; nor is it sufficient to thirst after the water of life, and to complain and
cry for it, (as Esaw cried for the blessing and sought it with tears) but ye
must come and drink of it, if ye will be refreshed and satisfied Ioh. 6.35
: Ho every one that thirsts Let him come and buy wine and milk without money
and without price Isa. 55.1.
.

14 When you are exceeding strange, 14 Symptom. If ye be strange and reserved
to Christ your spiritual husband.
and reserved, and have not that enlargednesse of heart, toward Christ your
husband and bridgroome, which you formerly had; the time has been you have
layen in his bosom, and had sweet embraces from him, and have been kissed
with the kisses of his mouth, and refreshed with the flagons of his wine Cant.
1.2.
; and not only so, but you have been open hearted toward him, and
communicated all the secrets of your hearts to him, ye kept nothing from him,
that might serve to express the reality of your love and the vehemence of your
affections to him, but behold now ye are grown strange, and sly, and take
state upon you, and are not free to unbosome your selves to your husband, this
intimates you have other lovers besides that you dally with, and impart your
minds unto (if I may so speak) and withal it apeares that you trad not much
with your spiritual husband: Ye know if a wife be reserved to her husband,
and yet familior with other men, it may well be thought that she has but
cold affections to him: and it is as true in this case, Christ has espoused
you to himself, he has purchaced you by his blood, and you are united to him
by his spirit: and will you let out your hearts after other lovers and give
them the best entertainment you have, whilst he stands at the door and
cannot be admitted? this carriage (as it does not become the spouse of Christ)
so it shows that she is declined in her affections and respects to Christ,
and so it was with the spouse in the Canticles Cant. 5.3.
when she put off her husband (who came to visit her in love) with idle
excuses, she was half a sleep, and half waking, and therefore did not
tainde the worth of him that came to give her a visit, and waited to be
gracious to her; but when she was perfectly out of her sleep, and knew it was
the voice of her beloved, she runs after him, and inquires of all the persons
she met with, where her beloved was, that she might go to him: And you that
are now asleep (if the Lord awaken you and move your affections by putting in
the finger of his spirit at the hole of the door Cant. 5.4.
) will be as restless as she was to renew your acquaintance and communion
with your beloved. 15 Symptom. If ye yield to fullennesse of spirit, and
refuse comfort.


Lastly if there be such a doggednesse and sullenness of spirit in you, that
you will not be comforted, like Rachell in her impatient mood, or like little
children ( which Christ alludes to Mat. 11.16, 17.
) who are so sullen and pettish that whether you pipe or mourn to them, how
ever you deal with them, whether by fair or by foul means, they will
continue wrangleing, if they have not every toy they would have: perhaps God
deals with you by afflictions, and deprives you of creature enjoyments (which
were a great block in your way) this does not please you but you grow
impatient, and repine at this dispensation: and if he abound to you in outward
things, and afford you much outward peace, and prosperity, ye wax wanton also
under this dispensation, no condition, neither that which you are in, nor that
which you long after, will keep your hearts in an even, and equal frame: truly
if it be thus with you, it argues you have a loathing stomach, and are
inclinable to a surfit, there is a superfluity of naughtiness in your hearts
which must be purged out, such as will wrangle and quarrel with every
dispensation of God and make improvement of none (as it is the case of some
souls that are in fullen fits) it seems to me they want the light of Gods
countenance, which (being bid from them) makes them impatient and sullen, as
the spouse is distempered: with the absence of her husband, who by his presence
puts her into a pleasant mood, and contented frame.

Having laid down these 15 Symptoms (wherein I have been some what large
because they are suitable to these deserting times) I shall now give you three
ground or reasons, why there are such eclipses or cloudings of Gods
countenance.

First because the spirit of God, which is a spirit of wisdom, 1 Ground. The
Spirit of God is free worker.
and revelation, a spirit of life and light, a spirit of love and of a sound
mind Ephesians. 1.17. 2 Timothy 1.7
, is a free and arbitray agent, he works when, and where, and in what measure
he pleases; as the wind blows where it lists so the spirit works where
and how he pleases John 3.8.
: to some he reveals more, to some less of the mind of God none are perfect
in there faith, love, joy, while they remain here: as he is free to give the
soul comfort, and speak peace to it, so he may as freely withdraw his divine
influence from it, (at least in some measure and degree) and who can blame him
for so doing since he acts freely, and every dram of peace, and comfort (which
any poor soul has) is merely of grace and benevolence: if you have more
communion with God then your brethren; and a bound in the comforts of the holy
Ghost whilst they morn under sad discouregments, you have so much the
morecause to magnify the grace of God for what have you which you have not
received? as the sun is free in shining on your outward man, so the spirit of
God is also free in casting his beams upon your inward man. Donum spiritus
liberum est, nulli merito alligatum. Musc.


Secondly, the Lord (in his infinite wisdom) lays you low, 2 Ground. Saints
are brought low, that they may sympathize with their brethren.
that you may pity others that are in a sad conditon, (over whom you would
otherwise insult and triumph) such as have known the terrors of God, and have
been in the depths of sorrow, and affliction themselves, will Sympathize with
there afflicted brethern: experience makes a compassionate and tender hearted
Christian: if ye be wounded your selves, you would be sensible of others: if
you be exercised in the spiritual warfare your selves you will pity those
that by groaning under the burden of corruption; by exercise we come to be
expert soldiers in the Camp of Christ and indeed the speculative part of
religion, is not comparable to the practical: our Savior himself was tempted
that he might be a compassionate high priest and know how to help others that
are tempted Heb. 4.15.
: you are apt to grow proud, and wanton, when you have much comfort and great
raptures, you are puffed up with your inlargments, and look at your poor
wounded afflicted brethren, at a great distance: the Lord (it may be) will take
away your comforts, and put you into the same capacity with them, that you may
be sensible of their sorrows: no temptation has taken others but it may also
surprise you, ye may ere long (for ought I know) mourn after your beloved as
the Spouze did in the Canticles; though you have the bridgrooms presence now
with you it may be shortly taken from you, and then your countenances will be
sad, and your hearts be filled with sorrow; you ought therefore to be so far
from censuring your disconsolate brethren, as that you should morn with them,
and help to bear their burdens and so fulfill the law of Christ; which is a
law of love.

Thirdly because God will put a difference in the measure, 3 Ground. God will
have Saints know they have not a full poffession of heaven here.
of the Saints enjoyments here, and in glory, here they live by faith, there by
sense and vision, here their comforts ebb and flow, but there they have an
uninterrupted communion with God, a fullness of joy in the beatificall vision
of the Lord of glory: it is true the saints in this world have experience of
that joy, which is unspeakable, and glorious, but they have but a taste of it,
some times they are so carried up in the spirit as that the most excellent
things in the world are as nothing unto them: but these raptures are not of
long continuance there is as great (if not a greater) difference, between the
Saints here, and the Saints in glory, in the measure of there joys, as
between the Saints that lived under the old administration, and those that
have lived since Christ's ascension, when he distributed great portions of his
spirit to the sons of men Ephesians. 4.8.
as princes use to give great gifts at the time of their coronation: the
Apostle cleares this excellently in the 1. Cor. 13: 12. now we see darkly
through a glass or medium [now we have but a Dark sight of the glory of God]
but then (namely) when the veil is rent and corruption swallowed up, we shall
see face to face, now we know but in part but then we shall know even as we
are known; the failings and imperfections of the most spiritual Saints, do
sufficiently confess the vain interpretation which some give on this place,
(namely) that the perfect vision of God is to be referred to the Saints there,
which cannot be obtained without a change of the outward man; this mortality
must put on immortality and this corruption incorruption at the glorious
appearance of the son of God, when the Kingdom shall be delivered up to the
father, and the father shall be all in all 1 Cor. 15.
now we are the sons of God, it does not appear what we shall be, but we know
when he does appear we shall be like him for we shall see him as he is 1
John 3.2.
he shall change our vild bodies that they may be fashioned like his glorious
body Phil. 3.1 21
: and this is that which the Saints long after as the great marriage feast, the
complement of their joy and happiness, praying continually, come Lord Jesus
come quickly.

the stratagems of Satan, and the deceitfulness of your own spirits, ye have
also seen the outgoings of God, and your mouths have been filled with mirth
and singing as the bird in a summers, morning; oh how pleasant and delightful
have the truths of God, and Saints of God been to you, but now behold (and oh
that you were sensible of it) ye walk in a desert and wilderness where there
is no water: darkness is your habitation; you feed on chaff and windy notions
in which there is no substance no reality; your understandings are clouded,
hearts hardened, your consciences benumbed your spirits (like Tinder) apt to
take every impression of Satan, and all this, because the bridegroom has
withdrawn himself from you, he is gone behind the curtain: the sun is
ecclipsed, and it is night with you: and what says our savior; if a man walk
in the night he stumbles, and if the light that is in thee [namely the
understanding which is the light of thy soule] be darkness oh how great is
that darkness 2 Mat. 6.22.
! In this sad condition you may take up that complaint of Job Job 29.2, 3, 3,
4, 5, 20, 25.
(who had experience of the Lords hiding his face from him) my harp is turned
into mourning and my organ into the voice of those that weep, and wish (which
him) that you were as in the months past as in the days when God preserved
you, when his candle shined upon your head, and when by his light you walked
through darkness, when the Secret of God was upon your Tabernacles, and the
Almighty was yet with you, when your glory was fresh in you and you were as
those that comfort the mourners, when you did see the power and glory of God in
the Sanctuary Psa. 63.2.
and your hearts were sweetly drawn out unto him because of the savor of his
good ointments Cant. 1.2
namely the glorious rays of his countenance which shined upon you.

with joy and peace but in believing? Romans 15.^^.
and again believing ye rejoice with joy unspeakable and glorious 1 Pet. 1.8.
: for your encouragement (let me tell you that) ye have a tender hearted
Savior to deal with; one that has abundant experience of your sorrows one
that knows what it is to have the countenance of God eclipsed: go to him and
plead before him the promises, his death, his resurrection, his precious
offices and relations, and call to mind former experiences of his love and
goodness he died for you when you were enemies to him; and will he not give you
a gracious visit now that ye are his friends? he was found of you when you
sought not after him Isai 65.1
and will he not manifest himself to you now that you seek him by faith? he
knows very well that you cannot be without him, having once had communion with
him, and therefore he will answer you when you call, he will open when you
knock and both he and the father will come and sup with you John 14.
: he cannot be long from you for ye are his jewels, and engraven upon the
palms of his hands, ye are members of his body Ephesians. 5.30.
and can he forget his own flesh and blood? its impossible: what though ye
have rebelled against him? yet consider that he loves you freely and will
heal your backslidings for his anger is turned away from you Iosea 14.4.
his thoughts are not as your thoughts, nor his ways as your ways Isa. 5.1.
having once set his love upon you, he will never take it off again: he may
(in his heavenly wisdom) for a while hide his face from you, that you may
prize his countenance the more when you have it: take heed of an evil heart
of unbeleefe in departing from the liveing God: to whom will ye go (I pray
you) for he only has the words of eternal life Ioh. 6.68
he that has wounded you must cure you; nay he will do it if ye will but
come to him him than comes to me I will in no ways cast out. Now the Lord
draw you by the Cords of his love Hos. 11.4.
that you may come to him and find rest in your souls not in the act of your
coming but in the person whom ye come to, for he is the eternal rest of the
Saints.

FINIS
THE TABLE.
A. ALterations not always censurable. p. 67 Applause p. 35 Assurance weakened
p. 51 Seize, rest not in what you have p. 66
B. Bitterness against those, differ in judgment, ill. p. 59
C. Communion of Saints slighted. p. 56 Comfort, suspension of it, page 4.
Sharking after Creature Comforts p. 48 Conversation, whose most holy, and
mortified. p. 27 Corruption, the keenesse of it, does not certainly suppose
declension in spirituals. p. 14 Covenant of works, now many go back to is p.
52
D. Desertion, total and real, what, p. 3 Distempers; bodily Distempers
hnider spiritual actings. p. 16
F Faith; not the acts but objects of it, to be leaned upon. p. 68 Formality in
duties. p. 39
G Gospel; the simplicity of it, not to be departed from. p. 62 Growth: the
measure of spiritual growth different. p. 18
H. Heart: tender-heartednesse to the weak. p. 28 Heaven: no full possession of
it here. p. 81 Humility: those most humble have clearest apprehensions of God.
p. 22
I. Enjoyments: Great and high enjoyments of God, how known. p. 21, 22, etc.
O Ordinances, to whom precious, 24. Why some neglect them. p. 40, 44
R. Reproof p. 37 Rigteousnesse of Christ only to be looked at. p. 53
S Saints considered, as justified, as sanctified. 6, 7, 8. less subject to
bondage now than under the old Testament. 9. They have their ebbings. p. 11
Sorrows not to be rested in. p. 70 Spirit: whether Saints may be under the
spirit of bondage, 54. A free agent. p. 77 Strangeness to Christ. p. 72
Streams: ill to affect them, and neglect the fountain. 31. Sad effects of it.
p. 33 Sympathizing. p. 79 Sullenness. p. 75
T. Temptations: Satan tempts to think better or worse of ones self, than it
is. p. 12, 13
V. Unfruitfulnesse. p. 46
W, Weak: who are tenderhearted to them. p. 28

ERRATA.
FOr lacivious page 26. read lascivious. Imediate p. 40. r. immediate. Presemum
page 45. r. presemium. Our selves p. 49. r. your selves. Parsecution p. 59. r.
persecution. Ptactice p. 61. r. practice. He could not dispute p. 67. r. I
cannot dispute, yet I can. Familior p. 73. r. familiar. Sense p. 82 r. since.
Saints there p. 83. r. Saints here. Morning p. 86. r. mourning.


