TRUE INTELLIGENCE FROM CORNWALL: BEING A true Relation of the Rising of 600.
Fishermen and their Wives, and falling upon Sir Ralph Hopton and the Cavaliers,
wounding Sir Ralph himself, by striking him from off his horse, killing
diverse of his men, and putting the rest to flight: and how the said Fishermen
pillaged the town of Bodnam in Cornwall, which caused the whole County to be up
in arms; and the Beacons to be fired throughout the whole County. Also how the
day following Sir Ralph Hopton with 500. men took some few Fishermen, and tied
them to trees, whipping them naked with Broom and Furse, and how he pillaged
M. Trefuses house. Likewise the taking of two Barks which came from the
Governor of Flanders with arms for 3000. men; and the names of the Malignants
in the foresaid County.

Sent in a Letter from Sir Jonathan Trelawney to M. Trelawney Merchant in
London.

LONDON, Novem. 10. Printed by R. Austin and A. Coe. 1642.

TRUE INTELLIGENCE FROM CORNWALL; BEING A true Relation of Sir Ralph Hoptons
cruelty, in apprehending diverse poor Fishermen, tying them to trees, and
whipping them naked with Broom and Furse.
Also the manner and occasion of Sir Ralph Hoptons being wounded, with the
names of the chief Malignants in the foresaid County.
ALthough I cannot enjoy that former happiness which I was wont, the fruition
of your society, yet I hope by our pens we may reciprocally understand of each
others welfare, I could wish, and daily pray that there might be a conjunct and
perfect union and concord between his Majesty and the Parliament, for want of
which we live in danger through fear of foreign and domestic enemies. Our
country is sorely oppressed, not only with the Kings part, but the vulgar and
poorer sort of people are in combustion: there was upon thursday last at the
Mount five or six hundred poor Fishermen and their wives that came to Bodnam
with spits, clubs and stones, and in a violent and rustic manner with the help
of other poor there, entered diverse houses, and carried away their plate and
pewter, so that the county was up in arms, and the beacons set on fire
throughout the Shire. Sir Ralph Hopton, who is at Pendennis, never stirred
forth in all this hurley-burley, but at night about six of the clock he came
and marched after the fishermen, and urged them to go to M. Trefuses his house
at Waford and plunder him, and he would second their designs. Sir Ralph Hopton
had a good bang on the neck for his counsel, and laid gasping in the high way,
and astonished: at the first his soldiers cocked their pistols, and vowed to
shoot them, who were also struck off their horses, and two slain in the high
way, so that for the present Sir Ralph and his followers returned to their hold
without pillaging M. Trefuses as he intended. Sir Ralph the next day came with
500. foot and horse, and then he revenged himself of some few straggling
fishermen, whom he tied to trees and whipped naked with Broom and Furse, and
that day took six light horses from Sir John Vigures stable pillaged him of all
his plate and pewter, leaving him not so much as a dish or a spoon to eat his
meat in. Captain Carwithan and his trained Bands rose, and very fiercely
assaulted Sir Ralphs troops, yet Sir Ralph made them retreat with the loss of
6 or 8. of his men. The fishermen and their wives came in the time of the
skirmish, most of them having gotten muskets, birding pieces and swords, so
that with the Trained Bands and the fishermen, they left but a narrow passage
for Sr Ralphs escape, vowing that if they could take Sir Ralph or any of his,
they would whip him or them to death for his barbarous cruelty on their
friends, Sir Ralph departed for that time, and carried away five of his eight
horses, and great mischief he would have done more, but the way was so dirty
and stony, that it is impossible for the horse to travel, much more to fight,
in such narrow passages.

There is one maine thing which I have omitted, and that is, the multitude of
Warrants which have issued forth under the command of Prince Robert to all
places within twenty miles of his Army, it runs in the nature of General
Lesley his Warrants at his entering of New Castle, commanding all men to provide
and bring to his Army all manner of food and sustenance for his soldiers
relief, as also that the country provide both horse and men for the assisting
of him in the said war, and that all those that will not assist him, to pay a
contribution of money for their refusal.

And this is the effect of the said Warrants, as I can rightly understand.
Plate and money is brought to his Majesty in abundance, and the Coyners of his
treasure carried upon wheels, and coin money traveling. It is a most
excellent invention of Leniell His Majesty's Engineere, whom we thought to have
been cut off in the last fight at Kinton.

There was this day seven-night two Barks full of Ammunition on at Foy, with
three thousand men's armor, which came from the Governor of Flanders, whose
name is, as I have heard, Don Francisco de Melos a Spaniard, M. Cozens one of
the Deputy Lieutenants for the Shire, seized on it for His Majesty, who bearing
the Parliament an inveterate hate for his last dishonor, in censuring him to
ask forgiveness for his false Patent, has in an opprobrious and tyrannical
manner levied great Forces, and does pillage his neighboring friends, and all
in the name of his Majesty. I cannot certify unto you more at this present,
save the names of such in this our County who are altogether for his Majesty.

The Lord Mohune, and his Son. M. Arundell, Sir Bevill Greenvile, M. Cozen,
Sir Ralph Edgcombe, Sir John Furse, Sir John Roystworth, Sir Robert Meynard, M.
Pope, M. Washer, Sir Richard Young, M. Venner, M. Pollard, M. Tingrose, M.
Trefuses, M. Phillipps, M. Carey,
FINIS.

