TREASONS BY THE LAWS of ENGLAND.
WHereas many Persons of late have Transgressed against the Laws of the Land by
open violence, and committed Treason and Murder under the notion of Liberty of
Conscience, and pretense of reforming Religion: and to the end that Offenders
in the like (and other cases) may not plead ignorance of the said Laws
established and confirmed by many Acts of Parliament, it has been thought
necessary to publish a brief Collection of what is Treason by Law, that so all
being informed thereof, no Person may unadvisedly fall into danger.

By the Statute of 25. of EdWard the 3. Cap. 2.
First, Cook lib. 9. fol. 28. Dyer fol. 98. 1. Edw. 3. fol. 24. Brooks
Treasons 1, 2. C.
To Compass or Imagine the death of our Sovereign Lord the King, Queen or
Prince, or of any that is Heir Apparent to the Crown, it is High Treason.

Note, That by the Common Law before and at the time of making this Statute: If
a man had only imagined to Murder or Rob another, and to that end had assaulted
him, though he killed him not, nor took any thing from him, yet was it Felony
and to suffer death, as in these two Cases following.

A man's Wife went away with her Avowterer, and they compassed the death of her
Husband, and as he was riding toward the Sessions of Oyer and Terminer and
Goal delivery, Cooks Pleas Crown. fol. 5.
they assaulted him and struck him with weapons that he fell down as dead,
whereupon they fled, the Husband recovered, and made Hue and Cry, and came to
the Sessions, and showed all this matter to the Justices, and upon the Warrant
of the Justices they were taken, indicted and arraigned, and all this special
matter was found by Verdict, and it was adjudged that the man should be hanged,
and the woman burnt.

In another Case a Youth was arraigned for that he would have stolen the goods
of his Master, and came to his Masters Bed, where he lay a sleep, and with a
knife attempted with all his force to have cut his Throat, and thinking that he
had indeed cut it, he fled, and all this matter being found by special Verdict,
he was adjudged to be hanged. Quia voluntas reputabitur pro facto, the will
being taken for the deed. Cooks Pleas of the Crown fol. 5.

If then to imagine only the death of a Subject be Felony, with much Equity
then have our Laws made it Treason to compass or imagine the death of the King,
who is the life and light of the Commonwealth, etc. without whom all things run
into confusion, as has been too too woefully experienced of late.

Secondly, To Levy War against the King, etc. in the Realm, and proved by some
overt act, as to incite by Letters against the King, or to provide weapons and
the like, it is High Treason: For no Subject ought to levy War within the Realm
without authority from the King, for to him it only belongs, Stat. 25. Ed. 3.
Bract. Lib. 3. fol. 118. Britt. fol. 16. Fleta Lib. 1. cap. 21. F. N. B. 113.
a. Inst. 3. fol. 12.

So that if many conspire to levy War, and some of them do levy the same, or
appear in Arms according to the conspiracy, this is High Treason in all, for in
Treason all be Principals, and the War is said to be levied by such a
conspiracy. Cooks Pleas 9. page

If any with strength and weapons, invasive or defensive do hold and defend any
Castle, Fort or the like, against the King and his Power, this is levying of
War against the King, and so is High Treason. 3. Inst. page 9. and 10.

If any levy War to expulse strangers, or to deliver men out of Prison, it is
High Treason. Inst. 3. fol. 9.

To Usurp the Royal Power is High Treason.

To raise force, to remove Counselors from the King is High Treason.

To alter the Established Laws by force in any part is High Treason.

To endeavor by force to any pretended Reformation, is a levying of War
against the King, because they take upon them Royal Authority, which is against
the King, and so is High Treason, 3. Inst. page 9.

If two, three or more do rise purposely to alter Religion established within
this Realm, or any Law, or to go from Town to Town generally, and to cast down
Enclosures, this is a levying of War within the Statute, (though there be no
great number of the Conspirators) because the pretense is public and general;
and so it was adjudged by all the Judges of England, Cooks Pleas fol. 9. and 10.

It was resolved also by all the Judges in the Reign of King Henry the Eighth,
that an Insurrection against the Statute of Laborers, for the inhancing of
Salaries and Wages was a levying of War against the King, because it was
generally against the Kings Laws, and the Offenders took upon them the
Reformation thereof, which Subjects by gathering of Power ought not to do Vide
Cooks Pleas. Title High Treason. 3. Inst. 10. page

Thirdly, Brooks Treasons. 1. and 13. Fitz. Trial. 54. ^. 3. ca. 2.
To be adherent to the Kings Enemies, is High Treason.

As to be Aider, Comforter or Assistant, either within the Realm or elsewhere.

The Delivery or Surrender of the Kings Castles, Forts, or the like, to the
Kings Enemies, either within the Realm or without, is an adhering to the Kings
Enemies, and so it is High Treason, Rot. Parl. 7. R. 2. number. 15, 17. 24. 7. H.
4. 47.

Where a man procures or consents to Treason, it is Treason.

Where a Jailer does voluntarily permit a man committed for Treason to escape,
it is Treason.

Where a man relieveth or comfort a Traitor, knowing of the offense, it is
Treason, 3. Inst. 129. page And knowing of Treason hereby, without aiding or
concealing the Traitor, is Misprision of Treason, and to suffer Imprisonment
during life.

Fourthly, To Violate the Kings Wife, the Kings Eldest Daughter unmarried, the
Wife of the Kings Eldest Son and Heir Apparent, it is High Treason.

Fifthly, The Counterfeiting of the Kings Coin without utterance thereof, it
is High Treason, Stamf. 3. c.

If any bring false Money into the Realm, or Counterfeit to the likeness of
English Money, with intent to utter it, knowing it to be counterfeit, it is
High Treason, 3. Inst. 17. 1. and 2. P. and M. 11.

To Clip, Wash, Round, File the Money of England, it is High Treason. 5. Eliz.
cap. 11. Or to impair, diminish, falsify, scale, or lighten the Kings Money,
by any ways or means whatsoever, it is High Treason, 18. Eliz. 1.

Sixthly, To Counterfeit the Kings Great Seal, Privy Signet, Sign Manual, it
is High Treason, 1. M. 6.

Seventhly, To kill the Chancellor, Treasurer, Justices of the one Bench, and
the other, Justices of Air, Justices of Assize, Justices of Oyer and Terminer,
etc. in their places performing their Offices, it is High Treason, and the
reason is, because sitting judicially in their places, (that is in the Kings
Courts) and doing their Office, in administration of Justice they represent the
Kings Person, who by his Oath is bound that the same be done.

Lastly, Maintaining or Extolling the Authority of the Bishop or Sea of Rome,
in the Kings Dominions, the second offense, it is Treason, in obtaining of
Bulls, or Instruments from It, etc. is Treason, 13. Eliz. 2. 5. Cooks Pleas 2.
5. Eliz. 1.

Persuading or reconciling, or for being reconciled to the Roman Religion, it
is High Treason, 13. Eliz. 1. 3. Jac. 4.

Where any Jesuit or any other Priest Ordained since the first year of the
Reign of Queen Eliz. shall come into or remain in any part of this Realm, it is
High Treason, 17. Eliz. 2.

Where any person brought up in a College of Jesuits, or Seminaries, and
shall not return within six months after Proclamation made, or within two
days after his return, submit himself to take the Oath of Supremacy, it is
High Treason, 27. Eliz. 2.

Note, That every man as soon as he is born owes Legiance to the King in whose
Realm he is born, and are obliged and bound as virtually by implication of the
Law, as if they had expressly sworn. The Law presuming every one to be sworn.

2. That the administering of the Oath of Allegiance at Court Leets to all
persons of 12. years of age, is to mind them of, and oblige them to their duty.

3. He that takes an Oath to the present King, is obliged by that Oath to his
Successors, because by the Laws of the Land the King never dies.

4. That the King is absolute King before Coronation, for by the Laws of
England there is no Inter-Regnum, and Coronation is but a Solemnity of Honor:
and so it was adjudged by all the Judges of the Land, Hill. 1. Jacob. in the
Case of Watson and Clarke Seminary Priests, for by the Laws there is always a
King, in whose name the Laws are to be maintained and executed, otherwise
Justice would fall. 9. Ed. 4. 1. b.

5. That all persons as well Ecclesiastical as Civil: As well of one Sex as the
other, are liable to the penalty of the Statute.

6. All men within the Realm of England, and whose Sovereigns are in amity with
the King of England, are within the Protection of the King, and if they commit
High Treason against the King, they shall be punished as Traitors.

LONDON, Printed by Roger Norton, for Robert Pawley at the Rainbow in
Fleetstreet. 1660.


