Troy-Novant must not be Burnt. Or, an exhortative to the City to preserve
themselves.
What is there none that will the City right?
Was all their story by feirce Vulcans spite.
Burnt in Ben. Iohnsons study; Let us rake,
And from those Ashes new-liv'd, sparkles take.
Not to consume our Troy, (as Nero.
he did Rome,
Who made him Music of his Citys doom:)
Rather such strains shall start from our struck lyre
Which shall build up our Thebes, not set on fire.
Such a bright Beam we will dart; that shall renew
Your Ancestors, and bring their Acts to view.
Acts that were lost, like his Eurydice,
Which we will reduce by Orphan Melody:
Acts, that your Senators cloth will deeplier die,
And make them Scarlet now with infamy.
When that their Purple shall upbraid the cloth,
Now spoyld, and eaten by a Politic Moth,
( Vermin at Westminster,) whom you have nursed,
Until your selves are starved; yet thei'le not burst.
See how the Bull-chins hang oth' Kingdoms breasts,
While she lanck Milcher looks like Pharaos beasts.
Transparent; and her squeezed vdders flop,
Like the dried driver of a schoole-boys Top.
Was the brave dagger in your Arms for this? Given for suppressing W^ats
Rebel^ion.

Was it for yiedling up your Liberties?
Was it for patient, modest, siting still?
And let the Rebel Act what his proud will
Had once presumed? No: It was given to show,
To after-age the Honor of that Blow.
That dagger still so famous on Record,
Which did engage unto it a double sword.
That of the Kings, and Majors, and did advance,
Upon its Point the Cap of Maintenance.
Look up to that brave Trojans; and youl' stagger,
Your bold invaders, if you draw that dagger.
Look in your Chronicles, and read what fears,
You were put in by the first Jack Straw and Cades Rebellion suppressed by the
City.
Levellers.
A silly, Lowsy, undigested Throng,
Who thought to have taken the Kingdom with When Adam Diggd and Evispan, who
was then the Gentleman.
a song.
Which these base Rebels, the true brood of those,
But not so learned, do pursue in Prose.
Shall such a sort of Raskalls the State awe?
Worse then those were, who are not worth a straw.
Shall these in Triumph ride throw the glazed streets?
When you may smell from Windsor by their feet.
Shall these on Palfreys through the City ride?
Who Crosse-legge sat till now, and never a stride.
Shall these the Honor of an Nation merit?
And say they took once London by the spirit.
And have a Name, only renowned in story, Crumwells words; What if it were for
the glory of God this City were burnt.

For burning London, to the good Lords glory.
Shall these profane the Scepter, as it were
A goodly Hoppe-pole made for Oliver.
And shall the horse of state by Pockey hands,
Be led, and be at Martins foul commands.
And go as Gingerly as he; shall Vane,
(Old perjurd Vane) swear away CHARLES his Reign.
As he did Straffords head. To make his Babies
Sucking Independents, Lords of Raby.
Shall Mildmay that same Precious Knave, cause known?
A Thief for Jewels, steal away the Crown.
Or Chaloner that speeching Atheist, think,
That the Kings fame is murdered by his Ink.
And because these could a Those four, the complliers of the scand^lus
Declaration against the King.
Declaration
Compose, Compose too an abused Nation.
We rise (you Imposters) as on a May day;
The Ills of the base Houses to display.
To pull them down, or send you thence, who sit,
And contrive Plagues. and pay your selves for it.
Give the Pale Speaker the other thousand Pound,
If he can Vote CHARLES his deposing round.
(This is their work) ye shall be guarded, yes,
But from the Palace to your destinies.
You shall not longer by your Arts detains us,
We rise up all as Crispin and Crispianus.
Or like the Bechams bold: you Vote down Plays,
That we may not know the valor of those days.
Because your snifling worships want lets see,
No Plays, we'll now go Act the Tragady.
And though you lately cleansed, for your own sakes,
The Privies, we will purge, you the Kingdoms Iakes.
Never such noisome excrement did fit,
Chose sure, when that the Country was at shit.
Whose stink so rank upon our nostrill grows,
As Atkins were sole gossip to the House.
Foh you State Farmers! Let your own despair,
Drive you away; That we may cleanse the air.
And make it fit for Caesar's Nose again,
If that the Royal Nose will ever deigne,
To be so never such Pole-cats: We now bring
Hemp for you Rebels, Nose-gays for the King.
Epiphonoma.
When Nero thnatned Rome with glorious Fire,
The news was next, the Tyrant did expire.
Go Oliver, thy malice not prevails.
Thou have two enemies, London and Wales.
And both in thy sure ruins hope to laugh,
Wales be thy Tomb, London thy Epitaph.
FINIS.

