THE True Account OF THE Proceedings at the Sessions. Holden at the
Sessions House IN THE OLD-BAYLY: FOR THE City of London, County of Middlesex,
and Jail-delivery of Newgate. Which began on the 24th of this Instant Feb. and
ended on the 25th of the said Instant. CONTAINING THE TRIALS Of several
Notorious Murderers, Fellons, and Burglarers, but especially of George Pie,
For Killing the Butcher in Hungerford-Market. TOGETHER, With the Names of such
as were Condemned, the number of those Burnt in the Hand, to be Transported,
and Whipped: With many other Passages that happened during this Remarkable
Session.

ON Friday the 24th, the Sessions of Oyer and Terminer, for the City of London,
County of Middlesex, and Jail-delivery of Newgate, began at the Sessions House
in the Old-Bayly, where the proceedings against the several Criminals Indicted
for Murder, Felony, Burghlary, and other Misdemeanors, were as follows.

GEorge Pie, a Bailiffs Follower, was Indicted, Arraigned, and Tried for
killing Edward Green a Butcher, in Hungerford-Market, on the 11th of this
Instant February; the manner (as appeared in Court upon Evidence) was as
follows: The Father of the Prisoner having a Marshals-Court-Writ to Arrest
the body of the deceased; he, together with the Prisoner, came to him and gave
him the word of Arrest, upon which he catching up his Cleaver, bid them come at
their peril, and in conclusion struck at the Father of the Prisoner, and with a
full blow cut his Wrist almost through, of which wound he is since dead, then
making at the Prisoner, cut two of his fingers almost off, upon which he having
his Rapier drawn run him through the Body; after which he still pursued him,
and threw his Cleaver at him, and then fell down dead; but the Writ being
produced in Court, and it appearing he was an Assistant to his Father in the
Execution of his Office, he was acquitted.

John Clarke, otherwise Maiden, a notorious offender, had Two Indictments
preferred against him; the first for a Felony committed on the 19th. of Jan.
last, in stealing two Silver Tankards out of the House of Margaret Winn, in
White-Chappel; Viz. he with one of his Companions coming into the House to
drink, observed the Key of the Cup-board (as it is supposed) where the
Prosecutor had laid it, and watching their opportunity, took out the Tankards,
and locking it again, departed; but he absolutely denying that he took any, and
the Evidence not being positive, the Jury supposed that some one else might
have been in the Room, and therefore Acquitted him of the Felony: but upon an
Indictment laid against him by Ann Bunfield, for breaking into her House, and
taking thence Watches, Spoons and Moneys, to the value of 20 pounds, he was
found guilty, having been already Burnt in the Hand; and several times before
in Newgate.

Robert Mason was Indicted for Stealing Cocks, Hens, and other Fowl, to the
value of Thirty Shillings, and upon proof that they were taken about him, he
was found Guilty.

James Smith was Indicted for Robbing his Master, one Mr. Wallis, a Victualler
in Great St. Bartholomews, on the 11th of October. last, of 40 pounds in money
and in Rings, and other things to the value of five pounds more, and then
absenting himself, upon search after him, in London hired a Coach for 4 pounds
to carry him and a Woman (that he had caused to run away from her Husband) to
Marlborough, but being (upon notice had of their flight) pursued, they were
over-taken (...) Reading, and there carried before the Mayor, who committed
him, and upon search 7 Guinneys were found sticking in a Penny Loaf which the
Woman's Child had in its Pocket; being examined how he came by the money, he
replied, It was left him by Friends; but not being able to prove it, the Jury
brought him in Guilty.

Peter Mardelue, a Dutchman, was Indicted for stealing a Tankard from John
Gale, an the 28th of Jan. last; the proof against him, was, that he coming
into the Prosecutors House to drink, watched his opportunity and carried it
away; but being pursued, it was taken about him; for which (being evidently
proved) he was found Guilty of the Felony.

Edward Coxhill and Henry Collet were Indicted and Tried for stealing of Crape,
to the value of Twenty Shillings, from one Mr. Benson, at Dowgate; but they
appearing to be Dyars Apprentices, and that the Stuff was lost off the Float in
the Thames, there being no positive proof that they had it, the Jury acquitted
them.

Edward Markham of Padington, was Indicted for Stealing several Chairs,
Table-Linnen and Sheets, out of the House of John Atley, which upon search the
prosecutor alleged he found in his House, but the Prisoner pleaded that he
bought them of the Prosecutors Daughter: so that he bringing Evidence that he
had some of the Goods that were laid to his charge above half a Year before he
was taxed with the Felony, he was acquitted.

Alexander Younger was Indicted for that he under the pretense of a Commission
from the Officers of the Customs, searching the House of John Denue for
prohibited Goods, took thence Stones set in Silver, Buttons, Buckles, and a
Silver Diamond, to the Value of Three pounds; for which, having Two Sessions
since had an Indictment for Felony upon that occasion, but that not being
Evident, it was thought fit to prefer an Indictment of Trespass against him, of
which the Jury found him guilty.

Rowland St. John's, who the last Sessions gave in Bail for the procuring his
Pardon for Burning in the Hand, as being found Guilty of Manslaughter for
Killing Mr. Style, brought his Pardon and pleaded it in Court, and after the
usual manner gave the Court Gloves.

John Williams was Indicted for Robbing Francis Basset, on the 20th of
September last, of Goods to the value of Five pounds, but the proof not being
plain against him, he was acquitted: As likewise Margaret Boil as being
accessory to a Robbery committed by John Clarke.

John Clarke was Indicted for Stealing a Silver Tankard from Thomas Green of
St. Martins in the Fields, on the 18th of January last, the which he brought to
the House of one Margaret Boil, which occasioned her to be Indicted as an
Accessory before and after; but upon full Evidence the Fact being proved upon
the former, he was found Guilty; notwithstanding he pleaded that his Companion
stole it contrary to his knowledge.

John Price was Arraigned and Indicted for breaking into an out-Shed, belonging
to James Bennits, and taking thence Goods to the value of Five or Six
Shillings; to which Indictment he refused to plead by reason that the Court
would not allow him to see his Accusers before he pleaded Guilty or not Guilty;
whereupon he was ordered to the Press, and after great pains taken by the Court
to bring him to be obedient to the Law: In that case, he was doomed to the
Press, having the Sentence passed upon him, and a strict order given that he be
Executed according to Law in that case made and provided.

Henry Couley was Indicted and Tried for a Robbery committed upon Mary Glascock
upon the Kings Highway, vi et Armis of two Hoods, but the Robbery not being
sufficiently proved by reason of a Defect in the Evidence, he was acquitted.

A Woman was likewise Tried for Marrying a second Husband during the Life of
the former, but the Evidence failing to prove the latter Marriage, she was
acquitted.

Edward Oden was Indicted for Stealing Linen, Pewter and other things in
White-Chappel, on the 7th Instant, from one James Willit, of which upon Trial,
the Proof being positive, he was convicted.

A Second Indictment was Exhibited against John Clarke, to which he pleaded
Guilty.

A Girl of about Thirteen Years of Age, was likewise Tried for Shop-lifting,
which appearing upon Evidence that some part of the Goods were found upon her;
she was found Guilty.

John Price was this morning brought into Court, as having formerly refused to
plead, and upon that occasion ordered to the Press, but after some persuasions,
he pleaded Not Guilty, but it being proved against him he was Burnt in the Hand.

John Amos was Indicted for Robbing Richard West of Fifty pounds in Silver, and
Seven or Eight pieces of Gold; it being Evidently proved that entered the
House, and there opening a Trunk or Desk, took out the Moneys, some of it being
found in his Custody, whereupon he was found Guilty, and Burnt in the hand.

Elizabeth Brown being Tried for Stealing a Diamond Ring, a plain one, which
she sold to a Goldsmith in the Strand for a considerable value, she was found
Guilty, but she not being above Twelve Years of Age, the Court took pity of
her, and upon consideration set her by for Transportation.

After this, the Court proceeded to give Sentence upon John Clark, convicted
for a Felony and Burghlary, and John Maiden, against whom there was several
Indictments, they having been both Burnt in the Hand formerly.

Eleven were Burnt in the Hand: Three to be Whipped: Two to be Transported: And
One Fined Twenty Marks as being found Guilty of a Trespass.

FINIS.
Printed for T: Benskin, in St. Brides-Church Yard: 1682.


