FOR ^^ose that meet to worship at the Steeplehouse, called John Evangelist, IN
LONDON, OR, any other in that nature upon whom ^^e Scriptures are fulfilled, in
evil intreat^^^ by the servants of the Lord Jesus, whom he lends to deliver his
Message amongst you.

(...) for any other that are condemned for sin, and have thirstings after
righteousness, that from sin and transgression they may be turned to the
righteousness that is perfect and eternal, without which there is no sure
salvation.

(...) a Word of truth to rebuke the de^^^rer, and him that pleads for him
against the restoration of the Creation to ^he liberty of God.

(...) your hearts condemn you, God is greater and knows all things, 1 John
3. 20. Rebecca Travers.

LONDON, Printed, and are to be sold at the black spread Eagle near the west
end of Paul's, 1659.

A Word of Reproof for those that meet at the Steeplehouse called John
Evangelist, in London.
O You foolish people and unwise! How long will you love your folly? How long
will you resist our Maker? Are you stronger then he? ^^o is as truly striving
with you, as ever Genesis 6. 12.
(...) was with that generation in Noah's ^^yes, who not receiving the warning
the one Preacher of Righteousness, (...) overwhelmed in their wickedness, (...)
having safety but they who were the Ark. And I, and thousands, yea (...)
thousands, praises to the Lord, who ^^come to the ends of the world, do ^ow the
world in which you live is (...) unto destruction, and are moved him that made
the world, to come into your meeting-places, to declare unto you what must
shortly come to pass, and to show you the blindness of your Teachers, with
their blasphemous 2 Timothy 3. 6, 7. 8. ^ph. 2. 2.
and idolatrous Doctrines, whereby they deceive the simple, lead captive silly
women, which are always learning, but never come to the knowledge of the truth
which makes free from the bonds of Death and Satan, (who has captivated your
minds, and has blinded the eye that gives the knowledge of God) which rules in
all you the children of disobedience, being the god of the world, a liar and a
murderer from the beginning; and so as acted by him, his fruits ye bring forth,
even in your most holy Assemblies, Teacher and people, as in your Steeplehouse
called John Evangelists, there the Teacher exhorted the people to read and
study the Scripture, for they were light and life, (speaking of the written
Letter) bringing a carnal comparison to maintain his idolatrous Doctrine,
saying, A written piece of Paper to a sore, would do no good; but a little
written Scripture to a wounded soul, was of great force; and tha^, that was:
which quickened David, and was a light (...) a lanthorn unto his feet. And I
who ^as brought thither of the living God, whom I serve, in obedience to him,
and ^or the Seed's sake, was moved to ask him a question (when he had ended) in
moderarion and fear, telling him it was not to disturb, but for edification,
and not speaking any other words to my knowledge, then these, Does the
Scripture more plentifully declare of any one Isa. 45. 16
thing, then that for Idolatry God brings wrath and vengeance upon Nations,
Peoples, Zech. 13 2
and Persons? But he hasting away ^s hirelings use to do, his people fell on me
as so many devouring Wolfes, railing, tearing, thrusting, haling, and pushing
me down several times, yet a hair of Ez^k. 16. 38.
my head they could not hurt; but the murderer was strong, and no hand to help
the innocent; nor tongue to plead for the harmless, seen or heard in your
Congregation, though some were nea^ related to me in the outward, stood by, and
said they thought I was a made woman, in which I can rejoice, being no other
Acts 26. 24. Ioh. 15. 20
then what was done, and said unto my Lord, The servant is not greater then his
Master, and him I serve, and he is my reward, by whom David was quickened, by
whom Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob were saved, before any of that was written
which you call the Scriptures, and the same quickening Word I witness, who was
once dead as well as you, in Epb. 2. ^.
sins and trespasses; but by the obedience of the spirit has the soul been
sanctified, and I made a witness of the resurrection of Jesus, and do (as
called of God thereto) bear my testimony, that he who was dead is alive, and
his Name Rev. 10. 9, 13.
is called the Word of God, who has been caught up to God; and she that
brought him forth, has been hid in Rev. 12 5, 6.
the Wilderness from the Dragon that has made war with the remnant of her Rev.
17.1, 15.
Seed, and the Beast has prevailed, and none has been made able for ages, to
make war with him, nor the Whore, who sits in the Waters; Mark, the Waters are
people nations, and tougues, on which the Beast that carries the Whore, does
sit, who has made drunk with her fornications, the Kings of the Earth, and is
drunk with the cup of abominations; and the hour of her righteous judgment is
come, and with her Rev 20. ^
shall be tormented the beast and the salfe prophet, and all that love, and
make a lie, for evermore; and blessed are they, and they only, that know these
things which shall shortly come to pass; but they that read Scriptures, and
have not heard the Word which gave forth the John 5. 7.
Scriptures to them, the Scripture is (as it was to them at Jerusalem, that
there crucified the Lord of life) a parable; and as it was said to them, it may
to you, Search the Scriptures, for in them you think to have eternal life, and
they tectifie of me, but you will not come to me that you may have life, says
Christ Jesus. And so they who read the Scriptures, killed him who gave them
forth, and came to fulfill the Scriptures, even the holy One, and the Just, whom
you now slay in the street of the great City, spiritually called Rev. 11. ^
Egypt; but the Witness shall arise whom you are yet making merry over, and as
a thief in the night shall he come upon you, and then shall you know that this
Visitation of mine (though now despised) shall be upon your heads, and the Lord
shall be clear; and a good savor am I unto him, as well in them that perish,
as in them that are saved, who am honored of him whom I honor, and know that
in the doing of his Will there is great reward; and though of you hated, and
scorned, and despitefully used, yet bear I the reproach, and despise the shame,
following the Captain and Author of my salvation, who was perfected Heb. 2. 10,
11. 2 Timothy 2. 12. Matthew. 10. 32.
thtough the suffering; and none shall reign with him but they that suffer with
him; nor will he confess any before his Father, but they which confels him
before men; and all that have, or do so, have been hated of men, as he Ioh. 7.
15, 18.
declard at Jerusalem, and is fulfilled at London, as well as in other places,
They shall bare you for my Name sake, and speak all manner of evil of you, and
they shall think they do God service. So blind are all men who from the light
are erred, in which God dwells the Creator of all things, who commanded light
to ^ Cor. 4. 6.
shine out of darkness, and has shined into our hearts, (who by the light are
subject) to give us the knowledge of himself in the face of Jesus Christ, and
Tit. 2: 11
being made a partaker of this Grace which is free, and has appeared to all,
^ear my testimony as the truth is in Je^^s, that if you obey it not, you are
out of the Covenant, so out of the blessing, and under the curse, and know not
the Word of God, though it be near unto you all, and many has been thereby
quickened to God; and it is that which made all things, and by it are all
things upheld; for in it is life, Ioh. 1. 4, ^
and the life is the true light of men, and this is the true light which
enlightens every man which comes into the world (as it is written) and John
bare testimony of it without your meanings, declaring what he had seen, felt,
and handled of John 1: 12, 13
the Word of life; that to as many as believed in him, he gave power to become
the sons of God, not of blood, nor of the will of man, but of the will of God;
of which birth (which only must inherit the eternal Kingdom) are all you
ignorant, who preach and pray, and hear, and act in your own wills, though your
profession be high as mine once was, you are not yet come to the first
principle, of repentance from dead works, which all that are in that, have not
been quickened by the eternal word, which Word abides for ever, and is Heb. 4. 12
quick and powerful as a two-edged sword, dividing asunder, and making manifest
the secret thoughts and intentions of the heart; and this is not ink and paper,
or words, which the worst of men, or the Devil may read or talk of; but it is
spirit, life, and power, killing and making alive; as a fire in the besome, did
and do the Prophets witness it; as a Sword, and a Hammer, to ^er. 23: 29
cut off, and break down all the uncircumcised of ears and heart. This is it
that Moses (who was faithful) called unto; this was the Word of faith which
Paul preached, who was called of God, and not of men; and all so called, bear
the testimony to it, as he did, that none need to say, Who shall ascend and
fetch Romans 1^. 6, 7, 8
Christ down? Or descend, and fetch him up; for he is near thee, in the heart,
and in the mouth; and this is the Word which we preach, says Paul, who was
sent of God. Now they that tell you the Letter without, is the Word, and the
Gospel, they preach another Gospel then the Apostles did.

O that you had ears to hear, and hearts to understand the things that belong
unto your Peace, who have been, and are professing godliness for many years,
and yet stand where you did, in the customs, in the fashions, in the love of
the present World, and call the Scriptures your rule; (mind you
Scripture-readers;) is it not written, in the World God is not known; and who
loves the World, the love of God James 4: 4
is not in him; the love of the Worldis enmity to God; and is it not the words
of him that cannot lie, The world loves its own, and that his are are not of
this world, as he was not of Ioh. 15. 19
this world, therefore the world hates them. So professors of Scriptures, see
what is written in Scriptures; What Is the true Religion? Is it not thus
written, To visit the fatherless, and keep James 1. 27
unspotted from the world? are you this people who are in the vvays,
worships; and fashions of the world, and excess of vanity, and pride, and
fullness, and whole families of your own flesh, and in your own ways; ready to
perish for want of food and raiment; sure you are not they which visits the
fatherless; sure you are not the Israel in which there was no beggar; nor you
have not the Storehouse in which all the tithes were put to feed the Widows and
the Fatherless; and sure you are not in the narrow way in which few walk, for
the way that you walk, many there is in, and they walk at ease; I feel what I
speak, who walked there many years, and as concerning the Law written in stone,
blameless as any, and had a zeal though not according to knowledge; Romans 7. 9
and when the Commandment came, the new Covenant, sin revived, and I dyed; 1
Cor. ^: 1^
and only by the power of the Cross, (which in the Wisdom of the World Gal 6:
14^
was, and is esteemed foolishness) do I live in the life that never shall have
end; and in this only do I rejoice, whereby I am crucified to the World, and
the World to me; and this to the World is a mystery, who by Wisdom cannot know
the things of God which are spiritually discerned, and therefore are in vain
imaginations, of which God did, and does complain, bringing out likennesses
Con. 6. 5, ^
of it as the Papists, in Wood, Stone, or Gold, others calling the Cross that
which you cannot fly from, not knowing the Cross which is daily to be taken
up; but we who of him have learned, who says, Take up your cross and follow
Luke 9. 23
me; know it to be the power of God unto salvation; and by it has the Devil
been overcome, and before it must all the powers of darkness fly; and this is,
and has been the defense of the righteous Seed in all generations, and the
Scriptures declare of it, and shall bear a testimony for me, and all the
children of light, against all you that have the words of the Scriptures, and
yet are found haters of the light which gave forth Scriptures; and if ever that
eye be opened in any of you that the god of this World has blinded, you shall
confess that, that wherein you have trusted shall witness against you; and
however your Teachers which are blind, may lead the blind, till both fall into
the ditch; yet is there a seed among you that the Lord will gather unto us, and
therefore does his long suffering lead unto repentance; but many shall be cut
off in their iniquities, Isa. 65. 12
to whom he has called, and they would not hear; and they shall cry, and he
will not hear, but laugh at your calamity, when destruction shall come as a
swift Whirlwind, and with the Prove. 1: 28
beasom of the Lord shall all the Workers of iniquity be swept away, and his
fierce Wrath shall consume them which have worshipped Images, and have bowed
down to the inventions of men, and instead of the truth delivered to the
Saints, (for which we earnestly contend) have set up the traditions of Matt:
15: 3
men. And here stands your Worship with the whole World, who are enemies to the
cross, which in the light only is seen; and so in the darkness has all error
and false doctrine been broached, and invented, and brought forth, and the
imagination has, and does bring forth the image, and both shall be consumed;
and therefore I who know assuredly that he will come, and will not sal: 11: 6
tarry, and his reward is with with him, who reigns snares, fire and brimstone
upon the Wicked every day, the idolaters and adulterous generation, who have
forgot God, days without number, and (...) committing Whoredom with the Images
of men; yea thou England, yea thou London, (that has talked so much against
idolatry, and fought that Images might be pulled down) art found in the great
abominations, and filthiness of spiritual Whoredoms, even in the sight of the
Son, the day being dawned, has shown the filthiness of thy night-works, which
thou ceasest not from, though the ligh has discovered them, but think the
Lord is like unto thee, who in the times of darkness winked, but now will
render a due recompense for all your psalm. 50: 3
Fornications; a horrible tempest goes before him, and in the Clouds he comes,
and the darkness hides him from you who hate the light.

O a vvo, a vvo unto all that discerns Heb. 10. 37
not the signs of his coming, for upon whom he falls, he grinds to powder, and
the adulterous eye cannot see him, which has run a lusting after many lovers,
yet pays her vows, offers her Prove. 7. 14 27
offerings, and wipes her mouth, and says she has done no evil, but her steps
lead to hell.

O how abominable are the prayers of the wicked in the ears of the Almighsy!
and the sacrifices of the wicked have an ill savor in the nostrills of the
holy One; unclean priest, and unclean people, whose offerings are flesh, and
not spirit; dead, and not living; who have robbed the Lord, and have given his
glory to that which you have framed in your imaginations; here is the heathen
for whom the devouring plague is prepared, who has turned the invisible God
into the similitude or likeness Romans 1. 23
of visible things; and for this does the fierce wrath of the Lord burn as an
Oven, and the wicked shall be as stubble therein; and with the Candle of the
Lord shall all you be searched who have set up any thing in my stead, says the
Lord, who am the Life, whom am the Light, and there is no other God, John 1. 4.
John 8. ^^ John 14: 6:
though you are among the many gods, who set Ink and Paper in his place,
calling it by his Name, which is eternal, saying the Letter is the word, and
the light, and the life. And this all you who remain in the idolatrous and
adulterous nature, alienated from God, strangers to the Covenant of light and
life, led by the Prince of the ai^, turn the most excellent of all that you
possess, into Wickedness; for it is impossible that an evil tree should Matt.
7. 18
bring forth good fruit, as it is written; for all who have not had the eye
opened (which the god of this World has blinded) by the power of him that is
the light and the life, as slaves are sub ected to the power of Satan, serve
him with the Scriptures, or whatsoever they have, though being in the dark they
know it not, no more then the Priests and people at Jerusalem, which if they
had known, would not have put to death the Lord of Life.

And so mind all you Scripture-readers and professors, who are ready to murder
for your Religion; Was not they at Jerusalem your type? who when he came in the
fullness of time (of whom the Scriptures prophesied) to fulfill the Scriptures,
and put an end to all their Worships, which though they were given by the
command of God, yet having lost the spirit and life by which they were
sanctified, are become corrupt and abominable, and ripe for destruction; yet he
that was sent of God to put an end to the old, and to make all things new, not
coming according to their expectation, who had framed an imagination from their
own understanding of the Scripture, as now you do, to come with their
observations; and so though they read the Scriptures daily, they could not
receive him nor his Doctrine; for says he, The vail which Moses wore, is on
your faces to this day; When you read Scriptures, is the Vail yet rent off your
faces? Friends and Neighbors, and Relations, if it were, you would see him
whom you have pierced, who are yet eating and drinking your own damnation, not
discerning the body of my Lord, who while I was a sinner, died for me. And so
friends in faithfulness, and in the love that is unseigned, with the Authority
which is from above, by which I am armed not to fear what any can do unto me,
and have, and do overcome the evil with the good-wil unto man, in which I can,
and do beseech you to be reconciled unto God for Christ's sake, which yet you
are strangers to: Will you set any thing in his place who Ioh. 6. 44
is only come to by the drawings of the father; and that is the drawings of
the father, which draws out of iniquity, and from transgression; and this
being attended to, you may learn to know what called Abraham, which Heb. 11. 8
obeying and following, brought him Ioh. 8. 56*
to see Christ's day, though there was then no Letter written of that you call
the Scripture; and none ever did, or shall give forth, or come to a right
understanding of the Scriptures, but as they obey and follow that in them which
condemns sin, and leads out of it, to him that has, and can only open the
eyes of all born blind; and this I declare as I have learned of the Father in
the light, That though I had been a reader of the Scriptures (as without) from
a child of six years old, as constantly as most, yet when by the power of the
eternal Gospel was turned from darkness to light, I saw things unutterable, and
the Scriptures that in my dark mind I had so often turned, was now another
thing in my eye, and plain without a meaning, as I came to learn of that spirit
2 Pet. 1, 20 21
which gave them forth; for as it is written, No Scripture is of a private
interpretation; but as holy men moved of the Holy Ghost, writ them forth, so
only those holy ones who have been, or are moved of the same spirit, which
are the children of the Kingdom, see the parable, and interpret the Scripture,
which all that are unlearned of the Spirit, interpret to their own destruction.

And so you that know not the moving of the spirit in which the Scriptures are
writ, have given meanings, and so in this long night of Apostasy have brought
forch errors and false Doctrines, and filled the World with Sects and Opinions,
the simplicity of the Gospel being betrayed by the crafty subtlety of men;
but we who are come Ephesians* 4* 4 (...), 29 14 15
in the light, to see the fulfilling of the Scriptures, know that the wisdom of
the wise is turned into foolishness, and the counsel of the prudent is brought
to naught, the Prophet is become a fool, and the diviners shall run mad, Hos.
9. 7.
and he that hides from the wise, reveals to babes and sucklings, and it seems
good unto him; though the heathen Luke 10. 2^^
then rage, and the people imagine vain thugs, the Lord is risen to recover his
own inheritance, that has Psalms 2. ^. Ezekiel. 34. 2. 3.
long been laid waist by the destroyer, and the devouring shepherds have not
fed the sheep, but eat the sheep, who have run and were never sent, therefore
have not the people been profited, and the mystery of iniquity that began in
the Apostles days, has spread Ier. 23. 21. 2 These. 2. 7.
again, to the filling of the world with thick darkness, as it was foretold by
Christ and the Apostles, that devouring Wolves should come and make Man. 7. 15.
havoc of the flock, and that in sheeps clothing, and these were to prevail
all the time and times that the world wondered after the beast, though your
teachers would make you believe Rev. 13. 3.
the false Prophets are come but now, that they might hide themselves; but O
that you did see and believe the Scriptures! then would you know who were the
ravening Wolves, we or they whom you call your ministers; see which is the
Wolf that devours and destroys, he that sends for his gain Isa. 56. 11.
from his quarters, and if he has it not, raises war, and sues, and casts in
prison, and if any speak in his meeting place, or asks him a question, he
causes or suffers his people to beat them, or hale them, or stone them, or whip
them, and will not speak himself but for gifts and rewards; Now are these the
Wolves, or they that bear all these things in patience, going up and down
freely, giving as freely as they have received, try whether of these be the
ministers of Christ, by that you call your rule; and truly people God will not
be mocked, and his eye beholds the deceitful worker every where; and the
Scriptures are ours upon whom the ends of the world are come, and for us were
they written, and shall bear witness for us against all the Idolatrous
generation, that sets them in the place of God, and to me are they precious,
who am come to the comfort of them, and let the wisest of your teachers if he
can without a meaning, bring a written Scripture to prove that they any where,
are called the John 1. 4, 6^
word, the foundation, the light, or the life, and I shall give some of the
many written in the Scriptures, to show that he who is the light, is the life,
and John 8. 12.
the way, and the ordinance, and the name ohn 14. ^
by which only salvation is; and are not those then false Prophets and
deceivers, John 1. 1:
which would make you from the Scriptures believe that which is not, John 1:
14: Phil. 29
and hide from you that which is? are not these the Antichrist which instead 1
Cor: 3. 11
of Christ, are setting up that which is not he in his stead? O shall not the
Acts 10. 42 Col: 2: 14
plagues threatened in that book come upon them, who are known to add and
diminish, and surely as the Sorcerers of Egypt are they that harden the Dut. 2,
4 Rev. 22, 18, 19*
heart in making likenesses; and truly friends these things are not written to
you, as to have your help or aid to defend or assist us, as your parsons use to
pray and cry for, for we are the people that have no helper on the earth, yet
beleiving, know we shall be Micah 4 1
the mountain set upon the top of every mountain, and while you are striving
against the little stone cut out of the mountains without hands, it Dan 2. 34
grows and you see it not, and shall be the praise of the whole earth, and the
devourers and the destroyer and all the ungodly shall be crushed under it, then
shall the earth be filled with righteousness; and of the increase of this
kingdom there shall be no end, which is come and coming, and not by power and
might, but by my spirit shall all the opposers of this kingdom be brought down
says the Lord, and the glory of it is the son, and all the subjects are
clothed with holiness, all being Priests and Kings to God, and the glory of it
is now seen coming down from heaven by them that the world hates, who are
following the Lamb through many tribulations into it, and the Dogs, and the
Whoremungers, and Rev. 14. 4
the makers and lovers of lies; (Mark this) false teachers and hearers that
speak the things you know not, with the Rev. 22. 15
fearful and unbeleiving must you be shut out (Mark you this) that cannot
believe what herein is declared, ^^t to you it seems strange, that God should
appear to his people as of old, and give us the same spirit as they had that
gave forth Scriptures, saying to the hardening of your own hearts, Mi^^cles are
ceased; why to us it is not marvelous to receive what we have waited for? the
spirit of truth to lead into all truth, and the Scriptures declare of him, and
he is the same and changes not, infallible and almighty, who is given to
convince the world of ^in, and till you come to believe in John 16. ^^ 92
that which convinces of sin, you can neither understand nor believe the
^criptures nor me, nay though one rise from the dead; and I who know how
precious your souls are, with thousands more, have been made willing in this
the day of the Lords power, to go forth with our lives in our hands, denying
^ll that has been dear to us, that you might be brought from under the power of
the Prince of darkness, to the obedience of the light, in which only is fire
salvation, no other name given under heaven whereby any can be saved; I am the
light says Christ Jesus, John. 8, 12,
and if any come to me be shall not abiae in darkness; and so all people who
hate the light, and are speaking against it, and giving it names, as natural,
and such like, are you not speaking against the Savior, who is the light, and
the way, and the truth as the Scriptures declare. O that for your souls sake
you would cease from hearing and speaking lies! and come to the light which is
the true light, and then you might see what God requiers!

Truth in the inward parts, which Psalm. 51. 6.
though it may be you have red often, yet are not come to it while you despise
the light, and have not (as I know none has out of the light) found that God
requiers; and what stead will all that stand you in, which he requires not?
and so all men and women come to the light: It is the words of Christ Jesus, He
that walks in the light stumbleth John* i. 9, 10
not, and all from it have and do stumble and fall; and therefore as you love
your souls and prize your everlasting welfare, give heed to the most sure word
of Prophesy, then that voice which come from heaven, your teachers tell you
that is the Scripture, but thus it is written; You do well to take ^eed to the
more sure word of Prophesy, as 2 Pet. ^. 19
to a light that shines in a dark place, till the day dawn and the day star ar
se in your bearts; and as to this you come, the subtlety of the deceiver, which
has beguiled man and led into the transgression; may be manifested, and you
shall come to see what thou were, and what thou art, and what thou must be
before thou come to inherit the purchased inheritance; for thou were made in
glory, O man and woman, in the Image of God; but by transgression art become as
a brute beast that perishes, and know nothing but what thou know
naturally, as from that wisdom which is sensual and devlilish, for here sits
the Devil in the sensual, fulfilling the lusts, slaying the soul, and yet
seeming religious; here is Cain's offering, Esaus tears, but not the blessing,
for that is to the seed for ever and ever, and in the Gel. 3. 16*
light only must thou come to know the promised seed, which is to break the
Serpents Genesis 3. 1^*
head: So to that of God in every man I speak, who has not left himself without
a witness in the worst of you, that you harken diligently to that which has at
sometimes showed your iniquities, and called you out of it, for it is better to
harken then to offer the sacrifices of fools, and till you hear him that called
Abraham, how far are you Sam. 15. 22 H^b. 11. ^
from the election that cannot be deceived, in the deceit, in the error, and
yet talking of others to be Heretics, and deceivers, but we know who holds the
truth in unrighteousness, who neither hear nor obey the call of God: Mind Titus
2. 11. 12.
people, who are talkers so much of free grace, what have you learned of it?
are you sober, that hail, and pluck, and fight, and laugh, and scoff, even in
your most holy assemblies? Have you learned to deny all ungodliness and wordly
lusts, who are in the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eye, and the pride of
life? Do you walksoberly and righteously in this present world? Are your women
the Daughters of Sarah, that wear not gold, nor silver, nor pearl, not brodered
hair? Are you the men whose moderation and temperance is seen unto Isa. 56. 12
all, who live in the excess, eating, and drinking, and in pride, and
covetousness, Romans 2. 11
and wantonness, respecting persons that are rich, and oppressing the poor,
despising the needy; and in the midst of all these your iniquities call your
selves Christians, and say you are justified by Christ Jesus, and saved by his
blood; Will not the Lord be avenged for these things? Will not the righteous
God do righteously? Does he justify the wicked, or will he save the ungodly,
Psalm. 7. 11 Exo. 34. 6, 7,
or acquit the guilty? nay a due recompense will be rendered unto all the
workers of unrighteousness, who are putting the evil day afar off, and are
crying, where are the days of his coming, things are as they were, let ns eat
and drink, for to morrow we must dye; but Mark 9 44
the Worm which must never dye will be your torment, for as the tree stands it
shall fall, and after death comes judgment; and in righteousness will he rain,
who shall give to every man according to his works done in the body, whether
they be good or evil, and in vain will a talk of salvation be in that day, for
all you that are out of the covenant; and I knowing assuredly that God is
revealed from heaven in flames of fire, to take vengeance on all that knows
him not; 2 These. 1. ^ 18.
cannot but warn you while you have time, to cease from all your imaginations
of God, which are vain, and to come to that which is only able to redeem from
the powers of darkness and bonds of Satan, whereby you have been and are
captivated; and all having a gift to profit with all, come to know it in your
selves, for by this must all be presented before God, who is just in all his
judgments, and requiers of no man according Romans 6. 2. 2 Timothy 1. 6
to that he has not, but according to that he has; his own is he come ^ Pet.
4. ^0
for, and though the unprofitable hide it, yet it is good and perfect; O that
you knewit. and the power thereof! for this only can redeem your souls out of
the pit, and break all the bonds of iniquity, and cleanse from sin, which has
separated Luke* 2. 48
you from God, and this was it which the Prophets witnessed, to set Psalm. 4. 1
their souls at liberty, before they could say the Lord is my righteousness;
and you that know not this gift, which is from the father of spirits, to be
your leader, and guide, and teacher, your best works are but
self-righteousness, Heb. 6. 1
dead works, and to be repented of, but we who have gained to that which showed
us the evil of our ways, and the vanity of the world, with the glory thereof,
have been brought to cease psalm. 4. 2
from our own works and words, and come to stillness, in which the still voice
has been heard of God, who complains of all you that are walking in vanity,
turning your makers glory into shame by speaking deceit and following after
lies, and in this stilness standing, are we come to possess sure salvation by
his redemption, that saves his people from their sins, and so it is God that
works all our works in us, and for us, and self and the boaster are shut our,
by the powers of the eternal word of separation, and so our joy and boasting is
in God all the day long; but you out Mat 1. 21 Esa: 26. 13
from the light, disobedient to that which shows your misdoing, have nothing to
warn you, or to rejoice you, or give you peace, but wat is from the fire of
your own kindling; and this you shall have at my hands says the Lord Esa. 50.
11
to lie down in sorrow, and this is the truth to you all, whatever your
teachers tell you, who cry vehemently against the light, for they know if you
harken to the light, their trade will soon down, and therefore many lies in
their pulpits and else where do they publish, (to hold up the kingdom of
darkness) saying we deny the Scriptures, and Christ which dyed at Jorusalem,
and the ministers, with many more false accusations; to which I answer for the
truths sake, no other Christ do we profess, then he that made a good confession
before Pilate, who when crucified, had over his head a writing set of Hebrew,
Greek and Lattin, by his crucifiers, as now he has (receive it if you can) of
whom Enoch Moses, and all the rest of the Prophets prophesied, and the Apostles
bare witness to, him do we believe in and call all to, who is in us the hope of
glory; and the Scriptures of truth we believe, and Deuteronomy. ^4 ^5
are come to the fulfilling of them, and being witnesses that the Angel of the
everlasting Gospel, has flown through heaven, after this long night of
Apos^asie; Rev: 14. 6.
we know that the hour of righ^eous judgment is come, in which Babylon and all
her merchants must down, and we cannot but warn them and you, of their sure
destruction, for these are the ministers of Antichrist, and not of Jesus
Christ, who set up any thing in his stead, who is the eternal Son of God, and
this was they seen to be, by some of them called puritans forty years ago, to
my own knowledge; and some that had been breed at Schools and universities with
them, and had taken their orders, though they were dark times, have all along
according to the light received, witnessed against the evil of these times
servers, so much as that they were hated of the world, suffered persecution,
some to death, others banishment for his names sake, who is John 1. 6.
the light; and the ministry sent of God, did and do bear witness to him that
is the light; and these we honor in the Lord, who by his power have turned
many thousands from darkness Act* 16 14
to light, and from the power of Satan to God, and we try them by their works,
and their fruits are fruits Mat. 7. 16 ler. 23. 28.
of unrighteousness, but you cannot gather Figs of Thistles, nor Grapes of
Thorns; what is the Chaff to the Wheat, says the Lord God, who is gathering
his Wheat into the Garner, and the day of Harvest is at hand, and the tares
must be burned with unquenchable fire; and so be awakned, for to that of God in
every man's conscience I am manifested, that you are warmed, and called to
repentance, and from your dead worships and works, John 4 23.
to the living God, who is a quickening spirit, and in spirit will he be
worshipped, and his first appearance is to destroy sin in the flesh; and if this
you despise, which convinces of sin, you offer despite unto the spirit of
grace, Heb. 10. 29
by which all the saved of God are sealed, and have the witness in our selves,
that he is true; this is the mediator of the new Covenant written in the heart,
put in the inner parts, which who are come to, need not any Heb. 8, 6 ler. 31.
33.
to teach, but are all taught of God, from the least to the greatest, knowing
^he pouring forth of the spirit upon ^ons and daughters, whereby we pro^hesy;
and this is a lanthorn to our ^^et, and a light unto our steps, and ^^eeping to
it he manifests himself un^o 1 Cor 13. 11 John 4. 4.
us, whom we know and feel mani^ested in flesh, to destroy the works of the
Devil, and as that which is perfect comes, that which is unper^ect is put away,
for he that dwells in us is greater then he that rules in the world, though it
be denied by ^ll those your teachers, which preach against perfection, to the
weakening of the faith, by which all the holy men of God were pefected, and by
which the world and death, and he that has the power of death, (the Devil) are
overcome; and this is our victory: O that you felt it! it is under the blessing
of eternal life, and without you know this to arise which can remove the
mountains, what have you to do with promises? for the promises are to the seed
for ever and ever, not unto Rom 4 16
seeds, as unto many, but unto on Christ Jesus, this seed bruises the Serpents
head, and keeps him under, who rules in all you that live in Sion, and plead
for it, but we that believe know the casting out of Devils, and the treading of
the Serpent under foot, and we speak with new tongues, Mark: 6. ^7
and the world cannot bear it, and the ear is bored that hears the she pheards
voice, and they can no more hear ^ stranger, and so the Scripture (which you
say is your Rule) does testify against you, and secrets are made known to us
that fear him, and more and more shall they be covered with darkness that
striye against the light, which now pricks many of you; and it is hard for you
to kick against it, and though you have or may for a time get above it, yet (if
not before) at your deathbeds some of you shall confess, that that speaking
trouble, none can speak peace, and that condemning, none can justify; for he
that is a God pardoning sin, iniquity, and transgression, will in no wise
acquit the guilty; are not you guilty whose hearts condemn you and there is no
remission but by blood? blood is lise, and the life of 1 John 3. 20 Heb 9 22
Jesus is the light of men, but all that ^elieve not in the light, are
condem^ed already, as says the scripture, M^^k ^6. ^6
and know not the blood that clenses, ^o more then they that peirced Jesus
(...) at Jurusalem, and saw the blood and water run out, yet had neither
^ensing nor salvation by it; then, but ^ohn 1. 7.
^ll who are in the light, as we are in ^he light, have fellowship one with
another, and the blood of Jesus clenses ^s from all sins, whereby we have
bold^ess in the day of Judgment, know^^g as he was, we are in this present 1
John 4. 17
^orld, hated, mocked, and despite^^lly used of you, for whose souls ^^ke we
have and can deny all that is dear unto us, not loving our lives un^o the
death, that while it is day you ^ight hear his voice, who svvears in ^is
wrath the unbeleiver shall never ^nter into his rest, and without you ^novv
and feel that which is pure and perfect, and eternal to believe in, Heb. 3. 1^
^^.
^our faith is in an Idol, and your offerings will not he offer, who lives for
ever, to make intercession for all that come to God by him, who is a psalm. 16.
4
priest for ever made by the Law of an endless life, and if ever you come to
know the true God, you must know him in you, who is over all, in you all, and
through you all, without respect Heb 7 25. Eph^. 4. 6. Acts 17. 28
of persons, in him we live, and move, and have our being, who made all men of
one blood; and this is Gospelnews, glad tidings to the poor and hungry, the
s^ck and lost, who may come freely, high and low, rich and poor, to him without
money, or without ^sa: 55. 1 Esa, 1. 27.
price; who condemns all unrighteousness, judges all iniquity, and redeems sin
by Judgment, and destroys the transgressor and saves the righteous soul which
can only inherit the Kingdom, which is unfaiding and undefiled, feel him in
you, into whose hands all judgment is committed; for know you not, that if
Christ be no in you ye are reprobate? and the Apostl traveled again in birth
of those tha^ John 5. 22 2 Cor. ^3. 5 Gal. 4 19 John 4. 29
had been converted, till Christ were formed in them; and so cease from the
meanings of men, and come to know the Prophet which can tell you all the evil
that ever you have done; is no^ this the Christ? truly the day is fa^ spent and
the night comes, in which none shall work, therefore prize your Hab. 1.13
Hos. 13. 9
time and repent, for in sin will not God save any, who is of purer eyes then
to behold iniquity, and the Lord is clear, and if thou perish O man, thy evil
is of thy self, who art warned to forsake the evil, and to obey that (which
condems the evil) which is good and perfect, and gives peace to the upright;
in which I have and shall rejoice, though the Seas roar, and the mountains be
removed out of their place, for truth is stronger then all, and shall overcome,
and in it have I an abiding place when the storm has been great, but where
will you hide, (that sit in the seat Psalm. 1: 1
of the scorners, and stand in the way of sinners) when the black and gloomy
day shall come upon you, and the elements shall melt, and the world shall pass
away with a great noise? your ^ocl 2:2: 2Pet:3:10 Esa 2: 02
riches and your honor will stand you in no stead, when you shall fling your
Idols of Gold and of silver to the Batts, and to the Moles, for he shall judge
in Acts 13; ^4
righteousness who is no respecter of persons by whom all actions are weighed
who throws Princes from their (...). 42. 6.
Thrones and raises beggars, and this is he who is given for a light to the
Gentiles, and a covenant to the people; O that you knew him and would trust in
him! who all the day long stretches ^sa. 65. 2
forth his hand to a stiff-necked and rebellious people; but the night comes
in which none can work, then all that resist the light shall be cast into outer
darkness, where there is weeping and wailing and gnashing of teeth for
evermore: Therefore that all that thirst after everlasting righteousness might
be gathered into the light, do I call and write unto you these things in
plainness. M^^ 8. 12


And now you who deny the light of Christ, the living Word, and have set the
dead Letter in his stead, how does death prevail in you? And how has darkness
beset you, that even while you are preaching and professing the Scripture, you
are fulfilling them against your seives? Did not the light of the World foretell
his servants what they must receive from the Worlds professors for doing his
Work, saying, I send you forth as sheep in the midst of Matthew. 10 Mark. 13
John 16.
wolves, and they shall stone you in their Synagogues; they shall put you nut
of their Synagogues, and in the Synagogues yo shall be beaten; and they shall
deliver you upto Counsels, and ye shall be brought before Rulers for my sake,
for a testimony against them; yea the time comes, that whosoever kills you,
will think he does God service; and these things will they do unto you, because
they know not the Father nor me.

And this they did unto such as he sent into their places of Worship to cry
against their Worship, who preached the Scripture, and thought therein to have
eternal life, as you do, whilst they thus entreated them in whom the Word of
eternal life was, who gave forth the Scriptures.

And thus death works in them who set the Letter for the Life, and denies the
Light of Life in themselves, and such would devour it in others.

And that his words may be fulfilled, he sends forth his sheep in his spirit
and power to suffer these things; and the Wolves that have the outward words,
the sheeps clothing, they tear, hale, and beat the sheep, as he has said they
should, for a witness against them. So search the Scriptures, and compare your
works and their works; they denied the light; so do you. They thought to have
eternal life in the Scriptures; so do you. They fulfilled them upon the sheep
in their Synagogues, even while they were preaching in them. And how many of
your synagogues is there in this Nation, where some of his sheep have not
suffered the self-same things from this generation? They haled before Rulers;
and how many Rulers is there in this Nation, before whom some or other have not
born this testimony for a witness? And when they had done all this to them,
then their time came to kill them, and think that whosoever did it, did God
service: And your time is at the door, and you are hasting apace toward it;
and some have already finished their testimony herein, and are at rest where
you cannot come.

And thus with the light which youdeny, are you comprehended, weighed, measured
and marked to be no sheep, but Wolves in sheeps clothing, and by your fruits
you are known; and the true Shepherd (who is not an hireling has sent forth
his sheep amongst you, who meets with no fruits amongst you, but briars and
thorns, and who returns from you beaten, push't and haled, kick't and cast down
in your Synagogues, and dirted in your streets; and thus we return to him that
receives the oppressed, in whose Name we are sent, and the best we can say for
the best of you, is, Father forgive them, they know not what they do, not
knowing the Father nor the Son. And herein you are found, (as he sends to prove
you, and to receive your fruits) all professions, forms, notions, and
gatherings; and herewith are you numbered, the best as a briar, and the most
upright as a thorn-hedge; Teachers and People in the tearing, devouring nature,
all from the Vine, and as clearly to be seen by your works, in which you are
found to be out of the nature of them whose words you profess, as a dog may be
known from a lamb, or a thorn from a vine.

So read the Scriptures, the Lambs sufferings and the Wolves actings, and read
your selves by your fruits, amongst whom you are found, and call not your
selves Christians, for Christ owns no such workers, for that of Christ suffers
in you, and by you; and though you say God is your Father, as they did, yet you
do the works of the Murderer; and though you say Christ is your Savior, yet
the destroyer is head in you; and though you say the Scriptures is your rule,
yet they condemn your lives, and cast you out amongst such who persecuted them
who gave forth the Scriptures; and while you stand in that nature, you have no
part in the Scriptures to inherit, but the plagues and woes therein foretold
for such workers: And the Scriptures needs no meanings to prove you there, but
are fulfilled in you in the behalf of him whose work you are doing; but when
you would take them to prove your Teachers or your selves to be of God, then
you must do it with meanings, twinings, and wrestlings; for in plainness and
truth, as the Scriptures were given forth, they shut you out. And when your
Teachers and your selves, with all their learning and crast, have taken the
Saints words, and put them upon your selves that you might be taken for sheep;
a sheep indeed is sent forth amongst you, and all your covers are too narrow to
hide the Wolf that is within; and how little a thing of Gods choosing quickly
confounds so great a building and profession, and lays naked that which many
years you have been hiding; and thus when the weakness and foolishness which is
of God, comes amongst you, it lays waste your great wisdom, great professions,
great notions, long prayers, separations, and gathering, and Names of Ministers
of Christ, and people of God, Church of God, and House of Prayer, and all is
shaken and gone, and naught of all this left but a heap of confusion, tearing,
haling, beating, pulling, stoneing, laughing, and evil-speaking, not the least
face of a Church of Christ left, nor one jot of all your sheeps clothing to be
seen; and the poor Instrument by which this is done, you count but a fool, or
mad, or one not worth hearing speak, or worthy an Answer, that the Scripture
may be fulfilled, which says, God has chosen foolish things, weak things,
base things of the ^ Cor: 1
World, and things that are despised, to confound the wise and mighty, and
bring all to naught that is not in himself; and this day is coming upon you
unawares, who are professing the Scriptures with your Candle out, and so not
having the light of Faith in you to guide you, it is risen against you in the
weak, to lay open your nakedness, blindness, and hardness of heart, before your
selves and all men*

So thou that would be counted a shepherd and a guide, behold thy Flock, and
the fruits of thy Ministry; When I was to come amongst you in obedience to the
Lord Jesus Christ, and in the power of his spirit to prove you, did you carry
your selves as sheep toward me? Let moderation judge you, and be ashamed. What
a heap of confusion was you all turned into on a sudden, when the foolishness
of God appeared amongst you in weakness and contempt! And did thou carry thy
self as a true Shepherd, to fly and leave thy flock in such a tumult upon a
poor despised woman, and neither to stay and answer one question, nor to rebuke
the devourer which was head in thy flock? So that if the Lord had not
strengthened and preserved this weak body, it might have been crushed with
violence, pushing and haling to and fro; for as one in the waves of a raging
sea, so was I amongst thy flock. Oh shepherd, be ashamed of thy flock, and they
of thee, from that day forward till you repent. Vine-dresser, be ashamed of thy
Work, how is thy Vineyard overrun with briars and thorns, that the meek cannot
pass unless he be fenced with Iron and Steel? Oh husbandman! What do thou sow
amongst them where this is reaped? And people, be ashamed of your shepherd, and
of his hire, and of your defense, and let the Words of Christ judge what he is
that flies and leaves his flock, and has not the Weapon of truth in the spirit
of meekness, to defend himself and his flock with; let your fruits judge you in
the light of Christ Jesus, what he has sown, and in what ground it has sprung
up; now it is laid open to your faces, and the nature of sheep is not in your
fold, violence has filled your House of Prayer; the abomination that makes
desolate, is got up therein, and stands where it ought not; pride is exalted,
and the wicked worker is set up, and the blind is got into the seat of
judgment, and leads the blind, who calls light darkness, and darkness light;
and the ear that should hear the true shepherd, you have stop^; and the eye of
a spiritual mind is blinded by denying the light within, and you have lost the
defense of truth; and so there is no way to make you understand what you are,
but by laying you open by your fruits before the sun, in whose light your
fruits are condemned, and you seen to be none of his flock, nor he your
defense, but enemies to it, and his appearance in the weakest thereof, whom he
chooses for such a work, Glory to the Lamb: And let all that learn his nature,
praise his Power and Wisdow sor evermore; for he has fitted the meek of the
Earth for his defense, but the horse and his rider he has cast into the sea.

And so people, had there been in you reasonableness or moderation, or any
desire to have known the truth in its power, when I did but ask a moderate
question of your Teacher, you would have been still and sober, and moved him to
answer, and in meekness of spirit you to have heard both parties, that so you
might have judged with that of God in you, (which will arise to the truth where
it is) who had truth on his side; and if your Teacher had had it in him, is it
not stonger then all to defend him and you therewith, which is Christ's weapon
against all errors whatsoever; and then if he had had the Staff of the true
Shepherd, to have stood over you, and defended you, then had he showed himself
like a shepherd, and you like sheep, and not he to betake himself to fly for
his defense, and you to carnal Weapons, and with the fist of wickedness list
up, run all a heaps in rage and confusion, to defend your Teacher and his
Doctrine by uncivil demeanor, not becoming men and women of government, wherein
you have but made it appear openly to be Truth that you withstood, by what way
you took against, is as truth has foretold in Scripture concerning the Worlds
Teachers and Professors, and what usage Christ's sheep should have in the midst
of Wolves; and upon you this day is this Scripture fulfilled for a witness
against Teacher and People, and out of it you are cast, and out of the Kingdom
and patience of Christ Jesus you have proved your selves, though you say you
are the children of the kingdom; and no church of Christ, but in the world you
are, which lies in wickedness, and enmity against the life of Christ Jesus; and
in the very same works which he said you would do, teacher and people are
found, and are not built on that foundation that bears and tries all things,
which cannot be shaken, but as the troubled Sea roaring and swellings, casting
mire and dirt, as the Scriptures says of the wicked world, which some out
their own shame, and shows what you have Esa. 57 20 ^ude 13
been long treasuring in your evil hearts; and so out of the abundance that is
Ma^^* 12 34
therein, you have powered out upon the servant of the Lord, just as your
fore-goers have done, and as he foretold, who is this day a swift witness
against you, who have set your selves against him, and the day has declared
it, that you have no part in the sufferings of Christ Jesus, but your part is
proved to be with them who has shed his blood, since Abel to this day: The
world by wisdom knows not God, says the Scriptures, which is now fulfilled in
this generation, where are high notions, swelling words, great professions, and
zealous forms, all in the world without God in them, boasting themselves in a
lie, who profess redemption in words, but in works are in the world, and in the
darkness thereof, blindness of mind, hardness of heart, and earthly captivity,
without life and power in you, to give you victory over the prince of lust, the
God of this world over your own spirits, which lusts to pride, lusts to envy,
lusts to strise and covetousness and oppression, and all that unreasouable
nature which devours the creation, and keeps it in bondage under the power of
Satan, and under wrath and the curse, which daily groans to be delivered into
its former glory, into it is first being in God and his sons, which is right
redemption without a lie, where all things are of God, and in the truth set
free from the devourer, which rules in worldy men and women, where all things
are not become new, and where all things are not of God, yet professing
redemption, with pride, lust, and covetousness, and all vanity in your
Vessels, not knowing him who is the greater, to be in you to condem these
evils, then he that is in you to entice you to all these things, and blind you
in them; and here you are seen with the pure truth that is in God, to be out of
God in the world, and in the lie, not doing in the truth nor redeemed thereto,
but the witness of truth lies slain, denied and buried in you; and where he
raigns not in the light, there you are in the darkness of this world, blind in
your hearts, and there the false Prophet is up in the seat of Judgment,
teaching lies and false-hood, to make you more blind still, and to harden you
therein, to seek to blind others also and to turn truth backward, that he may
grind the poor and needy to satisfy his lust in you; and to that end you are
fitted for the destroyer, and so comes the truth to reprove your pride and
devouring vanities which wastes the creation, and turns it quite to another end
then God gave it you for; and when you say what might so many poor people live
on, if we did not wear these things? as though your pride which is the ground
of all oppression, did relieve the oppressed; and thus you turn truth
backwards, with shameless and unreasonable words, not having a show of a truth;
and then if truth arise and stop your mouth in the open falsehood; then you have
more hidden deceit to cover your lust: And you say pride is not in the
outside, it is in the heart, when all men may see it in the out side; and as
many as have that eye open in the heart (which you have blinded with lust) sees
and knows that your pride had its first rise and rooting in your heart, ere it
came to spring forth it is cursed branches which now shines in the open streets
without shame; and that this which speaks outward is but part of that fullness
that is within in the heart, though your blindness be so great you see it not,
neither within nor without, and your hearts too hard to feel it; but have set
up there the Idol and stumbling block to blind withal; and then you say, what
was these things made for, if we may not wear them, where the truth of God in
you would answer, (were it not denied and betrayed by your evil eye) that they
was not made for the devoured, nor to be spent on your Justs, to the lust of
the eye and pride of life, but for the service of the needy; and co cover the
naked, that there might be plenty in the creation, and none might want, which
would be so, were the devoured judged in you and cast out, and did you know him
in you to order the creation which made it, who would lead you that are rich
another way to relieve the poor, then with being proud and vain and wastfull of
his freeness and fullness; and that spirit would let you see, that were it not
for that devourer which in you speaks and acts, there would be no poor, for he
gives plenty for all that he sends into the world, and the lust arising in the
heart of men and women, is it that makes poor and accursed, and keeps poor by
oppression in you, those that are under the power thereof; and cease but your
oppression of them to satisfy your pride, and judge the destroyer in you that
wastes it; and the poor would arise through the fullness of him that fills all
things, which is kept back by the devourer and the curse that is upon him, in
the creation through you in pride, gluttony, and drunkenness, who have all one
head against truth; and so the glutton says, What are the creatures made or,
but for man to eat? etc. and the Drunkard being reproved, has the same
pretense of mercy to the pore, as the proud, says he, How many poor people
lives of Brewing, and might beg, did not such as rich drink it as they brew
it; etc. And thus deceit utters it is voice in all the world where it is head
(who are without the true God in them) as though is was the work of the
devourer, that did uphold the creation in plenty, and keep the poor from want;
and how great is the darkness of this generation, in whom this passes for
truth? Is not this the world which by wisdom knows not God, but are given up
to vile affections and to believe lies.

Oh men how deep is truth fallen in you that nothing of it does arise to
condemn this doctrine and him that lives by it in you; what deceit is this that
has filled your hearts, to make you believe you take care for the wants of
others, by wasting that which should relieve them, spending as much one of you
upon your lust and vanity as would feed two plentifully (if not ten.) And this
is all the care of proud men and women, and gluttonous men and women, and
drunken men and women, to serve your selves, and feed the devourer in you, with
the mercies of God which he gives freely, that all might be feed, and praise
him therein: And then you say you spend but your own, and it is for you that are
rich to live thereafter, etc. But then what do you to profess the knowledge of
God, or name of Christ, or redemption that is in him: If you live as the
heathen and Gentiles do, then bear their name, and pollute not the name of
Christ, and live as do the Gentiles, not knowing Christ in you, to restore all
things in you to God, that you may see them to be his, and not your own; know
him in you to order them who made them, which all the redeemed of Christ Jesus
does, in whom the restoration is wrought by Jesus Christ, and all things of
God as in the beginning, before the prince of pride, the glutton, the
whoremonger, the drunkard, or the false Prophet that teaches lies entered into
man, or was exalted in the seat of truth, to deceive and bewitch people, by
calling evil good, and good evil, as in you he does, who they preach and
practice and profess to devour, which Christ comes to restore, and your life to
condem, and to deliver the creation from the waster, and destruction, and to
redeem it to the guiding of God the service of God in his will, and not the
will of men, nor the blind boaster; who says, I spend but my own; And who is
exalted in Pride and excess because of abundance, who knows not redemption, to
him that gives all things, but are out of the fear, far from restoration, for
were you redeemed to God your selves, you would also know that all you have was
restored to God in your redemption, out of the power of the destroyer, and into
the disposing of that spirit which works the repemption, for the redeemed
indeed are no more their own; much more is not that they have received.

Wherefore men be sober minded, and take heed what you plead for, and boast not
in your wickedness, and then double your iniquity by professing the pure name
of God, and the nature of redemption, and lie not against the truth of Christ,
Jesues ^n saying our redeemer our redeemer, further then yo^ konwhis spirit and
power living in you t^nlighten and quicken you against ^^se evils, (by which
his holy spirit (...) the creation suffers) and power in (...) over them, and
the Prince there^^* that you may serve his spirit in you, (...) a new life, not
serving diverse lusts, (...) serving your bellyes, but in fear (...) sober
meekness of spirit, serving (...) Lord in your souls, and bodies, ^^d estates,
and this only is redempti^^ without a lie, or without hypocri^^. And this is
the confession of Christ ^ome in the flesh, in life and power, to ^^ucifie the
flesh, the affections and (...) thereof, which wars against your ^ouls, and
against Christ, so long as ^ou live therein; and in works you de^y Christ to be
come in the flesh, though in words you confess him; therefore let that mouth
be silent that ^eaches lies, and let truth speak in ^ou all; and cease to say
pride is not ^n your hearts, when it has taken ^oot there, and is grown as a
covering, and has over-spred you in the ^ight of all men; and say not you do
it to relieve the poor, for shame blush at such deceit; and let not the
drunkard say the same with you, for you are seen to be the devourer and
destroyer of the creation; nor let the glutton say the creatures are made for
him, for the day is at hand that he must vomit them up, and then he will know
that they were not made for him, when truth comes to judge in you all, and to
devide aright between the oppressed and the oppressor, this will be confessed;
nor let the covetous person say, his Idolatry is but providing for them of his
household, nor the swearer say it is but to confirm the truth, which is found
out of the truth, which says swear not at all; nor the wanton person say,
there is a time to be merry, whose times are not in the Lord Jesus, nor ever
knew the man of sorrows, nor him that in secret mourns for that abomination
which wantons lives in, whose time of mourning is to come, which you that now
laugh should remember, for truth must come to sit as Judge upon all your
pretenses, and then these things will not cover you, nor lies be a safe refuge
for you.

Wherefore wait to know the truth of Christ Jesus the light of the world, in
your own hearts, to give you the good understanding which will let you see that
this is from the root of wickedness in your hearts that these things ^rise; and
that piety, and pity, and mercy, is but a pretense to cover the destroyer in
you, while he gets his work wrought of his servants, lest he should be seen in
your selves, or by others, and that you are but wise to do evil, and plead for
it, whereby you do but shut your selves out from the power of truth, and feed
upon lies, and put on false covers, which God will rend in judgment, and your
wisdom of words cannot cover your works from the light, which sees the
covetous, proud, envious, gluttons, drunkards, and all liars and vain persons,
and cursed speakers to be without God, not knowing in you the power of an holy
life, nor him that is made redemption and sanctification, though in words you
profess Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; do you know God in you, of whose
offspring all these good creatures are, which you wast, and by whose virtue
they are made to spring in their kind, and whose life suffers where they are
spent on the lust? Do you know the Redeemer in you, whose work is to restore
all things to God in you, who say you spend but your own, when you are
reproved? Or do you know him in you to live to, who says you must live after
your riches? Are you richer then he that had all fullness in himself, and yet
said let nothing be lost? this would you say also, did you know that life in
you that gives it forth, which your lust devours, who is pressed therewith as a
Cart with sheaves, who is broken with your whorish hearts, and made to serve
with your sins, whom you know not, though he be not far from every one of you,
yet his knowledge you have loft, and your hearts are too hard to hear his
voice, and your wisdom is too high to bow to his government in you; but being
got above the meek, you have lost the way, which gives light to the blind and
grace to the lowly, and that which should measure and search your hearts is out
of your sight, who are seeking without for that you have buried within, under
your pride and fullness lies the pearl shut up in the earth, and the key of
knowledge you have lost in your wisdom; by your wanton living on the earth, the
holy one and the just you have slain; the man of God is fallen into your
streets, the man of mercy and pity is perished by the proud, and there is no
Judgment nor deliverance in you, for the ear is stopped that should hear the
cry; And where this is so within, what knowledge of God is there? but man is
become like the beast that perishes.

The End.

