A CERTAIN relation of the Earl of Ormonds proseedings in IRELAND, Showing
what Prisoners he has taken, and what towns he has burnt and what store of
Pillage he has sent, and brought home with him.

Also the manner of the Enemies besieging Bandonbridge, with 12000. men, and
how that there were slain 2000. of them, the rest put to flight by the Earl
of Cork sons and Sir Charles Vauarsour.

Being a Letter sent from Sir Robert Trevers to Sir. william Dike, living in
theamestreet in London

June 3.
Ordered to be forthwith printed.



London Printed for John Blading 1642.

A Certain relation of the Earl of Ormonds victories of late.
Worthy Sir
I Know you cannot but much desire to here from your friends especially having
left them in this miserable distracted Kingdom, where nothing is frequent but
tumults and bloody masacres; yet in the midst of these it has pleased Almighty
God to bless your friends with health: I know you expect some news from hence,
and God be praised, I never had more cause, nor betternewes to certify you of,
which has conduced to the glory of Almighty God, and the comfort of all us
poor distressed Protestants, against whom that devouing beast of Rome, has
advanced her Force.

About the beginning of this month O Sulivan Bear, came from the Western
parts with twelve thousand men, and came to Timoleague, where Doctor Roger O
Shahqns dwells and pillaged the town, and killed a great many of the English
barborously, ravishing these Wives and Daughters, taking the prey of all the
town, marched away and came to Macharta Reh a great Rebel who had 12000 men,
joined theit Forces, marched to Band^nbridge, and there besieged the town and
us in it, threatening to put us all to the sword if we did not presently render
the town, so these Rebels and their Forces continued before the town strictly
besieging us, and daily shooting at the town, the space of four days, in
which time we had dispatched certain Messengers to my Lord President of
Munster to Cork, who hearing of our distress, sent Sir Charles Vavasour, who
came in the night with only 500. men and some other English Commanders, and two
pieces of Ordnance, who made an assalt upon them before it was light (they not
expecting any such thing) which being so suddenly performed, did so distract
and amaze the Rebels that they seemed to be men without life, and we hearing
this Alarm in the town, having 2000. men in readiness under the command of
the Right Honorable the Lords of Cenelmuch and Brahull, both my Lord of Corkes
sons (as having before had intelligence of the stratagem) did issue out upon
them, and ualiently assailed them, who at the coming of the town Forces, they
were absolutely routed, and every man began to provide for his safety by
flight, nor could the threats nor persuasions of their Commanders cause them to
stay but they all run away, and left their chief Commander O Sulivan Bear,
who was there taken prisoner, yet for all their have there were at this
bickering slain and wounded on the Rebels part to the number of 2000. men we
loosing but twenty men beside some prisoners that were presently conveyed to
Cork to my Lord Presedent, who presently caused them all to be hanged. Thus
we daily see by experience how mightily God fights for us, to whom be praise
and glory for evermore.

On Wednesday morning the 21. of May they burnt Ratowth and so marched to
Lonshaglan that day being uery foul and unfit for a long march, on that day
Leive-tenant Collonell Read, and Birssad of Kilrow, his eldest Son who
rendered them selves to the Earl of Ormond, as did also Mr. Patrick Barnwall,
were sent by the Earl of Ormond in the conidition of prisoners with twelve
horse to the Lords Lords, Justices, who denying them access to their presence,
commanded their committall to the Castle, where now they are and still remain.

On that day also Captain Roper Sir John Borlasse and Captain Bien arived
from Droghedah by Sea and brought us the glad news of those which were in
Tredah, Garrisons beating the Rebels from all their quarters round about
Drogheda, in so much as the Rebels and with them the Arch-rebell Sir Phelim
Oneall have bin Constrained shameful to sorsake the seige and run away,
leaveing not a man about the Town of Drogheda, and so the Lords and other
Rebels of the pale thus abandoned be the Northren Rebels are forced to
forsake their own habitations, and go along with the Northren Rebels or hide
their heads some where else from their own houses, of which they have
mournfully taken their last leave so as many think ever to see them or their
own again

Sir Henry Tichborne has burnt several Towns about him for three or four
miles and brought to the Towe in abundant store of Corn possessed him self of
Brawly whereby he is Master of the harbor, and now open Market is kept again in
the Town, so as we have still more cause to join in due thankfulness to Goq
for his still continued miraculous deliverances of us.

On Thursday the 22. of May other twelve horses were returned back to the Earl
of Ormond in leiu of the twelve he had sent the day before to guard the
prisoners hither, but those twelve horse observeing some more strength in the
way some six miles hence then they could safely encounter returned back to
Dublin again.

Therefore on the next morning being Friday at four of the Clock 60 horse were
sent in their rooms, the Earl wanted not any such accession of strength, 28
put to pass strongly and unresistably in messages between the Lords Justices,
and the Earl whilst he was doing the work of burning that part of the Pale.

On Sunday the 25. the Earl sent a guard hither with these prisoners
following, Edward Dowdall of Muncklowne, Lawrance Dowdall hi^ son Nicholas
Dowdall of Brownestowne, Gerrald Ailmer the Lawyer William Mallone of Lissmulen
Stephen Dowdall of Classlowne.

On Tuesday the 27. and Wednesday much pillage was sent home by the Army
vvherby the other sibe are made to see that now they have done pillaging as we
begin to pillage them

The Earl having caused diverse houses to be burnt and pillaged and amongst
the rest some of the Lords houses of the pale, he returned to Dublin with the
Army having left 500 men and a Troop of horse, which he left with Sir
Henry-Tichburne at Drogheda the better to enable him, to burn spoil wast and
destroy all the Rebels in the County of Lowsh and the other parts adjoining to
Drogheda, which Sir Robert Travers has already begun to do and, having 200
men which he left in garrison at Millakide, Sir John Netervile also rendered
himself in that Journey to the Earl of Ormond.

Since that time Georg Dovenish John Tal^^ of Robertstowne and Sir Andrew
Aileaner rendered themselves to the Lords, Justices, as also did the Lord Baron
of Dunsany on the 27 of May, and that Lord and Sir John Nettervill and all the
rest stand Committed to the Castle as Prisoners.

FJNIS

