THE Trial and Examination Of the Lord Major of LONDON ON Monday last, being
the second of this instant April, 1649. at the Bar of the House of COMMONS
WITH His Lordships Speech, concerning the Kingly Office; AND The Censure,
Resolution, and Votes of the Parliament, touching his contempt, their fining of
him 2000. li. His Body to be committed prisoner to the Tower of London, and to
be degraded of Mayoralty.

ALSO, The Princes Message and Proposals to the Parliament of Scotland, in
answer to the Letter sent by their Commissioners; and the Resolution of the
Estates at Edinburgh, concerning his Highness, to be sent to the Parliament of
England.

Likewise the proclaiming of a new Act, the^ rising of 5000 Gourdons in the
North, and their surrounding of Lieut. Genesis Lesley, and the Parliaments forces,
and declaring for CHARLES the second.

London, Printed for R. Williamson, 1649.

The Trial and Examination of the Lord Major of London, at the Bar of the
House of Commons, on Monday last, with his Speech concerning Kingly Government.
THe Lord Major of the City of London, being summoned by the Parl. of England
to attend that honorable House, for his contempt, in disobeying the Orders of
Parliament, and neglecting and re^^sing to proclaim the Act for abolishing the
kingly office in England and Ireland, within the said City; in order whereunto,
his Lordship was brought to the Bar of the House of Commons; and after some
Queries proposed, concerning his nonperformance thereof, He replied, That
according to the Oath of Allegiance which he had taken, he could not (in
Conscience) proclaim the said Act for the abolishing of the Kingly Office, and
Government of Kingship, declaring. That the business was only proper for the
Sheriff of the City. And being remanded from the Bar, the House voted as
follows:

Resolved by the Commons of England assembled in Parl. That the Lord Major of
the City of London, for his contempt in disobeying the Orders of Parl. be
fined 2000. l. Resolved, etc. That he be committed prisoner to the Tower of
London for two months, and be degraded of Mayralty. Resolved, etc. That an
Order be forthwith drawn up, and immediately sent to the Common Council of the
said city, requiring and impowring them to elect a new Major with all speed;
and in order thereunto, the several companies within the said city are
required to meet (this day) for the election thereof.

A new Declaration from the parl. of Scotland.
Sir, The Committee of Estates conveened at Edinburgh, begin to wave and
deviate from their former Resolutions for the investing of Charles the second,
and are now resolved to assume the power of a free Sta^e, their proposals to
their young King taking no effect; for upon the representing of the same by
their commissioners. His Highness was pleased to return this answer, viz. That
he was not (as yet) satisfied in conscience touching the lawfulness of the
covenant, and their Uniformity of presbytery, and therefore could not give them
a positive answer, touching his present signing and entering into covenant,
desiring further respite of time to consult thereon. 2 That he gives the parl.
of Scotland many thanks for their Offers and Loyalty to assist and protect him,
and for their fidelity and cordial affections toward the preservation of
Sovereignty, in acknowledging him their true and lawful King by undoubtfull
Succession; but withal desires, that they will take the advice of him and his
Council, in reference to Religion, Crown and kingdoms; to the end, that both he
and they, may (with stability of mind) six their Resolutions upon a Rock of
unmovable principles. The Estates conveened having received this message,
voted it unsatisfactory, and that 10000 Horse and Foot should be forthwith put
into a posture, for a conjunction with England, offensive or defensive against
all opposition to either Nations, from abroad or at home and have nominated and
made choice of commissioners to be expedited to the parliament of England with
a message, for the faciliating of this work, and intimating unto them the
transaction of affairs in this Nation. For so soon as they understood their
young Kings resolution, that he was determined for Ireland, they begin
universally to decline their first engagement, and have caused an Edict or Act
to be proclaimed at the Market Cross, exhibiting all persons whatsoever from
acting, abetting, or contriving any thing tending to the inthroning of Charles
Stuart the second, until such time that he shall give full satisfaction in
matters of Religion, and other public affairs, tending to the safty and
preservation of this Kirk and Kingdom; insomuch, that the Royal parsy are much
discontented thereat, and upon the proclaiming thereof, assembled together,
fell upon the Bailiffs, and other magistrates of the city, killed and wounded
many, crying out, God bless King Charles the second. But by the speedy coming
in of the trained Bands, the adverse party were routed, and many of them
apprehended, and committed to safe custody. But from the North we have received
a strong allarum, which is, that 5000 Gourdons have Bodied, and have surrounded
Lieu. Genesis Lesley, and that 2000 more are come in to their assistance,
commanded by the L. Oglesby, declare for Charles the second. The Lieu. Genesis is
in very great straights, but the Committee of Estates are sending 6000 Horse
and Foot to relieve him; you will hear of sudden action.

Edinburgh 28. Martii, 1649.
Sir, The Prince is very numerous in shipping, the Lord Hopton with 20 Sail of
ships, lies floting up and down the West Ridings; insomuch that no ships can
pass nor escape his fury; For, few days since, a Fleet of Merchants sailing
toward the Lands-End, were set upon by the Lord Hoptons Squadron, who coming
within shot of them gave them a broad side; but were answered with the like
volley from them again; insomuch, that they came to a hot dispute, the fight
continuing many hours, and after the exchange of several tokens from the Sons
of Mars, the L. Hopton held off, refusing to fight any longer, and steered
toward the Isle of Scilley; the famous ship called the Culpepper, and about 6
more, chased them about 2 leagues, sunk three of them, the rest escaped: in
this fight many were slain and wounded on both sides, and one of the Merchants
ships sunk also, above 100 Mariners sacrificing their lives in this engagement.
The fight beings ended, the Merchants Fleet hoysted sail, and steerd toward the
Lands-End; which being done, the Lord Hopton put to Sea again, and (being
thirsty of revenge) after few hours sail, he espied a prey, who with fury and
rage made toward them, gave them a broad side, surrounded them (although 8 in
number) insomuch that three of them were close beset, and several times ready
to board; but by their undanted courage and gallantry repulsed them, disputed
the Onset, and were in a good way to have got safe from them, but a supply of
more shipping coming afterward from Scilley, joined with the first Squadron,
who by their great potency and strength overpowred them, boarded the ships,
seized on all the goods and merchandise, tying every man back to back, shutting
them under Decks, and carried them prisoners to the Isle of Scilley, where they
now remain under the barbarous restraint of Sir George Carteret, the Governor;
God in his due time restore them to liberty, and grant them patience, in this
their time of affliction.

If speedy and timely supplies of shipping be not hastened forth, it is to be
feared, they will become sole masters of the British Seas. Since their taking
of the late prize, they have met with another Bristoll ship, richly laden with
cloth, which the Lord Hopton has distributed amongst the sea men and
soldiers. He is now sailed toward Milford Haven* but by the way, he struck
in at a Creek near Pendennis, where he landed many of his men for the fetching
in of provision, and other accommodation; but before they could faciliate and
accomplish their Design, the Parliaments Forces at Pendennis having notice
thereof, a considerable party of Horse and Foot were forthwith commanded out,
who hastened to welcome their coming in, and endeavored to get between them and
the water, for the intercepting of their passage, but through the malignity of
the Cornish men their design was almost frustrated; for after few hours march
they were discovered, and the Enemy in a posture to receive them, who upon
their near approach saluted each other with the tokens of Mars, and after a hot
conflict the Hoptonians retreated within command of their Ships, our men
pursued, kiled 19. wounded many, and made good their retreat with the loss of
7 men. Their Ordnance did much retard our pursuit, by which means most of them
got safe aboard having many Boats in readiness to receive them; otherwise few
of them had esca^ed: some of the Land soldiers deserted them at their coming
ashore, who say, That the Lord Hopton is commander in chief of that Squadron,
and of all the Land forces thereunto belonging, and that his Colors, (or
Ensigns) are yelow, with black bulets in the midst, and on the top thereof,
this Motto written in Characters of Gold, For Charles the second.

Bristol 29 Martii, 1649.
A new Declaration concerning Lieu. col. Lilburn.
The Commons of England assembled in parliament does declare, That the Authors,
Contrivers, and Framers of the late paper, entitled, The second part of
Englands new Chains, etc. are guilty of high treason, and shall be proceeded
against as traitors; and that all persons whatsoever that shall join with, or
adhere thereunto, and hereafter voluntarily aid or assist the Authors, Framers,
and Contrivers of the aforesaid paper, in the prosecution thereof, shall be
esteemed as traitors to the Commonwealth, and be proceeded against accordingly.

Lieut. col. Lilburn (since his confinement to the Tower) has had a conference
with some members of the Army, and has declared many prophetical expressions,
in relation to their proceedings, saying, that they are in the wrong way, and
that his forwardness and zeal proceeded from no design, or particular
interest, but real intentions of public good to the Nation.

Imprimatur T. JENNINGS

FINIS.

