NEPTUNES ADDRESS TO His Most Sacred MAJESTY CHARLES THE SECOND: KING of
England, Scotland, France and Ireland, etc.

CONGRATULATING His happy Coronation CELEBRATED The 22th. Day of April, 1661.

In several Designements and Shows upon the Water, Before White Hall, At His
MAJESTY'S Return from the LAND-TRIVMPHS.

LONDON, Printed by William Godbid for Edward Powel. 1661.

To the Reader.
I Heartily wish Thee a Spectator of this Triumph, it being set out with such
Art and Variety of Delight (not to speak in the Canting way of Puppet Shows) it
will afford Thee Talk to please thy Children, besides thy own Satisfaction; To
the Demonstration of which I refer Thee.

Neptune's Address To His Most Sacred MAJESTY Charles the Second.
HIs Majesty after the Land Solemnity, (and returning to Whitehall, with the
Duke of York, and others His Nobility) is pleased to take a Balcony toward the
Water, in expectation of this Triumph.

The Ordering of which is thus:

A Gallant-Large Fabric, made in likeness of the Tower of London, moves
through London Bridge, and so places it self on the River. Her Attendants are
the Hamblets and Officers belonging to the Tower, or persons representing them.
The Second Presentment is a Circle, in which is figured Three Whales, in chase
of Three Ships, on whose Backs fit Three Red Coats, or Prey-men, with Dudgeon
Daggers in their hands (like those of Pigmies) Hats on their heads buttoned up,
and Monchatoes like Switzers, smoking Tobacco, their Mouths wide, ready to
swallow the Ocean; from the Center of this Circle is raised a Rock, out of
which springs the Royal Oak, adorned with Crowns and Scepters. The third
Presentment is three Garlands, signifying the Three Crowns of England,
Scotland, and Ireland; these Garlands move Circumferentially also on the Water.
On this Triumph, are several Wayters relating to Gardens, who are placed in
Lighters at a convenient distance. The fourth Triumph is the Figure of a
Castle, out of which Neptune Mounted on a VVhale seems to come. In the Body of
the VVhale are placed Hoe-boys, or loud Music, who sound all the time on the
Water, until Neptune addresseth himself to His Majesty against Whitehal, in
Words as follows.
Neptunes SPEECH On the Water TO THE KING At His Return from the LAND-TRIUMPHS
NEPTVNE Coming as from a CASTLE or TOWER. GREAT SIR!
INvited from our Princely Bower by Fame,
(Who ever waited on Your Royal Name)
And to complete the Wonder of this day,
(To which the Worlds Eye does a Tribute pay)
Neptune (sole Sovereign of the Seat) is come
To give Your Majesty a Welcome home;
After the Lands Caresses we would do,
Something (though weak) that might be talked of too.
At such a Greet the Elements Conspire,
And Body into Joy, Earth, Air, and Fire:
Your Actions have created Wonders (Sir)
Converted Time, Astonished Bumazer;
Convinced the Atheist in a powerful sense,
Who never till now did own a Providence:
This is the Hand of Miracle, which we
Have often wished, and now rejoice to see.
Be pleased (then) to accept what here we bring,
Although a rude, yet Peaceful Offering.
The Tower is the Emblem of Your Peoples Love,
From whose united Strength Your Actions move:
The Wales (the Seas Levyathans) are those
That were to God, Your Self and Country Foes;
Who to maintain their Monstrous Bulk, pursue
Not the Barque only, but the Traffic too;
By which Trade perished, all Commerce was barred,
And War too rude burdened Our Realm too hard.
Yet from that ill-contriv'd Circumference
We find a Center, and derive from thence
A Rock, out of whose Barren Womb does spring
The Royal Oak, a Shelter for a KING:
The Laurel shall no more its Virtue boast,
Since that the Oak deserves the Glory most,
And Consecrated ought to be to Jove,
Producing both the Effects of Peace and Love.
The Fairies in a Ring shall 'bout it dance,
Inscribing Honey soit qui mal y pense:
The Poets with Phaebean Lyricks Sing
The Actions and the Fame of Britains KING.

Which ended, the several Figures on the Water, as that of the Tower, Whales,
and the rest, become a sudden Flame; as though the Elements of Water and Air
had been invited to the Celebration of His Majesty's Coronation. Many other
excellent Fireworks are presented both on the Water and in the Air, being the
Designments of Mr. Zacheus Juat, Gunner of one of His Majesty's Ships.

Thus I have given you a true Relation of the Night Triumphs presented to, and
much approved by His Most Gracious Majesty, he having already seen the Model
thereof.

Thine, John Tatham.

FINIS.

