THE COPY OF a letter sent from the Earl of Traquere in Jreland the third of
October 1641. To Old Father Philips, here in England, and now prisoner in the
Tower. Which letter was intercepted, at a certain time by Sir Robert
Richardson, kept private but now disclosed. Upon which old Father Philips was
committed to the Tower. With a true relation how the number of Rebels daily
increase in the woods at Ireland.

Printed at London 1641.

THE COPY OF a letter sent from the Earl of Traquere in Ireland the third of
October 1641.
To old Father Philips, here in England, and now prisoner in the Tower.
Venerable Father,
DVty compells me to make known unto you, the height of our intents, insomuch
as I know you to be a loyal, and constant friend to Rome, whose pious charity,
and just actions, by Heretics are accounted as abominations. Our chiefest,
friends. Some of them are in very woeful ieopardy of life, and others suffer
banishment, which I know is no little grief to you, nor vexation to those
which are your friends.

We are accounted as abject slaves, and are reviled by each merchanick, whose
chiefest ambition has been to arrive at that haven of happiness to drive a
Cart, or command a Plough, these and such like are of late grown to be our
Masters, nay we are scarce thought worthy to be their Srvants, we must have
our habiliments of war, though kept for a good purpose ceased upon,
privilidge is scarce given unto us to have a sword to hang by our side: double
and treble tribute by us must be paid and yet seem they not to be contented.

We must not Enjoy a holy Priest, which is not of their order, upon the
forfeiture of there dear and precious lives.

Father Walker, I heard they have drawn, hanged, and quartered, whose blood
shall lighten upon the heads of thousands of them, but to come the subject of
my loyal intents toward you.

The Plot which now long since, I gave you private notice of, goes forward
very well.

Those which are styled protestants hear in Ireland, dream of nothing, but
are persuaded they shall always sleep in whole skines, and yet some of them
begin to quake, many forts are already in posse, we do not fear but in a
very short time to have them in esse.

The woods are well scaned, then not a man there but will choose rather to loose
their lives, then their former liberties, they have already slain and pillaged
many Heretics so privately, that they are not so much as suspected for the
instruments of their deaths, our true and trusty friend Hugh Ogmakmahawne, is
as yet very safe, although he has been beset many times with the great danger
of his life, he does take very great pains to further our enterprises.

We have have made many private assaults, to take Dublin Castle, but as yet
cannot prevail, had we but once that strong house, our sole intents are to put
all the Heretics to fire and sword, But our beginning shall be with the Lord.
Justices, and the Privy Counsel.

I desire to have intelligence from you, to know your mind concerning your last
intents, we have had very ill fortune, concerning some affairs of late, which
we hope shortly to renew again.

I have at this time ten thousand men in arms in the woods, who are
sufficiently victualled, for five months, unknown to all but our own friends,
shortly expecte other news, in the mean while, I leave you to the
consideration of my former Letter.

Yours Traquere.
Dublin the third of October. 1641.
The manner of the Rebels lying in the woods.
There are at this time there about ten thousand men well armed and uictualled,
which have their habitation about the woods in Ireland, these were not long
since above three hundred, but thus their number increased.

Those three hundred men at the first, were wont, about the deadest time of
night, to leave the woods and seek abroad for their preay, which was thus.

To the first house, which they came at, they would call to the master thereof,
and bid him strait let them in; which he denied, without any more delay, they
would burn the house about his ears, but if he at that time do let them in,
then would they take all they found, and in the morning away out, if they were
espied to go out of the man's house, which was robbed, then should that man
be complained off, and be hanged for entertayning rebels: wherefore many men
being in that strayte were forced either to be hanged or to turn Rebels,
which has been the cause, and is so of their daily multiplying and
increasing.

FINIS.

