THE TRIAL OF JOHN FOSTER, for Stealing a Mag pie.
The Trial of John Foster a private Sentinel, at Justice-hall in the Old-Bayly
in London, on Thursday the Fifth Day of June, Anno Dom. 1693. And in the Fifth
Year of Their Majesty's Reign, etc. For Felony, in Stealing a certain Live Bird
called or known by the Name of a Magpye, and a Cage, at the Parish of New
Brandford in the County of Middlesex.

THE Court being set, and Proclamation made for silence, as is usual, the Court
proceeded as follows;

Clerk of the Crown. Keeper of Newgate, bring the Body of John Foster to the
Bar, (which was done). John Foster hold up thy Hand, (which he did) thou
stand Indicted, for Felony by the Name of John Foster of the Parish of
Hanwell in the County of Middlesex, Labourer, as in the Indictment is set
forth, etc. What say thou John Foster? Art thou Guilty of this Felony
whereof thou stand Indicted, or Not Guilty?


Foster. Not Guilty, my Lord.


Clerk of the Crown. Culprit, How will you be Tried?


Foster. By God and my Country.


Clerk of the Crown. God send you a good Deliverance.

After which the Prisoner was taken from the Bar, and within a little time
after that, he was set to the Bar again by Order of Court, etc.


Clerk of the Crown. Crier make Proclamation.


Crier. O yes, if any one can inform Their Majesty's the King and Queen's
Justices, Their Sergeant, Their Attorney, before this Inquest be taken, between
our Sovereign Lord and Lady the King and Queen, and the Prisoner at the Bar, of
any Felonies, Treasons, or Misprision of Treason, let them come forth and they
shall be heard. God save King William and Queen Mary.


Court. Amen.


Clerk of the Crown. You the Prisoner at the Bar, these Men that you shall hear
called, and personally do appear, are to pass between our Sovereign Lord and
Lady the King and Queen, and you, upon Trial of your Life and Death; if you
will challenge them, or any of them, your time is to speak to them as they come
to the Book to be Sworn, and before they be Sworn.


The Prisoner made no Exceptions, and the Jurors Sworn to Try the Issue are
these Gentlemen whose Names follow, who were called over, and appeared every
one at the first Call. JURORS.
Matthias Cupper. Crisp Grange. John Hynde. Robert Hynde. Paul Winkle. William
Webb. Henry Cripps. Charles Longland. John Holding. Robert Longland. Francis
Barry. Emanuel Davis.


Clerk of the Crown. Crier count these.


Crier. One, two, three, etc. Twelve good Men and true, stand together and hear
your Evidence.


Clerk of the Crown. John Foster hold up thy Hand, (which he did); Gentlemen of
the Jury, and you that are Sworn, look upon the Prisoner, and hearken to his
Cause; he stands Indicted by the Name of John Foster of the Parish of Hanwell
in the County of Middlesex, Labourer, for that he the 14th. day of May, in the
Fifth Year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord and L^dy the King and Queen, with
Force and Arms, at the Pa^^^^ aforesaid, in the County aforesaid, one Bird
called a Mag^^e value Twopence, and one Bird-Cage value Four-pence, (...)
Goods and Chattels of one Robert Connisbey Gent. then and t^ere being found
Feloniously, he did steal, take, and bear away, against the Peace of our
Sovereign Lord and Lady, the King and Queen, Their Crown and Dignity, etc. To
this Indictment he has pleaded Not Guilty, and for his Trial he has put
himself upon God and his Country, which Country you are; your Business is to
enquire whether he be Guilty or Not Guilty; if you find him Guilty, you are to
enquire of his Goods and Chattels, and whether he fled for it; if you find him
Not Guilty, nor that he did fly for it, say so, and no more, and hear your
Evidence.


Crier. Call Robert Connisbey and Richard Searing, who appeared in Court and
were Sworn, and Mr. Connisbey stood up.


Court. Come Sir, what have you to say against the Prisoner at the Bar about a
Mag-pye that you lost?


Mr. Connisbey. My Lord, I lost a Mag pie and a Cage the 14th. of May last, it
was taken from my Door off the Hook that it hung upon; b^^ truly, my Lord, I
cannot say the Prisoner at the Bar stole it from me.


Court. What made you bring him here then? It is a very small inconsiderable
Business to put a Man into Newgate for.


Mr. Connisbey My Lord, it was none of my doings, it was the Justice of Peace
his fault that committed him, I was unwilling he should go to Prison; I am
sorry it happened so, my Lord.


Court. What is the Justice of Peace his Name?


Mr. Connisbey. His Name is Hawley, my Lord.


Court. Pray where does he Live?


Mr. Connisbey. At New Brandford.


Court. He was but a foolish man for his pains to commit a poor Fellow to Goal
for such a silly trifling business as this is; he had better have sent him to
his Captain, and let him run the Gantlet, etc. Have you any other Witness, Sir?


Mr. Connisbey. I have no more, but the Constable that took the Prisoner.


Court. Took him, do you call it, why surely you had no great difficulty about
the taking of him, he was not in such fear as to run away for a Mag-pye;
however we will hear the Constable.


Clerk of the Crown. Stand up, Mr. Constable, (which he did).


Court. Is the Constable Sworn.


Mr. Constable. Yes, my Lord, I am Sworn.


Court. Come Mr. Constable, what say you to the matter? Do you know the
Prisoner at the Bar.


Mr. Constable. Yes, my Lord, this Gentleman brought me a Warrant from Mr.
Justice Hawley against the Prisoner at the Bar, and I served it upon him at his
Quarters at Old Brandford, where I found the Cage and a Mag-pye, and I took
them and the Prisoner, and carried them before Mr. Justice Hawley, and his
Worship was pleased to commit the Fellow to Prison.


Court. Poor Fellow! Friend, how long have thou been in Prison?


Foster. Almost three Weeks, my Lord, and I have endured a great deal of
hardship, and many a hungry Belly I am sure, God help me; I am very poor, my
Lord.


Court. Hark you, Mr. Connisbey, pray what did the worthy Justice of Peace bid
you do with the Mag-pye after he had committed the Prisoner?


Mr. Connisbey. My Lord, he ordered me to keep the Mag-pye and the Cage safe
till the Bishop of London's Bailiff came for it, it being a Waife, he said it
was forfeited to the Lord of the Manor; at which the Court laughed heartily.


Court. Pray Mr. Connisbey what was your Mag-pye worth, and your Cage; was it a
Wyer-Cage?


Mr. Connisbey. Worth, my Lord, I do not know well what it was worth, about a
Groat or Sixpence, as the Indictment sets forth; the Cage was a Twiggen Cage.


Court. Fie, fie! a silly business, a wise Justice indeed! he deserves to be
committed himself, till he learns more wit; have you done for the King and
Queen Mr. Connisby?


Mr. Connisby. I have no more to say, my Lord, I would not have come here to
say this, if I could have helped it


Court. Come Mr. Foster, you have heard what has been sworn against you; now
make your Defense.


Mr. Foster. My Lord, Indeed my Lord, I did not steal the Mag-pye; there was a
man overtook me (a Stranger to me) in the way between the Two Brandfords, and
desired me to carry the Bird and the Cage for him, which I did; and when we
came to Old Brandford, he desired me to keep it, till he called for it; he went
away, my Lord, but never came any more; so, my Lord, I was loath to kill the
Bird, and I did not know whose it was, if I had, I would have restored it to
the Owner.


Court. A good Defense. Look you, Gentlemen of the Jury, The Prisoner at the
Bar, John Foster, stands indicted of Felony for stealing a Mag-pye and a Cage,
of the value of 6 d. which is a very inconsiderable value.

And you have heard the Evidence for the King, who told you that the Mag-pye
was lost, and that it was found upon the Prisoner; but Mr. Connisbey does not
take upon him to swear that the Prisoner stole it from him; and the Prisoner he
denies it, and tells you, That truly he did not take it away, but that he had
it of a Stranger that he accidentally met withal upon the Road between the Two
Brandfords, therefore I don't see any color of Evidence against the Prisoner:
And I must needs say it was a very simple weak thing done of the Justice of
Peace to commit the poor Fellow for such a Trifle; I shall leave it to you to
consider of the Evidence, and if you find him guilty, you are to say so; but if
you think in your Conscience that he did not steal the Mag-pye, then you are to
acquit the Prisoner. You had best go over to each other, and consider; you need
not give your selves the trouble to go out of the Court about such a small
indifferent matter as this.

Then the Jury having considered of their Verdict, and being returned to their
Seats; the Court spoke as follows.


Clerk of the Crown. Gentlemen of the Jury, are you agreed of a Verdict?


Jury. Yes.


Clerk of the Crown. Keeper, set John Foster to the Bar (which was done).


Clerk of the Crown. John Foster hold up thy hand (which he did); Gentlemen of
the Jury, look upon the Prisoner; how say you, is he guilty of the Felony
whereof he stands indicted, or not guilty?


Foreman. Not guilty.


Court. Keeper, bring the Prisoner about into the middle of the Court (which
was done)


Court. Look you, Foster, because you are a poor man, the Court has considered
of your Condition, and acquitted you of the Fees; get you home about your
business, but have a care how you meet with a Mag-pye again.


Foster. Indeed, my Lord, I will; Pray God bless King William and Queen Mary,
and all the Honorable Bench. God be with you, my Lord.


ADVERTISEMENTS.
Letters of Love and Gallantry. And several other Subjects. All written by
Ladies. Vol. I. Printed for S. Briscoe, over against Will's Coffee house in
Russel Street, Covent Garden.
Geogr^phy Rectified: Or, A Description of the World in all its Kingdoms,
Provinces, Countries, Islands, Cities, Towns, Seas, Rivers, Bays, Capes,
Ports; Their Ancient and Present Names, Inhabitants, Scituations, Histories,
Customs, Governments, etc. As also their Commodities, Coins, Weights and
Measures, compared with those at London. Illustrated with Seventy eight Maps.
The Third Edition, Enlarged. To which is added a Complete Geographical Index to
the whole: Alphabetically digested The whole Work performed according to the
more Accurate Observations and Discoveries of Modern Authors. By Robert Morden.
Conformity of the Ecclesiastical Discipline of the Reformed Churches of France
with that of the Primitive Christians. Written by M. La Rocque, Minister of
Quevilly near Rouen. With his Learned Commentaries on each Article. Rendered
into English by Jos. Walker. Sermons preached on Several Occasions. By John
Conant, D. D. The Righteous Man's Hope at Death: Considered and Improved for
the Comfort of Dying Christians, and the Support of Surviving Relations. To
which is added Deathbed Reflections, etc. proper for a Righteous Man in his
Last Sickness. By Samuel Doolittle. The Mourner's Directory, guiding him in the
Middle Way betwixt the Two Extremes, Defect, Excess of Sorrow for his Dead. To
which is added, The Mourner's Soliloquy. By Thomas Doolittle, M. A. There is in
the Press, and will be suddenly published, a Sermon, Entitled, The Necessity
of an Early Victory over Satan. By T. Cruso. These Six Printed for Thomas
Cockerill, at the Three Legs in the Poultrey.

An Answer to the Late King James's Last Declaration, dated at St. Germains,
April the 17th. S. N. 1693. Memoirs concerning the Campaign of Three Kings,
William, Lewis, and James, in the Year 1692. With Reflections upon the Great
Endeavors of Lewis the 14th to effect his Designs, of Jame the the IId. to
Remount the Throne. And the proper Methods for the Allies to take to hinder
both. Reflections upon the Late Horrid Conspiracy contrived by the French
Court, to murder His Majesty in Flanders: And for which Monsieur Granvall, one
of the Assassinates, was Executed. Liturgia Tigurina: Or, The Book of Common
Prayers and Administration of the Sacraments, and other Ecclesiastical Rites
and Ceremonies, usually practiced, and solemnly performed in all the Churches
and Chapels of the City and Canton of Zurick in Switzerland, and in some other
Adjacent Countries; as by their Canons and Ecclesiastical Laws they are
Appointed; and as by the Supreme Power of the Right Honorable the Senate of
Zurick they are Authorized, Established, and Commanded. With the Orders of that
Church. Faithfully translated out of the Helvetian into the English Tongue, by
John Conrad Werndly, formerly Minister of the French and Dutch Congregation of
Santoff in the Isle of Axholme in the County of Lincoln: And now Minister of
Wraisbury cum Langley in the County of Bucks. Travels into diverse parts of
Europe and Asia, undertaken by the French King's Order to discover a new Way by
Land into China; containing many curious Remarks in Natural Philosophy,
Geography, Hydrography, and History. Together with a Description of Great
Tartary, and of the different People who inhabit there. Done out of French. To
which is added, A Supplement extracted from Hakluyt and Purchase; giving an
account of several Journeys over Land from Russia, Persia, and the Moguls
Country to China, together with the Roads and distances of the places. An
Account of the late Terrible Earthquake in Sicily; with most of its
Particulars. Done from the Italian Copy printed at Rome* The Life of Lewis of
Bourbon, late Prince of Conde. Digested into Annals, with many curions Remarks
on the Transactions of Europe for these last 60 Years. Done out of French.
These Seven Printed for Richard Baldwin.

These are to give notice to all Persons for the benefit of the Public, That
W. Elmy, Professor of Physic, and Operator, of known Integrity, and above 25
Years Practice, lives at the Blue Ball in Whale-Bone-Court, at the lower end
of Bartholomew-Lane, by the Royal Exchange. Who most safely and expeditiously
cures Deafness, and Noise in the Ears, in any, of what Age soever, (if curable)
and at first sight by inspection resolves the Patient, if so or not, as most
eminent Persons of Quality in this City can testify. I have Remedies ready
prepared for the preservation of the Hearing in those who through some great
defects in the Sounding Membrane, and other Impediments in the Auditory
Passages are not perfectly curable, which Remedies preserves them from ever
growing worse, and improves their Hearing to Old Age. That you may not mistake
and go to a false Pretender, my House is at the Blue-Ball, as aforesaid, you
may see it as you come into the Court.

LONDON: Printed for Richard Baldwin, near the Oxford Arms in Warwick Lane.
1693.


