THE ZEALOUS MAGISTRATE.

Set forth in A Sermon, Preached in Exeter, before the Right Honorable Sir
Robert Foster, his Majesty's Justice of Assize for the Western Circuit.

By THOMAS TRESCOT, Master of Arts, and Rector of the Church of INVVARDLEIGH in
DETTON.

Contend intrare per angustam portam. nec quid multi agunt attend; sed quid
agendum, ipsa tibi Naturae Lex, ipsa Ratio, ipse Deus ostendet: Neque enim aut
minor erit gloria^^a, si faelix eris cum paucis, aut levior Poena, si miser es
cum multis.

Ioh. Picus Mirand. in Epist. Nepoti suo. IT is this 10th. day of October 1642.
(by the Committee of the House of Commons concerning Printing) Ordered, that
this Book, entitled, The Zealous Magistrate, etc. be printed.

John White.

LONDON, Printed for Daniel Friar, and are to be sold at his Shop at the Sign
of the Red Bull in little Britain. 1642.

To the Worshipful, my much honored Friends, Arthur Vpton of Lupton in Devon.
Esquire; And Francis Rous Esquire, one of the Burgesses in PARLIAMENT for the
Town of Truro in CORNWALL.
Worthy Gentlemen,
WHEN one came to Alexander, V. Libanii exempla. P^ogymnas. Chria. 1.
and desired him that he might see his Treasure, he bid one of his servants
take him, and show him, not (...), his money, but (...), his friends. It seems
he put a higher value upon them, than he did upon all the wealth which he had.
Dilectio Christiani nominis thesaurus Tert. de patient. c. 12.
Good friends are an unvaluable treasure, and the rarity of them, does much
inhaunce the price of them. The love and friendship which I have found from
you, has stamped in my affections a very high valuation of you; and among other
friends which God has given me, I must ever reckon you among those of the
first magnitude. The confidence I have in you, in your love to those truths,
which this sermon holds forth, has imboldned me to make it public under your
names; J shall not much trouble my thoughts with what censures others may pass
upon it, so it carries the mark of your acceptance: I will say of that, as
Libanius did of the Commendation, which Basil gave him, (...), if you (and such
as you are) shall like well of it, Liban. in Epist ad Basilium.
it will over-master the opinions of other men. For my own part, I never
preached it, neither do I now print it with any hopes or desires to please all:
Salv. ad Eccles. Cath. li. 4.
Mirum esset si hominibus loquentia de Deo verba non placeant, quibus ipse
forsitan Deus non placet; 'Twere very strange, if I should please a world of
men, when God himself does not give every one content; and if I should but
offer to please Men, 1 Gal. 10.
my Master would quickly discard me, and I should be no longer the servant of
Christ.

I know St. Paul elsewhere strikes in with his (...), 1 Cor. 10.33
I please all men in all things, but then we must take him, Cum grano salis,
his all things must come under omnia licent, All lawful things, or (which is
more genuine to the Text) All indifferent things, Mr. Barys Sermon. in loc.
where God has left us in Bivio, without express, or implicit command. But I
can no where find that ever St. Paul did forbear to speak necessary truths
(though it were oftentimes to his own prejudice) or else speak them coldly and
faintly, 1 Titus 13. (...). Tremel. dure. Beza praetise in Annotat. Rigide
qrasm. sever^ter, and in Anotat. ad vivum. and severe Genesis note, roughly and
plainly, and go not about the Bush with them.
for fear of angring or displeasing men. I am sure he gives it in charge to
Titus, when he had to deal with those peccant Cretians, that he should rebuke
the^ sharply, cuttingly, do it to the quick; for look as Oil feeds the fire
which is quenched by other liquors, so many times a sweet oily loving Reproof,
makes some men the more choleric, and the gentlier they be handled, (like
Nettles) the worse they sting. It will therefore ill-beseem any Minister of
Christ, to let flattery take the wall and inside of plain-dealing, or make the
truth of God to Lacquie up and down after the humors of men. For my own part I
am yet to learn that piece of parasitical Divinity, and in this ignorance I
hope both to live and die.

I have no more to say, but to desire the God of heaven, still to supply you
with all those graces which may continue you serviceable instruments of his
glory, that you may still do worthily in Ephratah, and be famous in Bethlehem, 4
Ruth 11 ^
which shall be the daily Paryer of him, who is,

Yours, with his best abilities to serve you, THO. TRESCOT.

To the Reader.
IT was a true Observation, Sir Walter Raleighs Hist. l. 1. c 1. S. 15.
which a Learned Gentleman made of Truth, that he that prizeth Truth, shall
never prosper by the possession, or profession thereof. The fear of this has
wrought so strongly with some, even of the holiest Calling; that to follow the
thriving Method of the Times) they have set themselves upon the study of men,
and humors, to flatter the one, and observe the other; by that means to widen
their fortune, and work themselves into the favor of men, though it be with
the displeasure of God. 30 Is ah 10 Nulli grata reprehensio est, imo quod pejus
multo est, quantu^libet malus, quantumlibet perditus, mavult falsarum laudum
irrisiombus decipi, quam saluberimd ad monitione servari Salo. de Guber. l. 8
Hence it comes to pass, that the men of the world, being willing to be
flattered by such Chaplains, into a good opinion of themselves, cannot endure
to meet with any that shall deal plainly and roundly with them, but are ready
to say unto the Seers see not, and to the Prophets prophecy not unto us right
things, speak unto us smooth things, prophecy deceits. Those that would not
willingly be cousened of a penny, are yet very well pleased to be guld of
Heaven; and though in other matters they cry out for plain-dealing; yet in
things that concern God and their souls, they are all for Sophistry and
deceits, Prophecy deceits. The small experience I have had in the world, has
furnished me with plentiful proofs in this hind. This very Sermon has tried
it, which met with some of rotten Consciences, and itching ears, 2 Timothy 4 3
(...), qui titillentur and pruriunt auditu, unde quaerunt qui scalpant aures
volvptale orationis, ^on qui radant veritate. Erasm. Annot.
that could not endure sound Doctrine; and if they would but speak out their
own thoughts, I believe they were angry with the Sermon for the Texts sake.

When St. Steven had made an end of his Sermon, the Jews made an end of him
too, and stoned him to death. 7. Act. 57, 58. I can accuse none for casting of
Stones, yet some there were which could not hold from shooting out of 64 Psalm
3. Mr Ferdin. Nicols preaching the Anniversary Sermon. of the Cities deliverance
from the Rebels 6. Aug.
Arrows even bitter words, Tincta Lyca^baeo spicula fell. But I have bin the
less discouraged, because it was the same reward, which a Reverend and worthy
Divine had for his pains in that very place, but the day before If others
could have ruled their tongues I had at this time mastred my pen, which must
now stand me in some stead, to free me from the gross mistakings of some, and
the envious glosses of others, both which are able to betray the most innocent
passages (yea even Scripture it self) to scandal and exception.

Reader, If thou were a hearer of this Sermon, and thoughtest amiss of it;
then take the pains to peruse it now, perhaps thy sight may confute thy
hearing: And thine eyes prove better Judges, than thine ears: But if thou have
been a Censurer at second hand, and upon tradition, (...), In Aristoph. (...).
as Chremylus told Blepsidemus, Thou have done me the more wrong to pass a
blindfold Sentence upon me. But if hearing or reading, will neither change thy
heart, nor stop thy mouth, I shall resolve with Hezekiah's servants, who when
the King of Assyria had sent Rabshakeh, 36 Isaiah. (...) 11.
(one of his most desperate Cavaliers) to rail and threaten, they kept
silence, and answered him not a word.

I have now delivered over this discourse to the Press, with no other clothes
about it, than it had at its first birth in the Pulpit; should I have offered
to new-dresse it, some perhaps would have taken it for a changeling. The
thought of this made me forbear the enlargement of it with those proofs and
reasons, which at the deliverie of it, I was forced (by straitness of time) to
keep in, and omit. I was willing to say something of each point (being all of
them suitable for the occasion and seeing the Text was so pregnant, and teeming
with such needful Truths, I had not the heart to smother or stifle any of
them. Read them with the same mind that they were spoken, and thou shall
endeare me to be,

Thine, and the Churches Servant, THO. TRESCOT.

The Zealous Magistrate. Set forth in an Assize Sermon, Preached at St. Peter's
in Exeter the 7th. August 1642.
NEHEMIAH 13. Ver. 17. Then I contended with the Nobles of Judah, and said unto
them, What evil thing is this that ye do, and profane the Sabbath day?


YOU had at the last Assizes, By Master. Geo. Trevilian out of 1^. Acts v. 17.
the picture of a careless Judge drawn out before you, Judge Gallio by Name,
one that seemed somewhat forward for matters of Nisi prius, for meum and tunm,
between Plaintiff and Defendant; but for matter of Religiou (a bare (...),
Ver. 15.
as he profanely styles it) his Lordship would not touch with that.

I have now presented you with one of another spirit, one (who besides all his
care and cost for building again the walls of Jerusalem) makes it his Master
work of all, to re-establish the worship and service of God. And to effect
this the better, First he takes order, that the Churchmens livings, the Levites
dues, that had a long time been embezelled and detained, should be restored to
the right owners, verse 10, 11, 12. of this Chapter, and falls a chiding with
the Magistrates for suffering this horrible Sacrilege to be committed.
Secondly, he takes order for the better sanctifying of Gods Day, that it may
be no more profaned by Carriers, and Fish-mongers, and Pedlers, and such like
Hucksters, verse 15, 16. And here in the words of my Text, he falls a chiding
the second time, when he saw the Nobles and Rulers, so wicked and irreligious,
to suffer such abominable profanation of the Sabbath day; Then I contended
with the Nobles of Judah, and said unto them, etc.

The words are a lively Character of a Zealous Magistrate; and we might note
in them these particulars: First, 1 Nehem v. 11.
quis, who this good Magistrate is, and that is Nehemiah, and he a Conrtier
too; Secondly, quid, what he did, he contended: Thirdly, quibus, with whom,
with the Nobles of Judah: Fourthly, quomodo, in what manner, he lays sin to
their charge: Fifthly, quamobrem, wherefore, for suffering the Sabbath day to
be profaned; But I shall baulke this Method at present, and from the words
(without fetching blood from the Text) shall draw out six special
observations, to be the subject of my ensuing discourse; the first shall be
this:

The greatest men for place and authority are not always the best men. This is
plain by the Nobles of Judah, with whom Nehemiah here finds such foul fault.

second this, Great men may not be let alone in their sins; but may, nay must
be reproved for them: Nehemiah's chiding here, is warrant enough for our
reproving.

third this, It Is very sit and convenient for one Magistrate to mind another of
his place and duty: As Nehemiah did his Peers and fellow Magistrates.

fourth this, The sins of the people will be put upon the Magistrates score, if
they do not endeavor to suppret them: you may easily presume, that these
Magistrates (for such were the Nobles here, Genesis B.
and therefore one Translation calls them Rulers) were none of those Merchants
and Hucksters themselves: for they were Pedlers come from Tire, verse 16. and
yet says Nehemiah, Why do ye this evil? Ye.

fifth this, The profanation of the Sabbath is a great and grievous sin; Why
do ye this Evil and profane, etc.

sixth and last this; The remedy of this profanation, must be a principal
part of the Magistrates care and duty. As may be easily collected by Nehemiah's
blaming these Rulers here, for their remissness in this particular.

Thus you see what a great deal of matter is couched in a few words; It is
with this Text, as it is with Gold, Take but a five shillings piece, and it
will easily be beaten out into many leaves: This golden Text (you see) without
much hammering is enlarged into many observations, so many, that the time and
your patience will not allow me a through handling of all; and therefore I must
do as those who describe large Countries in small Maps, they make but a spot
for a City, and a dash for a River, give you but some brief Animadversions on
these particulars, which might well deserve some longer Commentary; and I
begin with the first in order, namely this,

The greatest men for place and authority, are not always the best men.

The Prophet Jeremie shall make my words good in his 5. Chapter, ver. 5. When
he had made a scrutiny throughout Jerusalem, and could not find one honest man
among the common sort of people, he made full account to speed well among those
of better rank and quality; I will get me unto the great men (says he) for
they have known the way of the Lord, and the judgment of their God; And
because the Prophet conceived they had more Wit, therefore he hoped they had
more Honesty too: But this hope was such as made him ashamed: for they had
altogether broken the yoke, and burst the bonds in sunder: A pitiful thing it
was, that those which should curb and restrain others, should be sons of
Belial, lawless, yoaklesse themselves, That those which should set bounds to
others, will keep no limits themselves, that those which should have been the
Governors of the people, should be little better than Christmasse-Lords, Lords
of mis-rule, and disorder; If you will say this was Strange, God and his
Prophet shall say, this was true. Read over the Chronicles of the Kings of
Israel and Judah, and how many of them were nigro carbone notati, that have
their lives drawn out with a black Coal, 2 King 23.37. cap. 24. v. 19 and
alibi.
and when they have dyed, the Spirit of God has bestowed no other Epitaph upon
them than this, They did evil in the sight of the Lord, according to all that
their Fathers had done. Their sins remain fresh upon Record at this day, though
they themselves lie rotten in their own dust.

When that wicked Jezabel had a plot upon poor Naboth's body, what Instruments
does she make use of for that bloody design? 1 King. 21.8 9.
no other than the Elders and Nobles of the City, the most noted personages of
that place, who as soon as they had received the Queens Letters, sealed with
the Kings privy Signet, they suborned two Knights of the Roast, to accuse
Naboth of Blasphemy, that so by that means, the little piece of Fee simple
which he had, might be confiscated to the King. We have been told of late by
an eminent Lawyer, how the Judges refused sour several Letters, which Queen
Elizabeth sent them, Mr. St. John's in the case of Ship-mony
to have one of her servants put into an Office, that was contrary to the Law,
and told the Queen, they had taken an Oath to God, to her, and the
Commonwealth to do Justice, and therefore could not admit him: But the Judges
of the Kings Bench in Ahabs time were easily wrought over to the Queens side,
and were very ready to sacrifice the life of one of the Kings best subjects,
only to comply with the humor of a very Iezabel.

In our Saviors time, who were the maine Agents to set Judas on work to
betray his Lord and Master? Why? who but the Great ones, the chief Priests and
Elders that met at Counsell-Table about the business, in 27. Matthew 1? Non
omnes Episcopi, Episcopi sunt, attendis Petrum sed and Judam consi dera,
Stephanii suspicis, sed and Nicolaum respice Hieron. in Epist ad Heliodor.
But what need I trifle away time to prove this Truth, which has been so
visible in these our days, and that both in Church and State? How has the
linen Ephod of late been shrewdly sullied, and stained? What spots have been
found in some of the finest Lawne? And how have some Priests of the high
places, rendied themselves vile, amongst the lowest of the people? And then for
Moses his Chair, how has that been made by some Cathedra pestilentiarum?
what plagues and mischiefs have from thence overspread the whole land?
whereupon some have been so much afraid, to stand to the judgment of that Law,
of which themselves had sometimes been the Judges.

Greatest men always the best? Then see here in the first place, the
crookedness of that Rule, by which most men walk, The Example of Great men,
in 7. of John 48. When some of the Underofficers stood fair for Converts, and
expressed a good liking of Christ, what other argument do they use, to
dishearten them, 7 John 4^
but a Majori, Do any of the Rulers or Pharisees believe in him? None but the
ragged Regiment, a company of rude illiterate Rascals, that know not the Law.
What made the people so obstinate in their Idolatry in Ieremiah's time, and so
peremptory against the Lord, and against his Prophet? what, but this the
Example of past and present times? 44 Jer. 17. We will burn Incense to the
Queen of Heaven, and pou^e out drinke-Offerings unto her: And why will we?
why? because we have ever used to do so, we can show a Custom for it; yea,
and we can bring our Presidents for it: our Fathers did so, (before ever our
heads were hot) and our Kings, and our Princes in the Cities of Judah, and in
the streets of Jerusalem.

-- Tutum est peccare autoribus istis. Our Fathers were good understanding men,
and our Kings were no fools, and our Princes were no Idiots, and shall we now
be so saucy, to think our selves wiser than they, who had more wit in their
little fingers, than all we in our whole body? The story is notoriously known
of Roboald King of West-Frizeland, who being persuaded by Charle-maigne to
receive Baptism, withdrew his foot as he was stepping into the water, and
would needs know, what became of his unbaptised friends and kinsfolks: And
being told, that they were thought to be in Hell, (living and dying Pagans:)
Then thither will I go too, says he. Sure he loved his own soul too little,
and his friends too much, that was so willing to be damned, to bear them
company. And yet alas, we have too too many of this brood, that value the
Examples of men, above the Precepts of God, and are ready to follow one Great
leading man in their Country, in their Parish, (as Sheep do their
Bellweather) though they venture (I say not the breaking of their neck, but)
the loss of their souls, of God, of heaven, salvation, and All.

But this now is not only the Error of some of the more simple, and untutored
Vulgar, but even of some that are reckoned for Great and Dominicall men in the
worlds Calendar. How have these made some of our greatest Masters in Israel
their Rule, Subditi ob liga^tur obedire superio ribus, in his Dutaxat, respectu
quorum sunt superiores, and dum regulas sua dominationis non excedunt. Ioh.
Gerson in Regulis Moral.
their Square, their Copy, their Oracles? yea, even then when the Rule it
self has been Irregular, the Square out of order, the Copy naught, and the
Oracles themselves, not only dubious but dangerous. Has not the example of
some great Masters of our Assemblies been too much observed by some, and too
violently obtruded upon others, even in those things, in which both Law and
Conscience did justify our warrantable Nonconformity? I would not be mistaken
here, as if I meant to shake off all yoke of authority or reverence of
Superiors, (I am not of that Anabaptisticall spirit: only this I would desire
to know, whether by virtue of Canonical Obedience, a man be bound to captivate
his Sense and Reason to the mere pleasure of his Superior, All Canons made in
Convocations are to be obeyed, though they yield no reason at all to enforce
their obedience. Dr. Pockling. Altar Christianu^.
in that which is neither Law nor Honesty: and yet how far this has been
imposed by some, and practiced by others, I leave to knowing men, both to see
and censure.

But judge now with your selves, how unreasonable it were, to turn men into
Apes? (o imitatores servum pecus!) and bind them to observe (I say not the
lawful commands, but) the mere humors of some Learned man above us, or some
great man over us: (...), The wisest men are not all of them Popes infallible.
We have lived to see some write their own Dr. Bray Ser of the L. Supper in fine.
Retractations, and more perhaps would do it, if that would be taken for
Amends There is an Arabic Proverb, (and I have it from Centur 2. Froverb Arab.
8.
Erpenius his Translation) Cum errat eruditus, errat errore erudito:) The
errors of learned men are learned errors. The meaning I conceive to be, that
Learned men are able to give some reasonable account, even for those things
which are charged upon them as erroneous; For my own part I cannot divine,
what account some great Rabbis will be able to make, when the Audit day shall
come, I fear some may come short, and not be able to stand Recti in curia.

Let this therefore caution us for the future, that we do not with Pythagoras
his Scholars, too much magnify the Ipse dixerit of the greatest Clerks,
specially in those things that do so nearely concern our souls and
salvation. Thou will both tell, and weigh thy Gold, though it be after thy
Father, thou will not receive money upon trust; and will thou then take up thy
Religion upon credit? Shall thy respect to any man's place, or opinion of any
man's parts, enthrall thy Intellectualls, and put gives and fetters upon thy
understanding? Will thou inflame that Freeborn Spirit of thine, thy Soul, to
say, and think, and do, as others will have thee? though never so opposite to
Law, Reason, and good Conscience. There is a story of Walter Mapes, Dr.
Sanderson Ser. ad Clerum.
sometimes Arch. Deacon of Oxford, who relating the gross Simony of the Pope,
for confirming the Election of Reginald Bastard son to Iocelin, Bishop of
Sarum, into the Sea of Bath, concludes his Narration thus, Sit tamen domina
materque nostra Roma, baculus in aqua fractus, and absit credere quae videmus,
Though the Pope be most grossly Simonaicall, yet we must not be uncharitable,
and as bad as he is, let us not think amiss of him: Charity, and so obedience
may be ingenuous, but it must not be servile, and blockish: There Is no man so
great that may ravish me out of my wits, to make me think the Crow is white, or
bind me to believe with Anaxagoras, that Snow is black.

Take heed then, do not make other men's words and warrants, the rule and
level of thy Conscience. In 1 King. 13.24. the man of God paid dear for his
Credulity; one would have thought it had been but good manners for him to
believe his fellow Prophet, an old man, and one that was much his Senior, yet
to run cross to Gods express order, though under pretense of Revelation from
God, 'twas as much as his life was worth. That of St. Jerome shall conclude
this, Non parentum aut majorum anthoritas, sed dei doc entis imperium: The
command of God must outweigh all authority, and example of men; Be they great
and potent? so were the Nobles here, and yet Nehemiah thought them no fit
president for imitation.

Great men be persuaded to be as eminent for their goodness, as they are for
their greatness. Art thou like Saul, head and shoulders above others? Let thy
virtues be as conspicuous as thine honors: As the Historian said of Tiberius,
Patercul. Lib. 2. Hist.
Imperio maximus, and yet Exemplo major; Let thy good Example have a greater
influence upon the minds of men, than thy command has over their bodies. Art
thou great in Office, or in Birth? In Office, art thou great in Church or State?

First, in Church, art thou a Star in the Firmament of the Church? 8 Rev. 11.
Oh be not as the Star Wormwood in the Revelation, that did embitter the
waters: No, if thou be a Star let thy light shine before men. 5 Matthew. 16
Has God made thee a Beauclerke, given thee abilities of wit and learning,
honor God with thy head, and with thy heart. Let that knowledge which is in
thee, be as the Light in the Watchtower, to guide and direct others, not as an
Iguis fatuus, to draw and toll them along into bogs and Precipices. Do as some
young Physicians do, practice thine own knowledge upon thy self. If thou
hold out the light of truth to others, and do not walk suitably thereunto
thy self, thou art but as a Whifler which carries a Torch in his hand, to
show others his own deformity. And yet this is not all, the mischief does
dilate it self further, even to vitiate and corrupt others, (for Scholars
seldom go to Hell alone) and make them threefold more the children of
perdition. I have read of a woman, who living in professed doubt of the
Godhead, after better illumination and repentance, Mr. Wards Sermon. The
happiness of Paradise.
did often protest, that the vicious life of a great Scholar in that Town did
conjure up those damnable doubts in her soul. How well then will it become
those, whom God has set upon the pinnacle of the Temple, to honor him that is
Mr. of the Temple? that others may fall down on their face, 1 Cor. 14.25.
and worship God, and say, certainly, God is in them of a truth.

Secondly, Art thou in any place of Eminency in the State, either in
Judicature, Magistracy, or the like? the eye of the world is upon thee, look to
thy self, and thy behavior: Those that are in such places are called Gods,
dixi du estis. 82 Psalm. 61. O then you must be like him in Goodness. The
adulteries of Jupiter and other Pagan Gods, Dr. Hackwells Apology l. (...). cap
2. Sect 4.
did draw the people to imitate their wantonness, and Saint Austin gives the
reason, Magis intuentur, quid fecerit Jupiter, quam quid docuit Plato, they
heeded more what Jupiter did, than what Plato taught. Oh then it is not for
such Gods, (as God has made some of you) to swear by God. It is not for Kings
O Lemuel to drink wine, 31 Prove. 4
nor for Princes strong drink. It is not for Gods to swear like Devils, to
rage like Furies, to be drunk like Hogs, to be wanton as Goats, and the like.
Wards Jethro Justice of peace.
Such as these (you shall have the censure from a Reverend Divine) will better
become an Ale-bench, than a Shire-bench, and are fitter to stand at the Bar,
than to sit upon the judgment seat. It must be otherwise with a good
Magistrate, he must be drayned from the dregs and sifted from the bran of the
ordinary sort of men, like a delicate Posie, he must be made up of the
choysest flowers, or like the picture of Helena, which Xeuxis made (the very
Abstract and Epitome of all other beauties) whatsoever is fair and beautiful
in others, must be admirably composed and wrought up in him. Imperaturus
omnibus eligi debet ex omnibus Plin. Panegyr. ad Traian.
O then let our earthly Gods think how much it concerns them to be free from
those sins, which often times they punish in others. Thou that punishest
another for theft, do thou steal? thou that do cart another for his
whoredom, do thou commit adultery? thou that do mulct and fine
Church-robbers, do thou commit sacrilege? thou that professest the Law,
through breaking the Law dishonourest thou God?

Non been convenient nec in unn sode morantur. Lucan.
Scarlet robes, and crimson sins, do not suit well with one and the same
person.

Last of all, Has God set thee in any eminent degree of Birth above the
ordinary rank of men? let not the ill example of thy life, obscure and cloud
the splendour of thy Birth. Might I here presume to advise our younger Gentry,
(and I hope I may presume) I would earnestly beseech them to keep up the Credit
of those Worshipful, and (which is a great deal more for their credit)
religious families, from which many of them are descended. I remember Barclay
tells a story of a beggarly Cobbler in Spain, In Icon Animor.
who when he lay upon his death bed, charged his son deeply to keep up the
honor of his house and family, Memineris in majestatem assurgere familia tua
dignam, as if he had been some great Don Pedro, or the like. I should
recommend this more seriously unto their thoughts and practice, to keep up the
honor of their families by not stayning their own honor, not to disparage
the goodness of their Birth, by the badnesse of their Life, not to disgrace
their earthly parents, by being so unlike their hervenly Father.

I should also desire them to study garbs and fashions, and complements less,
and study God, and Christ, and themselves more; that they would not spend more
time in trimming their heads, than in ordering their hearts, in kembing their
hair, than in saying their Prayers, and not bestow so much cost upon their
bodies, which must be but meat for Worms, and wholly neglect their souls
which might be companions for Angels: I should desire them likewise, to be as
zealous for their Lord and Master, as they are oftentimes for their Mistress,
to be more in love with the vision of God the Creator, than with the painted
vissage of a Creature: To give over Ben, and Shakespeare, and fall upon Moses
and the Prophets, to be better read in Saint Peter than in Sir Philip, and not
to read Monsieur Balzacs Letters with more delight, than they do Saint Paul's
Epistles. Oh that such thoughts as these, might have some kindly working upon
their soul, their Example then would be Magical and Magneticall too, to
charm and draw on others; they would leave their Names as a sweet perfume to
their unborne posterity, and Generations that are yet for to come, should call
them Blessed.

I have done with my first Observation, and have bestowed such a double portion
of time upon this, that the share which the rest must have, will be the less:
I come now to the second, which is this.

Great men may not be let alone in their sins, but may, nay must be reproved
for them.

Besides the Example of Nehemiah in the Text, we have the practice of other
holy men of God, to warrant us this Truth; of Elijah to Ahab, 1 King. 21.19,
20. Of Nathan to David, 2 Samuel 12. verse 9. Of Esaias and Jeremy to the great men
of their times: He is a very stranger in the Book of God, that knows not where
to fetch plentiful testimonies in this kind.

deplore the miserable unhappiness in which great men are, in that they meet
with so many flatterers abroad, and that none will adventure to tell them their
faults. Carneades in Plutarch was wont to say, That great men's sons learned
nothing well, Plutarchs Moralls.
but to ride horses, for men were apt to praise and flatter them, in what ever
they did; If they wrestle, then they that wrestle with them, will of purpose
fall under them, and the like: but a horse being not able to discern between a
private man and a Prince, will cast him off that is unskilful to rule him.
It Is even so now a days, let great men do what they please, never so
inconsistent with Law and Conscience, they shall not want more than enough, to
clap them upon the back, and give them a Plaudite, though the end be nothing
else but shame and perdition.

In 1 King. 22.6. When Ahab had a design against Ramoth Gilead, how was he
heartned on by four hundred Court-Chaplaines, and none did offer to discourage
him, but one Roundhead Micaiah. V. 17.18. etc. Ri. Grastous Chronicle.
Our own Chronicles tell us, when Vortiger had causelessely divorced his own
wife, and married Rowen ( Heng^stus daughter) a Pagan Woman, which distasted
most of his Nobles and Commone, yet some there were of both ranks that
encouraged him in it. What a sad business is it for great men to sin by
Patent, cum privilegio? and that none shall dare to be a faithful Monitor
unto them, so much as to ask why do ye thus?

Oh then that great men would be persuaded to love their souls, but one half
so well as they do their bodies! They will thank the Physician that shall
show them the danger of their disease, and prescribe them a remedy: yea, not
only thank him, but reward him too: but he that shall show them the danger
of their sin, is a Physician of no value. And what reward shall be given to
such a Nathan? even mighty and sharp Arrows, 120. Psalm. 4.
with hot burning Coals: Touch these great men, these Mountains, and they will
fret, and fume, and smoke (just as Li^e, when you cast water upon it) you are
but a pragmaticall fellow, a very saucy Priest to make so bold with your
betters, Micaiah's Gate House, Jeremiah's Dungeon, Daniels Den, and Peter's
prison were fit places to cool such hot liver'd Prophets as these, and the
like. Si reprehend^fers agree, reprehendenda ne feceris Lud. Vives ad Sap.
Introduct. 12. Prove. 1.
Let them (I say) be persuaded to love their own souls, to suffer the word of
Exhortation, yea and of Reproof too, to suffer their Consciences to be gagged,
and their ulcerous souls to be searched and tented. What says Solomon? He
that loves instruction loves knowledge, but he that hates reproof is a
Fool says one Translation, brutus est says Tremelius, is brutesh says our
last English, and fit for none but Nebuchadnezzar, to be fellow-Commoner with
him among the Beasts of the field: and there I leave him, and come to a

Second Use, to encourage Gods Ministers in their Office; boldly and freely to
reprove the greatest when they do offend. In 58 Esaias 1. Cry aloud, spare not,
lift up thy voice like a Trumpet, and show my people their transgression, and
the house of Jacob their sins. Cry aloud and spare not, spare neither breath
nor lungs; do not Syucopize and cut short thy words; do not whisper it in a
Corner, but Clames, ut Stentora vincere possis, Trumpet it out to some purpose:
But then though a Minister do it boldly, yet he must do it wisely, not
Satyrically, but Christianly, not reproachfully, but lovingly: 25 Pro. 12.
And then as Solomon has it most Elegantly, As an Eare-ring of Gold, and as an
ornament of fine Gold, so is a wise Reprover upon an obedient Ear: And indeed
the Ear can never be an obedient Ear, till it meet with a reprover, that is
a wise reprove^, (...), (says Isodore; I siod. Pel. Lib. 5. Ep. 103.
in his Epist. to Olympius the Presbyter) (...), Every one can find fault, and
reprove another for the same, but he that will do it handsomely as he ought,
had need to be a very wise man Hence it comes to pass, that many from such
like Mounts as these, do oftentimes shed and spill their wit, in some bitter
invective against sin, that they cannot be said so properly to reprove as rail.

I hope I shall not offend, if I instance in the profession of of the Law (that
honorable profession) when some there be that would lay open the abuses done
by some of that profession; for though the Law be good, yet all do not use it
lawfully) to the prejudice of many an honest man and his Cause, yet in what
manner do they it? They dip their tongues in such Gall and Vinegar, that their
words easily betray them, not to be zealous against the sin, but choleric
against the persons. Besides, the very language it self, what is it often times,
but a few shreds and scraps dropped firm some Stage-Poet, at the Globe or
Cockpit, which they have carefully bookt up, to serve them for such an
occasion: I speak not this, that these men should be Reproofe-free (reprove
them soundly, and sharply too, it is pity they should be let alone to live, and
dye in their sins) only this, I would have it done Christian like,
Divine-like, wisely, holily, lest a Satyr from the Pulpit be unhappily repaid
with a Ieere at the Bar: and always to remember this, That the Archangel
Michael did highly scorn it, Jude v. 9.
to fall a railing, though he had to do with the very devil himself.

third Use shall be to persuade great men to hearken to wise council; Let
them be advised by him that was the wisest among the sons of Adam. Solomon in
7. Ecclesiast. 5. it is better to hear the rebuke of the wise, Veritas aspera
est, verum amaritudo ejus utilior est, and integris sensibus gratier, quam
meretrican it is lingue distillans savus Ioh. S. de nugis Curialium l. 3. c. 6.
than the song of Fools, better to hear them that will tell them their
faults, than those that will tell them a tale, better to meet with sound
Reprovers, that will lay Thorns in their way, than the Devils Vpholsterers,
that will sow pillowes under their Arme-pits. What though they themselves are
grave and wise, and learned? yet standers by see sometimes more than Gamesters,
and those that stand upon Gods Watchtower can see further than those which
stand but upon the level. David the King, though he were himself a Prophet,
yet was he not without his Chaplains; Gad was one of them in Ordinary
attendance upon his Majesty, and God imployes him in a sad message to his Lord
and Master, to take his choice of those three great Evils, War, 2 Samuel 24.11,
12, 13.
Pestilence, and Famine; and yet the King did never put him out of the List, or
turn him out of service. A vast difference there is between those two Kings,
Ahab and David; when Elijah told Ahab of his murder and cruelty, 1 King. 21,
20. 2 Samuel 12.13.
he is an enemy to the Crown: Have thou found me, O mine enemy? But when
Nathan tells David of his murder and adultery, he presently cries peccavi, I
have sinned, but does not with Jeroboam stretch out his hand to cuffe the
Prophet. 1 King. 13.4 Creed te illi esse charum a quo amice reprehen deris Lud.
Vives ad Sap. Introduct.


O then far be it from any man (be he never so Great) to put a Gagge in the
mouth of any faithful Reprover; Oh do not muzzle the mouth of him that
speaks, so he speak as the Oracles of God: When Elies sons began once to
hate good Council, 'twas a sign God had marked them out for destruction. Let
me commend unto them the example of that godly King Edward the sixth, (that
miraculum naturae, Sir John Hoyward in the life of Ed. the 6.
as Cardan called him) who when Bishop Ridley, in a Sermon before the King had
insisted much upon the necessity of good works to be done, specially by great
men, the King, (taking himself principally aimed at) after Sermon was ended,
had private conference with the Bishop in his Gallerie, and desired the advice
of that worthy Prelate, to put him in such a posture to do that, which in his
own Conscience, (thus convicted) he saw he was bound to perform. Thus did the
heart of that young Josiah, submit and close with the word, and was ready to
follow that course, to which he was so divinely prompted. And thus from the
second, I come now to the third Observation, which is this:

It Is very fit and convenient for one Magistrate to put another in mind of his
place and duty. Nehemiah did so, and in 10. Hebr. 24. we have a Catholic
Injunction, to consider one another, to provoke unto love and good Works; Let
me then briefly apply it.

Magistrates to reduce that general Rule of the Apostles unto particular
practice, to persuade them (not to be thorns, in one another eyes, but) to
be as Goads in one another sides, to forward one another in their place and
station, those whose parts are meaner and lower, to set on work those whose
abilities are of a higher pitch: a handful of straw may set on fire a great
faggot, and a whetstone, that it self is but dull, may yet set an edge upon a
knife that is blunt. And the truth is, there are some which have need of a
great deal of whetting. The world cries out much of Idoll-Ministers, (cry and
spare not, till there be none of Issachars Tribe left) but are there not
Idoll-Magistrates too, as dangerous in the State (as others in the Church) that
have eyes but see not? I know not what Gifts have blinded them, cares, but hear
not; I know not what Bribe-waxe has stopped them; mouths have they but speak
not, Whom Dr. Hackwell has un-Sainted in a certain Manuscrip, which should
have been printed, but that it met with etc.
til the silver Cord be loosned; hands they have but strike not, being little
better than the picture of Saint George in a Sign post, that offers very fair
with his sword, but so dead and heartlesse that they will not give a blow. Will
you take it, not in my words, but in the language of a grave and learned
Doctor? These men (says he) have their names given them by Antiphrasis, like
Diogines his man, Manes a manendo, because he would ever now and then be
running away; so some are Justices a Iustitia, (the words are none of mine)
because they neither do, nor care to do Justice; Dr. Sanderson 1 Sermon. ad
Magistratum.
a little perhaps is done, but to little purpose; perhaps more to show their
Iustice-ship than to do Justice. Do not then such as these need some
whetting, some edging, some spurring? Oh then that their fellow brethren would
stir and quicken them up in their Duties!

Gerson (that great Chancellor of Paris) that Nulla re alia tantopere
laetaretur, In vita Ioh. Gerson.
quam si ab aliquo fraterne, and charitative redargueretur, He took it
wondrous well, to be told of his faults fairly, and lovingly: Faithful are
the wounds of a friend, says Solomon; 27 Prove 6. Veritas licet ad prasens sit
insuavis lamen cum fiuctus ejus atque utilitas apparuerit, non odium pariet,
sed gratiam Lactan. Divin. instit. Bpitome cap. 6.
and David calls to have such about him. In 141 Psalm. 5, Let the righteous
smite me friendly: and it shall be a rare confection, and a most precious
Balm. And so from the third, I come now to the fourth Observation, which is
this:

a^que utilitas apparuerit, non odium pari^t, sed gratiam Lactan. Divin. tome
cap. 6. The sins of the people will be put upon the Magistrates score, if
they do not endeavor to suppress them.

Aarons case, when Moses had substituted him to be his Deputy, while he was in
the Mount, about Isreal's grand Charter, and the people in the interim had
committed a Bull in substituting a Calfe for their God, Moses charge Aaron
with the sin; who had the oversight of the people in his absence, 32 Exodus 21.
what did this people do unto thee, that thou have brought so great a sin
upon them? Indeed Aaron would feign have shifted it off from himself, Fr.
Moncens in his Aaron purgatus.
(and his Champion has done his best to justify him in it) as if he had not
the least singer in the business, only he took a company of Rings, jumbled
them together, and cast them into the Furnace, and presently without any more
ado, -- Momento turbinis exit
Aureus hic vitulus.


The Calfe was made, no body can tell how: but this cannot serve his turn, the
fault was his that was so facile and yielding to them, whom he should have
restrained and punished; and therefore it was he which brought this evil upon
them: Qui non vetat peccare cum potest, jubet: Galba, though innocent of harm
himself, yet permitting it in others, opened the way to his own destruction.
Sir Hen. Savils Notes on Tacit.
He that does not prevent sin in others, when it is in his own power, does
all one, as if he did invite and set them onward to sin.

Let Magistrates then be well advised, how they greaten their own score by the
sins of others: They will have enough to do, to satisfy for their own
debts, let them take heed then, how they run in arrerages for other men: And
this they do when they lay the Reins on the neck of the Multitude, who easily
feeling the slack hand of their Governors, gallop on very furiously into all
manner of most prodigious impieties. Hence it is, that some of them have to
answer for so many Drunkards, and so many Swearers, and so many
Sabboth-breakers, (if that word do not smell of Iudaisme to some nosie
Critic) that have escaped them unpunished. Nay have not some of these
offenders found Advocates upon the Bench, rather than Judges? Advocates to
plead for them, sooner than Judges to punish them? Was it never known that a
Base Fiddler has been countenanced against a Justice of peace, Sir Henry
Rosewells Case.
and that in open Court too, in the very face of his Country? O what a
dishonor will it be to the Tribunal of a Justice, to be made a Bawd and
pander to sin, to own and father all the Basterdies, all the Rapes, all the
Thefts, all the Villainies, which the damned roaring Crew of yoaklesse
Belialists shall dare to commit. And this they do, 101 Psalm. 8.
when they do not set their faces against sin, to root out all evil doers
from the City of our God.

Senators of this honorable City, keep up the credit of your own Motto,
Fideles in aeternum, City Motto.
to be faithful in the discharge of that trust which God and the King have
imposed in you, in a due execution of those Laws which are made for the
punishment of those that do evil, Mr. Ign. Iourdaine, a late worthy Alderman
of that City; of whom I may more truly speak, than the Historian did of Amil.
Paulus, Vir in tantum laudandus fuit, in quantum intelligi virtus potest. Pat.
L. 1.
and for the praise of them that do well. Oh let it never be said of you,
that the fire of zeal was clean put out in the death of one holy Ignatius;
you know my meaning, you are men, you are Christians, you are Magistrates, then
quit you selves like Men, like Christians, like Magistrates, never suffer your
selves to be out-braved by the gallantest daring sinner: that is, never take in
other men's sins upon your own Account by partiality, connivence, impunity, or
the like: Two things it me recomend unto you, which may the better enable you
to discharge that public trust which is committed unto you.

First, do not enterfare, and clash one with another in the execuriou of
Justice, The States of the United Provinces, V. Remains of Britain in Impresse.
(upon some difference between them and us) gave for their Impresse two
pitchers, floating upon the water, with this word, Si collidimur frangimur, if
we once fall a dashing, we shall all fall in pieces. If Magistrates be not well
glued and sodered together, their disagreement breeds nothing but mischief and
confusion, like Castor and Pollux, if they do not appear together, it
presageth a storm.

Secondly, do not strain Courtesy in matters of public Concernement, whose
Tongue shall moove first, whose Hand must Subscribe first, and others like
pieces of ill-placed good Manners: This does oftentimes dash out the brains of
many a good motion, and crush them while they are but yet in the Egg. Often
times you will conclude, it is fit this should be done, fit this Order made, and
that Order confirmed, and the like, yet none will move their hand to the work,
though every one move his tongue: Just like the Rats in the Fable, they all
agreed 'twas sit the Cat should have a Bell about her neck (that they might
have warning of their enemies coming) but the demurre was, who should put it
on, and none would do that. Do not be thus overmannerly, but strive who shall
out-goe one another in the way of well-doing, as these two Disciples did, who
should out-runne one another in the way to the Sepulcher: 20 Ioh. 4.
Do not chalk up more sins over and above your own score, by a bashful
connivence, or a sinful silence: Let the world see and know, that your sword
is steel to the back, able to cut the strongest bars of Iron in sunder. That
Magistrate which shall be careful to execute Gods Laws, and the Kings, shall
have no need to run to Paris or the Hague for refuge, he carries a Sanctuary in
his own bosom, 2 Cor. 1.12. 1 Chronicles. 22 16.
such a one as Saint Paul had, The Testimony of a good Conscience, which will
be good security for his forth-comming at any time. Up then and be doing, and
the Lord be with you. And so I pass on to the fifth Observation, which is this;

The profanation of the Sabbath day is a great and grievous sin.

Evil? If it were not a fault, Nehemiah had no reason to make one, where he
found none. Look in the Law how read thou? In the fourth Commandment,
Remember the Sabbath day, 20 Exodus 8.^
and keep it holy^ You know how often this is reinforced in holy Scripture in
sundry places. And in the 56 Isaiah 2. there is a blessing pronounced upon the
head of all those, that shall conscionably observe it: Blessed is the man that
keeps the Sabbath, and polluteth it not, and keeps his hand from doing any
evil: They are cursed Caitiffes then, that do not keep and observe the
Sabbath, but profane and pollute it.

Nehemiah's Sabbath and ours is not all one.

Sabbath, and requires equal holiness in the observation.

V. The Translators Preface. Sol. Bishop Lakes The sis de Sabbato, in sine Dr.
Twisse of the Morality of the 4. Com. and Master George Walkers Doctr. of the
Sab has.
so strict as the Jews? then we may not kindle a Fire, nor dress Victuals;
and what then shall the Prefacer do, (he that made Dr. Prideaux his Lecture of
the Sabbath to speak English against his will and mind) for Roast-meat; for
want whereof he has made such a bitter complaint?

First, it is doubted by some (no ordinary Clerks) nay strongly denied, that
ever the Jews themselves, were bound to that rigid observation, that they
should not be allowed to dress meat for themselves: And as for those
Scriptures which seem to favor that opinion, you may receive satisfaction from
those late Worthies, whose pens have labored much in this Argument. And if I
had the time to deliver you their mind, yet I should be but a dull echo to
their silver Trumpets. Secondly, grant this Jewish strictness, yet that was
but some piece of those Ceremonies which now (like our old Almanacks) are
super-annuated, and grown out of date, and were dead and buried with Christ's
body, but with this difference, never to arise again, to chain and fetter our
Consciences, as formerly they did.

I have no purpose to follow all those questions, which here might be moved,
either of the exchange of the lewish Sabbath for the Christian, of the last day
of the week, for the first; or of the Name, whether we should call it Sabbath,
or Lords day; Lords day, I conceive to be more proper, and Critical, and yet
Sabbath every jot as good, as Priest or Altar, which of late went for current
English: No more yet, concerning the Morality of our Christian Sabbath, what
footing it has in the fourth Commandment. Only give me leave to bewail the
hard hap that Gods day has met with, to be in worse condition than man's
honor, or profit, Episcopacy or Tithes, which have had two legs to stand
upon, Ius Divinum, and Ius Humanum too, Divine, and Humane authority; and Gods
own day to lean wholly upon a broken. Crutch, The Observation of the Lords
day, is simply of Eclesiasticall Order. Primrose in Preface to the Treat. of
the Sabbath.
Jus Ecclesiasticum, and to continue no longer, but (durante been placito) so
long as the Church shall be pleased to have it ^o. Many other Quaeries would
here be resolved, but that you may find them full stated in those learned
Treatises, Mr. F. Rous his Cathol. Charity kept back, of whose labors M.
Bolton in Ser. 1 Cor. 2 26. had a better opinion Discourse of the Institut.
Dignity, and and ^f the Lords day.
which of late have been exposed to public view, and might have been much
sooner (as well as the labors of other Worthies) but that the world was so
much troubled with sore Eyes, that it could not endure to look upon such
glorious lights. But if there are any who cannot find the mind and leisure to
peruse those larger Treatises, let them consult with that short, but accurate
Discourse, of the learned Dr. Hake wels upon this subject; there he shall have
(...), much in few words, and I will say no more of it but this, The Image of
Caesar may be as lively drawn out in a small piece of Coin (and sometimes
with more Art, as in a larger Table.

Is the profanation of Gods Sabbath, such a grievous sin? Oh then let this
strike terror into the hearts of all those, that profane the Lords Day God is
a jealous God, jealous of his own honor, and his own Worship, he will ease
himself of his adversaries, 1 Isah. 24.
and be avenged of his enemies, even all those that shall pollute his Sabboths:
he that did but gather sticks on the Sabbath day, 15. Number. 35
was paid home with stones. And yet some there are, which will not stick at
greater matters than these. Some profane the Sabbath by that which you will
think very strange of: V. Pattern of Catechist. doctr. on 4 Com.
First, by doing just nothing, making it a day of idleness, and this is
Sabbatum Asinorum, their Ox and their Ass may keep as good a Sabbath as this.
Secondly, some that do not idle away the time, but yet are somewhat worse
employed; first in ryoti^g and drunkenness, and this is Sabbatum Satanae, with
such a Sabbath as this the Devil himself will be very well pleased: secondly,
in playing, carding, dancing, and the like; and this is Sabbatum aurei vituli;
such a Sabbath is the Israelites kept, when they made themselves merry with a
Calfe, setting themselves down to eat and drink, and rose up to play.

Now do but examine the practice of the Major part of the World, and you shall
find them somewhere in this division. And can God then take it well think you,
Hom. of place and time of pray ^^. 1 Part 2 Tom.
that (as our own Homily complaynes) the devil should be better served, and
God worse upon his own day, than upon any other day of the week? Shall not God
then visit for these things, and shall not his soul be avenged on such a
people? Go to my place which is in Shiloh, 5 Ier. 9. 7 Ier. 12.
says God, and see what I have done unto it, for the wickedness of my people
Israel. So may God say to us, Go to my place which was in Germany, and see
what I have done to it, and what has God done to it? Surely, great is the
misery befalne those Germane Churches; Mr. Ier. Dyke of a good Conscieace. p.
276.
And the time wherein the first blow was given, is not to be forgotten, which
was upon the Sabbath day: upon that day was Prague lost (I owe both the
observation and inference to a Reverend Divine) And what one thing have all
those Churches failed in more, than in the religious observation of the Lords
Day; They neglected to sanctify God on that day by their Obedience, and God
would be sanctified upon them by his Justice. Oh then let not England be high
minded, but scare; Germane sins will certainly bring down Germane plagues.
See what God threatens by his Prophet; 17 Ier. 27.
If you will not hearken to me, to hallow the Sabbath day, then will I kindle a
sire in the Gates of Jerusalem, and it shall devour the Palaces thereof, and
it shall not be quenched.

And so I come to my sixth and last Observation, which is this:

The remedy of the profanation of the Sabbath day, as a principal part of the
Magistrates care and duty.

Else Nehemiah himself had been too blame, to blame these Noble-Rulers for
that, in which they were no way concerned. The Magistrates are Custodes
utriusque tabulae, They have charge of both Tables, and if they be remiss and
negligent, to punish the violations of Gods Laws, God will not be behind hand
to punish them; Witness Ely for his indulgence toward his sons, the good
old man's neck cracked for it. 1 Samuel 4.18.

Ask of the days of old, and they shall teach thee the care that Princes have
had, for the due observation of Gods day: Begin with Constantine the Great,
Fox Acts and Monuments. p. 134. p. 21^. and 203. Edit. Postr.
and we find the Sunday commanded by him to be kept holy of all men, and free
from Judiciary causes, from Markets, Faires, and Manual labors. So did
Canutus inhibit public Fayres, Markets, and huntings: yea, King Edgar went so
far to ordain Sunday to be solemnized from Saturday nine of the clock, till
Monday morning. What reed I go so far upward, we have Laws of a far later
Edition, V. Stat. K. James and K. Charles.
(and more we hope for) to restrain and punish the profanation of of Gods day.
And in whom then does it rest, to see those Laws to be put in Execution, (...)
(says Aristotle) (...), It Is all one in the Issue, Arist Rbet. lib. 1. c. 16.
to make no Law, as not to execute the Law.

Nehemiah's of our time, to show themselves zealous and active for God and the
King. Let them do their best: First, to hinder the profaning of Gods Day.
Secondly, to further the sanctifying of his Day.

First, To hinder the profaning of Gods day, and that first by men of profit,
Pedlers, Carriers, Hucksters, unnecessary Laborers, and the like. These have
been Country, yea and City sins too; blessed be God for that Reformation,
which is in some good measure wrought in this kind. Secondly, by men of
pleasure, that make no more use of that day, than the Leviathan does of the
Sea, only to take their pastime therein: And since, if lawful Laborers be on
that day unsufferable, how much more unlawful are sinful pleasures?

It Is strange to behold the general pollution of Gods day, to see how the
world is grown perfectly profane, and can play on the Lords day without
book. Bish. King on Jonas Lect. the 7.
It Is a sad complaint, which a Reverend Prelate sometimes made, The Sabbath of
the Lord, the Sanctified day of his Rest is shamefully troubled, and
disquieted. The common days in the week are happier in their seasons, than
the Lords Sabbaths. The Sabbath is reserved as the unprositable day of the
seven (mark you his words, The Sabbath (and he was no Babe at that Age to be
taught English) for idleness, sleeping, walking, rioting, tippling, bowling,
dancing, and what not? What, and Dancing too? Heylins Geogr. Descript of France.
Sure the Bishop and the Geographer are of two minds, who has found out
dancing to be such an effectual means, for the conversion of Papists; that
had it not been for some strait laced Divines (as he calls them) of the
Reformed Church in France, who have so bitterly inveighed against that sport,
many more Catholics (I hope he means pseudo-catholiques) had been reformed.

The Counsel which good Ignatius gives, is much otherwise, (...), Epist. 3. ad
Magnesianos. 1 Rev. 10.
Let us keep the Sabbath in a spiritual manner, to be (as St. John was) in the
spirit on the Lords day, employed in holy and spiritual exercises, not in
bodily pleasures and Recreations, (...). See how that holy Father breaths
nothing but rank Puritanisme: Let them busy their heads in admiration of the
works of God, and not give their mind to play and dancing. How like you now?
Two Bishops, one of later; the other of elder times, (more also might be added,
both from old and new) zealous and punctual, Hor. Carm. l. 3. ode 6.
in the religious observation of Gods holy day. But aetas parentum pejor avis,
tulit nos nequiores, Children have risen up against the Gray Headed, and the
base against the honorable; so that it is high time to cry out with the
Prophet David, 119 Psa. v. 126.
It Is time for thee Lord, to lay to thine hand, for men have destroyed thy Law;
They have made the Commandments of God of no effect, through the traditons of
men.

Oh then it highly concerns those, whom God has substituted to be his Vice
gerents, to vindicate the contempt of his holy-Lawes, that in particular of his
holy day, to free it not only from the abuse thereof, by Hueksters, Pedlers,
Carriers, and the like; but to purge it also from prphanation by Bacchanalian
Revellings, and Heathenish May-games, with other like filth, and ordure, (the
consequence of both these) which yet in some places are more zealously
observed, and stood for, than either the Laws of God, or the King. I hope
those whom this concerns will give me leave to speak freely, and I shall speak
the words of truth and soberness. Sir Io. Walter, and Sir Io. Denham. In
effigies mutas divinus spiritus non transsunditur, as Agrippina told Tiberius.
Tacit. l. 4. Annal.
'Twas within these 15 years that a most wholesome order was made by the Judges
of this Circuit, for the suppressing of Church-Ales and Revells, which in many
places is Sabbath Day work. Oh then that it would seem good in the yes of your
Lordship, that by your authority, so wholesome an order, which now (like the
engravings on Tomb stones) is quite worn out, might rceive new force and
vigor, that so you would be pleased with the sword of Justice, to stab all
those unlawful Assemblies, (mere Conventicles of bad fellows) that they may
receive their deaths wound. Wound the hairy scalpe of such, as go on to wound
God in his name in his day, in his service, in his servants. We may p^^ach
against these disorders so long, till we spit out our very Lungs; and to no
more purpose than Bid did, when he preached to a heap of stones. 9 Hos 7.
The Prophet himself shall be but afoole, and the Spiritual man a mad man.
Our words shall be but wind; our words said I? nay the word of God himself, 4
Hebr. 12
though it be a double edged sword, yet it shall cut no more than a wooden
Dagger, unless (as Iron sharpneth Iron) it be whetted up, and made keener by
yours. Oh then bear not the sword in vain, like St. Paul in a Glasse-window,
unite it to the Ephod, the Ephod shall sanctify that, and let that defend the
Ephod.

Secondly, Let Magistrates further the sanctifying of Gods day; and that by
setting up a learned, painful, and godly Ministry; and secondly by providing
a liberal maintenance for such a Ministry.

First then, let them set up first a learned Votum m^ltorun est, and me um cum
multis, clerus per om nia d^ctus, docensque fiat domine Jesu, fiit cito. Epis.
Winton. Con ad Clerum pro doctoratu.
Ministry, such as may be able to convince Gainsayers, and stop the mouth of
the Adversary, lest unhappily a good Cause may suffer by a weak Champion. See
that they be (...), men fit to teach: If the light which should be in them be
darkness, quantae tenebra I how great must that darkness be? if those which
should be seers are blind themselves, how shall they guide and direct others?
Secondly, a painful Ministry, that may eat their Bread in the sweat of their
Brows; yea, and the sweat of their Brains too; no monthly, no quarterly men,
that preach now and then a little for Recreation, or the like. Fiscopotius apud
multos consulitur quam Christo, attonsioni potius g^egis quam attentiani Episc.
Wint. Con. in S^o. provinc. 5 Math. 16
These may cloth themselves with the Fleece of the Flock, and feed themselves
with the fat of the Lambs; but I can never persuade my self that that can be
wholesome meat which is saucod with the blood of souls. Thirdly, a godly
Ministry, such whose light may so shine before men, that men may see their
good works. To hear good words, and see no good works, will be to no purpose.
The Painter teaches his Boys more by pen and pencill, than he does by Rule
and Precept. Men will do as they see done, and not as they hear taught. A
Sermon well preached in the fore-noon, and confuted by bad Example in the
afternoon, Ida vos ^ be^^ius auditorum corda pene trat, quam dicentis vita
commendat. Greg Pastor. par. 2. c. 5.
is never like to do much good.

Then secondly; to provide a liberal maintenance fit for such a Ministry, I
speak not for silken-ignorance, or velvetlazinesse; for those which have more
wages than five honest men, and yet do not the tenth part of the work o one
of them; but for the laboring Ox, the painful, studying, preaching, living
Clergy, seed them with food convenient for them (I mean not that Convenientia
Natura only, but Convenientia personae too) not as they are Men only, Sublatis
Studiorum pretiis, etiam fludia peritura ut minus decora. Tacit. l. 11. Annal.
1 Timothy 5.8.
but as they are Scholars, as they are Ministers let them have convenient
meat, convenient Apparel, and Books convenient for them. Let them have enough
for themselves, and so much besides, as may enable them to go in Equipage at
least with Infidels, that they may be able to provide for posterity, lest wife
and children be forced to seek their Bread, in desolate places.

And here now we may justly take occasion to bless God for that pawn and
earnest, V. Deelar. of Purl. in that behalf.
which the Worthies of our Israel have given us, of their care and endeavor,
both for hindering the profaning, and further the sanctifying of Gods day, and
that by procuring a learned, painful, and godly Clergy, and answerable
maintenance fit for such a Clergy. A great door, and effectual is open to
them, but there are yet many Adversaries. In St. Paul's time there was (...), a
Rub in the way, 2 These. 2.7
a pull-back, that hindered the Revelation of Antichrist; till that was removed
Antichrist, could not appear fully and at length. There is now also, (...),
some block, some mountain cast in the way between a gracious King, and his
faithful A little to alter Otho's words Aeernitas rerum and pax genti^^m and
nostrasalus incolumnitate hujus Senatus firmatur. Tacit. l. 1. Hist.
Council, That Christ himself cannot yet appear so glorious in his Temple,
in that beauty of holiness, which we hope and pray for, Church-Worke cannot
but be long adoing, and it is much that any thing at all has been done, when
the way to it has been, (as bad as Hannibals was over the Alps) so alto gether
unpassable, that those who have set themselves to this work, have made their
way with Vinegar, in much bitterness of spirit; In journeying often, in
perils by their own Contrymen, 2 Cor. 11 26, 27.
in perils in the City, in perils among false brethren, in weariness and
painfulnesse, in watchings often, in fastings often, and the like.

What now remains for us, but that we do our best, to quench those flames,
that are unhappily broken out, not to po^^re in Oil, but as much water as
possibly we can: And no water like that of our own Tears; 10 Ezra 2.
There may be yet one in Israel, concerning this thing, that God may at last
return, and be gracious unto us. Oh then let us bestirre our selves, to seek
unto God, that it would please him to unite the dislocated members of this
State, that the Head may give influence to the Members; and the Members be
serviceable to the Head, that both Head and Members may serve the God of both,
and rejoice in their mutual Offices each to other; that so our Zerubbabels may
either find no more Mountains, 4 Zach. 7.
or make them none, but that they may bring forth the Head-stone of the Temple
with shoutings, and that we may all cry, 67 Psalm. 6.7
Grace, Grace unto it. So shall our Land bring forth her increase, and God,
even our own God shall give give us his blessing; God shall bless us; and all
the ends of the world shall fear him Consider what has been said, 2 Timothy 2.7.
and the Lord give you understanding in all things. Amen.

Gloria Deo in Excelsis.
FINIS.

