A TREATISE IN JUSTIFICATION OF THE KING.

OXFORD, Printed by Leonard Lichfield, Printer to the University. 1642.

A Justification of the KING.
TIBERIUS the third Emperor of Rome was not only killed, and drawn through
the streets by the Romans; but the Priests of all the Temples prayed unto the
gods not to receive him unto them; and prayed the Infernal Furies that they
would grievously torment him, saying it was justly required, that the Tyrant
which troubles the good in this life, should have no place amongst the good
after his death: And Tully speaking of a Tyrant says, non est naturae dispar.
illum spoliare, quem honestum ect necar^; nay, the same Author says, non se
obstruxit scelere, si quis Tyrannum occidit, quamvis familiarem, that is, it is
no wickedness to kill a Tyrant: now from that saying of Tully, I infer, that
to kill a King is impious; nay, so crying is the blood of a murdered King, that
the particular agent bears not all the ensuing misery though he only gave the
stroke, as you may see in the 49. of Genesis, the sixth and seventh verses,
Into their secret let not my soul come, for in their wrath they slew a man
(now who that King was, you may see in the 34. Chapter) Cursed be their wrath
for it was fierce, and their rage, for it was cruel, I will divide them in
Jacob and scatter them in Israel, verse 7. And are there not some in these
times as guilty as Simeon and Levi in their desires, though by Gods preventing
grace they want their opportunities, witness that unchristian like traiterous
and disloyal prayer of him that wished he might wash his hands in His
Majesty's blood; or what can be thought of that Declaration of the Lords and
Commons assembled in Parliament, for the raising of all power and force, as
well Trained Bands as others, to fight with, kill, and slay, by force of arms
all such as shall oppose them, and shall raise or conduct any forces against
them which are employed in this service by either or both Houses of Parliament;
and whereas they know that the King does raise forces, and notwithstanding
that, they give power to kill and slay such as raise or conduct forces against
their forces; and never so much as except the King in that Declaration, as His
Majesty himself has observed: Perhaps that may be a neglect in the Clearke
that delivered the Copy, or else in the Printer; for certainly the Parliament
have a greater care of the Kings own Person; but however that neglect breeds
ill affections and disloyalty in the ruder fort of people, and therefore it
deserves to be amended and corrected by the House, that the Malignants (as they
are called) might have nothing to object against them.

Another thing worth their consideration, is that which Saint Paul mentions to
the Romans in the 16. Chapter, 17 and 18. verses, I beseech you Brethren mark
them diligently which cause division, and offenses contrary to the Doctrine
which you have learned, and avoid them: And let any man judge whether there are
not such in these times: the Parliament is the only means we have to redress
those grievances which are and will be (if suffered) far worse then that of
Shipmony, or any other that has been remedied: Are there not like wise such as
the Apostle mentions in his Epistle to Timothy? Truce Breakers, false Accusers,
Intemperate men, fierce, and Despisers of such as are good, Traitors, heady,
high-minded, Lovers of pleasures more then lovers of God, having a show of
godliness, but denying the power thereof, from such turn away, says the
Apostle, for of this sort are they which creep into houses, and lead away
simple women laden with sins, and led aways with diverse lusts: 2 Timothy 3. and 3,
4, 5, 6, verses; certainly we have some pestilent fellows amongst us (I name
none) such as are movers of sedition amongst us throughout the world, and chief
maintainers of the Sect of the Nazarites, Acts 24. 5. Nay, are there not such
in these times that give private information of things which they cannot prove,
according to that in the Acts, They cannot prove the things whereof they now
accuse me, Acts 24. 13.

Kings are Gods anointed, and therefore sacred, and not to be touched with
rude hands; though their demeanor in Government be never so wicked and never
so unjust, yet the Divine character of Authority enstampt upon them, gives him
an inviolable immunity from humane hands. Hence it was that David, though
himself anointed also by Gods appointment, durst not injure Saul, But his
heart smote him for renting but the lap of Saul's garment; when God had
delivered Saul into David's hands: and shall we applaud our selves without
remorse of conscience, when we lay violent hands upon the fairest jewel of the
Crown of our Lords Anointed, and when we pluck the fairest flower of His
Garland from his head? was Saul more sacred, more holy, more virtuous than our
Charles? or have we more liberty, more privilege to disobey and to dis-robe
Kings of their Honor than the Jews had? or has this Parliament a more wise and
understanding heart, or a more sincere zeal to Reformation, or a more sacred
and Divine calling than David had? Oh then be wise ye sons of men, be
learned, you that take upon you to judge the earth; lest the King of kings
laugh at your folly, and crush you in pieces with a rod of iron. Let it be a
badge of antichristianity and of that Man of sin; and odious let it be to all
true zealots, to exalt themselves against all that is called God, let us fear
to separate that which God has conjoynd: Has not he taught both in the Old
and New Testament, to fear God and honor the King? and shall we now imagine
that the dishonoring the King, must be the chief evidence of our fearing God?
God forbid, let us know that Rebellion is as the sin of witchcraft; most odious
to God, most bewitching and entising in it self: shall we wonder it should
appear maskt with Religion, and ushered in with pretense of Reformation? behold
the father or lies the Devil, when he would have tempted our Savior to
Rebellion against his Father, came with scriptum est for a Preface, though he
knew his mischievous design of heart could not lie hid from the All-seeing eyes
of our Lord. How did Absolon court the hearts of the Israelites, when he was
hatching his odious Rebellion against ^is Father? was it not with pretense of
Reformation ^^ying, Behold thy matter is good and just, but there is no^
^^^uted of the King to hear it; oh that I were made Governor over this land,
how would I do justice to all that came unto me: And shall this policy of
dazzling our purblinde mortal eyes seem now strange unto us? nay certainly, were
not the face of all these present distempers maskt with a pretense of
Reformation, and uizarded with a seeming hatred of Superstition; though aiming
at more horrid intentions; how could we so soon have lost and torn the unity of
the Faith from the bond of Peace? do we not all believe in one God, worship one
Trinity, and rely upon one Mediator, and acknowledge one way to Heaven? and
shall the garb and apparel wherewith we walk this voyage, the gesture
whereby we worship this God, the Dialect wherein we pray to this Mediator, set
us at a greater distance of affections, than if we were Turks, Infidels, and
Pagans? does God more delight in contentions about Ceremonies, Gestures, words,
than in the peace of his Church? or shall the wearing of a Surplice, signing
with a Cross, or bowing with a knee, be able to divorce Christ from his
Spouse? God forbid; Oh then I charge you ye Daughters of Jerusalem, and you
that wish well unto Sion, by the Roes and by the Hindes of the Forests, That
ye awake not this his Spouse, this his Beloved, until she please; let us not
like the dog in Esops-Fables, quarrel for the shadow, and lose the bone
where the marrow is; while we seek to purify the Ceremony, let not the
substance perish, while we would settle the Church, let us not cut the throat
of the State, which is the guard of the Church, who will pour a Vessel of
pure Oil upon the flower, because the out side of the Caske is not
eye-pleasing? or who will cast away jewels, because the Cabinet wherein they
are suits not with his fancy? Oh then let as bind up the breaches of Sion,
least the Cloud depart from between the Chernbins, and the Arc fall into the
hands of the uncircumcised. Kings are Magistrates, and let it be our Religion
to obey those Magistrates, God has not given them the sword in vain, and let
not us feel the power thereof for our disobedience: Thus shall we follow the
steps of our forefathers, the Apostles and Fathers in the Primitive Church,
who chose rather to glorify their faith by suffering under, than resisting the
power of Magistracy, though Tyrannical: It is not the height of your zeal, if
not guided with knowledge, can excuse you; for then the Jews might have had a
fair plea for their crucifying Christ, the Apostle testifying they did it
through ignorance; and yet we, what a curse has dogged them and their
Posterity to this day.

If the King were a Tyrant, the case might be otherwise, but it is a thing known
to all the world, that His Majesty has given abundant satisfaction for the
past unhappy accidents in this government; and so solemnly protested for the
future, to be guided by the known Laws of the Land, and to defend the truth
of Religion, the Liberty of the Subject, and the privilege of Parliament: What
shall any man plead for himself at the high Tribunal of the Almighty, that
shall dare to take Weapons in his hands against his Anointed, let him flatter
himself how he please with his zeal, dote as he will upon his imaginary
fancy, and think his infidelity in and to his Prince, an argument of his faith
to God; yet miserable will his end be who shall perish in such an attempt, and
into the Congregation of suchlet not my soul come.

In a Remonstrance bearing date the 15. day of December: 1641. The dissolution of
the Parliament in 4. Caroli is mentioned, and the imprisoning of diverse Members
of the House after it was dissolved, not permitting their wives to come unto
them, even in their time of their sickness, enforcing some to put in security
of good behavior before they were released, still continuing the imprisonment
of those which refused to be bound; which might have been perpetual, if
necessity had not brought another Parliament to relieve them; of whom one dyed
by the cruelty, and harshnesse of his imprisonment, and his blood still cries
either for vengeance or repentance of those Ministers of State, who at once
obstructed the course both of His Majesty's justice and mercy.

And to speak truth without Faction or any Seditious intent, are there not
many at this time imprisoned in the same manner as is complained of in that
Remonstrance, being consined to that unwholesome air which the merciful narrow
grate can afford them, and that no sooner received, but corrupted with the
filthy stenches of those nasty prisons? nay, are there not some in these times
committed, and their wives (according to the words of that Remonstrance) not
permitted to come unto them? nay, is not Sir George Whittmore an aged man, and
of equality, sent to Yarmouth or some other prison far distant from this
place, and from his wife and children? and if his estate should miscarry
through his absence, or his aged self, by reason of that cold and hard passage
he may meet with before his arrival, would not that cry for vengeance or
repentance of those Ministers of State that sent him or caused it? I accuse not
the Parliament, neither can I harbor the least suspicion of their justice, but
sure I am that it is possible they may lend some of their authority to those
that may abuse it: For that Aldermans offense I question it not; but I am
confident an Imprisonment nearer home would have been more merciful: nay, to
speak farther, are not now many prisoners denied to be bayled according to
Law? I speak not this invectively against the Parliament, but rather declare
it to them (for peradventure they may not know it) that they may remedy it: and
though convenience cannot be offered for a speedy trial of some that are
accused, because there are now such urgent occasions; yet for those that are
baylable by Law, for safety of their estates and their security that they must
then give, would be as cautious and as much awed by that as they are by being
in prison: I know not what the rules of State policy are, but I know it was
the saying of a good man, that policy may govern the World, and nature policy;
but Religion should govern both, policy and nature may be her counselors, but
she is the Sovereign; they may be used at some time with commendation, but
she at all times with necessity and approbation: I speak not this either to
persuade any man to desert the Parliament cause, or to incense the KING against
them; neither will I take upon me to acquitt either side from errors, but
consider them to be all Mortals, and will ever pray that both King and People
may remember their duties one to the other, and that either one side or other
may be so sensible of whose duty it is to give the first stoop, that so by
some divine assistance there may be an utter cessation of arms in this cause:
it is said in the English-Gentleman, page 36. that such is the misery of
ambitious spirits whose ends are without end, limiting their desires to no
other period then sole Sovereignty, that they flatter themselves in their
vanity, as Pigmalion with his Image, or Narcissus with his shadow; reposing
more confidence in their own valor (Themistocles or Parsanias like) then on
all the information of friends, or the persuasions of a loyal and uncorrupted
heart* And it was a Rule much observed among the Romans, that 'twas impossible
for them to have a victory of that War who begin it with pride, and with
fierceness pursue it. Dial. Prim. lib. prim. cap. 8.

I shall not stand to examine who began. this war, least I should inveigh
against either side; but since it is unfortunately now raging, I must needs
commend them that are careful to appease it; but for those that never think
termed honorable enough for a peace, let them remember that counters which
some time stand for a thousand pound, may before the account be past, stand but
for a farthing: it is probable that those who are against peace which has been
offered on both sides, may have good grounds why eithers propositions should
not be accepted; but woe be to those, who like Tiberius, glory in nothing so
much as in cunningly cloaking their purposes with fair pretenses, going
invisible, and deluding Subjects resolutions with a seeming good.

Valerius Conqueror of the Gauls, denied the honor that was gotten by war,
quia magis dolor civibus amissis, quam gaudium fusts hostibus praevala ^t; and
says Seneca, quaeritur belli exitus, non causa; and 'twas the saying of one of
the Garamants in his Speech to Alexander, that to win true honor in this
life, and a perpetual memory after death, is to lead his life not in Wars, but
to take his death in peace: and if they will but hearken to Tully, He Will tell
them that multi fuerunt qui tranquillitatem ex^etentes, a negotijs se publici^
removerunt, and ad otium perfugerunt; imo principes hominesque quidem severi
and graves* nay, we ought to have peace with all men as much as in us lies,
Rom: 12: 18. Ephe: 4 2. Heb: 1^. 14. And Abraham to buy peace, resigned his
right to his Nephew, Gen: 13. 8. A good pattern were it now followed, but with
the loss of no right* but for those that rather than embrace^ hopeful
Proposition of peace, will freely hazard their persons in a civil War, let me
tell them, that if their lives were all they hazard, I should think as light
of it as they because I am sure the Kingdom is not endangered by such men's
death.

Or were it against a Foreign Force, where the Cause were publicly known, the
encouragement would be the greater; but it being a civil War, Father against
Son, Brother against Brother, and both pretending the same Cause, and both
making deep protestation: shall we fight and kill one another for we know not
what, unles it be whose Protestations shall first be believed? Absist, nay see
the effects which incredulity has produced, which are set forth partly in His
Majesty's first Speech in this Parliament the third of November 1640. In which
Speech, I find nothing promised, but what has been performed as much as in
Him lay, and that every one may judge whether it has or not, I have penned His
Majesty's Speech, to the end you may consider of the performance upon the
reading of the promise: viz.

The knowledge I had of the desire of my Scottish Subjects, was the cause of My
calling the last Parliament; wherein had I been believed, I sincerely think
that things had not fallen out as now we see: But now My Lords, and Gentlemen,
The honor and safety of this Kingdom lying so nearly at stake; I am resolved
to put my self freely and clearly on the love and affections of My English
subjects, as those of my Lords that did wait on me at York,very well remember
I there Declared. Therefore My Lords I shall not mention My own Interest, or
that support I might justly expect from you, till the common safety be secured;
though I must tell you, I am not ashamed to say, those charges I have been at,
have been merely for the security and good of this Kingdom, though the
success has not been answerable to My desires. Therefore I shall only
desire you to consider the best way, both for the safety and security of this
Kingdom, wherein there are two parts chiefly considerable: First the chasing
out of the Rebels, and secondly, the satisfying your grievances; wherein I
shall promise you, to concur so heartily and freely with you, that all the
World may see My intentions have ever been, and shall be, to make this a
glorious and flourishing Kingdom: There are only two things that I shall
mention to you; the one is, to tell you that the loan of money which I lately
had from the City of London, wherein the Lords that waited on Me at York
assisted me, will only maintain My Army for two Months, from the beginning of
that time it was granted. Now My Lords and Gentlemen I leave it to your
Considerations, what dishonor and mischief it might be, in case that for want
of money My Army be disbanded, before the Rebels be put out of this Kingdom;
Secondly, the securing the Northern people from those calamities they at this
time endure, so long as the Treaty is on foot: and in this I may say, not only
they, but all this whole Kingdom will suffer the harm: Therefore I leave this
also to your consideration, for the ordering of these great affairs, whereof
you are to treat at this time. I am so confident of your love to Me, and that
your care is for the honor and safety of the Kingdom, that I shall freely and
willingly leave to you where to begin; only this, That you may the better know
the state of all the affairs, I have Commanded my Lord Keeper to give you a
short and free Account of these things that have happened in this interim, with
this Protestation; That if this Account be not satisfactory as it ought to be,
I shall whenever you desire, give you a full and perfect Account of every
particular. One thing more I desire of you, as one of the greatest means to
make this a happy Parliament; That you on your parts, as I on mine, lay aside
all suspicion one of another, and as I promised my Lords at York,it shall not
be my fault if this be not a happy and good Parliament.

And if all this Speech promises be not performed, let the whole World judge;
Witness His passing a Bill for the Bishops Votes, the Star Chamber, and
High Commission Court, the laying down of Shipmoney, the signing the warrant
against Strafford, and the referring the execution of the now condemned Priest,
to the will and pleasure of the Parliament (though contrary to His desire of
showing Mercy) rather than hinder the desired Reformation. What then, shall we
be thought a yet faithless Nation, surely here is reason sufficient whereon we
may ground our belief.

And thus with a modest zeal, I have discharged my conscience, without care of
pleasing or fear of punishment; for that Court of Parliament being always
impartial, is ready to heave and remedy the abuses of either side, and to
fear them, were to suspect their Justice.

FINIS.

