SIR FRANCIS SEYMOR HIS HONORABLE, AND WORTHY SPEECH, Spoken in the High Court
of PARLIAMENT SHOWING What Dangers do ensue by want of Privilege of
Parliament. And how the Splendour of His Majestyes Glory is Eclipsed With
toleration of Jesuits, Seminary priests, and bad Ministers who still have
abiding amongst Us. As also, such who have betrayed the King unto himself, to
bring the Subjects under slavery. Whereby the King can neither be preserved in
Honor, nor the Commonwealth in safety Whereunto is annexed, Sir Walter Earl
his Paraphrase, concerning Bishop WHITE.

London, Printed for W. H. 1641.

An Honorable SPEECH Spoken in the high Court of Parliament.
THis great Counsel (as Tully said of the Senate of Rome) is the soul of the
Commonwealth; wherein one may hear and see all the Greevances of the subjects
and in the Multitude of such Counselors is safety.

Amongst whom, the greatest privilege, is liberty of speech. And therefore, J
humbly offer it unto you, to take into consideration, what wrong has bin done
herein, what Judgments has bin against the Members of this House, for speaking
nothing, but what concerned the good of the Commonwealth. Which said Judgments
has been against Law and Reason, and without president.

What Law or Reason is there, that a Parliament, which is the highest of all
Courts, should be questioned by inferior Courts, and Judges: as if the
Common Pleas should question the Kings be^ch, or the Chancery be questioned by
either of them.

Perhaps the Authors of it, have nature to plead for themselves, which indeed
teaches every man to preserve himself.

This perhaps, makes them advance that, and those members which otherwise must
condemn themselves. And such things have bin done, to maintain their
proceedings, as not only trench upon the liberties of Parliament, but also upon
the liberties of the whole Commonwealth: wherein I had rather suffer for
speaking the truth, then the truth should suffer for want of my speaking.

Where was ever more Piety in a Prince, and more loyalty in Subjects, and yet
what Commonwealth ever suffered like this.

His Majesty is the Sun, which though it ever shines alike in it self
gloriously; yet by reason of Clouds, many times it does not so appear, and if
his Majesty, by reason of bad members may not appear in such splendour, let us
labor to clear those Clouds: what will it avail us, if the Fountain be
clear, if the streams that issue therefrom be not so also. I will instance
in some particulars.

If we look into the face of Religion, that is out-faced, and such as
heretofore durst not appear, come boldly into our houses, as if they had a
concealed toleration, I mean the Seminary Priests, who though they have less
power, yet have they not less malice, but more, so long as the Pope has his
Agents amongst us. See we not how they go to Somerset house, and to S. James
with too much countenance? These are the enemies of the church, without the
church; I wish we had none with in it: who pull down churches, and I am sure
they build none up again: Amongst which are out Non-residents, who o're-sway
all by worldly preferments, and many livings.

Christ made it the Touchstone of Peter's love unto him, to feed his sheep and
lambs; but these men look at their own private gains not taking pains for
their own double honors, which are daily gotten.

What thing is there more against Reason and Nature, then for one man to have
above one wife, and for one shepherd to have more then one sheepefold.

These are dumb dogs, that cannot speak a word for God, of whom the people may
seek spiritual food, but can find none.

Others there are that preach, but it is not the Gospel* but themselves, that
the King has an unlimited power, and the Subject noe propriety in their goods.
These are bad Divines, and worse, and more ignorant Statesmen; who under the
name of Puritans, condemn all, who truly profess Religion. There are surely
many, who under a fo me of godliness, cloak impiety: but to teach, that a man
can be too holy, is the Doctrine of Devils.

And now, for fear I have bin overlong, I will speak of the Subjects
Liberties, wherein J remember, what was confirmed unto us by the word of a
King; and God forbid, that I, or any other should imagine, that the King did
otherwise, then he granted us.

But some there be, that have betrayed the King unto himself, and so committed
worse treason then those, who betray him to others, who tell him his
Prerogative is above all Laws, and that his subjects are but slaves: whereby
the King is neither preserved in Honor, nor the Commonwealth in safety.

FINIS.
Sir Walter Earl. His Paraphrase fitly spoken concerning Bishop White. in a
former Parliament.
QVi color albus erat, nunc est contarius albo.

In English thus,

The color that was white, is now turned black.

For Bishop White has sold his Orthodox Books, and bought Jesuits: that
Bishop White may go arm in arm with Mountague.

FINIS.

