A Salve for the Sufferings OF THE LOYAL PARTY.

A Lecture unto London: And an Expostulation with the present Parliament, in a
Theological Tract, grounded upon the words of the Prophet,

Amos 3.6. Shall there be evil in a City and the Lord has not done it?

Expounded and applied unto these times:

By J. K. D. T.

Psalm. 94.20. Shall the Throne of Iniquity have fellowship with thee, which
frames mischief by a Law?

Ez. 18.25. Hear now O house of Israel, Is not my way equal? are not your
ways unequal?

Qui potest obviare, and perturbare perversos, and non facit, nihil est aliud
quam favere impietati eorum, nec caret scrupulo societatis occultae, qui
manifesto facinori desinit obviare. Anastatius secundus, Epistola ad Anastatium
Augustum. Printed in the Year, 1648.

THE ARGUMENT.
Motives unto, and the subject matters of this Tract are:

FIrst, The Vindication of the most holy and just Providence of God in the acts
of sin, from the crude and impious impostures of the fathers of that false, yet
current Religion of these times; who from the Press and Pulpit, by the Grant
and Plea of Gods permission, would privilege and invest the damnable
doctrines, and actions of these times, with the sacred warranty of Truth and
Piety; Thus perverting the righteous ways of God and (with Balaam) for the
wages of iniquity, putting a stumbling block before their Brethren.

A second is to rescue from the Malignity of this doctrine, and counter
balance such as are (either through the infirmity of their judgments, or
condescension unto temporal Interests) apt to be overpoized with the seeming
advantages of the outward and present successes of sinful men; which are but
the natural products of their own sins in the punishments of them.

For Conviction of the first, It Will be cleared, that Gods permission unto the
power and Will of man, the Administration of Arguments and opportunities, and
Gods concourse (as unto a Natural ability) with acts of sin, no way^s inferres
his Approbation, or makes him the Author thereof: But that Gods permission unto
sinful acts, implies punishment, in the Dereliction of Grace, and the
assistance thereof, by the non-intervenience of more powerful impediments unto
sin, so that successes in unwarrantable and wicked undertakings (such are
those of these times,) amount not unto blessiings, but are punishments for sin,
and mere curses unto them that obtain them.

That God has an Overruling power in the sinful actions of men, in the
direction of them upon what object, and that end he (only) is (not they)
pleased, and the limitation of them, for their extent and continuance, so that
wherein men deal proudly God will be above them.

For the information of the second sort of people, divisible into two Classes:
As unto the first of these troubled with a spiritual weakness of Concoction,
in that they cannot happily distribute and dig^st their late sufferings in the
best cause [their Loyalty unto Gods Anoynted] but like those Novices in Gods
school, cry out, there is death in the pott, and have taken a sin feit of
their sufferings, we have cast meal into their Mess, and show them that there
is no barme in it, but that it will prove wholesome food for their souls: that
the evils of their late punishments by War, pr^ceed from the evils of their
own sins, for which God denied success unto so just a cause (as he did unto
the Israelites against the Benjamites:) Some divine and approved Receipts are
prescribed medicines unto the Maladies ^^owing hence.

As for those of the last and lowest Class, who are wholly seized with, and
sized by their own narrow Interests who have not yet themselves felt the fury
of War, (although they did largely contribute to bring it upon others,)
especially the Inhabitants of this City, unto them sudden Repentance from
some noted sins, is propounded the only expedient, to prevent those calamities
which (not only probable conjectures and political prognostiques, but)
parallel divine resemblances from like sins (noted by our Prophet in Samaria,
punished by War) fore^ell impending.

Shall there be evil in a City, and the Lord has not done it?

Amos, 3.6.
THE precedent part of this Chapter, contains a denunciation of the Judgments
eminent upon the Kingdom of Israel, amplified from their cause, their
Iniquities, which receive their aggravation from Gods peculiar favor unto
them; the neglect whereof brings the more numerous and horrid punishments upon
them. v. 2. You only have I known ( i. e. selected) of all the Families of the
Earth; therefore I will punish you for all your iniquities; the proper effects
of which iniquities and sins are a distance and separation between God and
them, v. 3. and the inevitability of the judgments impending on them, from the
already past publication of them: For as a Lion will not roar until he be
seized of his prey, and as a Fowler will not remove his Net until he have
taken some Game; no more would God so publicly denounce these judgments by
his Prophets, if he had not absolutely determined them, and were even now upon
the actual execution of them, v. 4.5. whence the Prophet labors to seize them
with the terror of them, that as a Trumpet cannot be blown in a City, but it
will beget admiration, fear, and concourse; so the denuntiation of these
judgments by Gods Prophets, (being to be referred unto God as their cause)
should procure their terror and horror; for, Shall there be evil in a City,
and the Lord has not done it?

The context informs us that where God places the greatest benefits, he
expects the greatest obedience, and will punish the defects thereof with the
greatest punishments.

That sin begets a disagreement, and distance with God.

That God denounces greater judgments, before he executes them:

That the solemn denunciation of them, is to procure our sear, and
application in them unto God, as their Original.

The words are an emphaticall and express answer unto a doubt, or the solution
of a question, anticipated and resolved by way of Interrogation; Shall there be
co^ll in a City, and the Lord has not done it?

That is, there is not any evil whatsoever happens in a City which the Lord
has not done.

The words in their entire consideration present unto us this single
Theological Axiom or divine truth, the due limitations thereof always
admitted.

That there is no evil happens, even in a City, which the Lord has not
done. For the direct explication whereof we must enquire: 1. What evil is?
Secondly, How God is said to do evil? Thirdly, Why to do it in a City?

First, what this evil is? There is a twofold evil mentioned in Scripture;
the first is malum culpae, the evil of sin or offense: Secondly, malum pena,
the evil of punishment.

There is the evil of sin or offense; Deuteronomy. 13.5^
for sin (being an Abberration from the Rule, which is the equity preconceived
in the mind of God, and expressed unto the mind of man by a Law, according
unto which, (in regard of Gods Dominion over man being his Creature) it is fit
he frame his life, and therefore defined (...) a transgression of the Law) is
an evil in regard that it is an aversion or turning from the summum bonum, 1 John: 3.4^
and chief good God, and a conversion or turning unto the minus bonum, and
less good the Creature.

Secondly, sin is termed an evil because there accompanies it, macula, a
steine, Esaias. 59.2^
a defect of the inward beauty of the soul, Ez. 16.4.
and want of spiritual comeliness of grace, exiled by the admission of sin,
which effecting a distance between God and the soul, he removes the beauty
of grace from it, and the steine and deformity of sin succeeds, by this
privation and absence of grace, and the superinduction of evil, in which sense
is it, that sin is termed in Scripture a filthiness, Prove. 30.12;
uncleanesse, corruption from the many vile and ugly effects thereof. 2 Cor.
7.1.
And unto this macula, Zek. 13.1.
or steine of sin there is reatus, Gal. 6.8.
the guilt always attendant, 2 Pet. 2.12.
and this strongly draggs on malum pena, the evil of punishment.

The second evil of sin, punishment, 2 Samuel 17.14.
which is inseparable from, 1 King. 21.29.
and does ever lacquie it unto guilt, for evil pu^sueth sinners, Prove. 13.21.
that is punishment. In the words the evil of punishment is principally
intended; but the evil of sin and punishment are so interwoven, that not
without great difficulty can the one be considered without the other, being
like Gemini inseparable twins, the next quere therefore will be,

How God is said to do both these evils, the evil of sin, and the evil of
punishment. First, of Gods doing the evil of sin: ^^ab. 1.13.
Almighty God is light in whom is no darkness, his pure eyes cannot behold
iniquities (that is) in the least wise to approve thereof, much less to
consent thereunto, and least of all to do or act sin; for being the chief
good, and immutable, 1 John 3.5.
and immovable, he can have no since: Yet is God in dive^s places of holy
Scripture said to do the evil of sin: 2 Chronicles. 11.4.
The Rebellion of the ten Tribes against the house of David; 1 Samuel 16 10.
Absolons unnatural Treasons, Genesis 45.5.
and abominable incests; the cruel sale of Joseph by his Brethren, Psalm.
105.25.
the servile thraldom of the Israelits in Egypt, are called Gods Acts, that
he did them, that they were from God: And this is in regard some principal and
chief actions in the evil of sin are Gods; but the guidance and regiment
thereof are wholly his; as will appear from Gods dealing: First, in the
beginning. Secondly, in the progress of sin.

By Gods dealing and action, in the beginning of sin, and that first in the
permission of sin, which is not by any license or Law, for the act of sin
is always taken away from the power of man (as unto an Authority or license to
do it) although he have desire and strength sufficient to do it; By a Law,
and divine prescript, whereby he is restrained that he cannot do a prohibited
act, without sinning against God, who has an absolute power and jurisdiction
over him, and all his actions, as being his creature; but this permission of
Gods is by a suspension of the impediments, which if they were applied, would
absolutely hinder sin, and this permission is by giving, first ability,
secondly will unto man to do that which he has a desire to do, and this
ability is first by continuation of man's life, without which he could not
commit sin: Secondly, by conservation of the means to do sin: Thirdly, by
a provision that a greater power be not opposed unto that ability, or power of
man unto sinning. Fourthly, by a presentation of the object on which sin is
committed.

Secondly, by Gods permission unto the will of man to commit sin; not but
that Almighty God does always present unto the will of man some means to
prevent, and impediments to hinder sin, the very Ethniques having from the
creatures scientia sub alternata, furtherances unto saving grace, and Lectures
to read God unto them, in regard that from principles more known, they might
have arrived unto principles les^e known, h^d they not become vain in their
imaginations, and wholly fixed them upon the creatures, when by them, as by so
many steps they might have ascended unto the knowledge of the Creator, as St.
Paul proves, Romans 1. but seeing the means of grace offered, rejected; God will
not apply others which would absolutely hinder sin; for causes according to
the secret working of his wisdom and power unto himself only known: The
amazing retrocession, John. 18.6.
and falling backward upon the ground of the apprehenders of our Savior, the
dissent of the witnesses in the forged evidences given against him, Mark. 14.56.
the resentment of Pilate, with other even prodigiously concurrent impediments
might have been sufficient stops to stay the progress of the Jews active and
profound malice unto our Savior; all which not having the due operation upon
them, God declines the administration of more powerful impediments to divert
their malice, which notwithstanding God makes to serve unto the great work of
man's redemption:

Gods dealing and action in the beginning of sin appears likewise in the
administration of such Arguments and opportunities as are motiva peccati,
motives unto acts of sin, which if not intended as such by God; yet they
prove such unto the affections of man as the events which depend upon them
show; and these are presented unto the mind of man, his senses external or
internal, either by the mediate and interposing work of the Creatures, or by
the immediate Action of God himself. Thus by the disposition of God, arguments
and occasions were offered unto Joseph's Brethren to beget their hate, and to
consummate the cruel effects thereof against him: First, Joseph brings his
Bretherens ill report unto their Father, Genesis 37.2.4.5.14.28.
next there was Jacobs fond and invidious distinction of him in his apparel;
here Joseph himself, and Jacob his Father by a mediate and intercedent act
give ground for rise unto this malice; there is likewise the immediate act of
God in presenting further arguments thereunto, Joseph's dreams sent by God, and
Jacobs own divine exposition thereof, the oportunities given unto them to
perfect the acts of their hatred; were Jacobs sending him to see his Brethren,
and the passing by of the Midianitish Merchants: The last dealing and action of
God in the beginning of sin is by Gods Concourse, which is necessary to
produce every act, since there is nothing that can have any being, but from the
first and chief cause and being, God, which concourse of Gods, is not an
immediate influence upon the second cause, man; but the action of God
concurrently flowing upon the effect of his creature, man; so that one and the
same common effect, is produced by one and the same concommitant action of God
and man together, being joint efficients, Vid. Scot. 2d. 37. q. 2. sect. Etsi
objicitur.
and neither without the other, and this concourse God denies not unto man,
when he has permitted an Act unto his ability and will; but Gods concourse is
only unto the act as such, not as it is a sin, but an ability to do such a
thing, and this has not the least mixture of evil with the act as sinful;
the malignity consisting in the execution or doing the act of sin; so that
the second cause, man, is causa totalis and solitaria, the whole and only
cause of the effect sin; God being causa potentiae ad actum, of the power as
a strength to commit sin; but not causa potestatis or actus, not the cause of
a Lycense to sin or the Act in sinning: Man then acting without the first
cause, God; it being in man's power then to act or not to act: In this sense the
Psalmist is to be understood, Psalm. 105. v. 25. The Lord is said to turn the
heart of the Egyptians, to deal subtly with his servants: The Egyptians
had ability and will to oppress Gods people, and so far Gods concourse; but
not in their hatred and ill dealing with them, which therefore God severely
punished.

Now the ground of Gods permission unto the ability and will of man to do
evil, of the administration of Arguments and opportunities thereunto, and of
his concourse is the trial of man's obedience unto God: There being planted in
man a receptive power to entertain divine grace, and the means thereof
offered, he being endowed with a capacity to embrace or reject them by his
elective faculty usually called free will, which amounts not unto a previous
natural disposition, much less selfe-ability to do good, the corruption of
natural man's will, always carrying him captive unto sin; but unto a free
concurrence with grace offered, and unto a voluntary power of subordinate
cooperation therewith, in the assistance whereof (only) he has strength to
make resistance against evil, and a possibility of performing prescribed holy
duties, unto which God (in his infinite and mere mercy through Christ, not by
any proportion of work or menit) has by promise ensured a gracious
acceptance, and rewards glorious and eternal. Behold (says God) unto the
Israelits, I set before you this day a blessing and a curse; a blessing if you
obey the Commandments of your Lord your God, which I command you this day, and
a curse if you will not obey the Commandments of the Lord the God. Deuteronomy.
11.26.27.28. So speaks our Savior, He that believes and is baptized shall be
saved; but he that believes not shall be damned, Mark. 16.16. God has done
his part, in that with the Prophet, he has shown us what is good: Michah. 6 8.
If there were no permission of sin, Chrysostom.
then there were no trial, if no trial no conflict, and if no conflict then
no Crown. That which is termed evil or sin (says St. Aug.) being well
ordered and placed in its proper seat, Illud quod mal um dicitur be^e
ordinatum, and loco suo positum, eminentius commendat bonum, ut magis placeant,
and laudabiliora sint bonadum comparantur malis. Aug. Enchi ad Laurent. c. 11.
does more emiminently commend that which is good; in that good things do the
more please, and are more praise worthy, when they are compared with evil
things. Good and badd are before us, we choose the good whilst we strive
against the evil; 1. Cor. 8.12.
for the willing mind is that which procures the acceptance with God; and this
if every man has not, it is through his own default. Th^re is no man to be
excused as though he would, yet could not, Neque enim quisquam poterit
excusari, quasi voluerit, and non potuerit, cum constet cum idcirco non
potuisse, quia noluit. Chrysostom. in ser. de Zachaeo.
when it appears that therefore he could not because he would not, says
Chrysostom And as in the beginning of sin, so Gods dealing or action
appears in the progress of sin, and that in a two fould Act of his
providence; First in the direction of sin: Secondly in the limitation
thereof: God does all things in Measure, Number, Wisd. 11.21.
and Weight: his powerful, just, wise, Wisd. 8, 1.
and sweet Order and disposition of sin appears:

First, in the direction of sin, and that two ways, Prove. 16 9.
first upon that object, secondly, Jer. 10.23.
upon that end God himself only pleases; First, upon the object, as when God
permits not unto a sinner to make every man indifferently the object of his
malice, bu^ such particular persons only as God shall direct him upon: S^tans
malice was directed by God against the strongest, and most perfect piece of
humane piety, Job: The King of Babylon using divination, and consulting with
the intralls whether he should make War with the Ammonites or Judah; Ez.
21.19, 20, 21.
God so disposed the whole course of the Divina^ion, that the signs and
results were for the War against Judah. The divine disposition of a like
attempt, of that most subtle adversary Christianity ever had, is a parallel
instance; such an enquiry of Julians, concerning the success and continuance
of Christian Religion; was answered with the manifest signature of those
Emblemes which spoke Government and Eternity. Nazian. Invect. 1.


And as upon what object God only pleases, so he directs sin unto that
end, he only pleases; and not what the party sinning intends: So Joseph tells
his brethren, As for you, ye thought evil against me, but God meant it unto
good to bring to pass as it is this day, Genesis 50.20
to save much people alive; God designed the Assyrian, the rodd of his anger
against Israel, Isa. 10 6.7.
for their fatherly chastisement and correction in Measure, howbeit the
Assyrian he meant not so, but it was in his heart utterly to destroy, says the
Prophet.

The malice of Herod, Pontius Pilate, of the Gentiles, and Jews, Acts 4.27,
28. Deus voluntate, suas unqe bonas, implet per hominum malorum (...) Suntates
mal^s, (...). 6.191.
against our blessed Savior, were as Saint Peter, and Saint John tell us, by
Gods counsel determined unto the work of man's Redemption: Thus God by the
evil wills of evil men; fulfils his own good will, says Augustine.

The limitation or bounding of sin, is an act of Gods divine providence,
whereby he confineth sin, that it extend not unto the various and boundless
desires of a sinner; but so far forth as God only in his secret wisdom
shall think fit: and this limitation is given unto sin, by the
circumscription thereof within certain periods, of time, for the duration and
continuance thereof; and within set bounds and distances of place for the
extent thereof, God thus putting a certain Measure and proportion unto sin,
both in the guilt and punishment thereof; There were times of ignorance, at
which God winked at, but (there ensued a determined time by God, and that was
the (...),) Now, (says the Apostle) he exhorts all men every where to
repent: Acts 17.30.
the rod of the wicked shall not always rest upon the lot of the righteous:
the Devil had a Commission against Job, Ps. 125.3.
but with a proviso and exception of his life, and therefore is it that God
many times does not hinder wicked men from the sin as unto the intention, Job
2.6.
but in the act, as unto the execution thereof; as God rescued Elias from
Ahaziah, who sent diverse times to murder him: God hindered not Joseph's brethren
from the sin, but from the act or execution thereof: But God hindered David
from the intention, not the act, as a power of execution, 2. Kingst:
when Saul his most confirmed, 1. ^^m 24.6.
cruel, and active Adversary was in his power, and from shedding Nabals blood.

Gods permission of the evil of sin unto the power and will of man; Object.
the administration of arguments, 1. Sam. 25.22.
and presentation of opportunities inciting thereunto, See Eccles. 5. v. 11.
etc.
his concourse with, and his direction and limitation of sin, Ps. 31. v. 8, 9.
seem to speak God the author of sin, Isa. 5.4.
which to think were the top of impiety, and even the apprehension damnable.

God sufficiently hinders sin when he gives forth a known and received
Law against it, Answ.
and convenient means and helps of grace to perform that Law; so that man is
only wanting unto himself: For as unto Gods permission that is not the
efficient cause of sin, (sin being done not without Gods will, Non fit
preler ^jus voluntatem quod etiam contr^ ejus fit voluntatem, Euchir. c. 100.
which yet is done against Gods will, as Aug. tells us.) In regard it is but the
suspension of the more powerful impediments of sin, neither does God by
deficiency, by being wanting unto man, occasion sin; the many offers and
frequent suggestions of Gods spirit always presenting a present and sufficient
assistance of grace, 1. Cor. 12.7.
if it have not been abused, for if we walk in the spirit, we shall not
fulfill the lusts of the flesh, Gal. 5.16. But when we grieve the holy spirit
of God, quench the operations thereof, Ephesians. 4.33.
and do despite thereunto, 1 Thessalonians. 5.19.
it is our own act that it leaves us, and abandons us up unto the evil of
sin. Heb. 10.29.
The administration of arguments, and Presentation of opportunities unto sin,
is no cause of sin, but the known and forewarned trial of man's obedience,
Gods concourse is but unto the act not the sin; ability to do an evil act
being a natural good, Scot ulis^pra.
but the execution thereof a moral evil, Gods direction and limitation of
sin proclaim his power and wisdom: Divina provident^a (...) i^^a dis^^im
(...) pee^ato (...), sed quta ipsa or ^^nat cum pecca^^rint, in Psalm. 7.
most sweetly Saint Augustine, That direction (says he) is to be attributed
unto the divine providence, not that it makes sinners; but that it orders,
and rules them when they have sinned. To rub out this puce grain out of the
ears of difficulty, and make it mandible for any of an intellectual gust,
Gods dealing as unto the evil of sin may by way of similitude, and such as
our Savior himself used, Mat 21.23.
thus be illustrated: A temporal Prince empowers some select subjects, Mat.
24 48.
for their own and the common good, with the disposition of his revenu^s, the
command of his fortresses, and government of his Real^^^s, yet these great
Tru^^ees abuse this power, employ it un^o the pr^judice of their Prince, divest
him of all Regal authority, bear their fellow servants, and commit all
insolences; the Prince thus empowering them is the chief and principal cause
of their ability to do enormous acts, in that he consigned such a power into
their hands, and presented such opportunities for the effecting them; yet the
Prince is not the cause of the enormities committed by Them, for his
concurrence was only unto their own and the public good, unto which they
were empowred, not as unto their sinful actions, which slow from the
perverseness of their own wills, their power was from him and so far forth
good; but the whole abuse thereof was from themselves, and so far sinful:
neither could a trial of their loyalty have been made, unless such a power
had been conferred upon them, the abuse whereof makes themselves the whole and
sole cause of the evil of their sin, disloyalty, and of the evil of the
punishment due thereunto: So is it between God and a sinner; but our temporal
Princes have not so much of omnipotency to direct and limit the abuse of the
power once given, that only can the supreme Monarch, God do; so that they
should trust forth no more power then they were able to direct and limit^: yet
neither is the direction or limitation of this power in them that abuse it.

Thus God does the evil of sin, God is likewise said to do the evil of
punishment, and that by his own infliction of punishment for sin, as an
evil, and because the evi^l: the punishment of sin being an act of Gods
providence, whereby sin according unto the divine justice receives the
reward designed by God as due thereunto, which are pains or punishments,
either temporal or eternal: temporal punishments are either corporal, or
spiritual; corporal punishments are either national, as that irksome and
unavoidable reproach the Jews lie under; the English sweat which followed the
English, Job 34.29.
and none else over the whole World, Zacheut Romans Qu^st. medicoleg
or proper unto a family as Gehazi his Leprosy; pinching want that prosecuted
Elies posterity, and these may be either immediate from God, such were the
Egyptian plagues, Exodus 8.19.
which are therefore called the finger of God: such was the Pestilence in the
time of King David, termed the hand of God, 1 Kings 24.14.
because that in such judgments the action of the first cause God is only
visible: So likewise the works of the Devil against mankind, as possession,
or sudden disasters wrought by him, are called Gods hand, Job 19.21.
so Job acknowledges them, because a spiritual instrument less apparent is
employed by God.

Corporal punishments are also mediate, wherein the action of second and
inferior causes are more visible, although they do but serve and are
subordinated unto the action of the first cause God, such are sicknesses of the
body, loss of things temporal, poverty and the attendants thereof,
nakedness, hunger, thirst, and that huge route of common calamities attendant
upon mankind; such are the oppression of a Nation by an enemy, with the many
sad effects thereof, of a particular person by an Adversary, with the
distastefull consequences thereof, in both which there is the divine justice
inflicting the evil of punishment upon a people or person, for the evil of
sin, by a mediate and isntrumental cause; which only act in the power of
the first cause; from whom their power receives its duration or continuance,
and the extent of the magnitude or greatness thereof: Sie fit ut malus (...)
and malus Angelus divina providemia mili ton^, sed nes^^^^ quid bons de ill^^
op^r^tur D^^^s, lib, de Agone Christ^^, 7, Isa. 10.5. Is^. 10.10, 26.
So it comes to pass (says Aug.) that both wicked men and evil Angels serve
the divine Providence, but they know not what good God works by them. Thus the
Assyrian is called the Rod of Gods anger, wherewith he whipped the children of
Israel, the Razor by which he would shave them; Midian a scourge by which God
would correct his people: God punished David by Saul, by Absolon; Solomon by
Jeroboam, this is an employment which God has for malicious men, which all
that profess Christ should observe, that oppressors and malicious adversaries
the ordinary iustruments, whereby God will punish particular persons, are
declared by the Psalmist to be the wicked which are Gods sword, Psalm 17.13.

Since all these judgments immediately or mediately are from God, Object.
and are the due punishments of sin, we ought no ways to prevent or oppose
them, for who has resisted Gods will, but to submit unto the increase of
infirmities, the growth of calamities, the tyranny and force of enemies
National and personal, and this course will be the dissolution of all Estates.

In the providence of God in the punishment of finne, Answ.
there is a twofold respect considerable: First, the act of Gods revealed will:
Secondly, the Act of Gods secret will: When the mentioned punishments are
inflicted upon us, it is evident that they are for our sins, they are the
acts of Gods revealed will; but of what continuation or extension they shall be
of, we know not, that is the act of Gods secret will: and therefore (after
humiliation before God) we should seek remedies against ing^uent infirmities,
prevent emergent calamities, oppose the invasion of an Enemy, Psalm. 118.17.
and the encroachments of an Adversary.

Spiritual judgments in this life inflicted and done by God, the evils of
punishments for the evils of sin, are as when one sin is punished by
another, or so as when a former may prove the occasion or cause of an ensuing
sin, and thus do sinners proceed from evil to evil, Ephesians. 4.18.
as the Prophet speaks, Jer. 9.3. Obstinacy and malicious continuance in
sin, Romans 1.21.24, 26, 28.
is punished by darkness of the understanding, and hardness of heart, a
giving men up unto the lusts of their own hearts, unto vile affections, and
unto a reprobate mind, yea the proportion of Gods judgments is most
observable, the resistance and grieving of Gods Spirit, 1 Samuel 16.14.
is punished with the dereliction of Gods spirit, the want of the assistance of
grace, and immission of an evil spirit, as in Saul and the Sycophant Prophets,
Deus induravit cor Pharonis non, in sundando malitiam, sed subtrahendo gratiam,
Aug.
so God hardened Pharoahs heart, not by infusing sin, but by substracting
means of Grace so often abused.

Elies sons would not hearken unto the voice of their Father, because the
Lord would slay them: Sometimes to do in God (says a Father) is in anger to
permit that which he has forbidden to be done: Aliquando facere Dei, est id,
quod fieri prohibet irascendo permittere: Greg. m. l. 25. in Job c. 13. Quis
tam impie desipiat ut di^at, D^um malas bominum voluntates, quas voluerit,
quando volu^rit, ubi voluerit in bonum non posse convertere, sed cum facit per
misericordiam facit; cum autem non facit, per jndicium non facit, Enchir. c. 98.
Can any man be so wickedly foolish as to say. That God cannot convert unto
good the evil wilt of men, which he will, when he will, as he will, but when
God does so, he does so in mercy, and when he does not so, in justice he does
not so, says Aug.

Eternal judgments the evils of punishments for the evils of sins, are
either pana damni, the punishment of the loss, which is the eternal want of
the most glorious, comfortable and beatificall vision, of always beholding the
face of God (the greatest torment of the damned) or pana sonsus, the tormente
to be inflicted upon the soul and body described unto us in Scripture, by
unquenchable fire, flames, everlasting burnings, intolerable heat, weeping,
wailing, gnashing of teeth, chains, perpetual darkness, the never dying
worm of conscience; from all which,

Good Lord deliver us. The evil here meant especially, is the evil of
punishment, and of all temporal punishments, the greatest, War; as appears
by the proclaiming thereof by the sound of a Trumpet (that warlike Instrument)
v. 6. by the tumults and oppression it should occasion, v. 9. by the poverty
and devastations it should bring with it, v. 11. War is the evil of
punishment for the evil of sin, inflicted by God, for it is God that
creates peace, and makes evil, says the Prophet Isa 45. v. 7. that is
War, as from the Antithesis in the place, in the opposition of evil (of
which War is a species) unto Peace appears: War is a destruction come from
the Almighty, Isa. 13.6. all calamities occasionable by War in the many
woeful eff^cts thereof, murder, desolation, rapes, rapines, poverty, hunger,
nakedness, violent death, with all that hudge rabble of the ill favored
miseries that wait upon that, are the sour fruits of sweet sins, the evils
of punishments for the evils of sins, the Lord does them: War is Gods rod
with which he whippeth a people for the evil of sin, Isa. 10.7. and more
sharp then Famine or the Pestilence it self; 2. Sam. 24 13, 14.
it never happens without Gods direction, being Gods sword in an enemies hand,
cz. 21.9. The Assyrian General Rabsekeh tells the Garrison of Jerusalem, Ez.
21.9, 10, 11, 12.
that it was God sent him to destroy that place: 2 Kings 18.25
Ecclesiastical History tells us, that a certain devour Monk meeting
Athalaricus the Goth upon his march toward Rome endeavored to persuade him to
spare the City, and not to make himself the author of so many miseries, S^zom.
li. 9. c. 6.
and evils as would ensue; unto whom the Barbarian replied, that he undertook
this thing unwillingly, for there was one who urged and commanded him to
destroy Rome: If men were wise (says Saint Aug.) those sharp and hard things
which they have endured from their enemies, Cum potius deberent si quid ricte
saperent, illa quae ab hostibus aspera, and dura perpessi sunt; illi divinae
providentia tribuere, quae solet corruptos hominum mores bellis, emendare, and
conterere. Aug. C. D. c. 1. l, 1.
they would attribute unto the Divine Providence: which uses to amend and
break the corrupt manners of men by Wars: So that we see War, the evil
here especially intended, is the evil of punishment, for the evil of sin:
The last enquiry then will be to know why God is here said to do this evil,
(the evil of punishment, War) in a City: The City upon which God here
threatens to bring the evil of punishment (War) upon, was the City of
Samaria; the Metropolis of the Kingdom of Israel, v. 12. A place wherein
nature and Art equally contended which should contribute the greater strength
unto, being situated upon an hill, and therefore chosen by Omri for the chief
seat of his new erected Sovereignty: 1 Kings 16.2^
This City in humane conjecture, by all advantages placed far above the
gunshot of danger; God here subjecteth unto the fury of War. To do the evil
of War in a City, especially in such a City; notably magnifies the power of
God in punishing, and shows the greatness of his punishment it self.

First it advances the power of God unto the highest pitch of our
consideration, in that Cities far above all other places seem secured from
the fury of War; Kingdoms and Countries (in which are great number of poor
Villages, and a dispersed (for the most part) naked people in scattered
habitations) lie open to the fury of Invasion, and inroads of Enemies, whether
Foreign or Civil; Citizens can more suddenly join together, as being people
more contracted into a near neighborhood of dwelling, which besides that it
begets familiarity and affection, common interest and preservation linkes them
together, and engages them unto mutual offense and defense; besides this that
Citizens and people of the same City, are united in one language and speech,
the same Laws, a like liberty in one form of government, and in a concord in
Religion; (then which nothing can more strongly unite a people: Nibil G^^man^s
Dei culto^e^ aqu^ inter se conciliat, atqui ^on ^^^^tes de Deo sententia. Na^^
Orat. 1. de pace.
) all which serve as so many strong ties and indissoluble bands to bind
Citizens together in the common opposition of an Enemy; and in the prevention
of the miseries of War: Add hereunto, that Cities are compacted, and rich
Circuits, fortified with walls and works strengthened with ports, furnished with
Towers and ^or^s, stored with money, ^^^^ition, and all warlike preparations;
all these accommodations seem to speak Cities impregnable, and may make
Citizens d^^^efea^^, and the fury of Wa^^^ and so probably did Samaria, for it
c^uld not be forced ^y Benhadad the King of Assyria his ^^t^ge Host; though
preached with u^ paralleld ex^remi^^^^ of Famine, in the Reign of Jeho^am, 2.
Kings 6. and ^^^^^ards endu^^d a (...) y^ar^s S^ege, by Shalmaneser 2 Kings 17.
(...) the evil of War upon such a City, seems aspec^^^ (...) of Go^s power.

(...) the greatness of the punishment, wh^^^ i^ Metropolis and m^^^er City is
lost, the stake of the whole Kingdom seems left and when the rage of War
(...) upon a City, scarcely any ^scape with life^ Kingdom and Countries yield
many hiding places, diverse C^ve^^s shelters, and safe retirements, so that
mary even in the hear of War do secure their persons, and so (...); there
being less of danger in losing a batt^ll in the field, then a City in an
assault; as we may observe in the Benjamites of Giboah, ^udg^^^. 47. Joshu^ 8.
and the Citizens of Ai; for in a City th^^ is sto^med none can promise to
himself life, much less his fortune, both lying at the mercy of the
me^c^^^sle soldie^s: and so fared it with the strong City of Samaria, as the
Prophet in the 12 v. prophesied, those that hid themselves in the most secret
corners should after be plucked out by the ears: It was not many years after
that it was taken by the King of Assyria, all the inhabitants thereof led
away captive into a far Kingdom, new Colonyes placed in their stead, ^ Kings
17.
and Israel destroyed from being any more a Kingdom: And this was the evil of
punishment, War, for the evils of their sins: The Prophet Amos shows us
what these evils of their sins; that is, their National and particular
evils of sin were, which brought these evils of punishment War, upon them:
That Samaria abounded with all manner of sins which beget punishments, is not
to be doubted: But those nototions and particular evils of sin that brought
this evil of punishment upon the Kingdom of Israel, especially the Metropolis
thereof Samaria, are brandmarked forth unto us by the Prophet, in great and
legible letters, to be four. Amos 2.6. And these were,

1 Oppression, Amos 2.6. and Amos 5.7.10. 2 Sacrilege, Amos 2, 8, Amos 4, 4. 3
Corruption of the worship of God, in Doctrine and Discipline, Amos 2, 11, 12. 4
They had no sympathy or fellow feeling of the sufferings of their brethren,
they were not grieved for the affliction of Joseph, Amos 6, 6.
These were the evils of sins which brought the evils of punishments War upon
Samaria.

We have now had (as the Israel^^s ^^^ir Manna) this portion of Gods word laid
out before us in the Doctrinals, Exodus 16
let us (as they did) gather every man according unto his eating, collect what
befits our several practice^ hence then are we informed:

First, of the great wisdom of God, (for the trial of man's obedience, and
the examination of his subjection unto him, and the divine rule of his will) in
the permission of the evil of sin, the administration of Arguments and
presentation of occasions herunto, and his concourse therewith.

Secondly, that Gods permission of the evil of sin and sinful actions, no
ways inferres his approbation of, or any ways make him the Author of sin,

Thirdly, the infinite wisdom and power of God is shown in the direction and
subordination of the evil of sin, unto his own holy will, and the
limitations of the evils both of sin and punishment, in the duration and
extension thereof unto his own good pleasure, which eminently serves unto the
great illustration of Gods glory: To bring good out of evil, that being an act
peculiar unto Gods omnipotency: Man must not do evil that good may come of
it, the direction and limitation of sin is not in him: That is Gods work, we
must let it alone for ever: It is he only who can bring good out of evil; who
has judged it better to bring good out of evil then to permit no evil at
all; Melius judicavit Deus de malis benefa^^re, quam mala nulla permittere:
Neque enim Deus cum sum bonus, ^ilo modo sineret, mali esse aliquid in
operibus suis, nisi usque ad o esset omnipo tens, and boxus ut benefaceret
etiam de malo. Euchir. s. 27.
for God being most good would suffer no evil to be in his whole works,
unless he were so omnipotent and good, that he could bring good out of evil,
says Saint Aug.

Fourthly, hence likewise may we be informed of the great justice of God; for
the evil of sin in inflicting the evil of punishment, which whether
temporal or eternal, corporal or spiritual, immediate by Gods own hand, or
mediate by Satan, or wicked persons Gods instruments, are all from God the
direct consequences of sin, and effects of divine Justice; for the correction
and amendment of sinful men, or their destruction.

Fifthly, hence likewise may be discovered the stupendous malignity of the
evil of sin, which drags upon mankind so numerous and horrid punishments,
all which do not yet satisfy the justice of God against sin, which that alone
sacrifice of Christ Jesus, once offered up a ransom and satisfaction for our
sins only does; in whom alone God will be well pleased with us.

Sixthly, Here we also learn that War is one of the principal evils of
punishment for the evil of sin:

Seventhly, that to bring the evil of War upon a potent City, argues both
the greatness of Gods power, and of that punishment: This likewise checks and
confutes,

1 The great impiety of such Christians, (if they may be so called) who would
make God the Author of sin.

2 The Manichees, who would have God to divide the government of the World with
the Devil; Epiph. Ha^es. 66. and Aug. de Ago. Christ. cap. 4.
fancying two Beginnings of all things without Beginning; one of good, God, and
the other of evil, the Devil; that these two did all things, the one all
good, the other all evil; whereas we see that the permission of sin is from
God, and that the whole order and Regiment of sin depend upon his singular
Providence.

3 Hence also (against the Manichees) that sin is the only evil and not the
Devil; Joh. 17 ^. 1 John 5.18.
for although the Davil be called the evil one, he is not so meant in the
state of his Creation (in which all Gods creatures are good) but depravation;
for he was placed by God in the front of the most perfect creatures, Naturae
omnes quoniam naturam prorsus omnium conditor sum bonus est, bonae sunt.
Ench. c, 12,
and therefore called Lucyfer the morning Star, the chief of the ways of
God, but from the corruption and malignity of his evil will, he is called the
^vill one, because he first brought the evil of sin, both into Heaven, and
into the earth: Isa. 14.13.
But the Devil say they sins from the Beginning, 1 John 3, 8, Job 40 19.
and therefore he was created evil: Isa. 14.14.
the Devil says Saint Augustine is not to be thought to have sinned at the
instant or beginning of his creation; Genesis 3.5.
but he sinned at the beginning because from his Pride sin began: Diabolus
non ab initio ex quo creatus peccare putandus est sed ab initio peccat, quod ab
ejus superbia caperit esse peccatum. Aug, l, de civi, D, l, 11, cap, 15,
Institutione Dei bonus, sua malus 26, cap, 26, Joh. 6.70. Joh. 8.44. Vbi supra.
by Gods ordination he was good, through his own will he became evil, and
whereas Judas in Scripture is called a Devil, and some of the perverse Jews to
be of their Father the Devil; It is to be understood that they were such by
immitation, not Nature, says Epiphanius: The Devil can do no evil of
himself or by his own power, for as unto the evil of sin, he cannot by any
inward suggestion or operation, or immutation of the phancie or senses (unless
in case or possession) promote it, neither can he any wise cause sin, but
either by persuasion thereunto, or proposing some thing as desirable. The
D^vill conquers or overcomes no man but by a fellowship in sin; Demon non
aliquem vincit aut subjugat nisi societate p^ccati. Aug de C. D. l. 10. c. ^1.
when sub signo by outward signs, he discovers the inward affections, and can
present objects suitable unto them, and can only promote sin, qua ad actum,
Tho. Aq. 1. secundae q. 75.8.
as unto the act, non qua ad peccatum, not as unto the sin: As for the evil
of punishment, the Devil is only the executioner of Gods wrath, for the evil
of sin. Devils (says the Wise man) are the spirits of Vengeance, Eccles.
39.28.
which in their ^^y lay on sore strokes, in the time of destruction they pour
out their force, and appease the wrath of him that made them: The Devil can
do no more, then he has warrant for from God, who has his Hook in his
Nostrils, Job 41.2.
and suffers him not to act any thing without his special Commission; Mark.
5.12.
he could not enter into the Swine without our Saviors license; so that
although the will of the Devil is always most unjust, yet his power is
always most just, for the boundless malignity of his corrupt will is from
himself, but his power still from God the fountain of justice, who directs
and limiteth it. God as he is the most good Creator of all good creatures
(says Augustine speaking of Devils) so he is the most just Orderer of all
evil wills, Deus sicut bonarum creaturarum optimus Creator est, ita malarum,
voluntatum justissimus Ordinator est, ut cum male illae utuntur Naturis bonis,
ipse been utatur etiam voluntatibus malis. Aug. de Civit. D. l. 11. c. 17.
that when they use their good natures evilly, he uses even their evil wills
happily.

4 Hence likewise may be refuted that grave and supercilious error of the
revived Stoiques of our times, who hold an inevitable Destiny, chained unto all
actions and events, by an indissoluble necessity; whereas we see, the evil of
sin is by permission only, and the evil of punishment is but the
consequence of that, which in it self is but Accidental.

5 This likewise serves a ground of confutation of such who hold Contingency
and Chance in all things sublunary, unto which unchristian opinion they would
gain Authority from that of the Wise man; That in all things there is Chance,
Eccles. 9.22. Which is to be understood unto mere humane conjecture only,
and for that the certain causes of events (like those of Sympathy and
Antipathy) are hidden from us, which otherwise have their proper causes; for
God is not Otiosus rerum spectator, a looker on only upon humane affairs, and
like Gallio to care for none of those things that happen upon earth; for his
infinite and always ever active Providence extends even unto the most mean
and interior of his Creatures; even the least lot that drops into the lap is
disposed by him: Prove. 16.33.
Sparrowes are not so gotten by him, the Lilies of the field are cared for, and
the hayres of our head are numbered by him: That is, to show us, that whatsoever
men account must vile and despicable is governed by divine Providence. Hoc enim
dixit, volens ostendere, quicquid vilissimum homines putant divina providentia
Gubernari. Aug. l. de Ago. Christiano, cap. 8. Deus qui nimiru^ dum sit se^per
omnipotens, sic intendit omnibus ut adsit singulis: sic adest singulis, ut
simul omnibus nunquam desit. Sic summaregit ut ima non deserit, sic imis
presens est, ut a superioribus non recedat. Gre. M, in Job l, 16, cap, 5,
That of holy Gregory's is an ample and pious acknowledgement of the plenitude
of divine Providence. God says the Father, being always omnipotent, so heeds
all things, as though he were present with every thing; he is so present with
every single and particular thing, that he is never wanting unto all things
together: and a little after, he so governes great matters, that he forsakes
not small things; he is so present with inferior things, that he goes not
from great matters.

From this joint survey of the evil of sin, and of the evil of punishment,
we may perceive, the convenienty of all Christian and earnest exhortation unto
all men; carefully and industriously to decline sin, to flee it as the only
hurtful thing unto us, the evil of sin which encompasseth us with so many
evils of punishments, and this we may endeavor by the practice of these short
directions.

First, By a Christian and awefull circumspection, and an holy jealousy over
all our actions, that sin insinuate not into, or mix it self with them; this
will preserve us in the first onsets or beginnings of sin, whether by open
invasion, or by secret attempt, and practice, and this we may do by a curious
and daily examination of all our actions, to take the most strict account of
them we possible may; Next to make an even reckoning each day, by unfeigned
Repentance unto God, of these our daily trespasses and debts, in thought, word,
and deed, which engage us unto these spiritual payments, the evils of
punishments, for the evils of our sins; this course will free us from the
dominion and servitude of sin, in sinning, in the inclinations unto sin,
and in the punishments for sin.

Secondly, By most humble, earnest, and frequent prayer, for the divine
assistance of Gods spirit, against the evil of sin; prayers (like Jonathans
arrows) never return empty without some supplies of Grace to aid us against
sin: This course will cause continual discoveries of sin, and of the
danger thereof unto us, and defend us against the power thereof; especially let
us pray that when opportunity to sin is present with us; God then in mercy
would take from us a will to sin; and when we have a will to sin God would
graciously remove the opportunity from us, and interpose such powerful
impediments that we may not complete an act of sin (especially of a
grievous sin) against God.

Thirdly, Let us strive to gain the power of a godly habit, by a constant and
continued practice of all holy and pious duties, contemplative and practique;
this will make sin odious, and the acts of piety most delightful unto us,
surely the many evils of our past and impending punishments, may serve as so
many powerful arguments to prove the necessity, and persuade unto the dractice
of their Christian duties: How have we been whipped, and sharply scourged by
God through War? How has God for our sins denied success unto the most
just cause; and rendered our Loyalties as useless and unserviceable unto our
Prince, as prejudicial unto our selves? Dan. 8.12.
how far has he stretched his permission unto our more sinful
Adversaries to oppress us engaged in the most righteous Quarrel? It is Gods
punishment for our sins, it was Gods act, it is from him that a people are
minished and brought low through oppression, affliction, and sorrow; Psalm.
107.39.
whence we may see that although, the will and malice of our Adversaries has
been most unjust against us, yet their power has been most just, because
that was from God; (as Saint Augustine speaks of the Romans against the Jews)
Their wickedness was made Gods Axe to hew us: The wicked man puffs at his
enemies, Impietas eorum tanquam securis De^ facta ^st. in Psalm. 73.
because Gods judgments are far above his sight, says the Psalmist; their
power was to punish us for our sins; the consideration whereof may serve a
just ground to exhort us unto these Christian acts ensuing.

First, unto a submission of our selves unto Gods will, in all our pressures:
Secondly, unto the principal application of our selves in them unto God:
Thirdly, unto a patient expectation of Gods mercy and succor in them:
Fourthly, unto a breaking off from those sins have occasioned them.

First, Let us cheerfully submit our selves in all these past and impending
calamities unto the will of God: Aged Ely when those terrible judgments were
denounced against himself and his family, thus resolves, 1 Samuel 3.1^.
It is the Lord let him do what seems him good: So holy David in his flight
from the unnatural conspiracy of his son Absolon signifies his submission,
and the ready resignation of his own will unto Gods will; Here am I (says he)
let the Lord do unto me as seems good unto him: 2 Samuel 15.26.
Wherefore should a man complain for the punishment of his sins, Jer. 3, 39.
Such are all our present calamities unto us, and shall we receive good at the
hands of God, and shall we not receive evil, says Job unto his foolishly
repining Wife? Lupus the Bishop of Rome saluted Attila, Job 2.10.
who depopulated Italy, with a salve flagellum Dei, welcome thou whip of God: A
due regard unto the providence of God, without which nothing can happen unto
us, is the best lenitive in all dolorous Occurrents; this like Moses wood will
sweeten Ma^a, the bitter waters of afflictions unto us; this is a sure stop
unto all inordinate griefs, and intemperate sorrows, it does fit and
establish our hearts, and discharges them of that great sin of murmuring
against God, as in David, I was aumbe, I opened not my mouth (says he) because
thou did it: Psalm. 39 9.
This conforming of our own wills unto Gods will, brings to pass that we stand
perfect and complete in all the will of God, Col. 4, 10. and will purchase
unto us the supreamacy of all temporal blessings, an unspeakable contentation
in all the things of this life, either by a most thriving and happy exchange of
our own weak and perverse wills, for Gods most perfect and blessed will; or it
will procure a condescension in Gods will unto our wills, in either of which we
shall archieve those victorious Prophees, which always wait upon that most
glorious triumph due unto a Christian conquest over our selves; so speaks the
conscientious Hebrew. Do his will as thy will, Fac voluntatem, ejus sicut
voluntatem tuam, ut ipse faciat voluntatem tuam sicut voluntatem suam, fac
voluntatem tuam sicut voluntatem ejus, ut ipse irritam faciat voluntatem
aliorum, propter voluntatem tuam. Drusins vet. sap. Gno.
that he may make thy will as his will; make thy will as his will, that he may
frustrate the will of others, for thy will.

This conformity of our wills unto Gods is the absolute and free Monarchy of the
eternal Monarch God in our souls, whose alone service is perfect freedom:
This is the gift and assignation of our hearts unto God, whose just demand it
is. My son give me thy heart; he has given all unto God that gives this.

Next this gives an indefezible right unto Heaven: not every one that says
Lord, Lord, Mat. 7.11.
shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, but he that does the will of my
Father which is in Heaven: 1. Joh. 2.17.
The World (says Saint John) passes away, and the lusts thereof, but he that
does the will of God abides for ever: And unto this cheerful submission of
our selves under the good hand of God, let us add:

Secondly, An immediate application unto Almighty God, and an humiliation of
our selves before him, from whom these judgments come, Job. 16.2^
that he would in mercy reverse them; this was holy Jobs practice, My friends
scorn me (says he) but mine eyes pour out tears unto the Lord; because it
was God that permitted his friends to scorn him: so King David when foul
mouthed Shemei cursed him. David replies unto Abishai, that would have killed the
Rayler; Let him curse because the Lord has said unto him curse David: 2 Samuel
16.10.
Thus Jehos^phat environed with the multitude of his enemies, cries out, Lord
we know not what to do, but our eyes are upon thee; 2. Chron. 20.12.
but alas how many of us like mad dogs bite at the stone, and look not at
the hand whence it was flung? whereas if we had recourse unto God as the first
cause, he would reverse the decree against us, as he revoked the Commission
given unto the destroying Angel in King David's time: Let us thoroughly humble
our selves before God for the evils of our sins, and the evils of our
punishments will cease: Micah. 6.8.
When we walk humbly with our God.

Thirdly, Let us have a patient expectation of Gods mercies and succors unto
us; Rom 5.3.
patience is the proper and divine effect of affliction; Psalm. 51.18.
God in his good time will do good unto Sion and build the walls of Jerusalem;
and this appointed time with Job we are to wait for: Wait on the Lord, Psalm.
27.14.
be of good comfort and he shall streng then your heart, surely the patient
abiding of the meake shall not miscarry, but bring forth a joyful and mature
issue; the frequent reading, Ps 62.5.
and meditating upon the 37 Psalm, will easily suppress the sedition and
mutiny of our murmuring and repining thoughts, at the prosperity of violent
men, who shall not be established upon earth: But let us with holy David, Ps.
123.2.
as the eyes of servants look up to the hand of their Masters, and as the eyes
of a may den unto the hand of her Mistress so let our eyes wait upon the Lord
our God, until he have mercy upon us.

Lastly, Let us break off the former evils of our sins, which have drawn
these evils of punishments upon us: It is holy Jobs counsel, surely it is meet
to be said unto God, I have borne chastisment, Joh 34.31, 32.
I will not offend any more; that which I see not teach thou me; if I have done
iniquity I will do no more: Saint Paul when he was struck down unto the earth
by God, cries out, Lord what will thou have me to do? Acts 96.
he was then forbiden to persecute Christ and to be converted; so we being
smitten by the hand of God, if we enquire of him what he will have us to do,
answer will be made us, That we must not persecute Christ, or crucify again
unto our selves the Lord of life by our sins, but break them off by
righteousness, and repentance, Dan 4.27.
and be converted that God may heal us; Gods judgments heretofore like
Jonathans signal arrows with David were shot beyond us, Acts 3.19.
but now they are come on this side of us; so that most of us may say with Job,
I have heard of thee by the hearing of the care, but now mine eye sees thee;
Job. 42. (...) 56.
we have heard of God in his judgments toward others, but now our own eyes
see him in his judgments upon our selves; let every of us then with Job say,
Wherefore I abhor my self and repent in dust and ashes.

If we desire a list of those sins for which God punishes a people with
War, the evils of our present punishments, serve as an Index to refer us
unto them.

First, Our inordinate excess in meat and drink, and luxury, in apparel,
Is. 5.11, 12 and 25, ^6.
War and desolation always wait upon this sin, so the Prophet Isaiah cap. 5.

Secondly, Our unthankfulness for temporal benefit^, plenty and the good
things of this life, this sin is attended with War for a punishment
thereof, Dent. 28.47, 48. Because thou servedst not the Lord thy God, with
joyfulnesse and gladness of heart, for the abundance of all things, therefore
shall thou serve thine enemies, which the Lord shall send against thee, in
hunger and in thirst, and in nakedness, and in want of all things.

Thirdly, Our disobedience unto, and neglect of the good word of God, so much
read and preached amongst us; this sin brings War upon a people: As against
the Jews, Dent. 28. v. 45. Because they hearkened not unto the voice of the
Lord their God, to keep his Commandments and his Statutes which he commanded
them, v. 48. Therefore should they serve their enemies.

Fourthly, The general contempt of the Clergy, Gods Lot, whose contempt God
interprets his own, and will always punish: War is the close comerade unto
this sin; this sin brought destruction upon the Kingdom of Judah, 2 Chronicles.
26. v. 16, 17. They mocked the Messengers of God and despised his words and
misused his Prophets, until the wrath of the Lord arose against his people
until there was no remedy; Therefore he brought upon them the King of the
Caldees.

Many good men free from the least taint of these recited sins, Object.
have notwithstanding been deeply plunged in the miseries of War.

Besides that, Answ.
that the best of Gods Saints may with the Lepers cry, Unclean, unclean; that
Gods judgments (who can do nothing unjustly) are a great deep; that the
sins of our Progenitors (of which we are a part) or an approbation of sin,
or neglect of the punishment due thereunto in our power, Dan. 12 10.
may involve the best of men in temporal punishments: Rev. 2.10.
) All afflictions and calamities are not punishments for sin, some are for
the trial of faith, and the addition of grace and glory unto Gods children:
All things shall work together for good unto them that love God (says the
Apostle) Rom 8.28. The love of God is the sole sovereign corrective of the
vitulency of affliction, and makes it wholesome and beneficial unto us:
Divinely Saint Augustine. Those that love God, In omnibus cum bonum invenient,
sive emendantem, sive consolantem, sive excercentem, sive purgantem, sive
Illuminantem: In Psalm. 124.
shall find him good in all things, whether (by afflictions) amending them,
comforting them, exercising them, crowning them, purging them, or enlightening
them.

But there is yet some thing lodged in those words seems to guide us to a
further application; the Prophet speaks of bringing the evil of War upon a
City: That City was Samaria, the Metropolis of the Kingdom of Israel, and are
not those sins which brought War upon her, visibly reigning in London our
Metropolis: Samaria was chosen the seat of the new erected Kingdom of the ten
Tribes of Israel, who withstood the Kingdom of the Lord in the hands of the
sons of David. 2 Chronicles. 13.8.


London is chosen the seat of a new Antimonarchicall Government, by such who
withstand the Kingdom of God in the hand of the son of King Henry the
seventh, who united those bloody differences in the Houses of York and
Lancaster, and of King James the peaceable, who united the Kingdoms.

Samaria was the chair of violence and seat of oppression, Amos 3.10, 4.
the Inhabitants of Samaria stored up violence and robbery in their Palaces,
they oppressed the poor and crushed the needy; their wealth and power served
them unto oppression; and has the wealth and power of this City of late been
more happily employed? have not these been the chief Instruments to oppress a
most gracious and pious Prince, to crush his poorer party, and overpower a good
Cause? so that besides that they have divided with us in the guilt of those
War-boading sins, inordinate excess in meat and drink, luxury, in
apparel, unthankfulness for, and disobedience unto the word of God, and
contempt of Gods Ministers; yet has this City outvyed, and outbid us for Gods
great judgment, (War) by one sin more then we, oppression: and herein
equald Samaria in her sin: God in mercy prevent that she partake not with
her in punishment, and grant unto this City timely repentance to prevent those
great calamities which (as thick clouds bespeake rain and tempests) by many
sad prognostiques ate threatened unto her: Look upon her now, (not without
earnest bowels) divested of all those things, wherein she promised unto her
self security, wherein she trusted, and in which her great strength lay; unity
of affection is lost in her, there being so many different Abettors of matters
in Faith, as were diversity of opinions among the Heathen Philosophers about
the Summum bonum, August.
which are reckoned above three hundred: Religion (the most firm and fast knot
of concord) as in the Church of Sardis. has a name (in her) that it is living,
Rev. 3.1.
but it is dead; for that having itching ears she has multiplied unto her
self teachers, who differ as much in their judgments, as the builders of
Babell at the division of tongues, did in their language, scarce two of them
speaking the same thing: Her ancient Laws are turned into the arbitrary power
of her passionate Rulers, her glorious Liberties and Privileges are upon their
deathbed, and at the last gasp; the menaces of private persons being able to
extort more Treasure from her, then by the entreaties of her borne Sovereigns
in many ages could be borrowed from her: her chief strengths are made
cautionary, her munitions aliened, her works and fortifications slighted:
Behold her now (not without pity and tears) like poor Sampson, luld asleep
by the Harlot Dalilah, the hands of her Government tied behind her, ready to
have the large and fair Nazarite locks of her great and growing wealth quite
cut off, the eyes of her Religion pulled out, and then she will be forced like
him to grind (...) the Mill for others food, be subjected unto slave^^ (...),
and no ex^ectation of a fre^^^on^^ (...), bu^ w^^h burying her self with the
Authors or (...) wo^^ (...) heir common mines: O Lord by the power of thy gr^c^
effectually move the hearts of the people of this City unto repentance, that
thou, O Lord, may remove from them th^se thy impending pu^nshments. Our
Prophet to prevent this punishment of War from Samaria, in ^he person of God
speaks unto that City thus, Seek ye me and ye shall live, Amos 5.4. So if
this City seek God in her fo^^er purity of Religion and his worship, and her
former in^eg^^ty of loyal affection unto the image of God in place and person,
his sacred Majesty, she shall live and continue in her ancient luster and
happiness; otherwise it is no Enthusiasme from the evils of her sins, to infer
the evils of her punishments; God grant that as among this people she was the
first in the transgression and sin, so she may lead the way unto repentance in
obedience.

But for these mighty Ones, A^o^ ^ 1.
The Kine of Bashan, that have nestled themselves in the Mountain of our
Samaria, let them as in a small Map behold the vast continent and large and yet
undiscovered Regions of the evils of their sinne^; see if they have not
outstript the Grandees of the Kingdom of Israel in all their impieties.

Did oppression ever cry more loudly unto Heaven then now, did ever any
professing the name of Christ so afflict and oppress their poor brethren as
these men have done? and that for conscientiously (for the greater part)
adhering unto their Sovereign Lord; have not they oppressed the servants and
subjects of our Lord the King, with insupportable ^ines, cruel mockings,
filthy poverty, heavy bonds, close imprisonments, i^kesome banishments, violent
deaths? Surely were all History utterly lost, the present sufferings of the
best Subjects would abundantly furnish posterity with as various as true
examples of those many miseries mankind is subject unto; and as though it were
not enough with the Samaritane Potentates, Amos ^ 8.
to drink the wine of the condemned; to glut and full gorge themselves with
their fines and fortunes, or as though the many prejudices sustained by War
were too little, like Syllas victory, the period of this war comes greater
cruelties against them: peace contends with war in cruelty and has overcome
it, Syllana victoria, etc. finite jam Bello crudelius in pace grassata est,
etc. Aug. de C. D. ^. 3. c, 28. Pax cum Bello de Crudelitate certavit, and
vicit: Illud enim prostravit Armatos ista nudatos. Bellum erat ut qui
feri^batur si passet feriret, pax autem non ut qui evaserat viveret, sed ut
moriens non repugnaret, ibid.
for that overthrew armed men only, this naked men. The condition of the war
was that he who was wounded might strike and wound again; but the condition of
this peace is, not that he who escaped the fury of war should live, but that
dying he should make no resistance: Yea it notoriously superads unto the
malignity of all their insolent oppressions, that they impiously and impudently
countenance them with the face of equity, thus (as the Rulers in Samaria)
turning justice into wormwood, and establishing iniquity by a Law: and of what
an infinite extension this their iniquity in oppression is, appears, Amos 5.7.
in that it not only reaches unto men's lives and temporal estates, Psalm.
94.20.
but even their souls and that great interest of future blessedness; in the
committall of that sin of far more visible deformity and worse aspect even
then murder, Sacrilege; Presbyteros, the Priests, but with Apostata Julian,
ipsum presbyterium, the very Priesthood it self, killing both Learning and
Religion in the root, by the taking from it that double nourishment ordained by
God for it, both the reward of maintenance and of honor, 1. Tim. 5.17.
Ecclesiastical endowments and dignities; and to further this sacrilegious
design, they have as Jeroboam cast out the Priests of the Lord, the sons of
Aaron the Levites, the Orthodox Clergy, 2. Chron. 13.9.
(who have left their possessions to adhere to the house of David, 2. Chron.
11.13, 14.
and preserve Loyalty) and made unto themselves Priests of the lowest of the
people; the lowest and most despicable, either in ability or integrity, because
these low men prove the best setters for their sacrilegious purposes, and
therefore as Jeroboam did, that they may have the cheapest and least costly
Religion, and that the surplusage of Church endowments may come into their
private purses, they allow every man to be his own Priest, unto that end
tollerating all schisms and heresies, and patronizing even Ignorance it self,
which cannot but beget superstition, and that will introduce popery, so that
these pretended Patriots build up what they seem to pull down, and make
themselves transgressors; yea this their sin, sacrilege, is yet of a more
horrible influence, if we consider the probable operation it will have upon
posterity, unto whom it threatens Atheism and Irreligion, not only a false
Religion, but even no Religion at all: and with this concurs their,

Corruption of the received worship of God in Doctrine and Discipline: that
ancient doctrine of Christ Jesus, his Apostles, Mat. 22.21.
and of the Primitive Church, the necessity of Christian obedience unto the
supream^ Magistrate, 1 Pet. 2.13, 17
they have (like salt that has no savor with them) cast out of doors and
trodden under feet; Romans 23.1, 2.
what horrid impr^ties do they broach publicly in their Pulpits, in making
God the author of their sins, from his permission argue his approbation, from a
natural power to do an act; infer the divine justice and equity thereof: That
an undertaking is holy and lawful because answered by success, that the
accomplishment of their passionate wills is Gods blessing and goodness unto them:
what is Turcisme if this be not? (...). ^2.25.
Thus do they daily use force unto the holy Scriptures by a most pr^posterous
and wicked application of all the promises, of God unto themselves, and their
irreligions practices, and a denunciation of the threats and punishments in
Gods word, unto such as arrive not at the same pitch of impiety with them that
most select choice of heavenly prayers, judiciously culd out of the best
Liturgies of the Eastern and Western Churches, elder (then what they reproach
it with) Popery, received with our first and only true Reformation, approved
by Gods blessing our Kingdom in their use, which reached all our necessities,
with which God and his people were acquainted, to every clause whereof we could
safely say Amen. [the book of Common prayer and Adinistration of the
Sacraments] these men have (not without ^^^oody violence) cast out of their
Synagogues, and in stead of these introduced long, tedious, often repeated and
unpremeditate, rash and ^umultuary prayers: Mat. 6.7.
exploded by our Savior, checked by Scriptures, E^cles. 5.2.
forbidden by Councels and the Doctors of the Church: H^s. 14.2.
How can a sober devotion accompany that exp^^ssion, Council 1 Bracar. Can. 30.
Council. Milever* c. 12.
it is not yet possessed with until it come unto a period; and then perhaps an
assent can hardly be gained unto it? how can a new fashioned and unknown
apparel of zeal be fit shaped unto our thoughts? Aug. in Ps. 8^. Greg M. in
^ob lib. 22. c. 2.
or how can we be acquainted with the piety of those petitions the Preacher
himselse knows not before they are mustred by his utterance for a full
sentence. Are not the greatest part of their prayers, unshapen Embryons of
their passions, fond expostulations with God, thin, useless and weak Cobwebs
of their fancies, and in those for the Kings Majesty, there is not so much of
prayer for him, as of Satyr to abuse him: that ancient form of Church
government Episcopacy (the fence of the Church and Church men) derived in a
continual series from Christ's Apostles unto these times have they suppressed,
and most injuriously and falsely stigmatized Antichristian.

Tantae molis erit Romanam condere Gentem: So deerly is the erecting of this
new and Antimonarchical government like to coslus, so they may arrive at their
own ambitious ends, they care not if Heaven and Earth meet together and the
old Chaos of confusion succeed; this is the cause why,

They have no sympathy or fellow-feeling with the sufferings of their brethren,
it is not to be marveiled at, that they Joseph, Amos 6.6.
their eldest brother, (for he had the birthright) and for the best of men,
their Prince a true Joseph; having sustained the same injuries from his people,
that Joseph did from his brethren: for Joseph going out to enquire of his
brethrens welfare; Genesis 37.
first they mock him, secondly they strip him, thirdly they endanger his life,
and lastly they sold him: and how has a packt and prevalent party under the
specious pretensions of making him a glorious Prince, of enlarging his
Revenues, of reforming Religion, restoring of liberty and property unto the
subject, mocked him (who went to see them in a condescension unto their good)
stripped him of his Regal power, often hazarded his life; and if his own
brethren sold him not (and if they did this Joseph will easily be reconciled
unto them) yet these men (sad experience shows us) bought him: The virtues of
this Joseph our Sovereign is too excellent a piece to be copied out by an
unskilful pencil; yet I may adventure without impertinency or digression from
the spiritual features, and divine graces in Joseph (taken out of the
Scriptures) to show you how as perfect paralels and equal lines they
concentrate in his sacred Majesty: Joseph's memory should be precious, and his
afflictions grievous unto his brethren for his prerogatives and virtues, and
that in these respects:

First, for the honor given him by God (the birthright) for although Reuben
were Jacobs natural Heir, and Judah his spiritual Heir, Gen^ 48.22.
yet Joseph was Jacobs actual Heir; what Jacob recovered by his Sword and his
bow out of the hand of the Amorites, was assigned unto him and his posterity.

Secondly, for his exemplary chastity and fidelity.

Thirdly, for his predictions, and providence in saving his Brethren.

Fourthly, for the cause of his sufferings.

Fifthly, for his patience in his sufferings.

Sixthly, for his easiness to forgive his Brethren who had injured him.

Our Sovereign Lord and Prince was honored by Almighty God with the
Birthright and Crown of three Kingdoms, of unblemished chastity, and
untainted fidelity in that trust and charge reposed in him by his Master God,
of his Church and people, witness his denial of subscription unto the Acts for
the Abolishing of Bishops and sale of Church Lands; and those other Acts lately
presented unto him, wherein the Liberty and property of the subject were so
much concerned: By subscription unto which he might have purchased his Liberty;
how often has he foretold of the destructive courses of those who stand in
opposition unto him, and with what providence has he withheld his concurrence
with them to save the Kingdoms from destruction? what have been the causes of
his sufferings, but that he has been so conscientious as not to join with
these men in their oppression, sacrilege, corruption of the worship of God in
Doctrine and Discipline; and that he has had a sympathy and fellow feeling
with the sufferings of his subjects whom he resolves never to abandon? and of
what a sweet facility and divine easiness he is to remit and forgive all the
injuries and insolences of his people against him; his frequent offers of an
Act of Indemnity sufficiently speak: Yet notwithstanding all these divine
Prerogatives and virtues of our Joseph, these men are not grieved for his
afflictions: great and heavy afflictions indeed if we consider his violent
expulsion from his unquestioned Patrimony, and right of regal government, his
restraint from Gods house, the place of Gods public worship, the Church, from
the Ministry of the Priests of the Lord, the Orthodox Clergy, from the
fellowship of his royal Consort, his most beloved wife the Queens Majesty,
from the society of those dearest pledges, his sweet Children, from the
attendance of his faithful servants to be narrowly confined and imprisoned,
and (which is worse then imprisonment) to be necessitated, to converse with
beasts after the manner of men savage and barbarous persons; can any sorrow be
like unto this sorrow? is not this to be Vir dolorum, a man of sorrows and
acquainted with grief, and to lie under the heaviest burden of afflictions?
yet for all this (as if they had been nursed up by Tygars) these men are not
grieved, but rather exult and rejoice in the afflictions of this our Royal
Joseph.

These are the evils of these men's sins, the words of the Prophet will warrant
me the boldness of a short expostulation with them: Surely they will not deny
but their disobedience is clearly checked by the word of God, and the best
interpreter thereof (the practice of the Primitive and purest times) So that
they have no power as unto an authority, or lycense to run courses of
disobedience unto their Sovereign Lord; and for Gods permission unto their
power and will, as unto an ability, they cannot thence infer the equity of their
actions, seeing such power and even successes themselves, are punishments for
sin, where the act is not licensed by God and grounded upon divine authority:
but these men cannot plead a full permission unto their ability, God daily
opposing powerful impediments unto it; by War the dissent of his sacred Majesty
the resentment of their fellow Subjects, differences and fractures amongst
themselves; so that notwithstanding their long and deep contrivances, their
dissembled pretentions, knotty Covenants, huge preparations, vast and strong
confederations, they cannot perfect their impious intendments; (God in mercy
unto the three Nations oppose sufficient impediments unto them) and although
arguments are offered, and opportunities presented unto them; yet they shall no
ways have the direction, limitation, and disposition of this prodigious Twin;
The powerful pride and armed envy of these last and perilous times; Sovereignty
and Church maintenance; for which (as the Roman Soldiers did for Christ's Coat)
they cast Lots for; shall never come into their hands, but if ever (even then
for the greatest punishments) it will come unto them like Joseph's Coat, torn
and dipped in blood; useless and bloodily: God give them grace to repent of this
their wickedness if perhaps the thoughts of their hearts may be forgiven them;
Acts 8.22, 2^.
for they are in the gall of bitterness and bond of iniquity, otherwise as
they have been like unto the Samaritane Potentates in their punishments. Amos.
4.2. The Lord God has sworn by his holiness that lo the day shall come upon
you, that he will take you away with Hooks, and your posterity with
fish-hookes. Let them not longer triumph in our miseries; we justly refer the
power given them unto God, and acknowledge our sins the causes of our
calamities; they were the rod in Gods hand to scourge us, he directed and
limited their malice against us, Psalm. 124.3.
otherwise they had swallowed us up quick when their wrath was kindled against
us; we have learnt that God sometimes by wicked persons exercises good men,
Aliquando Iratus homo apprehendit virgam jacentem in medio, fortasse
qualecunque sarmentum: cadit inde filium suum, ac deinde projicit sarmentum in
ignem, and filio servat haereditatem: sic aliquando Deus per malos erudit
bonos, and per temporalem potentiam damnandorum, exercet disciplinam
liberandorum. Aug. in Psalm. 73. Prove. 16.7.
and by the temporal power of them that are to be damned, disciplineth them
that will be saved; we comfort our selves in this assurance that when we have
thoroughly humbled our selves before our God, he will make our most potent
enemies to be at peace with us; they shall not have a will, or if that, not a
power to hurt us: When the French recovered Callis, a Commander of that Nation
jeeringly demanded of an English Captain, when would the English recover that
place? who religiously replied; When your sins are greater then ours: And this
was but an extract out of the divine dictate of our Prophet, to seek God that
strengthens the spoiled against the strong; so that the spoiled shall come
against the Fortress. Amos 5.8 9.
The Psalmist assures us that if we hearken unto God and walk in his ways,
Ps. 81.13, 14.
God will soon subdue our enemies, and turn his hand against our Adversaries;
Is. 9.4.
the Prophet Isaiah, that God will break the rod of our Oppressor, and that
his wrath and anger shall cease in their destruction, God shall break in
pieces our Oppressors, and cast his rod into the fire; Isa 10 25.
and make us again families like sheepfoulds, and bless our later end more
then our beginning; Ps. 72 4.
the Hypocrite shall not longer reign, Job 42.12.
nor the people be ensnared: Or if there be a further punishment due unto our
sins, Job 34.30.
let us not forfeit a good conscience, but know that these calamities are
punishments due unto our own sins, and not unto so just a cause as our
Loyalty, and (if it shall yet so please God) further to afflict us in the
pursuance of that, make Mauritius the Emperor his choice (though with the same
punishment, the extirpation of himself and his posterity;) Potius hic Domine
quam ibi; 1 Chro. 19.13.
Lord let us rather be punished here then hereafter, much rather temporally
then eternally. I conclude with these divine advisoes unto all Loyal Subjects:
First that in these public calamities which require humiliation, they fish
not in troubled waters or seek great things for themselves, but acknowledge
Gods mercy, in that he has given their lives unto them for a pray: (in stead
of all the ambitious ends their fancies embraced in these broils: Je^. 45 5.
) Next that like that true mother they would save the life of the controverted
Child, which is living, not to dispute whose is the dead, but labor to
compose (what in them lies) the present unhappy occasions of differences and
distempers, 1. Kings 3.
(without relation unto former) and piously and passionately endeavor to beget
unity and concord, to preserve what is living of the three bleeding Kingdoms
from ensuing destruction: Lastly, that by true and unfeigned repentance in
amendment of life, they would take off from the general Talley of their
sins, which score up so many evils of punishments against them, that we
ceasing from the evils of our sins, God may surcease the evils of our
punishments. Which God through his infinite mercy effect by the power of his
holy Spirit in us all, and let all true hearted English men say, Amen.

FINIS.

