The TRIAL OF Mr. John Gerhard, Mr. Peter Vowell, and Sommerset Fox, by the
HIGH COURT of JUSTICE sitting in Westminster Hall on Friday 30 June, 1654.

With their Charge, AND A DECLARATION of the particulars of the whole PLOT to
have murdered His Highness the Lord Protector, and those of the Council,
Seized on the Guards, the Lord Mayor, and others, and proclaimed Charles
Steuart King.

With the names of each person chief in the Design, and what each of them did
act, and were to do therein.

And the Testimonies of the several VVitnesses upon Oath, which were Mr.
Wiseman, Mr. Hudson, Robert Dale, John Hipwell, Col. Aldridge, Charles Gerhard,
John Man, Francis Fox, Mr. Wharton, Mr. Barnes, and Mr. Minors.

And the several pleadings and proceedings of their Trial

Taken in Writing in the Court by one present at their Trial.

London, Printed by Robert Ibbitson in Smithfield. MDCLIV.

Friday 30 June. 1654.
THE High Court of Justice met this day in the Painted Chamber.

Mr. Bond prayed with them about half an hour.

The Court then sat, and presently adjourned to the Court of Chancery prepared
for their sitting; The Lord Commissioner Lisle was President, Mr. Phelps Clerk,
Sergeant Glyn, Mr. Prideaux, and Mr. Ellis Council for the Commonwealth.

The Court was called (each member by name) and the Ordinance impowring them
read. The Prisoners to be tried were.

Mr. John Gerheard Gentleman. Mr. Peter Vowel, Schoolmaster of Islington. And
Summerset Fox.
Summerset Fox was first called to the Bar, and an Indictment of High Treason
read against him, for joining in a traitorous Design to have murdered his
Highness the Lord Protector and diverse of his Council, Proclaimed Charles Stuart
King, seized on the present Guards and Forces, involved the Nation in a bloody
war, etc.

Summerset Fox did ingenuously confess the Charge against him upon the main, to
be true, and that he is guilty.

Then Mr. John Gerhard, and Mr. Peter Vowel were brought to the Bar, and an
Indictment to the same purpose as that against Summerset Fox, read against them.

They pleaded not guilty, and denied every thing.

Vowel said that he required a Jury of Twelve of his equals, it being a Law
confirmed by Magna Charta; and according to the sixth Article of the Government
by the Lord Protector also, that Law being not repealed, and therefore that he
might be tried by his Peers.

The Lord President told him, That the Members of the Court were his Peers, not
his Superiors but his Equals, and that they were present near twice twelve as
he saw; And that they are to proceed by the power of an Ordinance before them.

It was also told him by Sergeant Glyn that he had owned the Jurisdiction of
the Court, in pleading not guilty.

Vowel said, he was a man ignorant in the Law, and desired advantage might not
be taken of his weakness.

The Attorney General Prideaux said none desired to take any advantage of any
thing, wished they had not brought themselves into these troubles; that they
were there in the name of the Lord Protector and the Commonwealth of England to
accuse the Prisoners at the Bar, and to bring in their proof, and the prisoners
were to defend themselves as well as they could, And when both sides were
heard, it was to be left to the Court to determine, and to judge between them.

And it was declared that the plot was to this effect.

That the Plot was to seize on the Lord Protector and murder him, and some of
the Council and others, and Proclaim and bring in Charles Stuart, Son of the
late King, to be King, which bloody design was to be effected thus.

That the first hatching of the Plot was in England by Mr. Hinshaw, who was one
of the chief plotters, and others; Mr. Hinshaw went over from England to
France, to acquaint Charles Stuart (whom they called their King) with the
Design, and Mr. John Gerhard about that time went over to France also, who had
told Mr. Hinshaw that he would do nothing in it until he had first had
approbation from Charles Stuart, Mr. Wiseman was also then in France with them.

Address was made to Prince Rupert, and the Design made known to him; desiring
him to communicate it to (him they called) the King, who accordingly did, and
brought Mr. Hinshaw to him, But Charles Stuart at the first delivered his
Judgment in the thing, that he was at present unsatisfied at that time to go
on in that design for three reasons.

1 Because it would be dishonorable to him in the esteem of other Princes, in
case such a thing should be known, and should not be effected, to come in in
such a way.

2 Because it did not seem to him to be feasible, but unlikely to be effected.

3 Because it was not at that time seasonable.

But Prince Rupert afterward did much encourage and persuade, That the design
might be carried on, and promised all assistance.

Mr. Hinshaw and Mr. Wiseman returned into England, Mr. Gerhard stayed there a
while longer, but some weeks after came back also; Mr. Hinshaw declared to his
confederates here in England what overtures had been with Charles Stuart, and
that Prince Rupert had engaged to send ten thousand Scots, English, and French,
and the Duke of York to come with them to land in Sussex, and other places, and
that there would be Forces enough ready to assist and join with them.

Mr. Hudson the Minister was thought on, to have Letters of Credence from
Charles Stuart, who sent a Letter to him, and that which he desired in case the
Plot had taken, was to be made the Master of Suttons Hospital, which Mr.
Hinshaw promised him.

One Master Phillips also, and others were treated with about it, and Master
Gerhard returning from France, the Plot was resolved to be carried on, which
was to be effected thus.

1 They were to seize on the Lord Protector, and Murder him, and to do this
work they should take the opportunity of his going to Hampton Court, which he
used to do every Saturday, with a small number slenderly armed; and those that
were to do this were Master Hinshaw, and Mr. John Gerhard with thirty Horse Mr.
John Gerhard to bring twen^y five Horse, and Mr. Hinshaw five, which either of
them were to engage; Mr. Gerhard was something cautious, not to discover who
they were he engaged, before an Oath of secrecy was given, but twenty five he
had undertaken for.

Mr. Hinshaws five were himself, Mr. Tuedore the Apothecary, Mr. Wiseman, Col.
Aldridge, and another, and then to seize on the Tower of London, and to go on
with their work.

2 If that failed, To seize on all the Guards about Westminster, which they
thought two thousand five hundred sufficient to do, and carry on their work
here about London; and for that purpose Mr. Hinshaw, Mr. Gerhard, and others
viewed the Mews and the rest, and was heard to say, What a pity it was that so
slender Guards should not be seized on, and that when the Soldiers were at
Nine-pins in the Mews, it was but shooting off a Pistol, and presently to fall
on.

3 The last way to have it effected to be thus, That when the Foot Regiments
that are for the Guards about London were Mustering in Tuttle Fields, as they
use several times to do, to come into Tuttle-Fields and meet them there as of
their own party, and when they have laid down their Arms to seize upon them,
and have others to be ready at the same time every where to perfect the work.
And for this purpose, if they acted this way,

Col. Finch with a party of two hundred was to fall into London, and do the
work in the City.

Major John Gerhard to fall on White Hall,

Col. Hinshaw to fall on the Mews,

Col. Daniel with two hundred to fall on Iameses,

Another to fall into Southwark.

And one Billingsly, a Butcher at Smithfield bars, with a Party to fall upon
Islington; and it was pressed that the opportunity might not be neglected.

And that the work might be the more feasible, they considered how as many of
the Soldiery as might be, might be engaged in the business. And the Papists
(who had a great hand in the design) gave information of two Soldiers of the
Army, that used sometimes to come and hear Mass, and these two they sent a
Papist Woman to, who engaged them, and their direction was, To give
intelligence at Mr. Hudsons house, whither Mr. Hinshaw and others of them
frequented.

Master Vowel was cautious being a solid man, for his work was not to bear Arms
but as a Privy Counselor to them, and he was to engage Mr. Billingsly the
Butcher with a Party to seize the Lord Protectors Horse at Islington, and him
Mr. Vowel recommended to be a very fit man for that work.

And they had this Art, to endeavor to make the Lord Protector odious to the
people, in turning the design upon him by a Libel, which was scattered up and
down London, that his Highness and the Army had a design to Mass^cre all but
their Friends in all parts of England, and this Libel was written by Mr.
Fenshaw, which was got printed by one in Newgate-Market, and Mr. Vowel had one
of them.

When the design was discovered, and Mr. Gerhard and some others apprehended,
Mr. Vowel being at Mr. Hudsons house, it was said by him, That the design might
still go on, though some were discovered; Mr. Hinshaw and Mr. Wiseman came to
him to Islington to his House, from whence they went to drink their mornings
draught, Mr. Vowel said, There were enough to do the work still; Mr. Wiseman
said, There were many Horse to fall on; Mr. Vowel said, It might be easily done.

One Wharton in Black Friars was to proclaim Charles Stuart King, and Col. Finch
was to seize on the Lord Mayor, and make him to proclaim him; Somerset Fox and
others were to raise Prentises to join in the design, but the Lord Protector
going by Water dis-appointed them.

Mr. Vowel then said to the Court, That they were not his Peers because they
were his Judges, and therefore desired a Jury of twelve of his equals.

Mr. Predeaux answered, that so a Jury are the Judges, though they be the
prisoners Peers.

The Witnesses against the Prisoners at the Bar were called for.

John Wiseman was sworn, and being required to give evidence what he had to
say touching the Prisoners at the Bar, avouched the Charge against them, and
said,

That he was with Mr. Hinshaw in France, who did communicate by Prince Rupert
to Charles Stuart the design, as is before expressed.

That he saw Mr. John Gerhard oftentimes with Mr. Hinshaw while he was in
France, and that he told him in England, That there was a Plot to fall on the
Lord Protector, and to bring in Charles Stuart to be King, and to the rest of
that design as is before expressed. And about three weeks after he met Mr
Hinshaw, and Mr. John Gerhard, and they went to Jamses, and the Mews,
White Hall, and other places.

That Mr. John Gerhard told one Mr. Minors of the business, and how they were
to fall on my Lord Protector, and so as before is expressed.

Then Mr. Gerhard interrupted him, saying, How should this be done with a
company of Geese.

To whom Mr. Predeaux answered, That he knew best how it should be done, and
wished he had never known it, nor gone about it.

Mr. Wiseman went on in his Evidence, and said, That Mr. John Gerhard being at
Mr. Hudsons house, did there speak about the Plot to fall on the Lord
Protector, etc.

That he had dispute with Mr. Hinshaw (whom the said Wiseman calls Brother by
some relation) That such a time, and so, and so, would be seasonable
(mentioning some particulars.)

That another day he heard Mr. John Gerhard say, That he was to command the
Party, and had a Pistol that would discharge three several times, Mr. Hinshaw,
and several other persons being then by; and that he doubted not but it would
be seasonable, That there were to be about 30 persons to fall on the Lord
Protector, that his brother Hinshaw said he was to bring five, and Mr. Gerhard
25 to do the work, and named the five aforesaid that his Brother Hinshaw was to
bring, and that his Brother Hinshaw told him that Mr. John Gerhard was to
surprise the Lord Protectors person.

And when the Plot was discovered, he heard his brother Hinshaw say, that they
that were taken were all of Gerhards party and none of his, and that there was
a Libel printed to turn the plot on the Lord Protector as is before expressed:
and that his Brother Hinshaw and Mr. Vowel had some of the Papers.

That on Wednesday after it was discovered he was at Mr. Vowels house at
Islington* and his brother Hinshaw was there, and they went to the Kings head
to drink, and there his Brother Hinshaw said, that the business might go on for
all it was discovered, many Regiments in several parts being ready rise, enough
to carry on the work.

Mr. John Gerhard, and Mr. Peter Vowel the Prisoners at the Bar still denied
all, and said it was not true that he said.

Then Mr. Edward Hudson a Minister that is blind was sworn, who said that Mr.
Hinshaw desired him to write two or three words to the Scots King, and that Mr.
Hinshaw related all the business to him of the design, and the three Objections
by Charles Stuart, and P. Ruperts answer afterward, and the three ways to
effect it, very much agreeing with the particulars aforementioned; ( which
need not be here repeated again, because it was the same as before)

When he came to particulars touching the Prisoners at the Bar, he said that
Mr. Vowel was his intimate friend, one that he had been much beholden to, and
might have perished had not he relieved him. That Mr. Hinshaw sought to engage
Mr. Vowel, but he answered that he thought himself to be unfit, That he said
he did not relish. What Mr. Hinshaw and he did agree he knows not, What he
heard was from Mr. Hinshaw, That they did meet accidentally, That he did
suspect Mr. Vowel to act, but was not sure of it, That he did suppose they had
concluded, but was not sure of any thing* That Mr. Vowel said he was himself
unfit to engage, but he would engage a friend if he could, That M. Vowel said
there were agree it many horses at Islington which might be surprised, that he
would try what he could do, but whether he did any thing or not, he knows not.

Mr. Hudson denied some things be confessed upon oath before Col. Goff Justice
of the Peace.

Col. Goff was sworn, He testified that the Examination (which was produced in
the Court) was all written from Mr. Hudsons own mouth, and after it was
written, it was read to him, to the end that if there had been any mistake it
might be altered, and was all by him owned upon his oath, that it was freely
testified, and nothing in it extorted from him.

Mr. Hudson said that he was pressed, and that he then said these words, Do not
thus afflict an old distressed man, that has nothing but afflictions upon him.

To which Col. Goff answered, That at first Mr. Hudson denied all, and would
confess nothing until he heard the whole business confessed by another, and
that all that was pressed to him was to discharge his conscien^e in speaking
the truth, and that when he heard another to confess the Plot so fully, he
desired to be heard again, and then did freely confess according to the
Examination.

In the said Examination Mr. Hudson declares the whole Plot, and the
proceedings in France, Charles Stuarts objections* P. Ruperts encouragement, the
three ways to effect it, and all the particulars of the design as aforesaid,
etc.

And how M. Vowel spoke with M. Hinshaw* M. Wiseman and the 2 Soldiers, that
Mr. Hinshaw said there were many Cavaliers in Town in the Plot, but would never
speak two together, that some relished it well, others doubted. But in some,
that it was agreed to seize on the Lord Protector and the Guards, go with Drums
and Color to White-hal, and the rest of the particulars for bringing in
Charles Stuart, for all the witnesses do much agree, etc.

In the said Examination he also said, that Mr. Hinshaw said that they would
set up Major Genesis Brown to be in the head of them, by a Letter which they hoped
to get from Charles Stuart, and believed that he would accept of it, he being a
friend to the King, as they called him.

That it was propounded to M^. Vowel, who did consent to do something in it,
and did afterward meet some six times at Mr. Hudsons house.

That Mr. Vowel engaged Billingsly the Butcher aforesaid to be a considerable
man, discoursed with him of the number of horse, and Billingsly said to him
that the horses at grass might be easily seized.

That Hinshaw told him and Vowel, after Gerhard was taken, that none of his
party was taken, and that the plot might go on, that the French, English, and
Irish from P. Rupert were to land at Rye and other places in Sussex.

The Lord President asked Mr. Hudson whether he did own it, to whom he
answered, that they were together, and such and such things were spoken, but
how far Mr. Vowel consented, he knows not.

Then Mr. Robert Dale was sworn, who declared against Mr. Vowel the Prisoner at
the Bar, that Mr. Vowel came to his house, and asked him what Arms he had, he
told him two Pistols, he said he would buy them of him, he asked for what use,
he said that he would tell him hereafter.

That he came with Mr. Hinshaw, and Mr. Wiseman several times to his house,
who did declare that they had a design to fall on the Lord Protector (and so in
all the particulars agreeing with the rest touching the whole business of the
design how it should have been done, as has been before expressed.)

And that Sir Gilbert Pickering, Mr. Strickland, and two or three more of the
Council were named that should be cut off.

That they invited him to assist them, and would have engaged me to fall on in
the se^zing of them at Islington, and they said there was one to head them,
which they should know afterward, and he said that Mr. Vowel heard these
things, And that at another time Mr. Hinshaw, Mr. Wiseman, and Mr. Plunket met
with Mr. Vowel.

And his Examination was read.

That Mr. Vowel asked him whether he had any Arms to accommodate friends, he
said two Pistols (and the rest of the discourse as now he had spoken before the
Court) only the Examination mentioned a third person of the Council, viz. Man,
Genesis Lambert also to be cut off. That they were provided of an Head, and bad
him therefore be sure to rise when he had notice. Then Mr. Hinshaw seeing two
men passing along by where he was, supposing them to be Soldiers said, they
should be killed, and he said that Planket would give notice when they should
be ready upon the design to fall on, And that he was engaged to get as many as
he could to assist in the work, That Vowel brought Hinshaw to his house.

John Hipwel, one of the two Soldiers in the Plot being sworn, said, That a
Papist Woman brought him to Mr. Hudsons house, where he met with them, and one
told him; That he had something to discover to him if he could join in it.

That he was examined how strong the Guards were, and that Regiment of which he
was, and said, the Regiment were 1200; He was asked what Ammunition, and other
such like questions, to all which he gave answer.

After some discourse he told him, That it was to fall on the Lord Protector,
and on the Guards, etc. and so told him the whole design, which he related to
the same purpose as those before.

That he was bid to enquire what Cavaliers were in the Regiment, and among the
Soldiery, and drink with them, and do what he could to divide the Soldiery,
and to make what Party he could for this work, and that when the time should be
for action, the Word should be, FALL ON.

The next morning hearing some were taken Prisoners, there was much sorrow.

Ye see the Papists sat at the Helm of this Plot, and they directed where to
find help.

Then Col. Aldridge was sworn, who said, That Mr. Hinshaw revealed there was a
design to have fallen on the Lord Protector, and brought in Charles Stuart to be
King, and related the particulars much to the purpose as is before expressed, and
that Hinshaw asked him if he would be one; That he made some queries about it,
but Mr. Hinshaw told him, They had great hopes of accomplishing it, and that
there was an Officer of their own in the Tower that should free the Prisoners,
and put Swords in their hands, and that all should be done upon an instant, and
that then they should have money enough.

Had all men's estates become their prey, they indeed would have had much, but
what a sad condition would England then have been in?

Then Mr. John Gerhard was caused to withdraw a while.

Mr. Charles Gerhard was next called for, to see what he could say touching the
Plot, who declared, That Mr. Hinshaw had been in France with Charles Stuart, and
his Brother John also, and Mr. Wiseman had been there, and made a Narrative of
all the proceedings there, agreeing with the rest before; and spoke also of
several meetings at Ludgate-hil, and Covent Garden; how he met Col. Finch at
the P^a^zo, who told him of the design to kill the Lord Protector, seize on the
Guards, the Lord Mayor, etc. proclaim Charles Stuart King; and the rest of that
story of their design, in which he agreed with the former. And that he declared
to him, That they were Listing apace, and they had many joined hereabouts. That
Col. Deane had listed all that day, that he himself had listed some; That Col.
Finch had a Party to join with him in the City. That another time he had
further discourse again with him about it, that they were to meet the next day,
and then it was also said, That Finch was to command a Party, and that his
Brother John Gerhard also was to command a Party, and that his Brother John was
then by, and heard this discourse; and that it was said there was ready about
London to seize on several parts in all, about two or three thousand, That Col.
Finch was to seize on the Lord Mayor, Col. Dean on James^s, Col. Haines on Col
Ingolsbie in Southwark (and so named other particulars like what is mentioned
before) Told him also the management of the design in France (agreeing with
what is mentioned before) and said. He had a Commission from the King (as he
called him.) And he spoke also of their meeting at Beliavage at Ludgate-hil,
where mention was made of his Brother John Gerhard, and that Somerset Fox was
there, and engaged in the design, and his was to get in all the Apprentises he
could to join in it. That at another time Hinshaw said, they had listed two or
three thousand.

Then Mr. John Gerhard was called to the Bar again where he appeared with the
other two. Mr. Charles Gerhard was then sworn, and upon his oath gave in
evidence, after his Brother was brought to the Bar, That the design was to fall
on the Lord Protector, etc. (he gave a short Narrative as before) and further
said that his Brother John Gerhard had been in France. John Gerhard Prisoner at
the Bar said he confessed it, that he was in France, when they were there, and
was sometimes in their company, but denied that he knew any thing of any plot.

Mr. Charles Gerhard being desired to go on further, said, That Mr. Hinshaw was
several times at his lodgings, and his Brother with him, and talked with him
of the design, which his Brother scrupled, but he told him that if it could be
accomplished the King (as he called him) would like well of it, That his
Brother met Mr. Hinshaw at Covent Garden, who had pen and Ink before him, and
talked of the numbers and other particulars, his Brother John then in the Room
(and he named the particulars as before) But his Brother did not relish it, and
was pressed by them, nor did he know that he consented to act.

Mr. Prideaux told Mr. Charles Gerhard that he did well to be as sparing as he
could against a Brother, only be careful to speak the truth, though with the
fairest interpretation, because Conscience is nearer than a Brother. The Lord
President also said, that he was not to look upon either the greatness of men,
or the relation of a Brother in this thing, but to look upon his Conscience,
and to look up to his God.

John Man was sworn, who declared the Design in general, (as the rest, all
agreeing) and that Mr. John Gerhard and others had consulted about it.

That being asked if he would engage in it, he answered yes: That afterward he
went to Belsavidge, but when he came there, there were Somerset Fox and others,
and they said he could not have admission, for several were apprehended about
it, and they knew not what to do, William Dod was sworn, who gave in evidence,
that on Thursday morning in Whitson week, Somerset Fox told him that there was
a design (as aforesaid, giving him an account of the whole, still all agreeing)
But he told him that it was to be kept secret. And that they were to meet about
two a clock in the morning about it. That at Bellsavidge he met with Somerset
Fox, and his cousin Fox the next day again, and had the like discourse. Francis
Fox being sworn, gave in the like evidence against his Cousin Somerset Fox, and
that he was invited to join with them, but could not tell what to do.

John Wharton was sworn, who said, he keeps a Victualling house in Black
Friars, and that a Gentleman, a stranger* came to him, and asked him if he
would serve the King, and fell in discourse about his calling; that he told him
he had married a poor widow: And that the Gentleman told him that if the
Design went on, he might have money enough, and said that he would find him
better employment. The Gentleman's name, he said, was Hinshaw, as he heard
afterward. And that he told him he would not be long before he came again.
He said that he did believe they had designed to seize on the Lord Protector,
and all the Horse guards. But for his part he was, when they should give him
notice of it, only to proclaim the King, that was all that he was to do.

Mr. Barnes was sworn, who spoke of the Design in general, much after the
same manner as those before.

Mr. Minors was the last Witness sworn, who gave evidence, that Major Hinshaw
told him of the Design near Covent Garden, and one Mr. Harison, Tuedor, and
others, were mentioned. That he asked him if he would join in it. That
afterward he met with Hinshaw in the Palace yard at Westminster, who told him
of the Design, as before. And that Major John Gerhard was to command a party,
and that the business was then in good forwardness, but Major John Gerhard
thought it could not yet be accomplished.

And that when Mr. Hinshaw heard that Mr. John Gerhard was taken, he said that
he might thank himself, for had not he delayed it, the business might have
been done two days before.

The Prisoners at the Bar were then asked what they had to say for themselves?

Mr. John Gerhard said he was falsely accused, and that the Witnesses did not
speak truth, and denied that he had any thing to do in the Plot, or knew of it.

Mr. Vowel did require of the Court to be allowed pen, Ink and paper* the
Copy of his Charge, and Council to advise him what defense to make for
himself. And pleaded Magna Charta again, as before, and the sixth Article of the
Government of the Lord Protector.

Sergeant Glyn declared, that an Ordinance being declared Law until the
Parliament shall repeal it, is to give the same authority to it which is to an
Act of Parliament, every Act being a Law no longer. That the Laws of old of
Treason against the King are of force (were this new Ordinance not in being)
For it means the Supreme Governor; though it names only a King, it has been
made use of for Treason against a Queen, and so is to be touching a Lord
Protector, or any other Supreme Governor.

Mr. Ellis Council of the Commonwealth, produced in Court the Government of
the Lord Protector, in which that very Article in the conclusion of it, has a
proviso to the 30th Article.

The Attorney General Prideaux declared, that the Charge having been so fully
proved against them, yet they could not but take notice of the ingenuous
confession of Sommerset Fox; but were sorry to see such obstinacy in the other
two, after such a barbarous and bloody design; that they should show no signs
of Repentance: And therefore in behalf of the Commonwealth prayed for Justice
from the Court against them.

The Court adjourned into the Painted Chamber, and Ordered that they should
have pen, Ink and paper, and any friend to come to them that they should
desire in the presence of the Lieutenant of the Tower.

The Court adjourned until Tuesday next in the afternoon.

FINIS.

