TREASON AND REBELLION Against their Native Country justly rewarded upon
several Traitors and Rebels lately executed in SCOTLAND.

Certified by an Express in two Letters dated at Saint Andrews, Jan. 26. 1645.

Together with a Declaration of the General Assembly of the Church of SCOTLAND.

Published by Authority.

LONDON, Printed for Robert Bostocke, and are to be sold at his shop at the
Kings Head in Paul's Churchyard 1646.

A Copy of a Letter sent from S. Andrews, dated January 26. 1645.
SIR:
THe Committee appointed for the Processes against Delinquents having found the
Enditements brought in against Sir Robert Spotswood, pretended Secretary of
State, William Murrey, Brother to the Earl of Tillibarne, Genesis Major
Nathaniell Gordoun, and Master Andrew Guthery, Son to the pretended Bishop of
Murray to be relevant, and having repelled all their defenses except that of
Quarters, which was left to the determination of the Parliament; their
Processes were read in open Parliament, and there were many rational debates
about the defense of Quarters grounded upon Scripture, Reason, Law of Nations,
and Military, and the municipall Law of this Kingdom; the state of the Question
was, Whether the granting of quarter in Battle to Delinquents by an Officer or
Soldier, did exempt them from punishment by the State, for their Murder,
Rebellion, and Treason; and it was resolved unanimously by the whole Parliament
that the defense of Quarters was not relevant, when all the defenses were
repelled, and the Parliament was ready to pronounce Sentence. Offer was made by
Nathaniell Gordoun to procure the exchange of all the Prisoners with James
Grahame late Earl of Montrose for himself, and to lie in prison until they
were brought hither, and further to engage himself, and find Surety that he
should never lift Arms against the Parliament. This offer he conceived to be
the more plausible, that the Lord Chancellors Brother was one of the prisoners
with the enemy; but when the Lord Chancellors opinion was asked therein, he
declared, That though all his Brethren and Children were in the like hazard, he
would not be the means of hindering the execution of Justice. And such was the
earnest desire of the Parliament to execute Justice, that this motion was
rejected, and all the four were forfeited in Life, Lands, and Goods; their
Coats of Arms appoined to be rent, and deleted out of the Book of Arms, and
themselves to be beheaded upon Tuesday the twentieth of January, there were
only five or six contrary voices, and those were for perpetual imprisonment.
The Earl of Tillibarn presented a very humble supplication for sparing his
brothers life, and entreating that any other punishment might be inflicted upon
him. This was denied, but in regard he was very insensible of his present
estate, his execution was delayed till Friday the 23. and some Ministers were
appointed to wait upon him, and to endeavor to bring him to some sense of his
condition. Upon the 17. three of them were executed, and first Nathaniell
Gordoun, who was exceeding penitent, whereof he gave many evidences to all that
heard him, and at his earnest desire (given in writing under his hand, whereof
a Copy is herewith sent) he was relaxed from the sentence of Excommunication.
After they were condemned, he and Sir Robert Spotswood were put in one Chamber,
whose obstinacy did him some har me; but when he came to the Scaffold, he said,
It was not time to dalley longer in a matter of eternal consequence, he
acknowledged that mercies led him not to repentance, and therefore God had
brought him to that public death; he confessed he had been an Adulterer, a
Drunkard, and a shedder of innocent blood; he besought all to pray for him, and
craved pardon of all that had any interest in the blood shed of late. Casting
off his Doublet, he said, That many a time he had cast it off to sin, but now
he cast it off to embrace his Savior, and to let his blood be now justly
shed, who formerly had shed much innocent blood. As for that ambition that made
men provoke to Combats, he said, Of all vanities it was one of the chief; He
desired the Parliament to keep unity in the Cause, and to avoid division, as
they desired to shun Gods Judgment upon themselves. And amongst his last
words, he said, He left as many ill wishes as in the condition he was in he
durst, to all such of his friends as should attempt to revenge his death, he
desired the Minister not to part with him, till he delivered him over to his
Redeemer. All his discourse was so ingenuous, and his expressions so Pathetick
that he had few hearers, from whose eyes he did not bring tears. But Sir
Robert Spotswood, and Master Andrew Guthery, dyed as they lived, full of malice
against the Cause and Covenant, justifying themselves in all that they had done
against the Cause. Sir Robert Spotswood inveighed much in his discourse against
the Parliament of England, stiling them always Rebels, and said, The Judgment
of God was upon this Kingdom for assisting those Rebels against their native
King, when he had granted unto us all that we could crave concerning the
settling of our own Peace, and desired no more of this Kingdom but that they
would be neutrals in the affairs of England; that the excommunicating those
holy men of GOD (meaning the Bishops) was lying as a grievous sin upon this
Land. That God had put a lying spirit in the mouths of our Prophets, whereby
the people were deluded. Master Robert Blare who was appointed to attend him,
desired the people to take notice that he was the Son of a false Prophet,
viz. the pretended Archbishop of Saint Andrews, sometimes Chancellor of
Scotland; he would confess no more sin, but that he had as other men,
Peccate juventutis, and quotidianae incursionis. He said to the Provest of
Saint Andrews, That he was sorry, the place where he was so much honored
should now be the Stage of his Tragedy. William Murray was executed upon Friday
the 23. He confessed himself guilty of Adultery and Drunkenness: but denied
that he was a Traitor to his Country. It is worthy of remarke, that Nathaniell
Gordoun whose sentence was most questioned, because of the offer made by him
for exchange, that it should please God to open his eyes, and move him so
ingenuously to acknowledge the Justice of the Sentence pronounced against him.
Sir William Rollock, Sir Philip Nisbet, and Inner Wharrity, who were formerly
executed at Glasgow acknowledged the Justice of the Sentence pronounced against
them; yea Macklauchlane, and Col. Ocain the two Irish Rebels hanged at
Edinburgh did the same: But these three last executed were obstinate to their
last breath. The Process against the Earl of Hartfell is to be brought in to
the Parliament this week. I acquainted you by my last that the Lord Ogilby was
escaped out of Prison in his Sisters clothes, and that the Rebels did retreat
to the Hills upon Colonel Barclayes advance. I have no more to add at this
occasion, but that I am Sir;

St. Andrews the 26. of January. 1645. Your affectionate friend to serve you.

At Saint Andrews Jan. 20. 1646/5.
I Nathaniel Gordoun, being heartily sorrowful for my manifold grievous sins
against Almighty God, and specially for taking up Arms and shedding much
innocent blood in this wicked Rebellion against this Church and Kingdom; for
which I was justly excommunicate by the Kirk; I do therefore humbly beg mercy
and pardon from God for the same, through and for the merits of Christ his
Son, desiring earnestly to be relaxed from that fearful sentence of
Excommunication: And do hereby request and exhort all who yet adhere to that
wicked cause, to leave the same as they would eschew the wrath of God. All
which I do declare and testify in the sincerity of my heart, and in the sight
of God the searcher of hearts, subscribing the same with my hand the day and
place aforesaid.

Nath. Gordoun.

The Copy of another Letter sent from Saint Andrews, Dated January. 26. 1645.
My honored friend;
I Know you will hear by the public Letters what our work is here; yet it
will be but a small loss of time to you, to take notice of some Observations
from him who is your Brother in Christ, and your private friend for the
Publikes sake. When I remember the servants of God who have suffered for the
Cause of Christ in this Land, of which many were my dearest friends, they bring
to my mind Simon a man of Cyrene, who bearing the Cresse of Christ after him,
was the character of a Christian: When I look upon them, who by order of
Justice are put to death for their wicked and unnatural Rebellion, some of
them, ^s Sir William Rollock formerly, and now Nathaniel Gordoun, represent to
my thoughts the penitent Malefactor converted to Christ at the time of his
death; But others of them, such as Spotswood and Guthery, are like the other
thief that died railing on Christ: In the one sort the mercy of God was
manifest to repenting sinners; In the other, the justice of God was seen
against such as continue in the iniquity of their fathers; for they were (...)
the wicked Sons of two excommunicated Prelates. This Spotswood, sometimes
President of the College of Justice, Son to him who was both pretended
Primate and Chancellor of Scotland, (monstrum horrendum) complained on the
Scaffold, that he was brought to suffer in the place where sometimes he had
been so much honored, but did not observe the justice of God, by this
circumstance of the place doubling his punishment, that some few years ago his
cursed fathers Coatch (himself then being in England) was brought from his
Castle through the whole City with the Hangman sitting in it, to the same very
place of the Market Cross, and rent all in pieces? The Lord is known by the
judgment that he executes; So let all thine enemies perish, O Lord. His fatal
sentence was to die as a Traitor to the Estates, and an Enemy to his native
Country; from which while he endeavored to vindicate his innocence, he did
involve himself in further guiltiness of both, by charging the Kingdom of
England with Rebellion, and this Kingdom with unparalleld disloyalty, in
taking part with a Faction in England against our own native King, who at his
last being here, had given contentment to this Kingdom, both in the Affairs
of Church and Policy, and by justifying and professing his assisting of the
design of James Grahame, whom he calls the Lord Marquess of Montrose, the
matchless mirror of all true worth and Nobility: In all which (to say no
more) he either lied most impudently against his own knowledge and conscience;
for he behooved to be convinced by our Declarations, and could not be ignorant
that James Grahame was not a Mirror for Noblemen to dress by, but to present
the monstrous face of drunkenness, of Adulteries, and of divellish pride, in
such as are of noble extraction; for which (as was often presaged of him, and
has been paralleld by some few examples,) the Lord has plagued him to be so
horrible an Apostate and unnatural murderer, and is reserving him for a
tragical end, to be a mirror of his justice and wrath to all degenerous and
perfidious spirits in this and the after ages. And I am sure that Spotswood did
no more allow him in taking and pretending to keep our first National
Covenant, by virtue whereof our Prelates did perish, then he did approve of
others in joining in the mutual Covenant of both Kingdoms, by which himself
and his fellows, with the Prelates of England, have now fallen. To return, if
Spotswood did not lie against his own present conscience, he was punished with
excae^^tion of mind, such as uses to be the usher of exemplary ruin and
destruction in those whom the Lord hates. One thing I cannot pass by, which
makes me conceive his estate to have been the more desperate, and that God had
shut the way against all comfort to him by his Ministers; he spared not openly
to spew forth that God had put a lying spirit in the mouths of the most part
of the Prophets in the Land; It was answered in the time, That himself was the
Son of a lying Prophet. And indeed, as one says of Caesar Borgia, the Son
of Pope Alexander the sixth, he was like his father, not only in body, but in
the swarthinesse of the complexion of his soul, both of them would have given
no other verdict of our first Reformers, and of all the faithful that have
either succeeded them in this Church, or have opposed defection, or sought
after Reformation in the Church of England.

The testimony of such Atheists and worldlings against them is no small
commendation unto them, and to the truth which they have constantly preached,
and sealed with their sufferings. But finding my self drawn beyond the length
of a Letter, I will not further insist: I would only know of you some few
things; 1. What can be the cause that Church Government is not yet settled in
England? The Assembly having given their advice for at long ago? the power of
the Parliament being increased to such a fullness, is able to do it; and if
they did not intend it in the beginning, or if they be grown more remiss then
they were at first, I pray you tell me by what means I shall convince
Malignants, and confirm the godly who have suffered so much in this cause. 2.
Let me know whether it be true that is talked here by the best affected, upon
what grounds I know not, that many of our professed Brethren rejoice in this,
that God has raised up an Enemy against us in our own Land, that they may the
more easily dispose of our forces there at their pleasure; for I cannot imagine
that they have more reason to rejoice in our calamity, then we had to rejoice
in theirs. 3. Who is that Robert Wright and that unknown Knight who endeavors
to make division between the Kingdoms by their letters and false informations:
Have we not expressly covenanted to discover all such as are Incendiaries
between the two Kingdoms, and to bring them to public trial, that they may
receive condign punishment, according as their offense shall deserve? And are
we not also obliged to endeavor that the two Kingdoms may remain conjoined
in a firm peace and union to all posterity. 4. I desire to understand, whether
before this work be done, they will insist in demanding their Garrisons, in
abridging or starving our Forces, and in using all means to drive us home re
infecta. When you have satisfied me in these particulars, I will tell you more
of my mind; In the mean time believe me, if matters go there according to the
speeches of many here, although none of the wifest, yet non est temere quod
vulgus dictitat, I know not what our Commissioners can say for themseives, that
they have not given timeous warning of so great a change of disposition in our
Brethren; and I know it will produce more woeful effects then I desire to see;
but God I hope will bring his work to a more gracious end; which shall be the
earnest prayer and endeavor of

St. Andrews, 26. of January, 1645. Your affectionate friend and servant.


