TREASONS ANATOMJE Or The Duty of a Loyal SUBJECT In Vindicating His gracious
Sovereign, against those horrid Aspertions, cast upon Him, conserning His
Fathers Death, The relief of the Rochellers, and The Rebellion in Ireland, and
in way of Answer to a Declaration, published by the House of Commons, Feb. 15.

Psalm. 89. Ver. 48. Lord where are Thy old loving kindnesses: which Thou
swarest unto David in Thy truth?

Ver. 49. Remember (O Lord) the rebuke that thy Servants have: and how I do
bear in my bosom the rebuke of many People.

Ver. 50. Wherewith thine Enemies have blasphemed Thee, and slandered the
Footsteps of thine Anointed: Praised be the Lord for evermore.

Psalm. 7. Ver. 8. The Lord shall Judge the People, give sentence with me O
Lord: according to Thy righteounesse, and according to the innocence that is
in me.

Pro. 19. ver. 9. A false witness shall not be unpunished: but He that
speaks lies shall perish.

Ps. 125. This I had: because I kept thy Commandments.

Proverbs 20. ver. 2. The fear of a King is like the roaring of a Lion; He
that provokes Him to anger, sins against His own Soul.

Psalm. 26. ver. 1. Be thou my Judge O God, for I have walked innocently: My
trust has been also in the Lord, therefore shall I not fall.

Perspice finem.

Printed in the year. Anno Dom. 1647.

The Preface To all his Majesty's Subjects.
Dear Countrymen,
HEaring of a Poisonous and till now) unheard of piece of treason lately
hatched, wherein is contained by the way of Articles) hellish and scandalous
imputations of his sacred Majesty, by inciting him to be the Author of his
Fathers death, Opugnant to the Relief of Rochell. And the Causer or Abetter of
the Rebelion in Ireland. etc. I thought it very meet (being both bound in
conscience by my allegiance and also for the referrence) every religious Man
ought to have the truth violated against any person, more especially, and in an
unspeakeable measure, when he; so gracious a Prince, is brought upon the Stage
of opprobrious calumny, false-witnesse, or rather accusers (for witnesses,
Maugre all their perjury they can, produce none) raising up and laying to his
Charge, things that he knew not. Let any man that has but common sense, Judge
how their other Arguments do hang together, and thereby he may the easier
discern of these last Superlatively, traiterous and most inhumane accusations,
being by no other means able to disturb his Christian Patience [admired of
all the World] think at last by these Helspude suggestions to overcome the
smooth [and as near as a man could be] immaculate current of his passions to
such a vehemency and vigor of Spirit as shall some way prejudice him in the
maintaining and supporting of so righteous a cause as he now in his royal and
religious person suffers for being debarred the liberty that the very meanest
of his Subjects enjoy; See their Horrid'st plots, pry into the sink of their
Diverlish, intentions, and thou shall plainly find that their maine design, is
to render our Sacred Soveraignee odious to the Ignorant Communalty, whereby
their Arbitrary Government may creep in; and then [how many Parliament men, so
many monstrous Kings, How many Monsters. so many Tyrants] I Will keep thee no
longer at the Gate, Enter, and view their Infernal Stratagem within doors.

Blush oh Heavens at the divelish, Impudency of this forlorn wretches O Earth
why cannot thy mouth open, swallowing their Dathans, and covering the Abiriums
of these catiffe times? O Waters how stands it, you rageing waters orewhelme
not these ten thousand more then Egyptian cruelty? how long will it be ere
these Iulianists cry vicisti Nazarene, or Jesus thou have overcommend? shall
the Enemy blaspheme thy glorious name, O God for ever unpunished, or the
presumption of them that hate thee increase thus ever more and more? Shall thy
dearest servant, and our dread sovereign be thus intollorably slandered, and
not their names perish? Shall not all the loyal blood that was shed from the
blood of Noble Stratford to the blood of that worthy Martyr Burleigh be
required of this viperous generation of cruel and inhumaine Canniballs? How
currishly do these cinnicall dogs bark and houle at the splendour (though
clouded by inhumaine Treason) of our Rroyall and unstained star, and be right
steerer of justice. The comfort (though now the Corazive) of all that have the
least glimpse of Knowledge, or sense of the fear of God. But to the intended
Subject, and first to that Hellish West. minsterian lie, of his Majesty's
having a hand in the death of his renowned Father, who (as it is known to all
of any capacity, especially of this City) dyed in a good old age, having
finished his course, and left his royal House in order, his disease being an
Ague and further to convince these hellish vipers, there have been diverse
Chiurgions and others (by the House examined) who were at the embalming, and
encoffening of that generally lamented Prince, who have Justified his corpse to
be as free from any the least imperfection, or change of color as could be,
'twould make the ruthlesest and most Tiger spirited man in the world repine,
except the drove at Westminster.

What Marble heart could but molifie to hear so virtuous a Prince thus
caluminated.

For my part I quiver and tremble in the carriage of my quill through this
bloody and villeinous Scandal, and were it not for the Vulgar satisfaction,
could think my self in no other predicament then a Traitor, for presuming to
recterate over such cursed and palpable yea most diabolical Surmises, which is
done by me to endeavor the Subversion or nipping in the bud of this In
attoneable and most heinous piece of treason, and may that hand perish that is
endued with the least ability, in writing that does not stir in the defense of
his righteous Sovereign against these Hell littered Slanders, be it ever so
little, set out thy good will in the defense of thy wrongfully defamed Prince,
and that drone that does not, deserves not the benefit of breathing.

Plead Oh England in the behalf of thy best and justest of Kings, examine
thine own conscience, whether ever any King has governed more righteously, or
any people lived in more happiness and tranquillity, every Man enjoying the
labor of his own hands, and every one drinking of his own Vineyard. No
Ahab-like tyranny exercised by him, no leading into Captivity, or complaining
in thy Streets, til their wicked Rebellion burst forth, and since thy more
impartial conscience may inform thee, how he has ever been a labourer for
peace, but when he spoke unto them thereof, they made themselves ready to
battle, who sat there to no other purpose, but to carouse on the blood of
Loyal Subjects, and to the extirpation of Monarchy root and branch, as that
Pock rotten fire brand of Hell, the Parliaments Sardanapulus) not long since
motioned to his Brethren of the same mould. Can thy understanding give way?
were there an Ideom or form shuffled for these unnatural and in the highest
nature ungodly invention to take the least impression on thy professed
Christian belief? will not thy own Genius tell thee, be thou never so
ignorant, that he who was next in succession to the Crown, his Father being
as it were by reason of his Age on the brink of the Grave, (between whom
there was such mutual and reciprocal love) should harbor a thought, much
less act, any thing that might either shorten his days by the course of
nature so nearly come to a period, or if thou lay a side all thoughts of his
Clemency (which were the greatest point of inhumane uncharitableness that
might be lodged in the cancaredst mind.) What would it avail a man to
endeavor the destruction or death of an already dying man (the Lord of Heaven
and Earth judge between him and those suggesting Traitors, according to the
righteousness that is in him, according to the clearenesse of his hands in thy
eye sight.

A few words more concerning that damnable lie, they say his disease was an
Ague, and say they it was resolved for his recovery, that nothing should be
given, or applied to his Highness by the way of Physic or Diet, but by, and
upon their general advice and consents. They say the Duke of Buckingham (a
Mortal Enemy to such rebellious villains as they are) after his inhibition,
procured certain Plasters, and a certain drink to be provided for his
Majesty, [surely of a contrary Nature, to that their Predecessors presented
King John with) and they say that he again provided the like drink and
plaster for the King [strong poison that must be so often used to carry away a
dying Man] His Majesty dies, and within two years a Parliament is called [or
which this is the very spawne] wherein many envious Machivilians [emulating the
dignities, and honors conferred on the Duke and him for them] ransaked the
innocent ashes of the deceased King, and deeply taxing him of the former act
amongst themselves, questionless, thought to murder him for his Heroic
merrrits, as they did the Earl of Strafford for fear of a Scourge for their
Treason, so they too soon after procured the death of that Anti. Rebel by a
desperate and fatal hand, Our gracious K. that now is [they say] cleared him of
that envious aspersion, and they say themselves that the former charge [or lye]
was answered on the Dukes behalf, and least they should murder that English
Hero. The King dissolved that Parliament. I would to God he had done the like
now to prevent this, the Kingdoms merely destructions, Now I pray you
consider whether it stands with reason, that the Duke being preferred to such
honors, that as beyond Hercules his Pillars. he could go no further, or be any
greater unless a King, which if thought of, was very contrarily contempted by
cuting off the Aged King, having an heir of such hopes I have before spoken
of, the well known affection between our King and his Father, and who he was
nearly come by the course of nature to his longest home. Also of the
Chirurgions, and not only they but many more are now living of that profession,
then embalming the King, besides inumerable proofs by Spectators.

As for the rotten frame of that stinking lie concerning the plaster and
drink, let al Loyal and Impartial Physicians Judge, and again, yea cursed
forgers, God in a specially manner threatens the disobedient with the like
children, yea infallibly punishes them so, but the World never veilded more
dutiful (and beyond expression) affectionate issue, then the royal branches
of his sacred Majare, but they have forgotten. Lex tallionis, Hammond, alias
Hamman the jailer; lately came to his Majesty, and told him that if he had
known what was in agutation, he would not have been so jocond, his Majesty
demanded of him what, he answered they were drawing up a Bill to question him
for his life, a thing never heard of before, his Majesty answered to this
effect, that let them rake Hell, from whence their actions are derived, it
should not disturb him, being clear in conscience, Hammond then told the
King, that if he had signed the last (traiterous) Bills, these last lies had
not been published, If true? which the God of Heaven knows to the contrary,
then for their own ends they intended to conceal that incredible paricide,
which, as I have showed, he is as free from as the child unborne.

Compare their cunninger and more seeming pretenses being [as thou seest] the
worst, but this off scumme of Hellish plotts, with their proceedings ever since
and left thine and the 3 Kingdoms woeful experience dictate, whether any thing
then professed, has been since performed; what was it that they taught which
either by corruption of inferiors, or their own [if any] negligence had
caused but was as soon granted as proposed; was the protestant religion the
cause? you see how that is most Athiesticallie renowned and the most zealous
professors thereof persecuted beyond hethenish cruelty.

Was it the Kings Royal Prerogative? you know and all the world, that to be the
worst the Father of lies and fountain of Rebellion could invent, the King
being Indungeoned, his virtuous Queen basely traduced and banished, a thing
irksome to the meanest Subject, the Royal object of our expectation exposed,
either to the cruel mercy of the Rebel, to be in his Fathers condition, or to
leave his Crowns in Revertion, and so throw himself to the wide world, which
last resolution he took hold on, knowing the inevitable danger of coming into
their crimson cursed claws, the rest of the Royal issue unfortunatly falling
into their clutches, merely dance attendance on their Worships as Hospital,
or the meaner sort of Alms people do on their been so do they on their
Malefactors; then the liberty of the Subject you feel to your general woe, is
converted to the neverheard of before, cruill bondage, yea such as was not
known in any civil or domestic Wars.

The last mentioned but first and farthest performed and pursued, were your
privileges of Parliament, but it is a legal one, when neither Town or
County, has the free Election of Parliament men? who are to negotiate every
man for his Country, as faithful servants of the Common wealth ought to do
(and not instead of serving them) to Tyranize over them like AEgiptian Masters
as they have don ever since the ungodly beginning of their 7. years Reign,
Judge Oh Judge impartially what a consumption has poor England been in ever
since, and how these states Paracelsians who with their desperate drugges or
dregs have occasioned the disease of a Nation (now most woefully languishing
of it) would prescribe a medicine worse then the disease, by converting of that
heavenly ordained government of Monarchy, into that Demonaicall and most
unchristian like arbitray rule. Corasives in stead of Cordials to a languishing
Common wealth: Take an occasion to peruse all their passages and pause
seriously upon them; and if thou find not their former actions to be in all
respects disagreeable to their professions; then I Will give thee free
dispensation (as I well may) to conceive and apprehend of these viperous
aspersions, according to thy own judgment, no man (I think) opposing: Till
when, or Calendas Graecas, I shall desire all those that profess the name of
Christ, to beware from such scandalous doctrine of Devils, of which, never was
heard the like: You (doubtless) know how that the calling together, exercising
and conducting of Land or Sea forces, solely belongs to the King, being the
supreme head and governor of all such his Kingdoms and Dominions. Tradition
shows this to every of the meanest and ignorant men; and that he is the
preserver and protector of his Subjects, whether against oppression or
invasion, and therefore know that he bears not the sword in vain, as the
saying has it, Reg^um est parcere Subjectos and debellare superbos. Kings are
for the ^ncouragement of the good and the terror of wickedness. But see the
fomenters of this unnatural and bloody War, unmasked and set out or
presented to the view of the World in their proper colors; some troubled
spirits both of the Parliament and City first mentioned the extirpation of
Episcopacie, root and branch. Others of the like cut, in the same manner
preferred a Bill for the transferring of the Militia of Sea and Land, out of
his hands, whom God himself had placed them in (our Sovereign Lord the King)
into the hands of such Sectaries or other temporising Com^^otters, who
(questionless) were to part stakes with them, whereby their. Rebellion might
the easier take effect. And although the full convention of Parliament
unanimously rejected these traiterous Bills, the main (...) Agents in the
business revive and promote them by tumults and insurrections. I shall desire
you to judge of the cause by the intended effect; and as a perjured villain is
never to have his Oath again, so I pray thee take not their tongues or pens for
slanders, who have been so often perjured: yea, would solemnly swear to the
world (were it not for shame more then conscience) that the sun never shined.
Never did that famous Orator Cicero pronounce an Oration with more confidence
and audacitie then their squeakers and other such as Martin will babble Treason
impudence, I should say of them: But to the former discourse, After this
dissertion, then began upon the House of Peers by the name of Bishops, and
Popish Lords, who (as they said) hindered a free passage to their Reformation:
And gathering to an head of the rabble rout of the Country, with a factious
party of the City, forced the Parliament as far as they could; crying down
of Bishops, and intollerably abusing them as they past, with the same barbarous
demeanor toward the Members of the House, that would not assent to their
treason; neither would these now reciding at Westminster, join to suppress
these tumults, being underhand not only permitters but promoters of those
horrid designs. Not long after, were by their means, opprobrious words, yea
most dangerous, spoken against his Majesty by the meanest that passed, saying
(as it is well gathered by a Gentleman) that they would have no more Porters
lodges; but would speak with the King when they pleased: Judge whether the
same spirit has not had a powerful influence ^n this last more horrid device.
His Majesty finding the danger that might ensue, accuses the chief promoters
to the Parliament, of high treason, being the Lord Kymbolton and the five
Members, the Articles are instanced in a Book called Comparatis Comparandis;
which Articles they have ever since endeavored to prove, and indeed
effectually performed, till it pleased God to stay their fury. The Houses
being by this time corrupted, would not obey the King in sequestring their
Members; but rather encouraged them in their treason. Having sent them to the
City where they were not only harbored, but in short time the Common
Council at London being illegally altered and unlawful and unaccustomed
watches kept in the City, under the command of Major -- Skippon, pretended for
the safety of the City; the Trained Bands guard those Members from the City
to Westminster, with many lights and long boats were sent out laden with
Saker, murdering pieces, and other ammunition, dressed up with waste clothes and
streamers, as ready to fight; the Mariners by water, the Soldiers by land, as
they past by White hall asked what was become of the King, where was he? And
for all his Majesty's accusation of the Members of high Treason, the
prementioned revive their former treason for transferring the power by Sea and
Land into other hands; withal the Commons desiring the Lords concurrence in
petitioning to the King that the Militia of the Kingdom might be transferred
into such hands as they would confide in, which was twice carried negatively,
by the voices of much the major part of Lords; hereupon they (by the incensed)
meaner sort, petition the House of Commons, against the Lords as Malignants,
and desire to know their names, and threaten to remove them: and Hollis made a
speech to the Lords, enforcing that Petition at a Conference, whereupon diverse
Lords went away, and then that traiterous vote passed, being rejected twice
before, when neither popish Lords or Bishops were present, twelve of the
Bishops being in the Tower: Since which time the lower House carry what they
will (Stat pro ratione voluntas) being guided by the former impeached Members,
having the rude multitude at their commands, wholly commanded the House of
Peers to what they list, who dared not but submit to any thing brought to
them, for their concurrence: Judge whether it was safe reciding for a King,
where his greatest enemies were so prevalent, and he in danger of his life
daily, had even any King more reason to desert enemies more dangerous? Now I
leave it to any intelligible, and impartial Christian to discern and judge of
these viperous scandals; being forced to publish this as an Antidote, while
stronger lines are in the Mint, the time permitting not a larger answer, yet
the World may see them here beaten with their own weapons: As they Allegiance
binds thee, pray and cease not for thy righteous Sovereign, so may thou
and all true Subjects prosper.

The next lie of any consequence is that of Rochell, which by the loyal
intelligence of a never failing Champion of the truth, I have obtained; (being
gathered from no Westminster like forger) but such as shall make it appear to
be the very truth of the proceeding then agitated, which are thus. His
Majesty's pious care in the sufficient number of men, and shipping, his choice
of the most experienced Soldiers of the three Kingdoms of England, Burrowes,
Rich, Hawley, Sant-Leager, Friar, etc. of Ireland, Willbughby, Crosly, Sir
Ralph Bingley, etc. of Scotland, Sir Andrew Gray, Conningham, etc. The hot and
bloody fight at their landing argues no want of Commission: At their landing
there was much galantry showed as might be in any action, where (at length) the
French were forced to retreat, the English losing many a gallant man, as Sir
William Heydon, Johnson the Engineer, Sir George Blundell, and others, and
coming before the Fort, although there were many great Commanders, who I
presume experienced in all feats of War, and would have been much offended
to be otherwise esteemed; yet when they came to entrench and raise batteries,
whether out or wilfulness, or ignorance, who can judge? None could be found
to undertake it, only John Tradskine was made use of as chief workman, and
this is conceived to be one great cause of the miscariage, and long lying
before the Fort, prevailing no further; and had not the seamen bravely
performed their part, they would not have stayed so long. for the enemies were
both skillful and dilligent in keeping them from releiving, but surely God
alone as is conceived they being no other but Sectaries though then professed
Protestants, we were frustrated of our designs, which was this; intelligence
being given that relief was coming, they drew their squadrons of ships, so
that part as the wind then sat, to be ready to receive them, the French
accordingly set forth, and came on, but fell to the Leeward, the Fort then was
upon Articles of surrender, when suddenly the wind chopped about, and so
advantageous it was for the French, and contrary to the English, that is was
not in the art of man to hinder, that advantage or rather providence: the
French making use of their victory, neglected not in the pursuit, the
miscarriage in the retreat, was either by the mistake, or too much care to
secure themselves or some Officers, if not contrary, yet far from the command
of the General, and the Council of War, and yet men esteemed full of honor
and long experience: and look then on the King, then but young, acting by his
Council, choosing such Officers of several Kingdoms, generally esteemed of
for honor, valor, and knowledge, sparing no expenses; Oh then judge equally
taking your charity of a Loyal Subject along, whether thy pious Sovereign, is
not intollerably, yea most undeservedly slandred; Let every true Christian shed
a tear for these most opprobious callumnies, and God will (if he weeps with
him that weeps) comfort him also in the day of his distress.

As concerning Rochell, after the Duke was slain by Felton, when ready to put
to sea, did he not with all expedition make choice of the Earl of Lyndsey, a
man full of honor, gallantry, and beloved of the Soldiery both by Sea and
Land, his gallantry in Denmark being fresh in memory, furnished with all sorts
of Ammunition, ships, and all other necessaries; and what do their miraculous
expectations extend unto? But they would have Moses, Joshua, Sampson, David or
Judas Maccabeus, and yet all could not mussell the mouths of these slanderous
Liars: as for their observations on his letters, suppose there be any overtures
to or with that French King, they do not suite with these actions, what use
can be made of what is not understood; how frequent is it with Princes and
Potentates to treat of Peace, and prepare for war, and to write and to
speak of peace only to make their Adversaries secure; yea even in the heat of
war to make overtures of Treaties, and to act quite contrary, this is showed
by all Histories; but admit as is objected, that his Majesty did only make a
show of war, without any intention, and that he did at last leave the
Rochellers to themselves, and the Duke De Roane also, although his Kinsman, and
questionless not without a just cause, when he was informed that whatsoever
pretenses of the Protestant Religion were obtruded upon him, the interest of
the King of Spain was advanced, and it was discovered that his gold paid de
Roanes friends: How great a Lover of Protestants he has over been is as well
known, as his just desire of Sovereignty over whom God appointed him, in all
Christendom (if this were as indeed it was) the true cause, who can blame his
Majesty to withdraw himself, that his first intentions were real, his
Exchequer Records will testify, his large expenses, great gratuities to, and
his Pensions to Mouseir Sabeeze, and others, to encourage them; certainly he
could (at first with good words) have kept his money, the Dukes Officers, and
others are able to give more ample satisfaction; but it seems strange to me if
this suffice not the King being satisfied how that their Religion was not as
pretended (any thing) agreeing with the Protestant, but were, and are most that
go under the notion of Protestants in France, of the Hugonists Sect, as far
from a Protestant, as God and Mammon, light and darkness, virtue and vice, so
pernicious a Sect is that of the Hugonists, which Sect, (as I said before) the
Rochellers were of; nevertheless all the while the King was not satisfied of
their Religion, his actions then in that behalf as I have laid down before,
will apparently manifest his forwardness to relieve Protestants.

Concerning the Irish insurrection, I wonder those grand Ones at Westminster
dare pronounce the word Rebel, they being the most impudent and inhumane that
ever I read or heard of. How dare they tax the King as a countenancer or any
way, encourager of those discontented people in Ireland? surely his so gracious
and frequent both Procl. and Declarations in that behalf, cannot but in the
highest nature both clear and justify him against these surmises. Read all
his Declarations concerning the Irish, and therein find his tender care of
healing the sores of the distressed Protestants there: Yea, offered to go in
his own Person on that design against the I rish; but within a little these
Rebels took occasion to rise in arms, and hindered all the proceedings
against the Irish; yea (as all the Kingdom may know) have converted most part
of men and money raised for the Irish service, to maintain this unnatural and
most bloody Rebellion in England.

Men may be guided by their fancies, and as the deaf Adder that stops her
ears at the voice of the Charmer, charm he never so wisely, refuse truth
offered unto them; I can but leave such (as they are questionlesly left to a
reprobate sense) to their own selfe-willed constructions.

There cannot be more innocence both pretended, and manifestly proved then I
have herein set down, though in few words; has not that glorious Lamp of
Gods glory, the Prophet Elias been taxed for a troubler of Israel; Paul
factious, Joseph by his incontinent Mistress, chaste Hippolitus, religious and
civil Susanna, Eugenius, Athanasius his name converted to Sathancthius; yea
often taxed a murderer of Cato and Scipio, and traduced before the Senate at
Rome, as our gracious Sovereign is before and by his traiterous Servants at
Westminster.

Was not that splendifferous object of the Gospels advancement Saint Jerome,
slandered by the Romish Priests for his pious conference with Eustochium,
Paula, Demetriades, Paulina, with such chaste and devout women? Was not Christ
himself said to be a Samaritan, and to have a Devil, with other odious as
blasphemous as reprooffes? Then in immitation of our blessed Savior; Let our
gracious Sovereign be barked at by all the intestine Zoylouses of the world,
while they with aspiring Phaeton, or too much confiding Icarus, trust to
fallicids, and God doubtless prepares a lantern for his Anointed.

I see the time draws on, and that I can no longer pass the picturing of
these antipodized times: Let the Loyal daigne the view of me, and the infected
take though sharp to cure their malady, and this is the ultimum of my honest
and loyal endeavors: God Almighty bless them that bless him, and curse them
that curse him.

FINIS.

