A TRUE ACCOUNT, Set up out the informations, intercepted Letters, and others
authentiq Instruments, concerning the horrid Conspiracy, against the Life of
his Sacred Majesty, WILLIAM the III. King of England, Scotland, France and
Yreland, etc. setting forth by whom it was contrived, how it was to be carried
on, and the manner of its Discovery, Trial, Sentence, and Execution.

Printed ad the HAGHE, By JACOBUS SCHELTUS, Ordinary Printer of the Kings
Majesty. 1692.

A TRUE ACCOUNT, Set up out the informations, intercepted Letters, and others
authentiqs Instruments, concerning the horrid Conspiracy, against the Life of
his Sacred Majesty WILLIAM the III. King of England, Scotland, France and
Yreland, etc. setting forth by whom it was contrivid, how it was to be
carryedon, and the manner of its Discouvery, Trial, Sentence, and Execution.
SOme of the Ministers in the highest Employments, and of the greatest credit
in the French Court, having formed a Design to assassinate His Maj. of Great
Britain, they made choice of one Bartholomew de Liniere, Knight, Sieur de
Grandvall, as their instrument to manage the enterprise, to find out Persons
fit to be employed in it, to engage them by promises of great rewards, as
also to be ayding and assisting in his own person.

The said Grandvall being informed that one Anthony Du Mont had been already
engaged in this design, in the life time of the late Marquis of Louvois, he
proposed it to him again, to Execute the same, by order of the Marquis of
Barbesieux and some others, where upon several Projects were drawn up, several
petitions delivered, and many Conferences were held, and at last the Resolution
was taken to bring it to effect the last Campaign 1691. But the providence of
God having disappointed them, yet not withstanding they did not let fall the
prosecution of their horrid Design. But Grandvall was employed to write
frequently to Du Mont (who was retired to Hanover) to stir him up to another
attempt this Campaign, which at last they agreed upon.

One Leefdale coming to Paris about that time, Grandvall making an acquaintance
with him, discoverd to him the said design, which Leefdale showed a willingness
to be concernd in. But soon after gave notice of it by Letters to his
Relations in Holland, that they might inform his Majesty. And the like
Discovery was made by Du Mont to his Highness the Duke of Cell, who acquainted
his Maj. with it, about the same time, that he received the other account.

In the mean time Grandvall having appointed Du Mont a rendezvous at Uden, in
the country of Ravesteyn, in order to speak with him and Leefdale, to
communicate him the mesures, taken about the design, and afterward to go to
the execution. He set out from Paris, in company with Leefdale, passing
through Bruxells, where he communicated his Design to one John d'Amours, who
was formerly a Domestic Servant to Leefdales Father, from thence they went to
Antwerp, and so to Eyndhoven, where Grandval was seized and carried to Boisle
Duc.

His Maj. directing the examination to be taken there, Leefdale was first
examined, who declared with great Exactnes all the circumstances of the
Design, but it is not necessary to mention more of them here, then that
Grandvall told him, the King of Great Britain was looked upon as the only
obstacle to the French Kings Designs. That Grandvall had sent to Du Mont last
Winter above 200. Pistoles to keep him firm to the business. That whilst they
were at Mons, a report being spread of some disorders in Schotland, which would
oblige his Maj. to cross the sea again, Grandvall fearing it might happen
before he could Execute his Design, spoke to Leefdale in these words, Dear
Friend, we are like to loose our Fortunes, I beg of you, that we may go away
immediately.

John d'Amours being next Examind, deposed that Grandvall told him at
Bruxells, he had a Great business to do, which had miscarryed the last year.
And they two falling into a discourse about his Maj., John d'Amours asked
Grandvall, if he had any thing to say to the King, yes, answered he, to break
his neck. John d'Amours representing to him the difficultys that might attend
such an attempt, Grandval replied, I have given my word to Monsr Barbesieux,
and I Will do it.

D'Amours adds further that going one day with Grandval and Leefdale by the
Jesuits Church at Bruxells; Grandvall said, let Us go in, and say a Pater
noster or two, that God would bles our undertaking, and accordingly, they went
into the Church

Du Mont having been Examined since, has owned the fact in all its
circumstances, adding several other particulars (vizt.) that Madame Maintenon
was acquainted with the Design, and that Grandvall in one of his Letters send
to him, used this expression, that he would accommodate the matter by the
means of Madame Maintenon. That Grandvall told him, the business succeeding,
he (speaking of him selfs) should have an ample recompense, even to be a
Duke. That whilst he was at Hanavor, he imparted the Design to Monsr. Bidal
(alias Hasfelt) who was at that time the French Kings Minister in that Court,
that he showed to the said Monsr. Bidall all the Letters, he writ to Monsr.
Barbesieux and Grandvall, as also the answers he received from them, that the
said Bidall approved the Design, saying it would be a very good business, if
it could be brougt to pass; and that Biddall lent him 50 Crowns at Hanover.

Du Mont adds further, that he was intimately acquainted with one Muller an
Agent for Bidall, that the said Muller told him as a great Secret, that Bidall
had sent him several times to Holland with dispatches, that came from France,
for Monsr. Moreau, Envoy to the King of Poland; That he always gave those
Packetts, in to Mr. Moreaus own hand, and Monsr. Moreau gave him the answers
to them in like manner, and that thus by the help of Monsr. Bidall and Monsr.
Moreau, the Court of France managed their choicest correspondence in Holland.

At last Grandval was examind who perceiving that to matter was discovered, and
that his own Letters could be produced to convict him, he Ingenuously
confessed all the circumstances of the Design, as they are particularized in
the Sentence.

After which Grandvall being brought to the Army, he was putt upon his trial
before a Grand Court Martial consisting of General Officiers, where he
appeared several times, together with the Witnesses above mentioned, who not
only persisted in what they had already deposed, but added many other
particulars and circumstances, of which there were very few, that Grandval did
not agree to, and that freely, without putting him upon, or so much as naming
the Rack to him, either before, or after Sentence.

Grandvall during his Imprisonnement drew up two petitions to be presented to
his Majesty, all written with his own hand, in which he says, that as to the
before mentioned Design, he acted in it, but in obedience to the ordres he
had received from Monsr. Barbesieux and Monsr. Chanlais, that du Mont was
guilty, that Leefdale was guilty, and that he (Grandvall) was guilty, since
every one that conspires against a Cowned Head, is worthy of death,
acknowledging his own fault.

The Judges after this having met several times, at last gave their Sentence
the 11 of August, in persuance of which Sentence Grandvall being acqainted that
he was to dye the 13 of August. He did give all the marks of a true repentance
of his crimes, and the same morning before he went to execution he writ in the
presence of the Fiscal, the Ministers and two other Persons this following
Letter.

From the Camp at Hall 13 August 1692. Madam,
I Pray you to goo to the Arch Bishop of Rheims, with Monsr. Tourduil, and to
let the said Arch Bishop know that it kosts me my life, for having obeyed the
orders of Monsieur de Barbesieux, which is the favor desired of you by.

Your Servant, DE GRANDVALL.
Speak to the Marquis d'Arsy, that he take care y be prayed for.



To Madam Jure, in the Trenelle Street, over against the Street of the two
Crowns, near the Hotell of Soissons, At Paris.

Upon the occasion of this Letter it will not be improper, to take notice of a
passage that happened some days before Grandvals condemnation vitz:; one
discoursing with the Chevallier Grandvall in Prison, and observing he sought to
justify himself upon the orders he had received from the Marquis of
Barbesieux, he told him, tho that was in itself a very weak excuse for being
engaged in so base an action, yet still it might prove so much the worse, as
that it was like enough, Monsieur Barbesieux would disowne that he gave any
such orders, or that he was any way concerned with him in a Business of this
nature: to which Grandvall replied, let him deny what he pleases; yet if I were
put upon it, I would make it appear very plain, for I have an original Paper
under Monsieur Barbesieux own hand, which I have lodged whith a Friend of
mine, who will not part with it, to anyone but my self and nobody else knows,
with whom I have entrusted it. About elleven of the clock in the morningh was
the said Grandval drawn on a hedge to the place of execution, where the
Sentence was read, and the prayer done in the Frensch Tongue, which he liked to
hear very earnstly, and afterward did the executors their work, in order to
the Sentence.

God bless King WILLIAM and Queen MARY.
SENTENCE Of the CHEVALLIER the GRANDVAL.
WHereas Bartholomew de Liniere, Knight, Sieur de Grandvall, Borne at Liniere
in Picardy, aged about 43 years, and now a prisonner, has confessed before the
Grand Court Martial without any constraints by pain or being in irons. And it
further appearing to the said Court Martial, that the late Marquis de Louvois
in his Lifetime Secretary of State to the French King in the year 1691 entered
into an agreement with one Anthony du Mont, about the murder of his Majesty
William the III. King of Great Britain, etc. And that the said du Mont had
framed a project setting forth in wat manner that design might be executed.
That he delivered the said project, to the said Marquis of Louvois. That the
Prisoner some time before the Marquis of Louvois death, asking his leave to go
some where else, was ordered by the said Marquis not to go away, for that he
had some business of consequence to employ him in, which the prisoner supposes
to have some relation to the said Design, but the Marquis of Louvois dying some
time after, there was no further progress then made in the said Design. That
the Marquis of Barbesieux son to the said Marquis of Louvois, as also Secretary
of State to the French King having five days after his Fathers death, found the
said project together with a warrant for 30 Pistoles to be paid to the said du
Mont among his Fathers Papers, the said Design was revived again, and the 30
Pistoles were paid accodingly; that the Prisoner contracted an acquaintance
with du Mont at Monsieur Rebenacs House, where Monsieur Paparel, Play Master
General to the French Kings Armies, saying one day to Monsieur Rebenac (the
Prisoner being present) that if they had a mind to seize the King of England,
du Mont would be a fit Person for it, du Mont replied with execrations, that
he would carry of his Majesty alive, or dead, as he had promised to Monsieur
de Louvois. That du Mont having delivred the same, or the like project to
Monsieur de Barbesieux, the Prisoner to promote the said Design had several
conferences with Monsieur Barbesieux and Monsieur Paparel, in one of which,
Monsieur Barbesieux told the Prisoner, that he suspected, his Father was
poisoned, by order of the P. of Orange (meaning his present Majesty of Great
Britain) and therefore he would be revenged on him. That Monsr. Barbesieux
told the Prisoner in another conference, that he should give du Mont notice,
that his Majesty of Great Britain wore a Coat of Maile, which the prisoner
acquainting du Mont with, he answered there upon, it is no matter, I Will kill him
for all that. That Barbesieux had said further, he would not speak himself
with du Mont, fearing he might be taken Prisoner, and if he should happen
then to name him, it might make a great breach in his fortune. That the
Prisoner was engaged wit one Parker a Colonel belonging to the late King James,
to put the said Design in execution, and that Parker had thold him, he had
formed the said Design with the late Marquis of Louvois. That at last the
Prisoner with the said Barbesieux, Paparel, Parker and du Mont agreed upon the
manner of executing the said design: vizt: that the Prisoner and Parker should
meet at the Grand Guard of the Duke of Luxembourgs Army, where they were to
have 1500. Horse, that Du Mont should go to the King of Englands Army, and
watch the time, when his Majesty went to visitt the Grand Guard, and at the
same time he was to shoot His Majesty; that the Prisoner and Parker with 1500.
Horse were to rescue and bring him of, the said Du Mont geving timely notice to
the Prisoner of the Intended Execution. That Monsr. Barbesieux giving the
Prisoner orders to accompany Du Mont to Menin, he gave him at the same time an
order to the Duke of Luxemburg, for furnishing the Prisoner with such a
Detachment of Horse, as he should require and think necessary for Executing
the Design. That the Prisoner by Monsr. Barbesieux order received of Monsr.
Paparell 80. Lewis d'Or. And in pursuance of Mr. Barbesieux directions he gave
to Du Mont 55. Lewis d'Or, out of that sum, vizt 15. Pistolls in specie and a
Bill of Enchange for 460. Livres French Money, to be paid at Ghent: That the
Prisoner accordingly left Paris, the 11. of Sept. 1691. and went post with Du
Mont to Menin, that he defrayd the whole charge of the Journey, that Du Mont
acquainted him on the way that Monsr. Barbesieux had promised him an annual
revenue of 20000. livres, and to make him a Knight of the Order of St. Lazarus,
in case the design took effect. That the Prisoner, coming to Menin, went to the
Governor Monsr Pertuis, as he had been directed by Monsr. Barbesieux, and
obtaind of him a Passeport for Du Mont, who parted immediately for Ghent,
promiting the Prisoner, that according to their agreement, he would send to
him at the Grand Guard. That the Prisoner there upon went to the Duke of
Luxemburgs Army, and he and Parker continued at the head of the Grand Guard
till the day before the rencontre at Leuze without hearing from Du Mont. That
Du Mont going to Hanover, the Prisoner had kept a constant correspondence with
him, about Executing the same design at some other opportunity, that the
Prisoner communicated what Letters he received from Du Mont, to Mr.
Barbesieux, who gave him directions wat answers he should return. That the
Prisoner resolved with Monsieur Barbesieux, that the Design should be
Executed this Campaign Anno 1692. which had failed the last, that the Prisoner
had taken some measures concerning the same with Monsr Chanlais Quartermaster
General to the French King. In the mean time one Frederick Aelbregt Leefdael,
heretofore Cap. Lt. of a troop of Dragoons in the service of the High and
Mighty States General of the United Provinces coming to Paris, was brought
acquainted with the Prisoner by the means of one Sterck. That the Prisoner
having contracted an intimate familiarity with the said Leefdale, discovered
the said Design to him toward the latter end of March last 1692, telling him
that an Officer who woul ingratiate himself in the Kings favor must venture at
something of consequence. That he the Prisoner had concerted the execution of
a Design upon which his fortune depended, that it was indeed a matter not
without hazard, but the greater the difficultys were, the more would be the
Honor, encouraging Leefdale to be concerned in it. And the said Leefdale
showing a readyness to comply with him, the prisoner opened himself with
greater freedom, and told him that he was engaged last Campaign with one Du
Mont to assassinate the King of great Britain, but it had no effect by reason
of his Majest. leaving the Army so Soon, but it was resolved again to putt the
same in execution this year. That Du Mont by many repeated Oaths had sworn he
would do it, and he the prisoner feared, that if he were not present, Du Mont
would not so exactly observe his orders, and therefore he was resolved to go
along with Du Mont, asking Leefdale. If he would be of the party, who
answering that he would the prisoner discoursd to him at large of all
particulars concerning the design, and afterward brought him to Mr.
Barbesieux and Chanlais. That Chanlais in one of the conferences held upon that
subject, told Leefdale, the Prisoner being by, that a great reward should be
given him, the business succeeding, that Barbesieux and Paparell had both of
them knowledge of the promised reward. That he the Prisoner with the said
Leefdale, and Colonel Parker went to St Germain on the 16 of April 1692, to
speak with the late King James about the said Design, who had knowledge of it,
and to take leave of him, before they began their Journey, that the Prisoner had
Audience at the same time of the said King James, the late Queen being present
King James telling him, Parker has given me an account of the business, if you,
and the other Officers do me this service, you sal never want. And Parker, the
prisoner and Leefdale enterd into a discourse about this Design. That du Monts
Wife deliverd to Mr. Barbesieux several Letters, which she received from her
Husband whilst he was at Hanover, and the Prisoner continuing his
correspondence with him at the said time, he engaged du Mont by Letters, and
specialy those dated the 20 and 25 of April and the 12 of May last, to kome
from Hanover to a Rendevous at Uden, in the Country of Ravesteyn, in order to
take a final resolution with the said Prisoner and Leefdale, concerning the
manner of executing the Design, the Prisoner pressing du Mont to hasten his
journey for fear the King of Engeland should have occasion to repass the sea,
the prisoner adding withal, that he should be mad, if he failed in his
business. That the Prisoner with Chanlais and Leefdale were agreed in what
manner the Assassinate should be committed on the Person, of his Maj: vizt:
that when the King should ride along the Lines, or should go out to take any
vieuw, or when the Army should decamp, that du Mont shouldly in ambuscade, and
when his Maj: should pas within 100 paces of him, he should rhen fire upon the
King, that Chanlais (to whom notice was to be given before of the time) should
be with 3000 Horse at the D. of Luxemburgs Grand guard, that the Prisoner had
told Leefdale their would be no danger for hem since, du Mont had a secret to
charm peoples eyes, and at all adventures they two would keep with those, who
followed the King, and when every body was pursuing after du Mont, they should
have time to escape and save them selves, and carry the account to Mr.
Chanlais, and it little concernd them, whither du Mont should be taken or not,
provided they could escape them selves. That the Prisoner and Leefdale received
their last orders from Chanlais, who told them he was going to Mons, and that
they should stay for him there. That the Prisoner and Leefdale went from Paris
the 17 of Apr: last and arrived a few days after at Mons, having waited some
time for Mr. Chanlais arrival and finding he did not come, they resolved to
go forward to the rendevouz by the Way of Bruxells: That the Prisoner as they
were traveling on the way told Leefdale, that their design taking Place, the
alliance among the Confoederate Princes would be broken, that the Princes
concerned would each of them recall their Troops and the Country being thereby
left without Soldiers, the King of France would easily make himself Master of
it. And K: James would be restored again: That the Prisoner with Leefdale went
to the Mayery of Boisleduc, and was apprehended at Eyndhoven. And whereas this
horrid design is contrary to the Laws of God, of Nature, and of all Nations,
and ought for the deterring of others, from the like machinations to be
punished with the greatest rigor. The said Court Martial, having with mature
deliberation, examined and considered the whole matter, have thought fit to
Judge and declare, as they do hereby declare, the Prisoner to be guilty of
high treason, and do condemn him to be drawn on a Hedge to the Place of
Execution, there to be hanged en a Gallows, to be cut donn before he be dead,
his Body to be opened, and his Bowels to be taken out, and burnt; his head to
be set upon a Pole, his Body to be quarterd, and the four quarters to be hung
up where his Maj: shall think fit; and do further declare all his Estate to be
confiscated, and condemn him to bear the Charges and Costs of this Trial.
Given and pronounced in the Headquarters of the Army, under the Command of his
Maj: of Great Britain, by the Earl of Athlone, Gen: of the Horse, Praesident;
the Lt: Gen: van Scravenmoere, and Lt: Gener: Talmash, the Marquis de la
Forest, the Here van Weed, Comte Noyells, and the Here Zobel, Majors Gen:, and
the Brigadiers Churchill and Ramsey, Cornelius van Wouw, and Richard Uthwayt,
Judges Advocates.

Assisting at Lembeek the 11 of Aug: 1692. Signed, Athlone.
And lower, By Ord: of the Court Martial. Thomas du Val.


