A true and perfect RELATION Of a great and horrid CONSPJRACIE, DISCOVERED By a
JEW in TVRKJE, against the ENGLISH. WITH The Names of the Conspirators, and the
proceedings of the Great Turk thereupon. ALSO. The unchristian like dealing of
Francis Hardedge, Master of a Ship, with his Passengers, bound for Barbados;
As it was in a Letter specified, by one that had a fellow-feeling of the misery.

Published at the request of many Godly Christian People, by John Headley.

LONDON printed for E.E. Anno Dom. 1646.

(...) speaker and (...) do so too, till God and Authority stop their mouths,
Quod fax it Dens. (...) Imprimatur Ja: Cranford, Sept. 2. 1646. FINIS.

A true Relation of a great and horrid Conspiracy discovered in Turkey.
THere are Letters lately come from Constantinople of Sir Sackvile Crow our
English Ambassador there, intimating his barbarous dealing with our English
Factors at Aleppo, Scandaroon, and other places, the particulars whereof
follow, viz.

That the said Sir Sackvile Crow being at the great City of Constantinople,
summoned together (as he had power to do) all the English Merchants and
Factors, under pretense of holding a Consultation, etc. who according to his
Summons met together, all but three or four, and at their meeting, the said Sir
Sackvil Crow acquainted them, That by reason of the Wars in England, what by
his Estate in Lands, and his place, he had sustained damage to the value of a
hundred thousand pound, or upwards, and that he expected reparation, etc. from
them; And perceiving themselves innared by him, they yeil-and to allow him the
Sum aforementioned; but the said Sir Sackvil Crow refused to accept thereof,
saying, that that would not serve his turn; and on a sudden clapped them all
into a Dungeon, and sent out Warrants on Aleppo, and other places to seize
their Goods.

This Plot was discovered by a Jew, who made it known to the Turks Bashaw.

To the courteous Reader.
READER,
I Shall desire christian patience to peruse these few lines from a foreign
Part, and from a Kinsman, who last year upon urgent occasions, best known to
himself, undertook a voyage to the Barbados, with one Francis Headley of
Wapping which when he gave me notice of, I perswad^d him to desist, and to take
his pillage upon some other ship; For first, I told him, that he would find his
name, by nature, both alike; and likewise that he had shipped a very sufficient
Surgeon (which he was advertized of) and by that means the Passengers were
like to suffer, if it should please God to send sickness among them, which
seldom fails; my Kinsman replied, that if he had his things ou^ of the ship
he would otherwise provide; but it was then to late. So I seeing an ultra posse
desired him (that God sending him well thither) he would give me notice
whether my words proved true, or no: now having received a Letter from my
Cozen, and very well knowing, that in these Halc^onall Parliament days, things
so enorm^ous are tolerated to be discovered, I thought it first my duty to
God, and secondly to my Country, to discover the same, for my Conscience tells
me, should I have kept this secret, and not divulge it, I had been accessory to
his cruelty; As also that such men as have employed him, may be more
circumspect hereafter: So I rest,

Thine I. H.

A perfect Relation of the unchristian like dealing of Francis Hardedge, Master
of a Ship, with his Passengers at Barbados.
To the Printer
SIR,
AS unknown, I salute you, having at present an imperfection of lamenesse,
which is the occasion of me not coming unto you my self, but have sent this
bearer: The business is, that last year having a Kinsman, a Merchant, that was
desirous to go to the Barbados upon such affairs as seemed best to himself,
he telling me, that he was to go upon a ship, whereof one Francis Hardedge was
to go Commander, and according to my knowledge he had shipped a ve^ insufficient
Chyrurgion, not worthy to undergo that place in a Spr^t He^ch, which without
doubt he very we I knew, I did dis^wade my Kinsman from proceeding with him,
telling him, that he would find his nature nor differ from his name; his reply
was, would he had known of it sooner, for then he could otherwise disposed of
himself, but now it was to late. Then at parting, I desired him, that (God
sending him well thither) he would write to me by some friend, whether my words
were true or no: And now I have lately received a Letter from my Cozen, and
have drawn our a true Copy of it, and have sent it unto you, and very, well
knowing that in these times, things of such enormity are tolerated to be
discovered, I thought it first my duty to God, and secondly to my Country, to
discover the same, that both his Owners and Merchants who are his Imployers at
present, may (by Gods grace) be more cautious hereafter of employing of him;
the reasons whereof you shall presently understand; ^or if any scruple be
made, I have the original to show, to quit both you, and my self: So rest,

Yours, I. H.


Indian Bridge in the Barbados, the 25. of Ian. 1645. Loving and kind Cozen
Headley,
MY love remembered unto you, we arrived here the 13. of this month I came very
sick ashore, and am not well yet, I think if I had been two days longer at Sea
I had fed fishes; for Mr. Hardedge victualled his Ship with stinking Beef and
Fish, and that infected our bloods; insomuch, that there was sixty, seventy,
and eighty sick at a time, our Surgeon a Dunce, and kept his Cabin all the
cold weather; he laid a man so fast asleep, he never waked again, and being
asked why he gave him so much opium, he answered, he did not know, he was
bound in his body, And our Master allowed us but meal a day, and stinking
Bevaradge, and not enough of that neither. There was not one person but was
sick two or three times, except one Gentleman and my self, who held out till
within four days of our arrival: In our sickness our Master would not allow
us water to drink, notwithstanding he brought ten Tun into the Harbor, and
has sold thirty Tun of Beer for himself and others. Neither would he allow us
Oatmeal to make water-grewel; And if he had, there was not one corn of Salt in
the ship to season although we lay a month in the Downs, and often desired
him to buy some: The sick people had nothing but the thin broth of the Peace,
and because they could eat no biscuit he took that from them, and when they
were well, they would have eat five or six Cakes a day, it they could have
got them, insomuch they looked like death it self.

He denied a woman with child beer, that was brought to bed two days after,
and perished, and three more, and the Child: we cast overboard my Lord of
Carlisle his Secretary, I pray remember me to Mr. Crews: So I rest,

Your loving Cozen, WILL: EDLIN.


One of the Seamen having bled twenty four hours, desired the Master to take
his wages, clothes, and all that he had in the sh^p, upon condition he might
have sweet bee^e and not suffer him to perish.

To the impartial Reader.
Take notice that the Letter came from a Gentleman of good worth, and what he
has written, question not of the truth of it, I hope it may be a means to
make the School phrase good, Felix quem faciunt aliena pericula ^autem, which
God grant it may.

Fare thee well.


FINIS.

