A True and Perfect RELATION Of a GREAT AND HAPPY VICTORY Obtained by the
Parliaments Forces, under the Command of Colonel Ruthin, over Sir Ralph
Hopton, and his Cavaliers, near Plymmouth, with the Names of the Prisoners they
have taken in the Battle, and diverse other passages of extraordinary
importance.

As it was sent in a Letter from the Commit at Dartmouth, directed to the
Right Honorable the Lords and others of the Committee for the safety of the
Kingdom; And read at a Conference of both Houses of Parliament, on Tuesday the
13 of December 1642.

John Brown Cler. Parliament.

Subscribed unto by William Ruthyen Alex. Pym Lov^s Dicke. George Thomson
Anthony Rouse.


December. 14. Printed for John Wright in the Old-Bailey. 1642

To the Right HONORABLE The Lords and others of the Committee, for the safety
of the Kingdom: present these.
Right Honorable;
ACcording to our duty and trust reposed in us, we have used our best
endeavor for the preservation of this County: And although little Assistance
has been offered us by the people here (to what we expected) yet God that
never fails those that go on in his way, and rest upon his power and
goodness, has so blessed us now in this time of Streights, that he has done
great things for us by small means, to him alone be the glory and praise.

Upon Tuesday the 29. of November, Captain Thompson, and Captain Pym, by
command of Colonel Ruthyen, went to Plymton, to keep the Town with their
Troops, and about 70. Dragoneers and 200. Foot, if they saw it might have
been kept without great hazard. But the next day hearing the Enemy was
marching from Tavistock, with (as was related to us) 3000. Horse and Foot, and
about 8. pieces of Ordinance, and finding the Town of Plymton not to be kept
without as great a Force as should come against it, by reason the Town lies so
scatte^ring, and several Villages so near it; And least the Enemy should come
betwixt them and Plymouth, they drew forth toward the Enemy, but night coming
on, they could not come to give them a charge, without hazard of the damaging
of one another in the dark, they then went to Plymouth.

The next day being Thursday, Colonel Ruthyen, with 4. Troops of Horse and
the aforesaid Dragoneers, went to Plymton to revive the Town and to see the
motion of the Enemy, and found the Town as was related to him. Then drew
toward Plymouth, and stood upon the Larie for the space of three hour, facing
the Enemy, who attempted one charge to have drawn us to their Ambascadoes, but
fled presently, and durst not withal then force, which we judge was at least
2500. Horse and Foot (then left, for many ran away the night before) give us
a charge upon fair ground, but that night, they went to Plymton where they
continued.

Wednesday the 7. of this present month, Colonel Ruthyen with the aforesaid
4. Troops of Horse, and about 100. Dragoneers, about three of the clock in
the morning, marched from Plymouth, over Ruberdowne, being a by way to Modbery,
where were gathered together by the Sheriffs command, 3. or 4000. Men, some
with Arms, and some without, and we came so privately, that they did not
discover us, until we came within a mile of the Town, which did so amaze
them, that after Sir Ralph Hopton had drew up the Force he could presently get,
he with Sir Nicholas Slaning ran away and escaped, and after a small
skirmish with those that stood to it, with the loss of one man and two hurt,
and 3. or 4. Horses, we took Prisoners the Sheriff, Sir Edmund Foscue, and
his Brother, Sir Edward Seymore and his son, Master Bassett, Captain
Glomery, Master Shopcut, Captain Wood, Captain Bidlock, Barnes of Exeter,
Lieutenant Penrose, Master Short, etc,

From thence we marched that day with our Prisoners to Dartmouth to the
gladding of the hearts of the good people there (having had a long march
sixteen hours on horseback,) for while we were upon our march toward
Modbery, one Master Thomas Lee was in Treaty with Sir Ralph Hopton, about the
delivery up of the Town as we are informed, and by his confession he had got a
warrant to free his house from Plundering, which Master Lee we have also
taken, and with the rest of the Prisoners, have sent to Plymouth this morning
in a Frigot called the Cresset, by one Cap. Plunket; we ran a great hazard in
this service, as your Honors may judge, for the Enemy lay on both sides with
all their force, part at Plymton, and part at Totnesse, but the Lord carried us
along in our way, and deluded the Enemies of his Truth, and our Liberties into
our hands, and made many more to flee before us. The Prisoners, Colonel
Ruthyen has ordered to be sent from Plymouth, with the first fair wind to
London, and we now lie here expecting some Force from Exeter to join with us,
which if we can have but a 1000. Dragoneers, we hope to do the Enemy much
damage.

We here this day, that since our coming hither, the Enemy is come with the
greatest part of their Force to Totnesse, what are left at Plymton we know not,
If speedy supplies come not of Men, Money, and Arms, we fear they will
plunder most of the good Towns, of this County, and what it may grow to, if
God does not mightily work for us, we know not, your Honors know of what
concernement the keeping of this County is, and we doubt not but the great
need of assistance will be sufficient to move your Honors to take into
consideration the premises, which that your Honors would please to do, is the
humble desire of

Your most obedient Servants. William Ruthyen. Alex. Pym. Lovis Dicke. George
Thompson. Antho. Rouse.

Dartmouth the 9 of December. 1642.
FINIS.

