A lively Representation of the manner how his late Majesty was beheade^ upon
the Scaffold Ian: 30: 1648:
A representation of the execution of the Kings Judges.


The True CHARACTERS OF THE Educations, Inclinations and several Dispositions
Of all and every one of those Bloody and Barbarous Persons, Who Sat as Judges
upon the Life of our late Dread Sovereign KING CHARLES I. Of ever Blessed Memory.

TOGETHER With a True Account of the Horrid Temptations and Suggestions, by
which the Principallest of them did first draw in themselves, and afterward
their Associates unto the Committing of that Execrable Murder.

LONDON, Printed for Edward Thomas, at the Sign of the Adam and Eve in Little
Britain without Aldersgate, 1661.

To the Reader.
THe Conspirators and Abettors in taking away the Life of His late Sacred
Majesty, as they were many in Number, so their Crimes were not all of one
Latitude; they are therefore distinguished by their Punishments, as they are
distinguished by the Nature and Degrees of their Offenses: The most Capital
being Excepted both for Life and Estate; in which Number there are Forty nine:
Others only to suffer in their Estates, in which Number there are Seven. And
some others the Abettors, the Principal whereof is William Lenthall, to suffer
both in Life and Estate, if they shall be found for the time to come to accept
of any Offices, Civil or Military, or to act any thing prejudicial to the
Government of his Sacred Majesty: And in this Number there are Eighteen
specified in the Act of General Pardon and Indemnity.

You are to understand, that diverse of the Contrivers and Actors in the Life
of His late Sacred Majesty, were taken away by the hand of Death, before the
Eye of Justice could take any notice of them. They are in Number four and
Twenty; the Chiefest and the Ringleaders of them Oliver Cromwell, that Bloody
and Prodigious Usurper; and John Bradshaw, who Sentenced His Majesty to Death;
two Persons so odious in their Deeds and Memory, that Needham who became their
own Creature, and Wrote upon their accounts the Public Intelligencer, and
Mercurius Politicus, does in his Praises of them recite it, as a thing very
Remarkable, That they both dyed on their own Beds! These two above with Henry
Ireton and Thomas Pride's Bodies are Ordered by the Parliament to be taken out
of their Graves, and Drawn on an Hurdle to Tyborn, where they are to be Hanged
up, for being Traitors to their lawful King and Country, and then after buried
under the Gallows, as a just Desert for such Regicides.

The true Characters of the Educations and several Disposition of all those
Barbarous Persons, who Sat as Judges on our late dread Sovereign King Charles
the I.
THIS Oliver Cromwell, was always a great stickler against Monarchy and
Episcopacy, and long before the Wars began, had many long and private
Conferences with his Friends, for a thorough Alteration: On the beginning of
the Wars his Estate was not valued to amount to above Thirteen hundred pounds
in money, with which he intended to purchase at a cheap rate, some of the new
drained. Lands in Lincolnshire; but the Wars favoring him, he passed the
several Degrees of Military Command, and aspiring after Sovereignty, waded
through the blood of his own natural Prince; after which no Cruelty was
unpractised by him, for the maintenance of his greatness. In the height
whereof, he was taken out of the world; And he who spilled so much blood, and
thirsted after more, being dead, and dissected (to the Admiration both of the
Chyrurgians and standers by) there was not so much as one Drop of Blood found
in his own heart.

John Bradshaw, A Councellor at Law in Grayes Inn, and a Judge at Guild Hall,
London, was President of the High Court of Justice, where having Sentenced our
Sovereign Lord the King to Death: was afterward heard to say, That he had very
well satisfied his own conscience with the Vnparalleled Murder that he had
committed.

Thomas Harrison, Major General: The son of a Butcher in Staffordshire, servant
to Mr. Hulher an Atturny in Cliffords Inn, a man always of a factious spirit,
and of dangerous principles in Religion; which made him acceptable to the
beginners of the late War, he was not only a malicious Judge against his
Majesty, but one of those who appointed the time and place of execution, and
was executed by the hand of Justice in the sight of the place he appointed.

Henry I^eton, The son of a Minister, and a great enemy to the Clergy, he
married the daughter of the Usurper, and was altogether of his father-in-laws
temper, and was one of those who appointed, the time and place for the
Execution.

Sr. Hardresse Waller, A Colonel of Horse, and a Great Committee-man, one of
those who Sentenced the King, and who at his arraignment confessed himself to
be guilty.

Col. John O^ey. First a Stoaker in a Brew House at Islington, and afterward a
Chandler in Thames Street, where he converted his blew Apron into a Buffe Coat,
and afterward became a Colonel of Dragoons, an inveterate enemy to the King,
and one who appointed the place of the Execution.

Francis Allen, A Gold Smith in Fleet street, and a very unfit man, if he had
either wit or grace in him, to be a judge on his own King

John Alured, One who at first pretended to much conscience, but afterward
being made Colonel, and inured to blood and cruelty, made nothing to wash his
own hand in the blood of his Royal Sovereign.

John Carew, a man assenting to his brothers death, as he had done to the
Kings, he was of Major General Harrisons principles, and did partake of the
same end with him.

Adrean Scroop, Descended of a good family in Buckinghamshire, but being a
great Puritan was easily drawn in to be one of the black list, which sat upon
the death of his own King, for which he himself suffered as a Traitor.

Thomas Scot, Borne in Buckinghamshire, by his policy did arise to great
preferment, and to a vast Fortune, he was not only one of those who Judged the
King, but desired that the infamy of the act might be engraven as a Badge of
Honor on his Tomb, in these words, Here lies. Thomas Scot who adjudged to
Death the late King.

John Blackistone, A shopkeeper in New Castle, and by an access of fortune
swollen to an excess of ambition, he was one of the Kings Judges.

Daniel Blagrave, A Councellor at Law, and a great Committee man, he was a
Constant Rumper, and by the Tribe of Traitors thought a very fit person to sit
among them on the Death of their Sovereign.

Miles Corbet, Of Norfolk, at the beginning of the Parliament, a man of a very
considerable estate; If he had not been a Jew or worse then Judas, he had never
condemned his innocent Master unto Death.

Cregory Clement, A merchant who having sold his conscience, not so much
betrayed as condemned his Master, for which he has since suffered as a Traitor.

Sr William Constable, being driven into necessity by his Debts, sold his Land
to Sr Marmaduke Langdale for twenty thousand pound, the money being received,
he had his Lands given him again by the Parliament for his good service, (be
like) being one of the Judges on the Death of the King.

Sr. John Danvers, a person much degenerating from the honor of his noble
Family, who thinking it safest to go on the strongest side, was drawn to be one
of the Judges, who sat on the Kings Death.

George Fleetwood, another of the same temper, and who being one of his
Sovereign Judges, acknowledged himself to be guilty of it.

Cornelsus Holland, was first a poor Boy in the Court, and waited on Sr. Henry
Vane, Controwler of the Princes House. He afterward by fraud attained unto a
very great Estate, and was one of the Kings Judges, and the Rump being turned
out by Lambert, he was thought worthy to be one of that most ridiculous
Committee of Safety.

John Hewson, a Schoomaker of London, he was also a great stickler for the
Cause for which he was made first a Colonel, and afterward a Lord; having been
the cause of the murder of some boys playing at Football in the streets, he
was found guilty by the Coroners Jury, but being one of the murtherous Judges
that sat upon his Prince, he will be found guilty by another Jury, if he be
apprehended.

John Jones, first a Serving-man, afterward a Colonel, and married the
Usurpers sister, and a very fit man to join with him in the taking away the
life of his Prince, for which he suffered as a Traitor.

John Lisle, none of the least Adversaries to the late King, he constantly
assisted the Usurper in all his Ambitious Practices, and in his spilling of
Innocent blood, He was a great man amongst the chiefest of those that passed
sentence upon their King.

Nicholas Love, the son of Doctor Love of Winchester, a constant and a
contumacious Rumper, one of his Sovereigns cruel Judges, and an Abjurator
against Kingly Power.

Sr. Michael Livesey, one that could act an Hypocrite to the life in voice and
gesture; he was one of his Majesty's most cruel Judges, and very eminent in the
Rump Parliament.

Henry Marten, Colonel of a Regiment of Horse, and (somesay) of a Regiment of
Whores: Having sold his Estate three times over, he lay many years a Prisoner
in the Kings Bench for debt; he labored a long time under a bad Reputation,
but the greatest of all is, that he was one of the wilful Judges of his own
Sovereign.

Thomas Hammond of Surrey, was first under the Lord Fairfax, and afterward a
great Creature of the Usurpers, and a Constant promoter of his Interests, by
whom he was induced to be one of those most cruel Judges against his own
Prince, to the great grief of his most Learned and Reverend Brother, Dr. Henry
Hammond.

John Moore, heretofore Colonel of the Guards, and who sometime had the benefit
of the Passes out of the City of London; and one of the black List, who
condemned his own Sovereign.

Gilbert Millington, a kind of a Lawyer, and a Chairman to the Committee of
Plundered Ministers, where Phelps and he shared large Fees; another of the Kings
most unlawful Judges.

Sr John Bourchier, a person of no great repute, nor estate till in those
troubled times, he got that which he fought for; He was observed to be as
constant at Committees, as at his Dinners in Hel^ in Westminster, one would
have thought a man that did eat so much, should have but a little desire to
drink any deep draughts, especially of the Royal blood of his own Sovereign,
at whose Trial he was too unmercifull a Judge.

Thomas Challoner, a man most violently invective against Monarchy, as for his
hypocrisy and Religion, there is no man can give you a better Testimony of him
than Monsieur Cone, who was Confessor to the late Pope, and who was very
Conversant with him, when some years since he was at Rome; but it is to be
believed, that the Confessor himself (unless without some manifest signs of
true Repentance) would be very unwilling to Absolve him of his barbarous Murder
of his own Sovereign

Richard Dean, first, but as a kind of a Hayman in Suffolk, and afterward a
Matrosse in the Artillary of the Army: Being an absolute creature (amongst many
others) of the Usurpers; he was by him constituted one of the Generals at Sea,
where he lost his life; but neither the loss of his Bowels or his Arm, was
able to make the least satisfaction for the loss of his Majesty's life, who by
him (being one of his Judges) not long before was barbarously Sentenced to a
most unworthy Death.

Henry Mildmay* a monster of Ingratitude, a shallow fellow (by some not unfitly
called Sr. Whimsey Mildmay) of a shallow apprehension, and fit to take any
Impression, otherwise he would never become Judge of that King, whom he was
bound to honor and pray for all the days of his life.

John Barkstead, in his minority of Francis Allens occupation, and a pitiful
Goldsmith in the Strand: He forsook his shop at the very first news of the War,
and shuffled himself into the Camp; being a true servant all along to the
Usurper, who constantly preferred him from one place to another; he became a
most severe persecutor of the Kings party, and was one of his worst Judges.

Edmund Harvey, heretofore a poor Silkman, but being become a Colonel, he
juggled himself into the Bishop of Londons house at Fulham; he was a factious
Rumper, and one of his Majesty's most cruel Judges.

William Heavingham, of Heavingham Castle in Suffolk, a Gentleman of an ancient
Family, and by the evil Council of the implacable Rumpers drawn in to be one
of the Judges against the King.

John Downs, a professed hater of any Government in one single Person, and
therefore more easily wrought upon to be an Assistant in the death of his most
righteous Sovereign.

James Temple, a great Rumper himself, and a person much be friended by them,
he made himself famous by no other Act at all, but that most abominable one of
being one of the Judges of his own Sovereign.

Simon Meyn, a great Committee man in the Long Parliament, and having got much
by them, he easily became a Rumper, and so became one of the Judges of his King.

John Dixwell, Burgess for Dover, a person who has many curses from the
greatest part of those who had to do with him in Kent; but that which renders
him most accursed, is his wilful Conspiring amongst many others of his fellow
Judges, to take away the life of our most gracious Sovereign.

Isaac Ewer, at first but a Serving-man, was preferred afterward to be a
Colonel, and had many Acres given him in Ireland for his good service, and for
being one of the cruel Judges against the King.

Sr. Gregory Norton, a man of no considerable fortune before these wars, but he
obtained afterward Richmond House, and much of the Kings goods for an
inconsiderable value, which made him to lend so ready an ear for the taking
away of the Kings life, he being one of the Judges that murmured themselves
into a conspiracy against it.

William Purefoy, Governor of Coventry; advancing once to fight with a party of
the Kings, and hearing they were numerous, he hid himself in a Barley field,
for which one of his servants that was afterward a Waterman, refused to Ferry
him over the water; he was a great Committee man, and one of the Kings Judges.

Isaac Pennington, Alderman, he was protected against creditors, yet has
bought store of Bishops Lands; he was an implacable enemy to the King and one
of his murderous Judges.

Thomas Andrews, Was Illegally made Lord Mayor, on purpose to Proclaim the act
against Kingly Government; A fit person therefore to be one of the Judges that
murdered their most Gracious Sovereign.

Owen Roe, One of the Firebrands of the City, being a professed enemy to its
ancient Government and one of the Kings Judges.

Robert Titchborn, Alderman; a Knight, and a Lord of Olivers making, which he
deserved for being one of the most cruel Judges against his King; afterward
was very forward in proclaiming the Act for no kingship: He was one of Doctor
Hewits Judges, and not long since a mighty man in the Committee, so called, of
Safety.

William G^ffe, Apprentise to a Salter in London, and his time being out, he be
took himself to the Cause, and from a Quartermaster was preferred to be a
Colonel; He was a Lord of the Usurpers making, a great aspirer unto Military
dignities; and one of his Sovereigns most cruel Judges.

Thomas Horton, In his extraction very inconsiderable, being Servant and
Falconer to Sr. Arthur Haselrige, a person of so little note, that he seemed
only to be remarkable in wickedness, by filling up the number of the Judges
that sat on the Life of our late renowned Sovereign.

Henry Smith, one of the Six Clerks, an implacable Enemy to all Sovereignty,
and another of his Princes Murderers.

Anthony Stapley, lived sometimes in the reputation of an honest man, but by
the temptation of crooked Interests, being drawn aside unto the Usurpers
Faction, he became one of the merciless Judges of his most gracious Sovereign.

William Say, a stately Committee-man in Kent, and thorough paced Lawyer, who
conceiving he could not better add unto his greatness, then by complying with
the Times, became one of the most unjust Judges against his own Sovereign.

Peter Temple, another great Committee-man; an odious Rumper, and one of the
Judges of his Sovereign.

John Ven, sometimes Governor of Windsor, and one who had made himself rich
with the Kings goods and movables, and rather than part with any of it, he
became one of his greedy and covetous Judges.

Edward Whaley, a kind of a Woollen Draper, flying from his Debts in London,
to the exercise of Arms, was always a great promoter of the Usurpers designs,
he was one of the accursed crew that durst sit in Judgment upon the death of
his Sovereign.

Thomas Wayt, a great and greedy heaper up of moneys, an Enemy to the Public,
to advance his private Interests, and one of the Kings Judges.

Valentine Wauten, Governor of Lin Regis, who has often times been accused
for Corruption and Oppression, and knew not how to defend one wickedness, but
by committing a greater, viz. by being one of the Judges on the life of our
late Sovereign.

John Cook, who was he that did Read his Majesty's Charge, in the pretended
High Court of Justice, and for which and many other Treasonable attempts of the
same nature, he has since suffered as a Traitor.

Daniel Axtell, Colonel, who being proved to have a very high hand in the Kings
Death, by encouraging his Soldiers and otherwise, has since suffered as a
Traitor.

Francis Hacker, one of those to whom the bloody Warrant for his Majesty's
Execution was directed, has since suffered the pains of death according to the
merits of that Treasonable Trespass which he committed.

William Hewlet, having in a most desperate vainglory, boasted, that he was
the Person who severed the Head (of our late Dread Sovereign King Charles the
I.) from his Body, is Condemned to suffer accordingly, as he has deserved.

Hugh Peter's, had very many Witnesses that did bring in their Evidence against
him, and so clearly, that he could not deny it. Being Sentenced to death, he
seemed afterward in a kind of distracted condition, and unprepared to dye,
but on the day following, he was drawn on a hurdle to Charing Cross, where he
was Hanged, Drawn and Quartered; His Head and Quarters fastened on several
Poles, are hanging on several Gates of the City.

Edward Dendy, Sergeant at Arms, who carried the Mace before the King, and
behaved himself very insolently both in Words and Deeds to his late sacred
Majesty, is Exempted from all Pardon, and to suffer the loss both of life and
goods.

Andrew Broughton, a great Committee-man, and an implacable Enemy to the Crown
and King-ship, is another of that vile List, that durst sit in Judgment upon
his late Majesty.

Sir Henry Vane, a great discontent during all Governments that but tended unto
Monarchy; and late Treasurer to the Navy, who intended to match his Son to
Lamberts Daughter, is likewise Exempted from Pardon either to Life or Fortunes.

John Lambert, Who was so inveterate against the King, that having lost all, he
desired that Richard Cromwell might be chosen Protector, than Our Dread
Sovereign should be restored to the Crown; Is for that and many other
Treasonable Practices exempted also from Pardon either to Life or Fortunes.

I shall conclude all with the memorable Example of Gods Divine Justice upon
Lockyer, and Active Agitator and Leveller in the Army, who had a principal hand
in seizing and bringing the King to his death, Cried out, Justice, Justice,
Justice, openly against him, and spit in the Kings face in Westminster Hall as
he was going to his Trial, before his Condemnation, Conducted him to the
Block; and was shortly after condemned in a Counsel of War by some of the Kings
own Judges, and shot to death as a Mutinier in Paul's Churchyard, London. Also
John Lilburn's double-Tryall for his life; soon after, a grand stickler against
the House of Lords: The proceedings against Saxbey, Syndercombe, and other
Levellers, who were chief Instruments in that Horrid Murder of our late dread
Sovereign, and the Grand Opposers of the House of Lords. The sudden and
fearful Deaths of Colonel Ven, Rigby, and others who were Engagers against
his Majesty, with the late pangs of Conscience, which Colonel William Purefoy
sustained before his death, for having a hand in the Kings blood, which LAY
HEAVY ON HIS HEART, as he told some friends. The sudden death of that Tyrant
Oliver Cromwell and his two Sons dismounting soon after; and Gods signal
Providence to his Majesty in his Peaceable Restoration, Maugre all the Plots
and Contrivances of his Enemies.

May it not awaken the stupid seared Consciences of all those now living, who
had any hand in these Tragedies and Engagements against King and Parliament, to
bring them to speedy and sincere public Repentance for them; Lest they fall
into the like Terrors or Judgments, as others that have so wilfully Engaged in
that execrable Murder.

FINIS.

