August 19th.

A True and Exact Relation Of all the Proceedings of Marquess Hartford, Lord
Pawlet, Lord Seymor, Lord Coventry, Sir Ralph Hopton, and other His Majesty's
Commissioners in the publishing of the Commission of Array in his Majesty's
County of SOMERSET.

Brought over by a Gentleman who was an Eye witness of all the Passages and
Proceedings there.

Whereunto is added True News from York, Hull, Newcastle and Darbyshire.

Also a List of the Horse under the Command of WILLIAM Earl of Bedford, Lord
General. With the Names of the Captains of every Troop; each Troop
containing sixty Horse, besides one Livetenant, one Ensign, one Coronet, one
Quartermaster, two Trumpeters, three Corporals, one Sadler, one Farrier.

London Printed, 1642. Aug. 19.

A TRVE RELATION Of all the proceedings of the Lord Marquess Hartford, Lord
Paulet, Lord Coventry, Sir Ralph Hopton, and other His Majesty's Commissioners
in the County of Somerset.
Somersetshire.
Monday the first of August the Lord Marquess being then in Wells, was
informed that Sir Francis Popham, S. Edward Baynton, Sr Edward Hungerford, and
M. John Ash did intend by force of arms to oppose them in the executing of
the Commission of Array, and to that intent had commanded the Trained-bands of
that part of Somersetshire, and the North west part of Wilts, to attend them on
Mendeep, in the mean time Sir Ralph Hopton publishing the Commission of Array
in Shepton-mallet was opposed by M. Stroude, who came with 700. men and would
not suffer Sir Ralph Hopton to read it; upon which, though his company was but
small, not amounting to above 24 Horse, or thereabout, yet he so valiantly
behaved himself, that amidst all M. Strouds company he unhorst him (though to
the great hazard of his life) for he had no sooner laid hands on him but a man
of M. Strouds presented a Pistol to him ready cockt, and had killed that Noble
Gentleman, had it not been prevented by one M. White then waiting no him, who
snacht the Pistol out of this fellows hands. Sir Ralph having taken M. Stroud
prisoner, delive^ed him into the Constable of Shepton-mallets hands, who was
compelled by the multitude after S^r R^lphs departu e to release him or lose
his own life.

By Wednesday night the Gentlemen of the County had sent into Wels to attend
the Marquess two or three hundred Horse very well provided, and Sir John
Horner with some of the other side, were met at M. Alexander Pophams House,
whose company amounted to 1000. armed m^n, besides the multitudes that came
flocking from every house upon Letters that were sent some Gentlemen of that
County, stuffed with so many doubts and fears that the people thought if they
did not now play the men, they should be utterly undone forever. This caused
their army to increase, so that by thursday night their company consisted of
8000 people, at which time the Marquess perceiving the danger he with the rest
of his company were in by reason of this multitude, thought fit to send out
Scouts, 60. Horse or upward, to guard the west part of the Town, which
accordingly they did, but roving somewhat farther then they had intended, the
evening being very silent they might hear not far distant a Troop of Horse
and Foot, as they guest, which made them to be very earnest to be satisfied in
the thing, therefore with a joint consent they marched forward till they found
this conjecture to be true, the company as they conceived could not be less
the 500. and therefore thought, their own company being so small, they should
be forced to give them way; but see the brave resolution of these brave
Cavaleers who thought it more glory to die Honorably, then to purchase a life
by a cowardly flight, therefore they chose three of their fellows to treat
with them and to know what their intentions were; their answer was they
intended to march for Mendeep that night; the Gentlemen hearing their answer,
told them that by the Lord Marquess appointment they were set to guard that
piece of that County, and keep peace, if by any means possible they might, and
with all desired their Captains, M. Pine, and M. Pr^stle, that they would
return every man to his own home, this could by no means be granted, but if
they could not have their way by fair means they would have it by foul. This
answer being returned to the Gentlemen they provided themselves for the
encounter, Collonell Lunsford with 20 of the Troopers armed with Carbines, by
the help of a ditch joining to the highway lay undiscovered, and commanded the
Soldiers that none should stir till they saw him with his company come forth
of this pit shouting and discharging there Carbines, which being done they all
should do the like, by the time they had set themselves in o^der these people
were come within a Musket shot, and discharged against the Gentlemen forty
Muskets or more, but were not as yet come so near Collonell Lunsford as he
wished them, who was forced as yet to lie still, but coming on thinking to make
their way (through their supposed weak adversary) at length came within the
reach of his Carbines, who presently shouted and discharged amongst the people,
who being hurt by they knew not whom, nor hardly from whence, and the Cavaleers
with the same expression coming in their faces, were so distracted that they
knew not which way to fly, some throwing down their arms and running into
Corners, others fled, some ran into the Corn to hid? themselves, for next day
in the afternoon two of them were found dead in the Corn, (yet note the
goodness of these Gentlemen Cavaleers) they did not offer to strike one man to
hurt him after they were routed, only took Captain Prestle prisoner, who was
as well entreated with the Marquess as any one of his own servants. There were
killed of these people four, and foureteen that are desperarely wounded; they
took from them 15 Horse, and 30 Muskets with some other Ammunition to no great
value, which they ran away from.

Well, now to my Mendeep Gentlemen, who (as some say) were no sooner upon the
hill in the sight of Wells, but their number increased to 40000. fighting men,
and women, some bringing Pitchforkes, Dungpeeks, and such like weapons, not
knowing (poor souls) whom to fight against, but afraid they were of the
Papists.

Now in the sight of this great Army there appeared some forty Horse or there
abouts, which so frighted them that they knew not what to do, nor whether to
fly, a confused noise was heard in the Camp, crying the enemy was commings;
well, to be short the Cavaleers left the hill, informing the Lord Marquess of
the multitude, desiring he would be pleased to suffer 500 Troopers to encounter
with them (if they could) but he out of his goodness toward them would by no
means grant their desires therein, but resolved rather then spill blood to
leave the Town next morning, which according-he did; no sooner were these
Gentlemen gone, but these people came into the Town with such expression of joy
for their supposed conquest as is hardly imaginable, tearing down the painted
Glass out of the windows of the Church, and in the height of their zeal
gloried in that action more then in vanquishing of the Papists; and having
found a picture, that pleased them so well that they placed it upon the point
of a Spear, whether in adoration or derision I cannot tell. So I leave the^
departing home with that great trophe of their victory.

As for the Lord Marquess and the rest of the Gentlemen, I hear they are at
Sherburne with a guard of 2000 men completely armed, with two Pistols before
them, a Carbine in one hand, and a Lance in the other.

Farewell.
York.
THursday the fifth of August, there was a meeting of the whole County of
York, where his Majesty made a speech desiring their assistance to serve him
in person, or upon condition that they would tender their Horse and Arms, etc.
His Majesty would find men, but they Petition the contrary desiring they might
not be disarmed, but that they might keep their arms for the defense of the
County, which His Majesty was graciously pleased to grant; in the West riding
of this County the Commission of Array has been put in execution, and they
have deducted men out of every band which are to go toward York for his
Majesty's service. Friday 6 of August there landed at Hartle-Poole a Ship laden
with great store of Ammunition and money for His Majesty's service, and were
safe conveyed to York: Our Soldiers here are very serviceably set forth
thought not so fine a^ those in London, but our Cavaleers are exceeding brave.
His Majesty has given Commission to Colonel Lunsford to raise a 1000
Volunteers in York, or else where with all speed.

Hull.
THe Cavaleers have left the siege against the Town, the market is kept
openly, but there is a strong Garrison kept here still. Sir John issue out of
the Town diverse times, and has taken diverse horse and foot, and likewise he
has taken on Master Booth a recusant, but Colonel Ashbournham is escaped from
thence in a disguise, and is fled to his Majesty which pleases not Sir John,
the Yorkshire men have promised His Majesty to send 500 Horse to lie before
Hull, to stop all passages and hinder Sir John's roving out on the Country. Sir
Thomas Instam with his assistance has quartered his Soldiers in the road.
Colonel Lunsford is near Doncaster, and other Cavaleers have dispersed
themselves in several troops to hinder all passages to or from London.

New Castle.
THe Earl of New-Castele has strongly fortified New Castle, with above a 100
pieces of Ordnance, and keeps a strong Garrison there. Also there is great
store of Ammunition landed there from Holland or other parts.

Darbyshire.
THere has been here a great robbery committed lately by the Cavaleers upon a
poor man, who had received 50. l. upon a bond, and being returning home was
set upon by 7 Cavaleers, who held their Pistols at him ready cockt, demanding
his money, saying they were His Majesty's servants, and they must have money,
and having gotten the money, shot and killed his Horse, but spared the person
alive, who when they were gone he made speed unto the Town, and sent hue and
cry after them, and two of them were taken in an Inn near the high way, and
were brought before the Justice and committed to prison, but they found very
little money they had, for they who were the purse-bearers are not as yet
cought. At a mustering of the trained bands here, there was a great division
among the Soldiers, for some were for the Commission of Array, and others
stood for the Ordinance of Parliament, the contention grew so hot that there
was a great slaughter on both sides, there was 19 slain of those that were for
the Commission of Array, and five of those which stood for the Ordinance of
Parliament, there was a Justice of peace of this County a very able man, who
made a speech in the defense of the Ordinance of Parliament which gave the
people great satisfaction.

A list of the Horse under the command of William Earl of Bedford, Lord
General of the horse, with the names of the Captains, each Troop containing
60 Horse, besides 1 Lieutenant, 1 Coronet, 1 Ensign, 1 Quarter master, 2
Trumpeters, 3 Corperalls, a Sadler and a Farrier.
Troop.
1. Lord General, 2. Sir William Balfoore Leiut. Ge. 3. Lord Gray. 4. Lord
Brook. 5. Lord Hasting. 6. Lord St. John. 7. Lord Stanford. 8. Lord Feilding.
9. Lord Wharton. 10. L. Willoughby of Parh. 11. James Sheffield. 12. Sir
William Waller. 13. John Gunter. 14. William Pretty. 15. Robert Burrell. 16.
Francis Dowet. 17. -- Temple. 18. John Bird. 19. Matthew Draper. 20. -- Dimock.
21. Hor. Carry. 22. John Aluered. 23. John Neale. 24. John Hammond. 25. Ed.
Ayscough. 26. Alexander Pim. 27. John Hotham. 28. Arthur Evelin. 29. Geor.
Tompson. 30. Edwin Sandys. 31. Antony Milemay. 32. Ed. Kighly. 33. Nathaniel
Fines. 34. Ed. Berry. 35. Alex. Douglas. 36. Tho. Lidcot. 37. Tho. Hammond. 38.
John Dulbeir. 39. Fean. Fines. 40. Sir Arth. Haselwrick. 41. Sir Walt. Earl.
42. John Fleming. 43. Arthur Goodwin. 44. Rich. Grinvil. 45. Tho. Terrill. 46.
John Hale. 47. Hen. Milemay of Gr. 48. Will. Balfoore. 49. George Austen. 50.
Adrian Scroope. 51. Herc. Langrishe. 52. Ed. Wingate. 53. Ed. Babington. 54.
Charles Chichester. 55. Hen. Treton. 56. Wilter Long. 57. John Fines. 58. Fran.
Thompson. 59. Edmund West.
Captains of the four Troops of Dragooners each Troop 100.
1. Sir John Brown^. 2. Nathan. Gordon. 3. John Brown. 4 Will. Buchan.
FINIS.

