A True and Joyful RELATION Of a Famous and Remarkable VICTORY OBTAINED BY the
Inhabitants of Clamorganshire in Wales, against the Marquess of Hartford, and
the Cavaleers, who had took the Castle of Cardiffe in the said County. October
the 3. 1642.

Also the manner how they obtained the VIctory, killing fifty of the Cavaleers,
with the loss of nine men, and after five hours fight obtained the Castle,
putting them all to flight.

Together with the means of the flight of the Marquess of Hartford into Wales
and the Victorious proceedings of the Earl of Bedford against his Confederates,
his taking the Lord Pawlet, Sir Henry Berkley, and two of his brothers Sir
Charles and Sir John Barks prisoners.

LONDON: Printed for H. Fowler. October 5.

True and Happy NEWS FROM WALES Declaring the Proceedings of the Marquess of
Hartford in Clamorgan shire.
THe Earl of Bedford since his last and Happy Victory over the Marquess of
Hartford, the Lord Paulet, and the rest of their Confederates, except Sir Ralph
Hopton, one of the greatest incendiaries in that opposition and Rebellion, who
is departed from them, and is escaped privately (as it is furmised) and returned
back again into Somersetshire, but there his welcome and entertainment will be
very mean and slender, were chased and pursued to Minhead by the Earl of
Bedford, where the Marquis according to his expectation, but contrary to his
desect found and was entertained, and received by some Coal ships,

Yet the Earl of Bedford had formerly used all possible means for the
preservation and stoppage of his passage over Severn.

Notwithstanding all which means formerly used by the Earl, for the prevention
of the Marquess his flight, having gotten the opportunity and conduct of these
small Coal ships, which then lay in the Harbor, he got over the River, and
escaped into Wales, and by that means escaped the Justice of the pursuing
Enemy. Yet notwithstanding this unhappy escape, and the Earls hopes to compass
his ends, the cause of all his labors and vexations, being frustrate by the
escape of the Marquess, he did not desist from his purpose but did pursue them
with all the violence he possibly could, and at the last came in view of them,
and being seconded with a happy success, he was made in part Master of his
Desires, for although he could not watch the Marquess who by the help of those
Wale ships had escaped into Wales, yet he took the Lord Paulet, Sir Henry
Berkly, and two of his Brothers, whom he has now in custody, and as soon as
with convenience he can, he will send them up to the Parliament, that by them
they may receive condign punishment.

By Letters from the well affected party in Wales, it was signified, that the
M. of Hartford had possessed himself of Cardiffe Castle in Clamorgan-shire, and
was resolved to seize upon all Cattels that belonged to the E. of Pembrook, but
so soon as the Inhabitants of that County had information of it, they gathered
a head, and gave battle against the Marquess, at Cardiffe, killing some 53.
with the loss of 9. men.

The Earl of Pembrookes Proceedings in Wiltshire.
Since the beginning of these present troubles in England, most of the Counties
of this Kingdom have bin first or last divided among themselves, and are not as
yet composed.

Amongst which Counties the County of Wiltshire did challenge a part, which
until within these few days was divided very much, and did so continue until
the Earl of Pembroke his going down, whose coming has done very much good in
those parts, and so settled the minds and affections of the Inhabitants
thereabouts, that now they are not to be doubted of their constancy and
fidelity to the Parliament.

At his first coming down he opened unto them all his Majesty's Proceedings,
showing them to be against the Privilege of Parliament, and the Liberty of the
Subject, and that His present proceedings in war are destructive and opposite
both to the Laws of the Kingdom, and his own oath taken at his Coronation.

When the Earl had thus far instructed them concerning His Majesty's present
Proceedings, they were not long before they did unanimously consent unto what
was desired them by the Earl of Pembrooke, but all placed themselves in a good
posture of War, and did declare their readiness and willingness to stand
for the King and Parliament, against all that shall endeavor any way to
disturb the peace of that County, and also promised both with their lives and
fortunes, liberties and goods, to promote and to maintain the Proceedings of
Parliament, so much as in them lay.

The Kingdom of Scotland has appointed 8. Commissioners four whereof are
Earls, to present a Declaration to the Parliament, and a Petition to His
Majesty the effect whereof was as follows.

That His Majesty would be pleased to leave his Evil Counselors, and return
to his Parliament, whereby a firm Peace may be settled betwixt them, and that
the Synod for the settling of Religion may go on, and some other such like
Propositions tending to peace, which if His Majesty shall refuse to hearken
unto, they do Declare, that they shall be enforced in duty to His Majesty, to
take up Arms to assist their Brethren in England.

FINIS.

