A TRVE AND FVLL RELATION of the horrible and hellish Plot of the Jesuits
Popish Priests and other Papists in Ireland, for the Massacring of the two
chief Justices, and all the Privy Council and Protestants in that Kingdom.

As it was related by my Lord Keeper in the house of Commons November the
first. 1641.

London, Printed for Thomas Banks, and are to be sold at his shop on Bridewell
stayers in Blackfriars. 1641.

A True and full Relation of the horrible and hellish plot of the Jesuits
Popish Priests and other Papists in Ireland, for the Massacring of the two
chief Justices, and all the Privy Council and Protestants in that Kingdom.
THe Lord Keep^r declared unto the House of Commons, that the Lord Deputy of
Ireland had received a Letter from the two Lord Chief Justices and Privy
Counsel in Ireland, of the discovery of an Ho^rible Plot by the Jesuits,
Popish Pr^^sts and other Papist in the Kingdom of Ir^land, for the murdering
of the two Chief Justices and all the Priv^e Couns^l and Prote^tants o^
^re^and, as also to se^z^ on all the Ki^gs ^^irs, C^stles and M^g^^en
whats^e^er an^ moreover, that they would murder all persons that should oppose
them in any of their intentions and desires, which were these.

1. First, to have their Crown not to be dependant upon England, nor to be a
conquered Nation.

2. Secondly, to have their Irish Laws established, and such as should be
made hereafter.

3. Thirdly, to have free liberty of the exercise of their Relegion.

The Earl of Leicester declared the same also, adding that he had the
original of a Proclamation which was made there, and had caused the same to
be coppied out. The Letter bears date the twenty third of October, 1641.
declaring that Hugh Ocorett went to Dublin unto the lodging of Hugh Maymubawne
his very good friend, and he and his friend going to the lodging of the Lord
Marquis, understood great store of Noble men and strangers had been there, but
they were all gone abroad, and they could not find them; wherefore they
returned back again to his friends lodging, where his friend revealed unto
him the whole Plot; but swore unto him he should not stir till it was put
into execution, and therefore his friend commanded his servants to look
narrowly to him: but after a while he fained some excuse of necessity for his
going down, which his friend gave way too, but sent his servants with him:
when he was come down, the servants not being so careful to watch him as they
might have been, he leaped over a wall in the yard, and made an escape, and
went to Sir John Burlacy, and discovered to him the whole Plot, which was this.

That at nine of the Clock the next morning, the Irish Rebels (amongst whom
the Lord Marquis was on of the chiefest) intended at one hour and moment of
time, to massacre and murder all the English and Protestants in the Kingdom of
Ireland, likewise to murder the two Lord chief Justices, and all the privy
council at Dublin, and at the same time, to seize upon all the Kings Castles,
Forts, and Magazens throughout the whole Kingdom of Ireland, as also the
Castle of Dublin, and that if they should find any of the City that would not
submit to them, then they would shoot down from the Castle, the tops of the
Chimnys to affright them, and if that did not prevail, they would then batter
down their houses about their cares. Hereupon the Lord chief Justice and the
rest of the privy Council of Ireland, sat all night in consultation, and took
the best course they could immagine of for the safeguard and security of
themselves; together with the Castle and City of Dublin. The next morning they
apprehended great store of these Trators and Rebels, together with the Lord
Marquise, who was gone from his lodging before day and hid in a Cockloft, and
at his lodging they found great store of Chains, Hammers, and Hutchets without
halves. The same day they had notice of several places and Forts seized upon
in Conno and Monno and other places, together with several Villages plundered
by the Rebels; but they wrote word that they did not believe that distemper
was so general as was reported to be, and then they made no question but they
should with care and pains bring all to a good issue; to that end they had
sent for five hundred of the Horse to come and guard them at Dublin, and had
likewise raise five hundred English for the sucuring of themselves and the
City, and that out of those five hundred they had chosen an hundred to be put
into the Castle under the command of Sir Francis Welloughby, who they hoped
would give a good account to his Majesty of the place fees two Months: And in
the mean time for fear least there should be some further and worser plots
then they knew of, they did desire that the Parliament in England would send
them down their Lord Lieftenant with m^n, money and Ammunition. They further
gave us to understand, that they had taken order for their Army of old
Soldiers, to be in a readiness and to mare in opposition to any of the Rebels
that should draw to a head.

FINIS.

