A True and Perfect RELATION, Of the most remarkable Passages and Speeches at,
and before the Death of His EXCELLENCE JAMES MARQVES of MONTROSE Earl of
Kincardin, Lord Graeme, Baron of Mont-dieu, etc.* Knight of the most Honorable
Order of Saint George.

Lieutenant Governor and Captain General for His Majesty in the Kingdom of
Scotland.

Faithfully colected by an Eye witness; In EDINBURGH as they happened upon the
18. 20. and the 21. of May 1650.

ANNO M.D.C.L.

A True and Perfect RELATION, Of all the Passages concerning the Examination,
Trial and Death of the most Honoble: James Marquis of Montrose, Earl of
Kincardin, Lord Graeme, Baron of Mont-dieu, etc. Knight of the most Honorable
Order of St. George. Lieutenant Governor and Captain General for His Majesty
in the Kingdom of Scotland.
THe Parliament of Scotland being informed that the Marquis of Montrose was
taken, and foreseeing that his countenance and carriage might gain him some
favor amongst the People, thought fit to give out their sentence against him
before he should come to Edinburgh. And therefore upon the 17. of May anno
1650. in the morning, they appointed a Comittie to prepare and give in their
opinions what was fittest to be don with him, where the same forenoone they
gave in their report in writing to this Effect: That so soon as he should come
to the Town, he should be met at the Gate by the Magistrates, and Hangman;
That he should be tied with cords upon a Cart bareheaded, and the Hangman to
ride upon the horse that drew the Cart covered before him, and so to be brought
through the town. That He should be hanged on a gibbet at the Cross of
Edinburgh until he died, His History, and Declaration hanging about his neck,
and so hang three hours in Public view of all the People: after which He
should be beheaded, and quartered. His head to be fixed upon the Prison house of
Edinburgh, and his Legs and arms over the gates of the Cities of Sterling,
Glascowe, Perth alias Saint Iohns-Towne and Aberdeine. And in Case He repented
not, (whereby the Sentence of Excommunication may be taken of by the Church):
the Bulk of His body should be burried in the Gray friars; if not, to be
burried in the Boromoore.

Upon the 18. day about 4. a clock in the afternoon, He Was brought in at the
Water Gate, and according to the Sentence was met by the Magistrates, the
gardes, and the Hangman of the City, the rest of the Prisoners being tied two
and two together, going bareheaded before him; So soon as He came within the
Gate the Magistrates showed Him the Sentence, which when He had read, and
perceived the Cart, and Hangman there ready, He said; He would willingly obey,
He was only sorry that through Him, His Majesty whose Person he presented,
should be so dishonored. then going cherefully into the Cart, He being
uncovered was by the Hangman tied thereunto with Ropes, and the Hangman on the
horse rid covered, thus was He carried to the prison, and in all the way, there
appeared in Him such a Majesty, Courage, and Modesty, no way Daunted, That
His very Enemies, nay common women, who as it was believed by diverse would have
stoned Him in the Cart as he passed, were upon the sight of Him so astonished,
and moved: that their intended curses, were turned, into Tears and Prayers for
Him; In so much as the next day (being Sunday), the Ministers Preached against
them for not reviling and stoning of Him as he passed along.

When He was taken from the Cart, He gave the Hangman gold, telling him that
was a reward for driving the Cart: It was seven a clock at night before he was
entered into the Prison, and immediately the Parliament met, and sent some of
their Members, and some Ministers to examine Him; but He refused to Answer any
thing to them, until He was satisfied upon what terms they stood with the
King, His Royal Master. which being reported unto the Parliament, they ceased
proceeding against Him until Monday, and allowed their Commissioners to tell
Him that the King, and they were agreed: He desired to be at rest for He was
weary with a long journey, and He said The Complement they had put upon him
that day was somewhat tedious.

The next day being Sunday, He was constantly attended by Ministers and
Parliament men, who still persued him with threatenings but they got no
advantage of Him; He told them, They thought they had a fronted him the day
before by carring him in a cart, but they were much mistaken; For he thought it
the most Honorable and joyfulst journey that ever he made, God Having all the
while most comfortably manifested His presence to him, and furnishing Him with
resolution to over look the reproaches of men, and to behold him, for whose
cause He suffered.

Upon Monday in the forenoone, He was brought before the Parliament and after
the deliverie of a Long penned discourse by the Chancellor where in he was
pleased to take notice of His miscarriages against the first Covenant, the
League and Covenant, His Invasion, and joining with the Irish Rebels and blood
gultines; and that now, how God had brought Him to just punishment: He desired
to know if he might be allowed to speak for himself, which being Granted, He
said, Since you have declared unto me, that you have agreed with the King, I
look upon you, as if His MAJESTY were sitting amongst you, and in that
Relation I appear with this reverence bareheaded: My Care has been allwaies
to walk as became a good Christian, and a Loyal Subject; I engaged in the
first Covenant, and was faithful to it, until I perceived some private
Persons under Color of Religion intended to wring the Authority from the
King, and to seize on it for themselves; and when it was thought fit for the
clearing of honest men that a bond should be subscribed, wherein the security
of Religion was sufficiently provided for, I subscribed. For the League and
Covenant, I thank God I was never in it, and so could not break it, but how
far Religion has been advanced by it, and the sad consequences that have
followed on it, these poor distressed Kingdoms can witness. for when His Late
MAJESTY had by the Blessing of God almost subdued those Rebels that rose
against him in England, and that a faction of this Kingdom went in to the
assistance of those Rebels, His MAJESTY gave Commission to me, to come into
this Kingdom, and to make a diversion of those forces that were going from
hence against Him I acknowleged the command most Just, and I conceaved my self
bound in conscience and duty to obey it, what my carriage was in this Country
many of you may bear witness; Disorders in an Army can not be prevented, but
they were no sooner known, then punished; never was any man's blood spilt but
in Battle, and even then many thousand Lives have I preserved; and as I came
in upon His MAJESTY'S Warrant: so upon His Letters did I lay aside all
Interest, and retreat.

And for my coming in at this time, it was by His MAJESTY'S commands, in order
to the accelerating of the Treaty betwixt Him and You; His MAJESTY knowing
that when ever He had ended with you I was ready to retire upon his call. I
may justly say, that never subject acted upon more Honorable grounds, nor by so
lawful a power, as I did in this service; and therefore I desire you to lay
aside prejudice, and consider me as a Christian in relation to the justice of
the quarrel; as a Subject in relation to my Royal Masters commands; and as
your Neighbor in relation to the many of your Lives, I have preserved in
battle; and be not too, rash but let me be judged by the Laws of God, the
Laws of Nature, and Nations, and the Laws of this Land; if you do otherwise,
I do hear appeal from you, to the Righteous judge of the world, who one day
must be both your Judge and mine, and who allwaies gives Righteous Judgment.

This he delivered with such Gravitie, and with out Passion, as was much
admired even of His Enemies: After which, the Chancellor commanded the
Sentence to be read, which He heard with a settled and an unmoved countenance,
and desiering to be further heard, was presently stopped by the Chancellor who
commanded He should be presently removed back again to prison, where being no
sooner come but the Ministers assault him afresh, agravating the terror of the
Sentence, thereby to affright him; He acknowledged Him self much beholding to
the Parliament for the Honor they put upon him saying, He Took it for a
greater Honor to have His Head stand upon the prison Gate for this Quarrel;
then to have his picture in the Kings Bedchamber. And (least his Loyalty
should be forgotten) they had highly Honored him, in designing lasting
monuments to four of the chiefest Cities, to bear up his memorial to all
posterity. Wishing he had had flesh enough, to have sent a piece to Every
City in Christendom to witness his Loyalty to his King and Country.

His Friends were not suffered to come near him, but a guard was always in the
Chamber with Him, in so much as He had neither time, nor place for His Private
Devotions. but in their Hearing.

The next day being the 21. Clothed in a Scarlet cloak richly Laced with
Gould Lace, He was brought to the Scaffold: He came a long the streets with so
great state, and there appeared in His countenance so much Beauty, Majesiie
and Gravitie, as amazed the behoulders; and many even of His Enemies did
acknowledge Him to be the Gallants Subject in the world: but because all His
Friends and well willers were debarred from coming near him; there was a boy
designed for that purpose on the Scaffold who took His Last speech. Which was
to this Effect.

I am sorry if this manner of my End be Scandalous to any good Christian. Does
it not often happen to the righteous according to the ways of the wicked, and
to the wicked, according to the ways of the righteous? does not some time a
just man perish in His righteousness, and a wicked man prosper in his malice?
They who know me, should not disesteeme me for this; many greater then I have
been dealt with in this Kind; yet I must not say but that all Gods Judgments
are Just; For my private sins, I acknowledge this to be Just with God, I
submit my self to him: but in regard of man, I may say they are but
instruments, God forgive them, I forgive them, they have oppressed the poor,
and violently perverted Judgment, and Justice, but He that is higher then they
will reward them.

What I did in this Kingdom, was in obedience to the most just Commands of my
Sovereign, For His defense in the day of His distrese, against those that rose
up against him. I acknowledge nothing, but fear God and Honor the King,
according to the commandments of God, and the Law of Nature, and Nations, and
I have not sinned against man, but against God; and with Him there is Mercy,
which is the ground of my drawing near unto him.

It is objected against me by many, (even good People,) That I am under the
Censure of the Church; This is not my fault, since it is only for doing my
Duty, by Obeying my Princes most just Commands for Religion, His Sacred
Person, and Authority. Yet I am sorry they did excomunicate me; and in that,
which is according to Gods Laws; without wronging my conscience or allegiance
I desire to be relaxed; if they will not thus do it, I appeal to God who is
the righteous Judge of the world, and who must; and will I hope be my Judge and
Savior.

It is spoken of me that I should blame the King (God forbid,) For the Late
King, He Lived a Saint, and Died a Martyr; I pray God, I may so end as He did;
If ever I would wish my soul in an other man's stead, it should be in his. For
His MAJESTY now Living, never People I believe might be more happy in a King:
His commands to me were most just; in nothing that He promises will He fail,
He deals justly with all men, I pray God He be so dealt with all that He be
not betrayed under trust as His Father was.

I desire not to be mistaken, as if my carriage at this time in Relation to
your ways were stubborn; I do but follow the Light of my own conscience,
which is seconded by the working of the Good Spirit of God that is within me, I
thank him, I go to Heavens throne with joy. If He enable me against the fear
of Death, and furnish me with courage, and confidence to embrace it even in its
most uglie shape: Let God be glorified in my end, though it were in my
damnation. Yet I say not this out of any fear or distrust, but out of my Duty
to God, and Love to his People.

I have no more to say but that I desire your Charity, and Prayers. I shall
pray for you all; I leave my Soul to God; my Service to m^ Prince; my Goodwill
to my Friends; and my Name, and Charity to You all. And thus briefly I have
exonerated my Conscience.

Being desired to pray a part, He said, I have already powered out my soul
before the Lord who knows my heart, and into whose hands I have commended my
Spirit, and he has been graciously pleased to return to me a full assurance
of peace in Jesus Christ my Redeemer. And therefore if you will not Join with
me in prayer; my reiterating again will be both Scandalous to you, and me. So
closing his Eyes, and holding up his hands, he stood a good space at his inward
devotions. being perceived to be inwardly moved all the while; When He had don,
He called for the Executioner, and gave him money, then having brought unto him
hanging in a cord His Declaration, and History, He hanged them about his
neck; saying, Though it has pleased His Sacred MAJESTY that now is, to make
him one of the Knights of the most Honorable Order of the Garter; yet He did
not think him self more Honored by the Garter, then by that cord; with the
books which he would embrace about his neck with as much joy and content, as
ever he did the Garter, or a chain of gould, and therefore desired them to be
tied unto him as they pleased.

When this was done and His arms tied, He asked the Officers, If they had any
more Dishonor, as they conceaved it, to put upon him, he was ready to accept
it. And so with an Undaunted Courage and Gravitie suffered, According to the
Sentence past upon him.

FINIS.

