The true CHARACTER Of such as are MALIGNANTS in the Kingdom of SCOTLAND.

By way of Information and Direction to the Ministry of that Kingdom.

ALSO The Indiction of a public FAST the third Sunday of February next, and
the Thursday following.

By the Commissioners of the general Assembly of the Church of SCOTLAND.

Wherein is showed their zeal to the glory of God, and the fellow-feeling they
have of their Brethren, the Members of Christ's Body.

LASTLY, Lamenting the present Distraction of the Church, and Kingdom of
ENGLAND.

LONDON, Printed for HENRY OVERTON, and are to be sold at his Shop in
Popes-head-Alley. 1643.

Directions to Ministers anent Malignants: By the Commissioners of the general
Assembly of the Kirk of SCOTLAND.
COncerning a sort of Enemies, the Malignants, whether they be such as from the
beginning oppose the work of Reformation of Religion in this Land, or such as
show themselves upon whatsoever pretense, backward and disaffected to the
Reformation of Religion of England, so much endeavored by this Kirk from our
zeal to the glory of Christ, our desire of the happiness of our Neighbor
Kingdoms, our fears of apparent danger to the Religion here, if they be not
made one with us in unity of Religion and uniformity of Church government: And
our hopes by the blessing of God, to have a pattern from the Word set up in
this Island, for the example of other Kirkes abroad. Because Enemies of this
kind may prove most dangerous if they be not discovered and avoided, it is at
this time our duty to make such Malignants known to the people that they be not
deceived and drawn away from their own steadfastness, and from the love of
Christ and of their Brethren: But in doing this duty we have great need of
wisdom, and the Spirit of discerning, that we neither take our friends to be
our enemies, and by that mistake discourage the well affected and multiply
enemies against our selves, nor such as are indeed enemies to be our friends,
and thereby wrong the cause of God and weaken our selves in seeking after
Reformation: and therefore they must not be taken for enemies who hope the best
of the Kings Majesty, and profes that they love his honor (which is the
calumny of the Malignant, against the seekers of Reformation) nor such as in
the beginning through want of persuasion were not so forward for Reformation,
nor such as in debate of matters do possibly differ in their judgments from
others, about some Circumstances, and midses which may lead to the desired end
of unity in Religion, provided their conversation be such as beseems the
Gospel of Christ; and for the substance and reallity of their Speeches and
actions in private and public, they be known to contribute their best
endeavors for Reformation.

Upon the other part, such as be enemies indeed may be known, first, by their
malicious Censuring and calumniating of the civil and ecclesiastical meetings
of this Kirk and Kingdom which are held for conserving of peace betwixt the
Kingdoms, and for endeavoring by all good means the unity of Religion, as if
they tended to the diminition of the King his greatness and Authority in
England. 2. By their dispising or misregarding of the public resolutions
agreed upon for so good ends. 3. By their notable injuring the Kings Majesty in
his honor, in attributeing to his Majesty whatsoever is plotted by bad
Counselors, or acted by the Popish and Praelaticall party, as if there were
not a difference betwixt the King and them, or betwixt the King and his
Authority, and the pretense and abuse thereof. 4. By slandering and traducing
all such as labors to promote the reformation, in England, not spareing them
who are in places of Government, and whom God has honored to be worthy
instruments in our own reformation, as if they were enemies to the Kings honor,
and were serving their own private ends, without respect to the public. 5. By
their going about and endeavoring to make the hearts and hands of others to
faint in the work of reformation, and if it were possible to make them as
Malignant and disaffected as themselves. 6. By laboring to bring the Parliament
of England in suspicion, as if they intended to ^st the yoke of royal
Authority, or intended not the reformation of religion, and unity with this
Kirk. 7. By their insol^ncy an^ boasting when they hear of the success of
the Popish and Pra^^aticall party, and their readiness to assist them
according to their power, whereby they bewray their fear of reformation of
religion, and their hope to see the day when they shall be avenged upon such as
they malign at home.

When they are known by these and the like practices, we sought to warn the
people to beware of their Company, Counsels and seducements; and because such
Malignants shrow^ under the false pretense of Loyalty to the Kings Majesty,
without respect to religion or the good of religion, we ought in all our
Speeches and Prayers to testify our faithfulness and high respects to the
Kings Majesty, and also to press and pray for the unity of religion, and for
the prospering all the good ways that may conduce for so blessed a work, as
serving for the honor of God, and for the King his greatness, and the true
peace of his Kingdoms, declaring all such as oppose the unity of Religion to be
enemies to God, to the King, and to the peace and prosperity of the Kingdoms.

Now since it is incumbent to us by our calling, and committed to us by the
general Assembly according to our calling, to use all lawful and
Ecclesiastic ways for furtherance of reformation and unity of Religion, for
continuance of our own peace at home, and of the common peace betwixt the
Kingdoms, a necessity is laid upon us.

First, to give warning to the people of the danger of the Protestant religion,
through the Popish Armies in England and Jreland, pretending that they are
better and more dutiful Subjects then the Protestants, but intending no less
then the ruin of the reformed Religion, and the planting of their Herisie,
Idolatry, and Tyranny in a more compendious way then could have bin, don by
the late Service-booke, and Book of Cannons in which course if they shall by
their power prevail, it shall be impossible for the Kings Majesty to suppress
Popery, and maintain the true religion, conform to the many promises
contained in his Majesty's Declarations; They will soon cast off their
professed Allegiance and subjection, and it will be no easy matter for this
Church and Kingdom, whence they conceive all their troubles and
disappointments to have issued to resist that violence, especially considering
what a disaffected and discontented party we have at home in our own bosom.

Secondly, since unity in the truth has bin our strength since the beginning,
we ought by all good means in public and private, to prevent and remove all
divisive motions which by malicious and crafty sichophants are endeavored by
spreading of Calumnies and Islanders against the present Government, and
putting aspersions on such, whether of the Nobillity and Gentry, Buroughs and
Ministry; as the Lord has honored to be faithful and happy Instruments in
his work, from the beginning having endured the heat of the day, and resolved
to be constant unto the end.

Thirdly, that since by the providence of God the two Kingdoms are so strongly
united, and there be hopes of a more strong union by unity of religion. It is
our duty to labor to remove and prevent all occasions of jealousies and
suspicions betwixt the two Kingdoms, and to do or say nothing that may breed
misunderstandings, break off correspondence, weaken the confidence or infringe
the Union and Peace betwixt the two Kingdoms, so happily established in his
Majesty's presence and with his royal consent in both Parliaments.

Fourthly, because when we speak for the Kings honor and for obedience to
civil Authority in all things lawful, our speeches are wrested by perverse
men to their corrupt ends, as if we loved not the reformation of religion in
England and Ireland; and when we speak of reformation, we are traduced as
enemies to the King and to royal Authority, which may make a great mistaking
and work dangerous effects amongst the people, who love both reformation of
religion and the Kings honor: Therefore in this difficulty we ought to show in
our Doctrine, that there is no repugnancy, betwixt the Kings Authority, and the
reformation of religion, that nothing can serve so much for his Majesty's glory
and the greatness of his Kingdoms, as does the reformation of religion in all
his dominions, and that such as are opposite to the reformation, are greatest
enemies to the Kings honor, whatsoever they profess or swear to the
contrary, and also to explain the difference betwixt the Kings power and just
authority, and the pretending and abusing thereof by such men for their own
private ends; and to show that oppoisiition to such men and their ways, is a
true testimony of faithfulness and loyalty to the King.

That the Presbiteries be careful to discern and try these Malignants and to
reclaim or censure them according to the Acts of the Assembly, and to make
report of their diligence to the next Assembly.

In end, because much every way does depend upon us of the Ministry, we have
need to stir up our selves and the people in truth and unity, which by the
blessing of God will be a powrefull mean to preserve our Religion, and to
propagate the fame to other Churches groaning under their several burdens and
panting for such a reformation as the Lord in mercy has granted unto us.

Indiction of a Public FAST, by the Commissioners of the General Assembly of
the Kirk of SCOTLAND.
WHereas by the late general assembly, power is committed unto us, to consider
and perform what we find necessary by all lawful and Ecclesiastique ways,
for furtherance of the union in Religion and unity in Kirk government, for
continuance of our own peace at home, and of the common peace in, and betwixt
the two Kingdoms. We find it necessary that there shall be a solemn fast and
humiliation kept in all the Kirkes of this Kingdom upon the third Sunday of
February next, and the Thursday following, for the causes add motives following.

1. Although within these few Years we renewed the Covenant and Vowed
solemnly to stand to the former reformation of Religion, and to reform our
selves and our Families We have notwitstanding fallen from the zeal and
fervency of our affection at that time, many persons of all ranks and callings
are grown lukewarm and are content with a mere formality and show of
godliness, without inward power yea sins and vices abound as in the time of
corruption, Family worship, mutual edification and stirring up on of another by
information admonition, consolation rebuke much neglected and Ministers
negligent in urging the same all which are so much the more heinous because of
our unthankefullnes after so great mercies and breach of Covenant.

2. The danger of this Church and Kingdom arising partly from within; by the
insolency of Papists in these troublesome times, and divisive motions of the
Malignant Party, and creeping in if errors; and partly without, from the Popish
Armies and Praelaticall party in England and Ireland, which aim undoubtedly at
the disturbance of our peace, and overthrow of the wish of Reformation: The
consideration whereof should move us to pray to God to dir ct us in all lawful
means which may serve for unity amongst our selves, that we may be the more
strengthened against the common enemy.

3. In respect of the fellow feeling which we ought to have with the Members of
Christ's body far and near, we have cause to lament the long casting
troubles of the Churches abroad in Germany, and else where, and especially the
combustions in England, and almost utter desolation in Ireland.

4. That the Lord may bless all lawful means to be used for preserving the
union and peace betwixt the two Kingdoms, and procuring the unity of Religion,
and uniformitie of worship and Church Government within his Majesty's Dominions
especially that God would grant a good success to the Treaty and travells of
the Commissioners both of the Parliament and general assembly.

5. Because the unhappy division; betwixt the King and Parliament of England is
a great impediment to the wish of Reformation, and the settling of a firm peace
in his Majesty's Dominions: It is our duty to recommend earnestly to the Lord,
that the differences may be composed in such a way as may most conduce to the
glory of God, and advance the so much wished for unity of Religion and
uniformity of Church Government.

6. Finally, that the Lord would discover and disappoint all the conspiracies
plots and machinations, which tend to the execution of the bloody decrees of
the council of Trent; the fountain from whence has issued all the troubles and
persecutions to the reformed Churches; and quickly destroy that Man of sin.
Amen.

FINIS.

