A TRUE AND wonderful Relation of a Whale, pursued in the Sea, and incounterd
by multitudes of other Fishes, as it was certified by diverse Mariners of
Weymouth, who coming from France, in the good Ship called the Bonaventure, did
shoot the said VVhale, which making to Land did strike upon the Shore, within
three miles of Waymouth, where being opened there was found in the belly of it
a Romish Priest, with Pardons for diverse Papists in England and in Ireland,
whose names are here inserted.
woodcut of a whale (resembles large fish) swallowing a person

Printed according to Order by I. H.

The Sea-wonder,
THat Antichrist or the Pope is the Beast of Rome has bin abundantly declared
by all reformed Writers, but that this Beast is odious not only to men and
Creatures on Earth, but even to the Fishes in the Sea, this age only can give
an illustration of it, and that in such a miraculous manner as never age can
produce the like. We will discribe unto you the full manner of it, and you
shall have it really and plainly related as we have recieved the truth from
many who were the present Spectators of this wonderful sight, and we shall
desire only from you but the gentleness to receive it, and the credince to
believe it.

On the 19 of October being the Lords Day the good Ship called the Bonaventure
of Weymouth, being bound for England, was bringing home her Merchandise from
France which was wines, linning cloth, and abundance of Wall-nuts, the day was
very fair and no wind stirring, so that the Ship for above three hours space
lay hulling upon the Seas, being not able to move either one way nor other for
want of wind, although she was full sailed and prepared to take the advantage
of every Gale Being put to some inconvenience by reason of this great Calm;
the Seamen for the present had nothing else to do but to look about them,
many of them (as the manner is at Sea) wishing rather for a Tempest then being
Wind-bound to stare about them and do nothing when behold not far from them
they saw a mighty rolling and working upon the water.

Amazed at the strangeness of the sight, they called unto one another, and
were all come above Board expecting what should occasion so strange a motion in
the water, they found it to draw nearer to them, which made them the more eager
to apprehend the cause, at length they perceived it to be a Whale, and that of
no small proportion but (as it were the Leviathan of the Sea) to transcend all
other Whales in length and compass.

The Whale made toward the Ship, which did put the Mariners into a great fear
being not able to get from it, b^t they perceived this Monster of the Sea to
come to them rather for refuge, then for offense, for they saw it was followed
by an infinite of Company of other Fish, as if all the Fishes of the Se^ were
in the pursuance of it: There were to be seen Fishes of all sorts, only the
Remora was absent, which the Seamen afterward conceived was got under their
Ship and stayed it on purpose that they might be Spectators and the witnesses
of this so wonderful an object.

There was the Sword-Fish the Thorn-back armed with his prickles, the fair
Balena and the filthy Phocae, and such a Fry of Sea Monsters (the old ones
following after) is the like was never seen nor can be represented, but only
by those men who were the Spectators of it.

In a most violent manner they did beat against the Whale, making a most
hideous and a fearful noise and falling upon her, she made what haste she could
to get from them: some of these fishes were in one shape, and some in another,
but all most wonderful to behold, who in great fury did use whatsoever weapons
of offense that nature had afforded them to assault this Whale.

Nay they were so eager in their fight that some of them were often seen to
leap above the water and as if by that they had gained an advantage of
strength, they did throw themselves with greater rage against it, who being but
one against so many thousands, was not able to withstand their fury, but making
a most terrible cry, did what she could to come near the Ship.

On this the amazed and distracted Seamen fearing that they should be drouned,
discharged diverse of their Muskets against it, which it seems took effect,
for presently they found great store of Blood to discolor the Sea, And the
Whale which before seemed to draw more near the Ship for a safety, did now
steer another course through the bloody and foaming waters.

The infinite sholes of Fish which in incredible numbers did follow the Whale,
were no way dismayed at the noise of the Muskets nor at the fire which was
given, but perceiving the wounded Whale to make away from the Ship in greedy
throng they pressed after it.

This made the Seamen to wonder more, for many of them whose names are
subscribed having bin often at Sea never behold the like thing before, nor
never saw such diversity of pertentous Fishes following troops on troops, one
after another, as if they were in emulation who first should exercise their
greatest fury and their revenge upon it.

Besides they do profess, that it did increase their wonder to see this
contestation which is against the usual way of nature: It being common and
ordinary for the Whale to pursue other Fishes and to devou^e them, and not to
see a multitude of other Fishes, (as if they were confederate all in one
obligation) to pursue the Whale, and to do the utmost of their endeavor to
destroy it.

In this manner they followed the Whale, and used what violence they could
against it, as far as their eyes could reach, the Sea beating up and down, and
the waters laboring as they passed through them, yet still in choleric
tumults pursued the chase, leaving a great trale upon the water, which for a
long way was to be seen behind them as they passed.

By this the evening coming on, the wind did begin to rise which blowing from
the South East was very welcome to the Seamen, who making their best advantage
of it, they came on the next morning being Monday October. 20. unto Weymouth.

At this Haven Town they were no sooner landed but they understood that a
Whale of a mighty bigness was cast up, three miles from that place, who coming
in with the tide and being sorely wounded with the Musket shots, did make what
have she could to land, and finding on the ebbing Sea, the tide to forsake her,
she made a mighty roar that the noise thereof (as the Country people do
report) was heard two miles from it: on the next morning she was found dead,
like a mighty ruin lying all along upon the Shore, the Country People coming
from all places in multitudes to behold it.

On the Friday following these Seamen having dispached their business at
Weymouth, went nine of them together in one Company to see the Whale, and the
rather because they did truly conjecture it to be the same Whale which on
Sunday before they saw pursued by such monstrous multitudes of Fishes,
conceiving also that by reason of the many wounds she received by the shots
from the Muskets that she made haste to the next shore to dye on, for the
Whale, (although when she is living will be covered with the Sea) yet when she
feels Death coming on, she does renounce to that watery Element and will
admit to no other coverture then the wide Vault of Heaven.

These Mariners being come they sound the Country people weary active in cutting
up the Whale some busy on one part of the body, some on another, the better
sort standing by and wondering at the mighty compass and proportion of it, and
encouraging the Country people to proceed in their unaccustomed work. The
honest people partaked in the labor, the better sort in the profit, and all in
the greivousnesse of the smell which to speak the truth was so excessive that
if it be true Philosophy that a violent Subject or sensible does destroy the
Sensory or sense: It may be a question whither these noses can ever have the
Capacity of senting any thing that is sweet again.

Had you been there, you might have seen Greenland at Weymouth, such a noise
and a quarter they do make when they do hew the Whales in pieces in that
Northern Climate, which is content for a whole year together, but with one
night and with one day. Their strength being lost with labor, and their
spirits with the odious importunity of the increasing savor which proceeded
from the corruption of that mighty carcass, they relieve themselves according
to the accustomed practice, with the strength of hot waters: And now being
armed against all ingredients of ill savours they distribute the fish in
prepared Cauldrons, which by the benefit of the fire must be improved into oil.

Though lucre is called filthy lucie, yet the smell of it, is said, to be sweet
being extracted out of the greatest corruption whatsoever: while the Laborers
are boiling the fish, the Merchants are compounding for the sperme, or the seed
thereof: and this commonly is called Parmacitie, some part thereof they design
to Falmouth, some part to Exeter, some part to Waymouth, and very likely some
part to Bristoll, and some part to London: But I would advise my friends in
London (on any hand not to meddle with it, the reason whereof in these
following Lines I shall declare unto you.

For the belly of this Whale being opened, and the vast ribs being taken
asunder, there was discovered in the bowels of it a man, who it seems had not
long layne buried, for his head was shaven, he was surely some Priest, and the
hair on his Crown since his death was not much grown forth. It does appear
that he had remained some while alive in those Chambers of death: for besides
some papers that were found in a black leatheren Box, it appears that he had
some papers to prove that there is a watery Purgatory, of which I believe no
man could ever give a more perfect testimony then himself when he was living
in the belly of the Whale,

In this Box was found diverse Pardons from the Pope for diverse Papists now in
England, and in Ireland, as for John Flower in England, and for one Humphrey
Vaux (of kin it is believed to that Guido Vaux, who would heve blown up the
Parliament House in the year 1605.

There were after this found diverse Pardons for dives Papists in Ireland, who
have labored to the uttermost of their endeavors to blow it up again as to
one Preston, the same, who is now expected to come over into England with
Auxiliary forces from Ireland with an exhortation also to him to proceed in the
wars he has undertaken, with the assurance of the Benediction of his Holiness
of Rome. A Pardon for one Muskerry, a Pardon for one Oneale, for Mac Magennts,
and one for diverse others, which was read by a Scholar, who was then present,
as those Seamen have attested, but being themselves but unexperienced men in
Letters, they are sorry they cannot deliver the particulars so fully as they
desire. It may evidently appear, that the reason why this fish before spoken
of in such monstrous tumults did prosecute this Whale, was by reason of the
person it interred, who it seems by some shipwreck was received into the
belly of the Whale. You may see by this how strong, and how deep a dye, is the
tincture of guilt which because all the water of the Sea could not wash away
from this man, the fishes would not endure their own Element until they had
expiated the Waves by the destruction of the Whale that did receive him and
intetre him, You may also see what a Sea of sin is in the sea of Rome, the
enlertainment whereof the fishes of the Sea would punish with death amongst the
greatest of their own inhabitants the benefit whereof to dissuade from Popery
will remain to these present times, but the Wonder to al Posterity.

The Pardons were for English men. John Flower, Humphrey Vaux.

Irish-men. John Muskery. William Preston. Patrick Oneale. James Macgennies.



The Names of the Seamen that were present and will make attestation of this
most wonderful truth are William Lelo Master of the Ship. Thomas Chibuall
Boteswaine, Francis Sero. Thomas Tailor.


FINIS.

