A NARRATIVE, Together with LETTERS Presented by CHAPTAINE TAILOR, To the
Honorable House of COMMONS, Concerning the late success obtained by the
Parliament forces in Carnavanshire in North Wales, against Sir John Owen, and
his forces, consisting of Malignant Papists and Cavaliers. As also, Of his
barbarous and unparalled inhumane usage toward the High Sheriff of the said
County, and others of the Parliaments party taken prisoners by him.

Ordered by the Commons in Parliament assembled, that this Narrative together
with the Letters be forthwith Printed and published.

Hen. Elsing Cler. Parl.



June 13 LONDON, Printed for Humphrey Harward, and are to be sold at his Shop
at the George upon Ludgate Hill over against the Bel-Salvage. 1648.

The Narrative, Together with Letters presented by Capiaine Tailor, to the
Honorable House of Commons concerning the late success obtained by the
Parliament Forces in Carnarvanshire in North Wales against Sir John Owen his
Forces consisting of Malignant Papists and Cavaliers.
SIr John Owen, Commander in chief of the enemies Forces (and whom they
called) and formerly Major General against the Parliament, with a hundred and
forty horse, and one hundred and twenty foot or thereabouts, was grown so
strong by some addition from the Country, that Major General Mitton together
with William Lloyd Esquire, High Sheriff of Carnarven, were forced for their
security to repair to Carnarvan Garrison, (upon Saturday the third instant.
Major General Mitton with the Sheriff, and what horse were in the Garrison,
being about twenty, and some Foot to the number of sixty or thereabouts,
marched forth the enemy; met them within three miles of the Garrison; the
Sheriff who led the horse was so far engaged, that being overpowred, he
could not come off, but after long struggling, having received seven or eight
wounds, became their prisoner, whose barbarous usage toward him can hardly be
related; they carried him, whilst he was able to sit, from place to place on
horseback, his wounds never searched nor dressed, which had they been, its
conceived they had not proved mortal, as by a Surgeons attestation appears,
given by him under his hand, as follows.

The Surgeons Attestation.
William Griffith Surgeon, being sent for to dress some men belonging to
Sir John Owen, found the High Sheriff of Carnarvan-shire, wounded in seven
several places, besides burnings and skars, but no considerable help afforded
for the healing of them, being unsearched, untented, unrolled, from Saturday in
the forenoon, until Sunday night only some shallow pledgets of Lint on the
superficies of the Orificies, which wounds (I believe) were all curable, if he
might have rested in a settled place but; being marching in wind and rain, and
cold getting into the wounds must, needs cause death, and this I testify under
my hand.

William Griffith

But when his strength began to fail, they carried him upon a Bear; and all
this not sufficing to take away his life, they threw him off of the said bear
with such violence that he presently died, having continued in the languishing
condition aforesaid, from Saturday till Monday following, after his wounding;
fresh clothes being brought to him, Sir John would not suffer him to be
shifted, and Major General Mitton sending to desire that he might come to
Carnarvan to have his wounds dressed, with engagement that after his recovery
he should render himself prisoner, it was wholly refused, and no answer
returned thereunto; Colonel Carter Governor of Conway, and Lieutenant Colonel
Twisselton, Governor of Denby used their best endeavors to suppress the
Forces raised by Sir Owen as aforesaid, and having mounted thirty foot from
Denby Castle with Colonel Jones his Troop, and about thirty Volunteers mounted,
being some late disbanded officers and others well-affected in Denby-shire, as
also seventy Foot and thirty Horse, procured from Colonel Duckingfield
Governor of Chester, together with thirty of Colonel Carters soldiers marched
toward Carnarvan, intending before engagement with the enemy, to add some of
the Forces in Carnarvan; but the enemy prevented this, and met them upon
Monday, the fifth of this instant month, upon a plain near the seaside,
betwixt Bangor and Aben; the Forlorns of both Parties being drawn forth,
charged each other with great resolution; but ours at last were forced to a
disorderly retreat; the enemy pursued with much courage, and were entertained
by our reserve, after some long encounter, to their total routing; and in
their retreat Captain Tailor singled out Sir John Owen, and after some short
encounter wounded him, and unhorsing him, took him prisoner; there were of the
enemy slain about thirty, whereof three Captains, one Captain Madrin;
Captain Morgan, and another, and fifty eight taken prisoners, most horse,
whereof many of quality, as by the list appears; they threw away their Arms,
and most of them possessed by us; few of them had escaped, but that our words
were somewhat alike in sound, and the signal on both sides the same; their
word was Resolution, ours Religion; the signal was without bands, so in the
disorderly pursuit, we knew not each other; about fifty of their horse got away
in a body, and carried three of our men with them, which we hear since they
have put to death, it being according to their resolution, as some of the
prisoners confessed, not to give quarter to any they took. Sir John Owen, after
he was disarmed, upon discourse uttered these words; though you have defeated
me, yet fourscore thousand men, now in Arms in Essex and Kent will not be
bafled therewith; and seemed therewith much to comfort himself.

By the Barbarous, and unchristian-like usage aforementioned by the said Sir
John Owen and his rebellious crew, toward the aforesaid Gallant Gentleman, the
late High Sheriff of Carnarvan, (who with his life gave testimony of his good
affection to Parliament, Mauger the late aspersions endeavored to be fastened
upon him by some persons really disaffected both to him and Parliament) as also
toward others taken by them prisoners, all unbyased men and of any ingenuity
and conscience, may discover their bloody resolution, and others of their
stamp toward the Parliament and their adherents. Did not God in mercy prevent
the execution of their bloody designs, as he has been pleased most eminently
of late, (especially in this expedition, and that success in Kent, and other
parts of the Kingdom so manifest,) which is hoped and desired, may prove as an
eye salve to open the eyes of such, as have been, or are apt to be deceived by
the plausible Pretenses of Malignants and Cavaliers, and serve as a motive to
all honest and religious men, to lay aside divisions, and to unite against the
common adversary, for the preservation of Religion, and public peace of the
Kingdom.

To the honourahle William Lenthall Esquire, Speaker of the Honorable House of
Commons.
Honorable Sir
I Have sent you enclosed a Relation of the good success God has been pleased
to give unto the forces which were coming to join with me (against Sir John
Owen) under the command of Colonel Carter, and Colonel Twisleton, as you will
find it expressed under their own hands; and surely it was in a mighty
seasonable time; the few Foot that I had in Carnarvan, which Captain Symkis
turned out of Anglesey, and a very few Horse, being tired with continual duty
in marching out to endeavor the obstructing of the enemy his raising of men,
which by the help of the late high Sheriff and Thomas Madrin Esquire, we did
very much prevent until Saturday last, when we marched out with a party, where
meeting with the enemy, Mr. Sheriff was taken prisoner, and two more private
soldiers, and we took a Lieutenant and an Ensign, and killed one of theirs.

The next day after the Sheriff was taken, a great part of the County came in
to Sir John Owen, and so fast, that if it had not pleased God to give us this
victory and deliverance, this County had not been only lost, but also almost
all North Wales, the Island of Angl^sey being in so distracted (or rather lost)
condition, and which I humbly desire may be speedily taken into consideration.

I cannot omit to give your Honor a relation of the unchristianlike usage of
that gallant Gentleman by Sir John Owen and some others, during the time he was
their prisoner.

The note here enclosed under the Chyrurgions hand, will demonstrate one part
of it.

As soon as he was taken I sent a Drum to see whether he were wounded, who
brought me word that he was very sorely, the next morning I sent a letter to
Sir John to desire that he might come to Carnarvan to recover his health, which
if it please God that he did, I did engage my self that he should become a
prisoner again: unto which, and two letters more, he sent me no answer at all;
he did also deny to let him receive a suit of clothes that I sent him for
shift: those that he was wounded in, being exceeding bloody; and he did carry
this Gentleman along with him every day, all the way he marched, until it
pleased God to take him from such bloody Tyrants, and put an end unto his time
here; in the field as near as possibly could be discerned, when Sir John was
routed and taken prisoner himself.

There be diverse other barbarous things spoken of concerning his usage, which I
forbear at this time to write unto your Honor of (till am better informed of
the certainty of them,) though I am induced to believe diverse of them.

I am emboldned to give your Honor this Relation, though tedious, not doubting
but the Honorable House will be pleased to take some speedy course herein, the
lives of your servants being so much concerned (if such men shall go
unpunished) and amongst the rest of him, that is

Carnarvan the 6 of June 1648. Your Honors faithful and most humble servant,
THO. MITTON.

To the Honorable William Lenthall Esquire, speaker of the Honorable House of
Commons.
Honorable Sir,
THe sad distempers of these times had reached these countries in a great
measure, and threatened sad things to these Parts, had not God been pleased to
give the Enemy a blow, and such an one, as we hope will crush and destory all
their hopes in these Parts; and it was exceeding seasonable; all circumstances
considered, the relation whereof we leave to this bearer, whose valor and
courage much conduced to the s^^^ice. Sir John Owen hearing of o^r march, and
suspecti^ (...) ^^ntion, which was to join with General Myt^^^ (...) he since
confessed, resolved to engage us to hinder it, and accordingly marched with all
the strength he could make, which was of Reformados and Fightingmen about 250.
all well appointed, and of Countrymen a numerous many, and met us between
Bangor and Aber in a very fair plain upon the Seaside, where he found us
ready to entertain him, having had intelligence of his advance, we were horse
and foot 200. and upwards the dispute was desperate and hazardous, but at last
(although our forlorn was first routed) thorough the resolutions of the
Officers and Reserves, the routed Party rallied, we utterly routed the Enemy,
killed and took many; and with no few knocks to our selves, this indorsed list
shows you the names and qualities of the Prisoners and their number: we
dispersed also all the Clubmen that were gotten together, there is some horses
of the Enemies gotten away which we could not immediately pursue, our horse
being wearied in the fight and march, but intend to give them little rest in
these Parts. We thought it our duty to present you with this account, wherein
we would ascribe all to that good hand of God that fought with us and for us.
We are, Honorable Sir,

Your most humble and faithful Servants. JOHN MARTER, GEORGE TWISLETON.


A List of the names of the Prisoners both Officers and Soldiers.
Sir John Owens Maj. Gener. Mr Richard Lloyd Colonel, Mr William Owens, Mr
Hugh Budurdah, Mr Joshua Cole, Mr Robert Wynn, Mr James Kinaston Capt. Mr
Matthias Lloyd, Mr John Wantom, Mr Thomas Lloyd Lieu. Mr Robert Wynn Lieu. Mr
John Mathews, Mr Samuel Conway, Mr Will. Sanders Capt. Mr Gilbert Fox Capt. Mr
Arthur Stapleton Cornet, Maurice Griffith servant to Sir John Owens. Willian
Hide of Cheshire. John Harrison of London. Richard Thomas, Of Carnarvanshire.
John Thomas, Of Carnarvanshire. William Pym, Of Carnarvanshire. Robert Jones,
Of Carnarvanshire. William Pirhard, Of Carnarvanshire. William Jones, Of
Carnarvanshire. Hugh Roberts, Of Carnarvanshire. Robert Davies, Of
Carnarvanshire. William Richard, Of Carnarvanshire. Richard George, Of
Carnarvanshire. Owen-ap-William Of Carnarvanshire. Ralph Davenport of
Lancashire. Evan Roberts, Of Denbishire. Thomas Jones, Of Denbishire. John
Davies, Of Denbishire. Hugh Green, Of Denbishire. Robert John's, John Hughes,
William Danis, William Calladay of Hartfortshire, Walter Morgan of
Glocestershire, Robert Creswell, Of Shropshire William Creswell, Of Shropshire
Walter Roe, Of Shropshire Thomas Stochwell, Of Shropshire Christopher Elmor of
Lincolnshire, David Williams, Of Merionethshire. Henry Pughe, Of
Merionethshire. Robert Williams of Flintshire. David Ellis of Montgomeryshire.
Benjamin Par of Carmarthenshire. John Morris of Cardigonshire. John Cross, of
Worcestershire. Thomas Cross, of Worcestershire. Jeffrey Burch, of
Worcestershire. John Clarke, of Worcestershire. Rich. Baxter of Staffordshire.
Isaac Edwards of Anglesey. John Cadwalader of Carmarthenshire.
FINIS.

