A true and perfect RELATION of The manner of the apprehension and taking of
46. rebellious Cavalliers at Brackly in Northamptonshire, under the Command of
sir John Byron Colonel, who were surprised by the Lord Brooks his Regiment,
and first committed to the Goal of Northampton for ten days space, and from
thence brought up to Newgate, being men of several Counties, intended for
mischief and spoil against the Parliament, and the Protestant Religion, with
a Catalogue of the names of every particular person as they were delivered to
the Sheriff of Middlesex in a Lift.

Whereunto is annexed the true Copy of a Letter from Sir John Byron Colonel
to Master Clarke at Draughton near Brackly in Northamptonshire.

ORdered by the Lords and Commons in Parliament, that this be published.

September. 14. I. Brown Cler. Parliam.



Printed at London for Thomas Bates, at his Shop in the Old Baily. 1642.

A perfect and exact Relation of the famous and valient Fight of Sir John Byron
Colonel of 3. Troops of Horse at Brackly in Northamtonshire, with a
Declaration how above 60. Cavalliers were taken, and much Gold, Apparel, and
other Riches to the value of 8000. pound, which Cavalliers were sent up to
Newgate in Carts; where they do now remain.
SIr John Byron with his two Brothers, was marching from Leicester to Oxford
with three Troops of Horse, he being the Colonel, and his two brothers each
of them led a Troop, who promised the Soldiers that they should do service
for King and Parliament, and that they should fight for Religion; and the
upholding of the happiness, and tranquallity of the Kingdom; and so by fair
speeches persuaded the Soldiers to believe that they should go for the King
and Parliament, and they received moneys to buy them Horse, and were all
provided of Horse, but not of Arms nor provision; and so they marched from
Leicester toward Oxford, tidings whereof was brought to the Officers and
Governors in the Country, and thereupon the Country was raised, and pursued
them with the greatest force, and all expedition they could till they came to
brackly, where news was brought to Sir John Byron that it was high time to
look about him, f^r the Country was in pursuit after them, and that if they
made not great have they would all be taken; which struck such an amazement
into sir John, and the Commanders, that they knew not what to do.

So the Colonel, Captains, and the rest of the Officers made the greatest
have to fly away that could be, not caring either for estate, or soldiers, so
that they could save themselves, and so the most of them fled away.

This was on Sunday the 28. of August last, at which time the Country came into
Brackeley upon them; and did there take many of them, to the number of about
60. with much wealth and many horses.

A Catalogue of what was taken, viz.
1. Above 60. horse. 2. two hatfull of gold. 3. About ^000. pound in silver. 4.
a Trumpet. 5. a box with great riches and wealth. 6. a packet of rich clothes
of Sir John Byrons worth 200. pound. 7. about 14 or 15 pair of pistols. 8. a
Sumptor horse of Sir John Byrons very rich. 9. betwixt 60. or 70. men. 10. The
value of all the gold, money, horse, and aparrell, with other things, cannot be
worth less then 6 or 8000. pound.
These men were taken, had all their money taken from them, so that they have
since that time lived on the charity of such as send them relief.

They were then sent to the prison in Northampton, for the space of about 8. or
9. days, and afterward sent up to Newgate, where they now lie.

They were brought to London in carts on Saturday the tenth of this present
September, and news being reported in the City that they were come, they were
followed with a great acclamation and shouting, about 8 or nine of the clock at
night they were brought to Newgate, where they do now lie in great misery, and
had they not relife sent them in of charity, they might perish.

It is every day and hour expected when 40. Cavalliers more (which are also
taken) shall come to Newgate, or to some other prison here in London, as it
shall please authority to appoint.

A Relation of the manner of the taking of these Cavalliers.
When Sir John Byron was at dinner in Brackly with his two brothers, and the
rest of the Commanders soldiers, some at that time with him, others at other
places.

Sir John gave his sumpter man charge to have away with the sumpter after
dinner, and all the rest to have away and look every man to himself.

Then he took his own horse which was an excellent stout steed, and got up,
set his spurs to the horse sides, and rid away with all might and maine, and so
got away before the Country came in.

Sir John's two brothers, the two Captains also got up and hasted away, one of
their Captains with a box wherein was money, and other good things, they one
way, and the other another way, also away as fast as they could, and got away
with others of the Commanders and soldiers, who hasted away so fast, that
whereas the Town was immediately before full of Soldiers, on a sudden they
were all gone.

The Country coming into the Town met 4. of the Cavalliers riding out of the
Town, and commanded them to stay, who were forced to yield themselves into
their hands, and coming into the Town, in the Innes there they found others
of the Cavalliers who were likewise taken by them, to Northampton, and from
thence to Newgate,

And coming to the Inn where Sir John Byron and the Captains had dined,
there they found the sumpter man loading of the sumpter horse, who seeing the
people come in, ran into the stable, and went about Ostlers work, there, as if
he had bin the Ostler of the house, so they took away the Horse, and all that
was in the Sumpter, and went into the Stable, and there seeing him took him
also.

Other Cavalliers were taken in other Country Towns near adjacent thereabouts,
who presently yielded themselves into the Countries hands, for there was not
any of them that did offer to stand out against the Country.

After they had taken as many as they could meet with of these Cavalliers, they
stripped them of their Clothes, to see what money they had about them, and they
found about some ten shillings, some twenty shillings, two pound, five pound,
six pound, some more, some less, yet some of them was so cunning as to hide
their moneys in their Boots, Dublet, or what private places they could find
out, and so did save the greatest part of their moneys.

But they were afterward searched again, because this their subtilty was
imagined, and then they found out a great deal more money than before about
some of them, and when they had done they sent them all to prison.

To Master Clarke at Craughton near Brackley in Northamptonshire.
Sir,
IN my way to Oxford, I made some stay at Brackley, to refresh my self, and my
horses, after a long march, were I was unexpectedly assaulted by sundry Troops
of Rebels that came (as I am since informed) from Northampton, and other
adjoining places, and withal most treacherously set upon by the Town of
Brackley, so that I was forced to make a retreat to the Heath to resist them,
had they had the courage to come forth of the Town. In this confusion one of
my Grooms who had charge of my baggage was surprised in the Town, another who
had a box, wherein was money, apparel, and other things of value, left it in a
land of standing corn, which since has been found, and as I hear brought to
you; I have therefore sent this Messenger to require the restitution of it;
which if you do, I shall represent at to his Majesty, as an acceptable
service, if not, assure your self I will find a time to repay my self with
advantage out of your Estate; And consider, that as Rebellion is a seed of a
hasty growth, so it will decay as suddenly; and that there will be a time for
the King's loyal Subjects to repair their losses sustained by rebels and
traitors: So I rest in expectation of a speedy answer by this bearer.

Oxford 2. Sep. 1642. Your friend and servant, John Byron.

The names of the prisoners received by the Sheriff of Middlesex of the
Sheriff of the County of Buckingham, the tenth day of September, 1642. And
then delivered into the Jail of Newgate.
James Estin. Robert Hardy. Robert Hooton. Robert Oliver. John Stoddarts.
William Craford. George Robinson. George Brown. Thomas Whitehead. William
Hebbard. William Day. John Holliday. Richard Moors. Edward Davenport. George
Key. Franc^s Frickley, Arch. Bell. Joseph Low. William Smith. Nickolas
Creswell. Thomas Bond. Edward Gibson. John Holswerth. Robert Pagget. Thomas
Langefeild. Waltar James. Henry Mason. John Garret. Andrew Brathwaith. William
Addington. Ralfe Crompton. William Brown. John Brace-girdle. Lwirell Thrifte.
John Greenwood. Richard Thompson. John Taylerson. Christopher Foster. John
Berry. John Maling. Edward Markyson. John Holliday. Robert Hardy. William
Bennet. John Lee. Thomas Norwood.
FINIS.

