A true and exact RELATION OF THE KINGS Entertainment IN The City of Chester.

WITH The Recorders Speech at His entering the City.

^ent from a Citizen of note in Chester, on purpose to be printed, to prevent
false Copies.

LONDON, Printed for C. M. October 4. 1642.

A True and Exact Relation of the Kings Entertainment in the City of Chester.
THe King came to Chester from Salop upon Friday about five of the clock, but
He brought in with him no great company; The Lord Rivers, Lord Cholmley, and
Sir Thomas Ashton came each of them with a Troop of horse to wait on his
Majesty into the City; besides those that came with him, there went out of
the City to Boughton about forty that had been Sheriffs, and some others on
horseback and foot-cloaths, and rid before Him into the City, and at the
Hony-stayrs there was a Scaffold made for the Aldermen to stand, and receive
him (as they had done his Father before time) and they kneeled down, and the
Recorder made a Speech or Oration to the King, not such a one as is conceived
much to his credit. Your father promised to send you a Copy that you may print
it to his shame, for I take it, he is so full of malice and pride, and but an
ignorant man in his own profession, and so for present leave him. After the
Oration, our Major gave the King the Sword, the Mace, and his Staff, and the
King gave them again to him, and the Major got on his horse and carried the
Sword before the King unto the Bishops Palace, where He stayed till Tuesday,
and departed toward Salop, taking Rexham in his way, and there dined with
Master Lloyd a Lawyer and the Kings Attorney for Flintshire, and thence to
Salop where he is.

Our Mayor and his Brethren presented Him with 200l in Gold, and to the Prince
100l: It was well taken; but by the report of some, a greater sum was expected,
but those know not our having; for I persuade my self, before it be collected
amongst the Citizens, it will be thought a very great sum. His stay amongst us
was very peaceable, and his departure very cheerful: The Mayor and Aldermen
brought him out of the Liberty on ho^se-back: It is reported He left a Garrison
amongst us; but He left none, but only commanded that 100 of the Country
Soldiers were put into the Castle; but what we shall have put upon us I know
not; but all those that are not of the Array are observed; for some of our
Country Gentlemen, as Sir Richard Wilbraham, Sir Thomas Delves, M. Manwaring of
B^dely, M. Wilbraham of Darfot, M. Berkinhead the Premotory and his son, are
all commanded to wait upon the King, and went with him to Salop, where they are
all yet. And I am informed that some have a Commission to search our houses in
Chester, what for, as yet I know not; but I hear my house is set down for one
to be searched; if they plunder not, I do not fear them. We have great store of
soldiers billetted round about our City, what for, I know not; but they are
very unruly, and came into many honest men's houses, specially into Ministers
houses, and take away some all, and what they please of their good.

Since the Sabbath day last, Manchester has been besieged by my Lord Strange,
now Lord of Derby; for his father lies dead at his little house under St.
John's, but we do not know nor hear that he has taken the Town as yet, neither
they yielded. This is all the passages that we have at present: so I end with
my prayer to God to bring all these troubles to an end. So comitting you to God
and rest.

Chester, October. 1. 1641.
Out of SHROPSHIRE.
IT is certainly informed by a godly Minister not far from Shrewsbury, That in
one great house which the Cavaliers have plundered and pillaged, they did
plainly and openly profess, that they had little to live on, but what they
took from others; and that when they went to bed (being about 60 of them)
diverse of them had Crucifixes hanging about their necks. In another great house
where they were, they drank a health to the good success of Sir Pbelim o Neal
in Ireland, of the Gentleman's own Beer, and in presence of himself, and diverse
of his servants. These Relations are certain, and will be proved by diverse
faithful eye and ear-witnesses: By which we may see how likely these men are
to maintain the true Protestant Religion, the Laws of the Land, and lawful
Liberties of the Subjects, whatsoever they pretend. And though they pretend
they search only for Armor, yet they break up, and take away whatsoever is
worth, or can well be carried away, and spoil many other things, cutting them
to pieces; and many of them (especially in out-towns and villages) where they
are billetted, pay nothing for what they have.

Mr. Recorder Brierwood's SPEECH AT The Entertainment of the King and Prince at
CHESTER, Sept. 23. 1642.
Most gracious Sovereign;
WE Your Majesty's most humble and obedient Subjects, The Mayor and Citizens of
this Your most ancient City, do in all humility crave leave to take the
boldness to bid Your Majesty and our most noble Prince, our hoped Earl of
Chester, welcome to this place; The ancient seat of Your Majesty, and Your
Majesty's Royal progenitors, Earls of Chester. This ancient City, the
Metropolis of this ancient County Palatine, though it has been sometimes
honored by the residence of senior Earls thereof within it; yet it has seldom
(ever since) been so highly honored, as to lodge a King and Prince of this
Realm at once within it, though but one night; The honor then, with the
accesses of Your Royal person, and of the person of our noble Prince at this
time unto this City does bring such, that it does transcend all former of this
kind, and does fill our hearts at once with a great deal of joy and security:
For we are in great fears in regard of the Rebellion in Ireland; as also, in
regard of a Malignant party that has lately appeared amongst us: But we are as
sensible, that Your Majesty's presence expells all dangers, and renders us
secure from the dangers abroad, and distractions at home: And it is, most
mighty King, the satisfaction of all our hearts, that Your Majesty has
already sufficiently testified to all the world, Your Majesty's indeered love
unto all Your Subjects, and to the Protestant Religion, whereof Your Majesty
is justly styled The great Defender; and we in this place, in thankfulness to
the same, will be ever ready to adventure our Lives and Fortunes for the
defense of Your Majesty, in whose safety rested only our security.

And Mr. Mayor of this City humbly prostrate upon his knees, does according to
his duty, surrender and yield up to Your excellent Majesty all the Authority
and Jurisdiction he holds under Your Majesty, and with it the Sword of this
City, the Ensign thereof: And he and we all of this City shall ever pray, Long
live King Charles victorious over all His Enemies.

FINIS.

