An humble Letter of Loyalty to the Londoners: Admonishing them of their
immiuent miseries, and advising them to a timely Prevention.
By L. T. a well-willer to the welfare of the KING, Parliament, and Kingdom.
THE imminent dangers and pressing calamities of this Kingdom are notoriously
known to all, and to some by sad and woeful experience, who have already tasted
of that bitter cup of misery, of which we must all drink the dregs, except GOD
in mercy prevent, and give us hearts to make use of the means which he has put
into our hands: our Religion bleeds, our Laws, Liberties and Privileges are
languishing at the last gasp, this all men know, this all men fear, of this
every man talks and discourses, and this is all they do to prevent and recover
these almost irrecoverable wounds: This general deluge and flood of misery,
wherein the particular welfare of every man is like to be drowned, (as every
man well knows) is only the subject of our discourse, which should be the only
object of our employments to remedy: we see our selves deeply plunged into a
deep ditch of distress, and all that we do is to cry (God help us) has not
GOD in great mercy given us an Army, Men, Ammunition and Money, what is wanting
that can be desired, but only active hearts and hands to make use of these
blessings, which I pray God to grant unto us, otherwise these which should be
the means of our support, will prove the instruments of our greater downfall,
and who may we thank but our own dull and drowsy selves? Rouse up your selves
then you noble Citizens of LONDON, you that have been hitherto the chief and
great Patriot to the whole Kingdom, who are not to be parallelled in your
great and liberal Contributions, and in your forwardness in all actions
tending to the support and recovery of this oppressed Nation: my humble advice
unto you is, that you persevere in this your good beginning, that you crown the
work with your constant and unwearied resolutions, that (now at this time of
need) according to your late Protestation, you put in practice all just and
honorable ways, for the preservation of your Religion, Laws, Liberties and
Privileges, which (together with your lives) are in immergent danger. Lose not
the honor you have got by your good beginning: should you now prove
faint-hearted or negligent, would not the burden of that speech of our Savior,
Luke 14. 28. fall flat upon your renowned City, to the perpetual disgrace of
it? That when a man having begun a work, and through want of advised forecast,
or diligent prosecution, is not able to finish the same, he becomes a reproach
to all that hear it. The eyes of the whole Kingdom are fixed upon you, such as
are in distress, and in the hands of cruel enemies expecting assistance from
you, and from whence else should they expect it, but from your Magazine of
strength? O let not their just expectations fail them at their need; some are
resolved to live and die in your assistance, let not your remissness prove a
discouragement to them: and others there are who daily expect and plot your
ruin: O let your diligent wisdoms prevent that: Be not so overtaken and
pussed with your own private affairs, which can be no way advantageous when
the public goes to wrack. Can the City flourish when the Country decays? if
the Countries be desolated, how long I pray you will the City subsist? But you
may say you have done your parts, you have freely contributed of your estates,
you have set forth men horse, arms, all ammunition and provision for the
defense and preservation of the Kingdom: this cannot but be confessed and
acknowledged to your perpetual honor. It Is true, God has blessed you with
abilities, and nothing is wanting, neither money, munition, nor men, neither do
your men want courage: but why then does the destroyer thus go on, destroying
and making havoc without control? or why do not these means raised by you
prove the instruments of defense and preservation to the Kingdom? You complain
that you suspect that things are not rightly carried in the managing of these
means, you suspect (and that not without grounds) that there are false brethren
and treacherous Counselors in the Army, you suppose that many of your
Commanders are such as aim at their own particular gains, more then at the
public weal, and therefore desire rather to protract and prolong the war, then
to dispatch and put a period to it: those things you fear (and certainly not
without cause:) but why then do you not by your wisdoms search and sift out the
matter, by your humble desires and petitions to the high Court of Parliament,
and to his Excellency the Earl of Essex, who are always most ready and willing
to hear and redress such things as shall appear to be amiss, especially such
matters of great concernment. I do not presume to propose any way for the
prosecuting of this particular, but do leave it by you to be considered of, but
being a matter of such high concernment, whereon the welfare of the Nation does
depend, let it not be by any means neglected: neglect rather your private
occasions for a while, and apply your selves to the public affairs. What will
it avail you to be getting by your trades, when in the mean time through your
too much security or negligence you are made mere bondslaves, and the estates
you have taken so much pains for shall be spoiled before your faces, and taken
away by villains and rascals. Nay what hopes can you have of any thing but
losses by your trading, so long as those wicked spoilers and robbers are
abroad, robbing and spoiling your Countrey-Chapmen, in whose hands you trust
your estates. Me thinks therefore it were better policy rather to secure what
you already have, then by a covetous desire of more, to hazard the loss of
all. Me thinks it is strange, that a business of such importance (as this must
needs be) should be so much feared, so much talked of, and no course taken for
prevention; will you give your money to become slaves? will you willingly and
wittingly be undone? can you suffer your selves and your posterity to be thus
betrayed? But you will say, there is at this time a Treaty on foot, and you have
hopes of peace, which with truth I pray God to grant (our desire is if it were
possible to have peace with all men:) But it is feared this Treaty (if there be
any) will prove as a small calm or breathing time between two storms, that the
latter may be more grievous and vehement then the former. Had we an absolute
peace and quietness amongst us; it were good policy to have our Pax armata,
our peace in every respect provided for war, much more in these treacherous and
dangerous times. Is not the cause just and honorable? what do we stand for,
but the glory of God in the purity of Religion? the honor of our King, in
rescuing him out of the hands of evil Counselors, desperate Cavaliers and
cruel robbers, our own just Liberties and Privileges? the least whereof
deserves our utmost endeavors to maintain. Let us then speedily put in
execution all possible means to defend it according to its deserts. Remember
the resolution of a heathen, Emori per virtutem mihi praestat, quam per dedecus
vivere: it is better to die honorably in defense of an honorable cause, then
to live in disgrace. I might multiply motives upon you to this purpose, but
will not tire your patience nor my own with these abrupt lines. Remember the
words of wise King Solomon, with which I conclude, Be circumspect and diligent
inmannaging of these great affairs, Prove. 5. 9, 10, 11, 12. lest thou give
thine honor unto others, and thy years unto the cruel: lest strangers be
filled with thy wealth, and thy labors be in the house of a stranger, and thou
mourn at last when thy flesh and thy body are consumed, and say, How have I
hated instruction, and my heart despised reproof?

Printed in the Year 1643.


