A true and most sad RELATION OF The hard usage and exrtrem cruelty used ON
Captain Wingate, Captain Viuers, Captain Austin, Capt: Lidcott, Capt: Walton,
Capt; Catsby, Capt: Lilbourne, Master Franklin, Master Freeman, Edward
Chillendon, Master John Bayley and his Father, with others of the Parliament
Soldiers, etc. Prisoner at OXFORD, under the custody of ONE SMITH
Provost-Marshall General to the KINGS Army: Written by one of the same
Prisoners in behalf of them all, TO A Worthy and eminent Citizen of LONDON,
Dated 9th of February, 1642.

London, Printed for GEORGE HUTTON, at the Turn'd-Style in Holborne, Feb: 13.
1642.

A True and most sad Relation of the hard usage and extreme cruelty used on
Captain Wingate, Captain Viuers, and others.
SIr, I was desired (by the Captains and Gentlemen here in prison) to let you
understand the truth of our usage here by Captain William Smith, who is
Provost-Marshall General to the Kings Army; Sir it is thus, That Captain
Wingate, Capt. Viuers, Cap. Austine, Capt. Lidcott, Cap. Walton, Capt, Catsby,
Capt. Lilburne, and Master Franklin, Burgess of the Parliament for the Town of
Marlbrough, and Edward Chillenden, are all of the locked up close prisoners in
their Chambers, and no man suffered to speak with them, and though they have
Beds of their own to lie on, yet when he pleases he will displace them out of
their own beds, and place others in them contrary to their wills: and for the
common Soldiers and such as my self their usage is thus, upon the complaint of
any of those they call the Kings Soldiers, which are here in prison, though
the things were false and never was spoken nor acted, yet if they do but say
it, we are presently clapped in irons and tied neck and heels together, and
called damned Traitors, we shall all be hanged and starved, and are beaten by
him with his Caine; and abused by every boy of his, yea even the Captains as
well as the rest, and his boys will abuse them so too; And further he has a
Protestation, which he does tender to all that do come into prison here, and
does force them to take it, and if they will not take it, (though it be against
the light of their conscience and knowledge, and against the Law of this Land,
and the liberty of the Subject, as indeed it is in a high degree; yet he will
clap them up in irons, neck and heels, and feed them with bread and water,
nay heel make them to be all a whole day without a bitt of any thing, as he
did one Master Freeman, and one of Marthrough Soldiers to force them to take
it, and a guard was set on them, and no man suffered to give them any relief:
and after all this when his pleasure is, that they have bin long enough thus,
he clapped them up into the Tower as they call it, and there feed them with bread
and water, which is at night, once a day half a penny lose and a can of water,
and will not suffer any friend neither in prison nor out, to relieve them with
any thing: but locks them up close that none can come to them, and thus he
swares he will use us all if we will not take the Protestation: and this day
there was meat sent to the prisoners in the Tower, and it was not suffered to
come to them.

And upon Saturday being the twenty seventh of January, there was some moneys
sent to the aforesaid Master Freeman that he had clapped neck and heels
together for not taking the Protestation, and he himself took it from him and
will not let him have it to buy himself food with, but still feeds him with a
half a penny bread and water a day, and svvears most fearful oaths he will
make him and all that will not take the Protestation to shit as small as a
Rat: and here is one Master John Bayley that was taken at Marlbrough, and his
father has paid two hundred pounds for his and his sons ransom, yet his said
son is kept prisoner, only because he will not take the Protestation: And here
is one Mr. Dunden a Counstable that has taken the Protestation, and because he
will not pay 59 pounds for his Fees, he is kept here prisoner.

Sir, this is miserable to consider and think of, and if you were here to see
it your very heart would be filled with grief, to see that poor Christians
should be so used; Therefore Sir I am entreated in the name of all the
Gentlemen here in prison, that you would make this known to the Parliament and
to the honorable City of London, and in particular to the Right Honorable the
Lord Brook: And it is desired and that by the Gentlemen here, that those
prisoners you have there may so be used, and not released from such usage till
there be a Certificate come from us to you of our better usage, and withal I
am further desired to let you know, that the Gentlemen and Prisoners have
preferred to the King and Council of War, a Petition and Articles against this
Smith and no hearing can be obtained; Therefore it is desired you would be
pleased to move the Parliament, and in particular my Lord Brook, that they
would write to the Earl of Lindsey to desire him to write to the King, That
His Majesty would be pleased to give command that the Petition and Articles may
be examined, and then no question is made but the King will see how basely He
is abused by those who say they are His best Subjects.

One thing more of special note is, that the Gentlemen of this house taking
pity of us poor distressed men that want both money and food, did liberally
contribute to our relief, and made one Master Kinssly a Lieutenant of horse to
be steward of it to see it disposed of, the which if they had not down, I am
confident half of us had bin dead ere this with hunger, one was starved to
death, another which was wounded by Smith, the Chyrurgeon not permitted to come
to dress him, dyed also for want of looking to; another died, and another is
like to dye, and all with ill usage, and now Smith will not let the money be
given to them, but has given strickt command to the contrary, and has charged
his servants to see that it be so observed as he has commanded.

The Chyrurgeon is committed here to prison because he reported the truth, that
the prisoners were starved and lost for want of looking to.

This is all truth that I have written every tittle of it, which all in the
prison will witness and seal to.

Oxford, Febr: 9. 1642.
FINIS.

