THE True and most miraculous Narrative, of a Child born WITH TWO TONGVES, At
the lower end of East-Smithfeild, in the Suburbs of London, etc.

Who three days after his Birth, was heard plainly, and expressly to cry out, A
King, a King, a King, Which it has ever since continued, to the admiration of
all that hear it.

As also its being sent for by diverse Personages of the Greatest Dignity, and
many Honorable Ladies in the Cities of London and Westminster, who not
contented to behold, and but one time to hear it, have sent their Coaches for
it again and again.

Together with the many various Interpretations and Constructions that every
where are made of it.

Horat. Sermon. Lib. 1. Nec si quid miri fecit Natura, Deos id

Printed for R. Harper near the Hospital Gate in Smithfield, 1659.

The True and most Miraculous Narrative of a Child born with Two Tongues, At
the lower End of East-Smithfield, in the Subburbs of London, etc.
Who Three Days after his Birth, was heard plainly and expressly to cry out a
King, a King, a King; Which it has ever since continued, to the Admiration of
all that hear it.
TO have two Tongues is commonly the property of a Dissembler, that is to say,
to have two Hearts, and one Tongue; for though the transgression of the Heart
be laid to the dissimulation of the Tongue; the Tongue is not so much guilty
of it, as is the Heart, that does sign, and dictate to it. It is the property
of a Wise man to have his Tongue in his Heart, (says the wisest of men;) but
if every man should have as many Tongues to express his thoughts, as he has a
heart that conspires with his head to contrive them, how many Monsters would
there be in Nature?

But though the Tongue be oftentimes a Dissembler, yet Truth it self (for the
honor of the Tongue) will not have it to be dissembled; that the Tongue is a
most Necessary Instrument, and attended with as much wonder, and prophecy, when
God peculiarly does please to move it, as it is with lies, and vanities, when
God does leave it to it self. We will descend by degrees to the observation of
this Truth, and we will endeavor to be as plain as possibly we can, for we know
to whom we write.

The first double Tongue that ever was in the World, was the Tongue of the
Devil, when in the form of a Serpent he courted Adam and Eve, to transgress
the Commandment of the Almighty. Adam before was as entire in his Tongue, as
he was in his Innocence; There was then in the World but one Language. and
there needed but one tongue to express that Language. Deceit was not known in
Nature, unless it was only in the Nature of the Serpent, into which Nature the
Devil did transform himself, and having tempted Man to sin by a secret
tincture, and an Infection of as much Ambit^on as crawling Corruption, he has
ever since made Man almost as serpentine as himself.

Man being thus infected with a double Tongue from the Devil, behold a
punishment proportioned to the Nature of his Offense. It was the double or the
forked Tongue of the Serpent that tempted Man to sin, and God will revenge it
with his forked Thunderbolts, which indeed had sunk mankind into the Pit of
eternal darkness, had he not in this wilderness of affliction been releived
with the Sight of a better Serpent, who after the immortal honor of his
ignominious Death, by the wonder of cloven Tongues which appeared like Fire,
did testify unto him the wonder of his Resurrection, so saving unto Mankind,
that whosoever calls on his Name shall be saved.

The Israelites heretofore for their murmuring, had been bitten with fiery
Serpents, the sins of their Tongues being punished with the Teeth of the
Serpents, their murmuring Tongues being like fiery Serpents, by which their
sins were chastised and expounded.

And as the Brazen Serpent was lifted up in the Wilderness, so was the Son of
Man lifted upon the Cross, and conferred the gift of Cloven Tongues on those
that loved him, that all Nations might partake as well of the blessing, as they
heard of the wonder of his Resurrection.

In the Contemplation of this I stand amazed, I find a Wheel turned in a
Wheel, a Sphere wrapped in a Sphere, especially when after this gift of a
Cloven Tongue, I do read: That it shall come to pass in the last days, that
the Lord will pour out his Spirit on all flesh, and their Sons and their
Daughters shall prophecy: And on my Servants, and on my Handmaids, says the
Lord, I will pour out of my Spirit in those days, and they shall prophecy.

The Beasts who had cloven Feet, were accounted clean in the Old Law, and we
find the Cloven Tongues to be the mystical Tokens of much happiness to come in
the new. They were the Interpreters of the Sheet which St. Peter saw, and what
it contained before the four corners of it were knit together. They were the
Prophets that foretold the Gospel of Salvation, which should be preached now as
well unto the Gentiles as to the Jews.

This is inserted, to take off the Imputation which the World does commonly
fasten on double Tongues, not that they are guiltless, for a double Tongue,
and a double Heart, go oftentimes together. A double Tongue for the most part
is a false Tongue, and the Devil is the Father of lies, and may have a Cloven
Tongue, as well as a Cloven Foot. But the Child of whom we come now to speak,
has not as it seems a double Tongue, nor a cloven, or a divided Tongue, but
two Tongues, one lapped over the other, and is as wonderful in his Language,
both in the earliness, and the Sense of it, as he is in the Supernumerary
Member.

Michael Scotus in his Book De secretis Naturae, discourses why some Men have
six Fingers, and why many men have one Thumb joined to another, which is not of
the same length and bigness, but subservient to the other; In this he gives
you uncontrouled Reasons, to satissie the exuberance of Nature. The great
Scholar Fracanstorfius, who wrote many years after him, is more full and clear
in his disquisitions on this Subject; If I do remember my self rightly, it is
in the very same place or very near unto it, where he gives you his Reasons why
David being an old Man, was advised by a Counsel of his Physicians to take a
young Maid into his Bed; But I have yet never heard of any Philosopher that
shows Reasons why a man has two Tongues, nor of any Historian who declares
that ever any one has had them.

True it is, I have heard many a man to say, that his own Wife, or his next
Neighbors Wife, has a thousand Tongues, which modestly I conceive is not so
much, by reason of the Number of so many Tongues, as by the perpetual motion of
one Tongue. And this indeed is the noise and the complaints of every day, and
every wind does blow them over the face of the World, that now they are no
sooner heard, then disregarded: but for an Infant to be born with two Tongues,
and to speak almost as soon as it was born, is a wonder in earnest, a wonder as
well to be seen, as heard, and the great wonder which I come now to declare
unto you.

In the Subburbs of London, in the lower end of East-smithfield, at a place
called Knockfergus, a young woman was brought to bed with a Child that was born
with two Tongues, the one in some measure covering the other, but the lower
Tongue appearing to be the more natural, for it seems to be more firm and
longer than the other. The father of it is a poor man, and of a poor trade, but
such a one that the best Lady in the Land, when she is plagued with Corns,
would be glad of his Assistance. Having a sharp Knife, and a good dexterity in
this, he does get a reasonable Subsistence to live in a hard world, and being a
good Corn-cutter, he does make his harvest, and thriftily brings it home, as
well in Winter as in Summer. His Name is John Clarke, and he lives at the next
door to the Sign of the Soldier and Trumpet at Knockfergus. His Wife is a great
Pains-taker, and well beloved amongst her neighbors, who were many of them
with her, at the time of her delivery, and did assist her in her Childing
throws.

Three days after she was brought to bed, many of her neighbors came to give
her a visit, and some of them were witnesses at the Christning of her Child,
whose Name was John, after the Name of his Father; looking steadfastly on the
Child and kissing it, the Child did open its mouth, and they plainly discerned
that it had two Tongues, which they were loath to discover to the mother, who
for all she gave it suck, had not then the least knowledge of it.

Mrs. Nicholls her next Neighbor whispering to the Midwife, whose name is Mrs.
Silk, concerning it, and the other Neighbors marvelling at it, and desired
that for the present it might be kept in private amongst themselves, because
they were loath to disquiet the mother, who began to take a little rest after
her hard Travail, with such melancholy News, the Child began to wayle, and to
cry out, A King, A King, A King;

If they were surprised with wonder to see two Tongues, how may we think, they
were now transported to hear one of them to speak, and to speak such a word, so
unexpectedly and distinctly.

In a silence full of amazement, they did now look on one another, the speaking
Child had made the Women dumb, which more then all the Bells in the Town ringing
at once, or the rattling of the brazen pans can do when the Moon is in labor:
Being all of them for a little respit of time thus hushed as midnight, the Child
began to speak again, and to repeat those-Words it did express before, which
the Mother hearing, did call for the Child, and did partake of the Wonder with
them; they entered into Council, and concluded that in regard the Name and
Authority of a King had been abolished by the Parliament, it was not fit it
should be divulged; the Mother, therefore did desire them that they would not
make any mention of it, which they pronsised to perform; but what muzzle can
silence the tongue of a woman?

From whispers at the first, it began to grow into open Reports, and the more
they did promise to suppress it, the more it was divulged; howsoever the Mother
(as she says her self) did tamper with the Child, and as much as she could to
make it sensible of her, she did forbid it to speak in that Name, which neither
she, nor others that did attempt it could ever effect.

In a short time the Child with two tongues, and the words in the mouth of it
were famous in the City, and diverse Gentlewomen of the City did send their
Coaches for the mother and the Child, who ever now and anon, would cry out A
King, a King, a King; and if there were any company about it, that it did not
like, it will put forth its hand and cry Away, away*

This being rumored in the City, great Ladies and many personages of honor at
Clerken-well have sent for the Mother and Child, who not knowing what to make
of it, have nevertheless been beneficial to the poor Mother of it. It is
observeable, that whereas other Children go forward, this Child do what they
can goes backward.

The Age of the Child being three quarters of a year.

FINIS.

