A true and perfect RELATION OF THE Trial, Condemning, and executing of the
24. Prisoners, who suffered for several Robberies and Burglaries at Tyburn on
Friday last, which was the 29. of this instant June, 1649. Expressing the
penitent end of the said Prisoners, the grief of the many Thousands there, and
the Speech of John Mercer (who was there executed) concerning Unity in this
Kingdom, and the bringing home and settling of the King.

July 3d

man executed on the gallows

LONDON, Printed for G.R. in the Year 1649.

A true and perfect Relation of the Trial, condemning, and executing of those
24. Prisoners, who suffered at Tiburne on Friday the 29, of June. 1649.
THe robbery of the wicked shall destroy them. Proverbs 11.7. But justice is
the pillar of the State, the Queen of virtues, and the Empress of Human
society; without it men could not live one by another; neither durst the Father
trust the son, the son the Father nor a faithful friend his seeming cordial
friend, so depraved is the condition of man, in this Iron age, when scarcely a
man can travel in the day time, much less in the night with a white rod (as
formerly) and a charge of money, but must be strongly guarded with company,
otherwise he shall lose his money, and what is worth any thing; if he
fortunately escape with his life; our honorable Judges judiciously taking into
consideration, most maturely condemned these following, being Indicted upon
several robberies, and Burglaries at the quarter Sessions last, holden in the
Old Bailey in London for the County of Middlesex, and City of London. And their
those most honorable Judges remembered that their office was not Jus dicere but
Jus dare, to interprit Law, and to make Law, or give Law; they then showed
themselves more learned then witty, more reverend then plausible, and more
advised then rash; all concluding with the last of the twelve Roman Tables
Salus populi suprema lex, The good of the people is the chiefest Law; which
this Nation cannot but take notice of, applauding the wisdom of such grave
persons, and heartily desiring that each Circuit of this Common wealth may be
furnished with such worthy Patriots, that so those who are ex lex without Law,
and would turn all to a Community, not respecting either the peace of this
State, or quiet men's peculiar proprieties, may be took away, for Immedic^bile
vulnus
Ense recidendum est, ne pars sincera trahatur. Ovid Meta.

The curelesse wound
Justice must cut, least it infect the sound.


Yet they went not so severely to wo^ke, but that they had an eye of pity to
those whom the Law would pardon as not hating the persons, but the vice in the
persons, not respecting the person, but judging according to their several
trespasses; For neither partial affection to the men, love of money, fear, nor
envy, incited them to pardon, or defe^r'd them to pronounce the final sentence
against them, which was must bravel with commisseration pronounced to them on
Wednesday last being the 27. of June, at the Sessions house in the Old Bailey,
from whence they were brought back unto Newgate, where a Minister appointed,
exhorted them to provide themselves for another world, since the Lord had
appointed a period to their lives in this. And they like penitent Christians
did so.

On Friday Morning about nine of the clock, they were tied in 8. carts and at
St. Sepulchers Church the Sexton according to the usual custom, ringing his
Bell made a short speech unto them. First, expressing their suffering according
unto Law, then inciting them to call on Christ Jesus; and Desiring the people
to pray for their souls; which being ended the carts were drove unto Tiburne
the Fatal place of execution, where William Lowen the new Hangman fastened
eight of them unto each Triangle, their was not much said as in relation to
confession of any other thing, then what they were condemned for by any of them
only John Mercer a young man desiring audience spoke to this effect as fo
loweth,

How that he was Indicted for murder and Burglary, (but took on his death,
that he was not guilty of any murder; And then spoke to the people, saying,
Pray for the prosperity of Jerusalem, let them prosper that love it, Pray (said
he) for the peace of this kingdom; let men love their wives, Women their
Husbands, one neighbor another, let concord and Unity be your desires,
embrace them as the chiefest good, for without them their can be no happiness
on earth, or beatitude hereafter; for in discord their is nothing but
dissentions arise, which being sovvne like tares disturb an spoil the best
cropp and most mature Counsels. For you soldiers be sure you fight the Lords
battles, and the Almighty God will be with you, and follovv you, so that no
doubt but success shall attend you here, peace to this miserable Kingdom, and
glory to your selves hereafter; But the only way to stop that vein which is
already bleeding, and to give an Antidote against future miseries which
already threaten to invade this distressed Kingdom, is to pray for the peace of
this City, this Kingdom, and to bring your King home, without whom their is
no likelihood of peace o^ settlement; for already the svvord is half drawn
out, but Woe be unto this already vvounded Nation, if the Almighty should take
it quite forth instead of sheathing it.

Which being ended, the people wished him to pray for his own soul, which he
with all the rest of the condemned most fervently did, as also cheerfully
singing a Psalm, and then the Minister spoke unto them, to call most earnestly
upon their Savior, which with eyes and hands upward to the Heavens, they
generally performed with such lamentable voices and mourning, that it moved the
many thousands of people there a far off, to pray lamentingly with them, and
to echo forth when the Carts were drawn away: Lord have mercy on their souls.

Thus gentle Reader, you have the true Relation of the untimely end of 23. Men,
and one Woman, condemned by the Law; wherein that great multitude which were
then at Tyburn, may take occasion still to call to the Almighty for grace,
without which they will be left unto themselves, as these sufferers were, and
all others may learn, not to rely upon themselves but on the strength of
Christ Jesus: For the Devil either by ignorance or insolence, will still be
insiting man unto sin: And there are three degrees of sin, suggestion,
delectation, and consent, suggestion is the seed, delectation the nourishment,
and consent the accomplishment: And then Laws must be in force, for good Laws
without execution, are like the picture of St. GEORGE, always with his weapons
up, but never striking.

And those who begin to follow these Life-bereaving ways but for a time, and
then intend to leave them of, let them know that Nemo repent fuit turpissimus.
Jurenal. Satyr. 2.

None on the sudden rise to the height of ill.


But when they once entertain such evil ways, they are not so soon left of,
as it is easier not to admit an uncivil guest then to turn him out, so is it
more facile to destroy sin in the embrio, then when it is come to maturity; for
Custom hardens, and draws with security the lives of many to their
untimely end: And thus not to restrain evil, is to maintain evil, and want of
punishment is the encouragement thereof; Therefore the Almighty faith, Deuteronomy.
1.17. Ye shall not respect judgment in persons. And why but because as the
Psalmist says, Psalm. 33.5. He loves righteousness and judgment, which let all
lay unto heart, and assure themselves, that although they commit their
wickedness secretly, yet there shall come a time when God will inslict
punishment on them, which the Poet could take notice of when he said Raro
anticedentem scelestum
Deseruit pede paena claudo. Horrat.

Seldom the villain, though much have he make
Lame footed vengance seem to overtake.


And the Scripture verifies the same in many places, therefore to defer all
our souls from these regnant sins, let us lay before our eyes, the untimely
death of men thus suffering; the stain upon their memories, which time cannot
blot out, the grief of their woeful Parents, Wives and Children, the shame of
their kindred, acquaintance and friends; with the loss of their precious souls
for eternity. For Numb. 32.23. Be sure your sin shall find you out, and except
ye repent, ye shall all perish.

The Names of the 23. Men, and one Woman, who were executed at Tyburne the 29.
of June, 1649. Thomas Smith William Moreton John Mer^cer John Blymvell Henry
Woods Robert Everet Hamlet Child William Burre Ralph Harrison George Brown
Joseph Rogers Thomas Whiting. Thomas Trodd John Carter Henry Pate Nathaniel
Bishop Francis Swayte Edward Minson Roger Dounes Rowland Bateman Richard
Broadwater Thomas Crook George Hewlet Mary Jones.


Finis.

