A true and perfect NARRATIVE Of the several proceedings in the CASE CONCERNING
The Lord Craven, BEFORE The Commissioners for Sequestrations and Compositions
sitting at Haberdashers-Hall, The Council of State, the Parliament: And upon
the Indictment of Perjury, Preferred and found against Major Richard Faulconer,
The Single and Material Witness against the Lord Craven, CONCERNING The
Petition to the King of Scots, Which as the said Faulconer pretended, was
promoted at Breda by the Lord Craven, and wherein, as the said Faulconer
deposed, The Parliament of England was styled by the name of Barbarous and
Inhumane Rebels.

SHORTLY After which Oath the Lord Cravens Estate was Voted by Parliament to be
Confiscate.

LONDON, Printed by R. White. 1653.

To the Reader.
AT the Trial of Richard Faulconer, upon an Indictment Term. Trin. xx. Maii.
1653.
of Perjury at the Upper Bench Bar in Westminster Hall, in the case of the Lord
Craven, It was there publicly pleaded on his behalf: That there was nothing
objected against the credit of Faulconer, so long as there was any other stone
to turn, though there were endeavors in Parliament before the Lord Cravens
Estate came to be sold, to prevent the Sale thereof: And therefore when all
Refuges failed, if they can undermine the credit of this man, then they hope to
undermine the Act of Parliament: And that after many transactions, and
settlements grounded upon this man's Information, now must he be blasted by an
Artificial Indictment a great while after.

These passages thus let fall by those who (it seems) had not perfect knowledge
of the proceedings in Parliament, in the Lord Cravens Case, might with some of
the Auditory, at so great a Trial, pass as certain truths: It is therefore
thought necessary to publish a Narrative, to clear those mistakes; And yet it
must be acknowledged that no exception was taken either to the Person of
Faulconer, or to the matter contained in his deposition against the Lord
Craven, before the Votes of confiscation of the Lord Cravens Estate did pass;
For that it was impossible for the Lord Craven, being near 800. miles distant
in Germany when those Votes did pass, to be here upon an hours warning, to make
his exception to Faulconers Deposition: The Parliament passing the Votes of
confiscation the same day Faulconers Deposition was reported and read in
Parliament: Neither the Lord Craven, nor any on his behalf being then heard or
summoned to be heard, nor could any on his behalf procure a Copy of the
Depositions, before the Votes of confiscation: It is therefore held requisite
more particularly to make known the several transactions in this husiness, and
what application has been made from time to time unto the Parliament, by, and
on the behalf of the Lord Craven, after the confiscation, and before the Bill
for Sale of the Lord Cravens Estate did pass, that the falsity of this man's
Oath might be examined in Parliament, or such other way as the Parliament
should please to direct and appoint; which the Parliament, after many
applications to that purpose, not thinking fit to give way unto; an Indictment
of Perjury was preferred in London against the said Faulconer, the Parliament
sitting, and the Indictment found by the Grand Jury, and the Parliament made
acquainted therewith before the Bill for Sale of the Lord Cravens Estate did
pass; and at the Sessions when the said Indictment was found, Faulconer might
have been also tried, had not the principal witness against Faulconer been
committed by Captain Bishop, after he was served with a Subpaena to give
Testimony against Faulconer, and kept in Prison from the first day of the
Sessions, till the Sessions was over, and then set at liberty: and before the
next Sessions the Bill for Sale of the Lord Cravens Estate did pass.

And forasmuch as the said Captain Bishop (the Prosecutor of the Lord Craven,
and a Contractor for a good part of his Estate) appeared more then a witness at
the Trial of Faulconer, and has since that Verdict endeavored to obstruct
Judgment upon the same, against so notorious and infamous a person: It is
further thought necessary to publish the proceedings at the Trial of the said
Faulconer, that the World (as well as the Jury) may Judge of the credit of this
man's Testimony against the Lord Craven, upon which so heavy a Judgment as that
of Confiscation was grounded: And with what indifferency the said proceedings
at the Trial are related, it is submitted to the Judgment of the Gentlemen of
the several Inns of Courts, and Practisers of the Law then present in Court,
and to all others who heard and took Notes at the said Trial.

Anth. Craven.

A NARRATIVE Of the Proceedings in the Lord Cravens Case.
MAjor Richard Faulconer being employed as a Spy into Holland, at his return
gave Information to Captain George Bishop, then Secretary to the Committee of
the Council of State for Examinations, against William Lord Craven: which
Information being prepared and reduced into writing by Captain Bishop, The
Commissioners at Haberdashers-Hall were sent for to White Hall, to administer
an Oath there unto the said Faulconer, who came accordingly: And upon the tenth
of February 1650. the said Faulconer was sworn before the said Commissioners to
the Information following, viz.

Febr. 10. 1650. The Information of Major Richard Faulconer of Westbury in
Hampshire, taken before Samuel Moyer, James Russel, Edward Winslow, Josias
Barners, and Arthur Squib, Esquires, Commissioners for Sequestrations and
Compositions, upon Oath:
Who says,

THat about a fortnight before the conclusion of the Treaty at Faulconers
Information against the Lord Craven
Breda, the Lord Craven, the Queen of Bohemia and her two Daughters came to
Breda to the Scots King Charles, and went not thence till the King went to
Honsleidike, a house of the Prince of Oranges. That during that time, this
Informant saw the Lord Craven diverse times in presence with the said King, and
every day with the said King at the Court there, he being there with the Queen
of Bohemia and her two Daughters, to take their leave (as they said) of the
King of Scots before he went to Scotland: That several Officers, about thirty
in number, made a Petition to the said King, to entertain them to fight for him
against the Commonwealth of England, by the name of Barbarous and Inhumane
Rebels, either in England or Scotland, for the recovering of his just Rights,
and reinstating him in his Throne, and deputed this Informant and Colonel Drury
to present the said Petition, who indeed drew the same. That when the Informant
and some other Officers came to the Court at Breda, intending to present the
said Petition immediately to the Kings hand, but finding the Lord Craven very
near to him, likewise the Marquess of Newcastle, who presented his brother Sir
Charles Cavendish to kiss the said Kings hand the evening before the said Kings
departure, who this Informant saw kiss the Kings hand accordingly; the Lord
Wilmot, the Earl of Cleveland, the Queen of Bohemia, the Lord Gerrard, etc. and
a great bustle of of business; This Informant, with Colonel Drury, applied
themselves to the Lord Craven, entreating him to present the Petition to the
Queen of Bohemia, to present it to the King of Scots; the said Lord Craven
taking the Petition, and reading the same Cheerfully, said to Colonel Drury and
this Informant, There is the Queen of Bohemia, deliver it to her, and I will
speak for you; Upon which they applied themselves to the said Queen, and she
presented the Petition; After which the King of Scots, the Lord Craven, the
Marquess of Newcastle, the Queen of Bohemia, with some other Lords went into a
withdrawing room, where this Informant and company could not enter; But the
Lord Craven came forth of the withdrawing Chamber, and told this Informant and
company, That they should receive an answer from the Queen of Bohemia to their
Petition, and that he had spoken to the Queen of Bohemia in their behalf, who
afterward came and told this Informant and company that she had delivered
their Petition, and that the King had taken order for it. The next morning at
three of the Clock the King departed, but this Informant and company had their
Quarters satisfied by the Princess of Orange, according to the said Kings order
upon their Petition, and thereby to enable them to follow the said King in the
prosecution of these Wars against the Parliament of England, which was the
effect of their aforesaid Petition: That this Informant saw the Lord Craven
very often and familiar with the said King, and enter with the said King into
the withdrawing Chamber, and staid there, the last night the said King was at
Breda, very late.

Richard Faulconer. Jur. 10. Feb. 1650. Coram nobis, Samuel Moyer, James
Russel, Edward Winslow, Josias Barners, Arthur Squib.

Colonel Hugh Reyly was likewise sworn before the said Commissioners at the
same time, whose Information was in these words, viz.

Febr. 10. 1650. The Information of Colonel Hugh Reyly, taken before Samuel
Moyer, James Russel, Edward Winslow, Josias Barners, and Arthur Squib,
Esquires, Commissioners for compounding, etc.
Who says,

THat during the late Treaty at Breda, this Informant did oftentimes Colonel
Hugh Reyly his Information against the Lord Craven.
see the Lord Craven with the now King of Scots in his Bedchamber, and also
walked abroad with him, there being no man more conversant with the King then
he. That the said Lord Craven during the said Treaty, did twice go to Rotterdam
and Dunhagh, and back again, being employed, as was commonly reported at Court
there, by the said King. That the said Lord Craven had a charge from the King
to look to one Mrs. Barlow, who (as is reported and he believes to be true) had
a child by the King of Scots, born at Rotterdam; which he did: and after the
King was gone for Scotland, the said Lord Craven took the child from her, for
which she went to Law with him, and recovered the child back again, as is
reported.

Hugh Reyly. Jur. 10. Feb. 1650. Samuel Moyer, James Russel, Josias Barners,
Edward Winslow, Arthur Squib.

Captain Thomas Kitchingman was ten days after sworn before the said
Commissioners, whose Information was as follows, viz.

Feb. 20. 1650. The Information of Captain Thomas Kitchingman, taken upon Oath
before the Commissioners for compositions, etc.
Who says,

THat the said Captain Thomas Kitchingman in April and May, Captain
Kitchingmans Information against the Lord Craven.
1650. Saw the Lord Craven several times with the King of Scots at Breda, and
waiting upon the said King several times at his Table at Breda; This Informant
also saw the Earl of Oxford at the same time with the King of Scots at Breda,
waiting upon the said King at his Table, and saw the Lord Craven, and the Earl
of Oxford many times go into the withdrawing rooms after the said King; This
Informant also saw the Lord Craven, and the Earl of Oxford in the Bowling-ally
in Breda Castle with the said King.

Thomas Kitchingman.
Jur. coram Commissionar. Febr. 20. 1650.
Sir William Craven having notice that the Lord Cravens estate was in danger of
Sequestration; and considering that himself and his children, by Elizabeth,
daughter to Fardinando, Lord Fairfax, upon whom a great part of the said estate
was settled, were like to be concerned therein; desired Mr. Rushworth to go with
him to the Commissioners at Haberdashers-Hall, and to desire a Copy of the
Charge against the Lord Craven, and accordingly a Copy of the depositions taken
against the Lord Craven was demanded by Sir William Craven, and Mr. Rushworth;
To whom Mr. Moyer in the name of the rest of the Commissioners, answered; That
they had not fully considered of the Informations against the Lord Craven; But
said that very speedily a Copy of the Charge should be delivered, and power
should be given to the Lord Craven to examine and cross examine witnesses;
whereupon at that time they departed, being confident that they should never be
deprived by those Commissioners of that common justice of being heard before
condemnation.

March 4. 1650.

The Commissioners at Haberdashers-Hall, having taken into The Commissioners
scruple to Sequester the Lord Craven.
consideration the said Informations of Faulconers, Reylys, and Kitchingmans,
were not satisfied in their judgments that they could Sequester the Lord
Craven thereupon; Wherefore they presented their doubt in that case to the
Council of State, which doubt or quere of theirs, as it is recorded, and
recited in an order of the Council of State, was as follows.

Tuesday 4. Martij. 1650. At the Council of State at White Hall.
Upon perusal of the depositions touching the Lord Craven, presented to this
Council from the Commissioners for Sequestrations, etc. sitting at
Haberdashers-hall; And of their certificate, wherein they mention that they
have given orders for the seizing and securing the said Lords estate, but offer
it as a doubt, whether the Parliament has made it matter of Sequestration for
any person living beyond the Seas, to hold correspondency with, or repair to
the person of the now King of Scots, when he was beyond the Seas; And desire it
may be offered to the Parliament for a Rule, which may enable them to proceed
to Sequestration in that and other cases of like nature: It is ordered by the
Council, that Mr. Atturny General do report this matter to the Parliament; and
in respect the retarding of Sequestrations, where persons may be esteemed
justly sequestrable, tends much to the prejudice and disadvantage of the State,
to desire that the Parliament will be pleased to give some directions therein
for the expediting of Justice in this and the like cases.

Ex. Gualter Frost, Secr.

March 6. 1650.

Mr. Prideaux, Attorney General, makes his report to the Parliament Mr.
Atturny Generals Report.
according to the directions of the said order, which report of his is entered
in the journal book, agreeing verbatim with the order of the Council of State
of the 4. March, and he also made a report of the three Informations before
mentioned (viz.) Faulconers, Reylyes and Kitchingmans, all which were
destinctly read by the Clerk, and after some debate these Votes following did
pass against the Lord Craven unheard, and not having any other Charge against
him.

Die Jovis 6 Martii 1650.
REsolved by the Parliament that the Lord Craven is an offender The Votes of
Confiscation.
against the Commonwealth of England, within the Declaration of the 24. Aug.
1649. Entitled a Declaration of the Commons assembled in Parliament, declaring
all Persons who have served the Parliament of England in Ireland, and have
betrayed their trust, or have or shall adhere to, or aid and assist Charles
Stewart, Son to the late King, to be Traitors and Rebels.

Resolved by the Parliament that the Estate of the Lord Craven be Confiscated
accordingly.

Resolved that the Commissioners for Compounding be empowered and required to
Seize and Sequester all the Estate Real and Personal of the said Lord Craven,
and to receive the Rents, Issues and Profits thereof to the use of the
Commonwealth.

Resolved that the Commissioners for Compounding be empowered and required to
seize and Sequester into their Possession, the real and personal Estate of all
such Persons as shall appear to them to be offenders within the Declaration of
the 24th August 1649. aforesaid; and to receive and take the Rents, Issues and
Profits thereof, to the use of the Commonwealth.

Hen. Scobel Cler. Parliam.

Which Declaratory Vote of the House of Commons, of the 24 of August, 1649.
follows in these words, viz.

Die Veneris 24 August 1649. Master Robinson reports from the Council of State
a Letter from Mr. Luke Robinsons Report.
Sir Charles Coot, from Londonderry, of the 15 of August 1649. and another of
the 14 instant, with Articles of Agreement between General Owen Oneal, and Col.
Richard Coot, in the behalf of Sir Charles Coot, Lord President of Conaught,
Dat. 22 May 1649. which were all this day read.
REsolved upon the question by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That this
House does declare that all persons, whether English or Scots, who have been
under the pay of the Parliament of England in the service of Ireland, and have
revolted and betrayed their Trust there, and all other persons who have or
shall adhere to, or assist Charles Stewart, Son of the late King, or any the
forces in Ireland against the Parliament of England, are, and be adjudged to be
Traitors and Rebels to the Commonwealth of England, and all their Estates shall
be confiscated, and their persons proceeded against as Traitors and Rebels; and
that all such Officers as have so betrayed their Trust, be proceeded against by
a Court-Marshall there.

Ordered by the Commons assembled in Parliament that this Declaration be
forthwith Printed and Published, and that it be referred to the Council of
State to communicate the same to the Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, and such
others there as they shall think fit, that the same may be put in execution.

Hen. Scobel Cler. Parliam.

Sir William Craven and Master Rushworth repaired again to the A second demand
of the charge against the Lord Craven.
Commissioners at Haberdashers-Hall, and demanded a Copy of the Informations
against the Lord Craven, to the end that he might be heard before he was
condemned; for that they understood the Commissioners had seized and secured
his Estate, and did purpose to Sequester the same.

Master Moyer returned this answer: That it was not usual with them to condemn
any man unheard, that they had a full purpose to have given A further Answer of
the Commissioners at Haberdashers-Hall.
liberty to the Lord Craven to make his Defense to the Informations given
against him, but now their hands were tied up, for the Parliament had Voted his
Estate to be confiscate: and they were required to Sequester all the Estate
real and personal of the Lord Cravens, to the use of the Commonwealth.

Hereupon Master Rushworth forthwith repaired to the Parliament, to inform
himself of the proceedings against the Lord Craven there: Took a Copy of Master
Atturny-Generals Report, the Informations aforesaid, and the Votes of
Confiscation thereupon; and immediately a Petition was drawn on the behalf of
the Lord Craven, in the name of Sir William Craven, and James Pickering Esquire.
Commissioners entrusted by the Lord Craven for the management of his Estate,
which from the 12 of March 1650. to the 12 of June 1651. they endeavored by
their friends to get delivered in Parliament, but could not obtain it, until
the said 12 of June, that the House took into consideration the first Bill of
sale of Delinquents Estates: When the Lord Cravens name being propounded to be
inserted into the Bill, it gave a handsome opportunity to that Member of the
House, who had so long attended to deliver Mr. James Chaloner.
the said Petition, to get the same delivered: which Petition then presented
and read, was in these words, viz.

To the Supreme Authority of this Nation; the Parliament of the Commonwealth
of England.
The humble Petition of Sir William Craven Knight, and James Pickering Esquire.
Commissioners deputed by the Lord Craven, for the managing of his Estate in his
absence,
Humbly shows,
That your Petitioners are informed that by a late Vote of this Honorable
House, the Lord Craven is declared an Offender within the The first Petition
presented on the behalf of the Lord Craven.
declaration of the 24th of August 1649. Whereby his Estate is made liable to
confiscation, and the Commissioners for Compounding are empowered and required
to seize and Sequester all the estate real and personal of the said Lord
Craven; That the Lord Craven being beyond the Seas in Germany, at the time of
the passing of these Votes, knows nothing of the Votes against him here in
England, and your Petitioners being desirous to discharge their Trust, in
giving his Lordship timely notice of the said proceedings against him, Do
humbly pray on the behalf of the said Lord Craven, that your Petitioners may be
permitted to send an Express unto his Lordship, to acquaint him with the said
Votes; And that this Honorable House would be pleased in the mean time, as to
the confiscation of his estate, to suspend their former Order.

And Your Petitioners shall pray, etc.
Upon the reading of this Petition the House thought not fit to make any order
to suspend the Votes of Confiscation, or to give leave to send an Express.

The Parliament afterward falling again upon the debate of the The house
divided about the Lord Craven.
first Bill of Sale for Delinquents estates, it was then propounded that the
House would give leave to speak against the former Votes of confiscation of the
Lotd Cravens estate, upon which the House was divided; 24 were for resuming the
debate, and 25 were against it; So it was carried by one Vote only not to
resume the consideration of the said Votes of confiscation: The Votes which
passed that day in Parliament were as follows (viz.)

Thursday 3. July 1651.
The question being propounded that leave be given to take the Vote touching
the Lord Craven into consideration again, it passed in the negative. The Votes
Summons four months after confiscation.


Resolved by the Parliament, that a Summons do issue forth for William Lord
Craven, requiring him to appear parsonally at such time as the Parliament shall
appoint, to answer such matters as shall be objected against him, on the behalf
of the Commonwealth of England.

Resolved that the place of his appearance be at the Parliament of the
Commonwealth of England.

Resolved that the day of his appearance be on the 3. of September. 1651. A
draught of the Summons to be signed by Mr. Speaker was this day read and agreed
unto in these words.

By Authority of the Parliament of the Commonwealth of England, These are to
command and require William Lord Craven, to make his personal appearance before
the Parliament of the Commonwealth of England, upon the third day of September
1651. there to make answer to all such matters as shall be objected against him
on the behalf of the Commonwealth of England, whereof he is not to fail at his
peril, dated at Westminster this third day of July 1651. Ordered by the
Parliament that the Sergeant at Arms attending the Parliament do proclaim this
Summons in Westminster Hall.

Ordered that this Summons be likewise printed, and that the Sergeant at Arms
do cause the same to be set up at the Old Exchange London, and other places
Convenient for the publication thereof.

Hen. Scobel Cler. Parliam.

The said Vote of Summons being past 4 months after confiscation, whereof the
Lord Craven had no notice, yet having got information of some former
proceedings in the Parliament against him and his estate, when he was far
remote in Germany, did thereupon send a Petition by the foreign Post, under
the Cover of the Dutch Packet, directed to the Parliament, which was delivered
the latter end of August 1651. by the Dutch Agent, then Resident at London, to
Mr. Speaker, and by Mr. Speaker faithfully presented to the Parliament before
the third of September 1651. but the Parliament thought not fit to permit the
same to be Read; by reason there was none present who could testify they did
see the Lord Craven subscribe the same, and give directions for the delivery
thereof; which Petition remains in the hands of Mr. Scobel Clerk of the
Parliament, and was as follows.

To the Parliament of the Commonwealth of England.
The Humble Petition of William Lord Craven.
Humbly shows,
THat the Petitioner, notwithstanding his Care and Endeavor to The first
Petition presented by the Lord Craven, not permitted to be read.
avoid giving any Cause of offense to the Parliament, has nevertheless been so
unfortunate, as to meet with those who by false and Calumnious Informations
have practiced to beget an ill opinion in this honorable Assembly of the
Petitioner, and thereby as much in them lies, to work his absolute ruin, with
the falsity of their suggestions; The Petitioner doubts not to make
manifestly appear, by diverse Witnesses and circumstances conducing to the
clearing of the truth; but in regard the present conjuncture of affairs here
does not permit him to come in Person, he does most humbly beseech the
Parliament, to be so favorable unto him, as to give way he may by his friends
and Counsel be permitted to answer and set forth the truth and circumstances,
not doubting but by this means he shall be able to clear his innocence, and
give satisfaction to this Honorable House.

And your Petitioner shall pray, etc. William Craven.

The Lord Craven hastens from Germany into Holland, and sends October. 1651. A
second Petition miscarried.
a duplicate of his former Petition by the hands of Mr. Peter Wilkin, a
Gentleman formerly of the Earl of Essex, and Lord Fairfax's Lifeguard, a
person of very much merit and faithfulness to the Parliament; who immediately
after he had his dispatch, fell sick beyond Sea, and dyed there; the Lord Craven
being much troubled at his disaster, frames a new Petition, and sends the same
over into England in October 1651. Subscribed with his own hand, which Sir
Gilb. Pickering, Mr. James Chaloner, Colonel Martin.
Petition, with the Duplicates thereof so subscribed, as aforesaid, remained in
the hands of several Members of Parliament, each of whom were desired to take
the first opportunity that was offered to any of them, to present the same; Who
from October. 1651. until 22 of June, 1652. though they often endeavored it, and
were daily attended therefore by Mr. Rushworth for above seven months together,
could not prevail to get the Petition read in Parliament; And then the House
falling into a debate of an additional Act for sale of Delinquents estates, And
the Lord Cravens name being propounded to be inserted therein, gave a
seasonable opportunity to have the Lord Cravens Petition read; which was in
these words.

To the Supreme Authority, the Parliament of the Commonwealth of England.
The humble Petition of William Lord Craven.
Humbly shows,
THat upon the Information of Major Richard Faulconer, who A second Petition of
the Lord Cravens.
acknowledges, That himself and another drew the Petition to the King of Scots
against the Commonwealth of England, and that the Petitioner promoted the
delivery thereof, and upon the information of Captain Thomas Kitchingman, and
one Hugh Reyly, that the Petitioner was at Breda with the said King, and upon a
Vote of 24 of August 1649. whereby it was declared, that those who had been
under pay of the Parliament of England in the service of Ireland, and revolted
and betrayed their trust, and all others who did adhere to the Son of the Late
King, or any of his Forces in Ireland, should be adjudged Traitors, and their
Estates to be confiscate, and their persons to be preceeded against as Traitors.

Thereupon the 6 of March 1650. it was voted in Parliament, that your
Petitioner is an Offender within the Declaration aforesaid, and that his Estate
be confiscate, and that the Commissioners for compounding be required to seize
and Sequester the same, which they have done accordingly, and have ever since
received the Rents and Profits of all his Lands, and have sold his Cattle and
Goods.

The Petitioner says, he is not guilty of the matter charged upon him, and
humbly desires it may be taken into consideration.

1. That he went with Consent of Parliament beyond the Seas before the War
broke forth in England, and has been there ever since attending his Charge.

2. That he went not to the King of Scots into Holland, but that the King came
to Breda, whilst he was there upon his employment, where his Residence by
Command then was.

3. That the material information is upon a single Testimony, of one who
confesses himself the principal contriver of that Treason, whereof he accuses
the Petitioner to be an abettor, and besides is mainly disproved and
contradicted in diverse parts of his Testimony, and proves not any word or deed
of the Petitioner, not against the Parliament.

4. That the Petitioner during all the Time of these late wars and differences
in England, did never engage, or in the least manner appear against the
Parliament of England.

5. That the Persons that accuse him were utter strangers to him, and the
promotion of their Petition no way concerned him. He humbly therefore offers to
your Honors consideration, how unlikely it should be that your Petitioner
should hazard himself and his Estate in England, which was known to be
considerable, in so unnecessary and unprofitable a business, and so much
contrary to all his former Deportments.

Wherefore the Petitioner humbly begs the favor of this Honorable Assembly,
that his Case may be considered, and that this Honorable Assembly would be
pleased to put his business into such a way, as that he may be heard by his
Counsel, not doubting but thereby this honorable Assembly shall Receive so
good an account of your Petitioners candid Deportment, as may fully satisfy
your Honors.

And your Petitioner shall ever pray.
At the same time a Member of the house delivered a Petition in Mr. James
Chaloner.
the name of Sir William Craven, and Sir Edmund Sawyer, giving notice of some
new Information to disprove Faulconers testimony, which Petition the said
Member moved, that it might be Read, and delivered it to the Clerk accordingly
to be Read, immediately after the reading of the Lord Cravens Petition, but the
Parliament thought not fit to permit the reading thereof, which Petition
remains with Mr. Scobel Clerk of the Parliament, and was in these words, viz.

To the Supreme Authority of this Nation, the Parliament of the Commonwealth
of England.
The humble Petition of Sir William Craven, and Sir Edmund Sawyer Knights, on
the behalf of William Lord Craven,
Humbly shows,
THat they having been a long time trusted in the affairs of the said A second
Petition presented on behalf of the Lord Craven not permitted to be Read.
William Lord Craven, have for these many Months attended upon the Parliament,
to get a Petition of the said William Lord Cravens presented, in which his
Humble Desire is, that he may be heard; That of late it has come to their
knowledge that the information given in by Faulconer (the single Witness, and
against the Lord Craven in the material parts of his Accusation) is altogether
untrue, and that it will be so made appear by several Witnesses then upon the
place with the said Faulconer, and now in Town; and particularly by Col. Drury,
whom the said Faulconer mentioned in his accusation to be deputed with him to
deliver the said Petition; who as your Petitioners are informed, can produce
the first original draught of the said Petition, of the said Faulconers own
hand writing: whereby it will appear (as your Petitiners are likewise informed)
that there was not the least mention of the Parliament or Commonweath of
England, nor any such expressions as are mentioned in the said Faulconers
information, which your Petitioners thought themselves bound in conscience to
acquaint the Parliament with, that their Justice might the more clearly appear
in a through examination of this business, in such way as they in their wisdom
shall think fitting.

And your Petitioners shall pray, etc.
Afterward the question being put upon Reading the aforesaid Petition of the
Lord Craven, whether he should be put into the Bill of sale, to have his Estate
sold, it was carried only by two voices, that his Estate should be sold, there
being 33. for the sale thereof, and 31. against it.

The Votes which passed that day, are as follows.

Tuesday June 22. 1652.
The house this day resumed the debate upon the Amendments of the The house
divided the third time about the Lord Cravens estate.
additional Act for sale of Estates forfeited to the Commonwealth for Treason.

The question being propounded,

That William Lord Craven be put into this Bill for his Lands to be sold, and
the question being put, that this question be now put, it passed with the
affirmative.

And the main question being put, that William Lord Craven be put into this
Bill for his Lands to be sold, it was Resolved by the Parliament, that William
Lord Craven be put into the Bill for his Lands to be sold.

Hen. Scobel Cler. Parliam.

The Parliament not thinking fit upon the said Petition of Sir William Cravens,
and Sir Edmund Sawyers, to permit the business concerning the Lord Craven to be
put into a way of Examination, and the Bill for sale being likely to pass
within few days, there was a necessity put upon the Prosecutors on the behalf
of the Lord Craven, to resort to the good Laws of England for remedy; And
thereupon, and not before, an Indictment was drawn in order to the conviction
of the said Faulconer of Perjury, which Indictment was the 12. day of July
1652. delivered to the Grand Jury at Guild Hall London; The Copy of which
Indictment was as An Indictment of Perjury against Faulconer.
follows.

Be it remembered, that at the general Quarter Sessions of the Land. ss.
public peace holden for the City of London, at the Guildhall of the same
City, on Monday the twelfth day of July, In the year of our Lord one thousand
six hundred fifty and two, before John Kendrick Mayor of the City of London,
Thomas Atkin, Thomas Andrews, and Thomas Foot, Aldermen of the same City, and
others their fellow Justices Assigned to keep the public peace in the City
aforesaid: And also to hear and determine diverse Felonies, Trespasses and other
misdemeanors committed within the same City, by the Oaths of Robert Dawks, John
Harvy, William Pitcher, Pelham Moore, George Boddington, Thomas Peirson, Joseph
Ruthorn, Samuel Coleman, Richard Pain, John Drafgate, Robert Trollaffe, Richard
Bartholmew, John Robinson, Robert Alkington, and Thomas Wilmer, good and
lawful men of the City of London, then and there sworn and charged to Inquire
for the Keepers of the Liberty of England by the Authority of Parliament, and
the body of the City aforesaid, it is presented that the Bill following is true.

The Jurors for the Keepers of the Liberty of England by Authority Land. ss.
of Parliament upon their Oath do present, That Richard Faulconer of Westbury
in the County of Southampton Gent. Not having the fear of God before his eyes,
but moved and seduced by the instigation of the Devil, and minding and
endeavoring to bring the Right Honorable William Lord Craven, Baron of
Hampsteed, Marshall in the County of Berks, in danger of the loss of his life,
and of the Sequestration, confiscation, forfeiture of all his Lands, Goods, and
Chattels within this Commonwealth of England, the tenth day of February, In the
year of our Lord God one thousand six hundred and fifty, at the Parish of Mary
Stainings, in the Ward of Cripplegate London, before Samuel Moyer Esquire; James
Russel Esquire; Edward Winslow Esquire; Josias Barners Esquire; and Arthur Squib Esquire; then
being Commissioners for compounding with Delinquents, and for managing of all
and every the estates of Delinquents and Popish Recusants; that the fifteenth
day of April, in the said year of our Lord one thousand six hundred and fifty,
were, or then after should be under Sequestration, did upon the Holy
Evangelists, corruptly, wilfully, falsely and maliciously, of his own proper
Act, consent and Agreement, swear, and upon his Corporal Oath before the
Commissioners aforesaid on the said tenth day of February, in the said year one
thousand six hundred and fifty, then having power to Administer the said Oath,
then and there depose concerning the said Lord Craven, in these English words
following; that is to say; That about a fortnight before the conclusion of the
Treaty at Breda, the Lord Craven, the Queen of Bohemia and her two Daughters
came to Breda to the Scots King Charles, and went not thence till the King went
to Honsleidike, a house of the Prince of Oranges. That during that time, this
Informant saw the Lord Craven diverse times in presence with the said King, and
every day with the said King at the Court there, he being there with the Queen
of Bohemia and her two Daughters, to take their leave (as they said) of the
King of Scots before he went to Scotland: That several Officers, about thirty
in number, made a Petition to the said King, to entertain them to fight for him
against the Commonwealth of England, by the name of Barbarous and Inhumane
Rebels, either in England or Scotland, for the recovering of his just Rights,
and reinstating him in his Throne, and deputed this Informant and Colonel Drury
to present the said Petition, who indeed drew the same. That when this
Informant and some other Officers came to the Court at Breda, intending to
present the said Petition immediately to the Kings hand, but finding the Lord
Craven very near to him, likewise the Marquess of Newcastle, who presented his
brother Sir Charles Cavendish to kiss the said Kings hand the evening before
the said Kings departure, who this Informant saw kiss the Kings hand
accordingly; the Lord Wilmot, the Earl of Cleveland, the Queen of Bohemia, the
Lord Gerrard, etc. and a great bustle of business; This Informant, with Colonel
Drury, applied themselves to the Lord Craven, entreating him to present the
Petition to the Queen of Bohemia, to present it to the King of Scots; the said
Lord Craven taking the Petition, and reading the same Cheerfully, said to
Colonel Drury and this Informant, There is the Queen of Bohemia, deliver it to
her, and I will speak for you; Upon which they applied themselves to the said
Queen, and she presented the Petition; After which the King of Scots, the Lord
Craven, the Marquess of Newcastle, the Queen of Bohemia, with some other Lords
went into a withdrawing room, where this Informant and company could not enter;
But the Lord Craven came forth of the withdrawing Chamber, and told this
Informant and company, That they should receive an answer from the Queen of
Bohemia to their Petition, and that he had spoken to the Queen of Bohemia in
their behalf, who afterward came and told this Informant and company that she
had delivered their Petition, and that the King had taken order for it. The
next morning at three of the Clock the King departed, but this Informant and
company had their Quarters satisfied by the Princess of Orange, according to
the said Kings order upon their Petition, and thereby to enable them to follow
the said King in the prosecution of those Wars against the Parliament of
England, which was the effect of their aforesaid Petition: That this Informant
saw the Lord Craven very often and familiar with the said King, and enter with
the said King into the withdrawing Chamber, and staid there, the last night the
said King was at Breda, very late; Which said Oath was the said tenth day of
February in the year of our Lord one thousand six hundred and fifty, at the
Parish and Ward aforesaid, reduced in writing, and taken before the said
Commissioners, then having sufficient and lawful power to Administer the said
Oath, and to take the testimony and depositions of witnesses upon their Oaths
in such cases; Whereas in truth neither did the several Officers, or any
Officer make a Petition to the said King to entertain him or them to fight for
him against the Commonwealth of England. Nor did several Officers or any
Officer make a Petition to the said King to entertain him or them to fight for
him against the Commonwealth of England, by the name of Barbarous and Inhumane
Rebels, either in England or Scotland. Nor did several Officers or any Officer
make a Petition to the said King to entertain him or them to fight for him
against the Commonwealth of England, by the name of Barbarous and Inhumane
Rebels, either in England or Scotland for the recovering of his just rights, or
reinstateing him in his Throne. Nor deputed he the said Richard Faulconer, and
Colonel Drury to present the said Petition, in the said Oath mentioned; Nor did
the said Richard Faulconer, with the said Colonel Drury, apply themselves to
the said Lord Craven, entreating him to present the said Petition to the said
Queen of Bohemia, to present it to the said King of Scots. Nor did the said
Richard Faulconer, with the said Colonel Drury, entreat him the said Lord
Craven, to present the said Petition to the said Queen of Bohemia, to present
it to the said King of Scots. Nor did the said Lord Craven take the said
Petition, or read the same; Nor said unto the said Richard Faulconer and
Colonel Drury, there is the Queen of Bohemia, deliver it to her, and I will
speak for you. Nor did the said Lord Craven tell the said Rich. Faulconer and
company, in the said deposition mentioned, that they should receive an answer
to their said Petiton, or that he had spoken to the Queen of Bohemia in their
behalf, As the said Richard Faulconer in and by the said deposition has
deposed. And so the Jurors aforesaid, upon their Oath aforesaid, do say, That
the said Richard Faulconer, in manner and form aforesaid, Corruptly, Wilfully,
Falsely and Maliciously, of his own proper Act, Consent and Agreement, did
commit wilful, false, and corrupt perjury; To the great dishonor of Almighty
God, and to the great damage, loss and infamy of the said William Lord Craven,
and in contempt of the Laws of this Commonwealth; To the evil Example of all
others in the like case offending, And against the public peace, etc.

Sadler.

This Indictment upon the Testimony then produced upon Oath, was accordingly
found by the Grand Jury.

The same day that this Indictment was found, Colonel Drury, Colonel Drury
arbitrarily committed by Captain Bishop.
who had given evidence to the Grand Jury, repaired to White Hall to Captain
Bishop, (having been formerly examined by him concerning the Lord Craven) and
told him, that as he was that morning going down Holborn-Hill, he was served
with a Subpaena to appear that day at Guild Hall London; and that he was
examined there concerning the Information given by Faulconer, against the Lord
Craven; and that after he was sworn before the Lord Mayor, He gave the same
evidence to the Grand Jury which he had formerly given to Captain Bishop upon
his examination; Whereupon the said Captain Bishop took the Writ under seal out
of his hand, with which he was served to appear, and said to Drury, How durst
you be examined against the Commonwealth, and not acquaint me first therewith?
and said further, Mr. Mayor, meaning (the Lord Mayor) had better have done
something else, then to have suffered that Indictment to be found; and
immediately calls for a Messenger, and Commits the said Drury to the custody of
one Midleton, a Messenger to the Council of State, who forthwith carried Drury
away Prisoner into the Strand, to the house of the said Midleton, where the
said Drury was kept by him in strict custody, from Monday that the Indictment
was found, and the Sessions begun, till Saturday, that the Sessions was past;
by which Restraint of Drury, who had Faulconers own handwriting to produce
against himself, and being otherwise the most material witness against
Faulconer, there could be no further prosecution upon that Indictment that
Sessions, and before the next Sessions the Bill for sale of the Lord Cravens
Estate did pass. After the preferring and finding of this Indictment, several
business of public concernment did interrupt the Parliaments present passing
of the Bill for sale; So that the Parliament had several debates upon the said
Act, and the 20 day of July the said Bill being committed to a Committee to
fill up the full number of 30 persons, and to present their names unto the
House, Mr. Rushworth attended with a Petition in the names of Sir William
Craven, and Sir Edmund Sawyer, and caused the same to be presented unto that
Committee then sitting in the Speakers Chamber in the Parliament House, therein
taking notice that the Indictment of Perjury was found; which Petition was as
follows.

To the Honorable the Committee of Parliament, appointed to consider of the
names of several persons, to present to the Parliament, whose Estates may be
forthwith sold.
The humble Petition of Sir William Craven, and Sir Edmund Sawyer Knights, who
have been Commissioners long entrusted by the Lord Craven in the management of
his Estate.
Humbly shows,
THat your Petitioners in their Petition presented to the Parliament A third
Petition on behalf of the Lord Craven.
about a Month since, and remaining in the Clerks hand, did most humbly
beseech them, that they would be pleased to permit such Testimony to be
produced, not only by witness, but by writing under the hand of Richard
Faulconer (the Single and Material Witness against the Lord Craven, as to the
Petition mentioned in Faulconers Deposition) which they hoped would make it
clearly appear unto the Parliament; (that the information given by the said
Faulconer) (upon which the Vote which then passed for the Confiscation of the
Lord Cravens Estate is chiefly grounded) is altogether false and untrue in all
the Material parts of his Examination.

That the Parliament not thinking fit to permit the said Petition (presented as
aforesaid) to be read, the said Faulconer is since indicted of Perjury, and the
Grand Jury have accordingly found the same.

That a Warrant was accordingly obtained to apprehend the said Faulconer,
thereby intending to have brought him to his speedy Trial, (all Perjuries being
excepted by the Act of Oblivion) but one of the chief Witnesses against the
said Faulconer, who gave Evidence to the Grand Jury, being since restrained of
his Liberty, was the only obstruction, why in a Legal course the Law was not
prosecuted against the said Faulconer this last Sessions at Newgate.

Your Petitioners humbly beseech you, that you would be pleased to present to
the Parliament the consideration of the whole matter, that this business may be
further and speedily examined in Parliament, or otherwise, as they in their
wisdom shall think fitting, and that in the mean time the Lord Craven may be
omitted out of the present Bill of sale.

And your Petitioners shall pray, etc.
This Petition was delivered to Aldermam Allen, then Chairman to the Committee
sitting in the Speakers Chamber, upon the Bill for sale; and word was sent up
with the said Petition, that there were some attending at the door to avow the
same, and accordingly the Petition was read at the Committee, but they thought
not fit to take any notice of the information therein given, nor to report the
same to the Parliament, that their pleasure might be known thereupon.

The Parliament again had in debate the said Act, upon a Report thereof made by
the Lord Gray of Grooby, and past many of the Amendments; whereupon it was much
pressed by several Members, that a Petition in the name of Sir William Craven,
and Sir Edmund Sawyer, on the behalf of the Lord Craven, might be read before
the Act did pass; the House at that time thought not fit to hear the same, but
declared, that before the Bill was put to the question, the Petition should be
read; and shortly after ordered the Bill to be engrossed, and to be brought
into the House on Tuesday August the third.

Tuesday, August 3. 1652.

Accordingly on that day the Speaker tendered the engrossed Act to the House, to
be put to the question, to pass as a Law, And the Member of the House in whose
hands the Petition remained, as he Sir Gilbert Pickering.
went into the House, was desired by the Petitioners to present the Petition,
and to procure them to be called in to avow the same, for that they would make
good every particular in the said Petition, and more, if need required, then
what was thetein contained; which said Member went into the House, and
accordingly presented the same, which was read by the Clerk, and is remaining
still in his custody, and was in these words.

To the Supreme Authority of this Nation, the Parliament of the Commonwealth
of England.
The humble Petition of Sir William Craven, and Sir Edmund Sawyer Knights, who
have been Commissioners long entrusted by the Lord Craven, for the managing of
his Estate.
Humbly shows,
THat your Petitioners in their Petition presented to the Parliament A fourth
Petition on behalf of the Lord Craven.
above a Month since, and remaining in the Clerks hands, did most humbly
beseech them that they would be pleased to permit such Testimony to be
produced, not only by Witness, but by writing under the hand of Richard
Faulconer, the single and material Witness against the Lord Craven, as to the
Petition mentioned in Faulconers deposition, which they hoped would make it
clearly appear unto the Parliament, (that the Information given by the said
Faulconer, upon which the Vote which then passed for confiscation of the Lord
Cravens Estate is chiefly grounded) is altogether false and untrue, in all the
material parts of his examination.

That the Parliament not thinking fit to permit the said Petition so presented,
as aforesaid, to be read, the said Faulconer is since indicted of Perjury, and
the Grand Jury have accordingly found the same.

That a Warrant was obtained to apprehend the said Faulconer, thereby intending
to have brought him to his speedy Trial, (all Perjuries being excepted out of
the Act of Oblivion) but one of the material Witnesses after he gave evidence
to the Grand Jury, was the same day committed at White Hall to the custody of
one Midldton, a Messenger of the Council of State, and by him kept in strict
custody till the Sessions was ended, which was the only obstruction why in a
Legal course the Law was not prosecuted at that time against the said Faulconer.

Your Petitioners take the boldness humbly further to inform the Parliament,
that it appears by search in the books kept at New Prison and Newgate, That the
said Richard Faulconer was committed first to New Prison, and then to Newgate
in April Sessions 1651. upon suspicion of Felony, where he should have been
tried for the fact, but that (as your Petitioners are informed, and hope to
prove) there was a stop made to the said proceedings, merely upon an Affidavit,
That he was in the Parliaments service; besides it is well known, that the said
Faulconer was altogether a Stranger to the Lord Craven, and has since his
coming over, lately confessed to Testimony of good Credit, that the Lord
Cravens deportment at Breda was altogether inoffensive as to the Commonwealth
of England, and that he understood nothing of the said business, more then that
a consideration was desired to be had of the present wants and great
necessities of the Petitioners.

All which your Petitioners humbly submit to the consideration of the
Parliament, beseeching you to omit the Lord Craven out of the Bill of Sale,
till this business be fully examined in Parliament, or by a Committee, or such
other way as you in your wisdom shall think fit, and until that other
Examinations taken by some, deputed by the Council of State, which (as is
reported) tend to clear the Lord Craven, be reported to the Parliament, as well
as those Examinations have been, which seem to make against the Lord Craven.

And your Petitioners shall pray, etc.
After the reading of the said Petition, there was very great debate about the
same, but none of the desires in the Petition were thought fit to be granted;
and thereupon it was put to the question, Whether the Lord Craven should stand
in this Bill, to have his Land sold, and it was carried in the affirmative by
three voices, there being 23 in the affirmative, and 20 in the negative: the
Votes which passed that day, were in these words following, viz.

Tuesday the third of August, 1652.
A Bill for sale of several Lands and Estates forfeited to the Commonwealth for
Treason, appointed to be sold for the use of the Navy, was this day read the
third time.

The humble Petition of Sir William Craven, and Sir Edmund Sawyer Knights, who
have been Commissioners long entrusted by the Lord Craven in the management of
his Estate, was this day read.

An intercepted Letter, directed, A Monsieur Monsieur Carleton a Ezglisse de
Chapelle Bruzelle, was this day read.

The question being put that William Lord Craven do stand in the Bill, it
passed in the affirmative: Resolved by the Parliament that William Lord Craven
do stand in the Bill.

Hen. Scobel Cler. Parliam.

After the passing of these Votes, several Members of the House were acquainted
that a great part of the Lord Cravens Estate was entailed, and especially
Comb-Abby, a Manor of the Lord Cravens, worth 2500 li. per annum, entailed by
John Lord Craven upon Sir William Craven, and the heirs male of his Body, the
very next in remainder (at this day) after the now Lord Craven; which entail
was had in consideration at the marriage of Sir William Craven, with Elizabeth,
daughter to Ferdinando Lord Fairfax, the Lord Craven then engaging not to
destroy the same.

Thus much being intimated to several Members of the House, it was answered by
some of them, that special notice was taken of the entayling of this Estate,
and that a Clause was added to this Act which was not in the former Bill for
sale, which would resolve the question; A Copy of which Clause being procured
and agreeing with that which was afterward in the printed Act, was in these
words.

And be it further Enacted by this present Parliament, and by Authority
thereof, That all Reversions and Remainders expectant upon any Estate tail,
upon any convetance made by the said Traitor or Traitors, or anyother person or
persons, by or under whom they or any of them Claim of any the Manors, Lands,
Tenements or Hereditaments of any the Traitor or Traitors in this Ast, or in
the aforesaid Act for Sale of several Lands and Estates forfeited to the
Commonweath for Treason, named, not actually vested in the possession of such
Tenant in Tail by the death of such Traitor or Traitors, before the Five and
twentieth day of March, One thousand six hundred fifty two, which by Fine and
Recovery might be Docqued by any of the said Traitor or Traitors, are and shall
be to all Intents and Purposes Forfeited for their said Treasons; And as well
the said Traitors and their Heirs and Assigns, and all other persons and their
heirs in Reversion or Remainder upon any such Estate, shall be for ever barred,
as if such Traitor or Traitors had actually levied a Fine, and suffered a
Recovery for doing thereof, Any Allowance, Law, Statute or Usage to the
contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

Wednesday August the 4. 1652.

The House again resuming the debate of the engrossed Act for Sale; A Proviso
was tendered by Mr. Strickland (on the behalf of Sir William Craven) who was
privy to the agreement of the said marriage of Sir William Craven, viz.

Provided that this Act, nor any thing therein contained, shall extend A
Proviso tendered on the behalf of Sir William Craven, rejected.
to make void any remainder, use or reversion settled upon Sir William Craven
Knight, out of the Estate of William Lord Craven, or John Lord Craven his
brother, whose Estate is since descended to William Lord Craven, at or before
this marriage with Elizabeth, daughter of Ferdinando Lord Fairfax, deceased;
any thing in this Act contained to the contrary thereof, in any wise
notwithstanding.

But this Proviso after the reading thereof, and some debate thereupon, was
rejected; And the Bill for Sale of the Lord Cravens Estate immediately thereupon
passed, as a Law.

The Lord Craven shortly after having notice that the Bill was The Lord Craven
resolvs of a further address to the Parliament.
past for Sale of his Estate; and that the Surveyors were sent down into the
Country to Survey the same, in order to a present Sale; and being desirous to
preserve the same (though confiscated, yet) from being cantanized into several
hands; was desirous again humbly to Petition the Parliament, and thereupon
retired out of Holland to Brussels in Flanders, and from thence did write a
Letter to Mr. Speaker, all of his own hand writing, and therein enclosed a
Petition, subscribed also with his own hand, submitting to such sum of money
as the Parliament should please to impose upon him; and also sent Duplicates of
that Petition to his friends, to be presented to the Parliament, in case the
Speakers Letter and Petition to the Parliament should miscarry, and withal did
signify to his friends his readiness to come over in person, and (though
innocent of the charge against him) Yet was resolved to submit unto, and
satisfy such sum of money as the Parliament should impose upon him; hoping
they would rather choose that way, then utterly to ruin him in his Estate and
fortunes, by permitting his Houses to be pulled down, his Woods to be felled,
and his Lands to be sold to strangers; Hoping also, that it would be considered
he was a person innocent, as to blood, plunder, or violence in the late
unnatural Wars in England, Scotland, or Ireland, having gone beyond Seas by
leave of Parliament, and resided there ever since, until now, being near
twelve years together, attending his charge there, under the Prince of Orange.

Which Letter and Petition from the Lord Craven, delivered by Mr. Speaker to
the Clerk to be read, were as follows.
To the Honorable William LenthallEsq; Speaker of the Parliament of the
Commonwealth of England.
SIR,
ALthough I am altogether a stranger to your Honor, yet as my misfortune A
Letter from the Lord Craven to Mr. Speaker.
is at present, I do not know how to avoid giving you the trouble of addressing
this enclosed supplication to you, for the Parliament of the Commonwealth of
England; the which I shall humbly beseech you, out of your accustomed civility
to all persons that have recourse to you in this kind, to present it with that
advantage, that it may be permitted to be Read, and taken into consideration of
that Honorable House, having been far other in my comportment, then what by
misfortune I have been calumniated to have been; so that I hope their grace and
favor will be afforded according to this my reasonable request; the which no
person shall acknowledge with more respect toward them, nor your favor herein
with greater value of your generosity and goodness, then what he shall do, that
desires to have cause to be

Your most affectionate and obliged Servant, William Craven.
September. 3. 1652.

To the Supreme Authority of this Nation, the Parliament of the Commonwealth of
England.
The humble Petition of William Lord Craven.
Shows,
THat whereas it has been your Petitioners sore affliction to fall into A
third Petition from the Lord Craven to the Parliament.
the displeasure of this honorable Parliament, and to remain under your most
heavy sentence, yet considering that the severity thereof was such, (reaching
both Life and Estate) as might justly deterr him from adventuring in person
into England, and considering that it has not been the manner of this
honorable House of Parliament, to execute their judgments to the ruin of
families, where there has been any hopes of rendering them serviceable to the
Commonwealth.

In these respects he is encouraged in most humble manner to entreat your
wonted Clemency, in the remission of your heavy Sentence against his Life and
Person, and that paying a reasonable sum of money, he may be restored to his
Estate, whereby both he, and those who have just Title in Law to it after his
death, (being preserved from Ruin) will be obliged to be your Honors in all
Respective Demeanor and observances.

And your Petitioner shall pray, etc. William Craven.

But the house was divided whether to permit the Petition to be read; Yet
afterward resolved to read the same; Whereupon the Petition was read; And his
Excellency the Lord General much pressed the house, that notwithstanding their
resolution to sell the Lord Cravens Estate, yet that they would rather impose a
sum of money upon the Lord Craven, for that he judged it to be more
Honorable, then to expose his Estate to Sale, and intimated a considerable
sum indeed; Besides the 30000. li. which had been already received out of his
Rents and personal Estate, and by the damage done to his Woods.

Sir William Craven, and Sir Edmund Sawyer did attend at the door at that time,
expecting to be called in, to give assurance to the Parliament, that the sum
of money which they should think fit to impose upon the Lord Craven, should be
speedily raised.

As the House was in debate of this business, the Danish Ambassador was
admitted to have Audience to take his leave, which being done, and the
Ambassador gone, it was moved to resume the debate again; But the contrary was
pressed by others; and the Speaker was required to propound the Question,
whether the House should any further resume the debate of that business; The
House was thereupon divided; And it was carried in the Negative The House
divided again about the Lord Craven.
by four Voices, there being thirty four against taking any further
consideration of his Petition, and thirty for resuming the debate thereof; The
Votes which passed that day, were as follows.

Friday 29. October. 1652. A Petition of the Lord Craven being presented,
REsolved by the Parliament, that his Petition be now Read; And the Petition
was now Read accordingly, and was Entitled, The Humble Petition of William
Lord Craven.

The Question being put,

That the House do proceed further in the debate upon the Petition of the Lord
Craven; it passed in the Negative.

Hen. Scobel Cler. Parliam.

After this Vote there was no further application made to the Parliament on the
behalf of the Lord Craven; For that Surveyors were gone to the several Counties
to Survey his estate; and some Surveys were actually returned, and days
appointed for Sale.

And the Members of the House stepped in with the first to buy the flower of his
Estate, to the value of five or six thousand pound per annum, as appears by the
Contracts made at Drury-House in their own names, and in the names of others
entrusted for the use of Members.

That stately House of the Lord Cravens at Causam near Reading, in excellent
repair, was bought by some persons, who for greedy lucre and gain, utterly
defaced the same, pulled down the Wainscot, Stayr-Cases, Lead, Iron, and all
the the materials about the house, which cost building 20000. li. they giving
the Commonwealth little above 1500. li. in moneys (the price of debenters
therein also inccluded.)

It being now Term time when the house was the last time divided about the Lord
Craven, and there being no hopes to have his case further heard, it was thought
necessary and convenient however to expedite the Trial upon the Indictment of
perjury against Faulconer; Whereupon course was taken to remove the Indictment
by a Certiorari into the upper Bench, to the end the said Faulconer might be
Outlawed for Perjury; The Record being accordingly removed, a Capias in order
to an Out-lawry was taken out against the said Faulconer, who for several
Sessions before had refused to appear: At last the said Faulconer was taken
upon the said Capias, and carried to Newgate, where he lay for some time, and
would not appear nor plead to the Indictment; Whereupon the prosecutors for the
Commonwealth were enforced to move the Court for a Habeas Corpus, to bring him
to the Bar, that he might be enjoined to plead, and accordingly the Court
required him to plead; Whereupon he pleaded Not guilty to the Indictment.

Hillary Term. 1652.

In Hillary Term following a day was appointed for Trial upon the Indictment,
at Guild Hall London, before the Lord chief Justice Rolls, where the said
Captain Bishop, and Faulconer appeared with their Counsel and Witnesses; And
Mr. Rushworth also appeared in behalf of the Commonwealth with Counsel and
Witnesses, and had given in the Record to have the Jury called, but it so fell
out, that a person of integrity then in Court, who had gotten certain knowledge
when and where the said Oath was taken; gave Mr. Rushworth notice, that the
Oath given to Faulconer, was administered unto him at White Hall in Middlesex,
and not at Haberdashers-Hall in London, and therefore the place being mislaid
in the Indictment, a London Jury could not find a fact done in Middlesex:
Whereupon Mr. Rushworth immediately withdrew the Record for that time, and gave
a stop to the Trial.

No time was misspent to recover this mistake: For within two days a new
Indictment was drawn, and preferred to the Grand Jury in Middlesex, (Sir Henry
Blunt being Foreman) where the Indictment was found: and was as follows.

Hillary Term 1652.
Before this time, that is to say, upon Tuesday next after the morrow Middlesex.
of the Purification of the Virgin Mary, this same Term, before the Keepers of
the Liberty of England by authority of Parliament, in the Upper-Bench at
Westminster, by the Oaths of twelve honest and lawful men, it is presented,
That Richard Faulconer late of Westbury in the County of Southampton Gent. Not
having the fear of God before his eyes, but moved and seduced by the
instigation of the Devil, and minding and endeavoring to bring the Right
Honorable William Lord Craven, Baron of Hampsteed, Marshall in the County of
Berks, in danger of the loss of his life, and of the Sequestration,
confiscation, and forfeiture of all his Goods, and Chattels, Lands and
Tenements within this Commonwealth of England, the tenth day of February, In
the year of our Lord God one thousand six hundred and fifty, at White Hall, in
the Parish of Martins in the Fields, in the County of Middlesex, before Samuel
Moyer Esquire, James Russel Esquire, Edward Winslow Esquire, Josias Barners
Esquire, and Arthur Squib Esquire, then being Commissioners for compounding
with Delinquents, and for managing of all and every the estates of Delinquents
and Popish Recusants; that the fifteenth day of April, in the said year of our
Lord God one thousand six hundred and fifty, were, or then after should be
under Sequestration, did upon the Holy Evangelists, corruptly, wilfully, falsely
and maliciously, of his own proper Act, consent and Agreement, swear, and upon
his Corporal Oath before the Commissioners aforesaid, on the said tenth day of
February, in the said year one thousand six hundred and fifty, then having
sufficient and lawful power to Administer the said Oath, and to take the
testimony and depositions of witnesses upon their Oaths in such cases, then and
there deposed; That several Officers, about thirty in number, made a Petition
to the Scots King Charles, to entertain them to sight for him against the
Commonwealth of England, by the name of Barbarous and Inhumane Rebels, either
in England or Scotland, for the recovering of his just Rights, and reinstating
him in his Throne. And did also then and there, corruptly, wilfully, falsely,
and maliciously, before the said Commissioners, swear, that the said Officers
deputed him, the said Richard Faulconer, and Colonel Drury, to present the said
Petition, who (as the said Richard Faulconer, then and there, corruptly,
wilfully, falsely, and maliciously, before the said Commissioners did swear,
indeed drew the same; And did also, then and there, corruptly, wilfully,
falsely and maliciously before the said Commissioners, swear, that he the said
Richard Faulconer, with Colonel Drury, applied themselves to the Lord Craven,
(meaning the aforesaid William Lord Craven) entreating him to present the said
Petition to the Queen of Bohemia, to present it to the King of Scots: And did
also then and there, corruptly, wilfully, falsely and maliciously before the
said Commissioners, swear, that the said Lord Craven, taking the said Petition,
and reading the same cheerfully, said unto Colonel Drury, and him the said
Richard Faulconer, There Is the Queen of Bohemia, deliver it to her, and I will
speak for you: And that the said Queen of Bohemia did present the said
Petition; and did also then and there, corruptly, wilfully, falsely and
maliciously, before the the said Commissioners, swear, that the said Lord
Craven, after told him the said Richard Faulconer, and company, that they
should receive an answer from the Queen of Bohemia to their Petition, and that
he (meaning the said William Lord Craven) had spoken to the Queen of Bohemia in
their behalf: Whereas in truth, neither did several Officers, or any Officer
make a Petition to the said King to entertain him or them to fight for him
against the Commonwealth of England. Nor did several Officers or any Officer
make a Petition to the said King to entertain him or them to fight for him
against the Commonwealth of England, by the name of Barbarous and Inhumane
Rebels, either in England or Scotland. Nor did several Officers or any Officer
make a Petition to the said King to entertain him or them to fight for him
against the Commonwealth of England, by the name of Barbarous and Inhumane
Rebels, either in England or Scotland, for the recovering of his just rights,
or reinstating him in his Throne. And whereas in truth, the said Richard
Faulconer, and Colonel Drury were not deputed by the said Officers to present
the said Petition, in the said Oath mentioned; and whereas in truth, he the
said Richard Faulconer, with Colonel Drury, did not apply themselves to the
said Lord Craven, entreating him to present the said Petition to the Queen of
Bohemia, to present it to the said King of Scots. Nor did he the said Richard
Faulconer, with the said Colonel Drury, entreat him the said Lord Craven, to
present the said Petition to the said Queen of Bohemia, to present it to the
said King of Scots. And whereas in truth, the said Lord Craven did not take the
said Petition, nor read the same; Nor say unto the said Colonel Drury, and him
the said Richard Faulconer, there is the Queen of Bohemia, deliver it to her,
and I will speak for you: And whereas in truth the said Lord Craven did not
tell him the said Richard Faulconer, and company, in the said deposition
mentioned, that they should receive an answer from the said Queen of Bohemia,
to the said Petition, nor that he the said Lord Craven had spoken to the Queen
of Bohemia in their behalf, As the said Richard Faucloner, in and by the said
deposition has deposed. And so the Jurors aforesaid, upon their Oaths
aforesaid, do say, That the said Richard Faulconer, in manner and form
aforesaid, Corruptly, Wilfully, Falsely and Maliciously, of his own proper Act,
Consent and Agreement, did commit wilful, false, and corrupt perjury; To the
great dishonor of Almighty God, and to the great damage, loss and infamy of
the said William Lord Craven, and in contempt of the Laws of this Commonwealth;
To the evil Example of all others in the like case offending, And against the
public peace, etc.

The reason wherefore this Indictment did not recite the Oath in haec verbae,
as in the former Indictment, but assigned the Perjury in the material parts of
the Oath; was by reason it came lately to knowledge, that the original Oath
could not be found, and therefore the Oath was to be proved by the Entries in
the book of Parliament, and at Haberdashers-Hall, and by the Testimony of the
Persons who administered the Oath.

The next day after the Indictment was found, the Prosecutors for the Lord
Craven moved the Court for a Habeas Corpus, to bring Faulconer to the Bar to
plead to the Indictment, who being brought into Court, desired time to plead
till the next Term. Whereupon the Court made this order,

That the said Faulconer, having now in Court appeared unto the Indictment,
should have time to plead unto the same, until the beginning of the next Term,
so that the issue thereupon may be tried at the Bar in open Court the same Term.

Term Pasch. 1652.
Faulconer having all this vacation neglected to appear, or plead to the
Indictment, the Prosecutors for the Lord Craven were enforced again to move for
another Habeas Corpus, to bring Faulconer to the Bar, to appear, or plead to
the Indictment; who appearing, desired longer time to attend his Counsel, which
the Court granted accordingly, and the ordinary Rules of Court were given unto
him for the peremptory days of pleading, or Judgment to be entered against
him; and the very last day, when the last Rule was out, and not before, he
pleaded Not guilty. And the Court ordered, That the issue upon the Indictment
of Perjury against the Defendant, be tried at the Bar upon Friday in the morrow
of the Ascension of our Lord, and that the Sheriff of Middlesex do attend
Andrew Broughton Esquire; with the Book of Freeholders, forthwith, so that an
indifferent Jury may be returned between the said Keepers, and the said
Defendant, to try the issue aforesaid, by consent of the parties on both sides.

Mr. Broughton accordingly appointed the Sheriff to attend him the next day in
the afternoon, with the Book of Freeholders, who accordingly named the Jury,
and notice was given by the Sheriff, requiring them to appear at the day of
Trial.

The Trial of Richard Faulconer, Friday, May 20. 1653.
THe Jury appearing according to Summons, and Faulconer being brought in
Custody, the Court proceeded to Trial, and ordered the Indictment to be read;
which being afterward opened by Mr. Boynton, the Evidence was managed by Mr.
Maynard, Mr. Hales, Mr. Twisden, Mr. Wild, Mr. Philips, Mr. Baldwin, and Mr.
Drury; who were of Counsel for the Commonwealth against the said Faulconer.

Before the Counsel for the Commonwealth proceeded to produce any Witnesses,
they offered unto the Court and the Jury something in general concerning the
Indictment. That the Indictment was for the crime of Perjury, wilfully and
corruptly committed; That Faulconer makes an Oath, that there was a Petition
delivered, in which there was a very sharp reflection (as he swears) upon the
Parliament, by the name of Barbarous and Inhumane Rebels; he swears he was
deputed to deliver it, being drawn by himself and Drury, and subscribed by 30
Officers; that in order to the delivery thereof, they did require the
assistance of the Lord Craven, that he promised to speak for them, and brought
them an answer; but they hoped to prove unto the Jury, that this Oath which
Faulconer did take, was very false, that it was by design, a design for money,
that the consequence of it was very notorious, the ruin of that Gentleman, of
his Estate, Fame and Fortune; That Witnesses will be produced to prove, what in
truth the Petition was; there was a Petition delivered, but not a Petition to
this effect at all, and Faulconer knew the contrary; we shall produce what it
was, and that under his own hand, whereby it will appear that there was no such
matter in it, as he has deposed; the Witnesses themselves will best speak the
Particulars.

For the opening of some things concerning this Oath of Faulconer, it is to be
observed, he took this Oath before the Commissioners of Haberdashers-Hall at
White-Hal, and was there reduced into Writing, and a Transcript was made of the
Original: which Transcript was sent to the Council of State, and they ordered
the same to be reported to the Parliament, and being reported there, is entered
in the Journal Book, and there remains a Record in Parliament.

The first thing therefore insisted upon by the Counsel for the Commonwealth;
was the proving of a true Copy of Faulconers Proofs of Faulconers deposition by
a Copy thereof temaining at Haberdashers-Hall.
deposition, in respect the Original was lost, or rather imbezeled by
Faulconer, to prove the same.

A Copy thereof was produced in Court, which agreed verbatim with that
deposition of his, which was filed upon Record at Haberdashers-Hall; (the
Proper Court where it ought to remain) and though that upon the File was but a
Copy, yet it was filed as evidence of that Deposition he was sworn unto by
them; but this was Faulconers deposition transmitted to the Council of State.
opposed by the Counsel for Faulconer, as not sufficient proof; and thereupon a
Copy of an order of the Council of State of March 6. 1650. was produced unto
the Court, whereby it did appear, that the Depositions against the Lord Craven
had been transmitted to the Council of State, by the Commissioners at
Haberdashers-Hall, Mr. Atorney General produced as a witness.
and it appeared further by the said Order, that Mr. Attorney General was
appointed by the Council of State, to report these Depositions to the
Parliament, so transmitted to that Council by the Commissioners at
Haberdashers-Hall; and the Attorney General being sworn in Court, did declare
that he reported no other Depositions to the Parliament, then what he received
from the Council Faulconers deposition reported to the Parliament by Mr.
Atorney General.
of State; and that the Depositions produced to him in Court, (whereof the said
Faulconers was one) was endorsed with the handwriting of the Lord Bradshaw,
then Lord President of the Council of State; and that the Votes of confiscation
of the Lord Cravens Estate did pass upon the report of the said Depositions,
which he presented to the Parliament from the Council of State.

Mr. Fermin, Chief Clark to Mr. Scobel, Clark of the Parliament, Faulconers
deposition entered in the Journal of Parliament.
did depose in Court, that the very same Depositions showed in Court to Mr.
Attorney General, endorsed with the Lord Bradshaws handwriting, were entered
in the Journal Book, as read in Parliament that day when Mr. Attorney General
did make his report unto the Parliament, which he knew the better to be true,
for that he received the same from the hands of Mr. Scobel, or Mr. Darnel, the
Clark assistant in Parliament, the same day they were read in Parliament, to be
entered in the Journal Book; and Votes of confiscation entered with Faulconers
deposition.
that he did enter the same accordingly with the Votes of confiscation, which
passed upon the reading of those Depositions; and afterward he and Mr. Darnel
did examine the said Depositions, whereof the said Faulconers was one, after
the same were so entered into the Journal Book. The Journal Book of Parliament
produced in Court to prove Faulconers deposition.


And for the further satisfaction of the Court, he produced the Journal of
Parliament, wherein the said Depositions (and particularly that of Faulconers)
were entered, which were read in Court, out of the Journal, whereby it did
appear that the Depositions of the said Faulconer, Kitchingman and Reyly, were
entered into the said Journal, and did agree verbatim with the Copy of
Faulconers, and their Depositions remaining at Haberdashers-Hall, and with the
Copy reported by Mr. Attorney General from the Council of State to the
Parliament.

Mr. Winslow, one of the Commissioners at Haberdashers-Hall, Mr. Winslow
produced to prove Faulconers deposition.
being one before whom the said Faulconer was sworn, did testify upon Oath in
Court, that the deposition of Faulconer produced unto him, and whereupon there
was an endorsement of the Lord Bradshaws handwriting; Was, as he did believe,
a true Copy of that deposition to which the said Faulconer was sworn at
White Hall, for that he finds his own hand subscribed thereunto; (as examined
by him to be a true Copy) and said it was usual with the Commissioners at
Haberdashers-Hall, when they take Examinations concerning any person of
quality, to appoint one of themselves to go from the Table to examine the Copy
by the Original: But whether when he subscribed his name unto the Copy produced
unto him, he did examine the same by the original deposition before it was sent
for away by the Council of State, or afterward, or by the transcript remaining
upon the File as a Record at Haberdashers-Hall, he could not positively
remember; But conceives that the Copy to which his hand is subscribed, as
examined by him, to be a true Copy, was taken when they had the Original in
Custody; but cannot certainly say it.

Mr. Barners, Another of the Commissioners at Haberdashers-Hall, Mr. Barners
produced to prove Faulconers deposition.
before whom also the said Oath was taken, did testify upon Oath, that to the
best of his remembrance, the particulars mentioned in Faulconers deposition,
then read in Court, were the same to which the said Faulconer was sworn unto by
himself and the rest of the Commissioners, though he could not remember every
Syllable and Letter.

Mr. Winslow, and Mr. Barners were again produced to declare The clause of
[Barbarous and Inhumane Rebels etc.] proved by Mr. Winslow and Mr. Barners.
what they did remember concerning this clause in the deposition of the said
Faulconer (viz.) That several officers, about thirty in number, made a Petition
to the King of Scots, to entertain them to fight for him against the
Commonwealth of England, by the name of Barbarous and Inhumane Rebels, either
in England or Scotland, etc. and thereupon Mr. Winslow did declare unto the
Court, that he did well remember that clause in Faulconers deposition when he
was sworn thereunto, but whether the number of Officers were thirty or no, he
could not tell, but a certain number of Officers were named.

Mr. Barners did declare the like, but whether the word Inhumane Mr. Barners.
was in, he could not positively say; But was certain that Barbarous Rebels
was contained in that clause; and that when Faulconer was sworn unto the same,
it was first read unto him, and amended in several places, and then he swore it
to be true: And Mr. Barners said, that he did remember his deposition the
better, for that himself and the rest of the Commissioners had several debates
upon it at Haberdashers-Hall, whether they should thereupon Seize, Sequester or
secure the Lord Cravens estate.

Having thus traced this Oath of Faulconers, which was taken at White Hall, and
brought to Haberdashers-Hall, afterward brought from Haberdashers-Hall back
again to White Hall, and from White Hall to the Parliament, and there entered in
the Journal book, as the grounds upon which the Vores of confiscation did pass,
and having withal proved that particular clause of Barbarous and Inhumane
Rebels, etc. the Counsel for the Commonwealth concluded as to that point, and
left it to the Jury to Judge, and to Faulconer to produce the Original, which
he has got into his custody, if he can find any variance in it from the
deposition recited in the Indictment.

And to prove that Faulconer had got the Original Oath into his custody; Mr.
Knight a witness was produced, who did testify upon Oath, that being in the
company of Faulconer, he did show him a writing written with Captain Bishops
own hand, (so far as he could judge one man's hand to be like another) and that
Faulconers name was subscribed thereunto, and that Faulconer told him the said
Knight, that that writing was the Original Deposition he was sworn unto,
against the Lord Craven, and which he kept on purpose to keep Mr. Bishop in aw
(Faulconer being then in necessity and want) and that the said Faulconer
further said unto him, the said Knight, that he had received 20. li. for the
business of the Lord Cravens, and was to have more, but said he deserved 2000.
li. for what he had done.

In the next place the Counsel for the Commonwealth did apply themselves to
prove the falsity of the Oath (viz.) That there was no such thing in the
Petition mentioned by Faulconer in his Deposition [As that thirty officers did
Petition to be entertained to fight for the King of Scots against the
Commonwealth of England, by the name of Barbarous and Inhumane Rebels, etc.]
and being to prove a Negative, they applied their proof to a certain time and
place, which Faulconer in his own Deposition did prove for them, for he swears
that the Petition was delivered the Evening before the King of Scots went from
Breda, and that the said King went away the next morning at three a clock; He
swears further, that he and Drury drew the Petition, and were deputed to
deliver the same, accordingly they applied their evidence.

Proofs, as to the falsity of Faulconers Oath.
MAster Horsnell being produced, did testify; That the night before the King
of Scots went from Breda, Colonel Drury, Mr. Horsness Testimony against
Faulconer, as to the Petition.
Captain Brisco, and diverse others were with a little short Petition to
remember the King of a former Petition which they had delivered, that some
course might be taken that their arrears which they owed in the Town might be
paid, that their Landlords where they lodged might not suffer, for they were
not able themselves to pay them; that he went along with them to the great
window just over the moat, and there he the said Horsnel did set his hand unto
the same, and that he was in the Chamber when Drury and Brisco came in to
deliver the Petition, in which there was not a word that concerned any thing,
but only the relief of their present necessities; being asked by the Court, if
there were not a mention of Barbarous and Inhumane Rebels; he answered, not
any thing of that nature was in it; He further said, that this Petition had
reference to a former Petition he was not acquainted withal, nor was his hand
set to the former Petition.

Captain Brisco being produced, did testify, that there were Captain Briscoes
Testimony against Faulconer, as to the Petition.
diverse Gentlemen in great distress met together in Colonel Druries Chamber at
the time of the Treaty of the Scots King with the Commissioners at Breda, and
among other things it was agreed to draw a Petition to the King, which was
drawn in Colonel Druries Chamber, expressing their necessities, That the people
of the Town might be Relieved, and that the Petitioners might not be left to
perish; That going to deliver it, they met with Secretary Long by the way, who
told them that it was to no purpose, For that there was no moneys come in:
afterward the Petitioners had notice the King was to depart from Breda,
Whereupon they met together again, and went into the further end of the Gallery
to draw a short Petition, to put the King in mind of his promise to Secretary
Long, concerning the People of the Town of Breda, that they might be satisfied,
and the Petitioners relieved, which Paper he the said Brisco delivered to the
Scots King, who threw it on a Table; And doing so, they stood all amazed, being
likely to be left in distress, and unexpectedly came in the Lord Craven,
whereupon he the said Brisco, having long served in the country, and knowing
him to be a lover of Soldiers, he spoke unto him, and said, Sir, we are a
company of poor distressed Gentlemen, likely to be left here in misery (he
said, Well) and the next morning the King went away, without giving any relief
unto the Petitioners; the Court demanded of Brisco whether there were no such
matter in it as Barbarous and Inhumane Rebels; He answered, that he Read it,
and was sure there was no such thing in it, the whole scope of it being to
relieve their necessities, which was the occasion of that Petition; being
demanded again by the Court, if Barbarous and Inhumane Rebels were not in the
Petition; he answered, no, not any such words at all, nor so much as any
mention of the Parliament.

Colonel Drury was in the next place produced, who testified, Colonel Druries
Testimony against Faulconer, as to the Petition.
That being at Breda, Lieutenant Colonel Bardsey, Major Faulconer, Major Hall,
Captain Kitchingman, and diverse others came to his Lodging, and told him that
they were in a condition of starving, and desired him that he would assist them
to draw a Petition to the King of Scots, to relieve their necessities, or else
they must perish; that the said Drury being in their condition, consented unto
it, and in his chamber, in his sons paper Book the Petition was drawn, Major
Faulconer writ it with his own hand, which says Drury, I have here to show,
and so presented the Original under Faulconers hand unto the Court, in which
Petition (said Drury) we desired some relief from his Majesty, showing how we
had served the former King, and in what necessities we were in; That they were
advised to deliver it to Secretary Long, For that they were told that the King
had not a Pistol to relieve himself, and it would be a vain thing said Long to
deliver it; that they followed Secretary Long, and solicited him daily for
three weeks together, and still he put them off; And the day before the King
went from Breda, they drew a short Petition to mind the King of his promise to
Secretary Long, and to desire that the Inhabitants of Breda that had relieved
them, might not be undone, that Brisco was deputed with him to deliver it, and
he accordingly delivered it to the King, that the King laid it down upon the
Table; In steps the Lord Craven, then Captain Brisco, having trailed a Pike
under the Lord Craven, went to him, and told him there were many Gentlemen
ready to starve, and desired him to speak a favorable word to the Queen of
Bohemia; to which the Lord Craven answered, Well, as Brisco then told him: the
next morning the King of Scots went away, and so nothing at all was done for
the Petitioners; That Original Petition which Drury produced unto the Court, of
Faulconers own hand writing, and in the presence of Faulconer, was publicly
Read in Court, and was as follows, viz.

May it please your Majesty;
THe great sense we have always had of your Majesty's present condition, The
first Petition, written with Faulconers own hand, and produced in Court.
has been the prime cause of our long silence; But now our necessities are
grown so great and insupportable, that we are enforced either to Petition or
perish: Most humbly desiring your Majesty, to take into your Princely
consideration, Their extremities who have been ever ready to prostrate their
lives in your Majesty's Royal Father his service: Nor no less willing and
ready to prosecute the same in what your Majesty shall command: Most humbly
petitioning your Royal Order, that some course may be taken for our present
susistance, that our future endevors may not be buried in that unavoydable
calamity, which our loyalty has reduced us unto.

And we shall cordially pray for your Majesty.
The Court demanding of Colonel Drury, if the said Petition was Faulconers own
hand writing, he said yea, and looking back upon Faulconer, said, he cannot
deny it,: I did dictate it unto him, and Faulconer did write it in my Chamber:
and that is the very Original that was so drawn, and being fair written, was
afterward delivered to Secretary Long: the other that was delivered, was a
memorial, to put the King in mind of his promise when money came in; and Drury
further said, that when he was examined by Mr. Bishop, he did give in his
Examination, the contents of the first and latter Petition, and said, he did
express himself at that time of his Examination by Mr. Bishop, to the same
effect which he had now done in Court: being asked by the Court, if the words
Barbarous and Inhumane Rebels were in that first Petition, the said Drury
answered, Faulconers endeavor to have Barbarous and Inhumane Rebels inserted
in the Petition.
that Faulconer moved to have Barbarous and Inhumane Rebels inserted into that
Petition so drawn by himself, but was answered by the Petitioners, that they
were Soldiers of fortune, it was uncivil language, and so they would not give
way unto it; being demanded by the Court who was deputed to deliver the last
Petition, he said, Captain Brisco was one, in regard he had many wounds at
Canon-Froom, that the King might commiserate his case the more, and that he the
said Drury was also deputed with Brisco to deliver the same, because he was
known to the Queen of Bohemia, and some other persons of quality, and Faulconer
was not at all deputed: Being asked if the Lord Craven was present at the
delivery of the first Petition: He answered no, the Petition was delivered
three weeks before: But the Lord Craven was present when the last Petition was
delivered, to mind the King of his promise; the said Drury further informed the
Court, that afterward Faulconer being discontented that he got no moneys,
said, as he was going into the Town, This is a horrid thing, that we should
Faulconer swears he will into England and do mischief.
be in this case, to follow a thing they call a King, (God dam me) I will go
into England, and do all the mischief I can.

Proofs as to the Credit of Faulconer.
IN the next place the Counsel for the Commonwealth did apply Mr. Woolridge's
Testimony against Faulconer.
themselves to offer proof as to the credit of Faulconer; Mr. Woolridge of
Clements Inn, Attorney at the Common Law, being sworn, did testify to this
purpose; That being in his chamber at Clements Inn, about this time 12 Month,
Faulconer came to him, asked how some of his Countrymen near Petersfield did?
that he asked Faulconer where he had been of so long a time? Who answered, he
had been in the Low Countries, had seen some Lords sit in Counsel for the King,
that he had been sworn against the Lord Craven, which would bring a great deal
of advantage to the State, that he had moneys for the doing of it, and said
that he had received already 80. li. (it was that sum here mentioned (said
Mr. Woolridge) to the best of his remembrance) but Faulconer said, he did
expect Faulconers confession, that he had received 80. li. for what he had done
in the Lord Cravens business.
a greater reward; that the said Faulconer has been as wicked a man as any in
England; that he spent his Estate and left the Country, did wicked acts while
he was there; that being at Petersfield, he drunk an health to the Devil in the
middle of the Street, of which information being given, we sent to the Justice
of the Peace in the Town, and had him bound over to the Sessions for doing of
it, but said, he did not see him drink the Health to the Devil.

Mr. Jackson of Petersfield being produced, testified, about Faulconer drinks a
health to the Devil upon his knees.
five years ago Faulconer was Ranting and Drinking of Healths, that he did
drink a health to the Devil, and said this, I have spent my Brothers Estate,
and my own, I will never want money, for whilst there is any in the Nation, I
will get it one way or other, and I will do something of Infamy to be talked
of, that the name of Faulconer shall never dye: being asked in what manner he
did drink the health, he answered, in the street, down upon his knees, that he
was present, and thousands can witness it, that he was had before a Justice of
Peace for it.

James Greham being sworn, did testify, that in May 1647. after Faulconers
attempt to Bugger a man. Faulconers Oaths.
the Siege at Excester, it was his fortune to fall into the company of
Faulconer, and as he was with him in the Cellar, he was swearing Dam him, Blood
and Wounds, takes a two and twenty-shilling piece of Gold, puts it into his
hand, and said, God dam him, Blood and Wounds, he would bugger his soul to
Hell, and these words he used frequently to Man, Woman and Child, bugger,
bugger, bugger; and correct him for it, he would say, Dam him, blood and
wounds, he would do it; being asked by the Court, if Faulconer did any thing
upon him, he answered, no; He was able to deal with as good Man as he.

Mr. Hughes has often heard Faulconer swear, dam him and sink Faulconer a
Dammee blade. Faulconer said Christ was a Bastard.
him, and such wicked expressions.

Mr. Bradley did testify, that he heard Faulconer say our Savior Christ was a
Bastard, and a Carpenters son, and carried a basket of Tools after his Father.

Mr. Dyer being produced, did declare that Faulconer confessed Faulconer
procures one to personate another man.
to him, that he had Ten pound of a man, by procuring one to personate Captain
Bishop; it was thus, (as Faulconer told him) that a Citizen, as he remembered
Faulconer said, did desire Faulconer to get Captain Bishop to do a business for
him, which Citizen did promise him twenty pound, ten in hand, and ten
afterward; whereupon Faulconer said he got one to personate Captain Bishop,
and to go along with him to the Citizen; which man so personating Captain
Bishop, promised the Citizen upon the account of Major Faulconers good services
for the public, to afford him his best assistance in the effecting of what was
desired in his Petition, which Story Faulconer himself told; And Faulconer
further said, Faulconers intent to murder Captain Bishop.
that Captain Bishop had used him ill, in keeping him so low in money, that he
had it one time in his thoughts, as Captain Bishop came from the
Committee-Chamber, through the Guard-Chamber, down the Stairs, to have cut his
throat; being asked by the Court, what moneys Faulconer had of Captain Bishop,
he answered, he paid to Faulconer with his own hands, by Captain Bishops
directions, Fifty pound paid to Faulconer by Captain Bishops direction.
Faulconer counterfeits another man's hand, to get money of Captain Bishop.
twenty pound at one time, and about thirty pound more at other times, in
several Portions; that Faulconer confessed to him he had twenty pound
afterward; being demanded what it was for he gave that money, he said, I will
not speak to that, I cannot speak to that.

Capt. Ballard being produced, did testify, that about three or four years
ago, he came to Faulconers Lodging, and saw him write a Letter in his chamber,
and that he writ it as if it had come from Colonel Burgess from Jersey, and set
Burgess his name to it, and Faulconer would have had him the said Ballard to
carry this Letter to one Captain Bishop that belonged to the Council of State;
and to say he had the Letter from one of Bristol, and get some money of Bishop
for that Intelligence mentioned in the Letter, of which the said Ballard was to
have half, but he the said Ballard refused to go with the same, knowing it to
be unjust.

Mr. Powel a Justice of Peace of the County of Middlesex did Faulconer
committed to Newgate for suspicion of Felony.
testify to the Court, that this Faulconer was brought before him upon
suspicion of Felony, and committed, which Mittimus he produced in Court; that
afterward the Lord Chief Justice Rolls did send for him out of New Prison to
Newgate; that Faulconer has A reputed highway man. Faulconer committed to
Ailesbury Gaol, for suspicion of Felony, Robbery and murder.
a common name for a Robber upon the high way.

Mr. Goodman, Jailer of Ailesbury did testify unto the Court, that the said
Faulconer the 20th of March 1648. was committed to Ailesbury Gaol by Sir Thomas
Sanders, Mr. Bulstrode and two other Justices of the Peace, upon suspicion of
Felony, Robbery and Murders, and tendered a Certificate thereof in Writing
unto the Court.

The Defense made on the behalf of Faulconer.
1. THe evidence being given on the behalf of the Commonwealth, Mr. Windham,
Mr. Latch, Mr. Lechmore, and Mr. Haggat, of Counsel for Faulconer, did offer
something to the consideration of the Court before they did produce their
witnesses viz. That although it concerns every man that perjury should be
punished; Matter offered by Faulconers Counsel before they descended to Proof.
For every man's Life, Liberty, Fortune and Estate depends upon an Oath, and in
these times it is somewhat dangerous if they should be forsworn; So on the
otherside, if Faulconer be not forsworn, it is but just he should be acquit:
That the Counsel for the Commonwealth have endeavored to prove that there was
a Petition, but that there was no such words in the Petition as are suggested,
and have endeavored to impeach the credit of Faulconer: That they have
produced a Copy of Faulconers Oath, which ought not to be admitted, because it
is but a Transcript of a Transcript, a Copy of a Copy, brought from
Haberdashers-Hall to the Council of State, and from the Council of State to the
Parliament, and there the Copy is entered in the Journal Book: And the witnesses
that have been produced, do not swear positively to the Oath as it is in
writing, and one particle may turn the whole sense of an Oath: And though these
words Barbarous and Inhumane Rebels were in it, Yet how it is applied, and how
the sense of it falls, it cannot be judged, but by the Original writing it self,
and it concerns the Counsel for the Keepers to produce it: How it should come
into Faulconers hands, there is no account given, but by one Knight, Who says
Faulconer showed him a thing, which Faulconer said was his [Original]
deposition against the Lord Craven, but the credit of Knights Testimony is left
to the Jury: It is sworn that that Copy produced in Court was examined, but Mr
Winslow does not positively say it was examined by the Original, when in their
custody.

That as to the witnesses produced against the credit of Faulconer, they did
hope to counterpoise his life to be, as of a man that might be credited: That
in the Petition delivered at Breda, there is something of those words, though
there be not Barbarous and Inhumane Rebels, which was but a nominal thing; yet
the prostrating of themselves to prosecute the cause, is desired may be
observed, though the actual words be not there, yet the sense does bear it;
that the case is somewhat hard with Faulconer, who was employed at the Court at
Breda as an Emissary, as a Spy: And at his return in giving an account of his
observations at Breda, let something fall concerning the Lord Craven, without
any design in him, and that what Faulconer delivered in his deposition was with
qualifications, as he did believe to his best remembrance, and the like.

Hereupon Captain Bishop was produced on the behalf of Faulconer, Captain
Bishops dicourse, not applicable to the perjury in question.
as a witness, whose discourse was long, and consisted of three parts.

1. It took notice how the Council of State sent for him from his habitation at
Bristoll, to be employed in matters of great trust, and afterward what trust
was reposed in him and Mr. Scot, in order to the safety of the Nation.

2. By way of Argument on behalf of Faulconer, he did declare what services
Faulconer had done for the Commonwealth, and that Faulconer was one by whom
this Commonwealth sat safe at this hour, and by whom he enjoyed his life: And
what an ill requital this was to be thus proceeded against.

The third part of his discourse was, to declare what particular designs the
State formerly had in hand, and what designs the enemy had against the State:
and what service he did to countermine the enemy in their designs: The last of
the three being not (as was conceived) so advisedly spoken in public, and
which would be more unfit to be in print: Shall therefore here be past over in
silence, as also what Captain Bishop said at large concerning the two first
particulars, In respect they are no proofs pertinently to be applied, as to the
perjury in question.

A brief account only shall be therefore given what Captain Bishop properly
spoke as a witness.

As a witness, Captain Bishop said, he had never seen Faulconer The substance
of Captain Bishops Testimony.
in drink or misbehave himself, but ever observed him as a sober man, that he
did draw Faulconers information [which Faulconer did deliver as the substance]
and that he must say, that the words [or to that effect] should have been put
in, and that it was his fault they were not in, and he could not tell but that
they were in; That the Commissioners at Haberdashers-Hall were desired to come
to White Hall to Administer an Oath to the said Faulconer privately, least
danger should befall the witnesses if they were discovered.

That Horsnel was formerly an Agent for the Prince, and was to receive orders
from Tom Cook in the Tower, and was ordered to be tried by the high Court of
Justice: That Colonel Drury was a Papist in Arms, and being brought before him
to be examined, still had the Lord Craven in his mouth, before he was asked a
question.

The like of Brisco. He said, that before Drury and Brisco came from beyond
Seas, his Agent gave him notice of their coming, And thereupon he laid wait for
them, and caught them; that Drury said, when he was examined, that he had not a
penny of money, that he did not commit him to Prison, but took his Paroll, and
in commiseration gave him two shillings six pence for his Supper; He said
further, that Drury did contradict himself in what he had formerly informed the
Council of State, and to that end produced in Court the Copy of Druries
Information, which being read in Court, agreed with the Testimony which Drury
then gave to the Jury.

By way of Digression observe, That Druries and Briscoes Observe.
Informations which Captain Bishop had taken, above twelve months since, and
which tended to clear the Lord Craven, he concealed till this hour that he
produced the same in Court, and never transmitted those two men's Examinations
to the Parliament; Though before the Bill of Sale did pass, he did transmit
Bardseys and Kitchingmans Re-examination taken by himself, and which he
apprehended made against the Lord Craven. Captain Bishop further said, That
whereas it was objected that Faulconer had money: he answered, that it is great
reason he should have moneys, for there was a real effect of the safety of the
Commonwealth by his services; that notwithstanding any thing has been sworn
against Faulconer, he believes what he swore was truth.

Captain Bishop speaking again of Faulconers Deposition, that the words [or to
that effect] should have been added: the Court asked him whether Faulconer gave
any directions to express these words in his Examination: to which Captain
Bishop made answer, that the Deposition he made, was the substance of things,
and he put it in words, and that [or to that effect] if they were not in,
should have been in. The Court again asked him if Faulconer did direct him to
put in these words [or to that effect] he replied again, he did deliver the
whole, as the effect of it.

Captain Bishop being further asked by the Court, if he were present when the
Commissioners gave the Oath, and took what Faulconer said in way of
information, he answered, That he prepared it before the Commissioners were
sent for, and then they had only the administering the Oath; and said again, I
prepared the information which he made oath of; hereupon Mr. Winslow desired
leave to inform the Court, that when he and the rest of the Commissioners came
to White Hall to administer this Oath, being sent for to that end, the
information was Ready prepared by Captain Bishop, and having no Register with
them, they made use of Captain Bishop, being well skilled in the use of his
Pen, to write over the Deposition, for though he had prepared the Deposition,
the Commissioners did see occasion to alter much of it, and it was writ over
again, and then Read to Faulconer, and attested by him, and subscribed unto by
the hands of all the Commissioners then present; and the Oath which we gave him
was this, Whether the Deposition thus drawn, and that which he was examined
unto, was the Truth, the whole Truth, and nothing but the Truth; Mr. Barners
attested the like: then Captain Bishop sat down.

After this Lieutenant Colonel Joyce was produced, who likewise Leiutenant
Colonel Joyce his Testimony.
spoke of very great designs, and of matters of State, and what discoveries
were made by Faulconer, which being not pertinent to the Perjury, shall be here
omitted; But as a Witness he said, That Horsnel was formerly an agent for the
Prince.

That Faulconer was a Hampshire-man, a Gentleman well bred that he was an Enemy
to himself in spending his Estate, that he was always faithful to the
Parliament, that he believes Faulconer has cuft some of the Witnesses produced
against him for their Malignancy, and that nothing could be expected to come
from them to the credit of Faulconer: That Faulconer was sent over by him as a
Spy into Holland upon an account of faithfulness.

Lieutenant Colonel Bardsey was produced in the next place on Leiutenant
Colonel Bardsey his Testimoney.
the behalf of Faulconer, who testified, that he put his hand to the Petition
at Breda, that the Lord Craven was desired to deliver it to the King of Scots,
that the Lord Craven said he was no Courtier, but a Servant to the States of
Holland, that it was fitter for the Princess Royal to deliver it then himself,
and so returned the Petition again; that the Queen of Bohemia told the
Petitioners the King would do for them what he was able; but about 4 a clock in
the morning he went away, and they had no other answer: that the Contents of it
was to put the King in mind of his promise, that some money might be delivered
to the Petitioners for discharge of their quarters at Breda; being asked by the
Court, if there were any expressions in it, as Barbarous and Inhumane Rebels,
he answered no: being asked, if to that Petition which Faulconer drew, he would
have had Barbarous and Inhumane Rebels added; he answered, yea, Faulconer did
move to have those words in, but was refused; that he the said Bardsey read
over that Petition, and set his hand to it, and was at the penning of it, and
Faulconer wrote it.

Captain Kitchingman being produced, did testify, that a Petition Captain
Kitchingman his Testimony.
was drawn at Breda, and signed by him, Faulconer, and others, to be presented
to the King of Scots; that it was in pursuance of gaining moneys to discharge
their Quarters, and to enable them to serve the King, but knows not by whom it
was delivered; that Secretary Long was to issue out moneys unto them, but they
never had any; and in order to the gaining of that money, there was another
Petition drawn, but by whom delivered, he knew not; only he saw a Paper in the
Queen of Bohemia's hand, which was told him was the Petition, and after a
quarter of an hours discourse with the King, She delivered it to the King, but
they never received any money upon that neither: That he did not read the last
Petition at all, nor heard it read; that it was the first Petition which he
signed.

Colonel Dove was produced in Court on the behalf of Faulconer, Colonel Dove
his Information.
who said, he knew nothing of his Birth, he only knew his Father and Mother,
that they lived in good Fashion and Credit, but how this Faulconer has been
brought up, and where he has inhabited for these ten or twelve years, he knew
not, and that this was as much as he could say.

Michel, an Ale-house-keeper was then produced, who said he Michel an
Ale-house-keeper his Testimony.
knew nothing of Faulconer, but that he was a very honest man, Faulconer having
lain in his house a year and three quarters; that he knows nothing to the
contrary, but that he was a good Scholar, an honest man, and brought up at the
University.

Captain Mowbrey being produced as a Witness, did testify, that Captain
Mowbrey his Testimony.
Anno 1649. in Amsterdam, he met accidentally with Captain Brisco, who said to
him and others, Gentlemen, I see you are in a sad condition, I will set you in
a way to get money; here are Dutch Men taking up Men to go to Plantations, and
you shall have twelve Stivers a piece a day, but I will warrant you, I will
force them to leave you behind, and accordingly they received twelve Stivers a
day, and Brisco would have had them on Shipboard, but one Church an English
Man bid them take heed what they did; for he served some English men so before,
clap them under decks, and received so many six Dollers a piece for them, and
so left them; That he has known Faulconer five years, and he has behaved
himself civilly for ought he ever saw.

Mr. Corey did testify something to this purpose, in reference to Briscoes
sending men to Plantations; who said further, he had no Mr. Corey his Testimony.
more to say against Brisco, but that he was a man would drink, and sometimes
swear as well as other men that are accustomed to it, that he knows nothing to
the contrary, but that he came to Breda to wait for employment: in the mean
time whilst he was there, he did as other men did, strive to seek for Relief.

After the Court had with much patience heard Captain Bishop and the rest of
the Witnesses on the behalf of Faulconer, The Counsel for Faulconer summed up
the Evidence, and left it to the Jury, with some further observations, viz.

That though the words Barbarous and Inhumane Rebels were not Observations
made by the Counsel on the behalf of Faulconer, after the evidence given.
in the Petition, yet there were words of tender of Service, as the King should
command, and to prosecute his cause, which was the substance of the thing
informed by Faulconer; That Captain Bishop, and Lieuteuant Colonel Joyce, who
have testified of Faulconers services, were witnesses to be preferred before
any witnesses produced against Faulconer; That the endeavor is not only to
convict this man, but by conviction and disabling of his credit, to undermine
that which has been acted by the Parliament upon his Testimony, and other
concurrent Testimonies, not only in passing Votes, but in passing an Act of
Parliament to sell an Estate.

That there was nothing objected against the credit of this witness, so long as
there was any other stone to turn, though there were other endevors used in
Parliament to prevent the Sale of the Lord Cravens Estate, so that when all
other Refuges failed, then they make use of this Indictment of Perjury, and so
hope to undermine the Act of Parliament; Though Faulconer might have some
extravigance, yet you see what his part was to Act, to dissemble that he was
not what he was, and it may be when he was amongst the God-dammees, and such
kind of men, it was his part to seem to be what most conduced to his end, [Like
themselves,] For a man as he was employed must twine himself into all shapes,
and though not drink a health, yet sometimes hold a candle to the Devil; That
they acknowledge the charge in part, and would lay it in words, not in
substance, and therefore not strictly in the Letter true.

That it was proved that the first Petition was to serve the King, as they
formerly had served his Father, and they served his Father against the
Parliament: so their offer must needs be, to be entertained to serve the King
against the Parliament.

That it is a sad case that this man for so many services performed by him for
the Commonwealth, and setlements grounded upon his information, must be blasted
here by an artificial Indictment a great while after.

And if he shall after all this be convicted of perjury, it will be a
discouragement for all men to undertake the like employment for the future.

And lastly, The Counsel for Faulconer did offer; That if there be a mistake in
what he has sworn, yet it appears not to be maliciously or corruptly done, and
that therefore the Jury ought to find for Faulconer.

The Reply by the Counsel on the behalf of the Commonwealth against Faulconer,
was to this purpose following.
GEntlemen of the Jury, You have heard the defense that Faulconer The Reply
against Faulconer.
has made; We have charged him, that he did take the Oath that was set down in
the Indictment; They say, First, We have not proved it; Secondly, That he did
not take it, but did take it in effect; And thirdly, If he did, it was not
maliciously, nor corruptly; But not one of them has said it is not false, no
not one of their own Counsel; The evidence that has been given for the most
part, has been to magnify the service of this man that is now in question
before you: We shall admit his services to be true, but this we shall be bold
to say, that a man that is employed beyond Sea, and gives good return of his
service in some kind, That that will not give him License to make a false
Accusation in another kind; and it is no Argument to say, that because this man
was a Spy beyond the Sea, and did good service as a Spy, that therefore he
did not give a false Information: In this he must not take a liberty to ruin
any man by a false Oath: His service must not excuse him, if what he has said
be false.

And for what Mr. Bishop said concerning his Oath; for Mr. Bishop tells you, it
is his fault if the words [Or to that effect] were not put down; if it were
not, whose fault was it? It was mended by those whose Judgments and
Consciences induced them to it: The Information he took was done by the
Judgment of the Committee, and not by the direction of him that was a
Minister, a Scribe to write, and not a Judge to dictate and correct: You have
here two men of unquestionable truth and honesty every way (meaning Mr.
Winslow, and Mr. Barners) that say positively he did swear it, and God forbid
that we shall live to that day, that any man should be ruined upon a Deposition
taken by the Judgment of a Clerk, to such or such effect; If we should come to
such a piece of Justice, that a Deposition to such and such effect, and that
taken by a Clerk, should come to cast a man, it is beyond an Oath of etc. For
it is the Judges that must say what is the effect of an Oath, and not the Clerk
that writes it: If a Clerk shall take an Oath, and he shall come and say, it is
to this effect, never shall any man be free from him that by Perjury will ruin
another man: It is proved unto you, it was read over to Faulconer, expressly
mended in his sight, and sworn by him, and let the effect go with the etc. that
went before it.

They objected to our witnesses, that Brisco had sold his Companions for twelve
Stivers a day; that information had no other foundation then the saying of a
Dutchman, that said so, or of an Englishman in a Dutch bottom; And what was
testified, was what was said, and not what was known or sworn; they objected
that Brisco would swear as well as another; that takes not off his Testimony;
But what do they say concerning their own witness Bardsey, whom they have
produced? He has sworn in terminis, in effect with Drury, which you will not
forget: He swore, that when the first Petition was drawing, it was moved by
Faulconer that the words Barbarous and Inhumane Rebels should be put in, but
is was rejected by them that were there, as a thing uncivil; so their own
witness concurs with Drury.

As for the Deposition on Record at Haberdashers-Hall, which being filed there,
it is proof of it self, which no man may aver against, when it is recorded; We
have showed it there, traced it here, brought a Copy of it endorsed with the
Lord Bradshaws hand; shall it be believed that a man shall be confiscated and
loose his Estate, and not so much as an Oath taken against him? It is apparent
there was an Oath, and it is hoped you will believe that which the Parliament
has Recorded, and expressly proved by the Gentlemen of Haberdashers-Hall here
present, which you will believe before any Imaginations can be made on the
otherside.

They have endeavored to say something touching the conversation of this man,
to uphold his credit; But Gentlemen of the Jury, You are to consider of the
man, what damnable blasphemy has come out of his mouth, you have heard it: If
a man will go so high, as to kneel down to drink a health to the Devil, I hope
there is no excuse for that; his good services must not plead for him to comply
with God-dammees, that will not justify him, he was not sent to do any such
thing: But we have not rested there; Have we not proved him a personator of
other men, a Decoy, and things that a man should be ashamed to name: the two
and twenty shillings piece he took out, and what base vilde words he spoke, not
fit to be repeated? That will not be palliated by any service whatsoever. And
for that which Mr. Bishop has said, nothing shall be said against him, but
what appears to you: that Mr Bishop has gone beyond a witness: for when he
has done his Testimony, acts and manageth the business, and in that is not
equal to others that do not: For his expression, that Faulconer is one of them
by which the Commonwealth of England sits safe at this hour: It is God we sit
safe by, and not by him: I blame him not for his service, but when we are upon
a question of truth, I say truth and righteousness is beyond all the service in
the world.

They say my Lord Craven furthered the Petition, and promised to second it:
Gentlemen, you must distinguish that which my Lord Craven knew, and that which
he knew not: There is not one witness from beginning to ending that ever can
speak one word that my Lord Craven knew what the first Petition was: In that
Petition was the expression of venturing their lives, which was three weeks
before the latter, which was singly to desire they might have money for their
quarters: The first Petition had some expressions relating to their former
service, and some expressions of their readiness for the future, but that
Petition my Lord Craven never saw, but was delivered to one Long three weeks
before, and Drury did put it down in his Deposition when he was examined by Mr.
Bishop, which agrees with that which was read in Court.

But the particular time when the latter Petition or Memorial was delivered,
with which the Lord Craven is charged, was the evening before the King went
from Breda.

They say that here is no corruption proved, and a man cannot be guilty without
corruption: but certainly he that swears a thing that is false, it must of
necessity be corrupt.

Faulconer swears that thirty Officers did subscribe the Petition: Does he
bring any one to confirm his Testimony, or the least color of evidence to what
he has sworn?

It was further pressed by the Counsel for the Commonwealth, that the Jury
would distinguish these two things, between the Petition framed and dictated by
Drury, and writ by Faulconer; and that other Petition delivered the night
before the King went from Breda; the first is produced, and proved to be
Faulconers own hand: that Petition was three weeks before, which begs for
maintenance, and proffers service, the Copy of which was brought forth before
any Evidence was given by them, for Drury upon his Examination before the
Council of State made the same known, and which agrees verbatim with that read
in Court; so the dictating of that Petition was by Drury, the writing by
Faulconer, the delivery was to Secretary Long, and that was the thing whereof
they did expect an Account; but that was not the Petition to which the
Testimony of Faulconer at all goes: that Petition of which this Oath is spoken,
and to which it is applied, is the Petition which was drawn the Evening before
the Scots King went from Breda, that is the Petition talked of in the
Deposition, that is the Petition upon which we pitch, and therefore if in that
Petition there be none of these words, that which he has sworn unto is false:
for in that Petition we say there was no such words, as Barbarous and Inhumane
Rebels: nor such words of proffer of service or malignity, but a mere desire
of supply: and they have not offered the least proof to the contrary. And
Secondly, that it was not promoted by the Lord Craven, for the Petition was
delivered by them to the Scots King, before such time as the Lord Craven came
into the room, so that my Lord Craven was no Promoter of the Petition; and had
he been a Promoter of it, there was no such thing in it as might give offense:
no not the least mention of the Parliament, or any thing that might offend; and
whereas they object that this Oath was not corrupt, the very words of his
expression are very considerable, for he does remarkably fix the words in his
Deposition, To sight against the Commonwealth of England, by the name of
Barbarous and Inhumane Rebels: why would he fix such an Emphasis upon it as
that was? it could not be a bare mistake: nor the words to this effect, as Mr.
Bishop would have had in, could never have served the turn, for to say that he
would fight against the Barbarous and Inhamane Rebels, or to that effect,
there is no such effect in the one Petition nor in the other: Then a second
thing is, that this Faulconer being, as he deposes, the contriver of the
Petition, it could not be a mere oversight and mistake in him; And then when he
could not have his desire beyond Seas, to get moneys, he said, He would come
here and do what mischief he could.

The Counsel urged further: Gentlemen of the Jury, what is become of the
original Deposition, it concerns not us to know, no more then the Original of
Depositions taken in the Country: it lies upon them that are for the Oath to
make it out. It cannot be presumed that the Parliament would confiscate a Noble
Man's Estate, and order it to be sold: would they enter it into the Journal
Book, and make it a Record: should it come and be transmitted from
Haberdashers-Hall (the proper Judicatory for that business) to the Council of
State, and from the Council of State to the Parliament, and then not to be a
true oath, or false Copy? that is not to be born, that a false Copy should sell
a Gentleman's Estate, and that a false Copy should be recorded to stand to all
Eternity.

After the Reply was made; every Judge in Court spoke what they in their
Judgment thought fit, for the better direction of the Jury; whereupon the Jury
withdrew, and the next day brought in their Verdict, that they found the said
Faulconer guilty of the Perjury mentioned in the Indictment. The Order
following was thereupon made, viz.

By the Court.
The Defendant was this day brought into Court, under the Custody Middlesex:
The keepers etc. against Faulconer.
of the Marshall of this Court, upon an Indictment for Perjury, whereunto he
had formerly pleaded Not guilty; And the Jury thereupon being impannelled, and
sworn, found him guilty of the Perjury in the Indictment mentioned: And
thereupon the said Faulconer is committed to the Custody of the said Marshall;
there to remain until, etc.

FINIS.

