A True and Full RELATION Of the manner of the Taking of the TawnE and CASTLE
of SHREWSBVRY.

With the CONDITIONS On which the Castle, and Fort at Frankvill, were
surrendered.

AS ALSO, A List of the Names of the several Commanders, Officers, Knights,
Esquires, Gentlemen, and others, that were taken Prisoners.

Printed according to Order. March 4th

London, Printed by J. R. for Christopher Meredith, at the sign of the Crane
in Pauls-Churchyard. 1645.

SIR,
SHould we not publish Gods goodness unto us, it would be an Argument of high
ingratitude, and render us to the world unworthy of so great a Mercy. For it
has pleased God of his goodness, after a whole years travel, and three
months strong labor, by the care and industry of our vigilant and active
Committee, to hand into the World a Blessing; for which, all that are
well-affected unto the welfare of this Church and Kingdom, will rejoice.

On the 21. of this instant, by order of the Committee, there were drawn out of
the Garrisons of Wem, Morten-Corbet, and Stock, 250. Foot, and 250. Horse. From
our good Friend Sir William Brereton, we were assisted with 250. Foot, and 350
Horse, of the Staffordshire Forces, under the Command of Colonel Bower: All
the Foot, being by order from the Committee, put under the Command of
Lieutenant Colonel Rinking, an able Soldier; who for his disereet managing
this business, deserves much honor; our Horse were commanded by Colonoll
Mitton: Things being thus ordered, we marched toward Shrewsbury, which is a
very strong Town, well Walled, and compassed about with a navigable River, in
the form of an Horse-shooe; the neck of Land at the opening of the Horse-shooe,
being not a Bow shot over, in which stands (on the East Side on the top of an
high Hill) a strong Castle, the River running directly along, close under the
side of the Hill: From the North-West-side of the Hill, there runs a strong
Wall, and a great Ditch to the River, on that side: Notwithstanding the
strength of the place, we were not discouraged, but marched on, and came to
Shrewsbury about three of the clock on Saturday morning: And now how to get
over the Work, was both dangerous and difficult, being so strongly Palisado'd,
well fortified; we therefore in a little Boat, that was provided for the
purpose, conveyed eight Carpenters up the River, and landed them within the
Enemies Brest-work, under the Castle-Hill, on the East Side were the Sentinels,
after some pause, gave fire upon them, but they soon sawed down so many of the
Pallasadoes, as gave our men free passage. The first that stormed, were forty
Troopers dismounted, with their Pistols, and about as many Firelocks, which
were led on by one Master Huson a Minister, Captain Willers, and Lieutenant
Benbow; after these followed some other Musketeers along Severn side, under
the Castle-Hill, and near Sir. William Owens house, entered the Town; after
these, marched 350. Foot more, under the command of Lieutenant Colonel
Rinking: These having gained the streets, part marched to the Marketplace, who
after some exchange of shot, gained the main Court of Guard there, the rest
marched to the Castle-foreward-gate, which within one quarter of an hour was
gained, the Gates opened, the Drawbridge let down, at which, our Horse under
the Command of Colonel Mitton, and Colonel Bowyer, with the Gentlemen of the
Committee entered. It was now about break of day the scriks in the Town was
such strange kind of Cock-crowing, as (I believe) you never heard the like.
Being thus entered, the Castle and a strong outwork at Frankvill held out, but
by twelve of the clock, the Castle was delivered upon these conditions, That
the English should march to Ludlow, but the Irish to be delivered up, which we
shall hang with Authority: The strong Work at Frankvill was surrendered up upon
bare quarter. And thus it pleased God of his great goodness to deliver so
strong an hold into our hands, with the loss only of two Common Soldiers, we
cannot be sufficiently thankful, for it is a place of great concernment; And
now many honest people are delivered out of an Egyptian slavery.

For this brief account of our last Action, I desire you to accept of, as an
earnest of his engagements, which is

Salop, Feb. 22. 1644. Your friend to serve you.
I Have sent you here enclosed, a List of such prisoners as were found at the
writing hereof: Its good sport to see how we Ferret these Foxes out of their
Holes every day.

SIr Michael Ermley, Knight, and his Brother. Sir Richard Lee, Sir Thomas
Harris, Sir Henry Frederick Thin, Knights and Baronets. Sir William Owen, Sir
John Wild, Senior, Sir John Wild, Junior, Sir Thomas Lystor, Knights. Francis
Thorns, Herbert Vaughan; Thomas Owen, Edward Keinaston, Robert Ireland,
Rich-Trevis, Thomas Morris, Arthur Sanford, Robert Sanford, Pellum Corbett,
Thomas Jones, Esquires. Lieutenant Colonel Edward Owen. Major Francis Ranger.
Doctor Lewyn, Doctor Arnwey. Raynsford, William Lucas, John Cressey, Thomas
Collins, William Long, Pontsbury Owen, Henry Harrison, Captains. John Pay
Feodary, Cassey Benthall, Edward Talbat, Richard Lee, Edward Standley, Francis
Manwaring, John Bradshaw, Edward Littleton, Peter Dorrington, Thomas Barker,
John Witacares, Joseph Tailor, Francis Sanford, Richard Gibbeons, George
Manwaring, Charles Smith, Gentlemen. Edward Palmer, Matthew Whitwick, Ensigns.
Vincent Tailor, Thomas Dew, Humphrey Davis, Richard Broyn, Sergeants. Nicholas
Proud, Clerk. Master James Lacon, Master Lendall, Moses Hotchkis, George
Bucknall, Corporals. Patrick Lawpaid, Irish, and 49. other prisoners.
The reason why we found no more Commanders was, because Prince Maurice had
drawn them out for his Design at Chester.



FINIS.

