THE TRUE CHARACTER OF AN UNTRUE BISHOP.

WITH A Recipe at the end, how to recover a Bishop if he were lost.



LONDON, Printed in the year 1641.

THE TRUE CHARACTER OF AN Untrue Bishop. With a Recipe at the end, how to
recover a Bishop if he were lost.
IF you ask me of what calling he is, I answer, I know not; for sometimes I
find him in Tribunali, in a Court of justice; sometimes in suggesto, in a
Pulpit: In the first, so much against Gods will, in the second, so much against
his own will, that as he has not a right to the one, he prizeth not a right
to the other. And what can I call this man?

2 If you demand of what Religion he is; I know not. He does protest he is
not a Papist, and I would willingly believe him; yet he persecutes
Protestants, and so I must necessarily doubt him. He is to me like the
Pictures, which by several lights, hold forth a several representation: On
the one side you see a pleasant Angel, on the other side a grim Satyr.

3 He always either acts or commands contradictions: For he calls a
Puritan an hypocrite, because he uses long prayers; and yet places all his
religion in a daily Service of two hours long.

4 He disclaimes Popery, and yet challenges his function by succession from
the Pope, who lineally descends from Peter; though (like the Pope) he succeeds
Peter in nothing but denying his Master.

5 He cries, No Bishop, no King; thereby professing Episcopacy the chief
handmaid of Monarchy; and yet exercises, contrary to law, regal jurisdiction
in his own name, and his own Courts. Is not this slily to supplant Monarchy?

6 He is a true pattern of Judas, who of all the Apostles is styled a Bishop;
for he cries, Hail Master, King of the Jews, and then kisseth him with a
treacherous design. Just as an Elephant, who croucheth to his Master, till the
youthful blood does begin, ebullire, to boil in his veins, and then he
tramples upon him.

7 He says that Miracles are ceased long ago, though he works miracles
every day: For he maintains universal grace, and yet forbids preaching,
the means of grace.

8 He institutes ( quo jure I know not) Saints days, or holy days, and yet
will not permit any holiness that day, either in our general or particular
calling: For work, men may not; and hear Sermons they cannot, there being none.

9 He exceedingly magnifieth that sweet and holy prayer, that prayer which is
most full of strength and affection, which is the pattern of prayer, the Lords
prayer; and yet makes this the means whereby he would take away all use of
prayer, while he wrappeth up all in that, and makes that a pillar to uphold his
No-prayer, his Bidding-prayer.

10 He fears and shunneth Crosses as much as another man, and yet makes the
Cross a maine (medium) means of all his devotions.

11 He contends with the two Witnesses, Reve. 11.10. as the Magicians of Egypt
did with Moses and Aaron, who should be most powerful in Miracles: They,
during the time of their prophecy, shut up heaven that it rain not; He,
during the time of his dominion, commands the malignant Intelligences, that
plagues, murrains, famines, new diseases fall down no less frequently, than
hail, rain, or snow.

12 And as he works miracles, so miracles are wrought upon him; for he is
all this while, Talpa cacior, blinder than a Mole, and sees not, that all his
efforts are but that rage which the Prince of the air must express, as his
time hasteneth, are but the Bishop his last thrusts: For Romes Civil and
Ecclesiastical tyranny, with all the dependances thereof, are falling, like a
millstone into the sea; God being now ready to pour, or in pouring out the
fifth vial. But all this he sees not, else (as Solomon says, Go to the Ant
thou sluggard) he would learn even with Rats and Mice, to withdraw from the
tottering house of this his Hierarchy, unwarranted in Scripture. He has eyes
and sees not, ears and hears not, and so is it with all those that listen
to him. But light is coming, and (which is the greatest miracle of all) they
who are the maine enemies, shall be chief authors of a most glorious
Reformation, and that by opposing it.

13 He thought with his Predecessor, the Pope, not to have left Lay men other
helps in Divinity than Imagery, calling Images Lay men's books. But Lay men
have of late so outstript him in that study, that all Episcopal Theology
concentred in one, will be but the Image of the true Divinity, which may be
found amongst Lay men. Witness those mighty Comments made by some worthy
members, of the most honorable assembly of the house of Commons, upon those
Monstrous, Babilonish, Menstruous Cannons of theirs, which have nothing good in
them but this, that by their eminency in their kind, they have not left
posterity a possibility of exceeding them.

14 He, by his consecration, makes holy that which God has made common; as
Bells, Bell ropes, Candles, Corporalls and Altars: Orpheus could advance from
vegetative to sensitive; for plants and trees were ravished by the sweet and
charming touch of his instrument; But a Bishop can do more: That which is
common, he makes holy.

15 He again can abase that which God has exalted: For by execration he
does anathematize the souls of most precious Saints. By his consecration he
does advance: By his execration he does abase: And who may control him?

Divisum imperium cum Jove Papa tenet. The Pope reigns as God. 16 He puts
holiness into the stones of the Temple, and it is he that renders unholy,
that makes stony his own heart and the hearts of his followers, which men
call the visible Temples of the holy Ghost: Witness his many Sparrowish,
Wren-like wanton extravagances which we meet with from men of that coat in our
Committees, and have known complained of in the high Commission.

Divisum imperium cum Jove Prasul habet. The Bishop reigns as God. 17 He is
learned in almost all arts and sciences: He is an excellent judicial
Astrologer; for whereas Picus Mirandula, Julius Caesar, Cornelius a Lapide, cum
multis aliis, deny any certain knowledge of our condition by the influence of
celestial bodies, he says boldly and truly, Let him be but under the
gracious aspect of Charles his Waine, and he is confident all will do well.

18 He is no less skillful in the Metaphysics, for whilst he hold unity,
^hese words, (...) d^ssenteth, (...)* to the end (...) the 18. staff ^^e to be
read (...) the end of ^^e 19* staff.
verity, and bonitie, termini convertibiles, diverse names expressing the same
thing, finding unity in the Papal Hierarchy, he concludes, that we must go to
Rome for truth and goodness. He dissenteth not much from the Jesuits, who are
altogether Paracelsians, in as much as they make famous those three Principles,
Sal, Mercury, and Sulphur: Salt they make the principal of all Christianity in
their baptism; Mercury, the father of lies and equivocations, is to them the
Principle of all doctrine and practice; they laid Sulphur, or Gunpowder, under
the Parliament house for a Principle of Reformation in England.

19 He is a rare Physician; whilst some contend for Hippocrates and Galen their
way, some for Paracelsus, he concludes, that Paracelsus is better, and so
deals wholly in Spirits, leaving none that come within his Courts any thing
more than skin and bone: yea, by this his art he can turn any thing into gold,
making money of every body that comes within his reach.

20 He is well versed in moral Philosophy: whilst the Moralist does dispute,
Vtrum prudentia sit virtus moralis, an intellectualis, he denies any such
virtue at all, else sure he would never have ventured his glorious calling for
his vote in Parliament; for by striving to keep the one, he is like to lose
both.

21 He knows that what is ultimum in executione, is primum in intention,
last in execution, first in intention; and so he being by a cure of souls
invested into Officium and Beneficium, Office and benefice, his mind his wholly
bent upon the last.

22 He knows very well the weight of a Circumstance, knows that that which
is in one art a Ceremony, in another is a Substance; and therefore punishes
the breach of a Ceremony with suspension, excommunication, deprivation, whilst
fornication and adultery are committed many times for four shillings.

23 He is a good Mathematician, he has found out Quadraturam Circuli, squaring
of a Circle: for our Island and Crown were tantum non, almost wholly with the
whole world reduced in obedience to his square Cap.

24 In the midst of all this learning, he is of a very tender conscience: In
observing that some thoughtlesse Christians did neglect their particular
calling by Sermon-hunting, and so began to idolize preaching, he imitateth good
Hezekiah, and takes away the Brazen Serpent, takes away Sermons.

25 He observes the Scripture in the Spirit of it, uses his greatest
Adversaries with most meekness; I mean, the Separation, and the
Non-conformists; concluding, that diversity of opinions will beget their
ruin, and establish him in his station.

26 He is a great imitator of Saint Paul, he becomes all to all that he may, if
possible, win some; for he is something of a Lutheran in the Ceremonies,
something of a Calvinist in doctrine, a Popish Disciplinarian in all things but
self-whipping.

27 He is half a Precisian in the outward man. He loves little bands, short
hair, grave looks; but had rather be slain at Tiburne, than preach in a
cloak (though Paul sent for his on some such occasion from Treas) or stand at
the end of a Table, he is so unacquainted with preaching either there, or
elsewhere.

28 He is half a Precisian in the inward man, abstaineth from blood (by the
Canon law he may not vote in blood) and meat offered to Idols, for there is no
such in the Shambles. But what his judgment is for things strangled, our
Prisons can tell, where many a good Minister has been pined and starved. And
for fornication, you may judge by his commutation, which should go to the
poor, but serves his wife for pins.

29 He is half a Jew, he contends for Priests and Altars, though he will not
use the word Sabbath, lest he should judaize throughout.

30 In all these complying like a wise man, he is true to himself. For though
he says the fourth Commandment is jure humano, yet he says Bishops are jure
divino.

31 He stands at the Belief, yet he hardly believes what he stands to;
else he would not be so severe to the members of Christ.

32 If he be a Heretic in any thing, it is in re-baptization, which he calls
Bishopping, and yet styles an Anabaptist an Heretic.

33 He does with the Spirit conclude, that bodily exercise profits nothing,
and therefore limits both prayer and preaching before Sermon, precisely to an
hour.

34 He hates his enthusiastic fumaticks, who talk so much of the Spirit; and
professes his skill of the Spirit in Philosophy, to be confined to natural,
vital, and animal; past animal he cannot go: in Divinity, to the third
Person in the Trinity, to the soul of good and bad men, to good and bad
Angels; further he does not know.

35 God is no regarder of persons, but requires holiness on his days. He is
a respecter of men, but holds all days alike.

36 Nay, he is not so great an enemy to Reformation as some think. For he
storms at the tyranny of the English-Church-government, which forces a man
against his conscience to swear or to vow, and that three times, Nolo
episcopari, I will not be a Bishop; when (note the text) the Spirit says, He
that desires the office of a Bishop, desires a good thing. He heartily
wishes that the word Lollard in the Statute were turned into the word
Puritan, for he would then make quick work.

37 In short, he is a great Divine. By his acute wit and deep learning he has
much facilitated the work of a Divine. For as Lewis the 11. reduces all his
King-learning to this, Qui nescit dissi^ulare, nescit regnare, he that cannot
dissemble, cannot be a King; so has he epitomized the necessary work of a
Divine to this, Qui novit been legere, novit been praedicare, a good reader is
a good Preacher; and indeed that is of greater consequence than some think for:
for if a man be come but to that height of learning that the Ordinary can say,
Legit ut Clericus, he reads like a Clerk, he shall never see the Gallows. And
here I think it will be high time to leave the Bishop, lest he should say with
the slave in the Poet, Ego vapulando, ille verborando; I with hearing, and you
with relating the truth are weary: and so I conclude the Bishops Character.

38 But lest after ages should desire to recall what we labor to reject, and
so our posterity should with the Romans be forced to Solon and Athens for
laws, should be forced to run to Rome for a Bishop; give me leave to present
you with a Recipe, which if you administer to the right party, you shall never
want a Bishop whilst the world stands.

THE RECIPE.
Recipe 1. IN stead of the magistrall of Pearl, the magistrall of some of
those consecrated stones which are to be found under the high Altar in Saint
Paul's. Secondly, The scales of a consecrated Clapper, almost mouldred to
nothing by the peevishness of a Scottish Puritan, which would not let the
bells ring upon their Sabbath: of these two an equal quantity.

2 Two ounces of the painting of the old Crucifix found in Christ's Church three
years ago. Secondly, all that quantity which remains of the scull of
Bradford, Latimer, Ridley, and others of those Heretics that suffered under
Bonner and Gardener, with half a pound of powder, which Faux laid treasured up
under the Parliament house.

3 Put all these, with a sufficient quantity of Puritanes ears, and the
greasy cover of a Singing-mans Common Prayer Book, used by him in some great
Cathedral these seven last years, into the Mitre sent out of Italy lately, as
a harbinger of what must have followed.

4 Be careful to lute this Mitre with three spoonfuls of a Pluralists fasting
spittle, with a salt chymically extracted, by a skillful hand, out of the first
square cap that was worn by our Archbishop after the Reformation.

5 Set it on the fire at a Canonical hour, and so double the heat at every
Canonical time, till these be boiled up to a perfect decoction.

6 Dry it, but dry it only at an Eastern Sun, and when it is dry enough, then
beat it into powder, and lest any bigger pieces should remain, scarce it in
three several launes.

7 First, that Laune with which Flora the famous Roman strumpet adorned her
self in her greatest glory. Secondly, in that which Cleopatra a Queen and
strumpet of Egypt dressed her self in when she entertained Anthony. Thirdly,
and lastly, in a piece of the Laune of a Bishops sleeve, as famous for
spiritual whoredom, as they for outward and bodily.

8 When this powder is thus perfect, make it up into several doses, and wrap
up everyone in a piece of Apocrypha Scripture. Administer it upon All Saints
day, or at least upon some Holyday.

9 Then give it to some young man that has read more Postills than other
Commentators, of either as few as may be: who holds the Master of the
Sentences, with Scotus, and Thomas, the only learning, though he rather know
their names, than their parts. Who reads Calvin to confute him, and commends
Luthers violence far above his conscience. Who deemeth Orthodox Divinity the
learning of fools, but Arminianisme, Socinianisme, Pelagianisme, a fit study
for wits. Who thinks Doctrine and Use the way indeed to save souls, but
strong lines the encomium of a rare Preacher. Who commends tenderness of
conscience in him which refuses two livings, and yet keeps three himself.
Who calls for obedience to the Church, and knows not what the Church is,
neither cares to know what she commands. Lastly, who wears a little band, a
long Cassock, a little longer than his Cloak, a fine holliock for the knot of
his girdle.

10 Let this man but take for three mornings together three doses of this
powder, after he has made three legs to the East, or to the Altar, and if he
swallow not three Bishoprics, with three Commendams to every one of them. I am
grossly mistaken.

FINIS.

