A true and sad RELATION OF The burning, sinking, and blowing up of the English
ships in the River of Thames, on Thursday and Friday last.

With the manner how one of them floted up to the Bridge in a flaming fire, and
there gave a most terrible and dreadful Blow with Gunpowder, renting the
houses, splitting the Boats, and tearing of diverse limb from limb.

With the Names and Number of the men women, and children, that suffered in
this dism^ll, and woeful Accident: some having their brains dashed against the
walls: Others, their Legs and Arms shot off: And diverse lamentably mortified,
to the great astonishment of many Thousands.

Likewise, the Discovery of a desperate and dangerous Conspiracy upon the
River; and the apprehending of a Gentleman on Friday night last, with diverse
Grenades and Fireworks.

Imprinted at London for G. Horton, 1654.

ON Thursday being the 20 of this instant July, a Merchants ship laden with
Cloth, and other Commodities, being bound for Bilbo in Spain, and from thence
to the Barbados, was to the great grief of many hundreds accidentaly set on
fire, whose violent flames brake so dreadfuly forth, that neither Mariner,
Waterman, nor others, could by no means possible alay or quench the fury and
vehemence thereof; insomuch, that every man was constrained to look out for
deliverance and none durst at last attempt a preservation of the Vessel, so
that she was exposed to a destructive floting, from toward Dep^ford to London
bridge, where it pleased divine Providence so to determinate a stop to her
boundless way, as to run her upon a shelve of sand near unto the bridge,
otherwise those stately Fabrics had been endangered to have been leveld with
the lowermost Arches; for no sooner was she stranded upon the sands, but
immediately the fire seized on the powder, and thereupon the great blow was
given, in which many lost their lives; for by its mighty violence all the decks
were blown up and rent asunder, and the main mast and misne cast up at a great
distance, so that the ship was so disjoynted, that sundry pieces thereof flew
about upon the shore, making great devastation; and many were slain and hurt;
amongst the rest, a Gentleman upon London bridge, as he was walking upon his
Leads, hads his skul and brains all shattered to pieces: Others had their
Head, Legs, and Arms taken off, and many sacrificed their lives in the flames,
whose names are said to be as follows: Mr. John Thorowgood, Mr. Leonard Mason,
Mr. Thomas Atkinson, Mr. Peter Ward, And James Anderton.


Besides the houses were most pitifully rent and torn, and so great a shrieking
of men, women, and children, that the like has not been heard in many Ages.

Notwithstanding which sad accident, the like danger by fire could not be
prevented on Friday the 21 instant; but about nine of the clock in the
forenoon, another ship laden with Oils, and other Commodities, lying at
Fresh-Wharf was likewise suddenly blown up, the manner thus:

The ship being unlading, and a Merchants man going down with some of the
Mariners into the lower Hold to look for some Goods, it so accidentally happened,
that the snuff of a Candle falling, took hold of the Gunpowder, and blew up
certain Parrels, which carried away the whole steerage, Gunroom, and Masters
Cabin, and the force of the blow did likewise split the Keel, so that the ship
was immediately filled with water, and great skreekings and doleful cries there
were ashore, some having their Arms also taken off: Others, their Legs, Heads,
and other parts of their bodies sorely bruised and brake; but that which seems
the most dreadfu^, is, that a Gentleman's maid holding a little Child in her
arms, about a twelvemonth old, upon the Wharf side, received several wounds by
splinters, and the poor Infant was blown from her, and never yet could be heard
of.

Nay more, the terror of the blow extended so far, that above 40 persons were
exposed to great misery, and are now made objects of pity and compassion.

Yet thus much is observable, that when the blow was given, the windows
shattered to pieces, and the houses rent and torn, that two birds in their
Cages, hanging near, and opposite against the Crane, where the blow had its
greatest force, were both preserved safe, and not so much as a feather hurt.

The number of those killed in this ship are said to be nine, viz. The Gunner,
The Gunners Mate. A Psalters man. The Bostons Mate, The Carpenter, The Steward,
And three more.


Great was the loss likewise the day before, for diverse were wounded as they
passed over the bridge, yet (blessed be God) not a man hurt in the ship, for so
soon as they perceived her a fire, the C^ptain leaped out into the Thames, and
swum for his life; the like did all the rest; who got clear off, except the
Gunners wife, who being newly come aboard, and astonished at the fire, ran
skreeking up and down the ship for her husband, insomuch that the flames caught
hold of her head-cloths, singed her hair, and scorched her face, but did her no
other harm.

The loss is exceeding great, and perilous to many; but so much the greater, by
reason of the taking off many Gentlemen; amongst the rest, Mr. Fulner a Drapier
upon London Bridge, coming to his Neighbors house, to help get off certain
goods, and to carry them at a further distance, by reason they feared the
firing of that end of the bridge, attempted (with two other Gentlemen) to go up
into a Gallery, to discover how near the ship was, who immediately thereupon
striking upon the sands, the blow was given, and the ship blown up, whose
splinters flew with such vehemence, that a piece of his head was taken off, and
his brains dashed against the walls: the other two Gentlemen were both hurt, but
not mortal: besides diverse that were in boats, and other places; to the great
astonishment of many hundreds. But it is hoped that care will be taken for the
future to prevent these sad accidents; and the rather, because there is a great
suspicion of some desperate Conspiracy agitating by the Portuglals; and that
for this cause: That on Friday last toward the Evening at Horsey-down, a
Gentleman was apprehended, who had diverse Fireworks about him; But upon
examination, he was committed to safe custody.

FINIS.

