Die Mercur. 29. October. 1645.
ORdered by the Commons Assembled in Parliament, that Sir Walter Earl, Captain
Skinner, and Sir William Strickland, do from this House give thanks to Mr.
Tailor, and Mr. Strickland for the great pains they took in the Sermons they
Preached this day at the entreaty of this House at Margarets Westminster, (it
being the day of public humiliation) and to desire them to Print their
Sermons. And they are to have the like privilege in Printing of them as others
in the like kind usually have had.

H. Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

I do appoint Stephen Bowtell, and none other, to Print my Sermon.

FRANCIS TAILOR.

TO The Honorable House of COMMONS Assembled in Parliament.
IT was a double privilege that God bestowed upon David, that he should fight
the Lords battles, and make large preparations for the Lords Temple. But the
honor to enjoy a peaceable Government, and to finish the Temple, God reserved
for Solomon his son. God has honored you with David's portion, Honorable
Senators, and worthy Patriots. Ye have fought the Lords battles with good
success, and made great preparations for the building of Gods Temple. The Lord
add Solomon's part unto you, that ye may have the comfort to establish a firm
peace in the Civil State, and the honor to settle due order in the Lords
House. The forwardness of the Work should fill you with courage against all
discouragements. The Talmudists have a Proverb, (...) Jalkut. in Leg. fol. 279
col. 1.
When your shoes are on, tread down the Thorns. Go on with valor, I beseech
you, to pull down all impediments that hinder true Religion or a solid peace.
To encourage your Honors to so great a Work, was the scope of these
Meditations; Which, as in the delivery they seemed not displeasing to you, so
under the shadow of your Order, they do now present themselves to the public
view. (...) Taanith. fol. 4. col. 1.
The rain that falls softly, say the Rabbis, moistens the Corn under the clods.
Whereby they intimate unto us that good dispositions are easily wrought upon by
a modest and moderate way of teaching. I did endeavor to avoid all things that
might offend so great and grave an audience. Yet not to neglect the duty of a
Minister, to speak those things that I conceived to be most useful for you to
hear, and most needful for me to deliver. If any good come by my pains to
Gods Church, have a sufficient reward. In the mean while, I humbly desire, that
the Press may be your remembrancer, and bring that often to your memories,
which the Pulpit presented to your ears. I shall no further make bold to
interrupt your weighty indevours, but begging a singular blessing from God upon
your Persons, and public employments, I conclude and remain

At your Honors service in the Lord, FRANCIS TAILOR.

A Sermon Preached before the Honorable House of Commons at a late Solemn
Fast.
PSALM. 74.20. Have respect unto the Covenant: For the dark places of the Earth,
are full of the habitations of cruelty.


THis Psalm contains a sad description of the sorrowful times the Church of
God endured, when by the cruelty of their adversaries they were deprived of the
liberty of Gods houses, and of their own. The name of Asaph, in the beginning
of it, puts the Commenters to some trouble. For if it were that Asaph, that
lived in David's time, it must needs be a Prophetical prediction of the future
troubles of the Church. For David's glorious Reign afforded no occasions of such
sad complaints. It seems rather to be a sensible relation of present
troubles, as many other Psalms are; As Psalm. 52. when Doeg complains of David
to Saul. Psalm. 54. when the Ziphims complain of him, Psalm. 56. when the
Philistines took him in Gath, Psalm. 57. when he was in the Cave, Psalm. 59.
when they watched the house to kill him, Psalm. 137. when the people were
captives in Babylon. If it be not a Prophecy, but a relation, then either it
must be composed by a later Asaph, who was an eyewitness of those troubles;
or else Asaph is put for the sons of Asaph, to whose care the singing of this
Psalm was committed, as Aaron is put for the 1 Chronicles. 12.27. Heb. Aaron.
Aaronites, and 1 King. 12.16.
David for Reboboam his grandchild.

But another scruple yet remains to unfold, what should be that troublesome
time, wherein this Psalm was composed. Some take it to be in the time of the
Babylonian captivity. Others in the days of Antiochus Epiphanes. The former
plead the burning of the Sanctuary, ver. 7. which was done at the taking of
Jerusalem by the Babylonians, whereas Antiochus only defiled it by commanding
it to be called the 2 Mac. 6.2.
Temple of Jupiter Olympius, and by bringing his Image into it, as Eusebius.
Chronic. l. 2. Hieron. in Dan. 11.
Eusebius affirms. The later plead the want of Prophets to foretell the end of
their troubles, whereas in the Babylonian captivity Jeremie was alive, who told
the Jews remaining in their own land, that the term of their captivity should
be Jer. 25.11, 12. and 29.20.
seventy years. This Daniel knew Dan. 9.2.
by books left on Record. And other godly Jews knew the Psalm. 102.13.
set time of their delivery. And Ezekiel foretells the Ezekiel. 40.
rebuilding of the City and Temple. I will not take upon me to determine so
great a controversy. But under correction of better judgments, I conceive it
was written in the time of Antiochus, and the burning of the Temple formerly,
recapitulated to aggravate their present sorrows, who had their Temple so
defiled now, that they could not with any comfort use it, and knew not when
their miseries would end, as the Jews did under the captivity.

The Psalmist wrestles with God in prayer, by many strong arguments, for the
freedom of Gods people from their heavy troubles. He tells of the cruelty of
the adversaries, not doubting but that God was so tenderly affected to his
people, that he would not suffer them to be ruined by their foes. But if God
should so far forget his people, as to slight their calamities, yet he knew
Gods glory was dear unto him, and therefore prays to God to avenge on his
peoples enemies, all the blasphemies they daily uttered against God himself.
He mentions the miracles God had done for his people formerly, in opening a
passage through the Sea to deliver them fully from the Egyptians; and drowning
those cruel Dragons, Pharaohs Princes, and giving Pharaohs own carcass, that
great Leviathan Cadaver Pharaonis e mari ejectum dedisti devorandum volucribus
and feris deserta incolentibut. Pisc. vide Ezekiel. 29.5. Sic Populi vox
usurpatur, Prove. 30.25, 26. and Homero (...), dicta observat Eustat. ad Il. and
Odys. E. Oppiano itidem, (...), Pisces. Piscat. l. 1. De apibus etiam, Columel.
l. 9. c. 13. Populi duo conjungi debent.
to the beasts for food, and opening another in the River Jordan, to let them
into the possession of the Land of Canaan. And is Gods power or mercy shortened,
Isa. 59.1.
that he cannot or will not deliver his people now? He foretells the shame
that would fall upon Gods people, if they should be disappointed of their hope
of delivery. He shows the cause of their troubles. Though their sins gave God
cause enough to afflict them more heavily, yet it was not that the enemies
looked at, but their Religion. They could well have been content, Gods people
should have been sinners, so they had not been Saints. And this makes him call
upon God to arise, and plead his own cause. And in the Text he urges God with
the Covenant. A strong argument. There was no power in the people to help
themselves. They had no merits for the Psalmist to plead in their behalf. There
was power and mercy sufficient in God for deliverance: but what right have they
to it, who are not in league with him? Nothing can bind God, but his own
Covenant. He might show forth his mercy and power to rescue others, though
these had perished. He could have made of Moses a Exodus 32.10.
great Nation, though all the other Israelites had been consumed in his anger.
And thus much for coherence.

The Ministers of God are 1 Cor. 3.10
Gods builders. They must lay a sure foundation by a right explication of the
words, Fundamentum debile fallit opus
lest all the building fall of it self. They must raise up strong walls, by
observations naturally flowing from the Text, lest the winds of false teachers
blow it down. They must lay on a firm roof by solid application, lest the
storms of men's lusts ruin it. For the words,

(...) Have respect. The word in the original signification of it, imports a
fastening of the eyes upon some object, that a man desires to look into. Hence
by a metaphor, it is transferred to the eyes of the mind, and signifies a
serious weighing, and consideration of a thing, God is said to Act. 17.30
(...), Looking over.
wink at the times of ignorance, or not to regard it. Gods people here look at
God, as if he did wink at his Covenant, and neither look at it, nor them in
their miseries. The Psalmist desires him that he would be mindful of it for
his peoples deliverance.

(...) Unto the Covenant. The word is derived from (...) to choose. The parties
that enter into Covenant choose one another, and choose their terms. So God
chooses his people. Psalm. 33.12
Blessed is the Nation whose God is the Lord, and the people whom he has
chosen for his own inheritance. So he chooses their seed after them, as Moses
testifyeth. Deuteronomy. 4.37.
And because he loved thy Fathers, therefore he chose their seed after them.
So Gods people choose God for their God, as Joshuah affirms. Josh. 24.22
And Joshuah said unto the people, Ye are witnesses against your selves, that
ye have chosen the Lord to serve him. And they said, We are witnesses. The
Rabbis observe the (...). Ab. Ezr. Qimchi in textum.
demonstrative particle included in (...) to point out a particular Covenant.
(...) Shel. Jar. in text.
That famous covenant which thou made with our Fathers. Some apply it to that
eminent covenant made with Noah Genesis 6.11.
when the earth was filled with violence as now, and the old world drowned for
it. To wit, Genesis 9.12.15.
that he would no more drown the earth for man's sin. This Covenant is also
mentioned by the Prophet. Isa. 54.9.
For this is as the waters of Noah to me: for as I have sworn, that the waters
of Noah should no more go over the earth; so have I sworn, that I would not
be wroth with thee, nor rebuke thee. But the Covenant here intended is that
solemn one made with Abraham, Genesis 17.7.
that he would be his God, and the God of his seed. Repeated by the Psalmist,
Psalm. 105.9, 10.
Which covenant he made with Abraham, and his oath unto Isaac, and confirmed
the same unto Jacob for a Law, and to Israel for an everlasting covenant.
Hereby the Psalmist conceives that God was now engaged to deliver his people.

(...) For. This includes a motive to move God to deliver his people out of
their miseries: So Joseph uses it, Genesis 42.18
This do and live: for I fear God. Though ye may fear wrong in an
idolatrous Country, yet I will do you none, because I am no Idolater, but
fear the true God, as ye do. So here, Do thou, O Lord, help thy people for
others hurt them.

(...) The dark places. An allusion, as some interpreters conceive, to the dens
of wild beasts, wherein Psalm. 104.21, 22.
they hide themselves to take advantage of seize upon a prey. To these cruel
men are compared. Psalm. 10.8, 9
He sits in the lurking places of the villages: in the secret places does
he murder the innocent. He lies in wait secretly as a Lion in his den, he
lies in wait to catch the poor. Such places oppressors and robbers choose.
Such are our Forts held by Malignants, that live on spoil. Others take it for
an allusion to prisons and dark dungeons void of light. As the Prophet
describes a prison. Isa. 42.7.
To bring the prisoners from the prison, and them that sit in darkness, out of
the prisonhouse. So trouble in Scripture is compared to darkness, and
prosperity to light, because darkness is irksome, and light comfortable. Isa.
9.2.
The people that walked in darkness, have seen a great light. And Isa. 50.10.
That walks in darkness, and has no light. And then the sorry hiding
places, whither Gods people went to hide themselves, are here meant. Yet could
they not there be quiet, but were pursued, found out, and spoiled by their
adversaries. Others take dark places for obscure and mean places, as dark men,
in the original are called Prove. 22.29.
mean men in your translation. And then it may either signify that the meanest
men did oppress Gods people: or, that the poorest and meanest of Gods people
were not spared. Such usage have we found in our time, when poor cottages of
our foes have sent out pillagers, and no cottages of ours have escaped spoiling
in diverse places.

(...) Of the earth. So the word is used, Genesis 1.1. In the beginning God
created the Heaven, and the Earth. And thence comes our English word, Earth.
But sometimes it is translated, The Land. As, Jer. 12.4. How long shall the
Land mourn? And so it should be here. For doubtless Gods people did not dwell
all the earth over, to be oppressed every where. But if the place be
interpreted of the Babylonian captivity, hereby is meant the Land of the
Chaldeans; if of Antiochus his time, the Land of Canaan is intended.

(...) Are full It notes out abundance. Many such dens of robbers there were
then, as now with us.

(...) Of the habitations. In the primary signification it imports Shepherds
tents, or cottages, for the land had great store of sheep. Joseph's brethren
were Genesis 47.3.
Shepherds. So was Psalm. 78.70.
David, before he was a King. And from thence it was taken for all manner of
dwellings, as here it is; as the (...) Skel. (...) in text.
Hebrew writers observe.

(...) Of Cruelty. They did not use secret fraud only, but open violence. The
fox is gone, the wolf appears. It is the custo me of the enemies of the
Church, when they are weak, to use glorious pretenses to cover their cruel
intentions, and when they are grown strong, to pull De Juliano Theodoret. Eum
prime (...), Histor. l. 3. cap. 15.
off the vizard, and fall to direct plundering.

The sum of all is, as if the Psalmist should have said; Lord, I have many
arguments to urge, to persuade thee to deliver thy people out of their great
afflictions: But especially I entreat thee to look upon thy Covenant made with
our Fathers, and accordingly to deliver their Posterity. This Iurge the more,
because thy people are throughout the Land oppressed grievously by thine and
their enemies.

Out of the words thus cleared, easily arise these four Observations useful
for these times, and fit for this occasion:

God is in Covenant with his people; Else would they not press it, and God
might easily reject their plea.

God seems to his people to neglect his Covenant, when they are oppressed by
ungodly men; Else would they not have called upon God to have respect unto his
Covenant: and in the first verse, God is charged to have cast them off for ever.

The Covenant is the Churches surest plea; Therefore is it here, and often in
other places urged.

We have most need to plead Gods Covenant in times of greatest trouble; So
Gods Servants do here.

For the First: God is in Covenant with his people.

I might bring many Texts out of the Old and New Testament to prove it, if it
were not notoriously known. A few places therefore may serve: Psalm. 50.5.
Gather my Saints together unto me, says God by Asaph, those that have made a
Covenant with me by Sacrifice. And by the Prophet Ezekiel Ezekiel. 16.8.
I swear unto thee, and entered into a Covevant with thee, says the Lord God,
and thou becamest mine. As much is said for Christians in the New Testament, as
for Jews in the old, Mat. 26.28
This is the blood of the New Testament, says our blessed Savior, or of the
New Covenant. For (...) in the New Testament answers to (...) in the Old, as
the learned know. And so it is translated in the Epistle to the Hebrews, and
the point likewise proved, where Christ is said to be Heb. 8.6.
a Mediator of a better Covenant. And God is said Heb. 8.8, 9, 10.
to make a new Covenant with us: which is there set out at large.

I shall endeavor to confirm it by Arguments:

Romans 4.11.
The seal of Circumcision is put to it to confirm it, Genesis 17.7. The Covenant
is set dowue, That God will be Abraham's God, and the God of his seed. And at
the eleventh verse Circumcision is required as a token of the Covenant between
God and them. The Passover is added as another Seal of the Covenant, Exodus
12.13. where under that one promise of delivering their children, when the
first borne of the Egyptians should be destroyed, all other benefits of the
Covenant made in Christ are shadowed out. Therefore is Christ called our
Passover. 1 Cor. 5.7.
For Christ our Passover is sacrificed for us, says the Apostle. In the New
Testament this Covenant is declared, Matthew. 28.20. we must do all that Christ
commands, and he will be with us to the end of the world. And Baptism is
added as a seal of this Covenant, in the verse before. The Lords Supper is
added as a further confirmation of this Covenant, 1 Cor. 11.25. This cup is the
New Testament, or Covenant in my blood: That is to say, it is the seal of it.
What Covenant can be more full and formal then this between God, and his
people, which is so plainly declared, and plentifully sealed?

Jer. 30.22. Deuteronomy. 26.26, 27, 28.
Ye shall be my people, and I will be your God. We confess that we are
Gods; and challenge him for ours. Psalm 95.7.
He is our God, and we are the people of his pasture, and the sheep of his
hand. And who can deny that Covenant that both parties acknowledge? what need
any further witnesses?

Mal. 1.6. If I be a Master, where is my fear? And our Savior says to his
Disciples, Ioh. 13.13
Ye call me Master, and Lord, and ye say well. for so I am. And every one of
us must confess with David, Psalm. 116.16.
Oh Lord, truly I am thy servant, I am thy servant and theson of thy handmaid.

An adopting father is in Vide adoptionis formulam apud Romanos Gell. noct.
Attic. l 5. c. 19
Covenant with an adopted child. Hence the Chaldee word (...) a son may be
taken from (...) to choose. God adopts us for his children, and makes us to be
so. Christ dyed for us, Gal. 4.5.
That we might receive the adoption of sons. God ownes us for such. 2 Cor.
6.18
I will be a Father unto you, and ye shall be my sons and daughters, says
the Lord Almighty. The husband and wife enter into a solemn Covenant one with
the other. It is called a Covenant of God, Prove. 2.17. God bids his people call
him Ishi my husband, Hos. 2.16. and confesses himself married to us, Jer.
3.14. A King and his people are in Covenant. He is to rule them in the fear
of God, and they are to obey him according to the laws of the Kingdom. God is
our King, Psalm. 149.2
Let the children of Zion be joyful in their King. And we may say with Gods
people. Psalm. 28.9.
Save thy people, and bless thine inheritance. By all these titles, the
Covenant between God and his Church is abundantly proved, and fully confirmed.

Egypt, and do they groan in their Spirits by reason of an heavy bondage? God
will come down and deliver them. Exodus 2.24, 25.
God heard their groaning, and God remembered his Covenant with Abraham, with
Isaac, and with Jacob. And God looked upon the children of Israel, and God had
respect unto them. Does Senacherih besiege Jerusalem, affright Gods people, and
threaten utter destruction to them? 2 King. 19.35.
God will send an Angel to destroy his host in a night. Do the Reubenites, and
Gadites, and half Tribe of Manasseh set up a new Altar, as if they went to
worship another God? Josh. 22.
Gods people will expostulate with them, and maintain Gods honor against them
by war if there had been cause. Do the men of Gibeah dishonor God by
abusing the Levites wife to death, and do the Benjamites uphold them in it?
Judge. 20.
Gods people will not give over, till they have welnigh rooted them all out,
though many of themselves dyed in the quarrel. This mutual upholding of the
peoples safety and Gods honor, is a real proof of the Covenant. And so much
for the first point.

The second Observation was this:

God seems to his people to neglect his Covenant,when they are oppressed by
ungodly men.

So Asaph complains. After an acknowledgement that God was the shepherd of
Israel, and so in Covenant with his people, and accordingly had wonderfully
brought them out of Egypt, and made them flourish marvellously in the land of
Canaan, he attributes their miseries to Gods neglect. Psalm. 80.12
Why have thou then broken down her hedges, so that all they which pass by the
way, do pluck her? So Ethan the Ezrahite, having mentioned Gods firm Covenant
made with David, afterward charge God, Psalm. 89.39
Thou have made void the Covenant of thy servant: thou have profaned his
crown, by casting it to the ground.

Many reasons may be given of this unkind carriage of Gods people to him. As,

Luke 22.64
The men that held Christ, blinde-fold him, then smite him on the face, and bid
him Prophecy who smote him. Such is our condition, when affliction blindes us,
that we cannot tell, who smote us, unless we could prophecy.

Adams and Eves children. When Eve had eaten of the forbidden fruit, she Adam
se excusare voluit de muliere, mulier se excusare voluit de Serpente Aug. Hom.
12. Excusare peccatum voluit, vir per mulierem, mulier per serpentem, Greg.
Mor. l. 22. c. 13. Oblique Adam Dominum tangit, quasi ipse peccati sui author
entiterit, qui mulierem fecit: Et Eva culpam ad Dominum refert, qui serpentem
in Paradiso posuit, Greg. ibid. Et ibid. l. 4. c. 23. Excessus sui vitium in
autorem latenter in torquet, q. d tu occasionem delinquendi praebuisti, qui
mulierem dedisti. Ita Creator hinc blasphematur, dum enim vult excusari se in
eo, quod fecit home, Deum accusat, a quo factus est homo. Aug. ubi supra.
tacitly lays the fault upon God. Genesis 3.13.
The Serpent beguiled me, and I did eat. Had thou not made a subtle
Serpent, I had not broken thy Commandment. Adam lays it openly upon God. Genesis
3.12.
The woman whom thou gave to be with me, she gave me of the tree, and I
did eat. Had thou not give me such a companion to betray me, I had been
innocent. So we their posterity, when trouble is upon us, suspect Gods
breaking Covenant, rather then our own. (...). Arrian. Epict. l. 3. c. 19.
Thus our nurses beat the stone, when children stumble through their own
neglect.





The Covenant is the Churches surest plea.

This was Solomon's strongest argument in his solemn mayer at the Dedication of
the Temple. 2 Chronicles. 6.14.
O Lord God of Israel, there is no God like thee, in the heaven, nor in the
earth, which keep Covenant. This was Nehemiahs. Neh. 1.5.
I beseech thee, O Lord God of Heaven, the great and terrible God, that keeps
Covenant. This was the Levites argument. Neh. 9.32.
Now therefore our God, the great, the mighty, and the terrible God, who
keep Covenant.

For the Covenant gives Gods people interest.

with him. Our adversaries may do us much wrong, and such as no Magistrates
can right. Gods justice can do it. But with what face can we come to God for
justice, if we be not in Covenant with him? Many times our consciences will
threaten hell to us. But God is the God of Truth, who has appointed salvation
for us, if we be in Covenant with him. That which is said of Gods mercy,
Psalm. 89.28
that he will never take it away from those that are in Covenant with him, is
true of his power, wisdom, and the rest of the forenamed attributes. So in
leagues here, defensive, and offensive, one parties power and wisdom supply
the others folly and weakness.

1 Timothy 4.8.
Godliness is profitable unto all things, having the promise of the life that
now is, and of that which is to come.

Hos. 2.18.
In that day will I make a covenant for them with the beasts of the field, and
with the fowls of the Heaven, and with the creeping things of the ground. In
men, Prove. 16.7.
When a man's ways please the Lord, he makes even his enemies to be at peace
with him. In Angels, Psalm. 91.11, 12.
He shall give his Angels charge over thee, to keep thee in all thy ways.
They shall hear thee up in their hands: lest thou dash thy foot against a
stone. Heb 114.
And all Gods Angels are sent forth to minister for the heirs of salvation.
(...). Romulus. Dionys. Halic l. 2. Vxor rethumanae atque divinae sccia
suscipitur. Modestin in Reg. jur. Digest. l. 23. tit. 2. l. 1. Et Gordian l. 9.
tit. 23. l. 4.
A Wife by the covenant of Marriage has an interest not only in all her
husbands personal abilities, and the promises made to her in Marriage, but also
in his servants and cattle. So have Gods people in all his good creatures by
virtue of the Covenant.

Fourthly, they which are in Covenant with God, have a right in all Gods
provisions. In temporal, as meat, apparel, Physic, and the like. In
spiritual ones, as in the outward Ordinances, the Word, Prayer, Sacraments; In
inward graces, as Faith, Hope, Charity, etc. These are the Jewels that Christ
adornes his spouse withal. Yea, these have a right to eternal glory, and
shall receive it in soul when they dye, and in body at the resurrection. See
the largeness of our Charter. 1 Cor. 3.21, 22, 23.
All things are yours, whether Paul, or Apollo, or Cephas, or the world, or
life, or death, or things present, or things to come, all are yours. And the
reason and ground of all, and of their interest in all, is, (...). Clem.
Protrept.
Because they are Christ's, and Christ is Gods.

Paul boasts of it, and glories in it. Romans 8.38, 39.
I am persuaded, that neither death, nor life, nor Angels, nor Principalities,
nor Powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor
any other creature, shall be able to separate us from the love of God, which
is in Christ Jesus our Lord. He teaches us to vilify as well the might as
malice of any creature whatsoever, when we (...). Soerat. in Platon. Apol.
Epict. Enchir. c. 79. and Disfert. l. 1. c. 29. and l. 3. c. 23. Clem. Strom.
l. 4. Theodor. Therap. l. 8. Plut. de Tranq. Max. Diss. 2.
are in Covenant with God. Romans 8.21. Si Deus pro nobis, nisi qui Deum vincit,
non laedit nos. Aug. de Verb. Apost. 16. and Beda in Romans 8.
If God be for us, who can be against us? Let the world, let the devil rage,
they cannot hurt us.

Joh. 16.33
In the world ye shall have tribulation, but be of good cheen, I have
overcome the world. Nay, we have interest in his victories. We are not able
to overcome our spiritual enemies by our piety, nor by our patience, nor by
our obedience, nor by our zeal, but by our Faith in Christ. 1 John 5.4.
Whosoever is born of God overcommeth the world, and this is the victory, that
overcommeth the world, even our Faith.

We have most need to plead Gods Covenant in times of greatest trouble. This
has been the practice of Gods Saints. David pleads it for himself, when he
was in deep afflictions. Psalm. 119.49, 50.
Remember the word unto thy servant: upon which thou have caused me to hope.
This is my comfort in my affliction: for thy word has quickened me. Moses
pleads it for the children of Israel, when God was so incensed against them,
that he threatened to consume them. Exodus 32.13.
Remember Abraham, Isaac, and Israel thy servants, to whom thou swarest by
thine own self, and said unto them, I will multiply your seed, as the stars
of heaven: and all this land, that I have spoken of, will I give unto your
seed, and they shall inherit it for ever.

This is the fittest time to plead Gods Covenant.



Jehoshaphat, We know not what to do, but our eyes are upon thee. 2 Chronicles.
20.12. And what have we most need to plead then? Gods Covenant.

Israel was in Egypt. And then our eyes must be fixed on the Covenant.

Have respect unto the Covenant.

The grounds being laid, I proceed to Application.

Isa. 44.1, 2.
chosen and choice ones. When men choose, and choose for themselves, especially
for some excellent use, they set an high price upon the things they choose. As
when a man chooses a wife to appropriate to himself. So are we chosen by God
Psalm. 135.4.
for himself, and for no mean use, but to be his peculiar treasure. It cost
him Deuteronomy. 4.34
many signs and wonders to bring his people out of Egypt. A thing which he
never assaid to do for any other people. These are the Amos 3.2.
only people that God knows upon the face of the earth. Other people he
cannot be ignorant of, although he acknowledge none for his own people, but
his Church. These are Mal. 3.17
his Jewels. They have daily converse with God in public, and private in his
Ordinances. A freedom denied to other Nations. They live in Gods Court; others
in rude and remote places of the Country. Jer. 38.5. Ester 5.6.
These have the Kings ear ready to grant their requests. Others may ask, and
go without. These are that people, that must Number. 23.9.
dwell alone, and not be reckoned among the Nations. I conclude this Use, as
David concludes, Psalm. 144. Happy is that people, that is in such a case, yea,
happy is that people, whose God is their Lord.

Psalm. 73.28.
drawing near to God. And how can we draw nearer to God, then by a Covenant?
It Sicut non potest quicquam ignis appropinquatione fierifrigi dissimum; ita
non potest homo, qui solus haeret Deo beatissimo, miserrimus fieri. Marsil.
Ficin. Florent. de Relig. Christ. l. 4.
were strange that a man should catch cold by drawing near to the fire. It
were no less strange that a man should become miserable by cleaving to God,
who is most happy. Gods people may be 2 Cor. 6.9.
Persecuted, but not forsaken; cast down, but not destroyed. Why should we
distrust Gods Covenant, when the heathen had so much confidence in (...).
Xenoph. in Agesil. c. 29.
Agesilaus, that they trusted more to his Oath, and covenant, then they did to
their own friendship, and when they would not put themselves into one another
hands, they would commit themselves to his custody? The Chaldees call a
covenant (...). a firm, a stable thing. So is Gods Covenant like the Laws of
the Dan. 6.15.
Medes and Persians, that could not be altered. It brings safety then to
those, that are within it.

Psalm. 146.3, 4.
put their trust in Princes, and in the sons of men, in whom there is no hope,
that perish themselves, and all their thoughts with them. But Gods people may
look for what an infinite God has promised to do for them, to make them
eternally happy, and is able to perform. And what is there in heaven or earth
that this God cannot bestow upon them? Courtiers that see the riches of the
Court, expect great preferments from the Kings whom they serve. What good may
not Gods people expect from God, who is Lord of all that their eyes behold,
their ears can hear of, or their hearts can imagine, and has prepared much
more then all this for his people? 1 Cor. 2.9.
Eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered into the heart of man,
the things which God has prepared for them that love him.

(...). Ille apud Plut. de Tranquil.
when they should in their miseries complain of themselves, and acknowledge
Gods Justice, complain of God, as if he had broken covenant with them. They
deal with God as Jacob did with his children: Genesis 43.6.
Wherefore dealt ye so ill with me, as to tell the man, whether ye had yet a
brother? He blames them for telling truth, when they were examined, but does
not acknowledge his own fondness, that for the present could have been content,
that himself and all his should perish for famine, and Simeon his Son lie in
prison in Egypt, rather then he would part with Benjamin for a little while.
So do Gods people in their troubles bury their own faults, and lay all the
blame on God, who is altogether blameless. Psalm. 60.3.
Thou, say they, have showed thy people hard things; thou have made us to drink
the wine of astonishment. Whereas they should have said, we have broken the
Covenant made with our God, and therefore thou have justly suffered the enemies
to prevail against us, and to bring us to a very low and sad condition.

Psalm. 27.20
when Father and Mother forsake us. This will do us good, when all our friends
are dead and gone. Isa. 63.16.
Doubtless thou art our Father, though Abraham be ignorant of us, and Israel
acknowledge us not: thou, O Lord, art our Father, and Redeemer, thy Name is
from everlasting. Luke 15.21
The prodigal, when all had forsaken him, had nothing to plead, but the name
of Father. Servet us blasphemously calls this pleading of Gods Covenant,
Ineptum and stultum lusion, quod suas Deo promissienes inter precandum
objicimus. Calr. in Text.
an unfit and foolish sport, that we offer Gods promises to him, when we
pray. But Gods people have accounted Gods promises to be their surest bulwark,
and his Covenant their greatest strength, when they have come to plead with
their God. If there be nothing in us, that can move God to pity us, there is
enough in the Covenant, if it be pleaded in faith and sincerity.

Edgehill, and the Victory near York; and then by putting valor and courage
into the hearts of the remainder of the Soldiers to get the Victory, showing
us what our God could do. And in the Victories since, by that Model so much
despised, he has taught us to see the hand of God manifestly in the battles
fought by men. We must therefore say, Psalm. 115.1.
Not unto us Lord, not unto us, but unto thy name be the glory: for thy mercy,
and for thy truths sake. And we must give the same reason which the Psalmist
does, Psalm. 105.7.
He has remembered his Covenant for ever: the word which he commanded to a
thousand generations.

Si quando nobis prosperi aliquid praeter spem nostram, and meritwn Deus
tribuit, alius ascribit hoc fortunae alius eventui, alius ordinationi ducum,
alius consilio, alius Magistro, alius patroeinio, nullus Deo. Hoc modo opertet
and terris gratius agere, quod fiuges annuas metimus, and vineis quod
vindeniamus, mari quod piscus capimus, silvis quod ligna caedimus, Salv. de
Gub. Dei. l. 7.
the Wisdom of our Senators, the Valor of our Soldiers, the Fidelity of such
as have been faithful in this great Cause; but we slightly praise God or his
Covenant. We scarce afford him our bodily presence in solemn days of
Thankesgiving; but we often leave our hearts behind us, and give God no praise
at all in our own families, or closets, for all the great things God has done
for us. We have cause indeed to bless God for such excellent helps, as he
has raised up for us, and to give them their due commendation among the sons
of men; but if our confidence, or our praises rest on them, God will make us
smart for it, as sometimes he has done. It was a sad forerunner of the King
of Swedens death, when not long before his end he said, that Swedish
Intelligencer.
God would take him away, because the people trusted too much in him. It is not
Gods, but our unfaithfulness, that brings losses upon us. Miramur si nobis
coelestis manus aliqua non praestet, qui quicquid praestiterit, derogamus Salv
de gub. Dei. l. 7.
Do we wonder, says Salvian, if Gods heavenly hand give us not some things
that we would have, who derogate from him the praise of all the good that he
has done for us?

Jer. 14.21.
Do not abborre us for thy Names sake, do not disgrace the throne of thy
glory: remember, break not thy Covenant with us. Gods Covenant pleaded, was
ever accounted the Saints Sanctuary to fly to in such dangerous times. Their
greatest hope of deliverance was in this, that God was theirs by Covenant. Our
prayers can have no other solid foundation. Great need there is for godly men
to lay claim to Gods Covenant, when all places are like dens of thieves, and
robbers, and oppression reigns every where. How many such have we left yet in
this Kingdom, although God has graciously delivered up many of them to our
Forces, and given the spoilers to the spoil? Therefore we had yet need to cry
out this day with Asaph, Have respect unto the Covenant, for the dark places of
the Land are full of the habitations of cruelty.

Psalm. 78.10.37.
They kept not the Covenant of God; their heart was not right with him, neither
were they steadfast in his Covenant. A lazy servant cannot look for wages,
though it be part of his Masters Covenant. One compares a Covenant to a Lute,
in which Si una chorda defuerit, perfectus caeteris sonus esse poterit Hiero.
in Psalm. 97.
if one string be out of tune, all the music is marred. Judge. 16.17, etc.
When Sampson brake his vow, and cut his hair, with his hair he lost Gods
protection, and was taken and basely abused by the Philistines. We have all of
us lately entered into a Solemn Covenant with God, to reform our own souls and
lives, and according to our callings and abilities to further the Reformation
of three Kingdoms. Oh that we would smite upon our breasts this day, and
bewail our failings! Then might we with comfort and courage plead Gods
Covenant with us, and expect safety from it.

Azariah the Son of Oded, to Asa, and Judah, and Benjamin. 2 Chronicles. 15.2.
The Lord is with you, while ye are with him: and if ye seek him, he will
be found of you: but if ye forsake him, he will forsake you. Many things are
objected to discourage us from keeping our late, solemn, and religious Covenant.

1 Pet. 2.13
to submit to the King as supreme. As if the power of every King were of that
extent, and so absolute, that whatsoever they command, must be obeyed, by
doing or suffering.

interpreted our Laws in things doubtful, and punished the greatest Officers
of the Kingdom for mis-interpreting them? Why do not our Kings sit in
Judgment in their own persons, but must have sworn Judges to do Justice, not
only between Subject and Subject, but also between King and Subject? Why do
not our Kings as David and Solomon did, when an offender appears worthy of
death, never try him by a Judge, nor execute him by a Sheriff, but say to one
standing by, 2 Samuel 1.15 and 4.12. 1 Kin. 2.25.40.
Go and fall on him and kill him?

Examples therefore of an unlimited Monarchy, are not applyable to the
Government of such States, as by the fundamental Laws have set bounds, and
fixed limits. If two Feoffees be entrusted with the estate of a dying man for
the good of his Children, and one of them, by bad counsel misled, seeks his
own dignity most, and the other the childrens good, which of these two should a
creditour pay debts to? Are our Kings only betrusted with our Religion, Lives,
and Liberties? Does not the Magna Charta put a great trust in our Parliament
also? Have not our Princes, guided by Courtiers, and Church Parasites,
countenanced Monopolies and Innovations? Have not our Parliaments stood up for
our lawful Liberties? Why should we not then stand to them to the utmost of
our Estates and Lives, according to our Covenant? If it be granted that a
power abused, may not be resisted, who doubts but a power never granted by God
nor man may? If a Father take a rod to correct the Child, though it be
sharp, the Child may bear it, but if he take a sword to kill the Child, he
may defend himself, because God has given no such power to Parents. Who gave
this power to our Kings to raise an Army against the Parliament, to keep
Malefactors from deserved punishments, to arm Papists against Protestants, to
bring the barbarous Irish into this and the Neighbor Kingdoms, to cut our
throats? Is this power of God, or from men? If neither, we may justly resist
it, and defend our selves, and our lawful Privileges.

Videantur Tertul. Apolog. c. 37. Cyprian, Ep. 1. ad Cornel. Roman. and ad
Demetr. Ambros. in ep. ad Sor. and in Concione ad Pop.
that they had power enough to resist them, but would not do it. They would
rather suffer Martyrdom.



Secondly, that when those Christians had gotten Constantine to assist them,
who had a share in the government, then they fought for their Religion, and
Liberties against the other Emperors. So may we having authority from our
Parliament, who have a great part in the Government of this Kingdom, by
Covenant defend our selves against the personal command of Princes.



Rab. Aquiba. in Bethneeman.
A Jewish Writer furnishes me with a feigned similitude fit for this purpose.
The Fox going by the River side, espies the Fishes leaping up above the Water.
Heedemands the reason. They tell him, there were nets laid in the water to
catch them. He bids them come to the shore then, where there were no nets. Nay
say the Fishes, if we cannot live quietly in our own element, how shall we
live when we are out of it? If we now be scarce able to subsist for troubles
and charges, while we stand up to defend our Liberties, what shall we do,
when we have given them all away? Did our Fathers purchase them with so much
charge and blood, that we should lose them?

To persuade you further to be firm in your Covenant, consider I pray you the
ancient form of making Covenants. It is said to be a cutting of a Covenant.
Genesis 15.18
In that day the Lord Heb. (...) Cut.
made a covenant with Abraham. Abraham in likelihood not only Genesis 15.11 12.
went, but slept between the parts of the birds and beasts divided. God went
between them Genesis 15.17
in a smoking furnace, and burning lamp. We read Jer 34.18
of a Calfe cut in pieces when the people made a Covenant with God. And the
Chaldee Paraphrast reads in the Text, The covenant which thou have (...)
cut with our Fathers. An allusion to the custom of making of Covenants then
among men. They swear first to keep the Covenant made: Then both parties went
between the parts of some beast divided, as wishing, that they which brake the
Covenant, might be so divided as that beast was. Something like is that in
Livy, Livius 1. Decad. l: 100.
The Priest struck down a Hog with a flint stone, saying; Sic feriatur a
Jove, qui faedus hoc sanctum fregerit.
So let him be smitten down by God, who shall break this holy Covenant. So
that by your Covenant ye do imprecate Gods wrath upon you, if ye break it.
But if ye keep it, it will keep you. Plin. l. 16. c. 40. Cedrus and juniperus,
si oleo ungas, nec tineam sentiunt, nec cariem.
Pliny reports, that the Cedar, and the Juniper, if ye anoint them with oil,
escape the moth and rottenness. If ye be anointed with the oil of Gods
Spirit, and thereby enabled to keep Covenant with God, ye will be
established. I have been the larger in this use, that I might satisfy men's
Consciences, and raise up their spirits to observe so solemn a Covenant.

(...), Aristct. Polit. l. 5. c. 11. (...), Agapet. Justin.
Set up piety in your own persons: You are more honored by God then others,
and should be eminent examples of piety to others. Ye owe more to God then
meaner persons do. If a Parliament man should be a drunkard, or a swearer, or
an adulterer, how much hurt would his example do? Ye have enjoined this
Covenant of personal and national reformation to others. O let not the people
say, ye are like the Pharisees, Mat. 23.4.
who lay heavy burdens on other men's shoulders, but will not touch them with
the least of your fingers. I speak not this, as if I knew any such among you,
but out of my respect to your honor, and reputation. Abundant cautela non
nocet. Reg. jur.
Much wariness does no harm. Set up piety also in your Families. Let Gods name
be daily called upon in them, let Gods Word be read there, let your children
be taught the grounds of Religion, that they may be Gods children also, and
God may give you comfort in them.

Babylon, wherein in time of deformation, they either found or might have
found, the womb of the new birth, and the breasts of true consolation, and
have we not yet need of a government? Have we lived to see our dearest
children deprived of their best birthright, denied the seals of Gods Covenant,
and brought below the degree of a Jew, and have we not yet need of a
government? Have we lived to see our duty to God as our Creator, and
subjection to his Law, which will bind us in heaven, abrogated on earth, under
color of a new band of Redemption, which frees not from the former, but rather
binds more strongly, and have we not yet need of a Government? Have we lived
to see our Savior Christ spoiled of his Deity, who in his humanity suffered a
cruel, and accursed death for us, and have we not yet need of a government?
Have we lived to see liberty of all Religions pleaded for in Print, as a
privilege procured by Christ, that the Heathen, the Mohammedan; the Jew, the
Papist, might dishonor Christ by authority, and have we not yet need of a
settled Church Government amongst us? Where are now those golden reins of
Discipline, which in your public Declaration, ye said long since, ye would
not let go? What odds between the bit out of the horses mouth, and the bridle
out of the riders hand? Ye stand up for Region and Religion. Ye know well
that the Kingdom, nor the Armies by sea or by Land, cannot subsist without
Discipline. And can the Church of God subsist without it? I know ye have had
many impediments. The real ones are in your element, the verbal in mine.



to them, if any man, when I have done this carefully, could undertake to
answer for me, as a Pastor, at the day of judgment. But will this course
make our Ministry either profitable or comfortable? I doubt, wise and godly
men will think no. This way I believe will not hold water. Let us try it a
little by those titles that are given Gods Ministers in Gods Word, and see, if
they carry no more with them, then the former opinion holds out. Are we Gods
Ephesians. 4.12, 13.
builders, to be employed till the Church come to perfection; and have we no
more to do, but to tell the stones, where they should lie? Is this building?
Are we Gods 1 Cor. 4.1.
Stewards, and have we no more to do, then to break the bread of life to the
household in due season? Is there not some rule in a Steward in the Masters
absence? See Matthew. 24.45. Stewards have not only the keys of the storehouse,
but also of the house committed to them. We have the key of Baptism committed
to us to let heathen into the Church of God, if they turn Christians, and have
we not the key of Excommunication to shut out Christians, if they turn heathen
in their lives and conversations? will our key unlock only, and not lock the
door? Are we 1 Pet. 5.2.
Pastors, that must take the oversight of the flock, as well as feed it, and
have we no Authority over our sheep at all? Are we Elders, not always by age,
(for some eminent Ministers have been so young, that their 1 Timothy 4.12
youth has been likely to be contemned) but in Office, and have we no
Authority? Nay, are we ruling Elders, and have we no rule? I never yet read
any learned man that interpreted that place, 1 Timothy 5.17. of Civil
Magistrates, or that doubted whether Ministers were in the number of the Rulers
there mentioned, when the Apostle notes them out with a (...), especially they
that labor in the Word and Doctrine. Although some learned men have doubted,
whether any others were included there. Are they Heb. 13.7.
which speak the Word of God to us, to have rule over us, and yet no Authority?
The Apostle requires Heb. 13.17
not only (...).
obedience to such in things necessary, but also (...).
submission in things of indifferency, that they may go on with comfort in
their Ministry, and give a cheerful account at the last. And if we do it
not, he tells us, it will be unprofitable for us. Is there any authoritative
relation between the Minister and the people, by virtue of the fifth
Commandment? If there be, sure it carries some rule with it. Is a Minister as
a Master of the family, a Ruler in his own house? Then is he as a Minister, a
Ruler in Gods house. See 1 Timothy 3.5. Prescription of sixteen hundred years will
ask much and sure proof to void it. A lesser time has proved a strong title
in our Law. How ordinary were excommunications in the primitive times? How much
abused? How easy had it been for the Asian Bishops to have answered Victor,
that there was no such censure as excommunication? But this string was not
harped upon till of late years. This opinion of denying of all
Church Government distinct from Civil, as it crosses all the Churches of the
primitive times, which did exercise such a Government among themselves; so it
crosses all the Protestant Churches at this time, both Presbyterian, and
Independent. Must I then be a Minister, only to tell the people from God,
what they ought to do, and if they do it not, stand aloof off, and cry God
help? Must I be forced to receive such as visible members of my flock, that
are not fit to be of any Christian Congregation? It were better for me to
follow Man's plough then Gods, upon these terms. Sure I shall never be able to
give that cheerful account of my Ministry forementioned out of Heb. 3.17.

Let no man object to me the Sanhedrin, which was but one Court, and that a
Civil one too, or at least had no distinction between Civil, and
Ecclesiastical power, yet is A brotherly examination re-examined, Page 16.
affirmed for certain to be the Government of the best Reformed Church, that
ever was. For surely the Sanhedrin will be no fit pattern for Government in a
Christian state. For,

First, it appears not that they had any Legislative power, but only a power
to judge according to Gods judicial Laws, or at the most, but to interpret
them in doubtful things.

Secondly, Priests and Levites did ordinarily judge in that Court among others.

Thirdly, though in (...) money matters others might judge, yet in (...)
matters of life and death none might judge but Priests and Levites, and those
Israelites, who might give a daughter to a Priest in Marriage, which was a
privilege of some persons of great rank, specified in the Sanhedr. c. 4. s. 2.
Talmud.

Fourthly, the High Priest might be, yea, and was ordinarily the speaker, or
chief Judge in that highest Court, as appears in the Scriptures, Job.
18.13.19. Act. 23.2.4. and out of the Talmud, which testifies, that (...)
Sanhedr. c. 2. s. 2.
the King never came there to judge, nor to be judged: (...) Sanhe. c. 2. s. 1.
But the High Priest did both. And who fitter to be the chief in the absence
of the King, then Gods High Priest? I am not ignorant, that they speak of a
(...) or Prince of the Sanhedrin, who they say might be any of the Sanhedrin,
that was eldest, but (...) Sanh. c. 3. s. 7.
the greatest among the Judges, may be the great Priest spoken of before, as
well as the eldest Judge, as some translate it. How ere, it is confessed that
the High Priest might be he. And if there were any other Prince of that
Court, it is very likely he was the Highpriests Deputy in his absence, or one
of later stamp. This Government might well fit them that were ruled by Gods
judicial Laws, and had one whole Tribe, the Tribe of Levi, for the Ministry
in one Kingdom, and might need the High Priest to ask advise of God,
sometimes in an extraordinary way. But this cannot fit Christian Churches, that
have more store of people, less of Ministers ordinarily, and no such
extraordinary way to inquire of God. I do not press this as if I conceived a
Minister without an Eldership, or it without consent of the Christian
Magistrate, might set up a Government, but I believe the Christian Magistrate
ought to see one set up.



Elizabeth's Reign,he might have proved a strong advocate for Popery, and an
opposite to Reformation. His Arguments, if they be of any weight, run all that
way. He might have told the Queen, that she ought not to make any change in
Religion; no not so much as to give the poor Protestants a toleration of the
public exercise of their Religion: Much less to establish it by Authority.
For her people were very ignorant yet, and had need of many years teaching.
They knew not which was the true Religion, neither could she find Preaching
Ministers enough for a quarter of the Congregations in the Kingdom. Yet that
good Queen of famous memory, thought it her duty to make that happy change; and
we have cause to bless God, that she did it. This Writer takes it for
granted, that our Parishionall Assemblies are no true visible Churches. Have
our worthy David's for above fourscore years defended them to be such, against
the Goliaths of Rome, and our faithful Nehemiahs maintained them for such,
against the Sanballats of Amsterdam, and are they not yet fit for a Government?
If our people be not fit to govern, they had need to be governed. In Corinth
were some that had not the knowledge of God, others that denied the
Resurrection, others that made rents, others guilty of fornication, yet there
was a government there. If we stay till all places be fit for Government in
this Authors sense, we may stay till the Church need no government at all. As
our Writers tell the Popish Commenters on the Revelation, (who to avoid the
Popes being Antichrist, and not being able to deny Rome to be Babylon, make
heathen Rome the Beast, and Antichrist the Whore that should ride on him, not
to come till near the end of the world) that the horse is gone long before the
rider come: So may we say this Writer builds Castles in the air, and will
afford us no Church Rulers till the Church need none. Yet no doubt there are
many Congregations in this Kingdom that can afford good Elders to rule, and
good people to be ruled. And the rest may well be trained up in knowledge and
piety, under a Classical Presbytery, till they be fit for a Congregationall.

Jure, divino, of Gods institution. The strict Independents say as much of
theirs. Neither of which appears to our Governors out of Scripture. Therefore
it is safest to set up none till that controversy be determined.

Boaz had it done in Bethlehem, Ruth 4.2. or whether I must do it in the
chief City of the Kingdom, as the Sanbedrin did at Jerusalem. Ye would think
this no good Answer; but rather say, God requires Justice should be done. He
ties us not to this place or that. Therefore it must be done where it may be
done most conveniently. If no Jus divinum appear to you of a particular form
of Church Government, yet seeing it is clear out of Scripture that there be
Church Rulers, and Church censures, God expects, that you should set up such a
form, as coming within the general rules of Scripture, conduces most to the
propagation of piety, and conservation of unity in the Church.





First, if ye be not convinced in your Consciences, of a Divine right for any
one particular form, then the Covenant, and your solemn Oath, will go a
great way with you. For ye swear to settle the Church Government, according
to the rule of Gods Word, and the example of the best reformed Churches. Not
that we are the servants of other Churches, but to maintain love among the
reformed Churches, we are willing to come as near them as may be, so we
infringe not the privileges of our own Kingdom, which may and ought to be
maintained. Viam qui nescit qua deveniat ad mare, eum oportet amnem quaerere
comitem sibi, Plaut. Pers.
He that knows not the way to the sea, had need take a River for a companion.
It is easy to discern which way the Government of other reformed Churches
goes. Look also to your own government in the State, which in such a case ye
may lawfully do. Would ye be content that every Town should have a court in
it self not depending upon any higher court, but for matter of counsel, nor
subject to any higher sentence? Why should it be thought to do well then in
the Church? unless God have commanded it; and then indeed all inconveniences
must lie down at his feet. Look upon the courses ye take in your families.
Do fathers only give counsel to children and servants, and then leave them
to themselves? Lycurgus, when one desired him to set up a popular government in
the City, bid him (...). Plutarch. (...).
first set it up in his own house. Last of all all I beseech you like skillful
Physicians feel the pulse of the times. Consider what diseases now reign in
the Church, ignorance, schism, profaneness, dangerous errors, and apply
such a Government to them, as may soonest cure them.

I beseech you bear with me. I have not spoken the words of passion and
bitterness, but God knows I have spoken the words offorrow and heaviness
occasioned by our sad distractions for want of a settled government in our
Church, for which I doubt not but your godly souls condole with me. I think
no Church on earth wants a settled Government but ours. Is it not then time to
speak? Isa. 62.1.
For Sions sake I cannot hold my peace, and for Jerusiems sake I cannot rest,
till the righteousness thereof go forth as nightnesse, and the salvation
thereof as a lamp that burns. I hope no man will be so uncharitable as to
conceive that I have spoken these things to lay the least aspersion upon the
Honorable Houses of Parliament, to whose care, as singular Instruments blessed
of God we owe our present helps, and future hopes of reformation.

Had not you stood up in the gap, our Bethel by this time might have been a
Babel, or Hos. 4.15. and 5.8 and 10.5. Vid. Chald. Par. Shel. Iar. Dan Qimchi.
Bethaven, our Religion Idolatry, our Liberty slavery. We and our posterity
have cause to bless God to the worlds end for raising up, and upholding such a
Parliament as this, and to say: Ruth. 2.12
The Lord recompense your work, and a full reward be given you of the Lord God
of Israel, under whose wings ye are come together (...) trust. I know ye may
say of England, Scetland, and Ireland, as the Apostle said of all the Churches.
2 Cor. 11.28, 29.
The care of three Kingdoms comes upon you daily. Who is weak, and ye are not
weak? who is offended, and ye burn not? It is a greater labor to build up one
house, then to pull down ten. What is it then to settle the Church and
Commonwealth in three Kingdoms, that have been many years unsetling? I entreat
you that ye would take my words only as incitations to a quick setting up of a
needful government in a dangerous time. Will ye know first that Egypt is
destroyed? will ye stay till we have not the face of a Church, before ye give
us the government of a Church? will ye not apply the remedy, till the disease
be lacurable? The God of Heaven, and King of the Church, give you wislome and
courage in a liberal measure, and all good encouragements to make a swift
progress in so glorious a work; and he that honored you to be the beginners,
make you the finishers of an happy Reformation, Amen.

FINIS.

