A true Copy of a Letter of special consequence from Rotetrdam in Holland,
subscribed by several credible hands; and sent to a Citizen of good note in
London: being very considerable to be taken notice of by all the well-affected
throughout the whole Kingdom; but especially by the City of London.
SIR
THe Ships we advised you of in our former Letter lie ready with Ammunition for
the Queen, and it is not yet certainly known whither they are bound; we fear
the report of the good success of the Parliaments Forces in the North, may
make them go for the West: and so it is here supposed there is great need of
Ships to be ranging about the Seas to attend this bloody Fleet. There is one
Peacock that has in him 1200. Barrels of powder, 4000. Pikes, 1400. Grenades
and much chaine-shot, 3600 Muskets, besides store of Carbines and 4000.
pistols; two other Ships are hired of about two hundred Tun apeece to carry
Ammunition, Wagons, Morters, Soldiers, and some thousands of Saddles, all
which we desire you to advise the Parliament of; also many Horses are provided:
the Prince gave the Queen since her return from Sea by the storm twenty
four fair Horses, and supplies her to his utmost: also sixteen Ships we
hear with eight thousand Soldiers are ready to sail from Denmark, from
whence most of the Moneys for these goods is made over to Mr. Webster of
Amsterdam. The Queen has provided Ammunition for sixteen thousand Men: she
has procured an Act from the States, that all her Baggage and Ammunition
should be shipped without visiting by any Searcher; yea, that none should come
aboard to examine after the goods, of what nature and quality soever they are,
all which are past by the States Act, without one penny of Custom: a Copy of
which Act we have procured under a publious Notaries hand. We hear also there
are sixteen thousand Muskets, with thousands of pistolls come to Dunkerk out
of Lukeland for the Queen: but our hope is that God (who has so mightily
appeared in blasting this Design by water, raising his storms to the
confusion of many of them) will still go on to perfect his Work: which is the
hearty desire of your friends to serve you.

LONDON, Imprinted for Henry Overton, and are to be sold at his Shop in
Pope's Head Alley, MDCXLII. the 20. day of the second Month.


