A TRUE DESCRIPTION OF THE BIRTH, EDVcation, Life and Death OF William Ward,

ALIAS Walker, alias Waller, alias Slaughter, who was borne in Cumberland, and
executed at Tyburne the 26, of July 1641.

With his Confession at the place of Execution.

LONDON, Printed by T. H. for Francis Coules in the Old Bailey, 1641.

A true Description of the birth, education, life, and death of William Ward,
Who was executed at Tyburne the 26. of July 1641.
It Is generally observed that where God bestows the best gifts, there, for the
most part the worst use is made of them: There is seldom any virtue that is
not attended on, if not over-luld by some vice. God bestows on some wit,
learning, knowledge, wisdom, valor, and many more heavenly gifts in a more
ample manner then on others, who being left over to themselves, these graces
tend rather to their ruin and destruction, then to their comfort here and
eternal salvation hereafter, as many examples in these present times
sufficiently testify. I could speak of the Earl of Strafford, who was endued
with more then ordinary virtues, and yet that first and damned sin Ambition
did so overweigh his good parts in the scales of Justice, that it rendered him
odious and contemptible to three Kingdoms, cut off his life untimely, branded
him with the just name of Traitor, and corrupted the blood of his innocent
posterity: but it would be needless to instance in any other examples then of
this Jesuit, whose birth, education, life, and death was as hereafter is
expressed.

He was the son to one Master Robert Ward, a gentleman of good repute, who
lived in Cumberland, and though a younger brother, and borne to small fortunes,
he matched with a rich widow, who had a jointure of some hundred pounds per
annum, on whom he begot this William Ward, who until he was fourteen years
of age he was educated in the best Schools of Religion and Learning that that
Country afforded, where he profited exceedingly, and surpassed (if credit may
be given to common report) his friends expectations. He was no sooner
fourteen years of age but he was more able and fit to instruct then to
learn of his Country Schoolmaster; whereupon, his Father seeing him so
capable and industrious withal, sent him to be further edoctrinated in a very
famous School at Leeds in Yorkshire, where he remained until he was
eighteen year of age, by which time he perfectly attained the Latin and
Greek tongues, and could discourse as familiarly in them as in his native
tongu. His Father being sensible of his admirable ingenuity was very desirous
to make him a Scholar, and he affecting no course of life but that, was sent
to Oxford, and there admitted a Student of Brazen-nose College, where he
continued for the space of seven years, during which time he was generally
accounted the ablest Disputant that College contained: His fallacies would
seem real Syllogismes, and like a true Sophister would wind his arguments
which way he pleased, to the astonishment of his antagonists: In which time
his Father and Mother both dyed, so that he was then destitute of means to
maintain him any longer at the University: whereupon he was forced to seek his
fortunes; and then repaired to London, where he remained in expectation of some
preferment for the space of half a year, in which time all his means was
spent, and he no way advantaged his fortunes. That then by accident he
happened into the company of one Master Dutton a welsh gentleman, who was to
travel into Spain only for pleasure sake, and to see the fashions of those
Countries, and promised to bear the charges of him the said William Ward, if
he would go over with him; which profer was most gladly accepted of.

That the said William Ward all his life time until he came acquainted with
the said Master Dutton was conformable to the Church of England, and a very
good Protestant. But the said Master Dutton being a Roman C^tholick (though at
first unknown to the said William Ward) in the space of seven years converted
him from a good member and supporter of the Church to be a demolisher of the
same. He that before could withstand and oppose the arguments of his
adversaries, is now confuted with an erroneous reason. In brief, he is a most
idolatrous Papist, an adorer of Saints and Angels, and a most supersticious
worshipper of the Lord in, at, and before Images.

Afterward he returned into England and came to London, where (as he confessed)
he lodged at a Priests house in Saint Giles in the fields, where finding cold
entertainment, thought it his best course to repair to the Papists Sanctuary
Rome, and then was admitted into the Popes presence, who approving his learning
and his jelous affectation of idolatry, bestows preferments and all the
degrees upon him belonging to a Jesuit, and finding him a fit member for his
purpose, sends him again into England, to seduce Protestants to his
Antichristian Religion, promises him rewards for his sedulity and diligence,
dispensations and pardons, for any sin how heinous soever.

He is now returned into England, he lodged sometimes in Coventgarden, in
Bowstreet, and resorted much to all places where there was a general concurse
of people and discourses with them as he found occasion, he would not lose the
least opportunity, but would sound the affections of people, and learn how
they were inclined, and accordingly he would fit his discourse.

By these means he seduced many, and constantly every month changed his name,
lodging and habit, so that it was almost impossible to take him tardy in his
dangerous enterprises; but the quick eye of the blessed Parliament, that like
the sun sends it luster through the least cranie, and with its vigilance
finds out things intended for obscurity, amongst other enormities espies this
catterpiller, whereupon he was according to Law of this land accused and
convicted of high treason, and found guilty of these and many more illegal
courses tending wholly to the ruin of religion, and the prejudice of the
common Wealth, which would be too tedious to relate in this small volume,
wherefore I refer you to his examination and confession.

For which offenses he was executed at Tiburne the six and twentieth day of
July 1641. in this manner, first he was hanged upon the tree, and when he was
half dead his body was ripped, and his heart, his bowels and privy members were
thrown into the fire, with a general acclamation God save the King, and then
his limbs were severed from his body, and order given to be hanged upon the
City gates, to the everlasting glory of God, joy of good Christians, and shame
and confusion of that bloody and superstitious sect of Rome.

The true confession of the said Ward at Tiburne.
HE standing in the cart with the rope about his neck, was desired to confess
and lay open his confession, and he then confessed he had been a Priest these
twenty and four years, and that he would die in that religion, and that he
should be canonized for a Martyr, and he h^ld it a meritorious act of
salvation to seduce people, which he had done all the time he had been a
Priest

And they desiring him to mention some particular people he had seduced, and
the means he used to seduce them; confessed that when he lay in Cursitors
Alley he seduced a man's wife, and endeavored to seduce her husband, who he
found very tract^ble, but so unconstant, that he thought he was of all
religions, and being desired to tell their names he would not by any means.

He confessed likewise that he was an intelligencer of the French of all the
news happening here in England; and withal solemnly protested, that if his
enlargement were offered him on the condition to turn Protestant he would not
accept of it; for he was sure of s^lvation through his own merits, and that he
saw the blessed Virgin in heaven interceding for him.

His confession being ended, he drew out of his pocket a long wallet purse,
wherein was great store of money; and called a particular person to him, unto
whom he gave the same, and gave him a charge to dispose of it according to his
former directions.

The hangman hearing him blaspheme so, bade drive on the cart: the Jesuit
crossed himself, and loudly invocated on the Virgin Mary, until his breath
was stopped.

FINIS.

