THE TRVE Effigies of our most Illustrious Sovereign LORD, KING CHARLES QVEENE
MARY, With the rest of the Royal Progeny.

Also a Compendium or Abstract of their most famous Geneologies and Pedegrees,
Expressed in Prose and Verse.

With the Times and Places, of their Births.

Printed at London for John Sweeting, at the sign of the Angel in Pope's Head
Alley. 1641.

Carolus Rex.
THis shadow is the brief Epitomie
Of Ancient, Royal, true borne Majesty,
Our Noble Charles, his Geneologie brings
From Portugales, Castiles, and Navarrs Kings,
Spain, Arragon, France, Bohem, Lombardie,
Granado, Denmark, Norway, Tuscanie,
Stout Sweathland, Poland, and Hungaria
Brave Austria, Naples and Sicillia,
Gallicia, Wales, Britain, Vallentia;
Fair England, Scotland, Ireland, Belgia,
From Germans Empire (West) and the Empire East,
From seaventy Caesar's he derives (at least
His Royal pedigree, and from their stemms
He Is sprung (the glory of their Diadems.)
Eight hundred Kings, and Emperors (and more)
Of all those Kingdoms that are named before,
From all their Royal bloods, that wore those Crowns,
And swayed those Scepters, (to their high Renownes)
King Charles is sprung, (by lineall true descent)
Their offsprings grace, their virtues ornament.)
Nine Kings of France, of Charles his name there were,
And each of them did several Titles bear,
As Charles the 1 Great, The 2 Greatest, The 3 Beloved,
The 4 Learned, The 5 Wise, The 6 Valiant (well approved)
The 7 Noble, The 8 Victorious, and the 9 Good.
By these distinctions it is understood,
How these brave Princes, all were quallified,
And in Fames Book Enrol'd, and dignified.
But our King Charles has all these in his breast,
He Is Great, Learned, Wise, Beloved, Good, and BEST.
King Charles his pedigree is derived from 20 Kings of Castile, 30 K. of Leon.
18 K. of Portugale, 20 K of Aragon, 6 K. of Spain, 42 K. of France 70
Emperors, 25 K. of Nables, 21 K of Bohemia, 40 Kings of Denmark 25 K. of
Norway, 12 K. of Lomb^rdie, 37 K. of Hungaria 38 K. of Sweaden, 31 K. of
Poland. 34 K. of Navarre, besides from the Kings of Sicillia, Gallacia,
Vallencia, with the Principality and Dukedomes of Austria, Savoy, Wales,
Britain, the 7 Electors of Germany, with many Lords of Belgia, (or the
Neatherlands,) and lastly from 50 K. of England, and 108 K. of Scotland King
Charles does derive his Royal Pedigree. Besides innumerable Families of
Princes, Dukes, Marquesses, and Earls, who have ^ineall relation of
Consanguinity with his Royal person in the most parts of the dominions and
Kingdoms of Christendom. He was borne at Dumfi^^^ling in Scotland, 19 of
Novem. 1600. whose prosperous Reign, God long continue amongst us.

portrait of Charles I Charles by the grace of God King of England Scotland
France and Ireland defendor of the faith etc.


Maria Regina.
WIthin the substance of this figure here
The Graces and the Virtue do shine clear:
The Godesses, the Muses, all agree
That in her breast their Residence must be,
From Juna, her Majestique Mind she gained,
From Citherea, Beauty she attained:
Minerva (Pallas) has inspired her Heart
With Courage, in Regarding Arms and Art.
Appollo, with his radient Rays Divine
Incli'nd her favor to the Sisters Nine;
And for a Blessing to this Happy Land
She Is largely Graced, by The Almighty's Hand
To be a fruitful Vine, whose Branches may
Spread Gloriously, as far as Phoebus Rale.
In Goodness, Greatness, and in true content
May She, and They be Supereminent.
portrait of Henrietta Maria, Queen of Charles I Henrietta Maria by the Grace
of God Queen of England Scotland France and Ireland etc.


Carolus Princeps.
FElix is Happy, and on Felix day
This Prince was born the twenty ninth of May 1630.
A Hopeful Branch of Happiness to Come
To us, and all disjoynted Christendom;
Whose fruitful Boughs, may flourish and Extend
To shelter Justice, and true Faith defend.
So Wise, Grave, Aged, he in Youth appears,
As if his Age had twice out stripped his Years:
The Abstract of Admired Majesty,
Rich Cabbinet of Royal modesty
Possessing. It is blessed Parents forms and faces,
Heir to their Crowns, their virtues and their Graces.
The valliant Black-Prince, that brave man of men,
Made France shake, and survived years five times ten
And may our High-borne Charles, as long remain
Great Britains Honor, and beloved Reign.
This Noble and hopeful Prince was borne on the 29 day of May, 1630. between
the hours of 10 and 11, it being Saturday And in the Almanac it is called
Faelix His birth was at S. James House near Charing Cross. His Godfathers
were Lewis the 13 the French King (now Reigning) and the other was the Prince
Pallatine. The Godmother was the Queen mother of France: their Deputies there
was, James Duke of Lenox (for the French King.) And James Marquest of Hamilton
(for the Palsgrave) And for the Queen mother (the Durches of Richmond and
Lenox was Deputy

portrait of Prince Charles (the future Charles II) Charles by the grace of God
Prince of Wales Duke of Corn well York and Albany borne May 29 1630


Maria Princess.
FOr outward Beauty, and for Grace within
This Princess is the Admired Magazin.
And though her Greatness, is from High borne blood,
Pure virtue, is her best and greatest good;
Mild, Modest, Assable, Beloved, and Loving,
Discreet, and Debonaire, Attractive, moving
True Honor, Duty, Service and Respect
From goodmen, who true goodness do Affect.
(Above the spanne of nine years Pilgrimage)
She is a pattern for her Sex and Age:
The Model, Medull, perfect form and name
Of Her Grandmother, (that most Princely Dame.)
And as she grows in years, Her virtues store
Like unexhausted Treasure, still grows more.
And could my Humble Muse speak half her praise,
My Verse would thousand years out live my days.
portrait of Princess Mary of Orange (daughter of Charles I) THE TRVE
PORTRAICTVRE OF THE HIGH-BORNE Princess* Mary Princess of Orange (...) married
at White Hall London 23 May 1641 borne ye 4 Nou(...)31


Jacobus Dux Eboracensus
THis Prince (much like another Sun) darts forth
Most gracious beams to's Dukedom and the North:
And makes us see with eyes of Expectation
He Will be a mighty Pillar to this Nation.
A stay of State, the weak supporting Proppe,
Whose fame will scale the height of Honors Top.
He hates dull idleness, and loves to be
In Action, such as fits his High degree:
He will be stirring in such Exercise
As well becomes his years, and qualities.
Surely, The Eternal Eye of Providence
Does watch, direct, and guard this Hopeful Prince
For some designs as may be for Heaven's Glory,
And fill the Earth with James his Noble Story.
This all true Britains, do expect in Love,
In hope our wishes are confirmed ABOVE.
The Duke dome of York was but an Earldom in the reign of K. Henry the
second, whose daughter Mauld was mother to Otho the fourth Emperor of Germany,
to which Otho, K. Richard the first was Uncle, and he gave to the said
Emperor (his Kinsman) the Earldom of York, Anno 1189. Edmund of Langley was
fifth Son to K. Edward the third, and first Duke of York, 1351. Edmund
Plantagenet, was after his father Edmunds decease the second Duke of York, he
was flaine at the Barraile of Agincourt, 25 October 1414. Rich. Plantagenet 3
Duke of York, slain at the Battle of Wakefield, 1460.

Richard of Shrewsbury, second Son to K. Edward the 4, was the fourth Duke of
York, and murdered by command of his cruel Uncle K. Ric. the thrird. Henry
second Son to K. Henry the seventh, was created the fifth Duke of York, he was
afterward K. Henry the 8. Charles second Son to K. James, was (by his father)
created the 6 Duke of York, on Twelf day, 1604. he was after Prince of Wales,
3 November. 1616. He is now our gracious King, and long may he continue so in all
prosperity. James now ^^ving, the third son of K. Charles, being 7 years of
age, is the seave^^^ Duke of York this year 1641,

portrait of Prince James, Duke of York (the future James II) THE HIGH BORNE
PRINCE JAMES DVKE OF YORK. borne October -- the 13. 1633.
Sold by Tho: Ienner af the South Entry of the Exchange.



Elizabeth Princess.
HEre is the Grace of Natures Workmanship
Wherein her self, her self she did outstrip:
And were the Muses all in one combined
They could not Blazon her Heroicke mind
Perfections Masterpiece, Arts wonderment
Heavens Darling, and great Britains Ornament
Elizabeth the Fair, the Rare, the Great
In Birth and Blood, and virtues full repleate,
An high prized Jewel, an unvallued Jem
(Of more worth than a Kingly Diadem)
If Heaven be pleased such blessings to bestow
That grace may grow as she in years do grow,
Her name and fame may curb the power of Rome
And freely spread Gods word through Christendom.
Meanetime let us rest in hope, through Heavens High hand,
This Princess shall add Blessings to this Land.
(...) portrait of Lady Anna (infant daughter of Charles I) Ladey Anna Died the
8th of December-1640
The Purtrature of the high borne Princes the Lady Anna. borne in the mounth of
March 17 in the year of our Lord 1636

sold by Tho: Jenner at the Royal Exchange. 1640.



Henry Duke of Gloucester. borne, July. 8. 1640.
KIng Charles (by Proclamation) did command
A Fast t'avert Gods judgments from this Land
His zealous Royal self did lead the way,
In true Humility to Fast and Pray:
And presently Gods gracious Excellence
Vouchsafed to give us loving Audience;
For note th'acceptance Deigned from Heaven above
(Whom King and People did in Prayers move)
That such a Blessing did from thence return,
That presently this sweet young Prince was borne,
Upon that Fasting day, HE was our Feast
Of Hopeful joy, a good presage of Rest,
Our Fast and Prayers (though weak, yet up they went)
And God was pleased, and this blessed Token sent,
Long may HE live, (directed by Gods grace)
Joy to HIS Parents and their numerous Race.
Henry of Oatelands (the place of his birth) Duke of Gloucester, 4. Son to K.
Charles, was borne on the day of the General Fast, Wednesday, 8. July, 1640.
In the reign of K. Henry the first, Gloucester was an Earldom, and the first
Earl was Robert surnamed the Consul of Gloucester. He was half brother to
Maud the Empress, and Son to Henry the 1. The second Earl of Gloucester was
William, son to the foresaid Earl Robert, this William was also Earl of
Glamorgan; The third Earl was John, 4. Son of K. Henry the 2. who after was K.
John. Almericke Mountford was 4. Earl of Gloucester. Geffrey de Mandevile was
5. Earl. Gilbert de Clare, 6. Earl of Gloucester and Hertford, Richard de
Clare 7. Earl. Gilbert de Clare (second of that name) was 8. Earl of
Gloucester. Ralph de Mount hermer, 9. Earl, Gilbert de Clare (third of that
name) and 10. Earl of Gloucester. Hugh Audley 11 Earl. Thom. of Woodstocke 6.
Son of K. Edward 3. was the first Duke of Gloucester, created in the 9 year of
K. Richard 3. After that Tho. Lord Spencer was the 12 Earl, beheaded at
Bristoll in th(...) Richard 2. Anno 1400. Humphrey 4. Son of K. Henry 4, was
second Duke of Gloucester, he was called the good Duke Humphrey, he was
murdered a^ Bury Alby, and buried (not in St. Paul's as is fabled, but) at St.
Albones. Richard 3 Duke of Gloucester, was brother to King Edward the fourth.

portrait of Prince Henry, Duke of Gloucester (son of Charles I) Charles Prince
of Great Britain, borne, baptized, and Buried. May 13, 1629
IN HONOR CARO: PRINC: MAG BRIFRA: ET HIBERN NULLI HAC TENUS ANGLORUM What does
Kingdoms happifie,
But a bles't Posterity?
THIS, this Realm, Earths Goshen fair
Europes Garden, makes most rare
Whose most royal Princely Stem
(To adorn their Diadem,)
Two sweet May-Flowers did produce
Sprung from Rose and Flower-de-Luce
The most hopeful and high borne Prince, Henry Duke of Gloucester who was borne
at Otlandes the eight of July. Anno. 1640.

Sold by Tho: Tenner at the South entry of the Exchange.



Upon the Life, Death, and Burial of Prince Charles, the first borne Son of
our most gracious King and Queen, who was borne on the 13 of May, 1629. and
dyed the same day: Buried at Westminster.
Sweet Royal Budde that had no time to bloome,
Snatched (in one day) from's cradle, to his tomb,
He (on this mortal Stage) scarce saw the light
Before Death laid his Corpse in endless night.
His meanest part of Earth, the earth contains,
His blessed Spirit in lasting Glory reigns.
God was most gracious to this hopeful Prince,
Before he knew this world, to take him hence:
He, to a transitory Crown was Heir,
Has got a Crown immortal for his share.
For earths vain hope, He real heaven possessed,
And freed from worldly Crosses, ever Blessed.
FINIS.

