TRUE INTELLIGENCE FROM THE WEST: OR A true Relation of the desperate
Proceedings of the Rebels, and Cavaliers gathered together at Angry-Fisherten
in WILT-SHEIRE.

WITH Their Barbarous cruelty exercised on the Minister, his Wife and Child.

ALSO The manner of their falling upon some party of the PARLIAMENT forces,
some of them departing wounded.

Written by a Gentleman of good quallity in the said to was, and Published for
satisfaction of all those that desire true information.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Tempes^ 1647.

AN EXACT RELATION OF The barbarous Proceedings, of the Rebels in WILT-SHERE.
MAny are the Enemies of this Kingdom, who have continually been plotting and
contriving mische(...) against this Real ^e; Yet has it pleased God in the
midst of all their treachery to frustrate their designs. And as they have been
so do they still persist in their wicked and barbourous cruelties, as may
plainly appear by this ensuing relation.

On Sunday last, certain Soldiers by the appointment of the Honorable
Committee of Parliament, with a Warrant under their hands, went to the Church
of Angry-Fisherton, and demanding the Person of Kent then officiating with
their Masse-Booke; where being assembled a great number of active Cavaliers,
their present answer was given in a most outrageous manner with stones and
Brick-bats about the Soldiers ears; who by way of entreaty, d^sired that
wretched rabble to keep their seats, and no hurt should in the least be done
unto them; but they in an insulting manner would not desist.

Whereupon the Soldiers being constrained for their own safety, drew their
swords in their defense, hurting some of the most notorious active varlers, who
being much more incensed the whole multitude in a most violent manner fell upon
them, and iambling the bells to call more of that bloody minded crew, (who
coming in an instant well Armed) they were constrained to retrea^e out of the
Town.

After this, the violent multitud of these wicked varlots, in a violent manner
being still more greedy (as a Lion) of their prey, with cruel rage ran down
to the House of their aged Minister, (who then performing those duties to God
which he could not be Permitted to exercise in that Church, brake open his
doors rushing in with drawn swords, most barborously, and in cruel manner
wounding him, on the head in two or three several places to the terror of all
honest people that were in and about that Town.

They likewise strok down his wife and daughter most furiously ru^ing at on
with their weapon who through Gods great mercy escaped their cruel rage; then
throwing the grave minister with his aged wife down the stairs they (...)ed
them out of doors possessing themselves of what he had: and making themselves
merry with what they found in his house.

This was no sooner performed but they began to barricado both ends of the
Parish very strongly with timber being provided with arms and Ammunition
sufficient for so (...) (...)petent time to withstand a considerable party they
being certain that they should have a sufficient supply to joy^^ with them in
this their design, (if occasion required) out of their neigbou^ City.

A while after the Soldiers being gathered together, and drawing themselves up
in a body* faced them in the field ^^ a good space* and perceiving that they
could not for the present draw them forth out of their strengths, they wheeled
about and ma^ched home ward (...) there way.

No sooner was this performed by this rebellious tumult but still they
proceeded forward in this their barbarous design, for certain of these
murderous Rebbels seeing which way these Sould^ers retreated, crossing over
some Meddowes by a neere^ ^ath* ^ay in A(...)cadoe where they were to pass and
in most bloody manner, furiously discharging upon (...) they (...) one of the
Souldier^ in his Leg* which much ^ they departed back again peaceably to
their own quarters.

Thus have you this sad relation of these bloody minded Cannibals who most
inhumanly gloryed in this their wicked design which I doubt not but will be
repayed to some of them ^^ justice at this next Assizes, to which and the
Gallows I leave them, for example to their posterity that shall come after
them.

These things if they be not taken into consideration, are like to bring this
Kingdom into a sad condition except some speedy course be taken for the timely
preventing thereof; and that such Offenders may be brought to trial and
punished according to their deserts.

FINIS.

