A true Copy of the ARTICLES A greed on at the surrender of EXETER; Examined,
perused, and signed by his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, With a punctual
Relation of the setlement and condition of that City by his Excellency.

The particulars at large of the further gallant proceedings of his
Excellencies Army in the West, their daily motions and advance for Oxford.

The surrender of St. Michaels mount, with the Conditions agreed on.

30 pieces of Ordnance. 3 Murdering pieces. 100 barrels of Powder. 500 Muskets.
100 Pik^s. 80 Tonne of Wine. And store of other Provisions taken there.
The Treaty for the surrender of Pendenis and Dunster Castle.

Commanded to be forthwith printed and published by the Original Papers by
order of Parliament.

London, Printed f^^ F. Goles in the Old Bailey. 1646.

Tudor rose Scottish thistle French fleur-de-lis depiction of Irish harp
SIR,
I Received yours this day, and return you many thanks for your full
intelligence, therein; our's here (you see) daily abates, as well as our
action: what you will have now will be little more then a bare relation of our
motion; nor can more be expected till we come into the Midland parts; and too I
hope our work will be but short: The General has sent Col. Ceelys Regiment of
foot, part of Col. Roles Regiment, and a party commanded by Lieut. col. Croaker
(1500 in all) to assist in the blocking up of Pendennis and the Mount, and two
of the three Regiments there will be drawn away Eastward with the General:
Col. Hamond is appointed Governor of this city; and three of the country
Regiments for the easing of the country reduced and placed in the Garrison a
complete Regiment for the Governor. Those reduced were: col. Fryes, col.
Shapcots, and col. Wears Regiments. Tomorrow the General will advance hence
toward Chard, and intends a Rendezvous the 23 instant at Salisbury. There were
in this city and in the castle about 30 pieces of Ordnance, and 150. Barrels of
Powder, with great store of other Ammunition: I have sent you enclosed the copy
of the Articles, which had come to you before, but that I was enjoined the
contrary, I hope they will be satisfactory now; and were perused and signed as
you may see) with his Excellencies own hand, Sir, I remain.

Yours obliged to serve you, W. C.
Exeter, April 18. 1646. 3. in the morning
SIR,
THe Messenger staying, I can now give you this further Account; Yesterday the
General came from Exeter to Chard, and this day we Marched to Darchester: This
Morning there came Letters from Col. Hamond of the surrender of St. Michaels
Mount in Cornwall on Thrusday Morning last: Sir Arthur Bassett was Governor,
and he and the rest of the citizens to go to Silley: There were taken therein
30 pieces of Ordinance, 3 murdering pieces, 100 barrels of Powder, 500 muskets,
100 Pikes, 80 Tun of Wine, store of other provisions; The next day he intended
to summon Pendennis, and I hope you will shortly have a good account thereof,
Col. Rowses Regiment of 600 were come then to Truro, so that Col. Ingoldsby and
Col. Hamond will come to the General.

Chard April 19, 1646. Sir,
I shall add one word more, that since the writing of the last, intelligence
is come that Pendennis is upon Treaty, and likewise Dunster Castle.

W. C.



Articles of Agreement concluded upon by Thomas Hamond Lieutenant General of
the Ordinance, Col. Sir Hardresse Waller, Col. Edward Harley, Col. Lambert,
Commissary General Stane, and Major Watson Sccui-Master General,
Commissioners on the behalf of the right Honorable His Excellency Sir Thomas
Fairfax, General of the Parliaments forces, on the one party: and Sir Henry
Berkeley, Sir. Geo. Parry,Col. Ashburnham, Col. Godolphin, Captain
Fitzgerald, Mr. Jo. Wear, M. Robert Walker and M. Tho. Knot, Commissioners on
the behalf of Sir John Berkeley Knight, Governor of the City of Exceter, on
the other party, touching and concerning the Rendition of the said City and
Garrison as follows:

I. THat the City and Garrison of Exceter, together with the Castle, and all
Forts, and Mounts, places of defense, of, or belonging to the same; with all
Ordnance, Arms, and Ammunition, Provisions, and furniture of War belonging to
the Garrison (excepting what shall be excepted in the ensuing Articles) shall be
delivered unto Sir Thomas Fairfax General of the Parliaments forces, or to any
whom he shall appoint to receive them for the use of the Parliament, on Monday
next after the date hereof being the thirteenth of this instant April by 12 of
the Clock at noon.

II That if any Officer, Soldier, or any Person included in these Articles,
wrong, or plunder in Person or Goods (in their March away or before) any
Citizen or Countryman or any Person whatsoever, shall as far as he is able
give satisfaction to the Persons so injured at the Judgment of his Excellency,
Sir Thot Fairefax.

III That if any Officer, Soldier, or any Person (included in these Articles)
shall after the Date hereof Wilfully, Break Deface, Spoil or imbeazle any
Arms or other Provisions of War whatsoever by the precedent Articles to be
surrendered as aforesaid shall lose the benefit of the ensuing Articles.

IV That the Princess, Henrietta, and her Governesse, with her Household, shall
have full liberty to pass with their Plate, Moneys and Goods, within 20. days
after the Conclusion of this Treaty, (when she shall desire) to any place
within the continent of England or Dominion of Wales, at the Election of the
Governesse, and there to remain until His Majesty's Pleasure be further known
touching her settling, and that the Governesse shall have liberty to send to the
King, to know His Pleasure herein, accordingly to dispose of Her Highness
within the aforesaid limitation of Places, and that sit and convenient
Carriages be provided for their Passage, at reasonable Rates

V That the Cathedral Church, nor any other Church within the City shall be
defaced, or any thing belonging thereunto spoiled or taken away by any Soldier
or Person of either side whatsoever.

VI. That the Governor together with all Lords, Clergimen, Gentlemen,
Captains, Officers, Troopers and common Soldiers, shall march out of the City
on Monday next the thirteenth of April by 12 of the clock at noone, with their
Horses, full Arms, Bag and Baggage, and their Goods, Colors flying, Drums
beating, Matches lighted, Bullets, full Bandaliers with sufficient convoyes
unto Oxford, or unto Helston in Cornwall at their several elections, and in
case the Governor of Oxford shall refuse to receive the common Soldiers that
shall march thither, they are there to deliver up their Arms to the convoy,
and have passes to repair unto their several homes, and those that march unto
Helston are there to be disbanded, and to have passes to their several homes.
That all Troopers and common Soldiers which march not as aforesaid shall
deliver up their Arms except their Swords, and have liberty to go unto their
own homes with bag and baggage, and shall not be compelled to take up Arms
against the King, provided also that all Officers and Gentlemen that shall
choose to go to Oxford and not taking up Arms, shall repair into the
Parliaments quarters within 40 days after the date hereof, and shall enjoy the
benefit of these Articles.

VII. That all those, which shall march to the Garrisons aforesaid, shall have
free quarter in their march, and not be obliged to march above ten miles a
day, and that such other Soldiers as are Inhabibitants in the City, shall
receive free liberty to march out, or remain therein, without being compelled
to take up Arms against the King: And if any Soldiers fall sick upon their
march that convenient Catriages and Accomodations shall be provided for them.

VIII. That all Lords, Gentlemen, Clergymen, Chaplains, and Officers, that
shall choose to go beyond Seas, shall march away with their full Arms for
their own use; And that all common Soldiers shall match away with their full
A^ with a sufficient Convoy unto the Port which they shall choose for their
transportation: Which Arms, they shall there lay down, and deliver unto the
Governor of the next Garrison belonging to the Parliament, the said Governor,
providing for their safety during the time of their abode their, where they
shall be assisted for the procuring Vesseils and shipping for their
transportation at the accustomed Rates, and shall have free Quarter for twenty
one days allowed, to provide for their passage. After which time shall be
expired, the same Officers and Soldiers paying for their Quarters, shall have
liberty to stay until shipping be provided, and weather seasonable; and that
during their stay; or before, it shall be permitted; That any two of them may
go to London, to treat with any Forrame Ambassador or Agent, for a Commission
to be entertained beyond the Seas.

IX. That neither the Officers, Soldiers, nor any person whatsoever, in their
going out of the City shall be reproached, or have any disgraceful speeches,
or affront offered unto unto them, or any of their persons, wronged, rifled,
searched, or their goods seized, or taken away from by any person whatsoever.

X. That the Governor, Lords, Gentlemen, Clergymen Chaplains, Commanders,
Officers, and Soldiers, comprised in these Articles, shall be allowed and
assisted in providing of sufficient Carriages at reasonable Rates to carry away
their Bag, Baggage and Goods; and that cafe be taken by the future Governor
of the said City, for the curing of such sick or wounded Officers and
Soldiers as shall be lest in the City, and that upon recovery, they shall
have Passes to repair to their own houses respectively.

XI. That the Parliament Forces come not into the City until the Kings Forces
be marched out, orcent one hundred and fifty foor, and one Troop, of Horse
with their Officers.

XII. That no Lords, Kingths, Gentlemen, Clergiemen, Chaplains (excepting
those, who are by name excepted by Parliament, from pardon and composition)
Officers, Citizens and Soldiers, and all other persons comprised within these
Articles, shall be questioned or, accountable for any Act past by them done (or
by any other by their procurement relating unto the unhappy differences betwixt
His Majesty and the Parliament they submitting themselves to reasonable and
moderate composition for their Estates, which the General Sir Thomas Fairfax
shall really endeavor with the Parliament, that it shall not exceed two years
value of any man's reail Estate respectively and for personal, according to the
ordinary rule once exceeding the proportion a foresaid, which Composition
being made, they shall have indemnitie for their persons, and enjoy their
Estates and all other imunities, without payment of any fifth or twentieth
part, or any other Taxes or Impositions, except what shall be hereafter charged
upon them in common, with other Subjects of this Kingdom, by Authority of
Parliament.

XIII. That all Lords, Knights, Gentlemen, Clergy, and Chaplains, (excepted in
the precedent Articles) shall have liberty to go unto any of the Kings
Garrisons, and to have a safe Conduct for themselves and servants, to go unto
the Parliament to obtain their Composition for their Estates, and indempnitie
for their persons, which, (though it prove ineffectuall) yet nevertheless they
shall have four months time next after the date of these Articles to
endeavor their peace, or to go beyond the Seas, and shall have passes for
that purpose.

XIV. That all Horses, Arms, Money, and other Goods whatsoever, taken as
lawful prizes of War, before or during the siege now in the City, be
continued in the possession of the present possessors.

XV. That all Officers, Gentlemen, Citizens, Inhabitants, Clergy men,
Chaplains, soldiers, and all other persons within the City, during the time
of their making their Composition, shall have free liberty, either to inhabit
within the same City or shall have free liberty at any time to depart with
their Families, Goods and Estates, unto any part of this Kingdom in the
Parliaments quarters; and before Composion made, the Merchants and Tradesmen
to enjoy their Merchandising and Trades; and after composition made, al others
(now prohibited by Ordinances of Parliament) to enjoy and exercise their
professions, or go beyond the Seas, and they, and every of them, shall have
power to dispose and sell to their own uses, either by themselves or others,
whatsoever part of their Goods or Estates, they shall not carry or convey away
with them: And all Inhabitants, which did Inhabit within the City, within
seven Months past, having made their compositions as abovesaid, shall enjoy
the benefit of this and the 12. and the 22. Articles.

XVI. That all Charters, Customs, Privileges, Franchises, Liberties, Lands,
Estates, Goods, and Debts of the Major, Aldermen, Bayliffe, Commonaltie, as a
Corporation, and all other Corporations of the said City shall be enjoyed by
them, and that the Ancient Government thereof remain as formerly.

XVII. That if any Persons or Inhabitants, which are comprised within these
Articles, shall break any of them; That such Breach shall only touch and
concern such Persons, and they to make such satisfaction for the same as the
cause shall require.

XVIII. That all Persons comprised within these Articles, shall have upon
request a Certificate under the hand of his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax or
the future Governor of the City, that such Persons were in the City at that
time of the surrendering thereof, and are to have the benefit of these Articles.

XIX. That his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax give assurance; That all Officers
and Soldiers in the Parliaments Army, and all others under his Command, shall
duly and exactly observe all Articles aforesaid: And that if they, or any of
them, shall directly or indirectly violate or insringe the same; Upon complaint
thereof, J^ may be done, and reparation made.

XX. That the Inhabitants of the City, shall be cased and freed from all
Free Quarter, or billet of Soldiers, except in cases of urgent necessity,
other then for lodging, and that to be ordered and disposed by the advice of
the Major or his Deputy.

XXI. That no Oath, Covenant, Protestation, or Subscription (relating
thereunto) shall be imposed upon any person whatsoever comprised within these
Articles, but only such as shall bind all persons aforesaid, not to bear
Arms against the Parliament of England, now sitting at Westminster, not
wilfully do any Act prejudicial, unto their Astaires, whilst they remain in
their Quarters: Except the persons aforesaid shall first render themselves unto
the Parliament, who shall cause them to be secured if they think fit.

XXII. That for the further and clearer understanding of the precedent
Articles, it is hereby declared, that the true meaning of them is; That all
persons comprised within these Articles, shall quietly and peaceably enjoy all
their Goods, Debts, and Movables during the space of four Months next
ensuing, and be free from all Oaths, Covenants, and Protestations, and have
liberty within the time of the said four Months in case they shall not make
their composition with the Parliament (and shall be resolved to go beyond
Seas) to dispose of their said Goods, Debts, and Movables allowed by these
Articles, and to depart the Kingdom, if they shall think it, and to have
passes for that purpose, or otherwise to stay in the Kingdom.

XXIII. That Mount Radford, and the Ward in St. Thomas Parish, with the
provisions of War thereunto belonging, be delivered unto his Excellency Sir
Thomas Fairfax, or whom he shall appoint to receive them, in assurance of the
performance of the precedent Articles, to morrow by six of the Clock in the
Afternoon, being the 7. of April, and that four such Gentlemen or Officers as
his Excellence shall approve of, shall be delivered at the same time as
Hostages for the performance of the foregoing Articles on the one part, and
two Hostages, such as Sir John Berkley Knight, Governor of the City of
Exceter shall approve of, and appoint to be received for performance on the
other part.

XXIV. Lastly, that these Articles be ratified and confirmed mutually by his
Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax on the one part, and Sir John Berkley Knight,
Governor of the City on the other part.

I do hereby ratify and confirm the Articles abovesaid, agreed on by the
commissioners on my Part.

April 9, 1646. THO. FAIRFAX.

FINIS.

