view of Plymouth A TRVE MAPP AND DESCRIPTION OF THE Town of Plymouth and the
Fortifications thereof, with the works and approaches of the Enemy, at the
last Seige; Ao 1643.


A True NARRATION Of the most Observable Passages, in and at the late Seige of
PLYMOUTH, from the fifteenth day of September 1643, until the twenty fifth of
December following. Attested from thence under the hands of the most Credible
Persons: Wherein is manifested to the World the handiwork of God, and his
gracious assistance to the United Forces of that Town and Garrison.

Together with an exact Map and Description of the Town and Fortifications
thereof; with the approaches of the Enemy.

As also the Summons of the Cavaliers to the Major and Governor of the said
Town.

And Prince MAURICE his Warrant to the Country since the raising of the Seige.

Imprimatur

JOHN WHITE.

LONDON Printed by L. N. for Francis Eglesfeild, and are to be sold at the
sign of the Marygold in Paul's Churchyard. 1644.

A true Narration of the most observable Passages, in, and at the late Siege of
Plymouth; from the 15 of September, 1643, Until the 25 of December following,
etc.
AFter Colonel Wardlaw, Commander in chief, and Colonel Gould, with the 600
men, shipped at Portsmouth, about the 15 of September, for the relief of this
Town, had stopped in Torbay; and finding Dartmouth besieged, left 100 men there
for the strengthening of that Garrison: we arrived at Plymouth the last of
September; (which Town had been blockt up by horse so that no provisions was
brought in from the Country for six weeks before) and having refreshed our
men, and mounted some 150 of them on horseback, the enemy having only one
regiment of foot (besides their horse) lying before us at their quarter at
Plymstoke, and keeping a constant guard at How, close under Mount Stanford,
consisting of about three hundred foot and a Troop of horse, which fort they
intended first to assault: about nine days after our arrival, the eighth of
October, we put over some three hundred men before day in boats, to Mount
Stanford, and at break of day fell on and surprised the enemies guard at How,
took Captain Slowley, one Ensign, fifty two common soldiers prisoners, two
Colors, and three barrels of powder, and put the rest to flight, with the
loss only of two men of our side: about the same time we secured some
Malignants in the Town, and sent up three of them to the Parliament.

By this time the Enemy had taken Dart mouth, and was on his march with his
whole army, to sit down before us; and we receiving intelligence that the
enemy kept a guard of two Troops of Horse at Knockers-hole, about two miles
from our Works, the fifteenth of October we sallied out with our Horse and two
hundred Musketeers, surprised that guard, and had taken twenty or thirty
prisoners, but about sixteen of our horse pursued the rest that fled so fast,
that their orders for retreat could not overtake them, engaged themselves too
far, and returning laden with prey and prisoners, other Troops of the Enemy
coming from their quarters on Roborrow-Downe, to answer the Alarm, met with
our pursuers and took them all, save only Major Searle charged through them and
escaped, Lieutenant Chasing, with fourteen more, were taken, and after escaped
out of prison, and returned to us, save only two or three.

And now the Enemy being settled in his quarters, at Plympton, Plymstoke,
Causands, Buckland, Tamerton, etc. With an army consisting of five Regiments of
Horse, and nine Regiments of foot, brought over land from Yalme, thirteen
fisher-boats, into Plunket-Mills Bay, over against Prince Rock, with an
intention as we conceived to land men on Cat-downe in the night, which they did
not attempt, but set on Mount Stanford in good earnest: and the twenty one of
October in the night, they raised a square Work within Pistol shot of our Fort
of Stanford, on the North-east side, and from thence were drawing of a Line
with Half Moons to surround the said Fort, thereby to hinder our reliefes
from coming unto it. To prevent which, the same day we fell on the Enemy in
their New Work they had raised, with all the disadvantage on our part that
possibly could be imagined, exposing our open naked bodies to an Enemy within a
strength, and assisted by their Horse, who much anoyed us, we having none of
our Horse to assist us, nor could have, the Sea being between us and them;
after long skirmish and diverse repulses, at last we got their Half Moon, and
after three hours hot fight, their close Work, and in it Captain White, and
fifty other prisoners: in which Work we put a Guard that night of thirty
Musquetires, commanded by an En^igne by whose treachery or cowardice, the Enemy
falling on that night, the said Guard quitted the Work to them, without giving
any Alarm to the Fort, for which he was shot to death shortly after; which
cost us a new labor the next day, with far greater difficulty and danger
then before: the Enemy having of their Horse and Foot ready to second their
guard in their new regained Work, which yet we again made ours, after the
loss on our part of Captain Corbet, who was shot in the Forehead as we fell
on upon their Work, and three other of our Captains were also wounded this day
and the day before; and we had in both fights some twenty men killed, and
above one hundred wounded, of whom many are since recovered. The Enemy lost six
Commanders whose names were concealed from us, and many men, besides those
taken prisoners.

After we had gained the Enemies Work the second time we slighted it: but to
prevent the like approaches, in regard Mount Stanford being a small Work, and
very untenable of it self, much less to keep so large a circuit of grounds
as it was built to defend, we were necessitated to draw a Line of Communication
both on the East and West side of the Work, to maintain a long ridge of
ground, with Half Moons at each end of the Line, which we defended diverse
days with extraordinary duty to our men, and diverse skirmishes with the Enemy,
till the third of November, when the Enemy planted their Batteries within
Pistol shot of our Forts; and on the fifth of November battered our Work with
two hundred Demy-Cannon and whole Culverin shot, besides other smaller Cannon
that continually played on us, and flanked our Line from Osan-Hill, whereby
breach was made in the Fort at several places, and the Lieutenant and some
Gunners of the Fort slain: the breach we repaired in the night, thickning the
Rampart as much as the smallness of our work would admit, and strengthened the
weakest places with Woolsackes; The next day they continued their Battery till
noone, with too much success, yet so as no considerable breach was made that
day: the enemy whither they had intelligence of the want of provisions and
Ammunition in the Fort, about one of the clock fell on with horse and Foot on
our Half-moons and Line, where we had reasonable guard: but tired with eight
days duty and long watching, after an hours skirmish were enforced to retreat
from the Half Moon and Breast work, and were taken by the enemies Horse who
came on the backs of them.

The Captain of the Fort having but seven men of thirty-six left to manage
the Gunnes, seeing himself thus surrounded by the enemy, whereby no relief of
provisions or Ammunition could be brought him from the Town; and upon
examination finding but two barrels of good powder, and a small quantity of
Case shot with him; and no provisions, and having held off the enemy some two
hours, and given a sign to the Town by hanging our a Wift, that he was in
distress, and no relief came; and the Townsmen for some reasons which you
shall hear anon, being unwilling to go over, and Collonell Goulds Regiment
being those that were tired, and put to the retreat, unfit to encounter the
enemies whole army that were fresh and victorious. The Captain yielded the Fort
on composition about four of the clock, upon conditions, that he should march
of with Colors flying, matches lighted, Buller in mouth, and a Demy-Culverin
the best in the work, with bag and baggadge, and that the enemy should
exchange all the prisoners they had taken of ours that day, being about
forty, for the like number of their prisoners with us, which the next day was
effected accordingly; but we are unwilling to let the world know by whose
Treachery, at least neglect, this Fort was lost, for want of convenient
quantities of Ammunition and provision. While the enemy was busy about
Mountstanford, we had begun to raise a work upon Howstart, where our men
retreated after they were beaten from Mount Stanford, which being unfinished,
and the same wearied men enjoined to keep it till the morning (for we had no
other, the Townsmen refusing to give over) possessed with fear of the enemies
Horse quited that place also, which the enemy soon after seized upon, and have
there built a Fort and diverse Batteries to hinder Shipping from coming into the
Harbor, and others to shoot into the Town, and at our windmill on the Hoe. But
notwithstanding they have done no harm to any Ship or boat that has passed in
or out for these two months past, nor has and shot of the many hundreds they
have sent into the Town, from thence, done the least hurt to man, woman, or
child, (except one woman hurt in the arm with a stone) and but little to the
houses, save that they shot off one vane of the Windmill which was presently
new grafted; so that by experience we find, that the loss of Mount-Stanford,
was the wonderful providence and goodness of God toward us, which had we
kept, we must necessarily have lost the best of our strength in the defense of
it, and having lost it, we find small damage by it, our Ships being beaten
out of Catwater before we lost Mountstandford by the enemies Cannon planted at
Osan, and by a Battery under Mount-Edgecombe on the other side, from riding
between the Island and the Main, so that we were feign to take Mill-Baye for
sanctuary: nay rather the loss of that was infinitely advantageous unto us, in
the nearer uniting of our small strength for the defense of the Town, and the
offering an opportunity to us to seize upon the Fort and Island, the most
considerable strengths, in the Kingdom, which then were utterly destitute of
provision, Ammunition, or any thing else necessary for the defense of them, of
which neglect, and the authors of it, account may be given to the Parliament in
due time: for in the very instant of the loss of Mount-Stanford, while all men
stood in doubt of the issue, Colonel Gould by order from Colonel Wardlaw,
Commander in chief, took possession of both those places, and afterward
settled stronger Garrisons with store of provision and Ammunition of all sorts in
the said Fort and Island. The securing whereof, and at the request of the well
affected of the Town, of four deputy Lieutenants in them, of whose
unfaithfulness to the State the Townsmen had great suspicion, we have found
since to have been a most effectual means, under God, to preserve the Town.
For these persons and places being secured and victualled, the Town, which
before was altogether divided and hartlesse in its defense; now grew to be
united with a Resolution to stick by us in the defense thereof, partly our of
fear, knowing that the Fort and Island would be goades in their sid^^, if the
Town should be lost; but especially from their assurance of our real
intention to defend the Town to the last man, by the securing of those four
deputy Lieutenants whom they suspected, and by the many asseverations and
resolutions of the officers, that they would, when they could defend the Town
no longer, burn it to ashes, rather then the enemies of God and his cause
should possess it: which resolution of theirs they confirmed, by joining with
us in a solemn Vow and Covenant for the defense of the Town. A copy whereof
is annexed to the end of this relation.

The Enemy thus possessed of Mount-Stanford, accounting now all to be his own,
sends a Trumpet to us with a Summons, a Coppie whereof also follows at the
end, which was answered by silence.

The same day Mount Stanford was taken, the Enemy made an attempt upon Lypson
work, but were repulse, with loss.

The eleventh of November a party of Horse and Musquetires were commanded out
to Thorne-hill to guard in Wood and Hay; but they transgressed their order, and
pursued some of the enemies Horse to Knockers-hole, killed a Captain and some
common Troopers, and took some prisoners; but staying too long, drew the maine
body of the Enemies horse upon them, and Major Leyton striving to make good
their retreat, was taken in the Rear, after he had received five wounds.

And now the Enemy having refresht his men, and having secured his new gotten
purchase, about the sixteenth of November sits down on the North side of our
Town, we in the mean time being busied in mending up some Hedges that were
formerly pulled down between the Works; the only Line of Communication we
yet have scarce defensible against the stormings of Horse, yet such places we
must now resolve to defend upon equal terms with the Enemy; for the Works
are of such a distance each from other, and the grounds so uneven, that an
enemy may in some places approach within the works, without any molestation by
them.

On the twenty eighth of November the enemy planted his battery against Lypson
work, but could not approach within Musket shot to batter our Work, in
regard of a deep Valley between, by reason whereof, after three days battery
they did little execution on our work.

About this time, one Ellis Carkeet a malignant Mariner was accused and laid
fast, for tampering with Roger Kneebone the chief Gunner at Maudline Work, to
blow up the said work, the powder room being buried in it, and he having the
keys, which was discovered by the said Kneebone, after he had concealed it
diverse days, God not suffering his conscience to give him rest till he had
revealed it. Upon the apprehension of Carkeete, two notorious Malignants, Henry
Pike a Vintner, and Moses Collins an Attorney, conceived to be privy to his
treason, fled to the Enemy. And upon the third of December, being the Lords
day, the enemy (as is credibly informed) guided by these two Renegadoes with
four hundred Musquetires three hours before day, surprised our guard at Lary
point, and in it three pieces of Ordnance. The work is but a Half Moon, and
the guard there placed only to give the Alarm, if the enemy should approach
Lare-Point over the sands when the tide is out. By which means the enemy
coming on under Lipson-worke (being a false varable ground to them by reason
of its steepness,) and coming on the back of our guard, easily surprised it;
the Alarm being given to the Town, and one hundred and fifty Horse and three
hundred Musquetires at break of day ready to fall on upon the Enemy that were
possessed of our work; which the enemy at Mount Stanford perceiving (for we fell
on upon the South side of the hill that was from the enemies view) gave the
maine body of the enemy that was at Compton all in arms, a Warning-piece;
upon which, Prince Maurice and all the gallantry of their army, with five
Regiments of Horse and four of Foot (having in the night made their way with
Pioneers) advanced under protection of their own Ordnance, and a hedge which
they possessed, where we usually had our Centries, and where since we have built
a Work under Lypson, to the assistance of those who in the night had surprised
our guard, we were in hope to have beaten off the enemy before their seconds
came up; and with Horse and Foot falling resolutely on them, met with strong
opposition, and Captain Wansey a gallant man, charging at a gap which formerly
he knew to be open; but now made up by the enemy, was unfortunately slain;
which made our Horse give ground, and both Horse and Foot after to an absolute
Rout for three fields together: at which time some of the enemies Horse mixed
themselves with ours, and came within Pistol shot of the walls and were killed
or taken. When a stand being made upon the height of the Hill above
Lypson-worke, and fresh men being drawn from several guards, our men being
encouraged, we held our ground for four hours. During which time, our ship at
Lare-point, seeing our Guard there taken, entertained a Parley with the enemy,
and so stood Newrers till we had beaten the enemy to a retreat, for which, some
of them are in question for their life. The enemy likewise sent a Trumpet to
Lypson work to summon it, and was answered with the Cannon after the Trumpet
was commanded to depart. And we having gotten a small Drake planted in the
cross way, discharged it four or five times on the enemies Horse with good
execution; and giving a sign by the found of a Drum, when our several
commanded places should fall on, the enemy began to give ground, and some two
Hundred Musquetires of the Trained bands of the Town being come to our
assistance, and a party of some sixty Musquetires sent about to play on the
backs of the enemies, was no sooner perceived by the enemy, but he commanded a
retreat, which was followed so close by us, that it was little better then a
hasty flight; for retreating most part over the Lare, and not the same way they
came on, their Rear guard of Horse of about one hundred being cut off from
their way of retreat, were forced into the Mudde, between Lypson Work and
Lare-point, and the Horse were almost all taken or drowned when the Sea came
in, some of the Riders crawling through the Mud, hardly escaped; many of the
enemy were killed in their retreat by our horse and foot, and by the ship at
Lare-point, who then grew honest again: of prisoners we took a
Captaine-Lieutenant of Horse, and one Langsford a Priest, that was a Captain,
and some thirty common soldiers, and thirteen barrels of Powder, two Teames
of Horses with furniture, by which they were drawing up our Ordnance against
us. Of ours, the enemy took in our first retreat, Captained Lieutenant Ro^,
Lieutenant Vpton, Ensign Crocker, and Francis Rolls Ensign, and about forty
common men, besides Captain Wansey, and about twelve more killed, and a
hundred more wounded, of whom, some are since dead: Colonel Gould had one
horse killed under him, and another shot, but he mercifully preserved. The Lord
showed himself wonderfully in our deliverance, in that when the enemy had
gotten a ground of advantage, and were ten to one against us, yet was pleased
by our handful to drive them back another way then they came. For had the
enemy possessed the ground that they had gotten that night, the next day they
would have been masters of all Cat-downe, and then we must have quitted our
Out-workes as unusefull to us, and have betaken our selves to the Town walls,
which then were not fully finished, and could not long have been defended. The
same day, the enemy with horse and foot assaulted Penny-come-quick-works and
were repulsed with much loss.

The enemy being thus repulsed, suffered us to be quiet (as his usual manner
was) for 15 or 20 days after: in the mean time gathering up his routed
Troops, save that one night he fell on upon a work we were raising under
Lypson, called in the Map Lypson-Mill work, for the prevention of the
enemies incursion again that way, and partly slighted it, our guard there
quitting it without a shot; from which they were suddenly beaten again and the
work re-edified. It were endless to acquaint you with the servall light
Skirmishes, that daily past between us, sometimes about our cattle that
stragled without our works, at other times, to pass time by bravadoes and
ambuscadoes made by our guards to entrappe the enemy. And now the enemy
finding his Battery against Lypson, and his intent to possess himself of
Lare-point suceesselesse, he takes about and begins to make his approaches
against Maudlin work, we in the mean time thickning that work within to make
it proof, and finding their Batteries planted within Musket shot of our
work, we planted a platform close by Maudlin work, and drew out a
Demy-Cannon which was taken in a prize that was going to the Rebels in
Ireland, to counter-batter against them, intending to have planted another, if
it had been needful. Upon the eighteenth of December the enemy began to
Batter, but by reason of our counter-Batterie which played constantly into
their work through their ports, whereby their men could not stand safely by
their Ordance, we having the advantage in playing down into them from a
commanding ground; The enemy in two days time, could do no good with his
Battery: but on Wednesday night the twentieth of December through the
carelesnes of the Captain of that guard, that set out centries perdue, it
being a wet and dark night, the enemy raised a square work with the help of
a corner of a field, within pistol shot of Maudlin work, almost in a direct
line between that and Pennicom-quick, which if they had held, might have cut us
off from the relief of that work, etc.

Thursday in the morning the twenty first day of December, as soon as it was
discovered, the ordinary guardes there, being some threescore men, fell on in
hope to have regained it without any more help. But found their work guarded
with two or three hundred men, and so were feign to retreat until supply came
from the Town.

And then about nine of the clock in the morning, having Horse and Foot in a
readiness, we fell on upon their work, and received the repulse twice, once
after we had gained the work, but our men heartned with the assistance of some
fresh men, and backed with most of the strength we could make, fell on, took,
and slighted the enemies work, took prisoners a Captain, Prince Maurices
Trumpeter, and some few others more, and killed that day near a 100 men, there
were taken of ours by the enemy Lieutenant William Harwar, and two more
surrounded by the enemies Horse in one place, and as many in another: we had
twenty men killed in the place whereof Ensign Grimes was one, and some
fourscore wounded, whereof Engsigne Samuel Horte, and some others are since
dead, upon the enemies retreat we could hardly dissuade our Soldiers from
falling on their works to gain their Ordnance. But we had too few men to
adventure upon so hazardous a design.

The next day we could see the enemy preparing to draw off their Ordnance, and
on Christmas day the twentie-five of December in the morning, they drew off
their guards from about us, being the same day that Prince Maurice promised his
Soldiers they should be in Plymouth.

That day Thomas Basset Major General to the enemy, called to an Officer of
ours that was in their work, and told him that he thought God fought against
them, and said, if he could be convinced that he was not in the right, he would
hang himself at his door err he would take up arms again in that quarrel.

The next day after, the enemy rising from before us, part of two of our works
fell down, which might have endangered the loss of them, if they had
continued their seige.

The enemy now quarter at Tavestock and Plympton, to refresh their men, and to
recrute for a fourth seige, and for the present they block us up from
provision, having driven all the country before them of all sorts of cattle,
so that we cannot subsist long unless store of all sorts of provisions be sent
us.

But if we may have a considerable supply of men, Money, Arms for Horse and
Foot, sent us with speed, by Gods assistance we may be able to take the field,
for all the Country is inclined to us, which opportunity we hope the
Parliament will not neglect.

One remarkable passage of Gods providence to us, we must withal thankfulness
remember and acknowledge, that after the Town had been a long time strictly
beseiged, and no fresh victual either flesh or fish, could be had, whereby the
poor people were grievously punished, there came in an infinite multitude of
Pilchards into the Harbor within the Barbicon, which the people took up with
great ease in baskets, which did not only refresh them for the present, but a
great deal more were taken, preserved, and salted; whereby the poor got much
Money, such a passage has not happened before.

We cannot forget the humanity of the good women of Plymouth, and their courage
in bringing out strong waters, and all sorts of provisions in the midst of all
our skirmishes for refreshing of our Soldiers, though many shot through the
clothes.

We cannot omit to set down also how that in few days after our first
arrival here, one Sampson Hele, Esquire: came in a message to this Town, from
the Prince, to persuade the yielding of it: But coming without Drum or
Trumpet, for his offense, he was persuaded to yield us two thousand pounds for
the payment and clothing of our Soldiers, without which we could not
possibly have subsisted so long. The enemies word in this last fight was, (The
Town is ours) and our word was, (God with us.)

We had upon the loss of Mount-Stanford a day of Humiliation, and upon Gods
deliverance of us, at Lare point a day of Thanksgiving, and another since the
seige was raised. The chief commanders before us, were, Prince Maurice, The
Earls of Marleborough, and Newport, The Lord Mohun, Lieutenant General
Wagslaffe, Major General Basset, Sir Thomas Hele, Sir Edmund Fortescue, Sir
John Grenvile, Sir Richard Cave, Sir James Coburne, Sir John Digby, Sir Peter
Courtney, Sir William Courtney, and diverse other considerable persons, many of
whom, as well as of the common Soulders, are since either dead or desperately
sick.

William Gould, Colonel. Michael Serle, Lieutenant Colonel. Nathaniel Willis,
Sergeant Major. Captains.
Thomas Hallsey. Samuel Bertch. Gabriel Barnes. William Wotton. Henry Plumley.
William Hill. Thomas Hughes. Robers Northcote. Henry Potter. Humphrey Barton.


To the Major and Governor of the Town of Plymouth.
THat you may see our hearty desires of a just Peace, We do Summon you in his
Majesty's name, to surrender the Town, Fort, and Jland of Plymouth, with the
warlike provisions thereunto belonging, into Our hands for his Majesty's use:
And We do hereby assure you, by the power derived to Us, from his Majesty,
upon the performance here of, of a general Pardon for what is past: And engage
Our Selves in Our Honor, to secure your persons and estates, from all violence
and plunder. We have now quitted Our Selves on Our parts; and let the blood
that shall be spilt in the obtaining of these just demands (if denied by you)
be your guilt.

Given under Our hands at Mount Stanford the 18 day of November, Anno Dom.
1643. John Digby. Thomas Basset. Peter Killigrew. Io. Wagstaffe. Jonathan
Treleany. R. Prideaux. John Arundell. Tho. Monk. Will. Arundell. John Downing.
Tho. Stucley.

PLYMOUTH the 4 of November. 1643.
IT is this day Ordered by the Council of War, That this Vow and Protestation
as follows, be openly published in the Assemblies by the Ministers of this
Town, to morrow, being the fifth of November, 1643. And that it may be
presented particularly to all Officers and Soldiers, Inhabitants and
Strangers, of the Towns and Garrisons of Plymouth and Stonehouse, the Fort and
Island: And that especial notice be taken of all such as shall refuse to take
the said Vow and Protestation, Which is as follows.

I A. B. in the presence of Almighty God do Vow and protest, that I will to the
utmost of my power faithfully maintain and defend the Towns of Plymouth,
Stone-House, the Fort and Island withal the out works and Fortifications to
the same belonging, against all Forces now raised against the said Towns, Fort
and Island or any part thereof, or that shall be raised by any power or
Authority whatsoever, without the consent and authority of both Houses of
Parliament, neither will I by any way or means whatsoever, contrive or consent
to the giving up of the Towns and Fortifications aforesaid, or any parcel of
them, into the hands of any person or persons whatsoever, without the consent
of both Houses of Parliament, or of such as are authorized thereunto by them:
neither will I raise nor consent to the raising of any Force or tumult, nor
will I by any way or means give or yield to the giving of any advice,
counsel, or intelligence to the prejudice of the said Towns and
Fortifications, either in whole, or im part, but will withal faithfully
discover to the Major of Plymouth and to the Commander in chief there,
whatsoever design, I shall know or hear of hurtful thereunto. Neither have I
accepted any pardon or protection, nor will accept any protection from the
enemy. And this Vow and Protestation I make, without any equivocation and
mental reservation whatsoever: believing, That I cannot be absolved from this
my Vow and Protestation, and wishing no blessing from God on my self or my
posterity if I do not truly and sincerely perform the same. So hope me God.

Prince Maurice HIS WARRANT Since the Raising of the Siege. To the Constables
of Egbuckland; and after notice taken of Publishing, To the Constables or
Tythingmen of St. Budeaux, there to be Published.
FOr as much as diverse persons disaffected to his Majesty's service, make their
daily recourse into Plymouth, furnishing the Rebels there with all manner of
provision for Man and Horse, contrary to his Majesty's Proclamation,
prohibiting the same: these are therefore signifying, That if any person of
what degree or quality, do ever presume to have any commerce or dealing with
any in the said Town of Plymouth, or otherwise; send into the said Town, or
take, or carry with him any Horses, Oxen, Kine, sheep, or other provision for
Men or Horse into the said Town of Plymouth, for the relief of the Rebels
there; every such person and persons shall be proceeded against both in person
and estate as Abettors of this horrid Rebellion, and contemners of his
Majesty's Proclamation, according to the limitation of the Court of War in
such cases provided. Willing and requiring all Majors, Bayliffes, Justices of
the peace, Constables, and all other of his Majesty's Officers and Ministers,
to cause this to be forthwith published in all Churches, Chapels, Markets, or
other places; whereby his Majesty's loving Subjects may the better take notice
hereof.

Maurice.

Ordered to be printed.

FINIS.

