Something in ANSWER To Two late MALICIOUS LIBELS of William Rogers; Entitled,
The Sixth and Eighth part of his (falsely so called) Christian-Quaker, etc.

Being a further Caution to FRIENDS, To take heed of that Treacherous Spirit
that is entered into WILLIAM ROGERS and his Abettors.

Who under the Profession of Primitive Truth, are betraying it to the World,
and putting truths Lambs into their Bearskins for the World to Worry, because
they have no power to do it themselves, who have published their wicked Books
in Askalon the fire of their Infamy; and have told it in Gath, the Wine Press,
to press out their sower Grapes to set the Peoples teeth on Edge against the
Lambs of God.

Published for the Clearing of Truth against William Rogers's Lies and
Slanders, and for the Information of the simple-minded, that they may not be
ensnared by the Crafts and Wiles of Satan through such fallen Antichristian
Instruments as William Rogers and such as are Entered into the same Malicious
Spirit with him.

C. T.

2 Timothy 3. v. 8. Now as Jannes and Jambres withstood Moses, so do these also
resist the Truth, Men of Corrupt minds, Reprobate concerning the Faith. --

V. 9. But they shall proceed no further; their folly shall be manifest to all
Men, as theirs also was.

V. 13. But evil men and seducers shall wax worse and worse, deceiving and
being deceived.

London, Printed for John Bringhurst, Printer and Stationer, at the Sign of the
Book in Grace Church Street. 1682.

AN ANSWER TO William Rogers.
William Rogers,
I Have read something in thy two Books, called the sixth and eighth part of
thy Book, called, The Christian Quaker, reflecting upon me at a gross abusive
rate, because I withstood thee in Print, in thy Printing that malicious Book
called by thee, The Christian Quaker, etc. And good ground I had to withstand
thee as I did: For reading in thy Book, I understood thy drift and intent to
be, to render dear G.F. by Name, and several others dragged by their Names in
thy Book, with my self included, and indeed all Friends who are in Unity with
us, who are the Church of Christ, to be Apostates and Innovators, and thy self
with thy Adherents, to be the Christian-Quakers, in thy false sense, as plainly
appears in thy Book, which I suppose thou will not deny.

So this being the true state of the case, we must either submit to thee, or
thou, and those of thy Spirit, to us. But that we are Apostates or Innovators,
(that is, Revolters, Backsliders from the Truth, deserters of our Guide and
Captain Christ Jesus: And Innovators, or such as bring in new things into the
Church, and alter or contradict the true Government and State of it) we utterly
deny, and reject thy false Charge, and all that are concerned with thee. -- And
my Charge from God upon thee is true: Thou art of a Rebellious Mind, and
stand up, as Korah and his Company did, against Gods faithful and true
Servants, who have and do keep their Habitations in the Truth to this day: And
thou art of a slanderous Tongue, and void of a good Understanding. How long
will thou pervert the Truth in thy gainsayings, and stand in opposition to the
Lords power, and reject Gods pure Counsel to thee through his Servants, and
their tender desires for thee, which sometimes have reached thy Conscience! But
take heed lest thy Rum come, and there be none to help thee: And when thy work
is over, without Repentance, with Judas, thou go to thy proper place.

What ado thou make because I have quoted no particular sentence out of thy
Book, but in the general as in my Title Page, and other places, I have given
the Reader to understand, that the matter of my Charge, against thee is in thy
Book, called, The Christian-Quaker, etc. These are my words in the Title Page:
To Friends, To take heed of that Treacherous Spirit that is entered into William
Rogers, and his Abettors; as appears in his Book falsely called, The Christian
Quaker. And if the ground of my Charge against thee be not the ground of thy
Book, and in thy Book over and over; then I have erred and am not to be
believed. But thou can not justly deny, nor any of thy Abettors, but that
thou have rendered us aforementioned, to be both Apostates and Innovators; and
if thou do deny it, thou do overthrow the foundation of thy Book: And none
need to pin their Faith on my Sleeve to believe this; but in the Light of
Christ to Read, See, and Believe for themselves in this matter. And to thy
wicked Book I refer the Reader, whether this be not the main Subject of it; and
so is notorious false and blasphemous. Read Rev. 2.9. I know the Blasphemy of
them which say they are Jews and are not; but are of the Synagogue of Satan.
This is become thy condition, who call thy self a Christian Quaker; but
indeed art of the Synagogue of Satan, that Adversary.

And what if I have neither particularly quoted Part nor Page of thy Book; yet
what I affirm is true: Unto which, for proof of what I say, I refer the Reader
to thy Book, and justify my Charge against thee; and Charge thee with
Rebellion, and gainsaying the Truth, and Power of God in his faithful Servants:
For we Charge thee in the Presence of God, and before his Angels and Men, to be
a false Accuser of the Brethren, and to be guided by a malicious evil Spirit.

And now as for my not quoting Part and Page out of thy Book; I did not go
about particularly to Answer thy Book, but to bear my Testimony against thee,
not to be of God in that Spirit thou writ it. And in Rev. 2.15. is spoken by
John of the Doctrine of the Nicolaitans which he hated, and quotes not what
that Doctrine was, nor Chapter nor Verse; and yet is not reflected on, as not
to be believed in one word he speaks, etc.

And whereas thou quotest something out of the third Page in my Book, and
quarrel'st with the two last words [for ever] because I say, To the Praise of
his Name for ever; having before spoken of the Lords eminent Instruments in his
Hand, as dear G. F. and others opposed by W. R. as Apostates and Innovators.
Thou say, by the words for ever, If I mean G. F. (that is to the Praise of
G. F.'s Name for ever) Then thou say I should have added so and so, etc. And
so bring in several ^fs and runnest with thy Horns especially against G. F.
But this is quibling, and scurrilous, and catching, according to the Nature of
the Spirit thou art led by: For who will take it so? But to put all out of
doubt for the sake of the simple, it is to be read, according to my Mind and
Meaning, To the Praise of the Lords Name for ever.

Now William, These foolish things from a perverse and malicious Airy Mind,
thou have been Publishing and telling as in Gath and Askalon, that the
uncircumcised Priests and Professors, and Rabble of unrighteous people may
rejoice. Is not this thy work?

And really so, how can thou have a face to deny it? Do not thou seek to
destroy our Lives and Reputations in the Truth; by rendering us Apostates and
Innovators? And what a Hurry and Pudder did thou and thine Adherents make,
concerning John Story, how we went about to unminister him, because we desired
him to return into the North, and first to be Reconciled to his Brethren,
before he came and offered his Gift; otherwise he would go out in a contentious
Spirit, to the sowing of Strife and Sedition amongst the Churches. Now consider
thy own work, who have espoused his Cause, what havoc thou make to lay waste
the Heritage of God? not only according to thy Ability to go about to
unminister Gods faithful Laborers, in the Work of his Gospel; but also to
unchristian them, by rendering them Apostates and Innovators. Oh! wicked Spirit
and unbridled Tongue!

And what parallel is this? Thy Publishing of thy wicked Book against Gods
People, as a common Adversary to Gods Truth and his People, endeavoring to be
believed in thy wicked work; and also as it were to curse Gods Heritage from
being his People and faithful Servants; if thou had power according to thy
will, as is too evident, by the prosecution of thy wicked Work; and so art in
Balaam's way? I say, what parallel is this, if all had been true what thou have
written, (writing it in a malicious Spirit) to Paul's withstanding Peter to his
Face before all men; which is false: It is not [before all men] but [before
them all] as is to be further shown hereafter. Did Paul publish this to the
World and all men to render him an Apostate and Innovator, and all of his
Spirit, who had Unity with him, as thou have done us? Nay it is manifest, that
Peter received and owned the plain-dealing and love of his Brother Paul, and
felt it to come from the Spirit of Love and true-heartedness to him: And it was
so far from making a breach between them, that it more nearly united them.

And afterward Peter very affectionately speaks of his beloved Brother Paul,
and of his Epistles, in which (says he) are some things hard lo be understood;
which they that are unlearned and unstable, wrest (as they do also the other
Scriptures) unto their own destruction, 2 Pet. 3.15, 16. As thou have
endeavored to pervert the plain dealing of Paul with Peter to serve thy own
turn, and thy false end in Printing us to the World as Apostates and
Innovators, etc. And what if this be now made public? it is a work quite
contrary to thine, and from another Spirit, and to another end. O William! If
thou could but see thy work and repent of it, how glad should I be! I have
pitied thee, and wished thee better employment.

And whereas thou reflects upon me in the sixth part, p. 21. saying: That I act
like such as have had their Education at Bilingsgate, amongst the Scolds,
rather than under the Roof of sober Families.

Blessed be God I act against thee, as the Lord does give me a good
understanding; and see thee to be of a wicked Spirit, in Korah's way and State
of Rebellion, and of Cain's murtherous Line (I mean spiritually) and how
impudent art thou, to compare my Education with the Education of the Scolds at
Bilingsgate? I have had for this thirty years, or thereabouts, my Education in
the blessed Truth, and always was, in thy best condition, thy Elder in it; and
have never yet deserved thy base language concerning my Education: And before I
was convinced of the Truth, I was of better behavior than thou now art; for I
then loved good and honest people, who feared the Lord, and wrought
Righteousness in their day and Generation; and sought and enquired after the
knowledge of the Lord from my young and tender years; but thou art in a
Rebellious State against Gods faithful Servants. Alas William! is this thy
work, to abuse Me and many grave Ancients in Israel, who have kept their
Habitations in the Truth? -- Herein I may a little boast to stop thy mouth:
Bring forth the Person who, this thirty years last past, can tax my Life and
Conversation, or Education; that I have not had my Education so in the Truth,
that I have been in my Life what I have Doctrinally Preached forth: I speak
this to the Praise of Gods Grace, and testify in the fear of God against thy
slanderous tongue. But it is like thee, who art guided by an unruly and
rebellious Spirit, who have corrupted thy manners by thy evil words; who art
turned against the Truth, and thy Tongue is at liberty to abuse those that have
kept their Habitations in it. Thou art a quarrelsom man, and thy impudence is
so great, that thou endeavourest to supplant the Righteous seed, and abuse Gods
faithful Laborers in his Vineyard, by rendering them as Apostates and
Innovators, and so art mischievous in thy undertakings; and we know thou art a
false Accuser, and thou endeavourest to stop the course of our Testimonies,
that we may not be believed as Christian Ministers, by thy false insinuations,
who would prejudice both Friends and others against us, to stop their Ears from
hearing the Truth; declared by us. O wicked envious Spirit, do thy worst: What
can thou do with all thy power? Gods pure simplicity being kept unto amongst
his people, they easily discern thee to be an Apostate and fallen Spirit, if ever
thou had a condition in the Truth. And if ever thou had, then wast thou but
a Novice in it, and yet have taken upon thee a mischievous work, to run out
with thy Horns against such as G. F. G. W. and my self, and many others,
rendering us Apostates and Innovators. But we truly comprehend thee to be got up
into presumption, lifted up with pride, and art fallen into the condemnation of
the Devil.

And therefore it is that thou art become malicious, and have not kept thy
first State in the Truth, but have left that habitation according to thy
measure which thou had in it: And now thou appearest in thy wickedness
against the Living God, and in this State, except thou can find a place of
Repentance, thou art reserved in the everlasting Chains of Darkness unto the
Judgment of the Great day.

And whereas thou reflects and despises that good Government of Christ, that
the God of Heaven has erected and established amongst us by his Spirit and
Power, the ground and foundation of which, in my Epistle of Caution, I have in
measure laid down, I believe to the satisfaction of all innocent Friends that
fear God: Yet thy foul Spirit is so offended at this work, that thou art evil
affected toward it, under the color of Impositions and Innovations, and
forcing a Conformity upon Conscience vefore Conviction and without Faith.

Unto which I answer, Without Faith it is impossible to please God: And
therefore we persuade men, by the force of Truth and the Word of the Lord, to
be reconciled to every thing that is good, as to good Order and Government, and
not to stand in opposition against it.

And a great clamor thou make about Government and Orders, and fillest
people full of stories of this kind, and rendrest us little better in these
matters than Papists and Popishly affected: And yet notwithstanding do not
set down what all these Orders are: Thou malicious man, begin from first to
last, and tell such to whom thou Writes and Prints, what all these Orders are,
thou so openst thy Mouth against: If they be good in themselves, as some of thy
Friends have said and confessed, therefore why not practicable, and why should
they be opposed? But ye are in confusion.

Should we not endeavor that every simple-hearted person may be informed and
truly Instructed in that which is Pure, Decent, Good, and Commendable, that all
things may be done in good Order, by the spirit of God, to the praise of the
Name of the Great God, who is the God of Order and not of Confusion or Anarchy.

They that plead for Liberty Contrary to the pure Spirit, Life and Power of
Jesus Christ, are out of the Faith, and not faithful to God. And in that state
they are blind and Ignorant of Gods way, and Truth in this his Gospel
Dispensation: And so they become wilful Opposers, of that which is good in a
Disobedient mind, and so call Good Evil, and Evil Good, And that Government
that is erected by the Eternal God in the hearts of his people, they despise
and contemn, because they are not in a Condition to Answer it, because of their
sinful disobedience, and love Darkness more than Light.

And if People be Simple-minded, We know the faithful-hearted that fear God,
into whom he gives a good understanding, will endeavor to inform such, as at
any time may conscientiously scruple any thing in this matter; And we say, None
should oppose, who do not see, and who do not believe those things, which
others both truly see, and to be of God, lest they fight like blind men, but
thou in thy wilful mind teach Rebellion, and to make the minds of the
simple-hearted, evil affected with the Government of God and Christ Jesus.
Which he has, and is still Estableshing amongst us, and like Iannes and
Iambres, thy mind is corrupted to oppose the Truth, being Reprobate or of no
Judgment concerning the Faith. For they that are faithful to God know us and
our work who are his Servants and Ministers through his Grace Excercised in his
Work, and Service; And that we are neither Apostates nor Innovators (for that is
thy own condition) as thy lying Tongue would Insinuate -- And that Government
and Grder, we have Estableshed by the Lord amongst us, is so far from the
Spirit of Antichrist in the Estableshment of it, that it is no less than the
product of Gods Power, and Heavenly Wisdom, which is pure and peaceable from
above. But thy Folly will be fully Mannifest, and thy shame will appear, though
thou would hide it, by endeavoring grossly to abuse such Ancients in Jsrael,
as God has clothed with his Heavenly Righteousness. I say, thy shame will
appear, and thy work of Wickedness will be made manifest to all the
Simple-hearted, who in their Souls truly desire to be tought by the Lord that
they may be truly Established in his Righteousness.

And whereas, In thy Eigth Part (page 11.) thou have these words; And if this
small Tract, as well as other Discoveries of Apostasy and Innovation, become as
so many Darts to pierce the bowels of that Cause espowsed by those nameless
persons, terming themselves the second Days Meeting, even as an Arrow shot at
an Adventure, pierced Ahab between the Joints of his Harnass when disguised to
save himself, then let us say, blessed be the God of our Solvation.

Now William, thy Drift and Intent, as what thou aimest at, we clearly
perceive, and it is easy so to do; For the Darts thou shootest, thou aimest at
Gods servants, the Second Days Meeting, to pierce the bowels of their cause,
which cause is the Cause of God, and they are and have been concerned against
thee, to bear Testimony against that Graceless ungodly Spirit with which thy
heart is possessed, that so the Truth being espoused by them, may still prevail
over thy Lies and base Slanders in thy wicked Works, who carest little what
thou do, or say, if thou can but make the Truth, and the Professors of
it, who are exercised in the Work and service of God, Odious; But all the
simple-hearted, who read that Book Entitled, The Accuser, etc. may easily see
thy Lies, and Slanders detected, and thy wicked heart, to thy shame, made
Manifest, that thou may be read as thou art, in thy own Nature, viz. As an
Apostate and Common Adversary to Gods Truth, and his faithful Servants, who
have kept their habitations in the Truth, and stand against thy design, which
is wicked -- Thou show thou art of a Murdering spirit, with thy Arrows; but
they are turned back upon thee again, to pierce thy own Bowels, Read Psalms the
11.2. Where thou may see into thy Work and condition. For Lo, the Wicked
bend their Bow; they make ready their Arrow upon the string, that they may
privily shoot at the Upright in heart, but thou have mist the Mark, etc.

W. R. thou say Part 8. Page. 10. Our Ancient Friends J. S. and J. W. when
Articled against for not acting against their conscience, etc. And Page 3. thou
speak of J. W. and J. S. again, and Page 6. thou say, There is no ground
either from the Scriptures of Truth without, or the Light of Christ within us,
to believe that any Christian Professor can in Truth affirm, that there are
outward Prescriptions, and Orders given forth by the Spirit of God through any
one or more mortal men in this our Day, which others ought to obey or follow,
whether they see it their Duty or no, so far W. R. Answers. The Insinuation of
our giving out Instructions to be practiced, whilst people do not see them
their Duty, is a false Insinuation; for Instructions of Duty may be given out
before they see them such; as believing that God will by his Light discover to
them their Duty therein, if they be not obstinate, that they may practice them
in the Light.

Persons not seeing their duty, does not make that void which is in itself
their duty; Nor yet ought men's blindness to debar true Ministers from Preaching
to them what is their Duty; for many see it not their Duty, to believe the
light of Christ in them, and yet it must be Preached to them, to open their
eyes, etc.

Then does it not plainly appear, that I. Wilkinson, and W. Rogers, are not in
the light of Christ, and Spirit of God; but are as yet blind, and do not see
that which is given forth from the Light and Spirit of God to be their Duty to
Obey and follow? And such by W. Rogers must be Accounted Honorable, Elders and
Preachers; And yet in his Sixth Part, Page 12. tells us, The Kingdom of God
stands in Righteousness, and Peace, and Joy in the Holy Ghost; and tells us
again in his Sixth Part. (Page 3.) of his Inward peace with the Lord, etc. and
in his Second Page, Part, 8. there he speaks of the Government of Christ, who
alone is Lord over the Conscience; and Page 10. Part 6. he tells us, He is
breathing to the Lord of Heaven, That we and G. F. may be humbled before the
Lord, and G. F. in Particular, that High and Lofty one, may not utterly fall,
etc.

What a mad Prayer is this! how can thou be at peace, and breath unto the
Lord, and be thus Wicked? for thy Prayers are an Abomination to the Lord. And
thou have not only Judged G. F, but (as thou scoffingly say) his party also,
to be Apostates; that is, such as have blessed Unity with him in the Truth,
which is the whole Body of Friends, who have kept their Habitations in the
Living Truth and Faith of Gods Elect, which thou art gone from.

And by what Spirit do thou pretend thou have Peace with God, and breathest
to God, and tellest of his Kingdom; and yet art blind, and do not see its thy
Duty to obey and follow that which is given forth from the Spirit of God? etc.

How can thy Spirit and the Spirit of those, thou termest thy Honorable
Brethren, be accounted any otherwise then a loose frivolous Spirit.

And does W. R. and those that Encouraged him to public his confused Books,
stuffed full of Contradictions, and with a Rabble of false charges (as has
been shown in other Answers in Print) believe, that they proceeded from Gods
Spirit, when he does not see it to be his Duty, to Obey that which is given
forth from the Spirit of God? are you all of his Mind?

And he says, Speaking of the Unction, That by it all things are known.

And yet he does not see it his Duty to Obey that which is given forth from the
Spirit of God: For this is applied to William Rogers. J. Story, J. Wilkinson,
and their Followers, for he does not mention any others, who are thus Blind,
that they do not see; for we who are the Members of that Body which Christ is
the Head of, do see it is our Duty to Obey that which is given forth from the
Spirit of God in our day.

Do we not Read that under the Dipensation of the Law, which came by Moses, the
Priests lips were to preserve the Peoples Knowledge, and to be Instructers to
the People in all things pertaining to that Dispensation, that the People might
not be Ignorant of the Law of God, but might fully know it; And where they
doubted in any thing, that Priesthood was to Complete their Knowledge in it,
that they might not plead Ignorance in any thing contained in the Law to be
done, for God was able by his Spirit, then both Immidiatly and Instrumentally
by his Priesthood, appointed under that Dispensation to Instruct them fully;
and none then could say, they did not see, or they did not believe what was the
mind of God under that Dispensation. But those that wilfully stopped their
Ears, and shut their Eyes, least they should hear and see, understand and obey
the will of God, who Rebel'd against the Spirit. And such came to be hardined
in their Sins, and Rebel against the Truth, and despise the Government of it,
as Korah and his Company in the Conspiracy against Moses and Aaron, etc.

Much more now in our day under the clear Gospel Ministration, may the Israel
of God be fully Instructed both Immediately and Instrumentally by his Spirit,
in all things pertaining to the Doctrine and Discipline of Truth and Gospel
Government, that their hearts may be subject thereunto: and they need not plead
Ignorance, and say, I see not this, or I believe not this, and, If I do this,
or Obey t'otheir, it will be a blind Obedience, and I shall do it without Faith
or sight. I say, none need plead thus, and upon this ground, and with their
blind Minds and dark Understandings in their Disobedience, oppose Gods People
in what they both see and believe to be given forth by his Spirit. For Christ
has enlightened them all, and has poured his Spirit upon all Flesh, that they
may see and perceive that which is given forth from the Spirit.

Therefore we do affirm, that every Imprejudiced simple-harted Friend, waiting
and following on to know the Lord in his Light and Spirit, will grow up in the
Faith, and not oppose the Faithful in their Faithfulness toward God, in what
he makes known of his Will. And so the Simple-minded, will mind the Lord and
his power, which will preserve them in Unity and fellowship with the Brethren
the Members of Christ in the Spirit and Light according to their growth in the
Truth, and if at any time there be any Conscientious Scrupling concerning any
thing as to matter of Discipline or Government or any thing else, they will be
desirous and willing to Ask Counsil of the Lord, and in Gentleness and Meekness
of his Faithful People in sinserity without Opposition, as the Corinthians did
to Paul, who answered them cencerning the things they had wrote to him, that
they might be Convinced and helped in matters pertaining to Faith and
Conscience.

And where did ever the Jews say to Moses and the Prophets, They were not
convinced, and did not see if their Duty to follow and obey that which they
declared from the Lord to them? And also where did ever the Disciples of Christ
say, We are not convinced, and do not see it our Duty to follow and obey that
which thou Command us. And forasmuch as it is on Record, that the Apostles
and the Elders wrote their Orders and Decrees, and Traditions to the Churches,
where did ever the Churches and true believers tell the Apostles, and the
Elders they did not see, nor beliebe, and had not Faith in their words, and
therefore it was not their Duty to Obey that which they writ, and spoke to them
from the Lord, by his Spirit; but called it Imposition, and blind Obedience,
this always was a mark of the false Apostles, and Christians who opposed the
true; and it was and is the Devil that did, and does blind People now, that
they do not see their Duty to God, to do what he commands them.

Are the Ranters excusable, because they say, they do not see or believe the
wickedness they commit to be sin or evil? Will this excuse them in the the day
of Judgment? take warning and take heed.

Must not the secrets of Men be Judged by Jesus Christ, according to the
Gospel, which is Preached to, or in every Creature under Heaven? And can
thou, and thine Abettors be excused in your wilfulness, and wicked rebellion
against God, and his People, under pretense, that you do not see nor believe?
Nay, William, thou and you are seen, and your wicked work is weighed in the
Balance of Truth, and found too light, and Woe and Misery from God will be
your Portion, except you Repent.

Your Nakedness does appear for want of anointing your eyes with eye salve,
that you might see, etc. For truly, since you went from the Light of Christ, by
which you were convinced; by which all God's People are now at this day kept in
Unity; I do plainly see with that eye salve God has given me, that you are got
into a Spirit of Rudeness, Lightness, Scornfulness, and despising those that
truly fear the Lord; so that it is enough to convince every sober-minded
person, what Spirit you are led and acted by, that they may see with the Light
of Christ, how you are fallen from the pure truth of the Gospel into Looseness,
like so many Way-marks for God's people to shun, etc.

W. R. Thou make a great Pudder and muddlest thy head about our Orders in
part 8. p. 5. and twice in page 6. And about outward prescriptions in the same
Page twice; and page 10. there thou art at it again, and speak of Decrees
and Prescriptions twice over; then page 13. thou art at it again, etc.

Answ. But William, why do thou make such a confused noise about our Orders,
as though thy Head was amazed! And do so worry them with thy muddled Head,
that thou have not been able to give a perfect list of them, (though it has
been of thee demanded, What those Orders are, that our Friends have imposed
upon you) For with thy own muddled Head thou think to muddle others Heads
with thy making a noise about our Orders, Prescriptions, Decrees and
Government; but neither thou nor J. S. nor J. Wilkinson have yet given a full
and particular Account of them, what they are, and stated them aright, with the
day when, and the Year they were given forth, that people might have seen them,
together with a Catalogue of thy own, I. Wilkinson's and I. Story's Decrees and
Orders, what they are; thou should have brought them forth, that people might
have seen them, and been able to judge of them. So give over thy making a
Noise, and Clamouring, and Brawling against our Orders, Prescriptions and
Decrees, as long as thou do not discover them all to the people what they
are; that people may not be deceived by thee; and pin their Faith on thy
Sleeve; for in this thy empty work, thou have but been beating the Air.

And as for the Fruits of a Careless, Loose, Libertine, Dark Spirit, W. R. with
all his I^'s in all his Writings has not proved against G. F. but has
manifested them to be the Fruits of his own Spirit, whose Tongue is become no
slander, nor words of any Credit with them that fear the Lord.

And J. Wilkinson and W. Rogers have not answered G. F's Question yet (though
W. R. be at it again in his 8th part, page 8.) viz. Whether or no an Heavenly
Member of Christ's Body ( that is, such as are born again of the Spirit, and of
the Immortal seed by the word of God) turns to Dust, Yea or Nay? For G. F's
Query was not about an Earthly Member, nor an Earthly Corruptible Body; but an
Heavenly Member.

Part 8. page 2, 3. W. R. says, It Is the duty of some, etc. to pin their Faith
on the sleeves of C. T. etc. Again, This small Tract is now written for the
sakes of such among the people called Quakers, as are not yet Principle'd to
pin their Faith upon other men's sleeves.

Answ. Are not the spreaders and the sellers of W. R's malicious Books, the
pinners of their Faith upon his sleeve? And yet they are so confused, that they
will not stand by him in it. But it was always my Judgment to Judge such, as
Pin their Faith upon thy sleeve, or J. S's, or J. W's, or upon any else. For
the Faith of God's Elect stands in Christ, the Author and Finisher of it. And
what need was there, that any one that reads my Book against thee, should pin
their Faith on my slieve?

But W. R. have not thou Judged us often over in thy malicious slanderous Book,
to be Apostates and Innovators? Was not this a just ground for me to declare
thee to be of Korahs Spirit, and of Cains Line? And if thou have not in thy
Book rendered us such, as Apostates and Innovators (unto which I refer the
Reader) then clear thy self if thou can; or else the Burden of my words in
my Testimony against thee in that Spirit, thou writ that Book, must certainly
lie upon thee. And herein I have not wronged thee, I affirm it, and still
charge thee in the same true Judgment, to be of Korahs, and Cains Line, to be
sealed down under Eternal Judgment and Condemnation, from God for ever, except
thou Repent; and we stand over thee in the Authority of God's Power, and of
such as Abet to thee, and adhere to thee in that Malicious, Proud and Lofty
Spirit, thou art entered into.

W. R. says, part 8. page 5. That 'twas safer to have a Dependency on this
measure (of Christ's Light) in our selves, than to have an Eye out to the
measures of others.

Answ. Has not W. R. showed his Darkness and theirs, that encouraged him to
Print his Book? For can any see the measure of the Spirit of Christ, and his
Light in others, but by the measure of the Spirit of God in themselves, in
which they come into Unity? But where did ever either I or any of our faithful
Brethren bring any to look, and have a Dependency upon the Measure in others,
and neglect the measure of the Spirit of God in themselves, by which they
should be guided to become the Sons and Daughters of God? This was never our
Principle, but thou would insinuate such a thing.

W. R. And in Part 8. page 10. thou speak of a Visible man to be an Eye to
see for the rest of the Body; and page 11. thou bring the same; and Part 6.
page 16. thou art muddling thy head again about the same thing, and tellest of
a late Doctrine, viz. Have your Eye to the Brethren. And say further, The
substance of this Doctrine has of late been published also in Public
Meetings, etc. As in the Natural Body the Eye is placed to see for all the rest
of the Members, so also in the Spiritual; and has been explained so, as it
has been sometimes taken, that G. F. is an Eye for the whole Body, and other
times, as if some other Persons were an Eye for a Meeting, etc.

Answ. But who have published these Doctrines (whom thou have so backbited in
Print) thou have not named their names; so must I pin my Faith on thy slieve
for the proof thereof. But has not my Caution to the simple-hearted, that they
should not be deceived by thy lying slanderous Book, tormented thee and thy
Spirit, because of thy wicked Works? And does not W. R. think himself to be an
Eye to his Brethren? And does he not take himself to be an Eye for John Story,
J. Wilkinson, and the rest of the Separate Company? And have not they made him
their Eye, and Tongue, and Mouth to Publish their Writings, and Words, and
their silly false Certifficate? Or is their Body without an Eye?

But the living Members, which are the Church, and the Body o Christ which he
is head of, he has given a Spiritual Eye unto; for he is their Eye by his
Light and Spirit, and without him we can do nothing: By which Light all Members
do see for themselves, and to edify one another in the most Holy Faith. -- And
I would have all people to have an Eye from Christ in themselves, that they may
see both thy Spirit, and thy Books, which many do now more fully see, than
before.

W. R. says, in Part 6. page 3, 4. When I consider what Multitudes of the
weaker sort of people, are apt to be deceived, by Embracing Shadows instead of
Substance, and Lies instead of Truth, etc. it has been one motive amongst
others, occasioned me once more to appear in Print.

Answ. Has not W. R. appeared here to make the weaker, and them that are apt
to be deceived (to believe him to be a strong man) and an Eye to see for them,
that which they are not able to see for themselves, nor help themselves who are
weak? so does not he pretend here to see for them, and to be a strength to
them? which he says, Has been one motive amongst others, occasioning him once
more to appear in Print? so has he not made himself a Seer, or an Overseer
here among others; which thing in effect, he Judges in the Body of Christ, of
which Body we are.

Now does not here W. R. confound himself? For why should not those Weak, hear
for themselves, and see for themselves, with the Light and Grace of Christ,
which thou W. R. confessest to be sufficient? And do not thou speak of an
Unction within them, by which all things were known? Part 8. page 11.

But Is not this the occasion that thou once more appearedst in Print, that
those Weak, and such as are apt to be deceived, may look at thy Writings? For
thou do not say, they should try thy Writings by the Light, and Grace of
Christ within them, (in the Third and Fourth Pages, Part Six.) But is it not
really thy mind, that they should believe thee, to see for them, and help them,
and to pin their Faith on thy Slieve? If not, to what end is thy Writing? For
if thou see neither for their Body, nor for the separate Meeting; what does
all thy Scribbling then signify?

W. R. Part 8. page 10. That the Grace of God is sufficient, and that every one
is to be left to their own measure. Thou needst not tell us that, who obey it.

And whereas thou go over and over in thy Book, telling us of G. F's Party;
but this is from thy malicious foul Spirit. We are not such a Party as thou
would insinuate, but are for Christ, and all his Believers in the Light,
which is the Life in Christ Jesus, before Parties were: And that in the Light,
Grace and Spirit of Christ, we might all exalt Christ, both in Males and
Females, and by it we may know him to Reign in all our hearts.

W. R. And whereas thou keep a Railing against the Second Days Meeting in
several places in thy Book.

Answ. I must tell thee, the least Babe in Christ, that is of that Meeting,
has an Understanding with the Light and Spirit of Christ, to see over thy foul
Spirit, and its Works: and God has given them the Spiritual Judgment to Judge
them both. And thou shall proceed no further, but art detected, and thy Folly
will be made manifest to all men that hear or see thy Books. And the God of
Heaven and Earth has suffered thee a while, that when thou have run thy Race,
he may fasten his Hook in thy Jaws.

And how dare W. R. Part 8. page 6. say, That the Second Days Meeting is Guilty
of the like Crime, of that nameless Book, that W. P. answered? Whereas Ellis
Hooks his name was set to the Book, on the behalf of the Second-Days-Meeting;
whose Credit did go as far as W. R's, and farther, among them that fear God.
And others also of us do own it, and will stand by it.

And W. R. Part 6. page 9. speaks, Of Saul 's harkening to Samuel the Prophet,
etc. ' Which he thinks, should be a warning to G. F. and others of his Party,
to hearken unto the Word of the Lord that came through his Servant John
Wilkinson, on the Twentieth Day of the Sixth Month, 1675. on this wise, viz. To
Repent and turn from your Proceedings, and leave Gods people to the Order of
his Gospel and Command; and that if they would not, then the Lord himself would
break them, and turn them one against another about their Orders; so far W. R.
of John Wilkinson.

Answ. But neither W. R's, nor J. W's Words do answer the Light of the Spirit
of God in our Consciences, to believe his words, as the word of the Lord, which
proceeded from his Imaginations, and lying perverse Spirit. For all the
Believers in the Light, which are the Children of Light, are in the Glorious
Order of his Gospel, the Power of God, and Command; and others are exhorted to
it.

And J. Wilkinson might see, (and thou also if thou and he will believe Truth)
that he is a false Prophet; and his false Prophecy is come upon himself. For
how many has the Lord broken off from them in the North, and also in the
South? And through thy Wicked Printings, many have come to see with the Light
of Christ your Wicked Spirit, and its Work: And especially when they see J. S's
and J. Wilkinson's Orders of giving power to meet; and those that would not
take them, but would meet without their Power and Orders, were called Usurpers
of Authority.

And many of these Simple-hearted, which were ensnared by Subscribing to them,
are come off from them, and have given Certificates against J. Story and J.
Wilkinson, which W. R. says, It was an Endeavoring to uncover the pretended
Nakedness of them, (to wit, his Brothers or Brethren) sending Certificates
abroad thereof, Spread amongst Friends and Enemies.

Now I do understand, that those Enemies were such, as J. W. and J. S. had
deceived and drawn into a Separation, or did Abet them; and the Friends were
the faithful that kept to Christ their head, and did not follow J. S. nor J.
Wilkinson in their Separation. And to such they were sent, that they might see,
how they had been betrayed; and as a Warning to others, that they might not be
deceived as thou had been. So the Spreading of those Certificates according
to the mind of those, who had been seduced into a joining with the Separate
Meeting, and were brought off through Gods Great Mercy, was to the honor of
God, and good Caution to others. Neither were they Printed; but sent amongst
Friends and thy own Company who are gone into Enmity, and so become Enemies.
This is no Parallel to the Printing and Spreading thy Wicked Book with Ham's
Spirit, to the dishonor of God and grief of his good People, rendering them
Apostates and Innovators, etc. (belying them) and so telling and publishing thy
slanders as in Gath and Askelon, to the gladding the hearts of the
Uncircumcised, and so manifesting thy own shame in going about to slander such
as God has Clothed, etc. And my Book stands still a Witness and a Testimony
upon thy head, and those that encouraged thee, against your foul Spirit.

And is there none come off in Wilts and Bristol, since the 20th of the Sixth
Month 1675.

I say, is there none come off from J. Story, J. Wilkinson, and W. Rogers? Yes
surely, Let Wilts and Bristol speak whether none there have come off from them,
and testified against their foul Spirit.

And W. R. unjustly compares J. Wilkinson and his false Prophecy with Samuel
the Prophet against Saul, which he thinks, should be a Warning to G. F. and
others to hearken to J. W 's false Prophecy: We have taken Warning but it is
concerning thine, J. Story's and J. W's Spirit, and do warn others to reject
his false Spirit and Prophecy, which if we should have believed, then we might
have Repented of it as some have done.

And so W. Rogers's and J. Wilkinson's own party is broken to pieces, as the
Certificates aforesaid manifest, and Gods People are settled and established
upon the Rock of Christ Jesus, and by the Certificate that follows, you may
Read J. Wilkinson's Apostasy; how he kept not his first Habitation. And was not
J. Story, and is not W. Rogers of the same Spirit with him.

A Certificate
FRom William Gandie in Relation of some words in discourse between him and J.
Wilkinson at William Gandies house some Years Past, concerning the Persecution
that was made by the late Act against Conventicles, and how liable such as I
(to wit William Gandie) who had a meeting twice in the Week at my house, were
liable to suffer, because the Informers did know certainly where to find us,
but said J. Wilkinson to me, we have taken a Course in Westmorland, to prevent
the informers for having their Prey upon us, for we appoint our Meetings in
Private places as Gills and Cloughs, where we think they cannot find us -- Then
I asked J. Wilkinson how they did appoint their meetings, whether Publicly,
etc. -- And J. W. said no, privately one to the other, -- And then how such
Friends should know, who might not be acquainted? or not be at the meeting, And
J. W. answered, they kept some one on a Hill, as a Boy, to give such Friends
Notice by signs, as by the Hat, or some such like signs, whither they might
repair to the Meeting -- And further J. W. advised me, to put the Meeting at my
house, to meet under a great Oak, that stands before my door in the Lane or
Kings high way, which would prevent them of Twenty Pounds due for my fine, etc.

This is as near as I can remember the Words that passed betwixt us.

Now I have often heard that William Rogers was about to Print, but I hoped
they would not have been so very Wicked, thus to show their Enmity; but they
will have their Reward.

So in this Day we may Bless the Lord that we have heen preserved from that
Spirit in our County.

William Gandie.
Cheshire the 9th of the 2d Month 1681.
W. R. says, Part 8. Page 14. Not one Iota of an Order approved by G. F s Party
can be Dispensed with to maintain the Ancient fellowship of the People called
Quakers.

Answer, But W. R. has not showed wherein, nor what all these Orders are, nor
our Ancient fellowship: This is but his empty Clamor like the Rest. And

Part 8 Page 13. W. R. says* whether such of G. F 's party, as declare
Disunion with another Person on the mere foot of that other Persons
Conscientious refusal to propose the Intention of his Marriage to a Meeting of
Women Distinct from Men, be not a Badge of Apostasy, etc.

Answer, This W. R. would insinuate, but has proved nothing with his dark
queries, nor named these other Persons, who do Conscentiously refuse. And page
15. he speaks of his Declarations of the Ancient Brethren, etc. exalting Christ
over all in Male and Female, the hope of Glory, etc. And why should not Christ
in the Female, as well as the Male; or why should not faithful Women have a
sight into the Marriages in the Covenant of God? And how can any Person
Conscientiously refuse or deny it.

And is not W. R. so high and lofty, that he and his followers do scorn to lay
a Marriage before Christ in the Female, as well as in the Male, or before the
faithful Women as well as the men, though in their Meetings they may be
Distinct or apart from the men, as absent in the Body, present in the Spirit
one with another. That so W. R. has n t yet proved Separation. For some of J.
Wilkinsons Party have called the Womens-Meetings an Idol; I am a Witness of it.

Part 6. Page 4. W. R. speaking of Opposers Recriminating Reflections, etc.
says, it has been one motive among others Occasioning me once more to appear
in Print: and one part of my End therein is, that some short Discovery may be
made of the ways and means, by which some simple-minded have heen betrayed, etc.

And he further speaking of the Second Days Meeting in London, says, These few
Lines shall remain on Record to the Infamy and shame of such as have approved
the aforesaid Books or Papers.

Answer, W. R. This shame and infamy will remain upon Record against thy self
and thine Adherents. And must not these thou calls simple, ensnared, betrayed
Friends, pin their faith on thy sleeve to unbetray them? But who the simple
betrayed Friends are, what they are betrayed in, and what our Recriminating
Reflections are, thou have not here named. And,

W. R. Thou say, Part 8 Page 11. The sense I have of the snare attending many
through Conformity to other men's Lines made ready to their hands in blind
Obedience, etc.

Answers. But who are those that are Conformable to other Men's Lines made ready
to their hands, and where are the Lines they are Comformable unto? Why have
thou not Printed them all? or must I pin my faith on thy sleeve in this also?
But what! W. R. who appearest in Print, for the simple and betrayed, is not the
Grace of God within, and the Light of Christ sufficient, by which all must be
kept to their own, to see Christ their Savior, that they need not look at thy
Lines made ready to their hands; which instead of undeceiving them, will
deceive them the more.

And as for the Second Days Meetings all thy brawlings and Clamours against the
Friends Concerned in that Meeting, they in the Lords Power do not regard, as
knowing thy words to be of no Credit with them that fear the Lord.

And W. R. are not all the Books, that thou have Printed against the Faithful
(in which thou have shot all thy Wicked Darts with thy foul Language) like unto
J. Story and J. Wilkinson's Condemnation thou drew up for them, which thou
calledst a Rattle to please Children? And could there have been more Wickedness
known in Man and Dissimulation, than that way? For was not thy Intent thereby
to deceive? And was not that a mark and a Badge of thy great Apostasy from the
Light of Christ and his Truth? But the Children of the Light, neither thou, nor
J. Story, nor J. Wilkinson, were able to deceive; And therefore thou Roarest
now like a Bull in a Nett, and reproachest such Faithful Friends, as here
desired thy Eternal Good.

And all thy Printed Books are like unto the Rattle thou speakst of to please
Children (and they must be Children indeed, and simple, and Betrayed from
Christ and his Light, that believe thy Rattles. But all that walk in the Light,
and are grafted into Christ, see over thee and them, and thou can not deceive
them. And therefore thou art in such a Toss and Tempest, and in a fretful,
Restless Spirit.

And what W. R! Would thou have a Meeting to wait upon the Lord to Manifest
thy Words, Works and Spirit? The Lord has sufficiently discovered both thy
Words, Works and Spirit by his Eternal Power and Spirit, and judged them. Thou
say, Thou art for Peace; Then call in all thy Dirty Wicked Books, and Condemn
them. And do not oppose the Light of Christ and his Grace, the Truth and the
Spirit in his people, nor the Gospel, the power of God in Men and Women, which
has led them to Christ and God, to meet in his Power and Spirit, by which they
are gathered to him, to take care of Gods Truth (which is their Duty) that he
be not dishonored, and the Camp of God may be kept Clean; And to see that all
Marriages may be performed desently and in Order, that Christ in the Female, as
well as in the Male may have an Eye in them, that both Male and Female being
Faithful to God may be Meet-helps together in Truth and in Righteousness and
Holiness in Christ Jesus.

But if thou do proceed, and go on, Gods Eternal Sword of his Spirit is
drawn against thee and that Spirit that takes thy part; and therefore be
warned. For its Judgment is begun, and his Sword will not be put up, until it
has perfected its Work: And when thou feel it cut, and the Terrors of the
Lord upon thee, for thy Wicked Works sake; in which thou have cried Peace,
Peace, but instead of Peace, Peace, nothing but Destruction will come upon thee.

Then William, O the Horror! when the Vengeance of God is upon thee for abusing
people with thy deceitful Rattles. Then remember the tender Bowels of them,
that sought thy Eternal Good, and would have reclaimed thee; for had thou
kept to the Witness of God, and Judged J. S. and J. W. thou had never
followed this Disorderly Spirit of the son of Perdition, which is exalted above
all that is called God in thee, which seeks to betray Gods people and his Truth
( Judas like) to the World.

But if ever God should be so Merciful to thee as to bring thee down to his
Witness in thy self, thou would Lament the Day that ever thou espousedst
that Spirit, that led J. S. and J. W. from the Truth, and so turned against the
Faithful Friends and Children of the Light.

W. R. Thou go over and over in thy Books with slighting Expressions against
our Church Government, and that in a lofty scoffing despising way: But I must
tell thee, Christ who is the Governor has established by his Light, Power and
Spirit, his Government in the hearts of all his Children of Light, who are
living Members of his Body, his Church, which he is the living head of; and the
Gates of Hell shall not Prevail against it. And by Christ's Light in themselves
every Male and Female in the Church sees their service and their Duty to God.

And W. R. Thou art busying and mudling thy head about G. F's Trade, thou had
better let G. F. and his Trade alone, who never did Despise the smallest honest
calling upon Earth.

W. R. says Part 8. page 8. Let G. F. know whether he can receive it or no,
that probable the Name of a Quaker might not have been despised so much by many
as it now is, had he but followed the example of W. D. and other his
fellowlabourers, keeping at some honest outward calling, instead of mudling his
head to bring about a Conformity to his outward Orders. For I am fully
satisfied in my Conscience, that that noisome scent that has risen like smoke
from the bottomless Pit, has been occasioned from an Antichristian Promotion
of his outward Orders; so far W. Rogers.

Answ. Now the Reader may see this Man's Spirit, he has not given a Catalogue
of these outward Orders, that the Reader may see them. And his Clamorous Tongue
is but from his Antichristian Spirit and Evil Conscience, and the noisome smoke
of his bottomless Pit; but he cannot darken Gods Air; for the Sun of
Righteousness is arisen with healing in his Wings, which shines over all; but
God will judge him for his foul Language, and hard speeches; for many weapons
have been formed against G. F. since he was about 19 years old, and moved of
the Lord to forsake all, and to follow the Lamb.

But how can W. R. tell and be so confident that G. F. has not some concerns
in the outward Creation, having a Family? He has not proved the Contrary,
which he must do, or else stop his Mouth for shame; for if he had not, how is
it, that he has been under sufferings and exercises some Years in several
Courts for not paying Tithes, and his quoting W. D. in the case, is mere
flattery.

But what outward calling was that J. Story followed, and J. Wilkinson, (when
they were at Bristol? let Friends of Bristol and Wiltshire speak, where they
were, and what it was,) whom he calls his honorable Brethren! and how have
they kept the Name of a Quaker from being despised there! What a malicious
Spirit guides thee to defame (if possible) G. F. that dear and faithful Servant
of God, who through his Grace has been such a Faithful Instrument in his hand,
that by him thousands have been converted to God through the Gospel committed
to him, and have been shod with the preparation of it to defend them from the
Briars and Thorns, the Exercises and Troubles of this evil World, to bring them
to Peace with the Lord. And the Authority of God is with him still to preserve
him to stand over the Devil, and thy foul Spirit, and all the Agents and
Instruments of Iniquity; whose Life has been preserved through great
sufferings. And those wicked Darts, which have been shot at him by thee and
such Apostates and Envious ones as thou art, have recoiled back again into
their own evil Souls. And who yet ever hated him and scorned him as thou do,
that ever prospered as to Godward, but in the end perished and withered?

And W. R. thy disdain and folly and malice appears in Reflecting about G. F.
his following no outward Calling, who is in his Calling and Service exercised
with all his might, that in the end he may give up a blessed and faithful
account through the Eternal Spirit of the Ever-living God of his Calling and
Service, he was in his young years called unto, forsaking all other Callings
and Concerns in this World to do the Work he was called unto; and is still in
his Calling; and who in this our day has traveled, labored and suffered more
on Truth's Account, than he has done? Who is still spending himself, that in
the end he may be spent in the Work of it, and lay down his head in Peace and
Joy in the Lord. And I am sensible, that all the Witnesses of God in his
Tabernacle will arise to judge and witness against thee and thine Abettors in
that foul Spirit, by which you are acted to Blaspheme God, his Truth and
faithful people. And now if W. R. by outward Orders, means the Men and Women's
Meetings, which G. F. and many other faithful Brethren and Elders in Christ,
were moved in the Power and Spirit of the Lord to direct people to set up such
Meetings, did and do answer the Spirit of God, in all that fear him; and with
the Spirit of God we witness the Authority of them to be the Power of God; And
we do witness with the Spirit of God a great service in them and for them to
see and take care for the Poor, and for the Widows and Fatherless; and to
exhort and admonish such that walk not according to the Gospel of Christ Jesus,
or cause his Name to be dishonored or blasphemed. And to see that all that do
Marry, have their Relations Consent, and be free from Intanglements with all
other Persons in Relation to Marriage; and to see, that the Widow and
Fatherless, be not wronged in their Estates in Marriage. And we do not limit
the Faithful Women in Jesus Christ from their exercise and care in such things,
but that all things may be seen to be done in Truth and Righteousness, to the
Praise and Glory of God. And these be the outward Orders W. R. speaks of, that
stink, and are so noisome, like the smoke from the bottomless Pit, and from an
Antichristian Promotion in W. R's Eyes and Nose; I tell him, we will stand by
them in Gods Power and Spirit against his wicked spirit; and God will Judge him
for his foul and wicked words.

W. R. Thou say, part 6. p. 5. 22. what is frequently brought to thy Ears,
etc. and thou say witness the Persecution raised against J. S. and J. W. and
proceeding against John Ainloe at a Quarterly Meeting in the Isle of Ely. And I
really pity J. A. that he should ever have given the least occasion wherefore
such a wicked adversary as thou art should be an advocate for him against us.
Alas Poor J. A! once Dear to me; my Soul wishes thee well.

But why did not W. R. set down the matter of Fact, that the Quarterly meeting
had against John Ainloe, together with the informers Names, that brought these
things to his Ears, and not to hide them under his dark Curtain? But has W. R.
sent his informations to the said Quarterly meeting, that the informers have
given him, that he might know the Truth of it, before he published it to the
Nations in Print? But we can expect little otherwise but General Clamours from
this Spirit.

And it is a gross abuse, and slender to say that ever Persecution was raised
against J. W. and J. S. by the Children of Light, but they sought their good;
who wilfully resisted all tender Admonitions. And though with thy Wicked
Spirit thou over and over smitest at G. F. and other Faithful Elders; yet both
he and many others can say, Many Weapons have been formed against him and us,
by Apostates and profane: But the Lord says, no Weapon that is formed against
thee shall prosper; and every Tongue that shall rise up in Judgment against
thee, thou shall condemn. This is the Heritage of the Servants of the Lord, and
their Righteousness is of me, says the Lord: so God has Restrained the
Weapons, and he gives Spirit and Power to Condemn those Evil tongues, as thine,
that rise up in Judgment against them.

And something I have to say concerning that Scripture thou bring Gal. 2.
further to manifest thy folly, 6 part, p. 5. W. R. thou say, if the mere
Discovering of Nakedness by some professor of Truth against another be a Sin,
then doubtless Paul was a sort of sinner in leaving it on Record, that he
withstood Peter to the face, because he was to be blamed for his Dissimulation,
read 2d. Chap. of the Gal. To this I answer that from the 14. verse of the said
Chapter we learn, that Paul's reproof was before all Men, etc. Answ. This proof
W. R brings to cover himself in Printing of his book, and to abuse the
faithful; And this proof he brings for a looking-glass for G. F. to behold his
face in, as he scornfully says. And now reader try his Doctrine, whether it be
not a proper Looking-glass for himself, and his Company. For 1st. did Paul
publish what he blamed Peter for, and withstood him in? and did he spread it up
and down in the Nations, yea and beyond the seas, as W. R. or some of his
Abettors have done? and have not some Priests and professors got them, that are
Enemies to the Light of Christ? let W. R. prove, that Paul did publish a book
against Peter, as he has done against Friends; and Paul's leaving it upon
Record, was in his Epistle to the Galatians, and was not that the Church of
Christ there? And therefore I put W. R. to prove it, that Paul did publish and
spread his book among the unbelieving Jews, or Gentile- Galatians.

Now we must try W. R. with the Scripture he brings, that the Reader may see
how he has abused the Scripture.

For in the 2d. Chapter to the Gal. verse. 14. to this he says, that from the
14. verse of that Chapter we may learn that Paul's reproof was before all men.
But let W. R. take his Looking-glass, and see whether he learns any such thing,
in the 2d. Chap. to the Gal. verse. the 14.

The Apostles words are these; But when I saw, that they walked not uprightly
according to the Truth of the Gospel, I said unto Peter, before them all, etc.
Now before them all, who were them all? were they all the believers then
present? he does not mention here (all men) but says, before them all, who were
them all? were they not them that were present? for here is not the Word, Men
in this verse; and the Reader may see that W. R has manifestly wronged, and
falsified the Scripture here.

And W. R. goes about to confirm it, and says, If any say Paul did not Publish
it in Gath and Askalon; To this He says, I Answer that from the 14th verse of
the 2d chap. to the Gal. we learn, that Paul's Reproof was before all Men. But
W. R. and his we, have not learned this from that Scripture, neither did W. R.
learn there, that he should Publish his Book in Gath and Askalon, neither that
Paul Published that which he blamed Peter for in Gath and Askalon; which thou
Fallaciously bring to cover thy Spirit, but instead of covering thy self,
thou have tumbled thy self over and over in the Dirt, and showed thy own
Nakedness.

W. R. says, Part 6. page 5. It Is frequently brought to my Ears, that our
Opposers common discourse is, that I have written a wicked Book against the
faithful Friends of Truth; that if all I had therein written were true, yet the
Spirit that gave it forth must be wrong, and the same with Hams, because it
discovers the Nakedness of a Father.

Answ. But if therein he alludes to the 5th Page of my Book, he perverts my
Words, and the Intent of them; for I do not say, it discovers the Nakedness of
a Father, as he has Maliciously Writ; but my Words are these, That W. R. has
endeavored to uncover the Nakedness of such as once he accounted his Brethren
and Elders, or Fathers, whom God has clothed. For thou have not, neither
can thou uncover the Nakedness of such Brethren, and Elders or Fathers, to
present them Naked to the View of the whole World, by Publishing of thy Book so
that herein thou have really done worse then Ham, for he wickedly and really
uncovered his Fathers Nakedness; but thou wickedly endeavourest to do it, or so
to present it to the View of the World, to make the Uncircumcised rejoice; so
that thy Sin herein is doubled; for thou have represented the thing which
really is not so in it self, that is, they are not Naked, but Clothed with
Gods Righteousness, whom thou have represented to be Naked; but have discovered
thy own Nakedness, and herein thou have exceeded Ham, who discovered a real
Nakedness. And also thy malice and wickedness in it has exceeded his, whose
work as I said in mine, may be said to have been a hasty rash Action, done on a
sudden, without premeditation; but thou have long premeditated, and labored to
bring forth thy wicked Book in Print, and endeavourest to betray and deceive
Peoples minds, that they may believe thy Lies, Juggling and Legerdemain, in
this matter

Christopher Tailor

Postscript.
SInce these Sheets were written, I have seen three Printed Sheets from one
Thomas Crisp, a man outwardly unknown to me, but that he is of an evil Spirit I
know well, and as I am credibly Informed, he is one of the old Apostate
Quakers, that went out from Truth many Years since; for they say he was once
convinced of it, but never since had the happiness, because of his evil heart,
to return into it again, as I am informed, but went on still backwards more and
more, and was Married by a Priest, and pleads for Gods allowance to him in so
doing by his Spirit, and also pleads for the liberty of paying Tithes by the
allowance of Gods Spirit, and also for the use of the Language Truth disowns,
as in the second Part of Babels Builders, p. 5. and in all this would cover
himself under the Notion and Profession of one of his Brother William Rogers
his Christian Quakers; Now let the Christian Reader consider, whether those
aforementioned were the Principles of our Ancient Friends and Brethren, who
came forth in the beginning in the great Authority and Power of God; and does
not this envious Spirited man, appear still to be in his Apostasy from the
Truth? does not his Language and Principles bewray him, to be no friend to the
truly Christian Quaker? And it may be he thinks now he has a grand
opportunity, by his joining with his Brethren, W. R. J. Pennyman, etc. in their
Rebellion and gainsaying the Truth, to become a kind of dark sect-master,
amongst their (so called) Christian Quakers; but they are blind indeed; who
cannot see such an Idle-headed Apostate as this man is, who would draw
Disciples after him, by reproaching Gods Truth and People.

His three Sheets are by him called [the second and third Part of Babels
Builders, etc.] wherein his Idle brain has been at work, and he has used my
name, or the Letters of it eight or nine times over; And his Text against me it
seems is out of the 3d page of my Epistle of Caution, etc. where speaking of
dear G. F. abused by W. R. I affirm that still he is made Instrumental in the
hand of the Lord to bring forth blessed things for the service of God, and his
Truth, from the Oracles of the Divine Breath, etc. This T. C. cannot endure to
hear of, no more than his Brother W. R. because they would have him and
thousands more that fear the Lord to be accounted Apostates, and so render them
dead, and their Divine breath stopped, and so altogether incapable to bring forth
blessed things for the Service of God and his Truth; but that is certainly
their own Condition, speaking perverse things in a heady, wilful mind, against
such as through the Grace of God have kept the true faith of Gods Elect, who
cannot be deceived by their speaking perverse things against us, but now Reader
observe his forgery, in his 2d page, speaking of our Idol G. F. his Laws, and
would insinuate those he calls G. F. his Laws to be an Idol, and me to be an
Idolator to Adore them as from the Oracles of the Divine breath, and in the 4th
page, he speaks of my having given G. F. unfitting titles, and names, but tells
not what they are; and in the 12th page, he is highly offended that I should
affirm that G. F. etc. are the best among the Quakers, or the best of Gods
servants; see his base foolish Spirit: what has this T. C. W. R. J. P. etc.
done in their time for God in his service? have they ever been Instrumental to
turn one person to Righteousness, since they were called Quakers? or when did
any of them Print any thing for God, before they begun to push with their horns
against us; Now they are become Champions, such as they are, to draw from the
Truth into their own Condition who are Apostatized from it as much as in them
lies, and so are the Ministers of the Devil and Antichrist, like ravening
evening Wolves and Bears they wait to meet with their Prey, and devour the
Righteous seed, but God will confound them, and their wicked design, and we
trample in the power of God upon their evil Spirit, if they do their worst. And
as Christ Jesus said to Judas, that Traitor, That thou do, do quickly; so
that they do, let them do quickly, that when they have done their wicked work
without repentance they may go to their proper place. -- And as for my adoreing
G. F. and his Laws, it is an ignorant, sottish, Idle, Childish Story; I knew
before thou T. C. W. R. I Pennyman, were called Quakers how to Adore and
Worship the true and living God, and still do know how to love and dearly to
esteem such Ancient Elders and Friends as were and are still Instrumental to
bring forth blessed things for the service of God and his Truth; and this is
done by a Divine breath, etc. and thus to affirm is neither to Adore or Worship
Men or Things, but to Assert the Truth, which thou have not disproved with thy
scandalous lying breath, and thy lies and slanders are detected, and I charged
thee to make thy charge good wherein I am such an one as Adore G. F. and his
laws, as thou calls them; bring thy proof, or eat thy words; for thou have
grossly perverted mine, as the Reader may see; and the least thing that's done
by the weakest Instrument in obedience to God's Will, is by a Divine Spirit or
Breath, which thou scoffs at, and falsely call it, Adoring or worshipping G.
F, and his laws, etc. and I lay it upon thee when thou Prints again, to set
down this Idol what it is, and such as thou calls G. F, his laws, set down a
Catalogue of them all, for people will not else I hope be satisfied to pin
their Faith on thy, or thy brethrens sleeves, to believe your bawlings against
them, as if they were some misshapen Monstrous things, Now T. Crisp, I must tell
thee, thy cause is naught, and thy brethrens also, and thy and your Battle of
Wickedness will come to an end, and I pray God preserve his People unto himself
from your muttering, peeping Counsels, who lie in wait to destroy the
simple-minded with your Craft and Wickedness; and this is my Testimony, that
your Work is wicked, and the God of Heaven is highly displeased with you; and
if I should never more in my native Country appear in Print, or however I may
in this outwatd World be disposed on, I say, I affirm in the presence of God,
that thou T. C. W. R. J. Pennyman, and all the rest, who in their hearts and
souls have resolutely Espoused your Cause against G. F. and thousands others,
both Elders and Friends of Truth, that though for a while, the Lord may suffer
you as an exercise and trial to his People, yet your wicked Rebellion and
gainsaying will come to an end; and except it be possible you can find a place
of Repentance, your end will be miserable; and this Testimony I leave behind
me, however the merciful, good and most gracious God may dispose of me. Oh! my
native Country, how dear is my love to thee! Praying that the Lords holy Truth
may still prevail in thee, and that my Friends and Brethren in the Truth may be
kept faithful in it, that his Glory may still arise, and his Power prevail, so
that this Nation may be as a Nursery to the Nations about it, to send forth
Rigbteous and Faithful Plants with success into his Vineyard, that thousands
and ten thousands may be alarmed by the sound of Truth, to come out of their
Graves of sin and unbelief, to the Resurrection, and Salvation of Jesus Christ,
Amen.

The 8th of the 9th Month, 1681.
Thomas Crisp said, That he has paid Tithes lately; and that the Spirit of God
did or might allow him to pay Tithes or Marry by a Priest; And that by the same
Spirit of God another might be required not to pay them, or not to do the same
things.

This Thomas Crisp spoke the day and Year abovesaid, and consented to have it
Writ and Printed; and took a Copy of the aforesaid Words.

Witness John Field, Jun.

See what an Agent W. R. J. Story and J. Wilkinson have gotten, who is a false,
wicked perverter of the Truth and of Friends Ancient Testimonies in the Truth
in the beginning. Oh monstruos! To set the Spirit of the Living God against it
self! Did we ever thirty years since, and since to this day, Preach for
Doctrine, and tell People, The Spirit of God did or might allow them to pay
Tithes or Marry by a Priest; and that by the same Spirit of God another might
be required not to pay them, or not to do the same things? Here the Reader may
see their Confusion and Blasphemy against Gods Spirit and Truth, what they
would be at under the Pretense of Liberty: so that at the last (for ought I
know) they may commit gross Evils, which Truth Condemns, and say, It is their
Liberty, and God allows them to do it by his Spirit, though others may be
Judged for it; And so by this wicked principle usher in all manner of
Ranterism. Alas! how miserably blind are those that cannot discern these men's
wicked and ungodly design, how mad and wicked they are to make void the Cross
of Christ, and wrest the Truth to serve the Turn of their own Licentious
Spirits and Carnal Minds. And I doubt not but some of these Brawlers against
us, are got too far with their Liberty into the Ditch already to their own
destruction, who do not deserve the name of a Quaker.

And now at this time, when we are exposed to great sufferings by
Imprisonments, spoiling of Goods, etc. for these Apostates T. C. W. R. and
their Adherents to be so malicious, as at such a time as this, to render us
Odious to the World by spreading and Printing their defaming, lying, and
slanderous Books against us: All sober Readers may see, how the malicious mask
is taken off these Babel-builders, and so their Spirit is seen to be the same
with those old Apostates, that are gone before them; And that they do but
hypocritically deceive People in pretending themselves to be Quakers, who are
none, nor Children of the Light, as may be seen by their Books and Principles;
And from that meek Spirit of Life and Truth they are gone; and under pretense
of exalting Christ and his Kingdom, they are exalting self, and with it are
opposing the Order of the Gospel, and the Law of the Spirit of Life, which is
in Christ Jesus: and their wicked Spirit and Work is to be Judged out of the
Camp of God.

John Story being asked, why he did not hinder William Rogers from Printing his
great wicked Book against us? in my hearing he Answered, That William Rogers
was such a Strong Willful Man that if he set upon a thing, he would do it, if
all the World set against him. So that W. R. may see what Esteem J. S. (his
great Elder and Brother) had of him, if he spoke not in Hypocricy at that time.

And W. R. what is that Honor that thou so often over and over in thy great
wicked Book gives and applaudeth to J. Story, and J. Wilkinson? is it from
Above or from Below, Spiritual or Temporal, Heavenly or Earthly? Answer Yea or
Nay.

Against W. R's Charge of Popery, and others.
WHereas W. R. 8th Part Page 3. as in many other places, Charge us with
Popish Principles and Practices. And Page 5. reflects on learning from Authors.
And in particular R. Baxter, as if G. F's Cause were at a low Ebb, in being
beholding to him and Presbyterians. To these few words at present. G. F's Cause
is no more beholding to him and Presbyterians, etc. than to W. R. J. S. and J.
W. etc. when they confess to Truth against themselves, or practice it, and yet
blame it in others. To that purpose I cite R. B. and others, C. 1. Sect. 45.
who in his History of Bishops and Councils, speaking of some Papists, says, he
cannot believe they were ill men; wherein I compare his Charity (though
accounted of the riged Sect) with W. R's, though owning Universal Grace, yet
excluding Micha's Mother from his, and though the Presbyterians now join with
W. R's abettors, against Women's Services in the Church, yet formerly they did
not so; But stood for them, as some also of other Persuasions. As D. M.
Sutcliff Dean of Chelsy College, False semblant, etc. c. 6.
a Cheiftain for the Church of England, proves from a Sermon of theirs on Romans
12.8. saying, unless they have Deaconesses, they exclaim that the Church is
maimed, (and condemn all other Churches) because Widows are Members of the
Church, as a Body, showing mercy, etc. And the said Doctor confesses, that
Ancient Churches, diverse of them, had Widows and Virgins, but not as Officers
(which Titles we stand not for, Ibid. cap. 13. from Act. 13.1. Cap. mass.
Musculus Soc. Com. Of the Nature and Administrations of the Church lib. 2. c. 4.
nor single life, nor other circumstances, which vary with times, but
substance) And says, if such were restored, they would resemble Nuns. But
Junius a great light in the Protestant-Church, as some call him, in the place
cited already, speaking of Deaconesses, says, they did partake of the Ministry
or Deaconry, as far as Women were fitter for it. And that some footsteps of
this remains in Hospitalls, etc. where Nunes sometimes are placed for service,
as Rubbish of a decayed house. And wishes that the Ministry of Women were
restored, according to the Rule of God's Word, the Examples of the Ancients,
and the Laws of Charity. This to stop the scorn and aspersion that I read in
Popish Authors. Cave, Gualter, Bucan.
For besides Langley's Abridgment, a Protestant, I name three other Protestants
besides these here; And could do many besides in time, I Question not Henoch
Clapham, who writes also against the Puritans (as Sutcliff, Clapham Brief of
Bible, 2. Part. Staff. 13.
some whereof were for Deaconesses; as appears in his Epistle Dedicatory to the
Arch Bishop, in K. James's Reign, yet confesses that almost all grant easily
that there were two sorts of Deacons, or Church-servitors, the first of men
Act. 6, 3, etc. 1. Tim. 3.^8. the second of Women, 1. Tim. 5.9, etc. Romans 16.1.
And that they attended the sick and impotent many held. So he. But some as the
Priests cry Popery, Popery, as Papists cried Heresy, Heresy, to people Ignorant
of those things; without any proof? but as Thieves in the head of the
Hue-and-cry; by their suspicious clamours to cause the honest man to be taken
that they may escape. As may be seen in a piece with G. W. I have writ in
answer to a Priest about Durham, about Justification. And in an answer to a
Priest in Scotland by Geo. Keith, called, Quakerism no Popery. And now seeing
these men cry Popery, but prove it not, I shall in short at present prove our
Assertions not Popery from the Chieftains against Popery, Controv. 4. q. 7. l.
2. n. 3.
viz. D. Whitaker, and Juell against Bellarmin and Stapleton, the Great Popish
Polemic Doctors. The first Whitaker, says, not only Peter, but any the meanest
Minister can impose and bind the Consciences of men, not as Author, Explic.
Cat. de peccat. Act. did. 3.
but as Minister; but I find not in him, or any other, the Condition if they be
convinced. Nay, on the contrary, I find in Ursin assented to by Panaeus and
Junius, all eminent Protestants, a distinction of sin against Conscience, and
sin not against Conscience, grounded on 1 Timothy 1.13. with whom Beza agrees;
Beza on the place. In Obenheim pugn. Expos. page 607.
that Ignorance is a sin, though not so great. The like with Brentius an
Eminent Protestant also, and Theophylact, called a Father, on Joh. 9.41. and
chapter 15.22. Juel, Act. 27. against D. Cole, affirming ignorance to be the Mother
of Devotion, cites Agustin on Psalm. 33. saying, the Kingdom of Ignorance is the
Kingdom of Error, Origin, Origin on numb. hom. 27.

Conc. Tolet 4. can. 24.


that the Devils have possession of them that are Ignorant. Toletan Council,
that Ignorance is the mother of all Error. But the Libertin Doctrine is, If
Ignorant of, or not seeing it our Duty, that is free from Conviction, then free
from Error, free from sin, free from Satan, free from Church censure, etc. And
then is not Ignorance the mother of Freedom from sin and Satan. And how comes
that short of the Papists, That its the mother of Piety, as they say, This is
the Consequence, that Ignorance is a safe State, though Christ says, the blind
may be led into the Ditch. I know of none that say among us, follow us blindly
without any sight at all. But to keep the single eye open, to see in measure,
to see whom to follow, as they follow Christ. Joh. 3.19.
For if they abide in darkness, loving darkness rather than light, and hating
it by which they should see, Romans 1.2.
it is through their evil deeds: And if their foolish heart be darkened, it is
because they liked not to retain God in their knowledge, though that which may
be known of God is manifest in them. And if given up to believe a lie, 2 Thessalonians.
2.10, 11.
it is for not receiving the love of the truth, but having pleasure in
unrighteousness, These causes of Ignorance in Apostates from truth are declared
by the Scriptures, and Primitive Doctrine. And if it has been declared, you
are not Condemned for what you know not, but for what you know and disobey. It
is to be understood only Comparatively, Act. 17.30.
as in the places above quoted; and that the time of Ignorance has been winked
at. 1. Cor. 4.4. Paul says, I know nothing by my self (or I am not Conscious)
yet am I not hereby justified. And Beza (no friend, but great Opposite, Larger
Notes.
to Papists) on that place says, This saying of Paul is to be restreined to a
certain supposition; For Spirits both are to be judged; and we ought to try our
selves, whether we be in the Faith. Neither also does the Apostle Condemn
private Judgments of Charity; and much less either Civil or Ecclesiastical
Polity.

But enough of this at this time (one may think) to balance with a private
uncharitable Judgment, that our Doctrine and Practice is Popish; without any
other proof, but that W. R. is so persuaded, he has said it and the people
must pin their Faith on his sleeve. His Authority is all, as all Authors;
thereby he charges us virtually with them all in Gross, in the lump. But let us
see them single, to be tried, seeing herein we must be tried by them; for as
Erroneous Doctrine must be tried by the Scriptures, as they say, and Spirits by
the Spirit; So Popery being that which came up under the Pope, and generally
opposed by Protestants, can only be proved to be such by their Authors.

Possevinus in Atheismis cap. 13.
For Socinianism denying the divinity of Christ, a gross Error, yet is not
Popery. And Papists holding the Contrary is not therefore Popery, but was
before Popery, Truth. So herein he has also but exposed himself an evil
surmiser to those he has exposed us to as such. Gault. on Jon. 1.
For whose sake also this is, to prevent the poison of prejudice and jealousy,
than which nothing is more fallacious and unjust, Arg^on is it. ein Schalck.
(...).
according to the German Proverb. To which agrees the Greek verse. signifying
that More devilish slanders arise from thoughts than deeds.

Proverb. 18.17. He that is first in his own Cause seems just, but his
Neighbor comes, and searches him.



A lover of Truth, R. R.

FINIS.

