A True NARRATIVE OF The Examination, Trial, and Sufferings of James Nayler in
the Cities of London and Westminister, and his deportment under them.

With the Copies of sundry Petitions and other Papers, delivered by several
Persons to the Lord Protector, the Parliament, and many particular Members
thereof, in his behalf. With diverse remarkable Passages (relating thereto)
before his Journey to Bristol, whither he is now gone toward the filling up
the measure of his Sufferings.

Esth. 3. 8. And Haman said unto King Ahasuerus, There is a certain people
scattered abroad, and dispersed among the people in all the Provinces of thy
Kingdom; And their Laws are diverse from all people; neither keep they the
Kings Laws. Therefore it is not for the Kings profit to suffer them.

Printed in the Year, 1657.

To the truly Christian Readers.
GReat is the enmity between the two Seeds, that of the Woman, and that of the
Serpent. A Truth, which though every Christian does experiment in himself, in
his measure and degree; yet it is then rendered most remarkable, when the
appearances of Christ are most signal, and carry a greater disagreement with
flesh and blood, and the glories of the first Creation. The reason is this, the
natural man having escaped the grosser pollutions of the World, and decking
himself with the knowledge of Christ Jesus after the Flesh, and the litterall
understanding of the Scripture, is whetted thereby with greater zeal and fury
to oppose the ministration of Christ in the Spirit, and his exsertions of
himself in that simplicity, innocence, and selfdenyall, which are proper only
to this dispensation. The legal Spirit is filled with indignation to be fo
far left behind, yea to be in danger of losing all, by this spiritual birth
of the Child Jesus in the Heart, as Herod was at the apprehension of his loss
in the outward, upon the relation of the natural birth.

This was the ground of the sufferings of the Prophets, of Christ himself, and
many of the Saints since that time; whether this consideration obtain not in
the present case of James Nayler, upon the perusal of this ensuing Treatise,
no doubt you will receive full satisfaction.

It Is an acquiescence to some Spirits, that they bore their Testimony against
it, and though their endeavors did not produce their desired effect, yet
having discharged their consciences, as in the sight of the Lord, and resting
in his will, they shall not lose their reward.

Who knows how necessary sufferings are for the Saints? yea how great a measure
of them is yet behind? Gird up therefore the loins of your minds, and receive
an alarm from the hand of the Lord to that self denial, and patience in which
you are to prssesse your souls until the Lord come.

It is not denied, but a Saint may be subject to many Temptations; 'twas the
privilege of Christ alone not to be overcome by them; yet when the True Judge
appears, he will embrace his own seed; and pass sentence, not according to
occasional diversions, but according to the constant tenor of the integrity
and uprightness of our spirits in his fight.

A REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE, TO WHOM The Examination of James Nayler,
Blasphemer, and other Misdemeanors were referred.
Resolved,
THat the matter of Fact, together with the particular Resolutions of this
Committee thereupon, be reported to the House.

First, I shall give you the short History of his Life, as the Committee had it
from his own mouth: He says he was born in the Parish of Ardisloe, near
Wakefield in Yorkshire, where he lived 22, or 23. years, till he was married
(according to the world) as he expressed it. Then he removed into the Parish of
Wazefield, where he continued till the last Wars began; during which time he
was under several Commands, and at last was Quartermaster in Major General
Lamberts Troop; in which Service he continued till disabled by sickness in
Scotland, and so retired to his own home; about which time he was a Member of
an Independent Church at Horbery in Yorkshire, of which Church Mr. Christopher
Marshal was Pastor; and by the same Church since cast out If he was cast out,
it was not till some years after he had withdrawn from them, for their wanton
and unchristian carriage, especially of Christopher Marshal their Pastor; which
things he had charged upon them, and given them in writing under nine
particulars, proving their practice contrary to Scripture, but never yet
received a line from them of any crime, as he declared before the Commit; and
how does this prove him an Imposture, etc.
(as himself confesses he has heard) From others, but nor from them.
by which Church he was charged as guilty of Blasphemy, Which Blasphemy was,
That he had affirmed in a book, Justification by the gift of Gods
Righteousness, which he proved from Romans 5. which stopped their mouths.
and uncivil and wanton carriage But nothing proved further then common
salutations, which then were not accounted evil, being about seven years since,
and before he saw the vanity of those customs.
with one Mrs. Rop^r a married Woman, as that she should sit on his knee, and
kiss him before diverse other persons; So it seems it was not done in a corn.
and that it was his Opinion, He might lie with any Woman that was of his
Judgment. Which he denied before the Committee, as utterly false, being never
his Judgment.
And then after some time, Which time was this last Summer, being so many years
after.
went to visit the quakers in Cornwall, and by his way was by Major Saunders
This is false, for Major Saunders gave him liberty to go on his journey; but he
was brought back about 20. miles from thence, and committed by a Judge, and
fined 20. marks for not putting off his hat.
committed to the Common-Goal in Exon, as a Vagrant. Of which company few had
bin Prisoners, as is intimated.
And thence he and his Company being delivered Must it be taken for granted
because alleged, when nothing is made appear that is evil?
by an Order from the Council. They traveling to Bristol, in the way Nayler
took upon him What?
as was alleged And four men, and what is the reason they are not mentioned as
well as the women?
against him. And as he passed through Chewstoke in the County of Sommerset,
toward Bristol, it is informed upon oath, certified by three Justices to the
Committee, That staying in that Town one night, he was there in a Chamber with
three Women But was there not fourmen, and two women more in the room?
of his Company, leaning upon the bed with one of them at night when the
servant of the house left them. And in the morning the servant found Nay^er on
the bed with one of the Women, and the Curtains drawn; and some of the Company
What evil was in this? if while he was on the bed, some of the rest also were
leaning upon some part of the bed, there being but one bed in the room, and
they having sit up all night.
wished the servant to make no noise to awake them.

The way taken in this Report, will be,

First, to give you the Articles charged against him.

Secondly, The Evidence, wherein there will be a little mention of the
Examinations and Informations upon Oath taken at Bristol; against which,
because there lies a seeming Objection, I shall first clear that upon the
matter of Fact.

The Objection was, That they were not read again to the parties as is usual in
such Cases.

Answer: That two Witnesses, both of more then ordinary good Repute, in that
place were both put, and took Characters of the questions and answers there,
and comparing their Notes, did both of them publicly avow to the Committee, as
that which they were ready to depose, That every material passage was read unto
the parties once or twice I hats utterly false, for the Prisoners did not hear
them read.
after they writ it down; and that they were the same which were offered to the
Committee, attested under the Mayor of Bristols hand to every of the said
Examinations and Informations, and the City-Seal annexed to the whole. And
besides there is nothing in the said Examinations and Informations taken there,
but what is generally more clearly made out upon their Examinations before the
Committee.

Other Evidence will be from Naylers Examination, wherein is most of this whole
matter, which was taken in Characters You had done well to have given in his
full Answers in your Report, and not to pick what ye thought good, and to
conceal the rest.
by five of the Committee, who were appointed to, and did compare their Notes.

Thirdly, the opinion of the Committee.

The whole Fact will fall under one of these two Articles.

First, James Nayler did assume How assume! because he was silent, and
submitted to the will of his Father?
the gesture, words, honor, worship, and miracles of our blessed The Pharisees
who persecuted the Prophets life, yet garnished their Sepulchress so do many
garnish the name of Christ with titles, but persecure his nature.
Savior.

Secondly, The names and incommunicable attributes and titles Sec his last
Answer to the Committee, and how false this Charge is, may appear thorowout the
whole Report.
of our blessed Savior.

As to part of the first Article, That James Nayler riding through a Town in
Summer^es, his company spread their garments, and sang Holy, Holy, before him;
and also sang the like at his entrance into Bristol, Is this his blasphemy, to
hear others praise the Lord? or that others in obedience to God go bare-headed?
Is not this thing usually practiced amongst, and to your selves? but what evil
has he done.
one going bareheaded before his horse.

The evidence was, That Dorcas Erbury in her examination before the Committee
in the Painted Chamber confesed, That she did spread garments before him; And
Martha Simmons in her examination at the same time says, That those garments
that she did spread, she spread in obedience to the Lord. But where is his
blasphemy, must be suffer because they obeyed the Lord?
And Hanna Stranger being then also examined, Said she threw two Handkerchiefs
before him, which she did because he that is Lord of all commandded But James
Nayler never commanded her to do this thing, then where is his blasphemy? is
obedience to him that is Lord of all, yielded by another, imputed to him for
blasphemy?
her so to do. And

J^h Stranger confesses, That he saw others spread garments before him in the
way from Exon to Bristol Its not denied; but where is the blasphemy of the
sufferer?
And

James Nayler himself confesses Is it blasphemy to confess what he saw others
do?
(upon the question, whether garments were spread before him) that some clothes
were cast down, and afterward that some gloves and other things.

The evidence for singing holy, holy, was thus.

Dorcas Erbury in her Examination at Bristol, being then asked why she passed
along singing, Said she did not do it, but they that did it, was commanded to
do it; How does this evidence prove the sufferer a blasphemer?
and the Lord has made it manifest that they were moved of the Lord to it; and
being asked to whom they sang? and whom they called the Holy one of Israil? she
said, him that rode upon the horse, Suppose she said so, does this make him a
blasphemer? what has he done?
and she would maintain it with her blood. And being examined by the Committee
as to this part of the Examination, and advised to deny if it were false, yet
did not deny it, though she did some other part of that Examination.

Martha Simmon being examined in the Painted Chamber, whether she did sing the
words holy, holy, before the said James Nayler, answered, It is my life to
praise the Lord, whether he be before me, or from me, it is my life to praise
the Lord. Then this was not James Nayler.
And being asked whether she heard any persons sing holy, holy, before the said
James Nayler, she answered, It is our life to praise the Lord. How is this
become an offense to you? Or, how does this prove him a blasphemer.


Hanna Stranger being examined in the painted Chamber, whether she sang the
words holy, holy, answered, She could not well remember the words, but if she
did not sing holy, holy, she witnesses the holy of holies was risen, which
moved her so to do; How does her confession of Christ's Resurrection, prove him
a blasphemer?
but said further, She did not stand there to accuse her self. And was this a
crime to say so? Is not here the spirit of the persecuting Courts got up again,
that seeks matter from the accused to judge them by.


James Nayler being examined by the Committee, whether any sang holy, holy,
before him as he rode; answered, There were praises sung to the Lord; Does not
he here acknowledge the praises sung to the Lord? And is this blasphemy that he
did not forbid praises to be sung to the Lord?
and being asked whether those words holy, holy were sung, answer^d, that he
heard those words; and being asked as to the singing before him when he rode
into Bristol, answered, That there was a Psalm sung, such a one as the Lord was
pleased to give into the Take notice.
hearts of them that sang; and being asked as to the words of the Psalm,
whether they were not holy, holy, said, It may be it was, very like it might be
so.

And in his Examination at Bristol, being asked why he came in there in such an
unusual manner, two women leading his horse, And what Law of God or man is here
broken, or does say that this is blasphemy, to have his horse led, and one to
go barehead before him, or to be accompanied with singing?
and singing, with one bare before him; said, It was for the praises of his
father, and that he may not refuse any thing that is moved of the Lord; And
that he did think Did believe.
the father did command them to do it; and being there asked whom they meant by
the word Holy, that they sang, he answered, That they that sang were all of age
to answer for themselves.

And this speaks something for the proving of another part of the first
Article, vindicating one going bare-headed before him, and women leading his
horse, which is more fully proved by the Informations upon oath of George
Witherly and Richard Heart, taken at Bristol, before the Mayor there, and
certified as aforesaid; and upon the confession of one Thomas W^dlock before
the said Mayor, who went bare headed before James Nayler, and said he was moved
by the spirit so to do. And James Nayler himself upon his examination by the
Committee, when he was asked whether any went bare-headed before him as he went
into Bristol. answered, He did not know, he took little notice of it, but heard
some say it was so; and being asked whether any women led his horse, answered,
There was a woman took hold of the Bridle of the horse.

Resolution of the Committee upon this whole evidence. The Commit were of
opinion A strange opinion to take the thing to be proved that he assumed such
things, seeing he himself was silent, passing on his journey, acting no evil
either against God or man, neither did require any of these things to be done,
only durst not forbid what God moved others to do.
that the first Article was proved.

One thing also being part of the matter of fact, we think worthy your
knowledge, though much stress It seems you will pass by nothing you think has
any thing in it that might raise up evil thoughts; you had done justly had all
been writ was said by the Sufferer, to prove his innocence.
will not be lain on it; And that is, that the description of our Savior by
Pubaus Lemu^us to the Senate of Rome in writing, (which is also imprinted) was
taken upon one of James Naylers Attendance, which is also certified by the said
Major; And for Nayler, hair both color and manner of wearing it, as also the
fashion of his beard, and feature, and person did much agree with that
description, which also was taken notice of by many of the Committee, how much
he resembled (as they apprehended with some affectation) the Picture usually
drawn for our Savior And to whom do you impute this fault, seeing there was no
art used either to the head, beard or feature, but was the work of the Creator.
How do you here love your example, who count him the greatest offender that God
has made most like him. Neither was the Letter forementioned known by the
Sufferer to be amongst any of his Company, till after it was taken from them,
and so he told the Speaker when before them.


That in diverse answers he imitated our Savior Jesus Christ, using the same
expressions Are not his Expressions good, and fit to be used, where they are
spoken in truth
that he did in one place; he says, That he lived some weeks fifteen or
sixteen days, without any food or other sustenance This may be testified by
diverse witnesses, yet is it no blasphemy. How are your hearts hardened against
the power of God? Had you known that Scripture, Mat. 4. 4 or the power of God,
it would not have bin counted an offense to see it fulfilled. Is not here that
Scripture fulfilled upon the Sufferer, Joh. 6 13. that faith, These things will
they do unto you, because they know not the Father nor me.
; and being asked, Wherewithal God fed him, if not with food; answered, Man
lives not by bread alone, but by every word which proceeds out of the mouth
of the Lord.

I shall here mention one remarkable one in his examination at Bristol; his
expression was, If they had known the Father, they should know him also: And
Nayler being examined by the Committee to this, whether that were his answer at
Bristol, he answered in these words, Truly I can say little of that, whether I
did say it or no; but if I did say it there, it is true; for if any one do know
the Father they shall know what I am, and where I live; and none can know my
life further then they know the Father; for the Father is my life: none can
know my life but they that know my Father Is it become an offense to live the
life of God? Had not the children of God their life hid with Christ in God?
Read Coll. 3. 3.
; for he is my life. This I particularly mention, being commanded And why not
the rest of his Answers, wherein his innocence might more fully have appeared;
and yet here is nothing in this, or any other, that proves him either a
blasphemer or an offender.
by the Committee, who resolved, Resolution of the Committee.
That this whole Answer And why should not his other Answers have been reported
also, seeing you thought fit to question him; and they that were to judge ought
to have known the whole truth?
of James Nayler be reported to the House.

Another part of this Article was, That he received the outward worship of
being kneeled unto This he denies to receive as to the outward man, though you
required that from him to you in the House at the Bar. Thus you condemn him who
denies it as to himself, and gives it to the Lord, and yet take it to your
selves; Is this righteous judgment, or to do as you would be done by?
and having his feet kissed. What blasphemy is in this, to kiss the foot more
then the hand, or any other part of the body? we have learnt greater love then
this, who can lay down our lives for the brethren.
And for this the evidence was,

Martha Simmons in her examination at Bristol said, She ought to worship him,
but here denied. If she deny it, why is it reported as evidence? and if she had
confessed such a thing, how does that make him guilty of blasphemy.


And further the evidence went, that after his imprisonment at Bristol, it
appeared by the Information upon oath at Bristol, to wit, of Thomas Terkins and
Thomas Cols.

Thomas ergan informs, that Dorcas Erbery fell down at Nayler's feet, and
kissed his feet If these things were true, what offense is committed, did not
the Saints do and suffer the same things Read 1 Samuel 25. 23, etc. 2 Kings 4.
27, 37 and Dan. 2. 46 Esth. 8. 3. Mat. 18 29. Luke 17. 16. Job 11. 32. Luke 8
41. Luke 7. 38, etc. John 13, 14, 15. And why should any be offended that the
Saints life and practice be made manifest again in the world.
and the same evening one Alice Brock felton her knees before the said Nayler,
and Nayler put his hands upon her head, and said, Stand fast, etc.

Thomas Cole informs, That the 25 of October Martha Simmons and Hanna
Stranger being called out of Naylers room into their own lodging, they one
after another kneeled before Nayler, and laid their heads on his knees, and he
laid his hands on their heads, making a groaning noise within himself, and
before they rose from their knees he Laying on of hands was owned before the
house; but crossing of hands is denied
crossed his hands over their heads. And Hanna Stranger at her examination
before the Committee confessed, That she kneeled at James Naylers feet and
kissed them; and others being demanded concerning these actions would give no
answer. And

James Nayler being examined whether any kneeled and kissed his feet, answered,
that there might be such things though he did not mind it, being things that he
did not glory in Mark.
.

As for his doing of miracles particularly, Dorcas Erbery says, that she was
dead Is it blasphemy to raise from the dead?
in Exeter Goal two days, and that Nayler laid his hands upon her, and raised
her, which she affirmed in her examination at Bristol, and did not deny when
examined as to this by the Committee.

To which Naylor being examined whether Dorcas Erbury was dead in Exon Goal, as
in her examination, answered, If you speak of such a death as you may
understand, she was dead. Being further asked, how she was dead in his
understanding, answered, I shall say little of my self in that thing. And being
further asked, whether he raised her from the dead, answered, I can do nothing
of my self. Being asked, whether any other did raise her by his hands, and if
he laid his hands upon her, answered. There is a power in me from above. And
being demanded, whether he had such a power as to raise from the dead,
answered, I have said before, I cannot bear witness of my self in the thing.
And being asked, who bore witness of him, answered, The Scriptures If the
Scriptures or any just Law of this Nation had been harkned to, the Innocent
would not thus have suffered cruel torments.
do bear witness to the power which is in me, which is everlasting. And being
demanded, whether he raised from the dead by virtue of that power, answered, I
can do nothing but what the power does in me; and it is the same power whereof
you read in the Scriptures Mark and take notice of this.
that has raised the dead according to the measure of the power manifest.

And being asked, whether that power were manifest in such a manner in him as
to raise Dorcas Erbery from the dead, answered, I have said, I shall not
satisfy in words concerning the thing further, than only this, That you may
clearly understand that wherein Dorcas Erbery, or any else do attribute unto
me, as to a Creature that has beginning and ending, that I utterly deny Mark
what blasphemy are in these words.
; but that that any see of God in me by the same spirit that revealed any thing
to them, that I do not deny. This may serve at one word, for there cannot be a
more abominable thing than to take from the Creator, and give to the Creature
Mark again.
the same power which did raise from the dead, which you read in the
Scripture, the same Christ Take notice he speaks not of another Christ, but the
some that was yesterday, Heb. 13. 8.
the same anointing according to the measure of him is manifest in me, and not
another. And being asked, if any prayed to Christian him, whether he did
dis-own it, answered, As a Creature I do disown it Take notice.


These things, What matter of fact is in these things that is in the least
evil? or what the Scriptures do not own?
and diverse others we have reported, as part of the matter of fact.

Second Article.
That the said James Nayler assumed How assumed, because others write and spoke
^ what the Lord commanded them.
the name and the incommunicable attributes and titles of our blessed Savior;
as first,

The fairest of ten thousand.
As for this, the evidence was in a Letter of Hanna Stranger, found about him
at Bristoll, the giving him the title of the fairest of ten thousand; which
upon her examination at Bristoll, and before the Committee, she confessed she
wrote to him in her Letter. And James Naylor being asked by the Committee,
whether any such title as the fairest of ten thousand had been given to him in
any Writing or Letter, he answered, To what they did in the Letter, if they
gave it to me as to the visible, then I do deny it Mark what is confessed, and
what denied, and let the wise judge if the Scriptures speak not the same
things, 12 Cor. 4. 7. 10. and 2 Cor. 6 18. and 13. chap. and 15. 1 Cor. 6. 19.
and ought not Christ to speak, or be worshipped in his Temple.
; but if they speak it to that begotten of the Father in me, then I dare not
deny it. And being willed to repeat that answer again, he said, If they speak
it as to the visible, as to that which is earthly, then I deny Mark, his yea is
amen.
any such thing belonging to me in that sense: but if they speak it to that
which the Father has begotten in me, then I dare nor deny it, because that (as
he said) is beautiful Where the most of that beauty is revealed by God amongst
ten thousand, there is the fairest of ten thousand. This was his testimony
before the House.
, wherever it is begotten. And in his second examination before the Committee,
his answer was to the same effect So he changes not.
.

Resolution of the Committee. Upon this evidence the Committee were of opinion,
that James Naylor You should not spend your opinion of things you know not; for
he denies that James Naylor, (which is the visible) to take these things upon
him.
had assumed the title of The fairest of ten thousand.

2. The only begotten Son of God.
And for that the evidence was, that Hanna Stranger in the said Letter gave him
that title. And being demanded whether he did assume that title, answered in
these words; That there are many sons Mark this also you that are of an
understanding heart.
besides, yet the son of God I must witness, and dare not deny; Was not this a
direct answer, and sufficient to all them that desired to hear the truth.
the son of God I am, and dare not deny. And being often pressed to give a
direct answer whether he were the only begotten He that is a son o God, is he
not the only begotten of God? Does any help God to beget his children, save
himself alone? Read Jam. 1. 5. Were you not wholly ignorant of the Scriptures,
and power of God, you would not stumble at these things.
son of God, answered thus, I am the son of God, but I have many brethren. And
again said, I have many brethren, though some of them do not yet know me. And
being urged to confess or deny it, answered in these words, I have answered
that I have given of my Father to speak for the present unto that thing. Being
asked, whether he were the only begotten son of God, he answered Has he not
well spoken? let him that is spiritual, judge.
, Thou have said it. Which question and answer being repeated to him as his
answer, he answered, Do not ensnare Saw he not their hearts?
the Innocent. And upon his examination, taken, certified, and attested, as
aforesaid, being asked whether he be the only begotten son of God, answered,
That he was the son of God, and that the son of God was but one Mark this.


But being examined by the Committee as to this part of his examination at
Bristoll Why did not they then at Bristoll write down his true answer, and
afterward cause it to be read to them.
, he affirmed, that this was not his answer.

Resolution of the Committee: Upon this evidence the Committee were of opinion,
that the title of the only begotten son of God was given to James Naylor To
that which was visible he has denied again and again: How is it that you
cannot receive the truth?
And being demanded whether he assirmed that title, he did not deny it.

The Prophet of the most High:
This title we find given him in a Letter to Naylor from one Jane Woodcock
found about him at Bristoll. And being examined there upon that clause in the
Letter, he answered, That he was the Prophet of the most high God.

And Martha Symmons upon her examination at Bristoll said, There was a time
when James Naylor was a true Prophet of the most high God, but now he is gone
beyond, and is in the administration of Peace, and is the beloved of the Lord.

James Naylor being examined by the Committee, whether he owned this title of
the Prophet of the most high God, he answered, Yea, I am a Prophet of the most
high God. And being pressed to answer whether he were the Prophet, he answered,
There be other Prophets Mark this.
besides me. And being pressed again with the same question, answered, I have
said what I may as to that thing in the counsel of my Father.

Upon this his confession at Bristoll, and answer as a foresaid.

Resolution of the Committee: The Committee were of opinion, that James Naylor
had assumed Why? because he confesses the truth.
the title of the Prophet. Therefore you should not have done him harm, Ps.
105. 15.
of the most high God.

The King of Israel.
And for this the evidence was, we find in a letter from one Thomas Symmons
this title given to James Naylor, and in the examination of Dorcas Erbery taken
at Bristoll aforesaid, we find something to this purpose, who being asked why
she pulled off his stockings, she answered, because he is the holy one of
Israel, and deserves and is worthy of it.

And Martha Symmons, upon her examination at Bristoll, says that James Naylors
name is now buried, and that he is anoninted King He witnessed before his
Judges, that he was a King over the powers of darkness, and so reigns according
to Scripture, Rev. 5. 10.
of Israel; to which being examined by the Committee, expressly owned the
examination as to that to be true, and the thing it self, but because this
varies a little from the charge and fastens Where is any thing that is evil
proved that he has said or done.
it not altogether upon James Naylor, they had this further proof, James Naylor
in his examination at Bristoll being asked whether he were the King of Israel,
answered, thou have said. To this James Naylor being examined by the Committee,
whether this question were so demanded as aforesaid, he answered; that it was
not asked by way of a question, whether he were the King of Israel, but that
the examiner did positively affirm, thou art the King of Israel, to which he
answered, thou have said it. And being particularly examined by the Committee
whether he did own the title of the King of Israel, he answered in these words,
I have no Kingdom in this World, yet a Kingdom I have, and he that has
redeemed me (...) has redeemed me to be a King Read Rev. 5. 9. 10.
for ever. And being examined again to the same question, whether he owned the
title of the King of Israel, he answered, as a creature, I deny any such thing
further, then as God manifested in the flesh. And if they gave that title to
Christ Would you not have him to ^ei^n? Read Luke 19. 27.
in me, then I do own it.

Resolution of the Committee. Upon this evidence the Committee were of opinion,
that James Naylor assumed Does he not all along deny it to the visible, how
comes it you bear false witness against him, in saying that James Naylor
assumes it?
the title of the King of Israel.

The everlasting Son of Righteousness.
This we find given to him in a letter by Hanna Stranger in these words, thou
everlasting Son of Righteousness. And Martha Symmons in her examination at
Bristoll calls him Lord of Righteousness, which she also affirmed before the
Committee. And James Naylor himself being examined by the Committee whether any
person had given him that title of the everlasting Son of Righteousness, he
answered, where God Take notice of his answers all along, whether there be any
blasphemy in them.
is manifested in the flesh, there is the everlasting Son of Righteousness.
And being asked twice The begotten of God cannot lie.
whether God was manifested in the flesh in him, answered both times, God
manifest in the flesh I witness, and may not deny.

Prince of peace.
This we find given to him in a letter by the said Hanna Stranger, and in her
examination at Bristoll she owned him to be the Prince of peace; the same title
was also given him by Martha Symmons, as it appeared by her examination at
Bristoll, which was confessed by her before the Committee. And being
particularly asked what she called the man whom we call James Naylor, answered,
I call him a perfect man. And being further demanded whether she did not call
him the Prince of peace, answered, he that is a perfect Read, James 3. 2.
man, he is the Prince of peace, and Naylor being examined by the Committee
whether he owned the title of the Prince of peace, answered, the Prince of
peace I own, the everlasting peace Blessed is he that can truly witness this.
is begotten in me.

Sent to judge and try the Cause of Israel.
The evidence of this was in the same letter of Jane Woodcocks, we find it
given to him, and in his examination at Bristoll whether that title was given
to him, he would make no answer. And being examined by the Committee, whether
he assumed to be sent to judge and try the cause of Israel, answered in these
words, the Judge of Israel is but one, and that Judge I witness in me, which
is the Christ. Mark his answers all along, and see what blasphemy you find.
And further answered, if thou speak of him, whom the Father has sent into the
World and begotten in me, the holy Ghost, the Spirit of the Father, and the Son
in me, which is in me, it thou speak of it, this I own. And being asked in what
respect he was sent, he answered no otherwise, but as God manifeand s;t in the
flesh, though not as mortal. And being asked by whom he was sent to try the
cause of Israel, answered, by him who has made all creatures, and has sent
his Spirit into me, his Son into me, to try the cause, though he said, he was
no Judge in carnal matters. And being asked whether he were more sent to judge
and try the cause of Israel than another, answered in these words, as to my
saying I am sent, mind that, no otherwise then as the Father and the Son is in
me, and to that I say further, that no other man is sent in that sense, but he
that knows the indwelling of that God, and according to the measure of his
knowledge of the living God, so far is Judgment Let his answers be w^yed in
the right Balance, Job 31. 6. and those that dwell in love will see no
(...)llin them.
committed to him, and no further.

And being urged to answer, whether any other had the same measure of
Judgment, to judge the cause of Israel as he had, he answered, that he ^^d^ot
at present any thing given him of his Father to answer unto that.

Resolution of the Committee: Resolution of the Committee. That James Naylor
Learn to speak truth.
has assumed to be sent to judge, and try the Cause of Israel.

Jesus.
And for this the evidence was.

John Stranger in a postscript in his wifes letter directed to, and found upon
James Naylor, used these words, thy name is no more to be called James, but
Jesus; which postscript being showed to Stranger by the Committee, he owned it
written by him, and being asked wherefore he called him Jesus answered in these
words, I was moved Be not offended at the movings of the Lord, lest he break
you in pieces. Read, Mat. 21. 44.
of the Lord, and afterward by the Spirit of the Lord, and being asked whether
by Jesus he meant the Savior of the World, he would give no answer. And Martha
Symmons in her examination at Bristoll says, that she has heard some call him
Jesus, which examina^ion being read unto her, she denied not that, though she
denied another part of that examination. And James Naylor being examinated
whether any person had called him by the name of Jesus, answered in these
words, as I am visible Take notice of this.
here before you, I believe they have not, but that the name of the Lord is in
me, that I dare not deny; and further said, that they have given that name to
him who is the Jesus. Read and understand, 2. Cor. 13. 5.
But if they have given it to any other then to the Son of God that is in me, I
do deny what they have spoken. Mark.
And being asked whether he denied, that they gave him the name of Jesus,
answered, as I am a creature Mark again, where is the blasphemy.
I believe they did not, and afterward confessed that the name of Jesus was
given him in a letter, and if he had understood it of any other than the Jesus,
he should have denied it: being demanded whether they gave the name of Jesus to
him, he answered in these words no otherwise than as to the Son of God, Take
notice of this also.
being demanded whether any had given him the name of Jesus; answered, not as
to the visible, and being demanded to what then they gave the name of Jesus,
answered in these words, I understand they gave that name to the Jesus, to the
Christ Let those that know what Christ Jesus is, judge if this be blaspemy, and
let the Scriptures bear witness Read Col. 1. 27. 2. Cor. 13. 5.
that is in me.

Upon his second examination being asked whether he owned the name of Jesus,
and if that title belonged to him, as to Christ within him, he answered, that
name was never published to be called by me, neither do I call my self Mark
again.
by that name, but what my Father has published, is another thing.

Resolution of the Committee. Upon this evidence the Committee were of opinion,
that James Naylor assumed the name of Jesus. What ground is there for such an
opinion, seeing they often Feared him deny it, as to self.


He in whom the hope of Israel stands.
And for this the evidence was in the letter of Martha Symmons found upon James
Naylor were these words, thou well beloved Lamb of God, in whom the hope of
Israel stands. And James Naylor in his examination at Bristoll being asked,
whether he were the Lamb of God in whom the hope of Israel stands, answered,
that if I were not his Lamb, I should not be so sought to be devoured, Is it a
true saying.
and that the hope of Israel stands in the Righteousness of the Father in
whomsoever it is, and being asked whether Isreal's hope were in any measure in
him, be answered, yea, which examination of his at Bristoll being read to him
by the Committee, he denied not this part of it, and being examinated by the
Committee, whether their hope of Israel did stand in him, answered in these
words, it stands only in Christ Jesus, Take notice he cannot deny Christ Jesus,
but himself does he deny.
and as Christ Jesus is known in me, and being asked again whether he were in
whom the hope of Israel stands, answered in these words, no way but as Christ
is in me, Mark.
and being then asked whether as Christ is in you, so are you he in whom the
hope of Israel stands, answered, nay, do not add to my words: I speak as
plain as I can, that all the glory may be given to God, Take notice of this
man's blasphemy, who would have all the glory given to God, and what is there
proved that he has taken to himself.
and none to the creature, that the whole glory may be given to my Father. And
none to me, as you look upon me as a creature, and the next question was
whether as Christ is in you, are you he in whom the hope of Israel stands, to
which he answered Christ in me the hope of glory, Search the Scripture Col. 1.
27.
and being examined what hopes Israel had in him beyond any other person,
answered, none can know but they that are of Israel, Let him that reads
understand, but he that will be ignorant, may be ignorant still.
they can give an account of their hopes, Israel must give an account of their
hopes themselves.

Resolution of the Committee. That James Naylor assumed Why because he says
the hope of Israel stands only in Christ Jesus.
to beseem whom the hope of Israel stands.

The Committee being desirous to inform themselves how far the said Naylor was
consenting unto that worship and those titles before given unto him, besides
tho former evidence they did find in his examination at Bristoll, where being
asked why he came into the City in so unusual a manner, as the woman leading
his horse and singing before him, he answered that he might not refuse any
thing that is moved Is this blasphemy for to own the movings of the Lord, and
who made you Judges in this matter.
of the Lord, which being read unto him at the Committee, he denied not, and
for the better clearing of this, the Committee examined Hanna Stranger whether
Naylor reproved her, for casting her garments before him, or for kneeling or
kissing his feet, from whom they could get no other answer then this, she would
not accuse or justify any. The Committee did also find in their examination of
Naylor being asked by them, whether he reproved the women for spreading their
garments and singing before him, ansvvered in these words, nay, only I said
unto them take heed that they did nothing but what they were really moved of
the Lord. Is not this good counsel where appears that which proves blasphemy.
And being also examined by the Committee, whether he reproved those that gave
him the title before mentioned, ansvvered, that he had not at all spoken unto
them, concerning that thing, only the letters he had wherein the titles were
given, and did not think at all that any should have seen So he intended not
the publishing of those titles, as one assuming glory to himself.
them, because he knevv there was things in them that many could not bear, but
now he saw his Father purposed they should not be hid.

Naylor at his second examination before the Committee, being demanded whether
he had reproved the persons that gave him those titles and attributes, he would
not say he had reproved them; being demanded whether he owned them or
disclaimed them, answered in these words, if they had it from the Lord what am
I that I should judge it; Is not this rightly spoken Read Romans 14. 4. 10.
and being pressed again with the same question, answered thus, if the Father
move them by his Spirit to give them to Christ I may not deny, if they give
that to any other but Christ I disowne it; Is this assuming.
and being asked again whether he reproved them, or not, answered, if
attributed to the creature, then it is reproveable, Or is this assuming.
if they did it to the Lord, then I dare not reprove it; and being asked,
whether he thought not Christ robbed Nay, they would rob him of his honor,
that would not have him to have it where he is.
of his honor, by that honor of worship given unto him, answered that he
looked upon it to be really to the true honor of Christ, or else he would
utterly have denied it; and being asked whether he had at any time whatsoever
reproved those persons, he answered, I never understood that they gave that
honor, but to God. Or is this blasphemy.


Here we have thought to have concluded this report, but the Committee meeting
with some further evidence, There is need of further evidence to satisfy the
wife-hearted.
they were willing you should be partakers of it, and it is this. John Baynam
Deputy to the S^rgeant of the house, to whose custody Naylor and his company
are committed, informs that the usual posture of James Naylor is sitting in
a chair, and his company both men and wodo sometimes kneel, and when they are
weary of kneeling, they sit upon the ground They have been sound in the same
postures daily since James Naylor has been removed from them And is this your
further evidence.
before him, singing these and diverse other words to the like purpose (viz.)
holy, holy, to the Almighty, to the true God and great God, and glory to the
Almighty, And is ^h^s further evidence of James Naylors blasphemy, that others
sing praises to the true God, and glory to the Almighty.
etc. And thus they do usually all the day long, but the informer never heard
Naylor sing as aforesaid, and says there is great resort to the said Naylor by
diverse persons, who most of them do kneel And do they not still the same, as
when James Naylor was with them.
before him in the manner aforesaid. And Martha Symmons in the posture
aforesaid sung, this is the joyful day, behold the King of Righteousness is
come, It is likely she knew what she sung, and well is it for them, that can
witness the Son of Righteousness come with healing, etc. Read Mala. 4. 2.
and further the informer says, that he never knew the said Naylor show any
dislike, either by reproof or otherwise of that honor or worship which John
Stranger and his wife Martha Symmons, and Dorcas Erbery and the rest gave him
How can he say they gave it to him, since he himself says that he never
understood they did it to him as a creature, and this informer has said a
littie before that their praises were directed to the great God, and to the
Almighty.
as aforesaid. And a Member of the house being lately at the place, where
Naylor is now a prisoner, informs the Committee, that he saw Naylor and his
company in the posture aforesaid, and heard John Stranger, and one of the women
sing, holy, holy, holy Lord God, Are you angry that others should sing praises
to the Lord God, and is this your further evidence of James Naylors blasphemy.
and holy, holy, holy to thee, thee, thee Lord God* And whilst John Stranger
sung these words, he did sometimes look upwards Is looking upon J. N. any
further evidence? It seems a* small thing will serve turn for further evidence.
, and sometimes upon James Naylor. Another Member Ought his Accusers to have
been his Judges? it was not likely that such could see his innocence.
informed us, as upon his own view, to the same purpose. And at Naylor's last
examination before the Committee, being Wednesday the third instant, one
William Piggot did inform, that Naylor sitting in a Chair where he is now a
Prisoner, one Sarah Blackbery came to him, and took him by the hand, and said,
Rise up my love, my doye, my fair one, and come away; why sit thou among
the pots? And presently put her mouth upon his hand, and sunk down upon the
ground before him.

To which Naylor himself being examined by the Committee, confessed she took
him by the hand, and spoke the words aforesaid, but denies the putting her
mouth upon his hand, and such bowing down, but says, that he sat low, and
that he was not free to go with her. And Naylor being asked to whom she
directed that speech, answered, to the Lord, and to him that raises from the
dust, and casts them down that are exalted. And being asked whether he
reproved her for that expression, he answered, he reproved her not. And
further, William Piggot informed the Committee* that the last week he was at
the place aforesaid where Naylor is now a prisoner, and that one Stranger and
Martha Symmons were with others sitting upon their heels before and about
Naylor, and that Stranger rose up, and stood and sung just before Naylor,
according to their usual manner Has it not been their manner since he was
removed as before? Ask their Keeper John Baynam, whom you cite as further
evidence.
of singing; when and where a man Quaker (being present) asked Naylor, Do
thou own that voice? Naylor answered, Yea, I do. And Naylor being asked by the
Committee, if this were so, answered, If I tell you the truth, you will not
believe me. And Naylor being pressed to answer whether he owned the voice
aforesaid, answered, That voice I will not deny.

To sum up all; the Committee asked Naylor, what he had more to say, (that
being likely to be the last time of hearing him before the Committee reported
the whole fact to the House) he thus answered.

I do abhor that any of that honor which is due to Take good notice of his
answers from first to last, and see if in any of them you can find blasphemy,
or any thing that is contrary to the Scriptures, and the Saints practice^
God, should be given to me as I am a Creature; but it pleased the Lord to set
me up as a sign of the coming of the righteous one; and what has been done in
my passing through the Towns, I was commanded by the power of the Lord to
suffer such things to be done to the outward as a sign, I abhor any honor as
a Creature.

Dec. 5.
The Report The first time the whole House sat about J. N.
concerning James Naylor, received and read in the House this day from the
Committee.

Dec. 6.
THE House this day resumed the debate upon the report The second time the
whole House sat about J. N.
touching James Naylor.

Resolved, That James Naylor be brought forthwith to the Bar, and that the
report of the Committee be read to him; and that it be then demanded of him
what he says hereunto by confession or denial. He was sent for accordingly;
and being brought to the Bar, was spoken to to kneel You should not be offended
with others if they do what you require your selves. Herein you walk not
charitably toward your brethren, more and chap. 13.
which he did not; and keeping his Hat on, the Sergeant by command of the
Speaker took off his Hat. And being asked whether his name were James Naylor,
he answered, he is so called. Being asked, how long he has been so called, he
answered, ever since he can remember.

The Report that the Committee had drawn up was read to him, and he was
demanded to every particular, especially when it is done to God in Man. Read 2
Cor. 6. 18. 15. whether that were his answer to the Committee: To which he
answered particularly, acknowledging them to be so, or to that effect But there
was much wanting of what he had spoken to the Committee, which in some things
the truth might have more fully appeared.
and so withdrew.

Resolved, that James Naylor be called in to the Bar, and demanded several
questions. He was accordingly called in, and these But what these questions
were, is not yet certainly known, for there is no record kept of them.
questions demanded of him.

Resolved, That the House does agree with the Committee in the report of the
matter touching James Naylor.

Resolved, That this debate be adjourned till Monday morning, and nothing to
intervene.

Resolved, That James Naylor be kept private.

Monday, 8.
The House according to former order resumed The third time the whole House
spent about J. N.
the debate upon the business of James Naylor.

Resolved, That this debate be adjourned till three of the clock.

Resolved, That Candles be brought in.

The question being propounded The fourth time the whole House sat about J. N.
, That James Naylor upon the whole matter of fact What was his fact that he
committed made him guilty of Blasphemy?
is guilty of Blasphemy; and the question being put, that the word Horrid What
horrid, thing did he? Let it be declared; few wise men are not satisfied as yet.
be inserted in the question next before the word Blasphemy, it passed in the
affirmative.

And the question being propounded, That James Naylor upon the whole matter in
fact, is guilty of horrid Blasphemy.

And the question being put, that the question be now put, it passed in the
affirmative It is much such a vote should pass, and so little ground for it as
yet appears.


And the main question being put, it was

Resolved, That James Naylor upon the whole matter of fact is guilty of Horrid
Blasphemy.

Resolved, That James Naylor is a grand Impostor It were well if cause were
showed why this was added.
and seducer of the people.

Resolved, that the debate upon this report touching James Naylor be adjourned
till to morrow morning You do your business with great leisure, and take time
enough; if you do it well, you will have the more peace with God.


Tuesday 9.
The House according to former order did resume The fifth time the whole House
sat about J. N.
the debate upon the report touching James Naylor.

Resolved, that the debate be adjourned two hours.

The House adjourned till three of the clock.

The House resumed The sixth time the whole House sat about J. N.
the debate upon the report touching James Naylor.

Resolved, that this debate touching James Naylor be adjourned till to morrow
morning.

Wednesday 10.
Resolved The seventh time the House sat about J. N.
that this debate be adjourned till to morrow morning eight of the clock, and
nothing to intervene.

Thursday 11.
The House resolved The eighth time the whole House spent about J. N.
etc.

The question being put, that the House adjourn two hours What is the reason
you are so earnest? you have spent time enough already to end such a business
as this, had not there been a Lion in the way; and you had done well to have
taken notice of the sword of the Lord drawn against you in this thing.
the House was divided.

Yeas went forth 84. Noes 87.

So it passed in the negative.

Resolved, that the debate touching James Naylor be adjourned till to morrow
morning and nothing to intervene.

Friday 12.
The House according to former order resumed The ninth time the whole House
spent about J. N.
the debate upon the business of James Naylor.

Resolved, that this debate, etc. till to morrow morning, and nothing to
intervene.

Saturday 13.
The House this day according to former order assumed The tenth time the whole
House assumed J. N. business.
etc.

The question being propounded, that the debate touching James Naylor be
adjourned till Monday morning Why, did you intend to spend your Sabbath about
J. N. had you not days enough besides to labor in?
and nothing to intervene, the House was divided.

Noes went out 65.

Yeas 108.

So it was resolved, that the debate touching James Naylor should be adjourned
till Monday morning eight of the clock, and nothing to intervene.

Monday 15.
The House according to former order assumed The eleventh time the whole House
assumed J. N. business.
the debate about James Naylor, and adjourned till to morrow morning.

Tuesday 16.
The House according to former order The 12. time the whole House assumed the
debate about J. N. It is wondered at by many what the cause should be that this
foolish business should hold so many wise men so long. Is not the Lord a
confounding the wisdom of this world with things that are foolish?
resumed, etc.

The question being propounded, that the punishment of James Naylor for his
crimes shall be death What you desire to him, will be your own end, but you
cannot kill the soul.
and that a Bill be prepared and brought in for that purpose; and the question
being put that the question be now put, the House was divided It seems you
cannot have your will in this neither.


The No's went forth 96.

The Yeas 82.

So it passed in the negative.

The question being put, that this be part of the punishment of James Naylor,
to have his hair cut off Why, do you think his st^ength lies in his hair? Must
you not have your will in this neither.
it passed in the negative.

Resolved, that this be part of the punishment of James Naylor, that his tongue
be bored through This was that the Scripture might be fulfilled, Rev. 1. 7.
with a hot iron.

That the further punishment of James Naylor shall be, that he shall be
stigmatized in the forehead This was also that the Scriptures might be
fulfilld, Is. 52. 14.
with the letter B.

The question being propounded, that James Naylor be set on the Pillory This
was also that the Scripture might be fulfilled, Mar. 15. 17.
in the new Palace Westminster the space of two hours, and then shall be
whipped This was likewise done that the Scripture might be fulfilled, Joh. 19.
1. Heo. 11. 36.
by the Hangman through the streets from Westminster to Cheapside, and there
likewise be set upon the Pillory for the space of two hours in each of the said
places, wearing a Paper containing an inscription of his crimes This was
likewise done that the Scripture might be fulfilled, Mar. 27. 37.
; that his tongue shall be bored through with a hot iron, and that he be
stigmatized in the forehead with the letter B.

Resolved, that instead of the word Cheapside in this question, the old
Exchange be inserted Why, had not Cheapside been far enough? What has he done
to deserve such cruel punishments?


Resolved, that these words be added in the question, With his head in
Otherwise the crown had not been about his head, Mar. 15. 17.
the Pillory.

Resolved, that the place for boring his tongue, and stigmatizing, be near the
old Exchange.

The question being propounded, that the prison he shall be committed to be
Bridewell in Bristoll; and the question being put, it passed in the negative.

Resolved, he be committed to Prison to Bridewell London.

Resolved, that in stead of the words, from the society of all men, these be
inserted, from the society of all Why, whom has he harmed? may he not have
food and raiment? His fact had need be great that deserves this punishment. Is
this the way to pay him some hundreds of pounds still in arrears, and for his
nine years faithful service in the Army?
people.

Resolved, that he have no pen, ink, or paper.

Resolved, that he shall have no relief but what he earns by his daily labor
Suppose you make him incapable of labor by your punishment, or he be at any
time sick that he cannot labor, must he then starve: Surely the spirit of
Christ you did not consult with when you passed this judgment.
.

Wednesday 17.
Resolved, that James Naylor be set on the Pillory, with his head in the
Pillory, in the Palace-yard Westminster, during the space of two hours on
Thursday You were long e're you could agree on your sentence, but quick in the
execution, the next day.
next, and shall be whipped by the Hangman through the streets from Westminster
to the old Exchange London, and there likewise be set on the Pillory, with his
head in the Pillory, for the space of two hours, between the hours of eleven
and one, on Saturday But one days respite between such cruel suffering? your
sentence had been more merciful had it been present death; for the
Executitioner confessed, that he gave him 310. stripes, and should have given
him one more, (there being 311. kennels) but his foot slipped, and the stroke
fell upon his own hand, which hurt him much: this he confessed to the Sheriff.
next, in each place wearing a paper containing an inscription of his crimes;
and that at the old Exchange his tongue be bored through with a hot iron, and
that he be there also stigmatized in the forehead with the letter B. and that
he be afterward sent to Bristol, and be conveyed into and through the said
City on Horseback bare ridged, with his face backward What, more sufferings yet?
, and there also publicly whipped The world may think this man a great sinner,
if they judge by outward appearance, according to his sufferings: but what evil
has he done?
the next Market Day after he comes thither and that from thence he be
committed to prison in Breedwell London, and there restrained from the society
of all people, Though the Devil had power to cast some into prison, yet the
Lords work will go on to the confounding of all his enemies, this assuredly
will come to pass, and remember that a prophet has been amongst you.
and there to labor hard till he shall be released by Parliament, and during
that time be debarred the use of pen, inck, and paper, See whether in Queen
Mary's days, or in the late Bishops time, they were ever so cruel, but this is
come to pass for to try those that dwell on the earth, which say they are
Jews, and are not, but are the Synagogue of Satan. Read Rev. 2 9. and Rev. 3.
9, 10.
and shall have no relief, but what he earns by his daily labors.

Resolved that the said James Naylor be brought to the Bar, to morrow by ten of
the clock to receive this judgment.

Resolved that the Speaker be authorized to issue his warrants It is a question
whether this be sufficient warrant (unless the Protector concur with them in
the thing,) if the instrument of Government be yet in force.
to the Sheriffs of London, and Middlesex, the Sheriff of Bristoll and
Governor of Bridewell, to see this judgment put in execution respectively in
the said places.

Resolved that the Speaker be authorized to make his warrant to the Sheriffs of
London and Middlesex, to convey the said Nailor to Bristoll.

Resolved that the Speaker do issue the like warrant to the Sheriff of
Bristoll, to convey him up to London, after the execution of this judgment
there.

Resolved that to morrow after the sentence is pronounced against James Naylor,
the several petitions now offered be read. Were not these petitions for the
destruction of the whole seed of the Jews, let that in your conscience answer.


Resolved that then the house do likewise take into consideration It were well
if you did them speedy Justice, they have been a long time kept by you from
their homes, and families, you use to say they are worse than infidels,
provides not for their families, who now hinders these and many more that are
innocent, which lie in prisons, dungeons and holes in this Nation, that have
broken no Law.
the persons brought up with James Naylor.

The House being informed that James Naylor was brought to the Door, according
to the former order made yesterday, that he should be brought to the Bar,
receive the judgment, and the resolution made yesterday touching the said
James Naylor for his punishment.

Resolved that these words be added to the said resolution, viz. and the
Parliament do declare and judge the same accordingly.

The question being propounded that James Naylor be had in, and before
judgment pronounced he be demanded whether he have anything to say, why
judgment should not be pronounced This had been just and legal, but it is
likely, you were afraid he would then have cleared his Innocence.
upon him, and the question being put, that the question be now put, the House
was divided.

The No's went forth 107

The yeas 87

So it past in the Negative. It is pity too illegal a thing should stand on
record against you, it is hoped and desired by all good men, that no Court of
Judicature in these Nations will follow the example, if they should, what will
become of the good and wholesome Laws, made by our ancestors.


The said James Naylor was by order of the House brought in to the Bar, where
the Speaker acquainted him with the heinousness of the crime, of which the
Parliament found him guilty, Of what? This the 13. time the whole House sat
about I. N.
and accordingly did pronounce the judgment against him, and upon which he
withdrew.

Resolved that the petitions from the Counties, and the business about the
women which were apprehended with James Naylor be taken into consideration to
morrow morning, nothing to intervene. You are very zealous, take heed the hand
of the Lord be not against you in this, as in the other, and that you be made
to feel it.


18. December (the day James Naylor first suffered.)
Was several petitions presented to the House containing complaints against
the growth and exorbitances of the people called Quakers, You name only these,
but it is against the whole seed that cannot bow to Haman, or that denies the
teachers made by the will of man.
were this day read one from the County of Devon, and of Exeter,

One other from the Ministers Whose Ministers are those that persecute, or that
will not give liberty of conscience to serve the Lord as he requires?
in the County of Northumberland, Durham, and Newcastle upon Tine.

One other from the Justices of Peace, Gentry, Ministers of the Gospel, These
rulers, Gentry, and Ministers must be such we read of. Mark. 14 55. etc. and
Luke 19. 47. 48.
and others within the County Palatine of Chester, and the Attestation of the
same petition by the Mayor, Aldermen, and Ministers of the City of Chester.

Another from the Mayor, Aldermen and Common Council of the City of Bristoll,
and the Ministers of the Gospel there, and other chief inhabitants there.

And also the humble petition of diverse well affected persons, Gentlemen,
Ministers and others in the County of Cornwall, which were all referred to a
Committee to consider of them, and to collect such heads as may be fittest for
a Bill for suppressing It were well that you first heard both parties speak,
and see if their complaints be true, for fear the Justice that is amongst the
heathen condemn you not in the day of the Lord, which is not far from every
one of you.
of the mischiefs, and inconveniences complained of therein.

The House likewise referred to a Committee, the Facts and Crimes They desire
to receive Justice from you, and as speedy as you please.
of the rest of the persons, apprechended with James Naylor to state the matter
of fact and report it.

Wednesday the 24. of December.
Came five Ministers to Newgate to J. N. namely M. Caryl, Mr Manton, Mr. Nigh
Mr. Griffith, and Mr. Renolds and it is said they did it by order from the
Parliament but they did not deal with him faithfully, or as Ministers of Christ
Jesus, for they would not permit neither friend or other to be present in the
room that might bear witness of their discourse, and likewise when they had
promised him to write down both their questions, and his answers and to leave
with him a copy of the same, which after they had written they took and burnt,
and performed not their promise with him, which thing was not honestly done;
and they doing such evil things, how can they teach good to their people, or
profit them at all, seeing they preach more by example then by precept.

Saturday 27. December.
This day James Naylor received a second part of the sentence of Parliament,
before the old Exchange, where he stood full two hours with his head in the
pillory, after which he was bored through the tongue with an hot iron, and
burnt on the forehead with letter B. this is observable that Robert Rich, a
Merchant being at the Parliament door, and there about this morning from eight
of the clock till about eleven, crying to the Parliament Men as they passed by;
to one, where he saw innocence, said, He that dwells in love dwells with
God, for God is love. And to another, where he saw envy reign, He that hates
his brother is a manslayer, and he that hates his brother is a murderer; and
several other the like speeches, dividing the good from the bad. And although
was then thought that James Naylor would not have suffered any further
punishment, by reason that there were many honorable persons then attending
the Parliament and Protector on behalf of the said James Naylor; and likewise
the Protector had sent to the Parliament a Letter, etc. yet the said Kich then
told the People, that the Innocent was going to suffer; and crying to the
Parliament, that he was clear from the blood of all men; and desiring them to
be so too, departed, and came before the Exchange, where with James Naylor he
went on the Pillory where he stood, and sat by him with two other women that
sat on each side by him, till after a good space Robert Rich took a Paper out
of his pocket, and placed over his head, whereon was written,

It is written, Luke 23. 38. This is the King of the Jews. But presently an
Officer stepped up, and pulled it down, and turned Robert Rich and the two women
off the Pillory; but after a while they lifted up Robert Rich again on the
Pillory, where he staid till James Naylor had finished his sufferings for that
time, and held him by the hand whilst he was burning, and afterward licked
his wounds, and lead him by the hand from off the Pillory.

This was also very remarkable, that notwithstanding there might be many
thousands of people, yet they were very quiet, few heard to revile him, or seen
to throw any one thing at him; and when he was a burning, all the people both
before him and behind him, and on both sides of him, with one consent stood
bareheaded. This was done that the Scripture might be fulfilled, Mar. 15. 38.

COPIES OF SEVERAL of the PAPERS given into the House of PARLIAMENT in the time
of JAMES NAYLERS Trial and sufferings, which began the fifth of December, 1656.
To the SPEAKER of the PARLIAMENT of ENGLAND, these to be read.
FRIENDS,
ACt nothing contrary to that which does co^vinceyou, though bound with an
Oath, although you bring your selves in never so much disgrace in breaking your
Agreement; for in such a case you may reject the Counsel of God against your
own Knowledge, and so appearing to please the world that looks upon you, the
unjust acts against the Just; herein you will do despite to the Spirit of Grace,
wilfully acting that which he knows he should not: So here comes man's
condemnation just from God; therefore before you do act consider; and before
you do give Sentence fear; for Blasphemy proceeds from the root of
Transgression; and see that you be first out of it before you of it do judge:
There is no Blasphemy in the Light which is truth. And to witness the light is
not Blasphemy. And to witness the Prophets Life, and the Apostles Life that had
the Life of Jesus made manifest in his mortal flesh. And to witness the Life
of God, and God dwelling in man, is not Blasphemy. And to witness the second
Adam, the Lord from Heaven, and as he is, so to be in this world, is not
Blasphemy; but not to witness this, and to be in the transgression, he is in
the Root that will blaspheme; and for a man to say he witnesses these things,
and himself in the transgression, he blasphemes, and is the Synagogue for
Satan, who did transgress, and not abide in the truth, who is in the
transgression. Now it is not because men can speak the Scriptures of truth,
therefore they are able to judge of Blasphemy; for the Jews could speak the
Scriptures of truth, but judged the Truth Blasphemy; Now if you would know
what is Blasphemy, this is blasphemy, and these were out of the life of the
truth that judged the life blasphemy; and you do not read that any that was in
the life of Christ, did whip, banish, prison, put to death any for blasphemy*
Alas! here is blasphemy heard all up and down the streets, men professing what
they are not: Now the Jews which had the Scriptures, and out of the spirit of
Christ, did put to death for blasphemy: Now with this examine and judge your
selves, that you may not be judged of the Lord: Although Darius could not
change after sealed, yet 'twas much grief to him: consider what Act that was,
and Law that was not to be changed after sealed. And consider Herod's Oath
against John Baptist, and the counsel and chief Priests against Christ for a
blasphemer. Is Christ in you? Now where is this council and chief Priests
against him? It is better to judge of things which you truly understand,
pertaining to this life (but that you cannot) till you come to the Light that
enlightens every man that comes into the world, and so leads into the Kingdom
of God and Christ that is not of this world; for there is a Kingdom of the
world which is not become the Kingdom of Christ, which is in the transgression;
and there are the blasphemers in the transgression of the life which the
Scriptures of truth is given forth from, which judges the truth blasphemy. Now
wait in the Light that you may receive the wisdom of God which comes from
Christ, by which all things was created, that with it you may come to use the
creatures with the wisdom by which they were created to the Glory of God. I
know the Lord is striving, that innocent blood you bring not upon your heads,
and has opened your understandings for to see more then at the first; and in
many of you has he wrought a noble Principle of tenderness and moderation, in
which if you abide faithful to act what it requires, the arm of the Lord you
will see revealed, and great things brought to pass; and so will you be clear
(whatever becomes of the Innocent) in the day of Gods visitation when he makes
Inquisition for blood; you whose understandings the Lord has opened and moved
to plead the cause of the Innocent; be faithful to God; be your talent never so
small, take heed of hiding it, least your sin become greater then you will be
able to bear.

If I may have Liberty of those that sit in the Parliament, I do here at their
door attend, and am ready out of the Scriptures of truth, to show, that not any
thing James Nayler has said or done is blasphemy, or worthy either of death or
bond^.

It concerns no man farther to judge then he is judged, and is in the truth.
This in tender love to all who are of an upright heart that sits in Parliament,
from Robert Rich.

There was several copies of the Letter given to particular Members, besides
this little paper given to many that had not the Letter.

In a Letter of mine given to the Speaker this morning (which I desire may be
read amongst you) is written at the latter end thereof these words, viz.

If I may have Liberty of those that sit in the Parliament, I do here at their
door attend, and am ready out of the Scriptures of Truth, to show, That not
anything James Nayler has said or done is blasphemy, or worthy either of death
or bonds. These were delivered the 15. of December, being the eleventh time the
whole House had set about this business; so when I had given the Speaker the
Letter, I waited at their door from the time they first sat till they arose,
and then I departed in peace.

ROBERT RICH.



To you that sit in Parliament, who own the Scriputres, are these for, what is
written aforetime is written for our admonition, 1 Cor. 10. 11.
Quaery 1.

WHether those that said God was their Father, and crucified him for blasphemy
that spoke the truth, were not liars, and of their Father the Devil, yea or
nay? read Ioh. 8. 41. and 44.

2. Whether liars, covetous or proud men are not the Synagogue of Satan* And if
such say they are the children of God, or Christians, whether (by the
Scripture) that be not blasphemy? Read Rev. 2. 9.

3. Whether the liar does not hate him that abides in the truth? Read 1 Ioh. 3.
12 and there see why Cain slew Abel. And as it was then, is it not so now? Does
not he that is born after the flesh persecute him that is born after the
spirit? Read Gal. 4. 29.

4. Whether they that have the spirit of Christ Jesus in them, punishes the
body, or puts any to death for words true or false? And did not Christ come to
save life and not to destroy it? Read Mark 34. Matt. 13. 29, 3^ John 8. 11.

5. Whether Christ Jesus has not been a stumbling stone, and a Rock of offense
throughout all Generations? Read and see Isa. 8. 14. and 18. Luke 2. 34. 1 Pet.
2. 7, 8. Luke 20. 17, 18, 19. Matt. 13. 55, 56. Luke 5. 30. and 33. (read these
Scriptures over And did not the very Disciples of Christ often stumble and were
offended at him? Read over these Scriptures and consider them well, Matt. 26.
8. to the 14. ver. and the 31. ver. Matt. 28. 17. Ioh. 6. 60. Luke 24. 11, 15,
16, and 37. ver. Ioh. 11. 39, 40. Joh. 20. 15. Lu. 24. 32. And did not the
Prophets do many things that the wisdom of the flesh might count foolishness,
and to be rediculous? Read Isa. 20. 2, 3. Ier. 13. 3, 4, 5, etc. Ezekiel. 4. 1, 2,
3, etc. and Ezekiel. 12. 5, 6. Acts 21. 12, 13. Ios. 6. 6

6. Whether the Lord in all ages has not tried the children of men? Read
Psalm. 11. 4, 5. Rev. 3. 9, 10. And whether the day be not approaching that will
try every man's work? 1 Cor. 3. 13. And whether all men be not either the
children of God or of the Devil? And whether by their fruits they are not made
manifest? And whether those that are the Children of God be not lead into
moderation, Gentleness, patience, mercifulness, meekness, love, etc. And
whether the Devil leads not his into wrath, envy, hatred, emulation, varience,
strife, etc? So in this thing you will make your selves manifest which spirit
leads you, and whose children you are. Search the Scriptures, and see if these
things be not so.

Robert Rich.

To the Parliament of England, etc
The humble Petition of Robert Rich, (surnamed, Mordicai) on the behalf of
himself, and all the Seed of the Jews, which wait for the consolation of
Israel, that are of an upright heart, scattered throughout these three Nations
of England, Scotland, and Ireland, whether in Forms or in Professions, or out
of them.

Humbly shows,
THat ever since the year 1648. it was hoped that Opression and all Persecution
for conscience sake, would utterly have ceased, according to what has often
been declared; and instead thereof that Truth and Mercy would have taken place.
But contrary thereto within these three years last past, have many hundreds
(even in this one Nation of England, in all pars thereof) been cast into
Prisons, Dungeons and Holes, and some have perished therein; and others have
endured cruel whippings, stonings, and other bodily punishments, besides the
spoiling of their goods, for no other cause save for matters concerning the Law
of their God, and that for conscience sake they could not bow to Hamans nature;
not so much as one known Law of this Nation proved that they had transgressed.

The Premises being considered,

My humble request is, That the Innocent in all Prisons throughout these
Nations may be set at Liberty (that only for eonscience sake suffer) And more
particularly, in case there be yet behind of the sufferings of James Nayler to
be file'd up, that it may be acted in my body.

And I shall ever pray for the peace of Jerusalem, and for all them that love
her proferity, ROBERT RICH.

Blessed is he that considers the poor and needy, the Lord will deliver him
in he time of trouble, and cover his head in the day of Battle. Let none become
Judges of evil thoughts. Jam. 2. 4.
Rob. Rich.

Quaeries given to the Speaker of the House, and several other Members of
Parliament.
1. WHether the anointing of the Father be not the Christ? (Exodus 40. 15. Psalm.
89. 20. etc. Psalm. 45. 7. Heb. 1. 9. Is^. 61. 1. ^sal. 104. 6. to the 16. 1 John 2. 27. 2 (...). 1. 21) and whether he was not complete Christ the Son of
God before he took upon him that flesh in which he suffered at Jerusalem, yea,
before the soul or body of man or the world was (Prove. 8. 22. to the 32. ^o^.
1. 1, 2, 3, 4. Jo. 8. 58. Joh. 17. 5. Ephesians. 4. 10.) And whether the Name Christ
reach not over the whole body, anointed from the beginning of the world to the
end? (1 Cor. 1. 12)

2. Did not Christ Jesus speak in other Vessels? and was he not persecuted in
other Vessels besides that wherein he was lifted up at Jerusalem? and if he had
said in those Vessels, he was not the Christ, whether he had lied or no? (Acts
9. 4. 2 Co^. 13. 3. 1 Cor. 7. 10, 12. Phil. 1. 20. Romans 8, 9, 10. Rom 10. 6, 7,
8. 1 Cor. 1. 24.)

3. Does not the Scripture say, God will write his Name on him that overcomes?
Rev. 3. 12. which Name he is to bear before Kings and Rulers, Acts 9. 15.
which if he deny, shall he not be denied before the Father in Heaven? Matthew. 10.
33. And if God does reveal what he has written to any other of his children,
and command him to confess it, whether his obedience be blasphemy, yea or nay?

4. Did Christ ever appear in the world, and had not a body prepared? Heb. 10.
5: And did he ever come into the world and not in a vail? Heb. 10. 20. 2 Co^.
3. 13, 14. And whether those that judged the Christ by looking on the outward
veil, could ever see the Christ, but became his persecutors? Read Matthew: 13.
55, 56. Joh. 5. 18. Jo^. 10 33, to 38.

5 Whether that which God begets in any creature be not the Seed of Abraham,
which is the Christ? Genesis 22. 18. Heb. 2. 16. Gal. 3. 16. and 29. 1 John 5. 18.
the firstborn amongst many brethren, Rom 8. 29. And does he not require the
growth thereof to the measure, stature and fullness? Ephesians 4 12, 13. And whether
any can judge of that measure in another, to which he is not grown in himself,
without erring* Romans 12. 3. 2 Cor. 10. 3, 14, 15. And whether this has not
been the cause of all the innocent blood that has been spilt from righteous
Abel to this day; let the wise in heart judge.

6. Whether this begotten be not the only begotten of the Father? Joh. 3 16.
Jom. 1. 18 And whether this begotten be not the eternal Son of God? Heb. 1. 2,
3. Isa. 2. 7. 1 John 5. 11. The Rock of Ages, Isa. 51. 1. Deuteronomy. 32. 18. 1 Cor.
10. 4 The Anointing; the Emanuel, Matthew. 1. 23. The Savior, Isa. 63. 8 9.
Obed. 21. The Lamb of God, Rev. 13. 8 Joh. 1. 29. The Prince of Peace, Isa. 9.
6. and the great Mystery, hid from Ages and Generations, Christ in you the hope
of Glory, Col. 1. 26, 27. The stumblingstone, and a Rock of offense laid in
Sion. Isa. 8. 14. 1 (...) 2. 7, 8. and the Christ Jesus this day, he was
yesterday, and will be for ever, Heb. 13. 8.

7. Whether Christ Jesus be not our example? Joh. 13. 14, 15. 1 Pet. 2. 21, 22.
James 5. 10 And if any of his brethren or memqers do, or suffer to be done, the
same he, or the Prophets of God did, whether this be blasphemy? 1 Samuel 25. 23,
to 33. 2 Kings 4. 27, 37. Dan. 2. 46. Matthew. 26. 7, 8. Luke 17 16. Heb. 1. 6.
And whether Christ Jesus where he is now made manifest, may not have the same
love and honor he formerly had? And if any be moved of the Lord to give it
him, whether that be blasphemy?

8. If any Prophet in these our days suffer to be done to him what the Prophet
Elisha did, 2 Kings 4. 27, and 37. who permitted a woman to fall down at his
feet, and did not reprove her, but did reprove Gehaz^, who would have put her
from him; or should any now do as Damel did, Dar. 2 46. who permitted
Nibuchadnozer to fall down at his feet. and worship him? Whether this in Daniel
or Elisha were blasphemy?

9. Whether to call any one Christ (in a spiritual sense) that is anointed
with the Spirit of God, or to call any Jesus that is saved from their sin, or
saves others, as Joshua, etc. Obad 21. be blasyphemy? and if it be, Whether
all manner of blasphemy against the Son of Man ought not to be forgiven in this
world, Matt* 12. 31, 32.

10. Whether this be not true blasphemy according to the Scripture for one to
say that he is a christian, or member of Christ, that is a liar, a covetous or
proud man, or that worshippeth the creature more then the creator; or that
hates his brother? (Read and understand, Rev. 2. 9. and 3. 9.) And if such be
blasphemers yet whether the Law of God, or of this Nation, does allow they
should die, or suffer any other bodily punishment as bad, or worse then death
for the same.

11 If any should worship an Angel, (Rev. 22. 9.) whether that be blasphemy, or
deserve cruel tortures, as bad or worse then death? Or is to be seen throughout
the Scriptures, that any Magistrate had power from God to punish for sin only
against him till such time as the mind and will of the Lord be first known, and
a command given; and is it not written, Vengeance is min, and I will repay it,
Rom: 12. 19.

These eleven queries I present to you who sit in Parliament, and such as are
spiritual to udge and consider of them; and for those that are sensual, not
having the spirit, my desire is, that they would not judge of the things they
know not, lest they condemn the Members of Christ as blasphemers, and so bring
upon themselves all the innocent blood spilt since the foundation of the world
to this day.

Friends, Let it not be forgotten, how that often the Lord has sent me amongst
you, for to advise and warn both by word of mouth and writing, that you might*
keep your hands clear from the blood of all mer; and there is few amongst you
that has not seen the sword of the Lord drawn against your proceedings since
you c^^tred on the business of James Nayler: And now in the sight of the Lord
my God (having warn d^you) am I justified; and for those that have cursed where
the Lord would not curse, the blood will be upon their own heads; and for such
amongst you as have had their ear opened to discipline, that have not condemned
the Just, and have pleaded the cause of the poor and needy* lift up your head,
and be faithful to the Lord in what he makes manifest, and you shall find his
salvation near, and promise fulfilled; That he will deliver you in the time of
trouble, and cover your heads in the day of Battle.

Rob: Rich.

To you that are honorable in this house, who are of sober minds, and loves
the thing that is right and just, am I of the Lord made willing to offer (in
case it be thought by you fit) to discourse of the things in particular, and at
large, that has been either said or done by James Nayler, with those five
Ministers that were sent to him into the prison a little before his last
sufferings at London; and doubt not but by the help of my God, to prove him by
the Scriptures clear (both in his judgment and practice) of Blasphemy. And the
rather do I desire to have to do with those five Ministers herein, for that
they did not deal with him (and doubt whether they have not done the like by
you) as men of integrity and faithfulness ought to have done; for they would
not permit any one person, friend, or other, to be present to bear witness of
what passed between them; which James Nayler perceiving, said to them, that
unless they would write down their questions and his answers thereto, and
afterward leave a copy thereof with him he would make no answer to them; so
they promised they would; But wheu they had asked what questions they thought
good, and he having answered the same, they took what they had writ, and cast
into the fire and burnt it, leaving no copy with him as they had promised. Let
the wise in heart judge whether this were done like Ministers of Christ, or
like the chief Priests that sought to catch him in his words: This thing is
offered by me. That if there be found wickedness with James Nayler, either in
Judgment or Practice, that it may be published and made known to the Nation;
or if the Ministers be found ignorant of the Scriptures and Power of God, they
likewise may be made manifest, that no longer they may deceive the Nations:

And one of these five Ministers (namely Mr: Ny^) has declared (as was
affirmed in Westminster Hall by one Mr: Smith, a Parliament man, That the said
Mr: Nigh told him, That coming where some quakers were met together, he found
amongst them a Jesuit which he knew, and of what college he was of beyond the
Seas, and that they spoke Latin to each other: So I asked Mr: Smith what was
become of the Jesuit; he answered he knew not, but supposed he was gone; so I
desired the Parliament men then present for to take notice who were the
favorers or conconcealers of the Jesuits, the quakers or Mr. Nigh: The Members
of Parliament then present, whose Names I knevv, were captain Bains, Judge
Advocate Margeret, Sergeant Berkhead, besides others whose Names I knevv not.

This is written, that the Parliament may examine and find out who are the
Jusuits friends:

Robert Rich:

AFter the tares appeared, then came the servants of the householder and said
unto him, Will thou that we go and gather them up? But he said, Nay, lest while
ye go about to gather the tares, ye pluck up also with them the Wheat: Let both
grow together until the Harvest, Matthew. 13. 26. etc.
This is the Doctrine of Christ Jesus our Lord.

Such care has Christ Jesus of the Wheat, that he will not that his Servants
pluck up the tares until the Harvest, the end of the world, lest they pluck up
the Wheat with them; this is his wisdom,

But some men pretend such care for the wheat, that they will have the tares
pluck up before the Harvest; this is their wisdom.

Now mind whose wisdom you follow, and whose Doctrine you obey; for you can do
Christ Jesus no service in going contrary to his own Doctrine, though some may
think they do, Ioh. 16. 2, 3. They shall think they do God service when they
are killing his servants, mistaking them for his great Enemies, for else they
would not kill them to do him service.

My desire is, that you may be found in the counsel and Doctrine of Christ
Jesus, which is safe, and keeps from that danger of shedding innocent blood.

Will. Tomlinson.

You have called him a blasphemer, we desire that you would publish what his
blasphemy is, that we may know it and take heed of it. Christ Jesus himself was
called a blasphemer, because he said, I am the Son of God; and says John, 1
Ioh. 3. 2. Now are we the Sons of God.

W. T.

THE near relation between Christ Jesus and his Father being owned by him, was
counted in him blasphemy, because he said, I am the Son of God.

Take heed lest the near relation between Christ and his Members whom he calls
Brethren, be not now counted blasphemy where it is owned.

And consider these Scriptures.

Now are we the sons of God through Christ, says John, 1 Ioh. 3. 2. If a son
then an heir of God, says Paul, Gal. 4. 7. If sons, then heirs, heirs of God,
and joint-heirs with Christ, Romans 8. 17.

Him that overcomes will I make a Pillar in the Temple of my God, and I will
write upon him my new Name, says Christ Jesus, Rev. 3. 12, 13. He that has an
ear let him hear what the Spirit says unto the Churches.

If you be able to see these things, do; but if not, take heed what you do,
lest you bring innocent blood upon your own heads.

There Is none able to judge of these things before the lusts of the flesh, land
the lusts of the eyes, and the pride of life be judged and overcome in them,
and the love of the world.

That Is blasphemy for a man to say he is a Jew or a Christian, and is not, but
still is in the old nature, that was a murderer from the beginning; he blasphems
the Name of God, Rev. 2. 9. for God has no such children in the New Covenant.
As it was then, he that was born after the flesh persecuted him that was born
after the spirit, so it is now, Gal. 4. 29. But he that is born after the
spirit never persecutes him that is born after the flesh.

W. T.

FRiends, your hands have hitherto been held from shedding of blood; consider
what it is that has withstood you, and kept you from it, and do not go on to
strive any longer against the Lord; but remember David how glad he was that he
was prevented from blood, when he was going with a full resolution, and the
thing was gone out of his mouth to destroy the House of Nabal, 1 Samuel 25. 22,
32, 33. Blessed be the Lord God of Israel (says he) which has sent thee this
day to meet me, and has kept me this day from coming to shed blood, and this
was, but the blood of a wicked man. So Friends consider, and strive not against
the goodness of the Lord, which has hitherto withstood you, and kept you off
from shedding of blood, and that with little force. It will be no grief of
heart to you that you have not shed blood, but to shed it may lie heavier upon
you then yet you are aware. To let the tares (if tares) alone with the wheat,
according to Christ's own Doctrine; this will not repent you, because it is his
own command; but under pretense of plucking them up, to puil up one of the
least of his Lambs, this will be a burden too heavy for you to bear; and
though you may think you do God service therein, yet he accepts it not. To seek
the harm of one that would not hurt an hair of your heads, consider whence this
is, and what acceptance this would have with God, seeing he says, He that
touches you (the innocent lambs) touches the apple of mine eye; herefore
touch not mine anointed, do my Prophets no harm, says the Lord; and blessed be
their work who are made tender of them, for what is done to one of the least of
those that belong to Christ, is done to him.

William Tomlinson.

They are very confident, who kill Christ's Lambs, to do God service, that those
they kill are not his Lambs, but his Enemies, else they would not kill them to
do Him service; for they could not think it service to God to kill his
children: yet see how far their confident zeal is mistaken, while they think
they kill his enemies, they kill the children of the Kingdom. Thus it happened
to Christ, the zealous Jews were very confident he was a Blasphemer, and
Seducer of the people, and therefore they durst say, His blood be on us, and on
our children; upon the same account the members also of Christ always suffer,
as Blasphemers, as Heretics, as Seducers of the people. You are now up on this
danger, and trial of your spirits. Now why is it that in this confident zeal
they kill his Children, taking them for enemies? It is (says Christ Jesus)
because they know not the Father nor me, Ioh. 16. 2, 3.

Now examine your selves you that are for killing, or hurting; Do you know the
Father? Do you know the Son? Have you communion and fellowship with them? Is
the Son begot in you? Is He formed in you? Are you come into His innocent
nature? if not, your confidence and zeal will deceive you, and you stand in
that nature that will kill children for enemies; for you cannot know them til
you know his nature brought forth in you. And if His Nature be once brought
forth in you, you will sinde a saving spirit raised up in you, not a destroying
spirit; for Christ and every measure of Him is a Savior, not a Destroyer; and
so from Christ the Savior spiring up many Saviors, Obad. v. 21. He that is
the destroyer and persecutor, is yet in the old Covenant, Hagar, He is but the
son of the bondwoman, which is yet in bondage with her children, and is to be
cast out, Gal. 4. 22. to the end. And if ever you come to witness the new
Covenant, and the Law of God writ in your hearts, and the nature of Christ
formed in you, you will sinde the persecutor in you cast out, and that it
enters not the Kingdom; for there is nothing hurts nor destroys in all Gods
Holy Mountain, Isa. 11. 9.

Will. Tomlinson.

You who are for killing, or otherwise harming, I appeal to that of God in your
own consciences, which will witness faithfully, Do you sinde the Spirit of God
witnessing in you, that you are the Sons of God? Do you find that hope in you,
that purifies you as the Son of God is pure? 1 John 3. 3. that faith that
purifies the heart? Acts 15. 9. Are you become dead to the world? are you dead
to the lusts of the flesh, to the lusts of the eyes, and pride of life? Have
you mortified the flesh with the affections and lusts thereof? Is your
conversation in heaven? Or, are you not yet among those that think these things
impossible, not knowing the power of God? Are you not yet in the reprobate
state, not knowing Christ in you? Are not some of you such as will deride, and
scorn, and are full of bitterness? Are not some of selfish, covetous,
high-minded, far from little children? Now if you be such, how can you be able
to see the high things of the Kingdom of God, who cannot yet see the low
things, the beginnings, the entrances; for till you become as little children,
you cannot see them, Matthew. 18. 18. 3. Joh. 3. 3. and while you are in your
natural condition you cannot see them, 1 Cor. 2. 14. The natural man perceives
not the things of the Spirit of God, neither can he know them. How then should
he that is such be able to judge of them? How can you that are judge such of the
high things of God, and not count them blasphemy? How can you hear one speak of
Saviors and not count it blasphemy, though the Scripture has spoke it, Obad,
ver. 11. How can you hear it that a feeble one shall be as David, and the house
of David as God? as the Angel of the Lord, Zech. 12. 8. How can you hear it,
that we should be Coheirs with Christ Jesus, if you consider what a Coheir
is? How can you hear it that any should sit in the Throne of Christ with him,
and have power over the Nations, Rev. 3. 21. and 2. 26, 27. and have the Name
of Christ put upon him; yea, though Christ put it upon him, Rev. 3. 12. How can
you that are such hear these things and such like, and not count them blasphemy
(though the Scripture has spoken them) any more then the zealous devout Jews
could hear that Christ should be called the Son of God without counting it
blasphemy? Therefore learn this counsel that Christ has given, First judge
your selves, lest you be judged for judging things above your measure.

Will. Tomlinson.

What shall be done to the man whom the King will honor? Let the Royal Apparel
be brought which the King uses to wear, and the horse that the King ridethou,
and the Crown royal which is set upon his head; and let his apparel and horse
be delivered to the hand of one of the Kings most noble Princes, that they may
array the man withal whom the King delights to honor, and bring him on
horseback through the streers of the City, and proclaim before him. Thus shall
it be done to the man whom the King delights to honor. And thus by the
command of the King it was done to Mordicai, a Type of that Spirit that cannot
how to proud Haman, Esth. 6.

Has an earthly King this Power to impart of his own honor to his Servants?
and has Christ Jesus, King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, no power to impart of
his honor to his servants whom he makes Kings?

Was it no Treason or Blasphemy against the King for Mordicai to receive this
honor and not to rebuke it? And must such a thing be blasphemy (if so done)
among the Lambs of Christ, to give and receive of Christ's. Honors at his
command in sigue of his approaching and coming again?

Has not Christ Jesus our Lord power to put his own Honors, Names, Titles,
Hosannahs upon his servants, as well as King Ahasuerus, to put his Crown and
Apparel Royal upon one of his who was found faithful?

Has not Christ said, He that overcomes shall sit with me in my Throne, even
as I also overcame, and am set down with my Father in his throne? Has he Power
to impart his throne which is greater, and which he received after he departed;
and has he no Power to impart his Hosannahs (if he please) which is less, and
which he had here on earth among and from babes and sucklings?

And how know you that he did not command this thing to be done (if done)?

Has not Christ Jesus said, He that overcomes, him will I make a Pillar in
the temple of my God, and he shall go no more out; and I will write upon him
the Name of my God, and the Name of the City of my God, New Jerusalem, which
comes down out of Heaven from my God, and I will write upon him my New name.
He that has an ear let him hear. Can this be but it will be accounted
blasphemy by the blind world who live in continual blasphemy, calling
themselves Christians and are not. Therefore consider what you are doing, you
whose mouths are opened against that ye under stand not,

Will: Tomlinson:

To the Protector, and
TO you who are chosen by these Nations to be the Parliament of Eugland, to
divide, rule and govern things, this is the Word of the Lord God to you; Take
heed of acting against Christ where he is made manifest; take heed of acting or
doing any thing against them that be in the pure Religion, or acting any thing
against Religion; how know you but this thing is fallen out to try you whether
or no you act against Christ where he is manifest in his Members; for it is
said, Christ in you; and if Christ be in you, the body is dead because of sin;
and if Christ be within, may not he speak in Righteousness, and be confessed
there? Now if Jesus Christ be not in you (mark) Jesus Christ be not in you, ye
are reprobates; and if Christ be within must he not speak (mark) Jesus Christ
the Emanuel, the same; is it offense for Christ to speak, and Jesus to speak
where he is within? Now examine your selves; know not you your selves how that
Jesus Christ is in you except ye be reprobates? And if Jesus Christ be in you
must he not speak in you; Is it not he that must speak? for the natural man
receives not the things of God, because they are spiritually discorned, and
they are foolishness unto him; and did not the Apostle say, He did not live,
but Christ, it was Christ that lived in him (mark again) it was Christ that
lived in him; if it was Christ that lived in him, it was Christ that spoke in
him, and the life that he lived it was by the faith of the Son of God (mark)
what a life was this; and did he not say that the Son of God was revealed in
him? and if the Son be revealed in any, must it not be he that must speak and
declare of the Father? but people have had the form of godliness since the
days of the Apostles, but have wanted the thing, and wants the thing that the
Apostles were in, who had the Son of God, Christ Jesus, and therefore it is by
them that have the form wondered and stranged at, and not the power of God
wondered, estranged, where Christ Jesus is manifested, and speaks, and acts, and
rules, was it not the Apostles Doctrine to preach Christ in them? and told them
the hope of the Glory, which was in them, which was the Mystery hid from ages
and generations: And is not this Christ the hope of Glory a Mystery in this age
as it was in the days of the Apostles, to the world, and had been to
generations before? and has it not been a mystery in the ages past amongst
them that have had the form of godliness since the Apostles? But where Christ
within, this Mystery, this hope of glory is witnessed, may he not speak without
offense? And did not Christ say he would come again to his Disciples, and make
his abode with them? And did he not say, I in you, and the spirit of the Father
which speaks in you? They were not to take thought when they were brought
before Rulers and Magistrates; and is not the spirit of the Father the spirit
of Christ? And are not they that have not the spirit of Christ none of his?

Therefore take heed, I am moved to warn and charge you in the presence of the
Lord God (ye Rulers and Magistrates of this Nation) lest ye be found acting
against the spirit of the Father where he speaks in such as are brought before
you who have the form of godliness, such as witness Christ in them, and the
spirit of the Father to speak, and the Son of God come according to his
promise, which does witness that fulfilled; does not John say in his Epistle,
That the Son of God was tome, and they were in him; and this was the true God
and Eternal life; and do not the Apostles in their several Epistles, which have
been read amongst you long, speak that Christ is in you, and of their being
the sons of God and the son of God revealed in them, and the spirit of the
father in them, and Christ the mystery in them? Have ye not heard these things
read, and amongst you? and have not these things long been hid amongst them
that have had the form of godliness; and Christ in the male and the female, and
God will dwell in you, and walk in you; and the Word is in thy heart, and is
not Christ's Name called the Word of God? Now think you not it strange to find
any to witness these things, and that these things should be possessed; you
that have had the form of godliness long, the night of the apostacy has been
long since these words were spoken forth, and the thing enjoyed that these
words spoke of; but now comes to be possessed the things that they did enjoy
which spoke the words, which long they have had the form of in the night of the
apostacy since the days of the Apostles: Now if it be not the spirit of God,
nor the voice of the father, nor the spirit of Christ that speaks in man, it is
natural and devilish, and that is it that stands against the voice of Christ
and the spirit of God; but if any mere creature by him made, says that he is
Christ, that is false, and is not so; for all creatures that were created were
by him, and for him; and all things that were made were created for his
service, Christ Jesus the Power of God, by which all things were made and
created; and where the Power of God is, there is Christ, and Christ is the
Power of God (take notice of that) the Power of God is everlasting; where the
Power of God is received and felt, Christ is received and felt; and where the
Power of God speaks, Christ speaks; and ye that feel the Power of God, ye feel
Christ, and will not be offended at the Power of God where it speaks, which is
Christ, and so Christ is one in all who are in the power; and where the
power of God does not rule and speak, the power of the devil that speaks, and
that is it which is tormented at the power of God, which is Christ that speaks;
if the truth speak, is it not Christ? Does he not say, I am the Truth; and if
the life speak, is it not that I which is the Life? If the unrighteous speak,
it is a false thing; but is the power of God speaks, it is the truth: If it be
the power of God that speaks, which is the true Christ, it is the power of the
Devil, which is the false christ: So examine your selves, if Christ be in you
the body is dead because of sin, and there the sin is dead: And is not Christ
Jesus, which ex^ept he be in you ye are reprobates, is not he the Emanuel and
the Savior, and the Prince of peace? and is not he the prince of Life and the
Hosannah? and is not this witnessed within where he is made manifest? or is he
divided from these? and is not he the Lamb of God? and are not they against him
where he is manifest with him that would not have him to speak, and such as
would not have him to reign? Here you may see what hathbeen lost since the
Apostles, that they were in and rejoiced, this night of apostacy, which time
had the form but not the power; but now is coming again to be made manifest
which have been lost, the Truth, the power of the form, and the life of Christ,
and Christ himself the Emanuel: Therefore take heed of persecuting that which
is created and made by his power, where the power is received and dwelt in, for
the powers sake, which power is Christ, and which the power speaks through,
and where the power of God rules; where there is a fault the fault is judged;
but where the seed is, that is to be owned; and it is not just that the mouth
of the seed should be stopped; in the fear of God and meekness weigh and
consider these things before you act, and consider what was in the Apostles
that caused them to suffer.

POSTSCRIPT.
IF the seed speak, which is Christ, he has no other Name, for the seed is
Jesus Christ, and it is not blasphemy, but truth; but if the seed of the
serpent speak, and say he is Christ, that is the Liar and the Blasphemer, and
the ground of all Blasphemy; and is not the seed which is Christ; but the head
of the serpent is to be bruised, which is the cause of all enmity, strife and
debate, with the seed of the Woman, which is Ghrift.

George Fox.

Was not the appearance of Christ when He was born glorious, when that the
voice was cried Hosanna to the Highest? Was not this to the astonishing of the
beholders, and amazement of the world? did it not stir up all chief Priests,
and Herod, was not He puzzled about His Birth, and they troubled at his coming?
did not the Chief Priests and Rulers gather against Him who was full of grace
and truth? did not the glory of Him show it self forth when He went up unto
Jerusalem, when the high voice was spoken, and the songs to him sung, the
strength ordained out of the mouths of Babes and sucklings? and was not
Jerusalem the highest place of Worship? and did not the strength which was
ordained for the Babes and Sucklings, set the Priests and Rulers on rage
against Christ, that they crucified and slew him? and did not that make Herod
and Pilate friends in the highest place of Worship? did not He say, and tell
his Disciples, He would come again, the Hosanna, Him that was cried Glory to
the Highest? And did not He come again to his Apostles accordin(...)o his
promise, and make his abode with them, and sup with them? Did not the Apostles
say to the Saints that Christ was in them the mystery, the hope of glory; and
if He was in them, the body was dead because of sin? did not the Apostle say,
Examine your selves, prove your selves, Know you not that Jesus Christ is in
you except you be Reprobates, [mark] Jesus Christ in you, the Emmanuel, the
Savior, the Lamb of God, the Hosanna; Is not his appearance in the Spirit as
glorious in his second coming, as it was at his first? is it not as much to be
admired in the world as it was ever? Answer these things, and satisfy
yourselves: To the Light wherewith Christ Jesus has enlightened you all, I
speak, that with it you may see when you act against him where he is manifested.

To prison them contrary to the Just is to make them to grow, and to banish
them is to shame your Religion, and not to own the thing the scripture speaks
of, and to put them to death, is to destroy your selves.

George Fox.

Whether or no you will suffer Christ to have as much honor in the earth, and
the world, as the Devil has? Where Christ is manifested, whether or no he
shall not have more honor, or as much, where he is manifested? And whether or
no it is offense to bow to man, or to kneel before a Indgein the world? Whether
this be offensive to the world, amongst the world, to bow before such, and
among such the truth is not in? And whether or no it would not be offense to
such, to bow to Christ where he is manifested, and persecute such as do bow
where the thing is in the truth; whether or no such a thing may not be done in
the truth, and be a figure to all the bowings of the earthly Powers which be
out of truth, which has reigned above the seed of God? An example to you all:
Therefore take heed and consider, before you act any thing or judge, lest God
judge you afterward, for be assured He will. Whether bowing in the Truth may
not be a figure, that the seed of God shall rise, and reign above the Earthly
Powers, and they shall bow to it? And how know you but such things as these may
be trials to you, whether you will persecute another, for taking that which
is acted among you to your selves, in another way different from this? Now come
to do as you would be done by, and do not persecute that in another that is
acted in the world, though it be professed otherwise in the intent, and come
to the true measure and weight: and act nothing in your own wills, nor out of
the counsel of God, to judge the just upon earth in this world, the just you will
be judged by, that is of the world to come, without end. I receive not Honor of
man; Whether or no if any do persecute the seed, which does take the honor of
God, which is over the world and it They themselves do take the honor of the
world, that persecutes the contrary. Are these things judged with a just
measure, and weighed with an equal balance, yea or nay?

George Fox.

DID not Christ wash the Disciples feet? Did he not do that as a pattern and
example to those that came after him, that they should do to one another? Have
you washed one another feet? Have ye anointed one another with oil that
stumble at these where they are acted? Are not these the expressions of love to
one another? And are not these things to be acted amongst the Disciples of
Christ? Are not these things wonders amongst you that do not wash one another
feet, that be out of the example of the Lord? did not the Disciples wash one
another feet according to Christ's example? Were not the Prophets feet washed?
Did not Peter desire his head o be washed? Do not wonder and strange at these
things where they are practiced: Were not the Saints to salute one another with
a holy kiss? and was not Peter to be carried whither he would not? Was there
not a time that he girded himself? And is it not the Prince of the air that
rules in the children of disobedience, if it be not the Prince of Peace and the
Lamb of God? And is it not an expression of love and honor where there is the
washing of one another feet? And for the washing or kissing of feet, it is but
an expression of love and humility? And is not this a pattern and example to all
you to judge you all how far short ye are of washing one another feet, or
kissing one another feet; and do not wrong one another about these outward
things, but to come to know the Seed of God, which bruiseth the Serpents head,
which would destroy and set one at enmity with another; that crusheth down
these outward things, and reigns over these outward things; which seed of God
comprehands all strife, and comprehends the world; which seed the promise and
blessing of God is to; in which seed is the unity, and not the enmity, for that
is it which is bruised with it. Therefore do not show your selves in enmity
against these actions, where they are acted in the seed of God in
righteousness, not in the world, out of the enmity; not as justifying the
wicked in these things, nor condemning the righteous. Mind consideration
before you do judge of such as are moved to act these things, whether or no
they be not examples to you all, to try you all, whether or no you will
persecute, or lift up your hands against such; and an act whereby you may
search your selves, and see how far short ye come of a Disciple: And come to
that good in you all, that is of God, that with it you may overcome, if there
be any thing that is evil, and the heaping the coals of fire upon that which is
the adversary: And whether or no there be not such things to be acted in
righteosnesse and simplicity, as washing the seet of the Disciples, or that
some may be carried whether they would not go; and if any should kiss the
feet, or wash the feet of another in love and simplicity, is that such a crime?
And for Jesus and Christ, and the prince of life and peace; if Jesus Christ be
within, the second Adam is witnessed, God with us, which is Jesus; and be not
offended with this, if any do witness the State reconciled to God, who has
witnessed the State drove from God, the first Adams state, who witnesses the
second Adams state, the Emanuel, God with us. Again, Now be not ye offended at
this, least you do manifest your selves to be in the first Adams state, driven
from God, not witness Jesus Christ, God with you reconciled to God again. But
if you stand against this, it shows your selves to be in the transgression,
standing against the Emanuel, which is God with us: Be not hasty in acting
these things, but examine and consider before you do act.

George Fox:

Except ye see signs and wonders ye will not believe: but this is come to pass
that the Scriptures might be fulfilled, that says, the time will come, that
they shall think they do God good service when they kill you. Remember the
Scripture which says, His face is more marred then any man's, Isa. 52. 14. And
whether this be not the same that gave his Checks to the Smiter, and opened not
his mouth? And see now who they are that have spit upon him; but what evil has
he done.

Notwithstanding all these warnings, yet on the 17. day of the tenth month,
the major part of the House pronounced Sentence on him.

A brief Account of the Grounds of the Petitioners that appeared for James
Nayler.
With the Copies of their Petitions, for satisfaction of all moderate spirits.
GOd who works all things, according to the Counsel of his own Will, is often
times pleased to make use of extremities, and by them to point out unto his
people their duty; Thus did he Order, that the increased tyrannies and
oppressions of Israel in the Land of Egypt, should press forth their cries and
tears unto the Lord, that he might thence take his rise to appear for them: So
in the days of the Bishops of late years, the trials and sufferings of the
people of God, have come to some head and ripeness, before He has bin
provoked to deliver them, as we might instance both in Scotland and our own
Nation. Even so fares it with the poor people of God at this day, who having
been for some time asleep and in a pleasing dream, as if the storms were over,
and the Winter were past and gone, are awakened by a fresh Alarm, to consider
and behold the same spirit of persecution and blood, revived again in the
bosom of that worldly peace and glory, wherein we have delighted to stand
forth in the Image of the Nations. How much better and safer had it been for
us, to have stood by the Lord in his founding of Zion, waiting for his Counsel
(who stood by us in our destroying the grosser Babylon) and to have been of the
poor of his people that trust in it, and not of those that exercise dominion
over it. There is a poor contemptible people whom God has pleased to call
forth out of all the Sects and Divisions in this Nation, both Professors and
Non-professors, whose principles and ways have bin fitted and prepared, to
give check or confront at least, to that Spirit of Lordlinesse and formality,
that after the throwing down of the old Fabric of a painted and pompous Church
and State, was but too apt to spring up again among us; which is the best
account we can at present give, why God should suffer so many upright souls, to
be snatched from their former communion and walking, into so exasperating a way.
There was something of the measure of the sufferings of Christ yet behind; and
of the Spirit of Antichrist, yet to be vented and acted upon our English
Theater. And truly, not without some regret in our selves, have we heard and
observed the long and often repeated sufferings of that poor people who have bin
whipped and imprisoned As Evesham can witness.
in many parts of this Nation, thrust into holes and dungeons, where they have
scarce had the liberty to breathe; and all this for nothing as far as we
understand, but what peaceable people may do without any disturbance to the
civil peace and quiet of the Nation. We hope what we have writ is clear, and we
may easily be understood herein, not to approve their scheme of doctrine, as
absolutely clear and Evangelical; but who knows what sufferings may do, to the
purifying and refining thereof? But thus have we stood gazing upon them, not
pleading their Cause, because disgusting some of their Principles, till the
Wisdom of God saw good, to give us a fresh and louder Alarm (not in our Ears
only, but before our Eyes) in the bitter usage of James Nayler one of the very
chief of that people, (though now dis-owned by the generallity of them, whose
case therefore is the more respected by us*) So that we could no longer, as
persons unconcerned keep silence, but we must appear for him in a Petition to
the Parliament. And this we could not refuse, unless we would renounce that
Love, that Light, that Cause, and those Principles, we have all along for some
years professed and avowed.

But how low and tender these first buddings of our charity were, the Petitions
themselves will show, which yet were as high as we could well go, or the
Parliament bear. And we were not so modest, but some thought us too bold and
daring, to appear in such a Cause, for such a person so obnoxious in their
account; for which we could offer many, and those very great considerations.

As I, and principally, the honor of that Cause, for which we have suffered
the loss of a thousand other things, we mean Conscience-liberty, which we
conceive to stand in nothing more, than in these two points (or indeed we may
say, bears it self up on them as two main pillars) viz. First, That the Civil
Magistrate is not the proper Judge of Error or blasphemy. And secondly, That
corporal punishment is not a proper punishment for offenses of a spiritual
nature, though it was used to the Jews for diverse special Reasons, peculiar to
that Legal dispensation only.

2. The safety of the Government, which is in danger of wrath from the
Almighty, for nothing so much or so soon, as for invading the spiritual
jurisdiction of our Lord Jesus.

3. The Consequence to our selves, who by this Rule may be pulled out, and
judged without a Law; yea judged and sentenced in the highest condemnation as,
blasphemers, for which the present temper of the civil Magistrate shall censure
to be blasphemy.

These with other Reasons were in our eye, which we shall not insist upon, but
desire it may satisfy others, that we are exceeding well satisfied our selves
in bearing our testimony. We cannot, we dare not cry Blasphemy with all that do
so; We dare not throw men out of Heaven and out of our hearts, (out of all love
and pity there) so fast as some can. It is a dark and disguising time, and
scarce any one wears his own clothes. Temptations are abroad, and there is not
a Spirit to judge and discern them a right. They many times are accounted
Orthodox, who have least right to it. Old Jacob must cross his hands again;
but this is the snare in which God will take the world. And look to it, the
worst of blasphemies is to make profession of the Gospel, and have no love.

The series of our Petitions, and addresses in the behalf of the said James
Naylor, hereafter follows.

To the Parliament of the Commonwealth of England, Scotland, and Ireland.
The Humble Petition of the Persons whose names are underwritten.
Humbly shows,
THat we are credibly informed, (from those eyes that have seen it) that James
Naylor is in a very ill and dangerous condition of body, not fit to undergo
that part of your Sentence he is adjudged unto, this day; and were desired to
acquaint this Honorable House so much, and to beg the respite of a week, or
some small time, as to your Wisdom and Goodness shall seem meet; That he may
recover a little strength before he be called forth again: Which office of
charity we could not refuse, though we are not partakers with him, nor abettors
of him in any thing that has occasioned this sentence. Therefore since we
believe, it is not your intent to destroy that Life, which you spared in your
Sentence, we humbly pray an Order of Reprieve, may be granted for a few days;
And it will be accepted as an Act of your Christian moderation and clemency



And we shall pray, etc. T. Z. J. W. J. S. C. H.


The substance of the foresaid Petition was certified to the Subscribers by
diverse credible persons; and it may further appear by a Certificate from the
woman that first washed his stripes; a Copy whereof is hereunto annexed.

The Testimony of Rebeckah Travers, who washed James Naylers stripes, after he
was whipped, as follows.
TO my best discerning there was not a space bigger then the breadth of a man's
nail free from stripes and blood, from his shoulders near his waste. And his
right Arm was sorely striped. His hands also were sorely hurt with the Cords,
that they bled, and were swelled.

The blood and wounds of his back did very little appear at first sight, by
reason of the abundance of Dirt that covered them, till it was washed off.

This I saw coming to him above an hour after his whipping, in all which time
none had been with him, or sent to him to look after his wounds.

Rebeckah Travers.

And others saw that he was much abused with horses treading on him, for the
print of the nails were seen on his feet.

Upon reading the aforesaid Petition, the Parliament respited the further
Execution of their Sentence upon James Naylor for one week, as by their Order
may appear, which was, Saturday 20 December.

Ordered,
THat the further punishment of James Naylor which should have been on this
Day, shall be suspended till this Day seven night, and be executed on him then;
and that the Sheriffs of London and Middlesex, do observe this Order
accordingly.

During which Interval, several peaceable and well-affected persons, being
sadly sensible of the Consequence of such proceedings, did address themselves
by Petition to the Parliament, for the remitting the remaining part of the said
James Naylers punishment; a Copy whereof is under written:

To the Parliament of the Commonwealth of England, Scotland, and Ireland, etc.
The Humble Petition of diverse peaceable and well-affected persons in the
Cities of London and Westminster, in behalf of themselves and many others.

Shows,
THat your Moderation and Clemency in respiting the punishment of James Naylor,
in consideration of his Illness of body, has refreshed the hearts of many
thousands in these Cities, altogether unconcerned in his practice; and has
opened their eyes to see something more then the terrors of Mount Sinai, to
dwell upon your Honorable House; and has likewise given them some hopes to
see you come forth in the Spirit of our Lord Jesus, yet more and more, to the
Convincement of those that Err, and are out of the way. Wherefore we most
humbly beg your pardon, that are constrained to appear before you in such a
suit, (not daring to do otherwise) that you would remit the remaining part of
your Sentence against the said James Naylor, leaving him to the Lord, and to
such Gospel Remedies as he has sanctified: And we are persuaded you will find
such a Course of love and for bearance more effectual to reclaim, and will
leave a seal of your love and tenderness upon our spirits.



And we shall pray, etc.
This Petition, being presented at the Bar of the House by about one hundred
persons in the behalf of the whole, was accordingly read and debated by them:
but being not likely to produce the desired effect, the Petitioners thought
themselves bound in Duty and Conscience to make this following address to the
Lord Protector also,

To his Highness Oliver, Lord Protector of the Commonwealth of England
Scotland and Ireland, and the Dominions thereunto belonging.
The humble Petition of, etc.

Shows,
THat your Petitioners having, out of tenderness to the good cause of our
spiritual and Civil Liberties, concerned in some late proceedings of the house
of Parliament, and to the good of these Nations and the Government thereof,
appeared in a petition to the Parliament (a Copy whereof is hereunto annexed)
for the remitting the remaining punishment of James Naylor, which Petition is
received into the house and rests there; We humbly conceive it our duty also,
in consideration of the Joint Interest which your Highness with the
Parliament, has, by the Instrument of Government, in the Legislative power, to
make our humble address and request to your Highness, That you will be pleased
according to all former Declarations, and the Experience we have had of your
Highness care of this tender Interest of Liberty of conscience, to weigh the
consequence of these late proceedings. And according to the 37th Article of the
Instrument aforesaid, and one of the grounds you declare upon in the war with
Spain, your Highness will stand up for the poor people of God in this day,
wherein your Highness will not do more right to your Petitioners, then to your
self and these Nations.



And we shall pray, etc:
The Product of which address was only sending the following Letter, by his
Highness, to the Parliament.

Oliver P.
RIght Trusty and Right Wellbeloved, We greet you well.
Having taken notice of a Judgment lately given against one James Naylor,
Although We detest and abhor the giving or occasioning the least countehance
to Persons of such opinions or practices, or who are under the guilt of such
Crimes as are commonly imputed to the said Person; Yet we being interessed in
the present Government on behalf of the people of these Nations, and not
knowing how far such a proceeding (wholly without us) may extend in the
Consequence of it. We desire that the House will let us know the grounds and
reasons whereupon they have proceeded.

Given at White: Hall the 25th. day of December. 1656.
To our Right trusty and Right Wellbeloved Sir* Thomas Widdrington, Speaker.
Which Letter ocasioning some debate in the House, and the day for Execution of
the remaining part of the Sentence drawing near, the Petitioners made a second
Address to his Highness, in manner following.

To his Highness, etc. The humble Petition, etc.
Shows,
THat with great thankfulness we acknowledge your Highness Love to the Cause
and People of God and their Liberties, and particularly your appearing at their
request by your Letter to the Parliament on their and the Nations bebehalf, as
they seem to be concerned in the proceedings against James Naylor. And we
desire we may not forget, nor be unmindfull to bless God that has raised up
your Highness a Bullwark between us and oppression and persecution. And has
given you to be faithful on all occasions when we have applied our selves unto
you; that expecting the fruit of your Highness Letter to the Parliament, to
our grief we find nothing is done, nor like to be done timely, but the
Execution of the remaining part of the Sentence will take place, unless
presented by your Highness.

Wherefore your Petitioners are constrained again to make their humble Address
to your Highness, that in regard the business will admit of no longer delay;
Your Highness will be pleased in pursuance of that claim you may justly make
to a joynt-Interest, and Concern, in such proceedings, to take such course,
that the intended Execution to morrow, may be prevented.

And your Petitioners shall as in duty bound, pray, etc.
Notwithstanding all which, the Sentence of Parliament took place, and was
Executed upon James Nayler.

It is very remarkable, that these great sufferings have hitherto been endured
by him with much patience and meekness; as a Lamb led to the slaughter he
opened not his mouth. He never murmured at the heavy sentence pronounced
against him; nor complained against his adversaries, nor of the severity of his
sufferings; but endured them with so much patience and quietness of spirit, as
that it has astonished the minds of many who were eyewitnesses thereof.

When he was before the House, and they asked him concerning particulars of his
examination before the Committee, which were passed out of his mind, He in
simplicity of heart, referred himself to his Examiners, saying, he thought they
would not do him wrong; though diverse of the House were hoth his accusers and
Judges.

When they were about to pronounce the sentence, He said, He did not know his
offense. The Speaker amongst many others, gave forth these words, That he
should know his offense by his punishment.

And when his sentence was pronounced against him, he showed not the least
dislike; but being denied to have liberty to speak, as he passed away, he
uttered these words with meekness: He that has prepared the body, will enable
me to suffer; and I pray, that He may not lay it to your charge.

Here follows the Relation of W. H. touching the five Ministers, that were
with James Naylor, a little before his last suffering on the Pillory in London.
Wednesday the 24. of December. 1656. my self with others being at the Prison
with James Naylor and understanding that diverse Ministers were come (...) Order
of Parliament to conserr with him, to^ hi^ (...)e things for* which he was
there ^^^aine ^: and being (...)s to know the Truth of what is ^e o^^e^
concerning ^^^e (...)phemies of which he is accused, and or which (...) also
the frame and temper of his Spirit ^n^er such g(...)dings, I desired to be
present at the said Conference. But being denied that Liberty by the Keeper,
who told us, he was appointed by the Ministers, to let none be present whilst
they were with him, one of us addressed to the ministers themselves, who also
denied us, or so much as one of us, to be present. So we could not be admitted:
but were turned forth. And my self having business in the City, went about the
same. And about eight of the Clock the same night, going through Newgate
Market, I met those Ministers in the Street; and judging they came then from
James Naylor, I went directly to the prison to know the issue of their meeting:
and asking him concerning it (so near as I can remember) he told me, as
follows, viz.

That he told those Ministers, he saw they had an intent to make him suffer
(though innocent) as an evil doer; and therefore denied any to be present that
might be indifferent Judges betwixt them and him, (or words to that purpose.)
And therefore he should not say any thing, unless, what passed, might be writ
down, and a Copy therefore given him to keep, or left with the Jailer, signed
by them. Which (he said) was, after some words, assented unto. And so they
propounded several Questions unto him, and took his Answers in writing.

And I asking him if he could remember any of the Questions propounded to him,
he told me as follows, (viz.)

That they asked him if he was sorry for those Blasphemies that he was guilty
of; and whether he did recant, and renounce the same? To which he answered,
What Blasphemies? name them. But they not able to instance in any particular,
He replied; Would you have me recant, and renounce you know not what?

They asked him, Whether he did believe there was a Jesus Christ? To which he
answered, He did believe there was: for he had tasted of him; and that Jesus
had taken up his dwelling in his heart and spirit; and, for the Testimony of
him, he now suffered. One of them replied. But I believe in a Jesus that never
was in any man's heart. To which he answered, He knew no such Christ; for the
Christ he witnessed, fills Heaven and Earth, and dwells in the Hearts of
Believers.

Again, they demanded of him why he suffered those Women etc. to worship and
adore him. To which he replied, Bowing to the Creature, I deny: But if they
behold the power of Christ wherever it is, and bow to it, he had nothing by
which he might resist that, or gainsay it. And withal said to the Ministers,
Have you thus long professed the Scriptures, and do you now stumble at what
they hold forth? Whereupon they desired one instance of Scripture, wherein such
a practice was held forth. To which he answered. What think you of the
Shunamite, in falling down at the feet of Elisha, and bowing before him?
Whether was the Prophet guilty of Blasphemy, in not reproving her when she did
so? 2 King. 4. 27, 37. as also diverse others in Scripture spoken of. Upon which
they pawsing for a while, answered, That was but a civil act, or
acknowledgment. So (said he) might you interpret theirs also, if your eye were
not evil, seeing the outward action is one and the same.

But after a while, he seeing them not contented with plain answers, but
seeking to wrest words out of him to their own purpose, in meekness uttered
these words, How soon have you forgot the work of the Bishops, who are now
found in the same, seeking to ensnare the innocent? Whereupon they rose up, and
with bitterness of spirit burnt all that they had before written. And so left
him with some bemoaning expressions, rather discovering a prejudiced spirit,
then real affection to the good of his soul.

So when they were departing he desired of them, (as he had also done before)
that the Parliament would send him such Questions in writing, as they desired
satisfaction in; and give him leave to return his Answers in writing also.

These (as near as I can remember) he told me, with some other passages, which
I do not well remember. And hoping the whole passages of that meeting will be
published by the parties themselves, upon consideration of what is before
mentioned, I humbly premise these Queries following, touching the Case of the
said Naylor.

1. Whether rationally those men in that their proceeding, can be adjudged
lovers of his Soul: or that act tending to the good thereof? or not rather
wholly prejudiced, and intending to say snares before him?

2. Whether any Nation afford the like President, that four or five persons (a
man's enemies) should be his examiners, and solely empowered to report his Case
to his Judges, not admitting, any to be present but themselves, as indifferent
witnesses betwixt them? If four or five of those Silversmiths, that made
shrines for Diana, whose gain Paul's doctrine destroyed, If they had been sent
to Paul to examine him and report his Case to his Judges; how unequal a thing
would this be accounted?

3. Whether the verbal report of those persons (or if written it being done
after they departed from him) ought to be received or credited as a true
testimony; when they have burnt their Examinations* and his Answers written
while they were together^ not admitting them to be seen as they were first
signed.

4. Whether it were not a very reasonable desire of James Naylor's (as the case
^ood) that Questions might be sent him in writing from the Parliament, and he
might have liberty to return his Answers in writing; for the avoiding of
misinterpretation of his adversaries.

FINIS.

