INTELLIGENCE SENT TO THIS KINGDOM, CONCERNING THE TAKING IN OF THE TOWN OF
NEW CASTLE: WITH

Copies of the Letters, and other Passages, that occurred betwixt our Army and
those in the Town.

AS ALSO The surrender of the CASTLE thereof.

EDINBURGH, Printed by Evan Tyler, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty. 1644.

For the Right Honorable, the Earl of LAUDERDAILE.
IT has pleased God of his infinite goodness, to grant to us a glorious and
happy Victory in gaining of this Town, without any considerable Loss; for
which we have all great cause to praise God, and to acknowledge his mercies,
even to outreach our very expectations; For I must confess ingeniously, that I
have never seen any Town all my Lifetime kept and defended with greater
resolution, continuing in a most constant obstinacy, till the very last; and
Gods Providence appear more in animating of our Officers and Soldiers in
general, against so hard oppositions and difficulties. The particulars of what
lately past, your Lordship may be pleased to receive enclosed herewith, and to
communicate the same with my Lord Crawford and the Committee of Estates. This
much in haste, Irest

Newcastle 20. October. 1644. Your Lordships most humble servant Leven.

Copy of Summonds sent to the Town of Newcastle, October. 14. 1644.
We Alex. Earl of Leven, Lord General of the Scottish Armies, that it may be
the more manifest, and appear to all, how exceedingly we desire you to prevent
all those evils, which cannot be longer avoided. Notwithstanding you have been
formerly invited by our several Letters, in all fair manner, to think on those
ways which might conduce most to your welbeing; Do by these presents require
and summond you, to give up and surrender the Town of Newcastle to us, for the
use of King and Parliament; that Citizens and Soldiers may be safe: and the
Town being preserved from ruin, may enjoy the fruits of settled peace, whereof
other Towns reduced to the same obedience, do liberally taste. You are
likewise earnestly desired, by no means to conceal this our last offer and
warning to the Citizens and Soldiers, as you will be answerable to God and
them whom it may concern. If in these things you fail, you may expect the
extremities of War. And we profess our selves, and the Army under our
conduct, altogether free and innocent of whatsoever bloodshed and other
calamities may ensue, through your obstinacy. Hereto we expect a present
answer. Given

For Master Major, Aldermen, and Common Council of the Town of Newcastle.
Sic subscribitur LEVEN.


From the Major of Newcastle, October. 14.
MY Lord, I received your Letter this afternoon, at almost five a clock: It is
directed to Major, Aldermen, and Common Council: And it is for no less matter
then the delivering up of the Town to you, (as you say for King and Parliament)
no Conditions, but to stand to your mercy. But I will not take upon me
absolutely to give answer my self, neither will I conceal it from any it
concerns; yet I hope you are not in so great haste, but I may take time to
give you a full answer the morrow, at or before this time, when you may by Gods
assistance, certainly expect it. And in the mean time I take leave, and rest

Your Lordships friend, JO. MORLEY.


MY Lord, we have received your Letter, wherein you require and summond us to
give up and surrender the Town, as you say, for the use of King and Parliament;
alleging diverse Reasons, mixed with Threats, to persuade us thereunto. All
which we have well weighed and considered: and as formerly, so now returns
this Answer; That we declare to you, and to all the world, That we keep this
Town for the use of his Majesty: And that we have full power and authority
from his Majesty so to do. And if either you, or any other can show us better,
or later Warrant from his Majesty to demand it, we will submit. And although
we neither dare, nor will acknowledge that disloyalty to our lawful King
(which you call, reducing to just obedience) is the way to preserve us from
ruin, and to enjoy the fruits of a settled Peace; yet that you and all the
world may see, we desire To shun the effusion of Christian blood; we desire
you to send us in writing, upon what Terms and Conditions you would have us
deliver up the Town, and then we shall return you a further Answer (which we
hope will be satisfactory:) And if this will not give you content, proceed and
prosper as your Cause requires: and let the Blood that is, or shall be spilt,
lie upon their souls and consciences that deserve it: And if we be the fault,
let this subscribed under our hand testify against us.

Newcastle 15. October. 1644. Sic subscribitur John Morley. Nicholas Cole. Thomas
Lyddell. Thomas Ryddell. Nicholas Tempest. Alex: Davison. Francis Bows. Raph
Cole. Leonard Carr. Robert Sherflo. James Cole. Mar. Milbank. Cuthbert Carr.
Edward Stote. Thom. Blenkincope. Samuel Cork. Oswald Mathie. Tho. Madisane.
Henry Rowcastle. Thomas Clarke. Charles Clarke. William Cork. Gabriel Robison.
William Harope. John Blackburne. William Robisone. Will: Armstrong. Anthony
Younger. Will: Archbald.



Right Worshipful, etc.
WE received your Answer to our last, wherein as in all former Letters, we
conceive we have used no threats, but fair and peaceable expressions, such as
are ordinary in differences of this kind: But that our constant desire to shun
the effusion of Blood, and the sincerety of our loyal Intentions, may more and
more appear to you and all the World, we desire that without any further delay,
Hostages may be sent from either side, and judicious men appointed to Treat on
such terms and conditions, as may put a happy end to the Business; And to
meet in such a place between the Town and Camp, or within the Town, as shall
be thought fitting by you. Hereto we expect your Answer, And remain

To Master Mayor, Aldermen, and Common Council of the Town of Newcastle.
October. 15. Your Loving friend LEVEN.


Right Worshipful, etc.
I Have been still expecting your Answer to my last, wherein it was desired,
That Hostages might be sent, and a place appointed for Treaty: but now since
you have returned none, we do hereby exhonour our selves; That all the World
may know how desirous we have been of the safety and peace of your Town, as
this and our former Letters will bear witness for us against your obstinacy:
And this we are confident God will bless us according to the integrity of our
Intentions. So I leave, and rest

16. October. 3. a clock afternoon. Your friend LEVEN.


My Lord,
WE received your second Letter directed as the former; and upon good
considerations, we could have wished that according to our desires in our former
Letters, you would have sent in writing the conditions and terms you desire
the Town upon; That we might altogether have considered and condescended to
what had been fitting and convenient for us to grant. But since you like not
that course, but desires Hostages may be sent, and some appointed to meet, and
treat, at a time and place convenient. We must acknowledge and confess that we
do not hold that power in us to grant, as Major, Aldermen, and Common
Council: But solely to be in the Major, as he is Governor of the Military,
who we find very willing to condescend to any thing that may tend to The
honor of his Majesty, The welfare of Newcastle, and The shunning essusion of
Blood, if you please to write unto him for that purpose. And so wishing a happy
and honorable peace in all his Majesty's Dominions, We rest

Newcastle, 16. October. 1644. Your loving friends Subscribitur as the other
Letter by Major, Aldermen, and Common Council

For his Excellence the Earl of Leven, General of the Scottish Army.

Right Worshipful,
I Conceived for your further exoneration, it had been most fitting to write to
your self, as Master Major, Aldermen, and Common Council: But now seeing I
understand by themselves, that the power is solely in your self, as Governor
of the Military affairs; I will use your way, and shall here repeat my former
desire, that Hostages may be sent, and a place appointed without further delay,
to meet and treat on such things as may most tend to The honor of his
Majesty, and Well of Newcastle: Being always most willing To shun all the
occasions of effusion of Blood. Hereto we expect your Answer the morrow before
10. a clock. And that ye will likewise make known to us the names and qualities
of Hostages; And such as you think fit to nominate to treat, and the place
appointed for meeting, according as ours shall be ready against the same time.
Thus I rest

For the Right Worshipful, Sir John Morley Knight, Master Major, and Governor
of Newcastle.
16 October. 1644. Your loving friend LEVEN.


My Lord,
I Received your Letter so late that I was forced to keep your Drummer all
night: And I am very glad to see that you and I aim both at one end; Which is,
His Majesty's Honor, Newcastles Welfare, and The avoiding effusion of Blood:
And I wish those that treat, may be of the same mind: But whereas you desire
me to name Hostages, and men to treat: I must desire you to name yours, and I
shall suit them as well as I can, for you know there is no Noblemen with me, but
two of your own Countrymen; yet we have Knights and other Gentlemen of good
esteem: Ishall also desire that there may be but three appointed to treat, and
each to bring but one man, and know what Guard you will send with your
Hostages, that I may send the like; the place of Exchange and Treaty may be at
Newcastle. And when I know your mind in those things, we shall appoint the
time of meeting. And if we hold close and sincerely to these ends by you
proposed, I doubt not but God will bless our endeavors, and set us at peace,
and I hope, in his good time, these distracted Kingdoms; which that it may be,
shall be the daily prayer of

Your loving friend John Morley.
Newcastle 16. October.

After the Committee did sit, a Letter was written by Master Primerose,
appointing Thursday the 17. at 12. a Clock, to Treat at Newcastle, the names of
the Commissioners sent in, viz. The Lord Humby, Sir David Hume of Wedderburne,
and the Provest of Jedburgh, whereupon the following Answer was returned.

My Lord,
I Received your Letter, and do approve of those men you name to Treat, being
all strangers to me: And likewise, that there is no necessity of a Guard, only
one Officer to meet them at the place appointed. But you desire that the
meeting may be this day at 12. a Clock: And that I will send the names of these
I intend to appoint as Hostages, to be exchanged at the time and place
abovementioned; which is impossible, for I received your Letter half hour
after 12. And certainly you mean not 12. at night; But I will keep promise, and
to that purpose, this night I will send you the names of the Hostages I intend
to send to the place appointed; and the time to be the morrow at 9. a Clock in
the fore-noone: As for those that are to Treat, I intend to supply the place of
one my self, and shall send you the names of the rest; And so wishing a happy
end to those and all the Troubles of his Majesty's Dominions, I rest

Your loving friend John Morley.
Newcastle 17. October. 1644.
For his Excellence, the Earl of LEVEN.

My Lord,
ACcording to promise, I send you the names of the Hostages, and of those
appointed to Treat; and shall keep the time and place mentioned in my former
Letter, and have set down their names here under: I will say no more, but
desire that during the time of the Treaty those courses may be holden which is
accustomed in War. And so expecting your Answer by this Drummer, I rest

Your loving friend Jo. Morley.
Newcastle 17. October. 1644.
Gentlemen appointed for the Treaty.
Sir John Morley, Knight and Governor. Sir Nicholas Cole Knight Baronet. Sir
George Baker Knight, and a Secretary.
Hostages.
Colonel Charles Brandling. Lieutenant Colonel Thomas Davisone. Captain
Cuthbert Carr, late Sheriff of Newcastle.

Whereupon Answer was returned, That all should be observed as was appointed.

Upon Friday 18. at 10. a clock our Commissioners went in, and stayed till 4. a
clock in the afternoon, but had no satisfaction to any of their demands, the
Mayor not suffering any thing to come in writ, but jeering all the time,
desiring they might have 2. days to advise, and thereafter they would give
Answer: So upon Friday at 8. a clock at night this Letter following was sent
forth by them.

My Lord,
WE have had some discourse this day with your Commissioners, but you have
bound them to have our Answers to your Demands in so short a time, as we could
not give them that satisfaction we would gladly, considering they demanded that
which was not according to your Propositions, namely, His Majesty's honor, and
The welfare of Newcastle: But we are so unwilling to see Christian blood shed,
as if that you rest satisfied until Monday, we shall then, God willing, send
you Propositions which we hope will give content. If this will not serve, we
trust God will deliver us out of your hands. And so we rest

Newcastle 18. October. 1644. Your loving friends John Morley. Nicholas Cole. G.
Baker.



At 10. a clock at night I caused conveene the Committee, and did resolve to
send in Propositions that night to them, which went in about 12. a clock at
night: The effect whereof was;

1. That all Officers and Soldiers should have liberty to go away with flying
Colors, full Arms, Bag and Baggage, and should have a Safe Conduct to any of
the Kings Garrisons within 60 miles of Newcastle.

2. That all such as had a mind to stay and go to their own houses, should be
protected, and have a safeguard for their persons, families, and goods.

3. That all Strangers, Residents within the Town, should have the like, with
liberty to go to their own dwellings in the Country about.

4. That all Burgesses and Townsmen should have free liberty and Trade, as
other Towns reduced to obedience of King and Parliament.

5. That they should have their persons, houses, estates, and goods protected,
and be liable to no other Sesses or Contributions, but as other Towns reduced
to the obedience foresaid.

6. That they were to be free from all free Billetting and Quartering, and none
of the Army to come into the Town but a competent Garrison.

7. That if they would embrace these conditions, they were to send forth
sufficient Hostages for delivery up of the Town within two days thereafter
upon Saturday 19 by nine a clock.

Whereupon the following Letter was sent forth about the same time.

My Lord,
We received your Letter, wherein you say, we cannot make good, that your
Commissioners Demands are against either His Majesty's honor, or The welfare
of Newcastle; we will give you but one reason amongst many: Whether it be for
His Majesty's honor, that the Town of Newcastle should be delivered to any of
another Nation? Nay more, If it be for the honor of the English Parliament?
And that it is not For our welfare, is so clear, needs no Answer. And whereas
you say, You wonder we are not ashamed to be sodilatory, having demanded a
Treaty; We say, We wonder you can be so forgetful, knowing we have your
Letter to show, that the Treaty was your own motion. But for answer to the
rest, and to your Articles, We say, The delivery of Newcastle is not of so
small moment: But if you intend (as you say) time may well be given until
Monday, for giving Answer; for in case we should give consent to let you have
the Town: There is diverse more Articles then you have set down, both fit for
us to demand, and you to grant: Therefore if you would shun effusion of
Bloodshed, as you profess, forbear your Acts of hostility, until we give you
Answer upon Monday, wherein we will not fail: Otherwise we doubt not but God
will require an account at your hands; And besides, will keep and preserve us
from your fury. So expecting your Answer, we rest

For his Excellence the Earl of Leven, General of the Scottish Army.
Newcastle 19. October. 1644. Your friends John Morley. Nicholas Cole. G. Baker.



UPon Saturday 19. Order being given the day before to all Commanders at their
several Posts round about, for their way in storming and entering the walls and
Town, after they should see a fire made on at two several places, Elswich and
Sheilfield. Our Cannon began to play at day light in brashing the walls at five
several places, and did continue very hotly till three in the afternoon, about
which time two Mines were sprung, one at Sandgate in the Lord Sinclars
Quarters; and the other at Whitefrier Tower, near Closegate; some four or
five Mines being counter-myned by the Enemy within the Town, and spoiled
before their were ready; who were likewise very diligent to get the two last
undone. And (as we conceive) did seek for delays till Monday only for the same
purpose. After 3 a clock the fires were made on: The walls manfully defended
round about. Our People went on at their several Posts and Brashes, did enter
very bravely and courageously, without once recoyling, notwithstanding there
could not be greater opposition made: Our Men were so eager, that these who
were appointed for Reserves at some Posts, did all enter also, so that we were
forced to send Horsemen to stand in their places. After very hot skirmishing
within the walls for a whole hours time and more, it pleased God to grant us a
very happy and considerable Victory, in gaining the whole walls and Town. The
Lord Crawfurd, Major, and many others, are retired within the Castle, and are
calling for Quarters to yield the same, whereof you may expect an account
shortly; as also of what Men we have lost, who are but very few. Our Officers
and Soldiers were all very merciful in sparing the lives of the Officers,
Soldiers and Townsmen, after they had won the Town.

The surrender of the Castle and Prisoners. New Castle 21. October 1644.
ON the Lords Day we gave thanks to God in the chief^ Kirk of the Town, and
that Day the Governor wrote to the General, desiring that he and the
Gentlemen, and Ministers with him, might have liberty to go to the King, or
where they pleased, with their Horses, Swords, and Pistols: This Letter was
neglected, and not answered. Upon Tuesday the 22. the Ministers, viz. Doctor
Gray of Pontiland, Master George Wishart, Vicar Alvey, and Master Walter
Lamonth, wrote an humble supplication to the General, submitting themselves
and their fortunes, to grace and favor; whereupon they were suffered to come
out and render themselves Prisoners. The Major and some Captains with him, came
out upon the like terms. Lodovick Lindsay sometime Earl of Crawfurd, my Lord
Maxwell, and some other Scottish-men are prisoners also, and kept in the Castle
(now rendered) by a Garrison of our Soldiers. This day also summonds were sent
to the Castle of Tinmouth, what answer is received, you shall hear by the next.

FINIS.

