A True Coppie of a Prophecy which was found in old ancient house of one
Master Truswell, sometime Recorder of a Town in Lincolne-shire.

Which in all men's judgments was not unwritten these 300 years.

And supposed to be seen still in a writing of Parcment, at Stow in the
aforesaid County, being the mother Church of Lincoln Minster.

Whereunto is added Mother Shiptons Prophesies.

a man sits at a table holding astrological instruments, with a astrological
book, and quill pen and inkwell

LONDON, Printed for Henry Marsh. 1642.

A Prophecy of a King that shall win the Holy Cross, prophesied by many and
their names as follows.
FIrst, Saint Thomas calls him a virgin King in brightness like an Angel.

2 Merlin calls him a Bull threefold of nature, that is to say, true
Inheritour of England, Ireland, and Castile.

3 John the Hermit calls him the King of H^rds, that is to say, the King of
many Hoasts and Kingdoms.

4 Merlin Sylvester calls him the King of Wretches, that is to say, there
shall be so much pride, leach^rie, sin and theft, at his beginning, that he
shall have much work to correct them.

5 Albion the Monk of Al^^ine calls him a Lion of the air, that shall take
his wings and fly to Rome, and shall be Emperor, and his name shall be Edward.

6 Alphion the Proph^t calls him the Wester^e Beast, which displayeth the
black Bull with the golden hor^es, first in the East, and in his d^yes shall be
destroyed the false Preachers for their unt^uth, and he shall win a great part
of the world, and make a free way to the Holy Land, and his name shall be
Edward, and in his days many tokens of Antechrist and other marvels shall be
seen.

7 Mallaycus Abbot of Ireland, calls him the sixth of Jreland, which will not
be governed by no man; but by God and himself, and in his days shall Friars
and Monks for their untruths and falsehood suffer punishment, and he shall be
c^lled Edward.

8 Sybill the wise calls him, The second Lion of all beasts, which shall win
the holy Cross, and in his years shall be destroyed Friars and Charmers.

9 David in the Psalms calls him an Unicorn, which shall never turn his
face from his enemies, nor of any be betrayed.

10 Bannister of England calls him, a Bear of a clean vessel, which shall
never be defiled, nor of any be betrayed; in his time much of the Church of
England shall be punished, for their examples given.

11 The Doctor Saint Jerome calls him, the true Dragon, which was christened
in no font; and he shall tread under his feet the King of pride, and then he
shall take his way to the holy Land.

12 Maconit calls him to the minds of the delectable Rose of Britain, and he
shall be defended of all Maidens, Widows, and Orphans, and he shall destroy
all falsehood, and maintain all truth.

13 John de Rapsissa calls him, the delectable Rose of Rome and Britain; and
by the hands of him, the Pope and all his Colleges and Cardinals shall be
brought after the life of Christ; so they shall go bare footed and bare legged
without shirts on their backs, and money in their purses; and he shall win the
holy Cross, and bring it into France, he shall make peace thorowout the wh^le
world, and shall be buried with the three Kings of Colen; and when he is
buried, a^^yce shall say, Lie further my Christian brethren here is our fourth
brother.

14 Saint Bede the Priest calls him, a Lion of a clean vessel, which by the
hands of him, much of the Church of England shall be punished for their
examples given, and he shall be Protector over all Christendom.

The Prophecy follows.
THe Lilly shall remain in a merry world, and he shall be moved against the
seed of the Lion, and he shall stand on one fide amongst thrones of his
Kingdom and Country: And there shall come the Son of man bearing three wild
beasts in his Arms, which Kingdom is the Land of the Moon, which is to be
dread thorowout all the world, with a company of people he shall pass many
waters, and he shall come to the Land of the Lion, looking for help, with the
beasts of his own Country: And in that year there shall come an Eagle out of
the f^^st, and his wings spread with the beams of the son of man; and that
year shall be destroyed Castles upon Thames, and there shall be great fear
over the whole world; and in a part of the Land there shall be great battles
amongst many Kingdoms: That day shall be the bloody field, and the Lilly shall
lose his Crown, and therewith shall be crowned the Son of man. And in the
fourth year, many battles shall be for the faith, and most of the world shall
be stoopen, but the Son of man with the Eagle shall be preferred; and there
shall be u^iversall peace over the whole world, then shall the Son of man
receive a ma^vellous token, and there shall bes great plenty of all manner of
fruits, and then shall he go to the Land of the Cross.

The Son of man is the King of England, the Lilly is the French King, the Lion
is Flanders, alias Scotland, the Moon is England and W^les, the Son is France,
the Eagle is the Emperor; the Seed, alias Head of the world is the Pope; the
mavelous token is the Holy Cross.

And the Coppie of this Pro^hesie was found in an old ancient house of one
Master Truswe^l, Recorder of a certain Town, and by all men's judgments was
not unwritten these 300 years.

This first Prophecy of Mother Shipton was in the reign of Edward the fourth.
IF Eighty eight be past, then thrive
Thou may, till thirty sour, o^ ^ive.
After the E is dead, a Scot
Shall govern there -- and if a plot
Prevent him not, sure then his sway
Continue shall t^ll many a day
The N^rth shall dye youn^, and the first
Perhaps shall ^e^gnes but (oh) accursed
Shall b^ the time, when thou shall see
To fi^te^n joined twenty th^e;
For then the Eagle shall have help
By craft to catch the Lions whe^p,
And hurt him sore, except the same
Be cured by the Maidens name.
In July month of the same year
Saturn conjoynes with Jupiter.
Perhaps false Prophets shall arise,
And Mahomet shall show his prize.
And sure such alteration
Shall happen in Religion.
Believe this truly, if then you see
A Spanyard a Protestant to be.
The lines (I confess impartially) are very mysterious, and withal they are
involved in a stupendous obscurity. They seem as aenigmaticall, as Sphynx
his hidden Riddle, yet I doubt not, but that your judicious minds will prove as
auspitious unto this, as Oedipus did to his.

You may enucleate the genuine sense and signification of the words, if you do
but seriously revolve them.

The second Prophecy of Mother Shipton, found in Henry the eight his days.
WHen she heard King H^nry the Eighth should be King, and Cardinal Wolsey
should be at York, she said that Cardinal Wolsey should never come to York
with the King, and the Cardinal hear^^g being angry, sent the Duke of Suffolk
and the Lord Darcie to her, who came with their men disguised to the Kings
House near York, where leaving their men, they went to Master Besley to York,
and desired him to go with them to Mother Shiptons house, where when they came
they knocked at the door, she said, Come in Master Besley, and those
honorable Lords with you, and Master Besley would have put in the Lords before
him; but she said, Come in Master Besley you know the way, but they do not.
This they thought strang^, that she should know them, and never saw them; then
they went into the house, where there was a great fire, and she bade them
welcome, calling them all by their names, and sent for some Cakes and Ale, and
they drunk and were very merry. Mother Shipton, said the Duke* if you knew what
we come about you would not make us so welcome; and she said, the Messenger
should not be ^^nged: Mother Shipton, said the Duke, you said the Cardinal
should ^ever s^e York; Yea, said she, I said he might see York (...) never come
(...) it; But said the Duke, when he comes to York thou shall be (...) We
shall see that, said she and plucking her Handkerchieff off her head, she threw
it into the sire, and it would not burn, then (...) sta^fe and turned it into
the fire, and it would not burn^^ the^^^ took it and put it on again: Now
(said she) I might have burned. Mother Shipton (quoth the Duke) what think you
of m^? My Love, said she, the time will come you will be as low as I am, and
that is a low one indeed. My Lord Pearci^ said, What say you of me? My Lord
(said she) shoe your horse in the quick, and you shall do well; but your body
will be buried in York pavement, and your head shall be sto^ne from the Bar,
and carried into France. Then said the Lord Darcie, And what think you of me?
She said, you have made a great Gun, shoot it off, for it will do you no
good, you are going to war, you will pain many a man, but you will kill none;
so they went away.

Not long after the Cardinal came to Cawood, and going to the top of the
Tower, he asked where York was, and how far it was thither, and said that one
had said he should never see York* Nay, said one, she said you might see
York, but never come at it. He vowed to burn her when he came to York. Then
they showed him York, and told him it was but eight miles thence: He said that
he would be soon there: but being sent for by the King, he dyed in the way to
London, at Leicester, of a Lask; And Shiptons Wife said to Master Besley,
yonder is a fine stall, built for the Cardinal in the Minster, of Gold,
Pearl, and precious stones, go and present one of the Pillars to King Henry,
and he did so.

Master Besl^e, seeing these things fall out as she had foretold, desired her
to tell him some more of her Prophesies; Master, said she, before that Owse
Bridge and Trinity Church meet, they shall build on the day, and it shall fall
in the night, until they get the highest stone in Trinity Church, to be the
lowest stone of Owse Bridge; then the day will come when the North shall rue it
wondrous sore, but the South shall rue it for evermore: When Ha^^s kindle on
cold hearth stones, and Lads shall marry Ladies, and bring them home, then
shall you have a year of pining hunger, and then a dearth without Corn; A
woeful day shall be seen in England, a King and Queen, the first coming of
the King of Scots shall be at Holgate Town; but he shall not come through the
Bar, and when the King of the North shall be at London Bridge, his Tail shall
be at Edenborough: After this shall water come over Owse Bridge, and a
Windmill shall be set on a Tower, and an Elin-tree shall lie at every man's
door, at that time women shall wear great Hats and great Bands, and when
there is a Lord Mayor at York, let him beware of a stab: When two Knights shall
fall out in the Castle yard, they shall never be kindly all their lives after:
When all Colton Hag has borne crops of Corn, seven years after you shall
hear news, there shall be two Judges go in and out at Mungate Bar.

Then wars shall begin in the Spring,
Much we to England it shall bring:
Then shall the Ladies cry well-away,
That ever we lived to see this day.
Then best for them that have the least, and worst for them that have the most,
you shall not know of the War over night, yet you shall have it in the morning,
and when it comes it shall last three years, between Cadron and Air shall be
great warfare, when all the world is as a lost, it shall be called Christ's
croft, when the battle begins, it shall be where Crook-back Richard made his
fray, they shall say, To warfare for your King for half a Crown a day, but
stir not (she will say) to warfare for your King, on pain of hanging, but stir
not, for he that goes to complain shall not come back again. The time will
come when England shall tremble and quake for fear of a dead man that shall be
heard to speak, then will the Dragon give the Bull a great snap, and when the
one is down they will go to London Town; Then there will be a great battle
between England and Scotland, and they will be pacified for a time, and when
they come to Brammamore, they fight and are again pacified for a time then
there will be a great battle between England and Scotland at Stoknmore: Then
will Ravens sit on the Cross, and drink as much blood of Nobles, as of the
Commons, then woe is me, for London shall be destroyed for ever after: Then
there will come a woman with one eye and she shall tread in many men's blood to
the knee, and a man leaning on a staff by her, and she shall say to him, What
art thou? and he shall say, I am the King of Scots, and she shall say, Go
with me to my house, for there are three Knights; and he will go with her, and
stay there three days and three nights; then will England be lost, and they
will cry twice a day, England is lost: Then there will be three Knights in
Petergate in York, and the one shall not know of the other: There shall be a
Child borne in Pomfret with three thumbs, and those three Knights will give him
three horses to hold, while they win England, and all noble blood shall be gone
but one, and they shall carry him to Sheriff Nuttons Castle six miles from
York, and he shall dye there, and they shall choose there an Earl in the
field, and hanging their horses on a thorn, and rue the time that ever they
were borne, to see so much blood shed. Then they will come to York to besiege
it, and they shall keep them out three days and three nights, and a penny
Loase shall be within the Bar at half a Crown, and without the Bar at a
penny; And they will swear, if they will not yield, to blow up the Town walls.
Then they will let them in, and they will hang up the Mayor, Sheriffs and
Aldermen, and they will go into Crouch Church, there will three Knights go
in, and but one come out again, and he will cause Proclamation to be made,
that any man may take House, Tower, or Bower for twenty one years, and whilst
the world endures, there shall never be warfare again, nor any more Kings or
Queens, but the Kingdom shall be governed by three Lords, and then shall York
be London. And after this shall be a white Harvest of Corn gotten in by women.
Then shall be in the North, that one woman shall say unto another, Mother I
have seen a man to day, and for one man there shall be a thousand women, there
shall be a man sitting upon Saint James Church hill weeping his fill: And after
that a ship come sailing up the Thames till it come against London, and the
Master of the ship shall weep, and the Mariners shall ask him why he weepeth,
being he has made so good a voyage, and he shall say. Ah what a goodly Catie
this was, none in the world comparable to it, and now there is scarce left any
house that can let us have drink for our money.

Vahappie he that lives to see these days,
But happy are the dead, Shiptons wife says.
In th'worlds old age, this woman did foretell
Strange things should hap, which in our times have fell.
FINIS.

