A true Copy of the Petition of the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and the rest of the
Common Council of LONDON, presented to both Houses of PARLIAMENT, March 18.
1641.
To vindicate the Honor of the City against a False, Scandalous, and Seditious
Petition, Printed, and presented to be exhibited to the Parliament in February
last, as The Petition of the Citizens of London, against the present disposal
of the Militia of that City, made by the Parliament.
And to assure the Parliament and the whole Kingdom; that the said City is
very glad of, and thankful for the present Ordinance touching that matter, and
will readily obey it.
To the Honorable, the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses of the Commons House in
Parliament. The humble Petition of the Mayor, Aldermen, and the rest of the
Common Council of the City of London.
Shows,
THAT the Petitioners do much rejoice in the happy Concurrence of both Houses
of Parliament, as in other things, so especially, in that most necessary
Ordinance touching the Militia of this Kingdom, and Dominion of Wales;
Whereunto the Petitioners do most humbly and cheerfully submit, for the safety
of His Majesty, the Parliament and Kingdom: For the ordering whereof many
pressing Petitions from most parts of the Kingdom have been exhibited, in this
time of imminent Dangers, proceeding from the bloody Counsels of Papists and
others, ill affected to the honor, peace and prosperity of our most gracious
King, and his Kingdoms.

And the Petitioners do likewise humbly return all possible thanks unto this
Honorable House, for the great honor and high favor vouchsafed, in giving
them leave to nominate the Persons to whom the Militia of this City should be
committed; And for accepting and approving of the Nomination and return made to
this Honorable House, by the Petitioners on that behalf.

But this their joy is much disturbed and interrupted by an untrue, unadvised,
and dangerous Petition, entitled, The Petition of the Citizens of London,
whose names are under written, directed and delivered, in February last, To the
Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament; And since published in Print, with
this Title, The humble Petition of the Citizens of London: Thereby to publish
it through the Kingdom, as the Petition of all the Citizens: Wherein is set
forth (as appears by one of those Printed Copies annexed that the ordering of
the Arms of London has time out of mind, been annexed to the Maioralty of the
said City; That the conferring thereof upon others would reflect upon the
government and Customs of this City granted by the great Charter of England,
and confirmed by diverse Acts and Charters since that time; and which every
Freeman of the said City is by the Oath of his freedom bound to maintain to
the utmost of his power; And that such Alteration in the ancient Government
might breed great distractions and inconveniences: or to this effect.

Nor this alone, but the Petitioners are yet more deeply wounded and grieved,
by the presumptuous boldness of the Publishers of the said Petition in Print,
by joining therewith His Majesty's Answer and denial, Entitled His Majesty's
Message to both Houses of Parliament, February 28 1641. Which Answer (as the
Petitiones humbly conceive) was grounded upon the said Petition, and
misinformation of some persons, ill affected to His Majesty and to the City,
Who have thereby, and otherwise, often endeavored to make divisions betwixt
the King and the Parliament; betwixt the Parliament and the City; and betwixt
the Citizens among themselves, to the intolerable abuse of his sacred Majesty,
and of all his loyal Subjects.

And they verily believe, that this bold publishing in Print, of the said
Petition, and his Majesty's Message (which shortly after followed the
exhibiting of the said Petition) together in one printed paper, was purposely
done, wickedly and seditiously, to make divisions as aforesaid, to beget an
opinion throughout the Kingdom, that the City of London does not intend to
conform unto but complain of, and oppose the aforesaid Ordinance, and to make
the said Petition a desperate president to the rest of the Kingdom, to do the
like; Thereby to hinder the cheerful, needful, lawful, and unanimous
Concurrence of the Kingdom, in yielding due, full, and timely obedience to the
said Ordinance.

They do therefore humbly pray, That this Honorable House will vouchsafe

1. To believe, that neither this nor any other Petition of the like kind ever
came from the Petitioners, nor was framed, contrived or approved of by them.
And that they do wholly and with detestation disavow and disclaim the same as
an untrue, unadvised, and dangerous Petition. 2. To put a difference between
the Authors, Contrivers, Promoters, Advisers, Publishers and Printers of it,
and such, as it shall appear to this Honorable House, were by subtilty drawn
in unawares to subscribe the same, without any malignant intention, and shall
clearly and fully acknowledge their error, and rashness therein; And that this
latter sort may have such lawful favor as may stand with the honor and
Justice of the high Court of Parliament. Lastly, they do humbly pray, that
this Honorable House will still increase their joy, by endeavoring to uphold
and continue, by all good means that blessed concurrence of both Houses of
Parliament, in all your great affairs and effectually to proceed against all
disturbers and undermyners thereof, and that shall endeavor to beget or cherish
any misunderstanding, or to make division betwixt the King and Parliament, whom
God and the Laws of this Land have united in so near a Relation.
And they shall ever be ready to assist and stand by this Honorable House
therein, with their Lives and Estates, to the utmost of their Power, according
to their late Protestation.

And shall incessantly pray, etc.
Another of the same Petitions, (with change only of the Title) was likewise
presented to the most Honorable House of Peers, the same day ( March 18.) by
diverse Aldermen, and other worthy Members of the Court of Common Council
aforesaid.

Printed by R. Oulton, and G. Dexter, 1641.


