The True Manner of the Crowning of Charles the Second King of Scotland, on the
First day of January, 1650. Together with a Description of his Life, and
Throne; And a clear view of his Court and Counsel.
The Manner of Crowning CHARLES the Second King of Scotland.
THe Crown, Sword and Scepter, being brought to Scoon, by the Estates of
Parliament, their King sitting in his Chair of State, and the Nobility, Barons
and Burgesses of Parliament about him, in the Presence Chamber.

The Marquess of Arguile made a Speech, advertising the King, that the
Parliament of Scotland were come to present his Majesty with the Crown, Sword,
and Scepter; But that before he received it, he was to take an Oath, and swear
as his former predecessors had done before him, which Oath was tendered to the
King and he swear to it as follows.

The Oath sworn by CHARLES the Second, King of Scotland, at his Coronation, 1
Jan. 1650.
I Do Promise and Vow in the presence of the Eternal God, that I will
maintain the true Kirk of God, Religion, right Preaching, and administration
of the Sacraments, now Received and Preached within this Realm in purity.

And shall abolish and gain-stand all false Religions and Sects contrary to the
same.

And shall rule the people committed to my charge according to the will of God,
and laudable Laws and Constitutions of the Realm; causing Justice and Equity
to be ministered without partiality.

After this one of the Lords, viz. the Marquess of Arguile and one of the
Barons, and one of the Burgesses, (which are three of the three Estates of
Scotland) held the Crown, which they offered to the King, which they delivered
to three Ministers of the Assembly of the Kirk of Scotland, advertising them
that they were appointed by the Estates in the Parliament of Scotland, to see
the Crown and Dignity of the Realm of Scotland, presented unto Charles the
Second then present, the right Descended Inheritor thereof. One of those
Ministers made a Speech to the King, and an express condition of his duty was
laid down, before he received the Crown, and in answer to the same he made this
following Speech.

A Speech made by CHARLES the Second, King of Scotland at his Coronation on 1
January 1650.
I Will by Gods assistance bestow my life for your Defense, wishing to live no
longer, then that I may see this kingdom flourish in happiness.

Then the Scots King stood upon a place where he might show himself to the
people and made protestations of great love and affection to them; and the
Crown being tendered to the King, by three Ministers of the Assembly, one of
them spoke as follows.

The Ministers Speech at the tendering of the Crown to the King.
SIR,
I Do present unto you King Charles the Second, the right Descended Inheritor,
the Crown and Dignity of this Realm, ( then turning his face toward the
people, the Minister said further) Are ye not willing to have him for your
king, and become subject to him?

At which time the Crown was held before the King three Ministers of the
Assembly being present, then the King turned himself to be seen of the people,
who cried with a great noise, God save King Charles the Second. And then he had
the Crown put upon his head, by the Marquess of Arguile, and he took the
Scepter in his hand, and the Sword he gave to a Lord of Scotland to bear it
before him.

A Description of the Life and Throne, and a ^e view of the Court and Council
of CHARLES the Second King of Scotland.
This glittering Commet is not to be numbered amongst the fixed Stars, his
Crown carries no luster, but what assumes a fained aspect to the pur-blind
Jockeys, between Fife and Orkney, who deal with him, as their predecessors did
with their simple ignorant King Ethodius the second, whom they Crowned for
reverence to the Race of Fergus, to carry the name of a King, but the Estates
governed him by a guard of Tutors, yet he himself acts his designs like
Nathalocus, their thirtieth King, who corrupting their Grandees with buds of
fair promises, obtained the Regal power.

This Artificial Meteor, is only a Scottish vapor, exhaled by French
distillation, and with clensing thunder shaken out of the English horizon,
fallen into the bosom of the Kirk of Scotland, and made their Baby in the
Stool of repentance, swearing as once Galdus did in the same Thron, Se majorum
consiliis acquieturum.

They having poured the oil of the Presbytery upon him, and given him the
Crown and Scepter to wear for them (though Arguile had not power to hold it
right and easily, on his disturbed and a king head) whilst they devide the rags
of his tattered Throne between the Kirk and Cavaliers, whose actings toward
their new Sovereign, puts him into a worse condition in the Charles-Waine, they
make him draw, then an honest English Carter that has a Team of Horses to pull
for him.

His unhappiness in his fatal Progenitors, he may read in Capitalls, engraven
even on the Throne he sits in, where is legible to his eyes, the ecodemical
disasters of the Family out of which he sprang, His Father was beheaded, His
Grandfather (as some Physicians have declared) poisoned, His great
Grandfather, and so on to several assents before, successively cut off, by
disastrous deaths.

And for himself, His niger hair, and swarthy complexion is a visible
heroglifix of his gloomy motions, in which he follows the dictates of his
mothers counsels and the Scots commands, resolved into politickes, as furiously
as his obstinate Father did the humor of ^is own will.

He has designed popularity from a child, and even in his tender years
expressed passion against his maidens, that disturbed those boys that came to
play with him.

And he did often in the City of London (the metropolis of his fathers
Teritoryes) to draw the peoples affections to be as fixed on him as their eyes,
scatter many handfuls of silver in small coin, from several Windows and
Belconyes in Cheape-side and other places, amongst the vulgar, and (as if he
had Roman Royalty bred in his visage) forced himself to triumph in this
liberality without any visible change in his countenance. But the words of
Augustine contain the Encomium of charity: Charitas est amor rerum quas non
nisi volentes amittemus.

In his fathers presence, he seemed to admire his Throne, and before his
mother, her Idols, yet to persons popular, he had many glances against the
Archbishop of Canterbury and others, whom the peoples discontents struck at;
as if Absolom-like, he chiefly studied the Preparation to his Fathers Kingdoms.

But herein, he did but delude those poor dreamers, (as he does now the Scotch
Presbyters) who being rich only whilst they sleep loose all as soon as they
awake, their dreams enrich them, but when they awake they are plundered of
all, and reduced to their former poverty.

During the late bloody wars of his Fathers waging, against the Parliament of
England, he was either with him actually, or (in his absence) carried on by the
advice of Cottington, Barkley, Culpepper, and others by his Father appointed
for his absolute Councillors, and after his Fathes death, he wholly prostrated
himself to the fortune of his mothers and the Jesuits, and Popish Priests
resolutions, as Culenus did to the Monastery of St. Andrews.

And after a foundation to act his designs upon, which were laid with great
consultations by power and policy to subdue England, Scotland, and Ireland to
his obedience which gave him some seeming promises (but no conclusion) at
Jersey. His brother of Orange was thought to have more sublime wings to give
influence to those cockatrise eggs; who brooded so effectually that the Treaty
at Breda patched up a public agreement with Scotland, as well as a private one
with Ireland (though the Dutch Prince so wasted his spirits in it, that he
soon dyed after) and Charles Stuart (upon his ill success against England)
being forced to keep beyond Fife, and the Scots cooped up with him, they are
like Pilate and the Jews, (though averse to each other) joined in combination
against England. And in this fury he has snatched up the Crown of Scotland.

And with great difficulty does he divide himself to play his part that he may
sit fast on that frozen Throne, To the Kirk he bequeaths his Tongue, to the
Cavaliers his Arms, to the English Courtiers his Back, and to the pure
Malignants his Breast; which makes me remember him that said, All the good
Princes may be engraven in a ring.

The Commonwealth of Scotland find fault with many unnecessary pleasures of his
yourh, the Nobility censure his too much abasing both himself and them, the
Kirk peirceth even his very thoughts, which they take upon them to divine and
judge of; and yet none deals so plainly with him as the horse he rides on, who
gives warning by careering, that (being neither flatterer nor Courtier) he will
cast him to the ground, as well as the poorest Groom of his Stable; and as for
the common people (especially the women,) as well as the Ladies, though not with
so near reception, they are daily and hourly soliciting, visiting, or (at
least) gazing upon him, so that he may say with King Alphonsus, that the Estate
of an Ass, is better then his condition,

And for the better advancement of their cause, as pure Covenanters (they being
a dissembling people (from whence arises the proverb, as false as a Scot,)
they suffer him not truly to know the state affairs, themselves not
acknowledging the truth though never so transparent, which made them before
their rout at Musleborough, to sit in consultation what conditions it was fit
they should offer to the English, ( then in Scotland which they said were
flying away homeward) whether or no, quarter was to be allowed to any for their
lives, and to whom only, and upon what terms.

But this dispute was ended for that time, by the defeat given to the Scots by
the English, who slew about 4000. took above 10000 private Soldiers prisoners,
2000 of their Horse killed, spoiled and taken 290 Colonells and other
Commission Officers. And two of their Committee of Estates, the Lord Liberton
and Sir James Lumsden (Lieut. General of the Foot) and some of their Ministers
taken prisoners, and there was taken besides 15000 Arms, 200 Colors 32 piece
of Ordnance, and al their Ammunition Bag and Baggage. And this was done but a
day or two before their intention to have received him into their Army.

And now since they have Crowned him, and made him Generalissimo, as well as
Rex, they carry him on as hood-winkt as before, Massey, and the rest of the
English (in hopes to find their own subsistence in his fortunes) pretend a
great interest and power in England to concur with his designs, by which
they squeeze some favor from him (by the leave of the Kirk, upon the
Presbyterian account) for employment and maintenance in the interim. Arguile
and the Scots they promise him greater things to be revealed to them, to be
accomplished in the influence of St. Patricke, then any of St. Georges hobby
horses.

But the Gourdons and Papists tell him that it is most conducing to make him
great and glorious, to satisfy the Irish, and all other Romish Catholics in
the three Nations, and speedily to dismiss the two Irish Lords Ormond and
Inchequeen, with ample returns full of satisfaction to the Assembly, that so
they being capable to reduce Ireland, they may, having accomplished it, come
over and go on helping to carry on the work effective in the three Nations.

But why do the Papists rage, and the Kirk imagine a vain thing the King of
Scotland set himself, and the Estates take council together, after so great
appeals, and such evident manifestations of the Lords so visibly owning of his
cause against them? He that sits in the heavens shall laugh, the Lord shall
have them in derision.

If so many Emperors after Pompey the great, and Caesar, could not but fall
when the decree was gone out, if the Queen Mary of Scotland, if his own Father
the late King, their heads were both cut off with the Executioners hatchets,
how can the son think to escape? What are the great fruitless boastings of
English Malignants the vain hopes of Irish Papists, and the Royal Musters in
the North of Scotland (for the South of Fife and Sterling they dare not
attempt) since even Henry the third (one of the Predecessors of his mothers
Family) of France, was murdered wilfully by a little Monk in the midst of
40000 armed men.

FINIS.
Published by Authority.

London Printed by Robert Ibbitson, 1651.


