A TRVE COPY OF A LETTER Sent unto the Right honorable the LORD MAYOR of
LONDON, from a trusty Friend in the Army.

Written on Monday morning 24. Oct. immediarely afrer the BATTLE.

LONDON. Printed by Luke Norton, in the Year. MDCXLII.

A TRVE COPY OF A LETTER Sent Unto the Right honorable the Lord MAYOR of
LONDON, from a trusty Friend in the Army. Written on Monday Morning 24. October
immediately after the Battle.
Worthy Sir,
IF it will Please you to accept of a hasty midnight letter from one, who if he
had his own time to command, would never fail to give you an exact account of
every thought, the smallest circumstance that arises here, on wedensday last
our Army marched out of Worcester, the King having before wheeled about behind
us from Shrewsbury by Killingworth, toward Southam; From thence to go to
Banbury, and as he intended or rather pretended to go toward London, our
Army lay at a place s^ven m^^^^ from Warwick, called Kinton, having layen the
night before at Stratford upon Avon, the King l^y ^he same night three miles
before them near Banbury: this morning the Lord General began to move, with
the Body of his Army toward the Kings, when, on the sudden about eight of the
clock, an alarm comes to us that the King would give us Battle, immediately
our forces were with the best expedition that could be put into a battalia,
and the Kings Forces came marching down a hill, of which they had a great
advantage, could they have kept it, besides the wind was for them, and drevv
near to us. All things were not in order on both parts till about one a clock
in the afternoon, and from that time forvvard till six of the clock we had as
bloody a battle as can possibly be imagined, the ordinance played one upon the
other all the time, we gave them two shoots for one, and their ordinance
blessed be the God of battles, did us scarcely any hurt at all, whereas we
scarcely discharged avvy a bullet in vain, our Foot was flanked on the right
and left Wing, with, horse and Dragonners; (...) left Wing of the horse; after
the fight had been about an hour, were drawn up to service, and before they
discharged once ran away, which had like utterly to have undone us, for we
trusted very much upon our horse, but the wise disposer of victories, was
pleased to determine it otherways, our right Wing held it out bravely, and our
Foot even to a miracle plied their business so well, that it seemed to be for
the space o^ four hours only one continued Peal of thunder. However so it was
that the unworthy retreat of our left Wing made us all despair all this day of
the business: the Cavalleers came on, and fired some of our Wagons, and took
all the rest, and took six pieces of our best cannons, when on the sudden our
men advanced bravely again, and retook our Wagons, and all our cannons that
we had lost, and three more pieces besides of the enemies, this eveniug we beat
them clear out of the field, and remain masters of it, though they had a
greater number of combatants both of horse and Foot then we, and many more
ordinance, there are very many slain on both sides, yet it is credibly
reported, there are two of theirs slain for one of ours, though both charged
bravely and like valiant men, I cannot give the number of them, though sure I
am, very much blood is spilt: we have taken prisoner their General of the
field, the Earl of Linsey, and his eldest son the Lord Willoughby, Colonel
Lunsford, and Collonell Vavasor, which last are here in warwick Castle, we have
taken also the Kings Standard, we have lost no man of note, but Collonell
Charle^ Essex, we think also Sir James Ramsey, for he cannot be found,
Collonell Vavasour told me immediately before the writing of this Letter, that
the King himself was for a time (how long he cannot say) in the field: it is
said by some Prince Robert is slain, how true it is I dare not yet affirm, we
had about 50. Troops of horse in the field, and two Regiments of Foot, and two
of Dragoneers, two Regiments came not up, but are fresh, to charge to morrow
morning, when we do expect as hot service as any we have yet had, and I doubt
not but the Lord will crown the day with a glorious victory. This Lords day
at night, at the conclusion of the Battle I came out of the field about an
hour after Sunset, it is now growing toward morning, it is time I should
take my leave.

FJNJS.

