A True NARRATIVE OF THE Great Solemnity OF THE CIRCUMCISION OF MUSTAPHA Prince
of Turkey, Eldest Son of SULTAN MAHOMET Present EMPEROR of the Turks.

Together with an Account of the Marriage of his Daughter to his great
Favorite MUSSAIP AT Adrianople, As it was sent in a Letter to Person of Honor
By Mr. Coke Secretary of the Turkey Company; Being in Company with his
Excellency the Lord Ambassador Sir JOHN FINCH.

LONDON: Printed by J. C. for William Crook, at the Green Dragon without
Temple Bar. 1676.

Licensed,

January 10. 1675/6. ROGER L'ESTRANGE.

A True NARRATIVE OF THE Great Solemnity OF THE CIRCUMCISION OF MUSTAPHA Prince
of Turkey, Eldest Son of SULTAN MAHOMET Present EMPEROR of the Turks.
SIR,
THese last five months I have spent in Adrianople: it is pleasantly situated
on the rising and top of an easy Hill, which to the South and West gives the
prospect of a large Plain, where the eye is not lost, but bounded with the
Mountains of Haemus; on the North and East are small Hills. It Is watered with
three Rivers (the chiefest Hebrus) which often uniting and separating their
streams, make many Islands, capable of what the most refined Luxury could plant
or build; but Spring-Gardens and Walks, adorned with Ladies and Gallants, are
things unknown to us Barbarians.

I have now told you all that is good: For this airy pleasure of the eye is lost
in so many solid inconveniences, that I never yet was in any City more
uneasy, nay more insuportable: the Buildings (except a Mosque or two) so mean
and contemptible, that they would disgrace a poor Village; the Water bad, Wine
worse, the Streets and all Avenues to the City so crowded with Carts,
Dunghills, and Carrion, that nothing can be more troublesome or offensive to
the sight and scent. In a word, what the Riches and Invention of Mankind did
contribute to make Rome delightful and glorious, the stupidity and fordidness
of these people have outvied in the reverse, making this place the Metropolis
of filth and inconvenience.

Our arrival here was the 10 of May; the 15th began the Festivals for the
Circumcision of the young Prince. In a large Piazza, or rather Field before the
Seraglio, were pitched the Tents of the Grand Signior, Vizier, and other great
men; which made a side and half of the Square: Another side and half was taken
up with Lamps hung upon Ropes, and fastened to Poles, disposed into several
figures of Ships, Buildings, and Woods, etc. which were changed every night;
others as they use in Egypt at their rejoicing when they cut the Nile. The
fourth side was the Seraglio, where the women had the convenience of seeing
through Lettices.

The Show begun in the afternoon (the morning being spent in Entertainments.)
The Grand Signior sitting in an elevated place by his Tent, much like a
Summer House in our Gardens, which over looked all, received the Presents
brought him by the Basha's, and all the Officers of the Empire, and all the
Arts of Constantinople. These were not left to the liberty and generosity of
the Presenter, but they were taxt what they should give, and an Officer
appointed to survey the quality of them; which if not approved, was returned,
and perhaps augmented: for in this Country it is no ill manners to look a
gift-Horse in the Mouth.

The Mechanics and some of the Soldiery were every day entertained in a great
Tent with a Turkish Feast; after were antic Dances in several Habits, Singing
and Dancing with most obscene Gesticulations, Jack-pudding, and Punchinello's
representations, Wrestling, Rope-dancing, fears of Activity and Strength; all
these promiscuously in the Area of the Square. Had there been but a Noise,
Rabble, and abominable Pigs head, nothing could have been an exacter Scene of
Bartholomew-fair.

At night a row of Poles, about a man's height, were stuck in the ground; on the
top were Hoops of Iron, in which burnt Pine-wood with a brisk and lively flame,
which with the Lamps, gave a delightful and magnificent prospect.

About an hour in the night began the Fireworks, which were plentiful, and not
amiss; though I think those I have seen at Rome surpass them: one sort indeed I
never saw, which was a great Basin like a Mortar-piece fixed into the Ground and
filled with Wildfire, which sent out a violent stream of fire, with a hideous
noise, a great height. It was an Object equally terrible and delightful. These
were the constant Divertisements all the time of the Solemnity.

The 25th, the Mufty, Vizier, and all the Basha's and great Officers, with the
Janissaries walking before, and the Chiaux a horseback attended the Prince, who
was so adorned or over-laden with Jewels, both himself and his Horse, that one
might say, he carried the Value of an Empire about him.

The 27th, which was Mahomet's Birth day, he accompanied his Father to the
Moschea: here was no solemn Cavalcade, only the Grand Signior's own Retinue;
and though it was less in number far than the Cavalcade, yet adjusted neater
and Court-like; the Grand Signior's Footmen and Pages being very rich in
Clothes and Jewels.

This evening the Prince was Circumcised in the arms of his Father; he is about
eleven years old, of a good Aspect, his name Mustapha. About two thousand
others were cut at this Solemnity, who had Money and a Quilt from the Grand
Signior. It was done publicly in the Tents, and any one Turk or Christian
admitted to see them.

June the 5th this Solemnity was concluded with Horse-races. After ten days
repose, began the Feasts for the Marriage of the Grand Signior's Daughter, of
about seven years old, unto the Mussaip or Favorite, who by the Tefterdar, or
Lord Treasurer (who was the Compare) in a solemn show sent his Presents to her,
thirty Mules laden with Sugar-plums and Sweetmeats, figures of several sorts
of Birds and Beasts of Sugar, so ill-favouredly represented, that they could
not be said to break the Law against making Images, though the Solemnity of the
time had not dispensed with it. Fifty six men, each with five more Vests of
Cloth of Gold, Satin, etc. then her Jewels, several Suits very rich; five led
Horses with rich Furniture of Pearls and precious Stone, and at last Coaches
with Slaves.

On the 19th of June was the Vizier, etc. in a solemn Calvalcade to accompany
the Presents the Grand Signior gave her: Eighty six Mules laden with rich
Household Stuff, very rich Habits for her, and Jewels of all sorts, twelve
Coaches with Slaves, and six and thirty black Eunuchs.

And the 23 was the last Cavalcade of all the great men to attend her from the
Seraglio to her Husbands house: They were in a close Coach plated with Silver,
attended with five and twenty others. At last came the Hassaki, or
Queen-regents Coach, attended with ten more; to every one of these Coaches were
two black Eunuchs. In a great Courtyard of the Mussaip's Palace were repeated
all the Sports and Fireworks that were before, at which the Grand Signior was
a constant Spectator. Besides, there was a Rope fastened to a high Steeple,
whence several men came flying down: one having a Boy tied to his back with a
Drum, the Rope broke; but being near the ground, and falling on another man,
they had none of them any considerable hurt. The most remarkable, was a man
that walked up a Rope fastened to the same Steeple, forward and backward; and
another man that upon a high loose Rope hanging by his hand, his body extended,
swung himself over twelve times, without stop, or touching any thing.

But too much of these trifles, though the Grand Signiour was much delighted
with them, and made them be continued many more days than were intended. He
took that fancy to a Gypsie-boy that swang and danced, as he has him in the
degree of a Favorite, being taken into the Seraglio, and presented by the
Great Basha's.

The Mussaip that has married the Grand Segnior's Daughter, is a man meddles
in no business, nor is thought to be much capable of it; for being Chimacham in
the Visiers absence, he showed no great abilities. The Grand Signior takes him
for a constant Companion in all his Divertisements, and has a strong affection
to him; which time does not impair, but rather augment; he being a Prince most
constant where he fixes. You would think this Marriage would make him happy,
but it is quite contrary; for it not only cuts him off in his pleasures to
which he is indulgent, he being forced to discharge all his women, even his own
Sisters; but it ruins his fortune, both by the expense in maintaining her
while she lives, and should she die, he must refund to the Treasury all he has
had with her, besides four millions (according to common report) of Dollars,
which is her Dote; which he is so far from an ability of, that he cannot pay
his present Debts. She has good proofs of his abilities another way, he
having, it is said, two and thirty Children.

To our own private Affairs, his Excellency my Lord Ambassador Sir John Finch
had all satisfaction, and has obtained very advantageous additions to our
Capitulations: but they being things Mercantile, and though not beyond, yet
beneath your knowledge, I shall not particularize.

We had a very hot Plague: My Lord Ambassador retired to a Village, but it soon
arrived there; so he lived in his Tents till the Sickness got among the
Servants, of whom five died: then he returned to the Village; Mr. North and I
stuck to the City, where, though in our street only two houses were free,
besides our own, and the two adjoining had five sick on the one, and two on the
other side; yet God be praised we and our Servants passed well along the Road:
and here it is not much less. Sir Thomas Baines my Lord Ambassador's Companion
that attended him in his Chamber, three days after our arrival, was taken, and
in three more died; he is the only English man has been visited. His
Excellency has retired upon this, a little way out of Town, for some time.

Dated from Pera, the 9th of October 1675.
FINIS.

