A TRVE NARRATION Of the surprizall of sundry CAVALIERS Being sent from
Nottingham to Oxford, as they were lodged at BRACKLEY. And also of A Cabinet
and Packet of writings, and other things of great value, cast into a Field of
standing Oats to be thereby concealed, but discovered and taken away. Many of
the foresaid CAVALIERS were sent to Banbury Castle.
August 29. 1642. All sent in a Letter from a worthy Minister in Northampton
shiere to a Gentleman of that County now in LONDON.
Printed by Order of one of the Committees for Printing.
YEsterday in the after noone, some Troops of Horse, which (as is said) were
sent from Nottingham to Oxford were discovered, and pursued by some of this
Country from Daventree to Brackley, and upon notice given of them to Banbury,
The men of Banbury did rise in Arms, and raised the Country, and came to Aynoh
this last Night, a great Company, Horse and Foot armed, and raised the Town
here and at Croton, and all as they went, to meet with these Troops. And so
it was; that the Troops, both Horse and Men weary, had taken up, to stay at
Brackley, and had bespoken their Suppers; but suddenly News came to them, that
they were pursued and beset; and thereupon their Trumpet sounded a March, and
they hastened to get Horse and pack away; but the Townsmen had barracadoed
the passage and stopped them, and the pursuers and Townsmen took of them 18.
men and 24. horses of service: And in this hurry and confusion, it seems that
the Captain had sent away a Cabinet and packet of vvritings, and other things
of great value, by a Servant to go before for Oxford; but the Messenger (as it
seems) mistook his way, and for fear did hide his Carriage in a Close of
Oats, near to Pimlico house and vvandred to Croton, and there asked for
Lodging, where he was taken by Mr. Clarke and the Constable; and the Forces
of Banbury and the Country coming to Croton presently upon it, they forced
him to discover all, and so he brought them to the place where his matters
were hidden: viz. vvritings (they think a Commission) letters, money, rich
clothes, etc. which they took, and they carried the man and all these to
Banbury. Old Burburough was one of them who did find these matters, and he
carried the man behind him last night through Aynoh to Banbury; mean while
all the residue of the Country went to Brackley to secure the Town, and from
thence did put themselves into a March, and pursued the Troops which were
gone on the way toward Oxford, and on the way they took their Trumpetter
and 3. more of the Company, whom they brought this morning through Aynoh, and
carried them to Banbury. At Brackley they took from the Troopers great store
of money and clothes, especially linen.


