A true Copy of the PETITION of the Lord Major, Aldermen, and the rest of the
Common Council of LONDON, presented to both Houses of PARLIAMENT, March 18.
1641.

To vindicate the Honor of the City against a False, Scandalous, and Seditious
Petition, printed, and pretended to be exhibited to the Parliament in February
last, as

The Petition of the Citizens of London, against the present disposal of the
Militia of that City, made by the Parliament.

And to assure the Parliament, and the whole Kingdom; that the said City is
very glad of, and thankful for the present Ordinance touching that matter, and
will readily obey it.

Together with the several Answers of both Houses of Parliament to the
aforesaid Petition.

Ordered to be Printed and published.

blazon of the City of London

LONDON, Printed for John Frank. 1642.

To the Honorable, the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses of the Commons House
in Parliament.
The humble Petition of the Major, Aldermen and the rest of the Common council
of the City of London:
SHOWS,
THAT the Petitioners do much rejoice in the happy Concurrence of both Houses
of Parliament, as in other things, so especially, in that most necessary
Ordinance touching the Militia of this Kingdom, and Dominion of Wales;
Whereunto the Petitioners do most humbly and cheerfully submit, for the
s^fety of His Majesty, the Parliament, and Kingdom: For the ordering whereof,
many pressing Petitions from most parts of the Kingdom have been exhibited, in
this time of imminent dangers, proceeding from the bl^udy Counsels of Papists
and others, ill affected to the honor, peace and prosperity of our most
gracious King, and his Kingdoms.

And the Petition^rs do likewise humbly return all possi^le thanks to this
Honorable House, for the great honor, and high favor vouchsafed, in giving
them leave to nominate the persons to whom the Militia of this City should be
committed; And for accepting and approving of the Nomination and return made
to this Honorable House, by the Petitioners on that behalf.

But this their joy is much disturbed and interrupted by an untrue, unadvised,
and dangerous Petition, Entitled, The Petition of the Citizens of London,
whose names are under written, directed and dilivered in February last, To the
Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament; And since published in print, with
this title, The humble Petition of the Citizens of London: Thereby to publish
it through the Kingdom, as the Petition of all the Citizens: Wherein is set
forth (as appears by one of those printed coppies annexed) that the ordering
of the Arms of London has, time out of mind, been annexed to the Majoraltie
of the said City; That the conferring thereof upon others would reflect upon
the government and customs of this City, granted by the great Charter of
England, and confirmed by, diverse Acts and Charters since that tim^; and which
every Freeman of the said City is by the oath of his freedom bound to
maintain to the utmost of his power; And that such alteration in the ancient
government might breed great distractions and inconveni^ncies: or to this
effect.

Nor this alone, but the Petitioners are yet more deeply wounded and grieved,
by the presumptuous boldness of the publishers of the said Petition in print,
by joining therewith his Majesty's Answer and denial, entitled his Majesty's
Message to both Houses of Parliament, February 28. 1641. Which Answer (as the
Petitioners humbly conceive was grounded upon the said Petition, and
misinformation of some persons, ill affected to His Majesty and to the City,
who have thereby, and otherwise, often endeavored to make divisions betwixt
the King and the Parliament; betwixt the Parliament and the City; and betwixt
the Citizens themselves, to the intolerable abuse of his sacred Majesty, and
of all his loyal Subjects.

And they verily believe that this bold publishing in print, of the said
Petition, and in his Majesty's message (which shortly after followed the
exhibiting of the said Petition) together in one printed paper, was purposely
done, wickedly and seditiously, to make divisions as aforesaid to beget an
opinion throughout the Kingdom, that the City of London does not intend to
conform unto, but complain of, and oppose the aforesaid Ordinance, and to
make the said petition a desperate president to the rest of the Kingdom, to do
the like; Thereby to hinder the cheerful, needful, lawful, and unanimous
Concurrence of the Kingdom, in yielding due, full, and timely obedience to the
said Ordinance.

They do therefore humbly pray, that this Honorable House will vouchsafe. 1.
To believe, that neither this nor any other Petition of the like kind ever
came from the Petitioners, nor was framed, contrived or approved of by them.
And that they do wholly and with detestation disavow and disclaim the same as
an untrue, unadvised, and dangerous Petition. 2. To put a difference between
the Authors, Contrivers, Promoters, Advisers, Publishers and Printers of it,
and such as it shall appear to this Honorable House, were by subtilty drawn
in unawares to subscribe the same, without any malignant intention, and shall
clearly acknowledge their error, and rashness therein; And that this latter
sort may have such lawful favor as may stand with the Honor and Justice of
the high Court of Parliament. Lastly, they do humbly pray, that this
Honorable House will still increase their joy, by endeavoring to uphold and
continue, by all good means that blessed concurrence of both Houses of
Parliament, in all your great affairs, and effectually to proceed against all
disturbers and undermyners thereof, and that shall endeavor to beget or cherish
any misunderstanding, or to make division betwixt the King and Parliment whom
God and the Laws of this Land have united in so near a Relation.


And they shall ever be ready to assist and stand by this H^nourabbe House
therein, with their lives and Estates to the utmost of their power, according
to their late protestation.

And shall incessantly pray, etc.
Another of the same Petitions, (with change only of the title) was likewise
presented to the most Honorable House of Peers, the same day ( March 18.) by
diverse Aldermen, and other worthy Members of the Court of Common Counsel
aforesaid.

The Answer to the aforesaid Petition.
Die Veneris 18. Martij. 1641.
THe Aldermen and Citizens that delivered the Petition this day to the Lords in
Parliament were called in, and the Lord Keeper told them by the direction of
the House, That their Lordships did give them thanks for their readiness and
forwardness in their Obedience to the ordnance of Parliament made by both
Houses concerning the Militia, and further care of preventing any disorders
that might have happened by preferring or exhibiting a false and scandalous
Petition in the name of the City, whereas it was not so, That their Lordships
have ordered, that this Petition now presented shall be printed and published,
And for the scandalous Petition, the Lords have ordered the same shall be burnt
by the hand of the Common Hangman: And that their Lordships do resolve to make
a difference between those that were the Authors and Contrivers of that
scandalous Petition and those that were seduced and ignorantly drawn in to
subscribe to that Petition.

The Answer of the House of Commons to the aforesaid Petition.
Die Veneris 18. Mertij 1641.
THe humble Petition of the Major, Aldermen, and the rest of the Common
Counsel of the City of London was this day read in the House of Commons, and
ordered to be entered in the Iournalls of the said House, and to be printed.
The Petitioners were called in, and Master Speaker told them that the House had
read their Petition, and received it with a great deal of contentment and
approbation, and it being of that great consequence, and so full of expression
of zeal and affection to his Majesty, and the Kingdom; and in particular,
that he was of respect to this House, commanded to return them hearty thanks
in the name of the whole House: And wished, that he had words sufficient to
express it.

And for those of the City of London, that subscribed that dangerous Petition
complained of by the Petitioners, and are desirous to acknowledge their error.
(Provided they were none of the contrivers of that Petition: nor had a
malignant spirit in the advancing and exhibiting thereof) This House according
to the desires of the Petitioners, is willing to show favor unto them. And as
the Petitioners do express their care of the King and Kingdom, and of this
House in particular; so this House will be always ready to give their best
endeavors to further those things that may concern the honor and safety of
the King and Kingdom, and in particular of the good and safety of the City of
London.

H. Elsing Cler. Parl. D. Com.

FINIS.

