A true Copy of the Petition of the Rebels IN IRELAND, Subscribed by eleven
Lords, and others of quality among them; Attested to be an Exact Copy, being
examined with the Original by a Person of Honor there, when it was
intercepted; and sent over unto two Members of the House in Letters, dated the
17th of August: 1642.
To the Kings most Excellent Majesty, The humble PETITION OF THE CATHOLIQVES
OF IRELAND.
Most Sacred and Dread Sovereign,
We your most Loyal and Obedient Subjects, whom it nearest concerns to
preserve the Rights and Prerogatives of Your Crown firm and entire, as yielding
us a just and merciful protection against the security of our penal Laws. In
maintenance of that power the birthright of Kings, kept unblemisht for You by
Your famous Ancestors, we have had recourse to Arms, to that end only, that
You Our Gracious Sovereign, with all the preeminences due and derived unto
You, by a long succession of Monarchs, might alone Reign over us; And we in
the just freedom of Subjects (Independent of any Jurisdiction not derived from
Your Majesty) live happily under the Crown of England. Yet lest these our
intendments by the practice of our Adversaries might be misrepresented unto
You, and we enforced undeservedly to suffer in Your Majesty's opinion (which
would be a burden more heavy unto us, then the sword of our Adversaries,
although daily imbrued in the blood of our wives and children) we have often
endeavored to have access to that Royal Throane, which with the hazard of
our Lives and Fortunes, we labor to maintain glorious and unspotted.

Yet such is the unwearied watchfulness of our Adversaries, that all our
attempts are made frustrate; And now of late when by Lieutenant Colonel Read,
whom therefore we employed, because a stranger to our cause and Country, and so
likeliest to pass undiscovered, we sent our Petition. He poor Gentleman was
intercepted, and put to the torture of the wrack, so as now it is beyond our
reach, and only in Your Power to provide that we may be heard by Your
Majesty, since we are so unhappy as that Your Majesty's resolution of coming
into this Your Kingdom, met with greater diversions then the threats and
menaces of the Puritan party of the Parliament of England, who seek all
things to limitt You our King, and to govern us Your Subjects.

That it would therefore please Your Majesty, to appoint some such way by
which with safety we may approach Your Royal presence, that so You may be
informed truly of the whole scope of our Resolutions, and we receive
faithfully Your Commands.

And we, as our duty binds us, will ever pray for Your Majesty's happy reign
over us.
London, Printed by L. N. and J. F. for F. C. August 24. 1642.


