A true Copy of the Petition of the Lord Mayor Aldermen, and the rest of the
Common Council of LONDON, presented to the Honorable House of Peers in
PARLIAMENT, March 18. 1641.
To the Right Honorable, the LORDS, in the High Court of Parliament Assembled.
The humble Petition of the Mayor, Aldermen, and the rest of the
Common Council of the City of London.
Shows,
THAT the Petitioners do much rejoice in the happy Concurrence of both Houses
of Parliament, as in other things, so especially, in that most necessary
Ordinance touching the Militia of this Kingdom, and Dominion of Wales;
Whereunto the Petitioners do most humbly and cheerfully submit, for the
safety of His Majesty, the Parliament and Kingdom: For the ordering whereof
many pressing Petitions from most parts of the Kingdom have been exhibited, in
this time of imminent Dangers, proceeding from the bloody Counsels of Papists
and others, ill affected to the honor, peace and prosperity of our most
gracious King, and his Kingdoms.

And the Petitioners do likewise humbly return all possible thanks unto this
Honorable House, for the great honor and high favor vouchsafed, in giving
them leave to nominate the Persons to whom the Militia of this City should be
committed; And for accepting and approving of the Nomination and return made to
this Honorable House, by the Petitioners on that behalf.

But this their joy is much distured and interrupted by an untrue, unadvised,
and dangerous Petition, entitled, The humle Petition of the Citizens of
London, whose names are under written, directed and delivered in February last,
To the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament; And since published in Print,
with this Title, The humble Petition of the Citizens of London: Thereby to
publish it through the Kingdom, as the Petition of all the Citizens: Wherein
is set forth (as appears by one of those Printed Copies annexed) that the
ordering of the Arms of London has time out of mind, been annexed to the
Maioralty of the said City; That the conferring thereof upon others would
reflect upon the government and Customs of this City, granted by the great
Charter of England, and confirmed by diverse Acts and Charters since that time;
and which every Freeman of the said City is by the Oath of his freedom bound
to maintain to the utmost of his power; And that such Alteration in the
ancient Government might breed great d^stractions and inconveniences: or to
this effect.

Nor this alone, but the Petitioners are yet more deeply wounded and grieved,
by the presumptuous boldness of the Publishers of the said Petition in Print,
by joining therewith His Majesty's Answer and denial, Entitled His Majesty's
Message to both Houses of Parliament, February 28 1641. Which Answer (as the
Petitiones humbly conceive) was grounded upon the said Petition, and
misinformation of some persons, ill affected to His Majesty and to the City,
Who have thereby, and otherwise, often endeavored to make divisions betwixt
the King and the Parliament; betwixt the Parliament and the City; and betwixt
the Citizens among themselves, to the intolerable abuse of his sacred Majesty,
and of all his loyal Subjects.

And they verily believe, that this bold publishing in Print, of the said
Petition, and his Majesty's Message (which shortly after followed the
exhibiting of the said Petition) together in one printed paper, was purposely
done, wickedly and seditiously, to make divisions as aforesaid, to beget an
opinion throughout the Kingdom, that the City of London does not intend to
conform unto, but complain of, and oppose the aforesaid Ordinance, and to
make the said Petition a desperate president to the rest of the Kingdom, to
do the like; Thereby to hinder the cheerful, needful, lawful, and unanimous
Concurrence of the Kingdom, in yeedling due, full, and timely obedience to the
said Ordinance.

They do therefore humbly pray, That your Lordships will vouchsafe

1. To believe, that neither this nor any other Petition of the like kind ever
came from the Petitioners, nor was framed, contrived or approved of by them.
And that they do wholly and with detestation disavow and disclaim the same as
an untrue, unadvised, and dangerous Petition.

2. To put a difference between the Authors, Contrivers, Promoters, Advisers,
Publishers and Printers of it, and such, as it shall appear to this Honorable
House, were by subtilty drawn in unawares to subscribe the same, without any
malignant intention, and shall clearly and fully acknowledge their error, and
rashness therein; And that this latter sort may have such lawful favor as may
stand with the honor and Justice of the high Court of Parliament.

Lastly, they do humbly pray, that your Lordships will still increase their
joy, by endeavoring to uphold and continue, by all good means that blessed
concurrence of both Houses of Parliament, in all your great affairs, and
effectually to proceed against all disturbers and undermyners thereof, and that
shall endeavor to beget or cherish any misunderstanding, or to make division
betwixt the King and Parliament, whom God and the Laws of this Land have
united in so near a Relation.

And they shall ever be ready to assist and stand by your Lordships therein,
with their Lives and Estates, to the utmost of their Power, according to their
late Protestation.

And shall incessantly pray, etc. ROE. MICHEL. Dep. Communis Conciliis Civit.
London.
Veneris 18. Martii. 1641.

ORdered by the Lords in Parliament, that this Petition shall be forthwith
Printed and published: And that the Scandalous Petition above mentioned, shall
be burnt by the Common Hangman. Which was performed the (...) of March.

London, Printed for Joseph Hunscott. 1641.


