A True COPY of the List, or Roll, of the KINGS MAJESTY'S most Royal
Proceedings from the Tower through London to White Hall, as it will be
Marshalled by the Lords Deputed for the Office of Earld. Marshall.
Imprimis MEssengers of the Chamber Gent. Harbinger, and Sergeant Porter Gent.
and Esquires, the Dukes servants Gent. and Esquires, the Kings Servants Sewers,
the Kings Servants Quarter Wayters Gentlemen Ushers in Ordinary Clarks of the
Signet Clarks of the Privy Seal Clarks of the Council Clarks of the Parliament
Clark of the Crown Chaplains having Dignities Aldermen of London The Dukes
Council at Law The Queens Council at Law The Kings Attorney and Soliciter,
with his Learned Council The Kings Advocate and Remembrancer Sergeants at Law
The Kings Sergeants Masters of the Chancery Knights Batchellours Secretaries of
the French and Latin Tongues The Queens Secretary Esquiers for the Body Sewers
Carvers, Cup-bearers in Ordinary Masters of Standing Offices, being no
Counselors, viz. The Tents Revellers Armory Ward to be made Ordinance
Masters of Requests The Chamberlains of the Exchequer Barons of the Exchequer,
and Judges of the Laws The Lord Chief Baron, and Chief Justice of the Common
Pleas The Lord Chief Justice of England Trumpets Gent. of the Privy Chamber,
and Bedchamber Knights of the Bath Knights that have been Lords Ambassadors,
Lord Presidents, and Lords Deputies Knights Marshall, The Master of the Kings
Jewel House The Dean of the Kings Chapel Barons Younger Sons Viscounts
Younger Sons Knights of the Privy Council Knights of the Garter Barons Eldest
Sons Earls Younger Sons Viscount Eldest Sons Treasurer and Comptroller amongst
Barons, according to their Creation. Barons of Parliament Principal Secretary
Bishops Marquesses Younger Sons Earls Eldest Sons Viscounts Dukes Younger Sons
Marquesses Eldest Sons Earls The Lord Admiral, and Lord Chamberlain of the
Household, if not otherwise Employed Dukes Eldest Sons Marquesses Dukes
Sergeant of Arms Clarencieux and Norry, Kings of Arms Lord Treasurer Lord
Chancellor Chief Gent. Usher Garter, Lord Mayor of London The Duke And the Lord
Great Chamberlain
Sergeant of Arms Footmen and Squires Gent. Pentioners The Constable, The
Sword born by the Earl Marshall. The KINGS MAJESTY, under his Canopie, Born up
by the Barons of the Sinckports. The Master of the Horse leading a Spare Horse
The Vice-Chamberlain to the King.
Footmen and Squires Gent. Pentioners

LONDON, Printed for Richard Williams, in Jewen Street near Cripple-Gate, 1661.


