THE TRUE NARRATIVE OF THE CONFESSION AND EXECUTION Of Francis Nicholson Who
was Executed this present Wednesday, being the 27th of this instant October,
1680. And Hanged up in Chains AT Hownslow-Heath, For Murdering of one John
Dimbleby AT HAMPTON COURT This being his own true Confession both to the
Ordinary of Newgate, and several other Ministers and others who came to him
whilst he continued in Prison, and have hereunto subscribed their Names to
attest the Truth of this Relation.
MY Father was a Malster in Lancashire who lived in good reputation, my Mother
is now a Widow, that lives in credit and is well beloved, and they gave me
good Education, but I was a disobedient and unruly Son to a loving and tender
Mother. I never heard of any of my Kindred that was guilty of Theft Murder, or
any such horrid Crimes before my self, for which I have justly brought this
death upon me, nor did I ever hear of any of my Relations that were ever cast
into any Goal or Prison before.

My neglect of duty to my Mother, caused me to fall into the acquaintance of
ill company of other lude fellows in whom I took too much delight, and the more
slighted the care and counsel of my Mother.

By frequenting such bad company I fell with them to drinking, and to spend my
time and money vainly at the Alehouse; though my Mother and Friends sought to
draw me from it, for the bad acquaintance I had prevailed more with me.

And then we fell to breaking the Sabbath day, by our meeting at the Alehouse,
and other bad places, when we should have been at Church serving God, to the
grief of my tender Mother.

And by these evil doings I got so bad an habit, that I grew careless how to
put my self into any way to live in any good course of Life.

And being thus unsettled in my mind I did consent to a young man of my unhappy
acquaintance to join with him in stealing of an Horse, for us to ride to London
and seek for some employment there.

I had very little money to carry me up, and was too stubborn to seek to my
Mother: but helping a Drover whom I overtook with Beasts, I had Diet and
Lodging in my journey till I came to London with him.

But I had money and necessaries sent after me, by my Mother to London, of
which I was very glad for I knew not what course to take

And then I put my self Apprentice to a Carpenter a very honest good man, who
was a loving Master to me; and gave me good edueation, and was a loving Master
to me and to whom I was much obliged for his care of me, and well pleased with
his Service.

And though he had diverse pieces of Plate about the house, and other good Goods
yet I did never wrong him of any thing by any Theft or Pilfering.

But I robbed both God and my Master of too much time with naughty company that
I found out, in drinking, and merry meeting, and lewdness, and sin.

And I did greatly profane the Sabbath day by neglecting the Church, and
meeting with my acquaintance, walking about and sitting in an Alehouse, and a
very bad life, so that I have some times thus spent the whole Sabbath day, from
nine a clock in the morning until midnight, and then have come home drunk.

And in all this I was not sensible of my miserable condition, by thus
provoking God by my Sins, in which it was Gods mercy to spare me, and give me
time to repent had I had grace to have improved it.

But that which is most dreadful upon my Conscience is, this bloody Fact for
which I am to die, which lies as a very sore and heavy burden upon my Soul;
and for which I can give no reason why I did it, but the instigation of the
Devil tempting to it when I was drunk, and not having the fear of God before
mine Eyes, and my Senses gone with drink, I was thus overcome of Satan, and
took up my Hatchet, and (oh my Soul bleeds to think of it) I murdered that man
that never did me injury.

I was there at work for my Master, and had opportunity (being from home) to
spend my time more ill, and not having God in my thoughts, I lived profane and
lewdly.

But this I can say ( I thank God) I never did commit Whoredom with any Woman;
but ill company, Sabbath-breaking, drunkenness, disobedience to Parents,
profaness, and other Sins I have been deeply guilty of. The Lord be merciful to
me, and pardon and forgive me for the sake of my dear Savior Jesus Christ.

When I had committed this horrid Murder for which I am to die, there was
another young man that was suspected to have done it, and was apprehended upon
that suspicion.

But when upon further inquiry I was found out (by a Watch I took out of his
Pocket) to be the man that did it; I was apprehended, and confessed that it was
I that murdered him.

Then I was asked if the other young man in custody upon suspicion, did not
join with me, or hire me, or set me on do it, and whether he had not some hand
with me in it.

To which I (like a wicked Wretch) affirmed that he hired me, and promised to
give me forty shillings, and a better thing; and so he came to be indicted with
me, and put in danger of his Life.

But this wrong that I did to him has much troubled me, and I thank God that
the Jury did acquit him: And though he was acquitted, yet I could not be quiet
in my mind till I sent for him, and I thank him that he came to me, and when he
came to me, I heartily asked him forgiveness, and he has as freely forgiven me.

Since I have been condemned to die, I have been much troubled in Conscience
for all my-sinful and naughty Life, especially for this bloody and wicked
murder, which is a very great terror to me, fearing lest God will not pardon so
vile a Sin, yet not despairing, so that I have been greatly dejected; and my
Soul dead, stupefied, under the terror and wrath of God, not knowing what to do.

But since the help I have had from the Ordinary, and other godly Ministers,
who have conferred with me, and prayed with me, and for me and instructed me
out of Gods word, both together with other condemned Prisoners, and privately
with my self, (the Lord requite them for their great pains) I have found some
hopes of mercy from God through Christ Jesus my Savior, who died for me, which
I prize more than my life. I am very sensible of Gods mercies to me, a wicked
wretch that deserve not what I have already received, though like a wicked
unthankful creature I have not improved but abused them heretofore, but do now
in deep sense of them, magnify Gods goodness therein. I confess it is a great
mercy from God to me (praised be his holy Name) that my life has not been cut
off in the midst of the very act of Sins, and been cast into Hell torments for
ever, but that God spared me and gave me time to repent; and offered me the
blessed means and helps that I have found here in Prison. I confess it is Gods
great mercy to me (by means of those worthy Ministers that have visited me) to
assist, teach, counsel, and comfort me in the way of peace, and reconciliation
with God through Christ; in which I have found a great change in me and hope of
mercy. I confess that it is a great mercy and favor to me to move the heart of
the Recorder and others that have given me so long time of repentance, after
the sentence of Death passed upom me, before my Execution too, methinks I find
my heart daily more and more humbled, my sorrow for my Sins to increase, and my
hopes of mercy and pardon of my sins, and of the salvation of my Soul move more
lively in me. And I thank the Lord that by his providence and grace, he has
under this sad dispensation of Death, brought my mind into a willing and hearty
submission to his Will.

I am not troubled that I must die in submission to Gods providence, I do not
much desire to live any longer, only to settle my peace with God, hoping when I
die, through Gods mercy to enjoy Life Eternal through Jesus Christ my Savior.
It is not Life in this World, nor any thing of this Life that I wrestle with
God for; I thank God I hang loose to all Worldly things. But it is the mercy of
God to my Soul, and the blood of Christ to wash away my sins, and to save my
Soul that I labor for, peace of Conscience and Eternal Life that I earnestly
seek for. Oh my sins, my Sins, these are my sorrows, therefore I beg unto God
day and night in the dark Dungeon where I lie in Fetters of Iron, what ever the
Lord does with me in this Life and what ever I suffer, that my sins may be
pardoned and that my poor sinful soul may be saved, and I do hope to find mercy
from God, who has promised mercy to those that confess their sins and repent
and call upon him, and though my sins are very great, yet my comfort is that
his mercies abound more and are greater than my sins, and the mercies of God
toward me aad his great working upon me since I have been condemned, makes me
also to hope that the Lord intends in mercy to save me though I have been so
great a sinner. I do spend my time in my dismal Dungeon I thank God in much
prayer in which I find great Comfort from God to my Soul, and sequestring my
thoughts from the things of this world that I may more comfortably enjoy God. I
desire all young men to take warning by me, that you may not bring the wrath of
God upon you in the like Judgment that I am under, or some other as dreadful or
more bitter. Had I been Dutiful to my Parents I had not needed to have taken
such desperate Courses as I have done. Had I kept the Sabbath holy I had not
fallen in such lewd profane company as have brought me to this miserable end.
Had I not been drunk I had not committed this horrid Murder. And had I
refrained ill company I had not lain under so great temptations to Sin. Had I
had grace and wisdom I might have lived as comfortably and as happily as others
of my degree. Had I been dutiful to a careful Mother, or obedient to a good
Master, I had not come to this sad end, but might have lived to have seen happy
days. I pray God I may be a warning to all Children to teach them duty to their
Parents, to all Apprentices to teach them to mind first their duty to God, and
then the Business they are entrusted by their Masters. And to all young Men to
take heed of ill Company, such as delight to Sin: To all Sabbath Breakers to
amend and turn to God, lest he leave them to Satan and they fall into some
dreadful Sin. And to all Drunkards, whose sin therein makes them Slaves to
Satan to commit any desperate wickedness that he tempts them to.

This is truly my Confession, witness my Hand Francis Nichollson. Witness H.
Walker, Minister. Richard Paxton, Richard Hawker, Officers.

The Confession of Francis Nicholson to Mr. Samuel Smith, Ordinary of Newgate,
in relation to his Murdering of John Dimbleby.
FRancis Nicholson declared voluntarily, and at several times to me Mr. Samuel
Smith Ordinary of Newgate, and to diverse other persons then present, that he
the said Nicholson was not hired by the Person Arraigned with him, to commit
the said Murder, as he persisted to affirm at his Trial, but the said
Asseveration was his mere contrivance, to lessen his own Crime, And farther did
Relate, that he had never thought of the Coachman, had not the man at the T^y
at Hampton Court asked him the question when he was before the Justice whether
or no the Coachman was not concerned with him. saying surely some body must set
him on to do it, and thinking thereby to clear himself, was the only reason of
his charging of the Coachman with that bloody Act. Whereupon I Samuel Smith
told him that he ought to send for the Person he had so wronged and to beg his
Pardon, which since he has done.

After the Discovery of such a false Aspersion, I asked the said Nicholson,
what moved him to murder the person, he said that having drank hard one Night
in Company, he wished that God would damn him if he did not try to kill a Man,
and affirmed from that very time, for a fortnight together, the Devil did so
haunt him, that he had no rest in his mind, by the Tempters urging him to make
good his Vow, for otherwise he would be certainly Damned. He said that it was
indifferent to him whom he killed, so he killed some Body to ease his mind.
That he watched an opportunity to kill the person at Hampton Court but his heart
failed him several times, yet being left to himself, by God for his wicked
imprecation or wish, he was so hurried on by the Devil to effect that Murthe^,
that he could not withstand it for he declared to me several times that it
neither proceeded from any Grudg or Malice, nor hope of Gain, yet after he had
killed the Man, he searched his Pockets and took out a Watch; also he said to me
that this troubles his Conscience very much, that he killed the Man on a
sudden, and so dying without prepatation, he knows not in what state or
Condition his Soul is in.

Ita Testor, Samuel Smith

LONDON Printed by D. Mallet, 1680.


