A TRVE COPY of a MESSAGE SENT TO GENERAL MONCK FROM Several Officers of the
Army, October twenty nine, 1659.
Dear Brethren and Fellow Soldiers,
WE most heartily wish Grace and Truth to be multiplied to you, through the
knowledge of God, and of Jesus our Lord; and also we desire the God and Father
of all Grace, to and to your Faith, Virtue; and to Virtue Knowledge, and to
Knowledge, Temperance; and to Temperance, Godliness; and to Godliness,
Brotherly-kindness; and to Brotherly-kindness, Charity.

Dear Brethren, We cannot but be deeply affected, and afflicted in our own
spirits, to consider of your dis-satisfactions with us, upon mistaken grounds;
You have known us these many years, to be your faithful Brethren, that durst do
nothing that is sinful, and we may affirm with plainness, honesty, and
simplicity of heart, we have done nothing in the late Revolution, bnt that
which the providence of the most wise God prepared to our hands, and led us out
to, without so much as one half hours time to design, or resolve, to take take
that course we are necessitated unto: since which, most of such persons that
were not clear in the presenr, and sudden action, have made their
acknowledgment of their full satisfaction, and were mutually reconciled; and
they are received and tendered by us affectionate Brethren. And for a more full
Narrative of the providential grounds and gradual steps that led us to the
Work, (yet with aching hearts) and as answer to your Queries, signed in your
name by William Clark Secretary, bearing date the 22 instant, We refer you to
a Book, entitled, The Armies Plea, and also, The Armies Declaration; relation
thereto being had, we hope will give you satisfaction.

Loving Brethren, What have we done, that you are offended? we are not
conscious, that any thing is acted by us, upon the public Theater; but that
which we judge, is acceptable to God, and that we have done has proceeded from
uprightness of heart, and for the glory of God, the good of his Interest,
Cause, and People in these Nations; nothing less then these worthy Ends could
have caused us to adventure our All that is dear to us, for yours and their
sakes, and after such a hazard, our brethren to look shie, upon us, yea such,
with whom we have lived and conversed together, prayed, fought, and jeoparded
our lives together, and witnesses together of the glory of the most high God in
the high places of the fields; yea, we that are of one society, of one Family
and Household, (that none hitherto, through the grace of God, could dis-unite
us) now to be at a distance with us, is the greatest wound to us, which is
unexpressable. If it had been from our enemies, we could have born it. Oh! but
they are the wounds of the house of our friends, and all this arising, without
first dealing brotherly with us, and without so much as sending to know the
providential grounds that led us to these undertakings, And likewise your and
our unhappyness has been, possibly by mis-informations received by those, who
have corresponded with the principal occasioners of this breach here.

However, We are censured by you, we shall, we hope, carry it Christianly and
brotherly toward you, and exercise our selves in the doctrine of our Savior.
If any be overraken in a fault, restore such a one with the spirit of meekness,
knowing also we are subject to like temptations: and we ought to pity and pray
for one another, and forgive one another, even as God for Christ's sake has
forgiven you.

We hope the fear of God will guide you, so that you may do nothing to grieve
him, and his little flock, and rejoice the common enemy abroad, and at home,
nor give them advantages to make a prey upon these Nations.

What can you propound to your selves? if you are for good things, so are we;
if for a Free State and Commonwealth, so are we; if against a Single person so
are we; if for Reformation, so are we; if for godliness and the Nations to be
exalted in Righteousness, so are we; Why do we differ in the form and way to it?

Oh dear friends, if you should precipitately engage into a war, and should
conquer your Brethren, would not the consequence be a conquest over your
selves, and all the good people of the Land? And if they are gone, certainly
(if you retain your old principles) you will not desire to live long after them.

Precious Brethren, we oommend unto you that place o^uture, Joshua 1. 14, 15.
We shall with onr bended knees implore the God of Heaven and King of Saints, to
guide you and perf^, as holy Noah said in another case, Genesis 9. 7. God shall
persuade Japheth to dwell in the Tents of Sem. Finally Brethren ^, be of good
comfort, let us be of one mind, live in Peace, and the God of Love and Peace
shall be with you and us, W^

Your most affectionate Brethren and Fellow Soldiers, John Lambert John
Disbrow James Berry Tho. Kelsey Hierom Sankey Will. Stane Samuel Clark John
Hewson Daniel Axtel Rich. Ashfield John Biscoe ^dward Salmon William Packer
(...) Allen ^ard Creed ^bert Hope Robert Swallow William Simmons William
Gough Daniel Kingswell John Duckenfield

Dear friend we hope to hear in your Answer to this, that all our dear Friends
now in Bonds, are at Liberty, and that the Lord has satisfied your hearts, to
Acquiesce in his present dispensations, so as we may not expose each other to
further inconveniency.




