Die Jovis, 28. Maii. 1646.
IT is this day ordered by the Lords in Parliament assembled, That Mr. Tailor
is hereby thanked for his great pains taken in the Sermon he preached yesterday
before their Lordships in the Abbey Church Westminster. And he is desired to
print and publish the same, which is not to be printed but by authority under
his own hand.

John Brown Cleric. Partiamentorum.

I do appoint George Whittington and Nathaniell Brooks to print my Sermon.

Francis Tailor.

THE DANGER OF Vows neglected, AND The necessity of REFORMATION: OR, A Sermon
preached before the Right Honorable House of Lords, at a late solemn Fast in
the Abbey Church at Westminster, May 27. 1646.

By FRANCIS TAILOR B. in D. Pastor of Yalding in Kent, and a Member of the
Assembly of Divines.

PSALM. 50.14. (...) Pay thy Vows unto the most High.

Published according to Order.

LONDON, Printed by M. S. for Geo. Whittington, and Nath Brooks, at the Angel
in Cornhill, below the Exchange. 1646.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE HOUSE OF PEERS Assembled in PARLIAMENT.
RIght Honorable, these pains were undertaken by your command, and your Order
was the Midwife to bring them into the light. I hope my imperfections shall
find a cover under the veil of your authority. God knows my hearts desire
was to mind you of your solemn Covenant, (which Lords be subject to a neglect
of as well as meaner men) and to stir you up to a private Reformation,
without which ye can look for no blessing upon your public endeavors.
Endeavor I beseech you to cast every little moat out of your own eyes, before
you go about to cast the great beams out of the eyes of the Church and State.
(...) Vajikra Rab. c. 5.
It is an afflicted City, say the Jews, whose Physician has the Gout. The
common vote of the people will be, Luke 4.23.
Medice, cura teipsum. Those great things ye expect in Gods, do them in your
own houses, that ye may be able to say with Joshuah Josh 24.15.
, I and my House do serve the Lord. Non solum obsunt vi^^^si principes, quod
illi psi corrum untur, sed etiam quod corrumpunt; plusque exemplo, quam pecca^o
no^c^t. Cicero de Leg. l 3.
Your vices and your peoples will be exemplary: so will your graces. Be valiant
to put to your helping hand to purge and settle Church and State. (...) Sab
fol. 32.1.
If the Shepherd be lame, says the Talmud, the go its will easily make an
escape. So will all sorts of Delinquents and Malefactors, if your Lordships go
slowly to work. I beseech you stir up your spirits, and be forward to settle
a religious Discipline in Gods Church, according to your covenant. Give not the
people occasion to say, The let of Discipline is, because great men cannot
endure a through-reformation. The Lord that called you to such a pitch of
honor, and height of employment, make your Lordships worthy instruments of his
glory here, and fill you with glory in his own presence in heaven. So prays

Your Lordships humble servant in the Lord Francis Tailor.

A SERMON PREACHED BEFORE The Right Honorable House of LORDS at a solemn Fast.
GENES. 35.1. And God said unto Jacob, Arise, go up to Bethel, and dwell
there, and make there an Altar unto God, that appeared unto thee, when thou
fleddest from the face of Esau thy brother.


THE Book of Genesis contains the Cradle of the world, and the Infancy of the
Church. The Story is brought down from the very Creation to Joseph's death. The
most remarkable Histories are the lives of the three famous Patriarchs,
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, set out more largely then the rest. In these ye
have their manifold trials and deliverances. The Text is a part of Jacobs
story: We find him in a sad posture, his daughter defiled, the Sbechemites
slain by his sons, their City spoiled, Chap. 34.30.
himself afraid lest the Country rise up against him, and destroy both him
and his. In this heavy condition God appears unto him. The Text does not
expressly set down when this apparition was, but the connection of it to the
former story, and the great need Jacob had of Gods appearing then, and Genesis
22.10, 11.14. and ^8.10, etc.
Gods usual manner of making the Saints necessities his opportunities,
persuade the Interpreters to believe, that it was presently after the slaughter
of the Shechemites. And the vulgar reads it, Interea, In the mean while. While
Jacob was musing what course to take to avoid the rage of the neighboring
Canaanites, God appears to him for his comfort. Neither is it set down what
manner of apparition this was, whether in a vision by day, or in a dream by
night. Sure it was not a message sent by any Prophet to Jacob: and certain it
is, it was not muta apparitio, a dumb show; but as Jacob had Gods presence ad
erigendum, to comfort and list up his dejected spirits, so he had also his word
ad dirigendum, to direct his wandering thoughts what safe course they might
pitch upon. God dealt with his children then, as we do with ours now; he
appeared to them and told them his will and pleasure, that they might teach it
to others: So we keep our children at home when they are young, and speak to
them our selves; but when they are bigger, we employ them abroad, and let them
know our mind by letters. That former course of apparitions we must not expect
now. It is sufficient that Hosea 8.2.
God has (...). Macar. Hom. 39.
written to us the great things of his law for our direction; and it is our sin
if we count them as a strange thing, and long after apparitions, as if we were
still in the infancy of the Church.

The ground of observation is explication; wherein the more pains is to be
taken, because our Interpreters trouble us with many Topographicall scruples,
and Metaphysicall speculations.

(...) Arise.
Some conceive that God has respect to the posture of Jacobs body, who might
now be laid in his bed. Others, that God looks at the sadness of his heart,
which was cast down within him. The former think that Jacob is called out of
his bed; the other suppose he is called out of his dumps. The truth is, the
Hebrew word in the Scripture use of it, does not necessarily imply either; it
rather calls upon men to prepare themselves to go about the work which God
enjoins them. So when 1 Kings 21.18.
God bids Elijah to arise and go down to meet Ahab: and also to 2 Kings 1.9.
arise and go up to meet the messengers of Ahaziah; he intends no more then
that he should set himself about that work. Neither does it appear, that
Eliah was at that time either laid in body, or troubled in mind.

(...) Go up.
Neither does this word argue that Bethel was higher by situation, then
Shechem: for in Scripture phrase both (...) to go up, and (...) to go down,
are often used only for going on, or forward, without respect to the various
situations of the places mentioned, higher or lower. So God says, Ezekiel. 26.3.
O Tyrus, I will cause many Nations to come up against thee. We know that Tyrus
(...) In the heart of the seas, Ezekiel. 27.4.
stood on the Seas; and we read that men Psalm. 107.23.
go down to the Sea. And Sennacharib King of Assyria, is said to Isa. 36.10.
See the like 2 Samuel 2.1. and 5.19.
come up against all the defenced Cities of Judah, yet it does not appear that
Assyria was lower in situation then the land of Judah. And on the other side,
Jephtha's daughter desires Judge. 11.37.
to go up and down upon the mountains to bewail her virginity for a time:
that is no more then to go from one place to another on the hills. And Judge
15.11. See the like 1 Samuel 33.6. 2 Samuel 2^.21 2 Kings 8.29. Jer. 18.^. and 21.1.
three thousand men of Judah are said in the original to go down to the top
of the rock Etam, which the Translators have carefully rendered went. So that as
the former word Rise required a preparation for the journey, so this word Go
up, requires a progress in it till he come there. He must neither be
discouraged from undertaking it, nor give it over before he have finished it.

(...). To Bethel.
But why is Jacob commanded to go to Bethel? God needs not give any reason of
his commands: his will is to us a rule. Yet the equity of this command, and
Gods indulgence to Jacob herein, appears by these following considerations:
First, by this means Jacob was carried away out of the sight of his enemies;
his very being among them would have been a perpetual eyesore to them, and the
sight of him and his a daily provocation to revenge. Secondly, the very name of
Bethel might be a comfort to Jacob: it signifies Gods house; and whither should
Gods people go for consolation and protection, rather then to Gods house?
Thirdly, himself had found comfort there in former troubles, as appears in
the end of the Text. Fourthly and lastly, there he might perform his vow to
God, Chap. 28.10
which he had vowed many years before, and hitherto neglected. This God seems
to have an especial eye upon in this command, as appears by the ensuing
words, Make there an Altar, etc.

(...). And dwell there. That is, make it thy habitation for a time. Others
read it, stay, or tarry there; to wit, till thy vow be performed. So the word
is used, 2 Samuel 10.5. Tarry at Jericho until your beards be grown, and then
return.

(...). And make there an Altar.

God does not intend the bare setting up of an Altar, but that when he had
built it, he should offer sacrifices on it, and acknowledge Gods mercy to him
in providing so liberally for him, and protecting him from the fury of his
brother Esau. So did Abraham Genesis 13.18. compared with chap. 22.2.9.
in the plain of Mamre build an Altar, not to look upon it doubtless, but to
offer sacrifices. And in this manner of worshipping God, questionless his
posterity were bred up. And to what purposes were places among us appointed for
religious exercises, if none were there performed?

(...). Unto God.
There is a great question among Interpreters, why God should speak himself
here in the third person, and why he says, Unto God, and not Unto me. Some
Writers both Vide August. Quaest. in Gea. Quaest. 110. and Willet in Text.
ancient and modern, pick out of it, the Divine nature of our Savior Christ,
and the Trinity of Persons in the Godhead. Some would have God the Father to be
the speaker, and to direct Jacob to the worship of his Son Christ, the second
Person in the Trinity. Others, that Christ should appear to Jacob, (who in the
judgment of our Divines, was the person that used to appear to them in the
old Testament) and call upon him to build an Altar to God the Father.
Doubtless we have plain places sufficient in Scripture to prove Christ's
Divine Nature, and the Trinity of Persons, and therefore need not to press
this place to that end, lest we do as weak builders, Debile sundamen^um fallit
opus. Wainflaet. de Gram.
lay so infirm a foundation, that the whole building fall to the ground: or as
wilful Soldiers, who defend a weak Fort against a strong enemy, and so are
vanquished. It is clear that God speaks of himself often in the third person,
where no such mystery is intended; as when he says, that Genesis 18.19.
Abraham will teach his household, and they shall keep the way of the Lord, that
the Lord may bring upon Abraham that which he has spoken of him. And, Genesis
18.14.
Is any thing too hard for the Lord? God is no more tied to give an account of
his words, then of his actions. He may speak of himself as he pleases. Yet I
doubt not but many reasons of this phrase may be given, which may yield profit
unto us.

As first, God may speak thus of himself for certainty sake, that Jacob might
know who spoke to him, and to whom he was to build an Altar; that he need not
say with Saul, Acts 9.5.
Lord, who art thou, Lord? Nor with Samuel 1 Samuel 3.4, 5.
run to Eli when God called him. Secondly, for Majesty sake: so in the third
Commandment, God does not say, Thou shall not take my Name in vain: but, thou
shall not take the Name of the Lord thy God in vain. And in the fourth, The
seventh day is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God. It was a strong argument to
dissuade them from dishonoring Gods Name, and persuade them to the observation
of the Sabbath, because they both did belong, not to any mortal man, King, or
Emperor, but to that glorious Lord who was their God. Thirdly, for interest
sake; that it might appear that God had an interest in Jacob by reason of his
former appearing to him in his troubles, and therefore deserved a journey and
an Altar at his hands. So God bids Abraham to offer Isaac Genesis 12.2.
his son, putting him in mind what interest he had in him. Fourthly, for
equity sake, that it might appear to be a very just and equal service, that
God required of Jacob, although the speaker had not been that God, nor Jacob
ever made a vow to build an Altar to him. And therefore God neither speaks of
himself in the first person, nor names Jacobs vow, but only limits both the
person and the vow unto him. I conceive these reasons to be sufficient and
useful, and proceed to the next words.

(...). That appeared unto thee.
The story is in the twenty and eight chapter; see there the apparition set
down at large.

(...). When thou fleddest.
Jacob was then in a sad estate, an exile as it were from his fathers house by
the malice of his brother Esau, forsaken by all his friends, forced to go seek
for subsiste^ce in foreign Countries: yet now is the time that God chooses to
appear unto him, and not formerly when he had both friends and comfort in his
fathers house. So that Jacob might have said then, as David does afterward,
Psalm. 27.10.
When my Father and my Mother forsook me, then the Lord took me up. God is like
a faithful friend, who stands to his, when they have most need of him. Not
like to Courtiers, who follow the Sun of men's prosperities (as Aspicis ut
veniant ad candida tecta columbae. Accipiant nullas sordida turris aves, Ovid.
Trist. l. 1. Eleg. 8.
Pigeons fly to new whited houses) and forsake them in the dark shadow of their
adversities.

(...) From the face.
Men's ill affection toward others appears in their faces. So did Labans appear
to Jacob Genesis 31.2.
. And Jacob beheld the countenance of Laban, and behold, it was not toward him
as before. Hence it is that we are afraid to abide in the presence of such as
hate us, because we expect mischief daily from them, which we seek to present
by flying out of their sight. Such counsel Rebecca gives to her son Jacob to
go to her brother Laban, Genesis 27.43, etc.
till Esaus fury were over, and then he might return in safety.

(...). Of Esau thy brother.
Jacob might well think that that God which would not suffer a brother to hurt
him then, would not permit the Canaanites to spoil him now.

The sum of all is, as if God should have said to Jacob, I know thou art in
great distress, and I will not forsake thee: Prepare thy self for a Journey:
think that all these things are come upon thee for the neglect of thy vow; go
now therefore to Bethel and perform it. It is a very just and equal thing,
that thou who need and look for help from me now again, should go
build an Altar to me there as thou have promised, and should offer sacrifice
and thanks to me. When this is done, I that did deliver thee before from Esau
thy brother, will also safeguard thee against these Canaanites.

Out of which words thus interpreted, arise naturally these four prosititions
suitable to the time, and profitable for this present occasion of our meeting.

First,

Secondly,

Thirdly,

Fourthly, that in performance of vows,

For the first.


A man may justly wonder, why Jacob had not performed his vow before now. God
had freed him from Labans pursuit, and sent Laban quietly back again. God had
delivered him from Esau's opposition, and sent Esau away in peace. What hindered
Jacob from going to Bethel? He might as easily have gone thither as to Shechem;
Sure nothing hindered him, but his own forgetfulness: and that is so much the
more strange, because God him self had put him in mind of his vow in direct
terms, when he commanded him to return home, and promised to bless him. Gen
31.13.
I am the God of Bethel (says he) where thou anointedst the pillar, and where
thou vowedst a vow unto me. But Jacob had got a quiet habitation at Shechem,
commodious for him and his cattle, and there he tarries till God fire him out.
Dinah is ravished, he and his in danger of destruction, and yet he thinks not
of going to Bethel till God bids him. This is noted by Interpreters to be the
first vow mentioned in Scripture. Hence it is, that Jacob is called by some of
them, Voterumpater, the father of vows. Yet this first vow is strangely
neglected when it might easily have been performed. We cannot think any worse
of Jacob, then of Pharaohs Butler, who Gen 40.23.
forgot Joseph, and remembered him not, though he did very well deserve to be
remembered.

But what may be the reason that good men should be so forgetful of God? It is
no marvel if wicked men forget him: they use God as men use Physicians, send
for them when they are sick, and slight them when they are well. But it is
strange that good men who love God, should so much neglect him.

The Reasons may be these:
First,

Secondly, Jacobs case; he had been twenty years with Laban since his vow was
made, and so had let it slip out of his mind.

Thirdly,

Fourthly, Jacob had no sooner left Labans house, but presently Genesis 31.22, 23.
Laban pursues him, and quarrels with him. He has no sooner dismissed Laban,
but Genesis 32.6.
Esau his brother comes out with an Army against him. When Esau was gone, he
fears the Canaanites, lest they should all rise up to destroy him, because of
the wrong done to the Shechemites. This might be one occasion of Jacobs
forgetting his vow. And so it may be to us also, who shall meet with opposition
as well as he.

I shall omit the Application, till I have handled the other points, and
proceed to the second obsersation.

The forget fullness of performing vows,

This Shel. Jarchi conceives to be the cause of all these troubles. He brings
in God speaking to Jacob, and saying, (...) Shel. Jar. in Text.
Because thou have staid long in the way, thou art fined, and this trouble is
befallen thee concerning thy daughter. The word he uses is used for a fine set
on delinquents heads by the Judges. So says Moses, Deuteronomy. 22.19.
They shall amerce him in an hundred shekels of silver. So this Author looks
upon God as a Judge imposing these troubles upon Jacob as a fine for the
neglecting of his vow. So Ferus on the Text, Nil mirum, quod adversa tibi
contigerint cum bactenus tam diu distuleris votum. Ferus in Text.
No wonder that crosses have befallen thee, seeing thou have so long deferred
the pryment of thy vow.

We find in Scripture, that the people of Israel were punished with 2 Samuel 21.
three years famine, because Saul not out of his zeal to God, but to please
the people, had slain some of the Gibeonites, contrary to the Josh. 9.15.
oath made to them by Joshua, and the Elders of Israel; yet was this vow Josh.
9.4.
fraudulently gotten by lying and deceit. Neither did Saul ever take this vow
himself. We read further of Sampson, that he was a Judge. 13 5.
Nazarite to God from the womb. It appears in the law that the Nazarites Numb.
62.5.
took a solemn vow; their hair was not to be cut. Sampson did not purpose to
break this vow, but being overcome with lust by Dalila's persuasion gives an
hint how his vow might be broken. The fearful consequences hereof appear in
the story of the Judges. Judge. 16.21.25.
Sampson is taken by the Philistines, his eyes put out, he is bound with
fetters of brass, grinds in the prisonhouse, and is made a laughing stock to
those that durst not look upon him before. 2 Samuel 15.7
Absalom abuses a vow, that under pretense thereof he may deprive his father
both of kingdom and life. 2 Samuel 18.15.
This cost Absalom his dearest life. The King of Judah Ezekiel. 17.13.16.
had vowed obedience to the King of Babylon; he breaks this vow, and God
passes this sentence on him, that he should die in the land of that King
whose covenant he had broken. Will God be thus severe for breach of a vow made
to a mortal man, and an heathen King, what will he do then for breach of vows
made unto himself?

It is time to come to reasons for the proof of the point; wherein I shall
desire to be somewhat large, in regard of the weight of the matter, and the
present need.

First, Ecclesiastes. For Eccles 5.4, 5.6.
first, God gives no day. He that makes a vow, must not defer the payment of
it. Secondly, God calls them fools that do defer the payment of vows. And
who doubts but parents are angry when they give such terms to their children?
Thirdly, he says, God has no pleasure in them: that is, he is very angry;
as in the third commandment, God will not hold him guiltless that takes his
name in vain: that is, he will hold him very guilty. And in Elies reproof of
his sons, 2 Samuel 2.24.
It is no good report, says he, that I hear: that is, it is a very bad one.
For they were no small sins, that were reported of them, as 1 Samuel 1.14.15.22.
robbing God of the fat of his offerings, and lying with the women at the door
of the Tabernacle of the Congregation. So on the contrary, when the Psalmist
says, that Psalm. 51.17.
God will not despise a contrite and a broken heart; he means, God will account
highly of it, and largely reward it. Fourthly, he says, It is better not to
vow at all, then not to pay. Who doubts but a man is angry when he hears him
chiding with his neighbor, and saying; I had rather you never had promised me
such a good office, then to fail when I looked for it? Fifthly, he calls it
sin in plain terms, Suffer not thy mouth to cause thy flesh to sin. And is
not God angry at sin? Sixthly, it is such a sin as God will not have covered
with the vail of an error. Neither say thou before the Angel, that it was an
error. Seventhly, he professes expressly, that God is angry at it; Wherefore
should God be angry at thy voice? Eighthly, he gives a real demonstration of
Gods anger, Why should he destroy the work of thy hands? Is not God angry when
he lays snares for men as we do for wild beasts to catch and destroy them?
Pro. 20.29.
It is a snare (says Solomon) to the man who devoureth that which is holy, and
after vows to make enquiry. Ask David who rains snares upon ungodly men, and
he will tell you, it is the Lord. Psalm. 11.6.
Upon the wicked he shall rain snares. Ask Ezekiel who brings covenant-breakers
into snares, and he will tell you, it is God. Ezekiel. 17.20
I will spread my net upon him, and he shall be taken in my snare. Is not God
very angry with those whom he curses? We read in Malachi, Mal. 1.14.
Cursed be the deceiver which has in his flock a That is, a sound male.
Elleipsis of the epithire, as Isai 1.18 wool, for wh^e woll; and Isai 5.4.
grapes for good grapes.
male, and voweth and sacrifices unto the Lord a corrupt thing. And a strong
reason, yea double one is added; First, because God is a great King, and will
not be dallied with by his subjects. And secondly, because his Name is
dreadful among the heathen, and therefore shall not be dishonored by his own
people. God keeps covenant faithfully himself. Psalm. 111.5.
He will ever be mindful of his covenant. Gods covenant is called an
everlasting covenant, and a covenant of salt, 2 Chronicles. 13.5. And as men who
strictly keep day themselves, are soonest angry with such as do not: so Gods
care of keeping, will make him a sharp revenger of breach of covenant in
others. Ezekiel. 17.59
Therefore thus says the Lord God, As I live, surely mine oath that he has
despised, and my covenant that he has broken, even it will I recompense upon
his own head.

Secondly, David and other godly men, that 2 Samuel 21.1.
Saul had broken the vow made to the Gibeonites; and it appears it brought
much trouble to Israel, even a famine of three years one succeeding another.

Thirdly, Judge. 16.20.
Philistines against Sampson. So here Jacob was afraid lest God would have done
the like to him, as appears in the end of the former chapter. And these
enemies God makes to do his work, when they think they do their own. The King
of Babylon though he went only to revenge his own quarrel on the King of Ludah,
yet he brings him Ezekiel. 17.20.
into Gods net for a punishment of his perjury.

Fourthly, Psalm 119.106.
I have sworn (says the Psalmist) and I will perform it, that I will keep thy
righteous judgments. And was not that oath a vow? Genesis 3.48.50. Tumulus restu,
Deus testu. Tumulus sacramenta^iter, quia signum est testisicans de re gefia ad
posteri. aten^. Deus proprie, quia testatur in conscientiam de pacto into, and
attestabitur suis iudiciis, and vindicta adversur periures.
God is called to bear witness of the covenant between Laban and Jacob, and
so is the heap of stones also, yet with a great deal of difference; the heap
is a witness sacramentally, as it were; it remained as a token of that league.
But God is properly called to witness, as one who heard all their words, and
would testify the truth to both their consciences, and by judgments on the
party that should break it. He that vows and pays not, is a perjured person,
says Voven^ and ne^ solvens peierat. Bern de praec. and dispens. cap. 20.
Bernard. This perjury makes our sins the greater, especially in those things
that we ought to do, if we had never vowed them, as ciphers added to a figure,
may make one a thousand. Perjury is a sin odious to the Turks and Mahometanes.
See the Turkish history.
Amurath when Uladislaus by the persuasion of Julian the Popes Legate, had
broken his covenant with him, and fought against him, draws the Articles out
of his bosom, and calls upon Christ for vengeance on his perfidious servants.
In this battle were slain both the King and the Cardinal; over whom the
Author of the Complaint of Hungery infults, saying, I n^^^ Iuliane, and dic
Reg^ tuo apud ^feres, Haereticis fidem non esse servandam. Quaerela Hungaria.
Go now Julian, and tell thy King in heil, that he need not keep faith with
heretics. Yea, this sin was odious in the very heathen; Senatorum i^nus
perfidia Carthaginensium i^sestus succlamat, per ques Deos fo^dos acturi
essent, cum ^o^ perquos anto ictum fefellissens: Per cosdem, inquit Asdrubal,
qui ^am infesti fun^ ^aedera violantib^^. Livius Hist-ab urbe cond lib. 30.
When the Carringinion in a low estate sent Ambassadors to Rowts, to defire
conditions of peace, one of the Senators offended at their former perjury,
demands by what God they would swear, (for they had deceived those gods by whom
they had formerly sworn) Asdrubal answers, by the same Gods that sit so heavy
upon them that break covenants: When Tissaphernes had obtained a truce from
Agesilaus, and had sworn that in that short time he would procure liberty for
the Grecian Cities in Asia; but contrary to his oath gathered soldiers to
fight against him: Agesilaus kept the truce till the time expired, and then
sent a message of thanks to Tissaphernes Habere se magnam ipsi gratiam quod
perjurio Deos sibi infestos reddid^sset, Graetis vero belli socios, Xenoph. c.
4. vitae Agesil.
, that by his perjury he had made the Gods his enemies, and engaged them to
assist the Grecian Army in the war. We read also that one Epicidides, going to
enquire at the Oracle of Iusiurandi sed filia nominis expers, Trunca pedu^,
manuumque celerrima, sed tamen instat, persequiturque virum dum stirpem fundtus
omnem bauscrit. Nic. Chron. Hist. Imp Manuel. Com.
Delphos, received an answer, That perjury would pursue a man till it had
rooted out all his posterity. So odious was this sin to men altogether ignorant
of the true God. And do we marvel then, that God sends plagues upon his people
for neglect of vows made to himself?

It is now high time to come to the third observation, which is this:

God will at length rub up the memories of his servants,

God does not straightway deliver Jacob out of his trouble, but calls upon him
first to perform his vow made to him for former mercies. As Genesis 41.8, 9.
Pharaohs Butler is put in mind of his neglect of Joseph, by Pharachs dream; so
God finds a way to put his in mind of their vows.

Two things I have to do: First, to show, how God does this. Secondly, why he
does it.

For the first, How God does it.

God rubs up their memories, first, by troubles, Jacob. Bella Deiflagella, wars
are Gods scourges. And parents oftentimes make their children call to mind
their faults, by taking away their victuals, and whipping them.

Secondly, Jacob, he tells him his fault, but very gently, he does not upbraid
him with perjury, nor call him a vow-breaker; nay not so much as names his vow,
but insinuates it rather, that Jacob might see, God sought not to shame him,
but to amend him. We must not look for such revelations now: but God often
meets with us in the ministry of his Word, and makes us see those faults in
our selves which we little dreamed of, and covenant breaking among the rest.
Many wicked men marvel to hear Gods Ministers rip up their secret faults, as
if they were in their bosoms: good men I hope will sooner be informed by them.

For the second, Why God does it.
First, honor of God. But if they be not performed, God is not honored by them,
nay he is dishonored, as being slighted by his own people.

Secondly, Psalmist, Psalm. 35.27.
Let the Lord be magnified, who has pleasure in the prosperity of his servant.
Now he knows that our forgetfulness and unthankfulnes will hinder us of much
good, and bring many judgments upon us; which to prevent, God puts us in mind
of our vows and covenants.

I proceed to the last point.

In performanes of Vows,

God does not bid Jacob go shift for himself in this troublous time, nor
enquire out the kindred of the Shechemites to restore their goods to them, but
he bids him go build an Altar to God. And Jacob accordingly goes about it.
This is the method of Gods commandments; the first Table contains duties to
God: the second, to our selves, and our neighbors. This is the method of our
prayers; our Savior reaches us first to pray for the honor of Gods Name,
Kingdom and Will, before we pray for daily bread, pardon of sins, or power
against temptations. This is the method of our Faith, in the Articles whereof,
and most Confessions, we first profess what we believe concerning God, and
then concerning our selves. This is the method of our Covenant, both in the
Preface, looking first at the glory of God, and the advancement of the Kingdom
of Jesus Christ, and then at our own privileges; and in the body of it, the
two first Articles concerning Religion, and the following ones concerning our
Liberties. This was the method of the ancient Romans, as Dionysius
Halicarnasseus reports. There are three things, says he, that make a State
happy, (...), etc.
first, the care of religion; secondly, of temperance and justice in peace;
thirdly, of military discipline in war. The Romans were careful of religion in
the first place, they provided Temples and Altars for their Gods; and this they
conceived to be a main reason of the large extent of their Empire. Solomon was
longer in building his own house: but he builded Gods house first, as appears,
1 King. 7.1. 2 Chronicles. 8.1.

For the reasons briefly. The first is, because God is more worthy to be
regarded then our selves: therefore the love of God is called, Mat. 22.37, 38,
39.
The first and great commandment: and we are commanded to love God with all
our heart, soul, and mind, but our selves and our neighbors in a lower degree
of love like the former, but not equal to it. From God we have all that we have
here, or hope for hereafter; and the fountain must be preferred before the
streams, the sea before the rivers.

The second is, because that is our care properly, To honor God. It is Gods
care to provide for our souls and bodies: not but that we may use the means for
the good of either, looking for a blessing from God; but not in the first
place: our prime care must be for Gods Glory. When a master enters into
covenant with a servant, he looks that he should take care of his work, and
leave the care of provisions to his master. So does God look for the like at
our hands. First obedience to God, then faith in God. I have done with the
Doctrinall part, and come to the Practical.

Here is first of all, Humiliation fit for the day, to bewail among our other
sins, our sluggishnes, in not remembering those things which concern our own
safety. I am afraid, lest we be in Jerusalems case, that Luke 19.42.
in this our day we know not the things that be long to our peace. And may we
not then expect Jerusalems end? Our forgotten vows should fetch sighs from
our hearts, and tears from our eyes this day. Many of us (I doubt) may with
Pharaohs Butler, cry out, Genesis 41.9.
I do remember my faults this day. Weep, I beseech you, that reformation so
long since vowed, goes no faster on. It is a sign the body is much out of
order, when so strong a Purge as a National vow and covenant works no better;
and let them weep most who are greatest, and nearest to God, and so most
concerned in it. Lordly tears may become this day as well as common ones. We
are met for this end, let us not miss of our end; else all the labor of this
day will be lost. I doubt not but every one of us, even the greatest and the
best, may find somewhat in our selves, that may hinder our vowed reformation,
if we would look well into our own souls. The Lord show it us what ever it be,
and give us grace to repent of it.

Secondly, Meditation. Think often of your vow and covenant; for the reason why
men, especially good men, neglect it, is, because they think not often and
seriously of it. Our Savior Christ appointed the Bread and Wine in the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper, to be the signs and remembrances of his death
to us. A thing so beneficial to us one would think should need no remembrance,
but should always be fresh in our minds. So should our covenant, that has
proved, and is like to prove so beneficial to three Kingdoms; yet we had need
often to call it to mind. God by Moses often calls upon the Israelites inthe
wilderness, to remember Deuteronomy. 4.9.10, 20.
the things which they had seen, and not to forget the great things God had
done for them. Surely, we had need often to call upon our own souls, to think
of our vows made unto Almighty God; we would be loath that God should forget
his covenant to us, Psalm. 12.4.1, 2, 3.
Our enemies would then soon smallow us up. Why do we then forget our part of
the covenant?

Thirdly, Acknowledgement, to teach us to impute any continuance of our
troubles to our neglect of our covenant: very few have mended themselves, fewer
their families, and sewest of all have endeavored to amend the public,
according to the trust reposed in them. Somewhat of our selves is sought aftor
of most men, even in the very work of reformation. Our plow goes along with
Gods; we look for a share of prosit, or honor in the work, and do it not with
a single eye out of love and respect to God: We would join God and the world
together. And hence come many rubs and hindrances of the great work of
reformation. We should therefore this day not only bewail our sluggishnesse in
regard of the sinfulness of it, but also in respect of the sad effects of
troubles, fears and jealousies, that yet attend upon our nonperformance of
our vows. A disease can never be cured, till the corrupt humor which causes
it, be known, and purged away; nor our Church and State troubles removed, till
we have bewailed our remissness, and amended it, which is the next use in
order, and without which weeping will do no good at all.

Fourthly, here is a lesson of Incitement, 1 Samuel 15.14.
What meares then the lowing of the owen, and the bleating of the sheep? Are
nor many nowadays of Gallio's religion? Acts 18.14, 15, 16, 17.
If it were a matter of right or wrong to men, they would meddle in it; but if
it be a matter of religion, Gallio cared for none of those things. The Turks,
if a man ^asphe me Mahamet, put him to death without mercy; but if he blaspheme
God, they only scourge him with rods. And being demanded a reason, they answer,
That God can right himself, but Mabomet cannot. It may be many now are willing
enough to put off Gods cause to the day of judgment, so theirs may be righted
now. I am afraid that many may this day say with Naaman, In this thing the Lord
pardon me, that although I have not countenanced heresy, schism, or
profaneness in my own person, yet I have not been so careful as I might, to
pull it down by my authority in others. It is not good to be so busy for the
Lord of hosts, it is good sleeping in a whole skin. Which of us can say with
Elijah, 1 Kings 19.10.
I have been very zealous for the Lord of hosts; for the children of Israel
have forsaken thy covenant? Or with Jehu, 2 Kings 10.16.
Come with me, and see my zeal for the Lord? Jehu was an hypocrite, yet he 2
Kings 10.18, 30.
rooted Baal out of Israel, and obtained the Kingdom for his posterity to the
fourth generation. But if that were done, and here sies, schisms, sects, and
profaneness pulled down by public ordinances; have we set up a Church
government in the Kingdom nearest to Gods word, and the pattern of the best
reformed Churches? Let no man tell me that we covenanted only to pull down the
former government, but not to set up a new form in the room of it, and that the
honorable Houses must interpret the covenant, who imposed it, and not we that
took it. Be it so, yet are we confident, that the honorable Houses will never
give a sense of the covenant contrary to common sense, such as this is; we
covenant to bring three Kingdoms to the nearest conjunction and uniformity in a
form of Church Government, that is, we intend only to pull down Episcopacy, and
then let every Sect set up what government they please. Pulling down jointly,
will not bring us to one form of Church government, it leaves scope enough for
20 kinds of Church government, and 10000 errors to be taught contrary to Gods
word, to the pulling down of Gods Church. Will that interpretation give
satisfaction to the conscience of a moral man? If not, as I am confident it
will not, how should it then satisfy the conscience of a religious man, unless
it be biassed by self ends before? It is like the gloss on Gratian, Statnimus.
i. Abrogamm. Did. 4. c. Statuimus.
We enact, that is, we abrogate it, and forbid it; or that on the Code, Que
magis. i. Que mius. Gloss ad Cod. l. 3. de Iudiciis. Quoties.
How much more, that is, How much less. But be not deceived, God is not Gal.
6.7. Gr. (...). est autem (...), a subsannantium geflu tractumvocabulu^ quod
Latin naso adunco, five excusso suspendere, uti Flaccus, sermon. lib. 1. sat. 6.
and Persius sat. 1.
mocked. Give me leave to press you with a similitude or two, to persuade you
to more diligent and careful performance of your vow and covenant for the time
to come, that so ye may expect a greater blessing from God, and an end of our
present calamities. Quicunque commodatam pecuniam creditori reddiderit, sibi
reponit. Non difficile enim homo cum opus fuerit, quodlsbes impetrat si
foeneratori suo celeri sasatu factiono responait. Isle vero quem persidia
argust, semper creditoris sui ianna^ clausam ^nvenet, and quamv is frequenter
pulset and supplicet, ristas a^ vacuus cum increpatione recedis. Valerianu^.
Suppose some one of you had a rich and kind neighbor, of whom he might borrow
money whenever he needed; provided that he repaid it at his day; so might he
be bold to come again and borrow greater sums. But if he break his day, he may
come again and again, knock often at the door, and no man let him in; entreat,
and yet go away empty, sad, and with reproachful speeches. This is your case.
If ye perform your vows, ye may be bold to come to God as often as ye will
in the greatest troubles. But if ye neglect them, ye may Non Des usihus
necessarium est quod in tribulationibus promittis. Ob hoc a ^e tuum munus
quaeritur, ut sps^ fulgees tuo auro, ipso tuo niteas argente, ^^se tuis gemmis
orueris ipse tuo sirico vestiaris. Tuis donis tuam vuse Deus animam compo^^,
quam vi^^t ant superbia, au^ nequitia, and a veritiae, (...) luxuria vitio
depravatam. Valetianus.
ask, and be denied; seek, and not find; knock, and no man will open to you.
Had any of you a tenant whose lease were expired, his rent not paid, the house
run to ruin; if he should sue for a new lease, would ye not answer, Pay your
old rent first, and repair the house, then I will talk with you of a new lease?
Such an answer may ye look for from God, if ye keep not your covenant. What
are your vows to God, which ye make in your afflictions? Has God any need of
them? Gets he any good by them? Thy gift is required of thee, that thou may
shine in thy gold, that thou may be bright in thy silver, that thou may be
adorned with thy own jewels, that thou may be clothed in thine own filk. God
would have thy soul set in order with thy gifts. He knows it is corrupted with
pride, or wickedness, or covetousness, or luxury. Yet though our discharge of
our vows give us free access to God in all our wants, and bring no good to
God, but all good to us, when the reckoning is cast up, Aestimes miseros
oblivienis bibisse pocula, magis quam salutis. Valor.
we shall find that wretched men delivered by God, have not with the Psalmist
Psalm. 116.13.
taken up the cup of salvation, but of oblivion. God give us grace to perform
our vows better, and to remember that of the Rabbis, (...) Ber. Rab. Sect. 81.
In time of trouble, a vow; in time of respiration, haste; and be as forward to
pay in prosperity, as to vow in adversity.

Fifthly, Gratulation. Let us praise God that will not let us perish by
neglecting to honor him by performance of our vows, and so be neglected of him
for ever. He knows our forgetfulness and unthank fullness would undo us, and
he puts us in mind of our vows to preserve us: yea, let us praise God, that by
his ministers this day he admonishes us of them, that we may perform them, and
prevent further jarres and troubles.

Sixthly, Reformation. Let me leave the people and speak to you, honorable
Lords, who have called me to speak to you this day; I beseech you give me leave
to speak home. I have one petition to put up to your Lordships; if you deny it
me, I shall be never the worse; if ye grant it me, you shall be much the
better. In brief, it is this, that ye would begin with a particular and
personal, and end with a general and public reformation. Be godly for time
to come in earnest, and be not content with shows of godliness, no more then
ye are with the shows of honor. Imitate Jacob here, being called to reform, he
not only mends his fault whereof he was admonished, but also reforms his
family, makes them put away their Idols, call upon them to cleanse themselves,
and change their garments, which were signs of for saking sin, and putting on
righteousness. An instrument can never make good music to others, til it be put
in tune it self. I never look to see any man a through-reformet, that is not a
godly man. A wicked man will ever be afraid of going too far in the work of
reformation, lest he lash himself or his. But a godly man had rather purge away
his own sins, then other men's. Like a charitable Physician, that is willing to
heal his poor neighbors, but will first heal himself and his family.
Charity, they say, begins at home. How can we think your Lordships have charity
to healother men's souls, if ye have none to your selves nor yours? Honor your
places more then your places can honor you. Remember that Talmedieal saying,
(...) Shab. fol. 145.2,
In my own City my name, in another my garment shall eredit me. Count piety
your greatest ornament, it is a Mott^ may well become the S^^tcheon of the
greatest noble man in the Kingdom, Pie^as veranobilitas. God linesse makes men
likest to God, and bring^ them nearest to him. And what greater preferment can
this world afford, or that which is to come? Your Lordships are stars of the
first magnitude in the heaven of this State. O shine brightest in the beams of
piety. You owe most to God, and must do most for God. God has betrusted you
with the greatest talents, and Luke 12.48.
expects the greatest account from you. Grandis honos, sed grave pondus istius
est honoris, Greg in Evang. Hom. 26.
Honos and Onus go together. The fairest Steed must have his Saddle. Every
honor must bear its burden. That measure of piety will not serve a noble man,
that will surve a meaner person; unless that measure of honor will serve you.
You look for much respect from men of a lower spheare^ Gods looks for more from
you, because there is a larger distance between the Creator and the highest
creature, then can be between the highest and lowest of all the creature. Let
not the Comm^n^ out go you in piety, lest they prove more honorable then you
in the end. God says, Psalm. 82.6.
I bu^o said ye are Gods, in regard of your power, give us cause to say so too
in regard of your ho inesse. I beseec^ you take away from us all occasions of
Court-idolatry. Teach us in you to honor men more for their worth then for
their grea nesse. We know not how Psalm. 15.4.
cordially to honor a proud Haman, a loose Amnon, a covetous Nabal. But we ran
lay our heads down at the feet of religious Lords to do them good. Account of
honor without piety, as the Jews do of a body without wisdom. They say it
is (...)
like a house without a foundation. Carry your selves so, that Lords on earth
may be Saints in heaven. That honor will last when your Lordships are gone,
and their Royalties that made you Lords. From this personal reformation
proceed with comfort and courage to the public. We are met now to humble our
souls before the supreme Lord of heaven and earth, to pray to him to cease all
our troubles, and to take away the great jealousies arising between the two
Kingdoms, that the plots of those that would set us together by the ears, and
make our wars worse then ever yet they were, may be confounded utterly. God
will answer, Go to Bethel, and perform your vow, build an Altar to me. Why
suffer you some to rob my dearest Son, and your only Savior of his Deity, and
go unpunished? Why suffer ye others in print to rob me of so many thousand
years of praise, I should have in heaven by laying Heb. 12.23.
the spirits of just men made perfect asleep with their bodies till the day of
judgment? Why suffer ye others co countenance all manner of uncleanness and
pollutions of marriage by maintaining a lawfulness of putting away men's wives,
and taking others for causes which I never allowed? Why suffer ye books to be
printed under color of maintaining liberty of conscience for the toleration of
all forts of heresies and blasphemous religions, that I may in my own land be
blasphemed to my face by public authority? Why have I advanced you more then
others, but that ye should be more jealous of my honor then they? Would any of
you keep a Steward that should deal faithfully with your servants, give them
their meat in due season, and not suffer them to wrong one another: but would
let them dishonor you to your faces, rail upon you, and embezle your goods?
Consider of these things, and the Lord make you public Reformers here, and
glorious Mat. 22.30.
like the Angels in Heaven. Amen.

FINIS.

