THE TRUE NARRATIVE OF THE PROCEEDINGS AT THE SESSIONS HOUSE IN The Old Bailey,
Which began on Wednesday the 6. of this Instant December, and ended the 8.
following.
Giving an Account of most of the Remarkable Trials there, viz. For Murders,
Fellonies, Burglaries, etc. With a particular Relation of their Names, and the
Places where the several Facts were Committed, with the Number of those
Condemned to Dye, Burnt in the Hand, and to be Whipped.
December. 6. 1682.
THis day the Sessions of Oyer and Terminer. began for the City of London and
County of Middlesex, and Jail-delivery of N^wgate, where after Proclamation
made, the Jurys were called over, and 24 Swom, to Try the Issues between the
King and the Prittoner, viz. Twelve for London and Twelve for Middlesex, after
which, the Court proceeded to Trials as follows.

William T^^^per and Edward Dicks, were found Guilty of breaking open the House
of R^bert Budington, Merchant, and taking from thence a Bat of Si^k to the
Value of 200 pounds.

Thomas Friend, brought from the Marshelsea in Southwark, was Convicted of
Stealing a Silver Tankard.

John Price was Cast for a Silver Tankard which he Stole from Thomas Price, of
six pound Value, and another from Captain Love, of the Value of five pound.

Samuel Dossey was Indicted for Felloniously Stealing out of his Masters Trunck
a considerable Sum in Gold and Silver, with Gold-Rings, etc. of which he was
Convicted.

George Robinson was Convicted of four Trespasses, for Counterfciting four
several Bills in October last, directed to Mr. Minga, to which he Counterfeited
the Hands of Mr. Marmion, Mr. Beaumont, Mr. Ditton, and Mr. Wyat; the first for
the Sum of 100 l. the second for 70 l. the third for 75 l. and the last for 50
l.

John Bates was by his own Confession Convicted of Stealing a Silver Tankard
from Thomas Mariot, John Cotton being in Company with the said Bates when he
Stole the Tankard, pleaded Ignorance, stood his Trial, and was acquitted.

Ten Apprentices were Indicted-for a Riot committed in the City of London, viz.
Thomas Page, George Dicks, John Brown, Francis Pierce, Gamaliel Webb, Thomas
Fisher, Thomas Langham, Joseph Tenant, Thomas Turner, George Hickman, whereof
the three last were acquitted, Thomas Langham was Indicted for an Assault also
upon the Body of William Spencer, as the said William Spencer was peaceably
passing the Street, near St. Mary Woolchurch, but Evidence being given in Court
that the said Lungham was not with the Rabble, but within Doors, the Jury
brought in their Verdict that he was acquitted of the Riot, but not of the
Assault.

Sarah Brown, alias Bowen was Convicted of Stealing a Silver Tankard from Mr.
William Norris, to the Value of 8 l.

James Lashly Esquire, being brought the 6th. Instant from the Gate House at
Westminster, was found Guilty of Murdering Mr. Glover in Covent Garden.

These Highway-Men following were brought the 2d. Instant by Habeas-Corpus from
Salisbury, viz. Richard Brown, Thomas Harris, alias Paggit, John Foster, alias
Page, alias King, Henry Layfield, and John Davis, were found Guilty of Robbing
Andrew Meal and Samuel Doughty of a Horse and several Goods, and upon another
Indictment Convicted of Robbing Mr. Tibber of a Sorrel Horse in Marlborough
Thicket.

These following Foot Padds John Hutchings, Joseph Redwell, alias Kedwell,
Henry Passet, Richard Kent, Thomas Williams, were all brought from Chelmsford
Goal in Essex, the 4th Instant and Convict for Robbing William Johnson and his
Wife of a Steel-Box a Hankerchief and five pound in Money, between Mile end and
Bow, as they were going to Rumford.

Abraham Casteel. Richard Kent, Robert Mason and Thomas Williams, were Convict
of Breaking the House of Elizabeth Morten Widow at Newington Green, upon the
10th of October last, and Stealing several Goods of a considerable Value.

Robert Mason was found Guilty of three Fellonys more, viz. for Robbing John
Ady, Daniel Sitherdel, and Robert Skempton.

Derothy Cotterel, was found Guilty of Stealing a Silver Cup, and an Aggat
hafted Knife value 8 shillings from John Hale the 17th of September last.

Arthur Pembrook was found Guilty of Stealing 18 Else of Holland from Vincent
Yate, Value about 20 s.

Edward Horner was found Guilty of Stealing 14 yards of Fustion, value 14
shillings from John Clayton the 5th of November last.

John Price and Dunny Will, were both Apprehended in Court one in Hickes-Hall,
the other in the Old Bailey, for a Robbery and Murder committed about two years
since in Kent.

Amos Day was Convict of Stealing Goods from Sir Thomas Bide, upon the 2d. of
June 82. to the Value of 40 s.

John Barker a Broker was Cast for Stealing a Coach-Seat from Elias Gliss, to
the Value of 10 d.

William Hammond was Convict for Stealing a Gown, Stockings, and other Goods
valued 10 d.

George Everet was found Guilty of Stealing 14 Sheep from William Pope.

Alexander Price was Convict of Stealing Beeswax, valued 10 d.

Edward Pemberton for Stealing a Coquo Cup from Lyonel Jones, valued 10 d.

Nathaniel Pardue, for Robbing of George Hall on the Highway the 4th. of
September 82. of Money and goods was found Guilty.

John Macklin, for Breaking the House of Thomas Rawbone, and stealing from
thence Goods to a considerable value, was found Guilty of Felony.

James Farrower, for stealing Ten Gold-Rings, Gold and other things to the
value of Twenty pound, was found Guilty.

Fifteen received sentence of Death, viz. Sarah Brown, Alias Bowen. James
Lashly Esquire Richard Brown. Thomas Harris. John Foster. Henry Layfield, John
Davis. John Hutchins. Joseph Redwell, Alias Kedwell. Henry Pafet. Richard Kent.
Thomas Williams. Abraham Casteel. Robert Mason. Nathaniel Pardue.


These Following, being Convict of several Fellonys received the Benefit of the
Clergy, viz. Thomas Faulconer. Arthur Pembrook Edward Homes. John Price. Edward
Dickins. John Prince. Samuel Dawley. George Everet. John Marklain. James
Farrower. William Trumper. Thomas Friend. John Bates.


These Seven to be Whipped, viz. William Morris. John Barker, Hannab Price.
Edward Pemberton. Amos Day. William Hummon. Alexander Price.


These Following were Fined. George Robinson Fined Forty Pound, and to stand in
the Pillory two hours in Fleet Street, on Tuesday next, at the Royal Exchange,
on Thursday, and in Cheap Side on Saturday, John Brown. George Dix. Gamaliel
Wells. Thomas Fisher. Francis Pierce. Thomas Page.
Were Fined each twenty Marks and to stand on the Pillary,

LONDON, Printed for Langley Curtis.


