A true Relation of all the remarkable Passages, and Illegal Proceedings of
some Sathannicall or Doeg- like Accusers of their Brethren, AGAINT WILLIAM
LARNER, A Freeman of England,

AND ONE OF THE MERCHANT-TAILERS COMpany of London, for selling Eight Printed
Sheets of Paper (all of one matter,) Entitled, LONDONS last WARNING; as also
against John Larner, and Jane Hales his Servants.

He first, (acording to his Liberty) refusing to be Examined upon
Interrogatories, whereby to accuse himself or others; And then they, (according
to their refusing to take an Oath, whereby to entrap themselves, or betray
their Master. He being carried first before the Lord Major of London, who
committed him is the Counter Prison, Next before the Committee of Examinations,
who Committed him Close-Prisoner to Maiden-Lane, (where now he has the liberty
of the Prison,) and at last, Turned over to the House of Lords: From whom he
appealed to the House of Commons, to be tried by his Equals (or
Fellow-Commoners,) according to Law and Justice, who turned him back again to
the Lords; and by them were his servants committed to the Common Jayle of the
Fleet, where they yet lie, being denied of the Prison Liberty, which
malefactors do enjoy.

All which Passages, coming to the hands of some of his, and the Commonwealths
friends, are Published by them to the view of the World, chiefly for the
serious Observation of all the Freeman of England, who cannot long enjoy their
Fredoms, Lives nor Estates, if the Rule of law be not truly followed, nor
Justice duly Administered.

Eccles. 5.6. and 16.7. If in a Country, thou see the oppression of the
poor, and the defrauding of judgment and Justice; be not astonished at the
matter, for he that is higher then the highest will regard it, and there be
higher then they?

And moreover, I have seen the place of Judgment, where was wickedness, and
the place of Justice, where was iniquity; I thought in mine heart, God will
judge the Just and the unjust, for time is for every purpose, and for every
work.

A True Relation of the Remarkable Passages, and illegal Proceedings against
WILL. LARNER, and his Servants.
THere being a Book (Entitled, The last worning to London,) sold in many
places and shops in the said City, some of them being brought to the shop of
one William Larner, in Bishops-gate-street, who after the manner of the Trade
of Booksellers, (which is to buy Books, of all sorts, brought to their shops,
not examining the Persons that bring them, either names, or Places of abode,)
bought 25. of the said books, not knowing what they were for matter, or
examining the Person, what he was that brought them, or where was his abode,
not suspecting any danger in them, either to himself, or others, nor knowing
any thing of them, before they were brought to his shop.

But this being done, presently after (22. March, 1645.) there came two
Stationers, Miller and Hunscott, into his House, not sbewing any Warrant, yet
notwithstanding searched, and found 14. sheets thereof lying openly amongst the
rest of his Books, there being no Prohibition against them,) for sale; and
Eight sheets more, which they had taken from another, (one Woodnet, a
Stationer,) who declared, that he bought them of the said William Larner:
Whereupon the said Hunscott, and Miller, presently commanded a Constable to
assist them, as though they had taken a Thief or a Murderer.

So the said William Larner, being carried before Thomas Adams, Lord Major of
London, in Guild Hall, (many other Aldermen being present,) the Lord Major
spoke unto Hunscott, saying.

L. Major. Did you Mr. Hunscott take these Books in this man's house?


Hunscott. Yes. [laying several other things to his charge, which he was not
able to prove, after his old accustomed manner, in the days of Will. of
Canterbury.]


L. Major. How many of these Books did you buy?


Larner. Five and Twenty.


L. Major. Of whom did you buy them?


Larner. Of one that brought them to my shop.


L. Major. Do you know the Party, or where he dwells?


Larner. I desire the Liberty of a Freeman of England, not to Answer to any
Interrogatories, whereby to accuse myself, or others.


L. Major. Sir, I charge you, (as I am a Christian Magistrate,) Answer me to
what I shall ask you: Did you bye no more then 25. of these papers?


Larner. I say again, I desire the Liberty of a Freeman, which is, Not to
Answer to Interrogatories. And if my Accusers can prove any more, I am here
ready to answer.


Then Mr. Larner was caused to withdraw, and being called again, was committed
to the Poultry Counter, by command of the Lord Major, and after the space of
Three hours, there came this following warrant from the Committee of
Examinations to shut him up close Prisoner, and to suffer none to speak with
him, but in presence of a Keeper. viz.

21. Martii. 1645.
AT the Committee of the House of Commons for Examinations: It is this day
Ordered, that William Larner, Prisoner in the Counter in the Poultry, be kept a
Close Prisonor, and none to be permitted to speak with him, but in the presence
of his Keeper, till Monday next, and then to be first brought to this Committee.

Laurence Whitaker.

Then upon Monday, the 24. of March, the Under- Marshall of London, and other
Officers, came to fetch the Prisoner to the Committee, but the Prison-keeper
demanded two Shillings, for two nights Lodging, which being refused to be paid,
he was commanded to be locked up again by the said Marshall, so he went away,
and awhile after, sent two of his men to fetch the Prisoner, but first he must
pay a shilling, though it was all he had about him; which so prolonged the
time, that the Committee was risen before the Prisoner could be brought
thither: So he being brought back by the Marshall, he committed him to his own
Prison in Maiden-lane, where he was kept four days without warrant, where of
two of them, to wit, the 26. and 27. of March, he was kept Close Prisoner, that
none might speak with him, at the command only of Hunscott, and one Whitaker a
Stationer, which command was given in his own hearing, to Mr. Hodgkins, under
Keeper of Maiden-lane Prison: Whereas the Committee had given no such Order,
but only commanded the Marshall to take care of him, which was on Tuesday,
March, 25. when he was examined, the particular Passages whereof were as
follows.

The Committee, having much business, it was divided into two parts, the one
purposely to try the said William Larners Case: So the Stationers and he being
called in, he was commanded out again for the space of an hour, but being
called in again, he thus addressed himself unto the Committee.

Lar. May it please this Honorable Committee: I conceive it but equity, seeing
I was caused to withdraw, whilst I was accused, that my Accusers withdraw now
also, whilst I have liberty to speak; which being done; he desired these three
things.

I. That the Committee would deal favorably with him, in regard of his
unacqaintednesse with the manner of their Proceedings: And in case any thing
through ignorance might escape, tending to the Infringing of his own, or the
Subjects Liberty, be might have leave to recall it.

II. That as he was a Commoner, or Freeman of England, be desired the Liberty
of a Freeman, not to answer to Interrogatories, whereby to insuare himself or
others.

III. That if it might please the Honorable Parliament, to grant him the
Liberty of the Common Law, he would not doubt in a short time, to prove some
of his Accusers Thieves and Robbers, not only in the time of the Bishops, but
in time of this present Parliament.


Commit. Whereat one of the Committee said, Have you any thing more to say?


Larner. Not till I hear of what I am accused.


Then the Accusers were called in, and one of the Committee taking up the Book,
entitled Londons last warning, said. Commit. Do you know this Book?


Lar. I have seen it.


Commit. How many did you sell of them?


Lar. Eight sheets, and 14. they took in my House.


Commit. How many did you buy?


Lar. Twenty five.


Commit. What became of the other three?


Lar. I know not.


Commit. Of whom did you buy them?


Lar. I desire the Liberty of a Freeman, not to incrap my self, or others.


Then they writ, He denies to Answer to Interrogatories.

So they began again, and went over all as before, and when it come to the
Question; Who did you buy them of?

One of the Committee standing up, said. Mr. Larner, take heed, and speak
truth, and spoke as if you had taken an Oath, though we tender none to you, if
you look at us, as Magistrates. And now Mr. Larner, speak as if you were a
Preaching. Another, upon hearing of his Name, said; Larner! I promise you, he
has learned his Lesson very well.


Then Hunscott charged several things upon him: but being put to prove them,
he could not, nor any thing else, which was a transgression of any Law. This
being the second time of his being at Westminster, but the first and last of
his being heard, though he was commanded; and waited six several times at that
High-Committee Door.

Thus Courteous Reader, this our Worthy Friend, and Fellow-Commoner of England,
being turned over to the House of Peers, I shall first present thee with the
Copy of Three Petitions, one from his Wife to the House of Commons, and two
from himself, to the house of Lords, with two Letters from him to
Parliament Men; before I present thee with the particular Passages concerning
this business in the House of Peers; but first I shall insert the Copy of the
Two Warrants for his, and his two servants Commitments; his Commitment being
four days after he was Prisoner in Maiden-lane. (two days whereof, he was
kept Close-Prisoner by the Stationers sole command,) as appears by the date of
this following Warrant.

28. Martij. 1646.
At the Committee of the House of Commons, for Examinations.
IT is this day Ordered, that William Larner be continued in the Custody of the
Marshall of London, in the New-Prison in Mayden-land, as he was before, till
further Order from the House of Commons, or this Committee.

To the Marshall of the City of London, Keeper of the New-Prison.
Die Jovis. 16. April. 1646.
IT is this Day Ordered by the Lords Assembled in Parliament, that John Larner,
and Jane Hale, shall stand committed to the Prison of the Fleet, for refusing
to take Oath to testify their Knowledge, as witnesses in a cause depending in
this House, until the pleasure of this House be further signified; and this to
be a sufficient warrant in that behalf.

Jo. Brown Cler. Parliament.

To the Gentleman Usher, attending this House, to be delivered to the Warden
of the Fleet, or his deputy.
To the Right Honorable, the Knights, Citizens, and Purgesses in PARLIAMENT
Assembled. The humble Petition of Ellen Larner, wife of William Larner.
Shows,
THat Your Petititioners Husband, to the ulmost of his Power has endeavored
to advance the service of the Parliament, having therein lost two Servants, and
been himself Sutler, to the Regiment of the Right Honorable, the Lord Roberts,
in which Regiment is due to your Petitioner, the Sum of 46. Pounds, 6.
Shillings, 6. Pence, as by evident proof be is able to make appear; And during
his absence since his return home, the Wardens and Beadle of the Company of
Stationers, did sundry times search, ransack and break open your Petitioners
Trunks, and injuriously carry away her goods, contrary to Law, and any Warrant
which they could produce; And since his return home, he has been by the
malice and instigation of the said Wardens and Beadle committed to close
Prison, and is yet in custody, and your Petitioner, being with child, seeing
the violent apprehension of her husband, fell into a dangerous sinknesse, to
her great charge and damage, by all which agreevances, Your Petitioners estate
is totally consumed, and her Husband greatly indebted, and is utterly unable to
defray the charge of imprisonment, supply the extreme wants of his Family,
(which is 6. Persons,) or relieve his aged Father and Mother, who are past
labor, and were lately Plundered in Gloster-shire, or satisfy his Creditors.

Wherefore Your Petitioner most humbly prays this Honorable Assembly, to be
pleased to Order, that her Husband may be suffered under sufficient Bail, to
follow his Calling, thereby to prevent the apparent ruin of himself, and his
whole Family; And he will be ready to Answer to any thing wherewith he shall
be justly charged, when he shall be commanded before this Honorable Assembly.

And your Petitioner shall ever pray, etc.

Which Petition the Petitioner humbly offered, first to Sir Isaac Pennington, a
Commissioner for the City of London, to the Parliament, and next to Sir Matthew
Baynton, to be presented to the House of Commons, but they absolutely refused
to meddle with it at all.

To the Right honorable, the House of PEERS. The humble Petition of William
Larner.
Shows,
THAT Your Petitioner has been in Actual Service for the Parliament, and
shall be ever ready to approve himself in all his Actions, to be such, as he
doubts not but to clear himself of the Accusations laid to his Charge, if he
may have the benefit of the Law, which is his Birthright.

That your Petitioner is not bound by Law to Answer Interrogatories against
himself nor others, till he has the same to consider of, and then your
Petitioner is at liberty to put in his Answer in writing: neither can Your
Petitioner by law be proceeded against, being a Free Commoner, but by the Try
all of his fellow Commons, in Actions criminal, according to Magna Charta.

Therefore Your Petitioner humbly prays, that he may have the benfit of the
law; and that he may not be compelled to answer to Interrogatories, till a
legal Charge be given against him at law, and then according to law, he may be
permitted to make a legal Defense.

And Your Petitioner shall ever Paray, etc. WILLIAM LARNER.

But the Petitioner not hearing of any Issue concerning his enlargement,
neither any kind of Answer of one or other, after many days patience and
attendance, did send this second Petition.

To the Right Honorable, the House of LORDS, Assembled in PARLIAMENT. The
humble Petition of William Larner, Citizen and Stationer in London, now
Prisoner in Maiden-Lane.
Humbly Shows,
THat Your Petitioner, out of his good affection to the State, left his Wife,
Family and Calling, and voluntarily went in the service of the Parliament
against the common Enemy, where he continued a long time, until he was visited
with sickness, and thereby necessitated to come home, and being much
impoverished and wasted in his estate, having lost two of his Servants likewise
in this war, and having received little or no pay; there being in arrear, and
due unto him 461. 68. 6d. upon account by the Parliament.

That Your Petitioner, for the maintenance of his Family, and charge, following
his former calling of Bookselling; One Hunscott, a Beagle of the Stationers,
with his Partners, under color of searching for Scandalous books, did enter
seven several times into your Petitioners house, and both break in pieces, and
forcibly carried away much of Your Petitioners goods, having never hitherto
made any restitution or satisfaction therefore.

That the said Hunscott, in further prosecution of his malice, has of late
again broken in into, and searched your Petitioners House, apprehended and
carried him to the Poultry Counter, causing him to be kept close Prisoner
several days, not suffering any of his friends to come at him; and
afterward, from thence to Mayden-lane Prison, where he has continued 22.
days: And for his further vexation and charges, has been carried Eleven times
to Westminster, yet no breach of any law ever proved against him.

That Your Petitioners Wife was so frighted by the said Hunscott, and his
Confederates, that she lay deadly sick, like a Woman in travail, most of the
time of his imprisonment; And by reason that your Petitioner is taken from his
Calling, both he, and she, with their Family, are ready to perish, except
some speedy course be taken for his Deliverance, that he may use lawful
means for their subsistence.

Your Petitioners humble suite is therefore, That Your Lordships will be
pleased to take his former Petition into your serious consideratin, and in your
noble disposition, no longer to expose your Petitioner, his wife, and family to
ruin, which they cannot avoid, if your Petitioner may not have his liberty,
and be permitted to follow his Calling, for the maintenance of himself, wife
and family; and the rather for that Your Petitioner has not transgressed any
known Law of this Kingdom, but only have done that which others of this
trade daily use to do, even to buy and sell books of all sorts, which are not
prohibited, neither can his Adversaries, nor any others, prove that he, or any
for him, have bought or sold any of those Books, for which he is now
questioned, since they were called in, and prohibited.

And Your Petitioner shall pray, etc. WILLIAM LARNER.

The Copy of a Letter from William Larner, to Sir Henry Hayman, a Member of the
House of COMMONS, as follows.
Worthy SIR,
AFter my humble service presented, these are to certify Your Worship,
concerning the condition of your poor supplicant, being imprisoned for selling
Eight sheets of printed Paper, entitled the Last Warning to London; twice have
I been kept close Prisoner, that none might speak with me; seven times brought
from the New-Prison, to attend the Committee of Examinations, and but once
examined, and have not the least breach of any known Law found against me;
Also my wife being much frighted at their rigerous and harsh courses, has for
these 12, days been very And during, that sickness she miscarried.
sick, and likely thereupon to have a miscarriage; having no guide for my
Family, they depending on the Labor of my hands for their bread, having been
formerly in the Parliaments Service, in which also I lost two servants, and my
Father and Mother having been lately plundered by the Cavaliers, being left
very poor, and having much of their relief from me, out of my labor, there
being due to me for my service, 46l. 6s. 6d. Moreover my Accusers, have since
this day Twelve-moneth searched my house, broken in pieces, and unjustly
carried away much of my goods, under pretense of Authority from the PARLIAMENT,
fix several times. And at this present, 3. or 4. others being in question for
the same things, yet they are at liberty, and I in prison, to my utter ruin
and undoing, which I desire your Worship, to take into your consideration: And
as Job says, to open your mouth for the dumb, and as in duty, I shall ever
remain.

New-prison in Mayden-lane. London, the last of March. 1646. Your humble
servant to command, WILLIAM LARNER.


[This Letter was delivered, but no Answer returned.]

The Copy of a Letter from William Larner, to Sir Henry Vein the Younger, a
Member of the House of Commons, as follows.
Right Worshipful,
THough unknown to You by face; yet as a Commoner of England, I am bold to
present unto you my present Suffering condition, and how illegally and
Injuricusly I have been dealt withal, and proceeded against, by my accusers,
and Persecutors, You that are entrusted for the Commons of England, and have
sworn and engaged your selves to defend their just Liberties and Freedoms, for
which they have so freely and cheerful undergone all hazards, should (now,
after the Common Enemy is almost brought under,) suffer us daily to be cast
into Prison, and robbod by these wicked Proomoters, and Informers, Hanscott,
and his Fellows, who ever made it their trade, as well under, and by the
Bishops, before this Parliament, as now under and by color of Authority, from
the Committee of Examinations, to rob and spoil honest men's houses, under the
name of Searchers, is strange to me; yet could I never hear of any, whom they
thus searched for, Imprisoned, and broken their houses, were ever convicted, or
proceeded against in any legal way; I was carried before the Lord Major of
London, who would have examined me against my self, contrary to Law, and so
committed: after was I carried before the Committee of Examinations, who would
have had me to answer Intergatcries against my self, just High-Commission-like,
to the end, when they have not wherewith to charge me, to get something from my
self, to give color to their doings; seven several times they have had me at
Westminster, and now they labor to get me turned over unto the House of
Peers, thinking to effect and compass their mischievous ends upon me there,
which they cannot do well elsewhere. In all crimminall Causes; you know,
Commons are to be tried by Commons, as Peers by Peers; so that if any should
attempt to bring a Peer to trial by Commons, the Peers would not give way unto
it; And I hope, the representative body of the Commons of this Kingdom, will
never give the Commons right and Birthright, into the hands of the Peers; but
as you are tender of your own Privileges, so give us leave to stand for our
Liberties, and let it be your care, to see the same preserved; I have been in
the space of 12 days, committed to two several Prisons, kept Close Prisoner,
and for certain days, none permitted to spoke to me, or come at me, and
worser used, then they do Thieves, Murderers, or Traitors, and yet my charge
no other then for felling Eight Printed sheets of Paper, Entitled, The last
Warning to London, which I bought in my shop; as the manner of our trade is, to
buy Books of all sorts; This bearer can inform you of the truth of my bad
usage, how my wife has all this while been sick, in pangs like a travailing
woman, being frighted with Hunscott, and those that have seven several times
searched my House, who took away from me much of my goods; Sir, I have heard a
good report of you, and of your readiness in furthering honest men's causes; I
desire nothing from you, but the benefit of the good Laws made against
Oppression, and Oppressors, that you will not suffer me to be ruined by these
Old Informers, and Quandam servants to the late Bishop of Canterbury, and if by
your mediation to the House of Commons, I may obtain so much favor, as to
have Common Justice, which is every Free man's Birthright, to make my legal
Defense; and liberty given, I doubt not, but to clear my self, and prove, that
some of those my Accusers, not only to be Thieves and Robbers of other men,
but such as are, and have been unworthy Promoters and Informers under the
Bishops, by which trade, they live and subsist, and if by legal conviction, I
be found guilty, I shall not refuse to submit unto such exemplary punishment,
as by the law may be inflicted upon me, but in case I suffer unjustly, through
your neglect, and you shall refuse to give me your Assistance, for the freeing
me from the malice of these base Informers: If I cannot, yet some of my friends
will make it known to the World, where the fault is, and how Justice is denied
us; besides, how I was actually a long time in the Parliaments Service,
adventuring my self for them in this War, and how 461. 6s. 6d. is due to me,
as the Right Honorable the Lord Roberts, and many of his Officers of his
Regiment can inform you, and till you pay the Principal, whether these cruel
doings, and Imprisonment, must serve for Interrest, I refer it to your own
self to consoder of, and how much, (if you suffer these things,) it will
dishonor you, besides alienate the affections of the People from you; which
that it may not be, is the desire of him, who is

From the Goal of New-prison in Mayden-lane London, the 3. of April. 1646.
Yours to do you any service, as a Free Man, WILLIAM LARNER.


[This Letter was also delivered, but no Answer returned.]

Now to proceed to the business before the Lords. The 8. Time of his being
hurried to Westminster (which was the second day of his going to the house of
Lords, Ap. 3. 1646.) he being brought thither with two others, to wit, Mr.
Giles Calvert, and Mr. Overtons man, Henry Crispe, and standing at the Bar,
the Earl of Manchester says.

Manchest. Which is Larner?


Larner. I am the man.


[Manchester taking up the book in his hand, said,] Manch. Mr. Larner; here is
a Book, entitled Londons last Warning, which you are looked upon to he both
Author, Printer and Publisher. [Laying that down, he took up a Paper in
writing, saying,] You are to answer to whatsoever this Court shall demand of
you.


Lar. I desire this Honorable House to admit of one word; that is, Whether I
be brought hither to be tried by Rule of law, or not?


Manchest. We are not to Answer to your requests; but you are to answer to all
this House shall demand of you: [looking in the paper in his hand, said,] Will
you answer or not?


Lar. I* humbly conceive, it is provided in the Law, that no Answer is to be
made otherwise, but by way of Bill, or Answer in writing: And I humbly conceive
further, that every Commoner in England in criminal Cases, is to be tried by
the House of Commons, as Magna Charta says; and therefore I shall humbly
beseech, this Honorable Court, wholly to leave this Case unto them, they having
begun the trial thereof already.

Whereat they were caused to withdraw, but presently after, both the Accusers,
and accused, were all called in face to face; Miller, one of his Accusers, thus
delared against him.


Miller. I went, by the Lord Majors command, to see if I could find out the
Author, Printer, or Publisher, and coming to Cornhill, at a shop, found 8. or
10. sheets thereof; where he was informed, that Larner was the seller of them;
so he and his fellows, (naming Hunscott,) going thither, found them lying in
Larners Window before him, as he stood at work: to which Hunscott agreed, and
added, that it was proved at the Committee for Examinations, by the
Letter-founder, that Larner was he that bought the Letter which printed the
Book. How true this is, all honest people may judge from the Founders own
words, given in upon Oath: which shall be inserted in their proper place: But
the Founder, and the other Bookseller in Cornhill, being not there, they
proceeded no further that day.

He being commanded the second time before the Lords, his Accusers, with their
Witnesses, were called also in; the Witnesses which they presented, were 3.
Viz. Mr. Nicholls, a Letter Fownder, Woodnet a Bookseller, and Conly a
Pursevant; These three were all sworn to speak the truth, and nothing but the
truth; what they knew in this business concerning Mr. Larner. Then VVoodnett
was first asked about the Books, how many he bought? Who answered; shall it
please you my Lords, I bought of Mr. Larner 8. or 10. Sheets; I know not
whether, he is here that sold them, and they that took them, who can tell as
well as I.

Then Mr. Nicholl's was asked, Whether Larner had any hand in buying the Letter
of him; or who did buy it? he Answered.
Mr. Nicholls. No; he never bought, nor fetched any Letter from me; indeed
Larner was proffered for Surety, but I returned him, because of his Poverty.


Lords. Who then was bound?


Nicholls. One Smith.


Lords. From whom did you receive the money?


Nichol. Of the said Smith. [Then Smith was called in, and sworn; which done;
it was demanded of him, Of whom he received the money? Who answered, Of Mr.
Larner.]


Then was demanded of Conly, what he could say to the business?

Conly. Shall it please you my Lords, I am a Messenger to the Committee of of
Examinations, who sent me with Mr. Hunscott, to search Smiths house, and when
we brought him along, we asked him, of whom he received the money, and he
said, of Larner, and Mr. Hunscott bade me bear witness.


Lords. And is this all you can say?


Conly. Yes. [so they were all commanded to withdraw, and after a little space,
Mr. Larner was called in alone.]


Manchest. Mr. Larner, you see what course we have taken, and you hear what is
laid to your charge, and proved by Witnesses under Oath: Now it remains, that
you should speak to clear your self.


Larner. My Lords, shall it please your Honors, as I humbly conceive; if it be
a Transgression of a law, for being bound, and for paying money for a
Commodity, then he that sold the Commodity, has also transgressed a Law.


Manchest. Have you any thing else to say?


Lar. My Lords, as for the Books, I have done nothing, but what is the manner
and custom of all our Trade, to buy all manner of Books, being carried about
to be sold at shops by Men, Women and Children, and those being brought to my
house; I did not much mind them, being busy about my other employment, to wit,
binding of Books, and to this day and hour, I do seriously declare to you, I
do not know any one sentence in it, except the Title, for I never read six
lines of it.


Manchest. Of whom did you buy them?


Lar. May it please your Lordships, (as I said before, so I desire again) that
you may spare me in that thing; for under favor, I conceive, that a man is not
bound by any law or Reason, To accuse himself or others,

[and this was put to him 3. times, but their Lordships must rest satisfied,
for the man is more faithfully resolved, and disposed for the preservation and
vindication of the just laws and liberties of this Nation, then any wise to
destory or annull them.]


Lords. What servants have you?


Lar. I have a Brother lives with me, which has been 3. years in the Service,
by the same token, he has 16 or 17 l. due for the said Service, and besides
him, I have an ancient Maid, near 60. years of age.


[Then he was committed to his Keeper, and going away, he was called back, to
know his servants names, at which Passage he was somewhat troubled, and said
10 the two Clarks, What? is it not sufficient to keep me 18. or 20. days in
Prison, and make me wait 10. or 11. times, but you must molest my family
also.]

To which one of them made this answer;

We have not used you so bad yet, but We will use you worse before we have
done with you.

Then upon Thursday, April 17. he with his 2. Servants, was brought to the
Lords Bar: but his servants being commanded to be sworn, they plead
ignorance in an Oath; Then the E. of Manchester told them, They must swear to
answer to such Questions as that Court should demand; the which they refusing,
were both committed to the common Goal of the Fleet, where they remain still in
durance.

And upon the last of April, 1646. Hunscot, and 4. of his Partners, came in
the nightime, and searched Mr. Larners chamber, and Pocketts in the Prison,
as other birds of their feather, did that other worthy Prisoner, Mr. Musgrave,
two months ago in the Fleet, who also suffers for the Freedom of the
Nation. There is a little book called Every Man's Case, newly divulged in the
behalf of Mr. Larner, and is printed with another Letter thereunto annexed.

FINIS.

