A TRUE RELATION OF EVERY REMARKABLE CIRCUMSTANCE IN RELIEVING OF TREDAGH, BY
Captain Thomas Steutevile. Also the Copy of Sir Phelome Oneal's Commission,
for the establishing of Colonel Richard Plunket Lieutenant General of
Lempster, and Vlster. Together, with the distress of the whole Kingdom, and
other passages of note.

Printed by J. R. for C. M. 1642.

A true Relation of those passages which happened unto Captain Thomas
Steutevile, unto the Town of Droghedagh, else Tredagh; from the ninth of
January, unto Wednesday, the 19th day of the same; together with his releeving
the Town.
ON Sunday, Captain Stutevile late in the night set sail, having with him the
Swan, two Friggots, one Gubard, and two long Boats. And going along the Coasts,
the Captain sent out of the Swan some Musketeers to the Sherreis, where he
found the enemy fled, but had left behind them much goods, which being all
taken aboard by them, they set the Town on fire; and with it got above 500 l.
worth of Corn. Then returning unto their Ship on Tuesday, they came safe to the
Bar of Droghedab, where Captain Stutevile with his five small Vessels laden
with victuals and Ammunition put over, and went up the River not without much
danger; the Rebels having made a kind of a Block-house upon the entrance into
the River, whereon they had planted two Pieces of Ordnance, and all along in
Trenches within both sides of the River were placed Musketeers; and he being
not able to pass, but continually within Musket Shot of either, for two miles
together, his Ordnance but seldom availing him any thing (by reason of the
height of the shore above him;) yet (God be thanked) he got la^e within the
Town with his Vessels, without the loss of a man (he having with him 124
Musketeers, besides Ship-men.) But to express the joy of the Soldiers in the
Town, requires a quicker Genius than mine own, or at least one that had felt
their wants. The Rebels supposing that there would be such joy, and tha^ by
reason of the Soldiers now having store of victuals, they would altogether
drown themselves in security, (as it is thought) dealt under hand with some
Centeries that were on the Walls, and brake in at a place where there had been
a Shallop-Port, so that two might come with stooping low, on a breast; in at
which, it is certain 500 got, and marched a great way into the Town; until at
last one of their chief Captains was perceived by a common Soldier of ours,
to turn a Piece of Ordnance that stood upon the bridge, toward the Town.

The Soldiers seeing this, shot, and killed the Captain, and gave the Allarum.
Whereupon our Soldiers gathered so fast, that they wholly discovered the
Rebels, and had the killing of 160 of them, and took prisoners 40: some
escaped through the place they came in at, and others over the Wall, yet many
brake their necks at that sport; some one hundred is thought to be yet in Town,
hidden in Papists houses, and is confessed by some of the Householders that were
found faulty that way; that it was intended by the Townsmen to have cut the
throats of all the Officers that lay in their houses, upon this assault. But
(God be thanked) in all this we lost not one man. And on Thursday, Captain
Steutevile set forth out of the Town, and came with less danger than before to
the Bar, where he was on ground, and was forced to stay for want of water; for
the Tide being spent, he lay in a manner dry, the rest of the Shipping
forsaking him; whereupon the enemies came down thinking to have taken him and
his Ship: but he laid about him so well, that he killed 20 of them; yet they
not contented with this (but like desperate villains) got underneath the stern
of the Ship some 30 of them, where he could do them little hurt; and there they
be-laboured themselves with a Pick-axe and a crow of iron, and brake the Ship
almost through; whereupon he threw some 6 Grenades amongst them, and they
finding themselves fewer by six, by reason of them, and many of themselves to
want plasters about the thighs and shins; and the seventh cast, thought their
heels their best safeguard, leaving behind them some pikes and swords, one
Target, Pick-axe, and a crow of iron. Then he finding himself quit of them,
the next Tide hoisted up sayls, and came in this day safe into our Town of
Dublin; but we cannot hear any certainty of the other Vessels that forsook
him, only we fear that by reason of the winds, they were driven Northerly.

THE Copy of Sir Phelome O-Neal, Knight, his Commission for establishing Colonel
Richard Pluncket his Lieutenant General of Lempster and Vlster.
To the Right Honorable, our friend and kinsman, Colonel Richard Pluncket,
Lieutenant General of Lempster.
WHereas we have hitherto sustained several inconveniences, in regard of the
great want of able Commanders, concerning the Forces in the Northern parts of
this Kingdom; For the speedy prevention whereof, We Sir Phelome O-Neal, Knight,
Elect General of the two Provinces of Lempster and Vlster; by the free will
and consent of the Right Honorable, Lords, Knights, and Commons there, Are out
of our pious care for the safety of the said parts, moved to nominate and
appoint One whose Birth and Honors, together with his Wisdom, Prowess, and
Magnanimity, may animate, advise, and discipline our Army within the said
parts, as well to a due obedience, as unto fight, in a time of War. In tender
consideration whereof, we the said Phelome O-Neal, Knight, General of the said
Forces, and Commander in Chief, Have thought fitting, and most expedient, for
the speedy advancement of the holy Roman Catholic Religion, together with the
great contentment, satisfaction, and welfare which shall therein ensue unto our
Sovereign Lord, By this may be seen the insolency and false pretense of the
Popish Rebels.
the Kings most Excellent Matie, Have Nominated, Ordained, and Constituted, and
by These our letters do Nominate, Ordain, and Constitute our trusty and well
affected kinsman and friend, Colonel Richard Pluncket, to be our Lieutenant
General, and next in Commission unto us, over the said Catholic Army within
the Province of Lempster and Vlster: Under whose Conduct and Command, we do
hereby straightly charge and require all manner of persons within the said bounds
and limits of Lempster, to yield their ready service and obedience whatsoever.
And furthermore it is our said will and pleasure, That it should be lawful
unto him our Lieutenant General Pluncket, to perform and do whatsoever in his
wisdom and prudence shall be requisite, unto the expediting of these our
Affairs.

We the said Sir Phelome O-Neal ratifying, confirming and allowing the same, as
our own proper Act and Deed;
whereunto we have set our Hand and Seal, (...) day of (...) 1641.
Sir,
SInce the relieving of Tredagh, the Rebels have drawn their greatest Forces
thither, hoping to make that their purchase, which has been, of late, so
fatal to them.

Two Jesuits are at this instant brought from Yonghall; they came from Spain
in English Bottomes, with ten Barrells of Powder, and Letters full of knavery,
with a false superscription, to R. B. Earl of Cork.

Our Soldiers are in a great want of Money; they begin to play mad pranks. For
us in Town here, we are like to be in great distress, if Men, Money,
Victuals, and Provision come not speedily, indeed with far more speed than
hitherto they have done. The promises we have had, and the stay there has been
in the performance thereof, doubtless much animates the Rebels in their
massacres and daily cruelties. Besides, it makes us fear the whole Kingdom,
which by a reasonable supply of Men, Moneys, and other necessaries, would be
able (which otherwise will be suddenly put to a very near extremity) to
encounter their greatest opposition. And so looking (even with the first
Winds) for a considerable relief, till the next opportunity. Farewell.

Dublin, Jan. 24.
FINIS.

