A true RELATION OF A great Robbery committed near Andiver in Hampshire, UPON
JOHN LLOYD, AND DAVID GWYN, The one of Northwales, the other of Southwales,
coming up to LONDON.

And how the Britains bravely encountered with twelve Thieves; killed six in
the place, and wounded the rest: yet at last were Mastered, and robbed by the
said Thieves.

With diverse strange Passages* and events concerning the same; which (being
truly worth observation) were thought fit to put to public view for
satisfaction of all their Contrymen, friends, and acquaintance; and all
others that desire to be truly informed touching the same.

Cantabit vacuus coram latrone viator.
LONDON, Printed for G. F. near York-house. 1648.

To the Courteous Reader.
Courteous Reader,
A Thing may happen in a moment, which perhaps will not fall out again, in
seven years; Though (I must confess) I am a stranger to the persons who are
the subjects of the ensuing lines, and to their Country, yet at the
importunate solicitation, and information of many of my friends and Comrades
of those parts, I undertook to publish what my weak Muse could perform
herein; being ravished with the thought of the conceited subject, which merited
a better vain then mine to give it a true varnish. Whatever you find dropped
from my rude Language, excuse the weakness of my fancy, being more to please
others that would have it so, then my own Genius; and perhaps may add a smile
to thy countenance. I say no more, but Quod spero and placeo, (si placeo) tuum
est. And so am gone.

Democritus junior.

In praise of my dear Friend, the Author hereof.
My Friend,
THy Work I have perused, in which I find
Matter most admirable to my mind.
It is as Musical as David's Lyre.
Thy Muse I do adore, thy Muse admire.
The Times restore thee thanks, for why?
Here Is matter to digest a Christmas Pie;
Sufficient, and able to reimburse,
What Jack or Taffie suffered by their Purse.
I. Ho.

A True Relation of the Robbing of two gallant WELCH-MEN.
THe remnant of the British worth of old,
Is by their * Bards to future ages told; W^lsh-P^ets.

And that their Valor did out-blaze their same,
None else but they deserved the Martial Name.
Even to this present time left as a Story,
To sing their worth, their praise and glory.
Muses stood mute-wise in admiration,
At the deportment of that Nation;
Admire we must, nor can we do no more,
The like was never heard, since or before.
OWEN great * TEWDYR, Prince of the Northern Pole, Prince of North Wales.

Virtue and Valor left he for his Dole.
Prince * BRYCHAN swayd the Southern parts
Rare in his worth, and skillful in all Arts. Prince of Brecknockshire.

These Gallant Prowess Princes of that soil,
Endless hatred always got the broyle
Betwixt them, and the strife and jarre,
While lived, begot a constant war.
The sequel leads my Muse to speak the praise,
Of other two brave Gallants; I want but Bays
To crown their Worth and Virtue store,
An Emblem, visible for evermore.
They both descended from the Royal Blood
Of those Heroic Princes that then stood
So long, so gallant and so stout;
Admird they were in all the World about.
Red The North Wales man, and a crafty F^x.
Jack the one by name of Tewdyrs race,
Feirce in his wrath, and fearful in his face,
He dared, and durst with any one encounter;
For him to run away, it were a wonder!
The others descent from Brichan, far Nobler Blood
Then any of the Tewdyrs, or the Flood,
His Name as big as 'looks are grym,
Monstrum horrendum A South Wales man, who never was in London; he heard often
of it, and thought it was no City, but a Monster upon earth.
DAVID GWYN.
Upon a gloomy day not long since past
Marching for London without his Breakfast,
Mounted above reason with Pistols, Sword and all,
But in their way they had a rotten fall.
Resolved they were for London, there to try
Their skill and Art with gallant Chivalry.
The Gwyn to Court brave Ladies to his mind,
A less poor Taffie left his Purse behind.
The blustering Flood, well trayn'd in Cupids School,
Thought to make Taffie prove an arrant fool,
Gave precepts to the youth for to embrace
The Ladies favors, and obtain their grace,
By learning first to cringe, and next to swive,
So soon as they at London should arive.
But in the Rode these two Bilbonians met
Twelve gallant Sparks, who bravely them beset:
Tewdyr looks back, and spies their glittering Swords,
The Blades carvetting with big Oaths and words.
Near Andiver in Hampshire, proved the day
Dismal to none but to John Flood and I.
Quoth Noble Taffie, resolved I am to die,
If nothing else afford me remedy.
I looked me back, and spied my Blades behind;
Judge what a terror then struck in my mind!
Oh the^ said Jack to his young friend,
Spur up thy horse, our lives are near an end.
Horse, Horse, away, and let us us no longer stay,
For they do vow and swear they will us stay,
And rob us, which is worse then death;
With this they ran till they were out of breath.
Old Jack being better mounted, spurred away,
Left Taffie and his * Goat to go astray. The young man's horse not much
bigger then a Welsh Goat.

And wanting aid, was then compelled to cry
Help Plowmen now (I pray) or else I die.
The heartlesse Clowns would not afford their aid
To this poor Britain, sorely now affrayd:
And, wanting help, among the Thieves he fell;
O what a dolfull story it is to tell!
He groaned and said, (Brave hearts) O give me breath,
Delight not in an ancient Britains death.
All that I have is yours, so that you be
Preservers of my life and liberty.
Quoth they, true Britain, rouse, rouse up thy heart,
Think not we will aim to act a wicked part;
It Is not thy life nor blood will us content,
Yield up thy purse, for that is our chiefest bent.
To this replied poor Taffie, in a faint strain,
Here is the store which does with me remain;
Content I am to part, so you will spare
My life that is dear and then I do not care.
Farewell the Purse with eight odd pounds in money,
For want of which, I Will cease to court or coney.
And after they bereaved this youth of all,
They spurred and cried, and gave to John a call.
John with his gallant Polimero steer,
Scorned to turn back, but did them flout and jeere,
Swore a big Oath that he would never yield,
Resolved he was to die within the field;
So long my horse, or self, can act it out,
Let me alone, I Will put the Rogues to rout.
Forth came his Sword, his Pistol charged, let fly,
Routed the Rebels wing that Northward lie.
In this same gallant action being two hours space,
Encountered with these Cutters face to face.
At last his horse grew weak, his spirit fail,
Such gallant soul who would not much bewail?
Help, help (quoth he) to Taffie, villain come,
Behold my case, I am fore're undone;
Make Hue and cry, call for the Plowmens aid,
See now the Rogues begin to be dismayed.
No help for John, who there along was left
Amongst the Rascal Thieves that him bereaft
Not only of his Cash but senses to,
Drew down the high looks of his lofty brow;
And (as himself relates) his horse did tire, This name he has from Twedyr
the Prince of Northwales, being he is from thence himself.

Tumbled poor * Twedyr up to the ears in mire.
When valiant John could them resist no more
He yielded up his Purse and all his store,
His Horse, his Cloak, his Saddle, nay lost all!
How now old Fox, could you not choose to fall?
Crafty and cunning was this * Fox of old,
He parted with his money, not his Gold; A Fox in respect of his subtilty,
being a notable crafty man in all his dealings.

Taffie lost all, the Gold he did conceal,
What fool was Taffie he did it not reveal?
With fainting hearts in this unhappy plight,
Up to the Hill they went, and there did light,
Condoling their mischance, and cursed the day
That ever brought them to that cursed way.
In this same sad condition both did strive
To uphold their sinking spirits and alive
Each other to preserve, with sweet and balsome tales,
Like conquered Taffies newly come from Wales;
Till this Metropolis they both should enter,
And by some other Nobler way to venture
Their fortune lost, and valor to regaine.
Assistance of friends they knew it was in vain
To crave; to beg they were ashamed;
To fall to rob, could they be justly blamed?
Supported with vain hopes, at last they came
To this brave Town to play their latter game.
In this same conflict, both of them fell out,
Which proved most coward, which most stout.
Tewdyr began to swear and brag, that he
Did then behave himself most gallantly;
Killed six and more with his great Trojan hand,
If Taffie durst (not fight) but only stand.
Cursed be the womb which brought forth such an Ass,
That brought us both to such a sorry pass.
Ye sons of Mars trust not a heartlesse Gay,
Instead of fight he will but run away.
Hold there my friend (quoth Noble Taffie)
I cannot think on this, but I must laugh;
You fight, you shite, what ayl'd your pocky nose,
You ran away and durst not face your foes?
The World can testify my valor and my skill,
To fight and roar with any he that will.
My proper person promised nothing less;
Merit of worth, as all men by me guess.
A Coward Rascal that nere drew a Sword
In anger all his life, take it on my word!
I fought most gallantly, he spurred away,
Left to the hazard of that gloomy day.
Concluding this discourse, they did agree,
To Westminster to go, there for to see
If they could find the Blades that them did rob;
Poor men for want they did both sigh and sob.
Never a man that wore a Sword, but they
Like Country Hobbies star'd him in the eye.
Often to Westminster they came in vain,
As wise as fools they did return again.
But on a morn Jack Tewdyr did behold
One of the sparks that was so rash and bold
As to demand his Purse, but truly he
For want of Taffies presence, had no certainty.
The next day met with his Comradoe Gwyn,
Told him the story; next he did begin
His feature, face, and body to discry,
His terrible looks and stern Phisiognomy.
Which much amazed the youngster on my word,
And struck him dumb to hear he had a Sword.
Resolved they were to try another way,
Whatever Fate or Fortune would gainesay.
Brave Twedyr to the Country does retire,
Relates his fate, and makes his friends admire
At his escape, and what to him befell,
Which for a Christmas tale serves for to tell.
Some at him laugh, others great pity take;
Some jeere and flout, some lamentation make,
Some wish him well, but most did pray,
This Vermin Twedyr might not live that day.
The crafty Fox sits silent, lets them curse;
Out of their Treasure he will cram his purse,
He poles the Country people with deal of ease,
By color of an Office, called Clerk of Peace.
Taffie Attorney is of great renown,
Big in his Country, but an arrant Clown.
His Clients Cash was all that he did loose,
I deem him for his pains a gagling Goose.
His greatest aim was Ladies to salute,
Whose vapring presence struck the young man mute;
A Country leg could make, and busse his hand,
Rub up his nose, and like a Goblyn stand.
And being no later then the other day
Fortune did present him in his way
With a rare purchase, had he but the wit,
And money to, t'improve the best of it,
Might have regained his credit and lost fame,
Made himself rich and famous in his name.
Wanting both wit and Cash, nay breeding to,
Lost all his hopes, to his eternal woe.
Thus ( Gentle Reader) you have here at large
The true Relation of the Britains charge
Near Andiver the manner, time, and place
Where they were robbed, and how with much disgrace.
Which being the sum in the Frontispiece of the Book
I promised to perform; pray view and look,
And with impartial judgment give your Vote,
Which proved the man, or which the Goat.
-- Nemo me impune lucessit.
FINIS.

