A TRUE RELATION Of such Passages and Proceedings of the Army of Dublin, in the
Kingdom of IRELAND as has happened from the seventh of July to this present.

SHOWING How unprovided the Rebels are of Powder, and if now there be not a
speedy supply of Men and Moneys, to destroy these Rebels, how the Protestants
are like to suffer through the Kingdom this Winter, by reason of Supplies of
Arms as a^e providing and expected from ROME and SPAIN.

3 August

Published to prevent false and erroneous Copies, which too often are set forth
with mighty disadvantage to the Truth it self.

LONDON. Printed for William Bladen, and are to be sold by T. Paybody, in
Queens-head Alley, 1642.

A TRUE RELATION OF SUCH PASSAGES And Proceedings of the Army of DUBLIN, in the
Kingdom of Ireland, as have happened since the 7th. of July, to this present.
DUBLIN, July 7th. 1642.
THis day some of our Army marched from Dublin with two field pieces,
westward; The Lord of Hosts defend them, under the command of Colonel Gibson.

July 8. This day others marched toward the County of Wicklow under the
command of Col. Crafford, with two battering pieces, and two field pieces
toward a Castle of one Talbots, near to Porescourt; where the Rebels had set
at defiance Col. Crafford a little before, he going now to try their valor,
but before our pieces came near to the Castle by three miles, these Rebels fled
away, and left behind them some bedding and victuals to furnish our men for
their Garrison in that Castle; but Colonel Crafford with two field pieces
marched after them, the two battering pieces returned back to Dublin the same
night.

This day was printed here three letters sent from Rome to the Lord Macquire,
and Sir Philem O Neale, and other Rebels to encourage them in their Rebellious
taking of Arms against the King of England, and to settle the Crown on the
House of the O Neales with earnest admonition for peace amongst themselves,
promising aid from the Pope, and from Spain.

July the 13th. This day Colonel Crafford sent to have his Commission enlarged
for a longer time, for his better service, having driven the Rebels out of
Wicklow Town and sent also for victuals and some pieces of battery which are
sent in by Sea, but the Rebels run away from him and will not stay to try their
manhood, and the justness of their cause.

July the 14th. This day Colonel Gibson with his Army returned to Dublin, who
marched within ten miles of Kilkenie, where in all his march no one Rebel
would stand to our men, nor all their great bodies would once dare to oppose
us; but in Castles the Rebels set our men at defiance, with all the spite and
wicked language that could be uttered, which for want of battering pieces we
were not able to tame, only a Castle called Baltingglase, when our men came
near it, abound^nce of Rebels being there, the Castle stands in a bottom, a
River on the one side, which our men to pass over, close under the Castle, on
the other side of the Castle hie ragged mountains and a wood, from whence the
Rebels stocked in multitudes to the Castle, making show to defend it, at which
our worthy Colonel and courageous Soldiers were not daunted, because the
Castle was of no great strength, drawing with great show our field pieces as
though they had been battering pieces; the Rebels it seems were much daunted,
for those Rebels on the mountain discharged one musket, and one in the Castle
seconded him, and all, both in the Castle, Town, mountains and woods betook
them to their heels and ran all away, so that our men took the Castle and
Town, and set them all on fire, that there is no more lodging for them; In all
this march, our men have done as much service as could by any Army be done, by
firing of all the Towns that had no Castles for their defense, and killing
what they found out of Castles, which were many scattering Rogues, but for want
of battering pieces many Castles of great importance to our great annoyance are
full of Rebels, we being not able to help it for want of great pieces, which
the Rebels know too well by the many spies they have daily amongst us, so that
nothing can be concluded either at Counsel table, or Counsel of war, but it
is presently carried to the Rebels which we daily find by woeful experience,
but had we money, munition, and men we never had better encouragement, for it
is credibly reported the Rebels want powder in these parts, which if our
shipping guard the Sea, that none come to them, we hope in Gods mercy they will
not be able to stand against us; but we hear out of France great store is
coming to them, which we trust in God by the care and vigilance of our
shipping, will be prevented for coming into their hands, otherwise it will be
a long and miserable war, and a great hazard of the loss of this Kingdom,
and the ruin of all Protestants and of our profession.

July the 19. This day Colonel Crafford returned from the County of Wicklow to
his garrison at Bullock, wherein he has done good service by burning of above
two hundred Towns wherein the Rebels did harbor themselves, and taking cattle
and sheep from them, but the Rebels never stood to fight, although they showed
themselves in great multitudes but as our Army came near them, they run all
away, our men beat them out of the woods, bogges, and mountains, wheresoever
our men came, and yet these wicked Traitors upon all advantages, if they meet
with a few of our men, and they many, would set upon them, by which we have
lost three men, and in one night as our Troop horses were feeding, stole many
of them away, which loss is not small, but we hear their resolutions in not to
fight in any battle, nor to stand to our men till winter, and then they purpose
to plague us so that unless we have men and money whereby we may be able to
get their corn and cattle from them, and so to starve them, little good will be
done in this poor Kingdom, but they will put us to misery and great hazard to
keep what we have, they still steal our Cattle from us, within the liberties
of our City by night round about us, The Lord in mercy put in the hearts of
all that have authority to prevent these miseries poor Ireland is in.

I have written formerly, how they brag and boast themselves of his Majesty's
of favor.

Two of our City were tried at our Sessions for cursing the Parliament of
England, and our Armies, calling us all Rebels, and wishing the Devil confound
us all; and they hoped in a short time that a Protestant should not dare to
speak a word against a Papist, but that we shortly should be all cut off; all
which words are clearly proved, July 20.

FINIS.

