A true relation of some notable passages faithfully performed on the Coasts of
ENGLAND and IRELAND,

By some of the ships under the command of the Right Honorable Robert EARL OF
VVARVVICK For the service of KING and PARLIAMENT.

As it was certified by two Letters sent to the Honorable Committee for the
Navy.

LONDON, Printed by Francis Leach, for Lawrance Blackelock, and are to be sold
at his shop at Temple-Barre, July the 8. 1643.

A true relation of some notable passages faithfully performed on the Coasts of
England and Ireland. Bristoll this 30. of June.
HONORABLE,
THis acquainting you of my proseedings since the 20. of my being then sent to
Dublin, by order from the Lord Inchequinie, to the Lord Marquess, after safe
Arrival at Dublin, remained four days and could have no dispatch where by to
return, for the Marquess did daily expect the Lord Taffe with three other
Rebels from Kilkency, I remained till they came, then could have no dispatch
before a Packert came from the King, thereupon I went to them to the end to
seize upon the Packett when it came, likewise to take the foresaid Rebels as
they past over for the better accomplishing, I kept the middle Channel and on
the Coast of Wales, first I chaste the Post Bark, and he heaved the Packet over
board, for which I questioned him, he said he did according to express order,
the seventh of June I gave chase to two ships which I found to be prizes taken
by a Dunkerke to the Northward of Scotland the one was above 200. Tons deep
laden, her I burnt, the other I chaste a shore upon the Rocks an English mile
to the Southward of Wickloe head being Laden with Tarr, Train, and Fish, and
saved two of her men, by that time I had don with getingout some Pillage there
comes about the head a Dunkerke of 16. Gunns and gave us chase, leave him we
could not, and so expected him, with the intent to make our party good in
entering, I protest he would not come within shot, and claps by a wind and
stoud for Arckeloe being hard by him, we followed him in two Fatham water, then
I came for Milford to tallow a new, when I came to Sea I took four prizes,
whereof two Welsh men, one Saint Tiues man of 80. odd tons laden with Coals
and had some few Arms, with two Gunnes, three Murderers, and thirty men,
also I took another burden a hundred Tunes laden with Coals, sold the
Malignants four Gunns and discharged his lading of salt he is not come in here
yet.

I will to my life help you in this the cause of God, craving pardon for this
my bordnesse, humbly desireing to excuse have, and a Monday God willing I will
write concerning passages in Wales and do rest.

Your honors servant moved ever faithful to this cause. Tho. Perlunkett.
Not forgeting if I had a Commission to prejudice Papists Malignants in Wales,
and Ireland I would with such a Commission do much more then I have done.



Right Honorable,
ANd worthy Friend, these serves only to give you notice that about the one
and twentieth of May, my Lord General sent me and Captain Hill to the West
parts to gather intelligence of the State of the County of Deavon till his
Lordship came, so coming into Torbay the 24. sad advice from Dartmouth; that
Exeter was besieged, and required present accommodation to suppres the River,
that day I met with Captain Peter's of Plymouth in the John, which was sent to
their assistance by the request of my Lord Stamford* The 25. came in the tenth
Whelpe and Captain Cranch of Plymouth in the Abraham, so I sent to Dartmouth
for Captain Tirpin in the Cat who came to us the 26. so the 27. before day we
all weighed, and went into the Bay of Apsam, I sent in Captain Cranch, and
three boats mand into Tinmouth to fetch a bark out, which was carried in
there by the Falmouth Frigot, which Captain Iourdaine took, which is effected
without loss of blood, though faced with some 300. horse as they say.

That same Tide sent Captain Hill, Captain Tirpin and Captain Peter's of
Plymouth over Exmouth bar, who have seized upon their two Ships, one whereof
was ready fitted for a man of War bound to the Sea. The 28. about 9. of the
clock all five under sail coming away, but the wind took them short on the
Bar, so only Captain Hill got out, but the other four were forced back, and
I hope this morning will come all out they had much opposition, four small
gunnes planted at Exmast side upon the bank or red clift to the East of the
Church, and two planted at Star Cross, and played very hot, but last night not
any man lost one drop of blood, only one of Captain Peter's men bruised in the
back with one of their great shot out of their small Ordnance, they had made
a work at passage point on the West side upon the sand, but had brought no
gunne in it, thought to have Maintained it by Musqueteeres, but they soon
forced it, and raced that down again, and so keep it so long as they do
there remain, I suppose 500. men with the assistance of Exeter would clear
that Harbor and cirquit, We much long for my Lords coming, things going well
I hope no blame will be laid on us, for so presuming, if otherwise must have
patience to be sensured, we knowing a desperate disease must have a desperate
cure, a Fleet in this Country would do much good, if there were no greater
occasion else where, the Country is wast, the good people much discouraged,
though our coming here has put them in heart, and the advice of my Lords
coming altogether revived them, and last night did arive into this Bay
Captain Dauck to give further advice of his coming by the first wind, in the
mean time we shall do the best good we can for the guard of this coast, or we
have now got together six men of War, these two coming for Exmouth, which I
doubt not of this tide with the other two Ships, likewise this is all at
present that I can advice, only a prisoner we have of Charge one Bureroft, had
his man came to him yesterday, and reports Somerset shire is all fallen off
from their obedience of King and Parliament, and now stand all for the Array,
and says Sir John Stowell, and my Lord Paulett has sent 1500. to the
assistance of the siege against Exeter, and that Hopton has got forces enough
to go and besiege Bristow, and has already taken Bath and Wells which I scarce
believe.

Here is in Torbay Mr. Phillips Mr. Enson with diverse others going for
New England to the number of 8. sail.

This County is so fallen off in general that the very Fisher boats are as
cautious to come near us, as though we were Turks, and because they see they
cannot go to Sea but we must speak with them, they will not go at all,
except they can steal by us without seeing them.

I have not else but my prayers to God for the preservation and safety of this
kingdom in general, and of friends in particular, do take leave, wishing
your unwearied pains may be rewarded with good successes here, and happiness
hereafter, do rest your Servant.

Robert Moulton.
From abord his Majesty's Shipp Swiftsure Turbay this 29. June 1643. THe last
day we took up a little boat with three men in her, little bigger then to
carry them, which came running from thence out of Captain Jones, which came from
Breast, and brought Poulehill and all his runawayes, and says here was none
they took by betraying, but might have taken them if they would have given the
onsett, and so says it with them all, not one of-tenn but forced to go
against their will, says Captain Derrie an Irish man was chaste in at low
water, and bilged his Ship but is repaired and come again to Falmouth, and
ready is making to go to Sea.



July, the 7. 1613.
Imprimater.

FINIS.

