THE TRUE NARRATIVE OF THE PROCEEDINGS AT The Session-House IN THE OLD-BAYLY
Which began on Thursday the 1st. of this instant June and ended on Friday the
2d. following.
Giving an account of most of the Remarkable Trials there, viz, For Murder
Fellonics, and Burglaries, etc. with a particular Relation of their Names, and
the places of their committing their Facts, with the number of those Condemned
to die, Burned in the Hand, Transported and to be whipped.
RObert Saetor, was brought upon his Trial for Robing one Mr. Cralling, living
in Drury Lane, of 49. pieces of Gold. A Gold Watch, several Rings, Half-Shirts,
and a Silvir Hilted Sword, which he Conveied out of his Lodging having been
formerly a servant to the Earl of Argloss, with whom likewise, the Gentleman
lived, the Prisoner upon his Trial denied the taking the goods, and moneys
although he had some time before confessed the Robery not only before the
Justice but likewise in Prison, but being urged by the Court to tell the truth
he could no longer deny the Fact, but Declared that he was Enticed to consent
to the Robery and was Aiding and abetting therein. But denied he either broak
open the door or carried away the Goods and Money, but owned that he had a
share, as also the Gold Watch, whereupon he was found Guilty of the Felony.

Thomas Hermitage, was Tried for Robing the Lady Williams, by entering the
House at a back Window and taking thence Feather-Beds Carpits Curtains, and the
like, which being discovered in the place, where they had conveied them, he
thought it not convenient to put the Court to farther trouble, but confessed he
was Guilty.

Catharine Cook, was Tried for stealing several Silver Spoons, from Sr. Robert
Jason in Fetter Lane, she being a servant in the House, and having them under
her Charge, but she pleaded that she never had them but did verily believe that
a woman came in to ask for a person took them. But the Witnesses alleged that
she promised to pay her share toward them but she producing several Witnesses
to support her credit, who gave Testimony that she had behaved her self very
well in many places, in which she had been a servant: and that she had had
great Charges of Plate, and money In her custody; the Jury, by reason no
positive Evidence were produced accquited her.

Liddia Letsworth, was Tried upon an Indictment Exhibitted against her, for
that she living with one Mr. Thead in St. Gileses Criplegate, and having
several Oppertunitys to go into a Closet where several parcels of money lay in a
Cabinet, the which she took out it a mounting in Gold and Silver to the Value
of 12 Pounds which she carried to one of her acquaintance and desired her, to
keep it for her. But whether through fear or an honest Principle is uncertain
she hearing of the Robery restored the money, at first the Prisoner denied it,
but being but a young thief, could not long outface whereupon she was found
Guilty of the Felony.

Ann Bland, was Tried for Picking a Market-Womans Pocket of 5 or 6 Shillings as
she was siting in Hony-Lane-Market, taking it out of her Pocket-apron and went
off with it, but the woman well noteing her, in a short time found her out, but
she stiffly denied the Robery, but upon the positive Oaths of the Evidence she
was found Guilty. It appearing in Court that it was her usual practice to
haunt Markets and other places of resort.

John Austine was Tried for stealing Goods to the Value of 9 Shillings from
John Ashton, in St. Martins in the Fields, on the 10th of April, which were
afterward found where he had sold them, but upon Trial he utterly denied that
he knew any thing of the matter affirming that he never was at that place, nor
knevv not where it was, but the party to whom he sold them, attesting that
he brought them to him and recieved money for them he was found Guilty.

John Welling a Stripling was Tried for picking the pocket of a Gentlevvoman
in Hony-Lane, on the 6th of May, which was proved thus. The Person who lost
the money, being upon search of the thief, a woman come to her and asked her if
her pocket was not picked; picked, telling her that she see some such a boy put
his hand in her pocket: so that the boy being apprehended, declared he had not
the money but the two boys that were in his Company had it. The which he
likvvise urged upon his Trial, but the Evidence being plain he was found
Guilty.

James Cotton, was Indicted for Robing a woman in White-Chaple, of Goods to
the Value of 30 Shillings to which Indictment he pleaded Guilty.

William Sims, was Tried for Robing a House in St. James's on the 16th of
April. Taking thence Sheets, Table-Linnen and other Goods to the Value of 12
Pounds which they sold at a Broakers, in Long-Acar, of which their being
pesitive proof made, he was found Guilty.

Abraham Kent, was Tried for stealing Iron-Work, from on Shipboard, being the
Goods James Yemans being taken in the very Fact yet he denied it upon Trial
till at last it was proved some part of the Goods were found in his Breaches,
then he said that he Accidentaly droped into them, but he could not so Impose
upon the Jury, for they found him Guilty.

Several Presentiments were made this Sessions, of Recusants many of them being
of Note.

Jane Harison, was Tried for Robing a Shop, in Leaden Hall Street on the 10th
of May, and taking thence Ribons, Gloves, and Linen, to a considerable Value,
but the things not being found about her, as it is supposed conveied them away
by a Second Person the Jury found her not Guilty of the Fact.

John Spitle, was Tried, for breaking open the House of Margret Tryer, in the
Parish of St. James's Clarkenwell, on the 20th of May. And taken away Grates,
Kettels, Pots and Puter, which was proved thus, that a Dray-man coming over
Clarkenwell-Green, percieving a parsel of Fellows of which he was somewhat
Suspicious, he went to his fellows and told them of it, but they refusing to
assist him, he went himself, and meeting the Prisoner with a pair of Grates
upon his back, stoped him and carried him into a House, where was taken into
custody of a Constable but in Court he pleaded that the Grates were Delivered
to him, but the Evidence being plain and that he was taken 40 Yards of the
House that was broak open, and the Jury found him Guilty.

Jane Kent, was Indicted For a Witch, for that she sometime past had bewitched
Elizabeth Clambleton, Daughter of Richard Clambleton on Mile-Inn Green. As
likewise his wife, he first gave Evidence to hold the Court along story of two
Sows that he had had bewitched by reason he would not trust Jane Kent for two
Pigs, that she had bespoke, and that he never killed them, but she would send
to ask wheither he had killed any of the Pigs she bespoake and farther that
after the death of his Swine, his Daughter fell sick and died in a strange
manner and that his Wife falling sick likewise, he went to a Doctor in
Spitle-Field who advised him to a Medecin that as he said took of the spell
and put the Prisoner into such pain that she came howling to his house although
he did not see her, being charged ta keep the door shut. That a vvomon Lik wise
swore that she had an unusual Tet, and feveral other strange Marks, but
Evidence being given for her that she was a Labourious woman, and frequented
Religious assemblys she was acquitted.

William Stafford, one of the Life-Gaurd, was Tried for Killing one Roundwaith
near Hide-Park, in fighting the defunct having recieved several Wounds, but the
Prisoner pleading that it was Sedefendendo and that when the Deceased died he
retreated as far as he eould, and there appear into former Grudg the Jury gave
their Verdict that he was Guilty of Man Slaughter.

Ann Hix was Tried for Robing the House of David Ki^ghorn on the 20th of April
to which she pleaded not guilty. Evidence being called, first the woman, Wife
to the party whose name the Indictment was Laid, Swore whilst she was absent
the prisoners took the Goods out of her House but the Constable being produced
that went to search for them he swore that the Prosecutor told him she had
formerly taken them by her order to secure them from the Seasure of their
Landlord So that it being Evident that the case had been Depending above two
years, it was looked upon as a Malicious prosecution, and there upon the
prisoner was cleared.

Mary Coverton, brought upon her Trial, for an accessory to a Robery, Committed
by one Ann Stubs Convicted the Last Session, for that she bought Goods of her
that were stolen from Captain Faisby, she knowing them to be stole but she
Pleading to the Contrary and there being no positive proof she was found not
Guilty.

John Johnson, was Tried for Breaking open the Chamber of the Esquire Turner of the
Temple on Sunday last, nature of the Fact this, he having Picklock keys,
endeavored to open the door, but finding it Bolted he with a betty forced it
open, but bu entering found the Landress there, whereat he cried he was
betrayed and then drawing a Pistol out of his pocket and swore that unless she
would let him depart without making any discovery he would Pistol her which foF
fear she promised but he was no sooner gone but she shut the door and cried
thieves, whereupon he was taken upon Evidence he was found Guilty.

Henry Arnold, was Tried for a Tobacco-Box and Watch from one Mr- Vox, taking
it privily from his person, but it appearing that there had been tampering in
the case and there being no positive proof he was acquitted.

A person was Tried for Robing the Chamber of Mr. Hoole in the Temple, and
taking thence Silk-Curtains, to the Value of Twenty Pounds part of which was
taken in the Possession of the Prisoners Wife as she was going to pavvn them
at a Broakers, and the Prisoner having confessed it, he was found Guilty.

There were four condemned, three Women, and one Man, Viz. John Welling, Lidea
Littleworth Ann Blan, and Elizabeth Hunt. Five burnt in the hand, two to be
whipped, one Transported, and one fined twenty pounds and so ended this Sessions.

LONDON, Printed for L. C.


