A True RELATION OF THE DAILY PROCEEDINGS AND TRANSACTIONS OF THE Army in
Scotland Under his Excellency The Lord Genesis CROMWELL.

Certified by Letters from the Headquarters at Stonehill in Scotland, Aug. 23.

And published by Authority.

LONDON, Printed by E. G. in the Old Bailey. Aug: 30th 1650.

SIR,
IN my last I told you of our marching back to Musleborough, where we stayed
Thursday night, Friday, and Saturday, taking in provisions; and on Sunday the
17 marched back to our old Quarters on Pencland hills.

Whilst we stayed at Musleborough Fields Orders were given for the possessing
and fortifying of two Houses, one belonging to Mr. Hamilton, who with his man
were guides to that party that fell so desperately into our quarters in
Musleborough, and both killed on each side the House. The other was a Frontier to
Dalketh, and another Garrison formerly kept by our Dragoons near Edenborough
(but quitted.) The former (being near the Waterside) is intended as a Magazine
for provisions for the Army, in it there are 140 Foot commanded by Cap. Hughes,
one of Col. Fenwickes Captains, and forty Horse under Lieut. Wilkinson of Col
Lilburns Regiment, and twenty Dragoons: and the latter to secure the passages
between the Garrison and the Army, it being in the midway between both: in it
there is a party commanded by Cap. Webb of Col Malliveres Regiment. We had
intelligence of the killing two of our Foot soldiers that went to seek
provisions in the Country, besides one of Col. Daniels that was killed by some of
the enemies Horse adventring too far into their quarters toward Edinburgh when
the Army was encampt on Pencland Hills.

In the Armies march from about Musleborough to Pencland Hills the Enemy drew
out several bodies of Horse which faced us in the way, but came to no
engagement; they also fired at our men out of several Houses which they had
Garisond in the way. At his Excellencies coming up on the hills he sent two
Troops of Dragoons to possess Collinton house, which is a very strong House
within half a mile of Redhouse (a Garrison of the enemies) which annoyed our
men upon their former march thither.

A Sergeant of Col. Coxes Regiment was executed on a Gallows on Pencland hills,
though there was no Tree to hang him on, for being present with some Soldiers
of that Regiment when they plundered a House, and himself took away a Cloak:
and so tender is his Lordship of any injury to be done to the Country, that he
renders good for evil: there were three Soldiers condemned with him, but his
Excellencies mercy was extended toward them, and a pardon brought them
immediately after the execution of the other.

In the mean time several great bodies of the enemies Horse, to the number of
2 or 3000 were drawn out on the West side of Edinburgh between the River
Lies and the Sea, and having an advantage of a pass over the River (which
they supposed our design was to take) several parties of theirs came and
pickeerd in the sight of our Army, but upon the drawing up of our parties,
retreated back. His Excellency in person drew out a forlorn and went before
them; when he came near them one of them fired a Carbine, upon which his
Excellency called to him, and said, if he had been one of his Soldiers he would
have cashierd him for firing at such a distance, whereupon he that fired having
formerly served L.G. Lesly, coming up told him he was Cromwell himself, and
that he had seen him in Yorkshire with his Master.

There are 39 of the Runawaies that went from the army brought prisoners by Sea
from Barwick, where they were apprehended by Col. Fenwick the Governor, more
are coming, and some of them will be made exemplary, 27 of those already
brought were Monday Aug. 19. condemned at a Court Martial.

Diverse women and others get away by night from Lies by Land and water, and
steal back into the Country: by which we perceive they are in some straights
for want of provision: We wonder to see such a false relation printed as goes
under the name of one Mr. Brooks at the Angel in Cornhill, Numb. 3. wherein he
relates the taking of Leith, which if it were done our work were soon at an
end, it being the most considerable place, and the only considerable Port town
in Scotland: certainly none in the Army would mention such a fiction, when we
see the Enemy in it every day. Tuesday Aug. 20. there was a parley between Maj.
Genesis Lambert and other Officers of ours, and Col. Straughan and others of the
enemies Army: much was said to convince each other, but it amounted to nothing.

Lieut. Genesis Lesleys Trumpeter came with a Letter, and Declaration of their
Kings (as they call it) which He has now subscribed, but was drawn up by the
Kirk; the effect was in confessing his Fathers and his own guilt in the late
War, and promising for the future to do nothing but by the advice of the Kirk
and State. There is also a sheet of paper, entitled, A Supplication of the
Officers of the Army to the Committee of Estates, to purge the Army and Court
of Malignants, without respect of persons: and the Committees thanks to them,
and promise to do it.

This day the Enemy drew their whole Army Horse and Foot out of Leith, they
gave them out to be 30000. they left a Regiment of horse and 1000 commanded
Foot in it. The King was then at Dumferling with a Lifeguard of Horse, and two
or three Companies of Foot: But when we expected an Engagement they retreated
back to Leith: Our Army is begun to entrench on Pencland Hills.

Wednesday August 21. a Counsel was called of all the Field-officers and
Captains: the business was to relate what transactions had been, and how the
Scots having combined with their King, and scornefully sent his Declaration
before any thing could be offered farther in an amicable way to prevent the
misery of what must follow by force, or that we should do our utmost
endeavors to reduce them, using all means which an envading Enemy will do
one against another; and as they were speaking every Man his heart, whereby
there might be a knowledge how it was with them, There came an Alarm that the
Enemy was drawn out several ways toward Sterling, toward the provisions:
There was pickering near Collington house with the Dragoones, and the Enemy
had a Captain of theirs slain and two prisoners: The Enemy are reduced to
such extremity for want of provisions that they must move one way or other, and
I doubt not but God will fill this hippocriticall Generation with whom we have
to deal with their own ways.

This night a party of Horse and Foot are drawn out upon a considerable
design, of which more by the next.

Stonehill Garrison, Aug. 23 1650.

