The true Protestants humble Desires to the Kings most excellent Majesty. Or,
Protestant-like Propositions for His Majesty's perusal, tending to a safe and
well-grounded Peace. With a Commination or Chorus of the People against those
that desire it not.
1
THat your Majesty will be pleased to sign
To nothing that may after cause
All former Statutes to decline,
And grate our Fundamental Laws.
And your good Subjects shall daily pray,
God preserve your Majesty.
2
That your Majesty would never let
The Scottish Government be erected,
For fear, lest when their Laws we get,
We with their treasons be infected.
3
That your Majesty would never give
The staff out of your hand again;
For though as slaves we will not live,
Yet we will have a Sovereign.
4
That your Majesty, as you are sworn,
Would maintain the Church in that good state,
As your Forefathers did it adorn,
And has been taken away of late.
5
That your Majesty would graciously please
To hearken to none would innovate,
For so we shall nere cure our old disease,
Occasioned by riots intemperate.
6
That your Majesty would please once more
The simple people to instate
With the Common Prayer Book, as before;
They are not for extempore prate.
7
That your Majesty would not yield,
Your friends, who ventured their state and lives,
Fighting for your honor in the field,
Should be cut off, as their Enemy strives.
8
That your Majesty would please nere to admit
Any Committees, the plague of the Nation,
Who (while like Censors) in chairs they do sit,
Do wrack the poor Commons in grievous fashion
9
That your gracious Majesty would abhor
The thought, to consent your Sisters Son,
Brave Rupert should die, for maintaining a war,
As every good Subject ought to have done.
10
That your Ma. would please that famous Newcastle
Whose religion makes not his loyalty less:
Who once for you even with Mavors did wrestle,
May not lose his lands, be it he did transgress.
11
That your Majesty would make Jockey to pay
Interest on interest for that vast sum of gold
Which he took for your person, but the other day
When you to your better Subjects were sold.
12
That your Majesty would please, though we hate superstitions,
Yet we may have one religion or other,
Any thing but that of the English Precisians,
And that of Iockeys our most dear Brother.
13
That your Majest. will please to have your old rent
That is now behind for many years past,
Due to be paid by your Parliament,
Who are bound upon bond, to pay you at last.
14
That your Maj. will please again, when you get
Your ships into your own hand, as you ought,
Officers in them more trusty to set,
Then those who assented for coin to be caught.
15
That your Maj. will please to give him his due
That late has insranchiz'd you from your confinement,
He deserves honor, that has so helped you,
Both in his own person, and by his designement.
16
That your M. would please the lands two eyes
Now dimmed may be restored to their old wont,
I mean the two famous Universities,
And we not mistake a basin for a Font.
17
That your Majesty would please to call
A Synod, a body of learned men,
For ours in four years have done nothing at all,
We are not the better for their purse, nor their pen
18
That your Maje. would please to send for the Prince,
To avoid the imputation that some
Cast on him, who say, he on purpose went hence
Himself to ingratiate with the Sea of Rome.
19.
That your Majesty would please to send for your Spouse,
Who in France like a Turtle forsaken does moan,
She cannot the least disturb either house,
If she will, then why do not they lie alone.
20.
That your Majesty would please by a Declaration
The deluded Commons to undeceive,
That you hate the acts of the Irish Nation,
Contrary to that some would have them believe.
21.
That your Majesty would please never to hearken to those
That would have the Laws in English translated
So we may have bald Rhyme for very good Prose,
And have our calamities still propagated.
22
That your M. would turn days of humiliation
And our days of thanks for we know not what:
With our strange Fast-daies for pe^turbation,
For those which the Service Book still points at
23
We beseech your Majesty all qualifications
Not heard of but lately, all negative swearing,
All Protestations and foul Abjurations
May never be licenc't again to have hearing.
These things, great Sir, if you please to afford,
We shall have a safe and well-grounded peace,
All this is allowable by Gods holy Word,
and if observed, may occasion our weal to increase.
And your good Subjects shall daily pray,
God preserve your Majesty.
A Commination to be confirmed By a Chorus of the people.
SInce that by Gods Command, we may
Curse those that do the truth betray,
Let us take up our curse and say,
Cursed be he that hates the King,
And would his State to ruin bring,
And scorns to be wedded with a Ring.
And all the people say Amen.
Cursed be he the Queen that hates,
And against the Privy Counsel prates,
And does delight to cause debates.
And let all the people say Amen.
Cursed be he is Enemy
Unto our harmless Liturgy,
And to the Bishops Hierarchy.
And let all the people say Amen.
Cursed with a horrid curse be he,
That would have the Scottish Presbytrie
For to take root in Britanie.
And let all the people say Amen.
Cursed be he that with hand and heart
Does not take the Armies part
Against those that would our Laws subvert.
And let all the people say Amen.
Cursed be he, or they, or all,
Wish not his Majesty in White Hall,
As great as ever before his fall.
And let all the people say Amen,
Cursed be he would not the Queen
Should once more with her Lord be seen,
And in that pomp she once has been.
And let all the people say Amen.
Cursed be he does not desire
The Prince from France should now retire,
For to behold his King and Sire.
And let all the people say Amen.
Cursed be he that does not use
All means that may a peace produce,
And does to lend his aid refuse.
And let all the people say Amen.
Cursed be all Inscendiaries,
Schismatics, and Sectaries,
And all Inventors of new Fegaries.
And let all the people say Amen.
Cursed be he that does not pray
The Excize may quite be taken away,
And all Traitors to come to decay.
And let all the people say Amen.
FINIS.
Anno 1647.

