A True RELATION of a late VICTORY Obtained By Sir RALPH HOPTON Against My
Lord of STAMFORDS Forces in Cornwall.

Which (through the mercifulness of the General Sir RALPH HOPTON) was gotten
with little bloodshed.

The like Victory cannot be paralleld in the memory of Man.

Being the Copy of a Letter written from Salt-Ash by a very impartial hand,
Dated the 24. of this present Ian. 1642. which many other Letters that came by
the same Post (no doubt) will confirm.

Printed by His Majesty's special Command at Oxford, Ian. 28. 1642.

By Leonard Lichfield Printer to the Universitie.

A true Relation of a late Victory obtained by Sir RALPH HOPTON Against My Lord
of Stamfords Forces in Cornwall; Which (through the mercifulness of the
General Sir Ralph Hopton was gotten with little bloodshed.
The like Victory cannot be paralleld in the memory of Man.
I Do not make it my profession to write News, but that this extraordinary
unexpected accident gives me occasion: I doubt not but you will have it at
Oxford from other Pens then mine, for indeed I could have wished I had not had
occasion, but truths which are so perspicuous cannot be hid: therefore I will
(without further circumstance) come in brief to the business it self.

This week my Lord of Stamfords Forces under Colonel Ruthen came out of
Devon, to seek out Sir Ralph Hoptons Army, and give him battle: it seems the
Defendant had some advantage of the Assailants, as by that which follows will
appear.

Salt-Ash in Cornwall, January 24. 1642.
FOr confiding News, take this for truth, that Sir Ralph Hopton with his stout
Cornish blades, has given the Lord of Stamford his Forces a total overthrow:
he took from them all their Arms, Baggage, Munition, and Ordnance, amongst
which was a Brass piece of fourteen foot long, with the Rose and Crown
engraven on it, and has taken to the value of ten thousand pounds, most of it
was taken up in Devon upon the public Faith, with fifteen hundred prisoners,
amongst whom is Sir Shitton Calmado, with many Commanders, and some eighteen
Ensigns, Ruthen fled for his life and liberty, with much ado got over
Salt-Ash passage, in a small Boat, the rest that escaped report, that Sir Ralph
Hopton is a most merciful commander, for otherwise every mothers fonne had
perished; Sir Ralph lost but two men: the like defeat was never known nor
heard of.

On Sunday last, to clear the Land of mercy (for so those that are escaped
term Cornwall) of the Militia Forces, Sir Ralph with a small party marched
toward Salt-Ash, wherein were three hundred Militia men, and ten pieces of
Ordnance, he beat them from their Ordnance, entered the Town, drove them to the
Sea side, where about one hundred did rather choose drowning then killing; of
which three hundred but forty escaped. After that, Sir Ralph, who was still in
the front, took a lusty Ship, that rode in the river near Salt-Ash, to assist
the Town against the Cornish, in which was sixteen good Guns, with much
Ammunition and provision; so that now Cornwall has cleared it self of the
Militia Forces, and strongly fortified all its frontier Towns.


FINIS.

