A TRVE RELATION OF Certain special and Remarkable Passages from both Houses
of Parliament, since Monday the 15. of August till Friday the Ninteenth 1642.

Containing these perticulars, etc.

I. Of Letters from Scotland to Both Houses of Parliament. II. Of news from
Ireland. III. A Message from both Houses to the Earl of Leiceste^ for his
speedy dispatch for Ireland. IV. An other to the Lord Keeper, concerning his
delivering up of the Seal to Endymion Porter. V. The fetching of Arms from
Kent, and bringing Sir John Sackvile to the Parliament. VI. Of Letters from the
Earl of Warwick, and his surprising of a ship from Holland. VII. The taking
of the Earl of Barkshire, and four other Gentlemen in Buckingham-shire, and
their bringing up to London. VIII. Of the charge of the new Lord Major of
London. IX. The bringing up of Mr. Barrel a Minister in Kent to the Parliament
for Delinquency. X. The Apprehending of three Cavalieres in Somersetshire, and
bringing up to the Parliament. XI. Of a Proclamation from the King for the
setting up of his Standerd at Nottingham and of the state of the Kings Army.
ORdered to be forthwith Printed, and published.

Hen. Elsyng. Cler. Parl. D. Com.



LONDON, Printed by Francis Le^ch. 164^.

Instructions for Sir William Brereton, one of the Members of the House of
Commons, and one of the Deputy Lieutenants of the County of Chester, and for
the rest of the Deputy Lieutenants for that Courtie.
WHereas it does appear to the Lords and Commons in Parliament now assembled,
that the King seduced by wicked Counsel, intends to make War against the
Parliament, and for that it is not improbable that under color of a guard for
his Majesty's person, or some other pretenses, the Knights, Gentlemen,
Freeholders, and Inhabitants of the County of Chester, may be drawn together,
therefore you, and every of you, shall take special care that the Ordinance
concerning the Militia be put in execution through the whole County; and the
Sheriff, and all other Officers are hereby moved to assist you, and every of
you therein; and if any person whatsoever shall leavie or endeavor to leavy any
Soldiers, or draw, or keep together the trained bands, or other armed Forces
of the said County, or any other Force, by color or pretense of any Commission
or warrant from his Majesty, under the great Seal or otherwise, without Order
or consent of both Houses of Parliament, you, and every of you, shall in the
name and authority of both Houses, require and command all persons to forbear
the execution of such Commission or warrant, and the same to be delivered up to
you, or any of you, to be sent to the Speaker of the House of Commons, and you,
and every of you, shall require and command all his Majesty's Subjects, to
forbear to obey any such warrant or Commission, and you, and every of you, are
hereby required to draw together such of the trained Bands and other forces of
the said County, as shall be expedient for the suppressing of all such
Assemblies, and for apprehending of all or any person or persons as shall after
admonition and command by you, or any of you, made unto them to forbear the
execution of any such command or warrant, or the calling or gathering of or
keeping together any such forces or assemblies, still persist in doing the
same, and likewise such disaffected persons as shall be found raising any
parties or forces against the Parliament, to be sent up hither to answer such
their offenses as to law and Justice shall appertain; and you the above said
Sir Walliam Brereton, shall in the names of the Lords and Commons, require and
command the Sheriff of the County of Chester, to publish throughout the said
County, the Declarations formerly Printed by both Houses of Parliament, and
you, and every of you, shall further take care that such Resolutions, and
Orders of both Houses (as have bin, or shall be delivered, and sent down to you,
or any of you) be put in execution, and shall require the Sheriff and Justices
of the peace, and all other his Majesty's Officers and Lieutenants, to be
aiding and assisting to you for that purpose; and you shall declare unto all
men, that it has been, and still shall be the care and endeavor of both
Houses of Parliament to provide for his Majesty's safety, that they do not,
nor ever did know of any evil intended to his Majesty's person which might
move him to require any extraordinary armed guard, that his greatest safety is
in the Parliament, and his greatest danger in withdrawing himself from them;
To that under color of doing him service, disaffected and Malignant persons,
obnoxious for their bad counsels against the Justice of the Law, labor to
raise forces and a party, against the Parliament, which at the last may break
out into open Rebellion and civil war, to the destruction both of King and
Kingdom, you the said Sir William Brereton, and every of you, shall endeavor
to clear the proceedings of Parliament from all imputation and aspersions, and
shall from time to time certify so of all things which you conceive necessary
for the present service, and that we may have a sudden warning of it, and that
our directions to you as well as your advertisements to us may have a clear
and ready passage, you and every of you, shall lay a strict charge upon all
post-masters, that they do not suffer any Letters or other dispatches to or
from the Parliament to be intercepted or stayed; and if any shall presume to
make stay of such dispatches, you and every of you, shall direct the
post-masters to repair to the Justices of the peace, Constables, and all
others Officers, for their aid and assistance, who are hereby required to take
a special care that there may be no such interruptions.

You and every of you, shall take care that none of the Recusants arms or
other Ammunition of the said County, be carried or taken out of the County upon
any pretense or command whatsoever, without warrant of both Houses of Parliament.

And you and every of you, shall give order and direction to the Sheriffs,
Justices of the peace and other Officers, to require and command all the Popish
Recusants in that County, to confine themselves to their dwellings, according
to the Statute in that case provided, and if any such Recusant shall be found
to transgress therein, you and every of you, shall cause the Justices of the
peace forthwith to bind them to their good behavior, and upon refusal or
neglect to give security accordingly, to commit them to prison, and further to
proceed against them according to the Law.

You shall also in the name of both Houses of Parliament, require all such
persons who have in their custody any part of the public Magazine of your
County, to deliver the same unto you or some of you, to be employed for the
service of the said County.

And you and every of you, are likewise to give charge from both Houses of
Parliament, to all Captains and Lieutenants, and other Officers of the
Militia, that they be observant to such directions as they shall from time to
time receive from the Lieutenant of the County or his Deputies, or any of them,
for due performance of any commands of the said houses.

And you and every of you, shall resist and repel, and are hereby authorized
to resist and repel by the power of the said County and by all other ways and
means, all such force and violence as shall be raised or brought by any person
or persons to the hindrance or disturbance of the said service, or for the
Arresting or seizing the persons of you or any of you, or of any other that
shall be employed in the Ordinances, instructions, and commands of both Houses
of Parliament, for any thing done in execution thereof, and the Sheriff, and
the Justices of peace of the said County, and all other Officers and Subjects
are hereby enjoined to be ayding and assisting to you and every of you, for the
more better and speedier execution of the premises.

And the Lords and Commons do hereby declare, that they will protect, defend
and assist, all manner of persons for such actions as they shall perform in
pursuance of these instructions and other Orders and commands of the said
Houses of Parliament.

John Brown Cleri. Parliament.

Orders of the Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament.
IT is this day Ordered by the Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled, that
the several Lords Lieutenants appointed by Parliament, their Deputy
Lieutenants, the Justices of the peace, and other his Majesty's Officers within
the Kingdom of England and Dominion of Wales, shall take special care to
prevent and suppress all Ryots, Tumults, breaking into, or Robbing houses,
breaking into Churches, taking away of the Goods of any person, or taking of
Victuals, without due payment for the same, and to take and Apprehend all such
person or persons as shall do or commit any such Outrages as aforesaid, and to
proceed against them according to Law. And it is further Ordered, that the
Commanders and several Officers, shall give their best assistance for the
apprehension and punishment of all such persons which shall be found guilty of
the misdemeanors aforesaid.

Die Jovis August 18, 1642.
WHereas there have been diverse Complaints made unto us of many disorders
committed by the Soldiers in their marching, and in such places wherein they
have been quartered or Billited, which disorders (as is informed) have been
partly occasioned by the neglect of their Officers to go along with them and
conduct them: It is therefore Ordered by the Lords and Commons Assembled in
Parliament, that the Lord General be desired to give Command to all his
Officers, that they take care to attend according to the duty of their several
places, that the Soldiers thereby may be hereafter kept from straggling up and
down the Countries: And to that end to lay his Command upon the Officers of
each Company, both in the Marching, Quartering, and Billetting, to be in person
amongst the Soldiers themselves, to prevent any disorders whatsoever, and
punish such as shall offend.

ORdered by the Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament, that these Orders be
forthwith Printed and Published.

John Brown Gleric, Parliamentoram.

FINIS.
(...) come thither? Ordaining the Earl of Cumberland General for the raising
of Forces in the Northern parts, Proclaiming all such as refuse to Obey the
Commission of Array, to be Traitors; And diverse other threats against such as
oppose it.

There was also a Letter presented to the Houses from York, informing the true
state of the Kings Army, that He has about 4000. Horse, and 2000. Foot, and
not more; the greatest part thereof being very desperate, Lewd, and
inconsiderable persons that daily commit great outrage in the Country,
pillaging and spoiling all that seem any ways well affected to the
Parliament, and commit great spoils up and down the country, without any
respect of persons, whereby the Country is very sorely oppressed by them.

Whereupon both Houses are drawing up a Declaration against the Kings
Proclamation for the setting up of his Standerd, commanding that none proclaim
the same in any part of the Kingdom; And that such as have or shall suffer any
losses by the Cavaliers, shall have reparation allowed them.

Hen. Elsyng Cler. Parl. D. Com.

FJNJS.

