TRVE NEWS FROM OXFORD.

Being a Relation of the Magnificent valor of the Scholars in number 500
completely armed; the more encouraged in respect of the presence of the Lord
Lovelace and Lord Wilmot, who for manifold achievements styled them with the
Title of Heroicke Cavaleers.

Sent in a Letter by a Scholar in the University to a brother of his in London.

London, Printed for R. Best. August 29. 1642.

Dear Brother,
I Am very sorry that I o^^^^ed the last weeks opportunity, which was by reason
of the Carriers haste in going, and not my negligence in writing, but I will be
sure not to be failing in this kind any more. I have received your last Letter,
as also both the Letters mentioned in the same, and am very sorry that you have
not received my answers thereunto, for I sent you answers to them particularly.
In your last Letter you wish that your Regiment might come to Oxon to visit our
traitorous malignant scholars, which if you did, or any else, you would be
nobly entertained; the University affects Londoners so much, that I done say,
they had rather have your room than your company; but if you do press them
with your company you shall have as good entertainment as their hostile
preparations can afford you, for here is every day training of scholars, with
other great preparations for your coming, so that now our scholars have
exchanged exercising with their books in study, for the practice of their
Arms in the field, but to say the plain truth, they employ themselves better
now then before, for before, their whole time was spent in whooring, drinking,
and swearing, (fit soldiers for this choose) but now great part of their time
is spent in martial exercises, but by no means will they wholly neglect the
other. A while since the University hearing of some or the Parliament forces
coming hither, in all have a judicious Convocation was called, Powder and shot
in readiness provided, scouts sent out, the bridge blockt, strict watch set at
the gates; and the City all in arms, but our courageous, valiant scholars
most part fled, our great grave Doctors went as fast as they could, some run
afoot, some rid to overtake them, not to bring them back or stay them, but much
desired their company, most of them disguising themselves for fear of them
that intended not to trouble them, like the wicked in the Psalm, fleeing when
no man pursued them: by which we may take notice what a scarecrow a bad cause
and a bad conscience is, both which is apparent to all good Christians, they
fight to maintain. We hear that the King will be here very shortly and set a
strong guard on the University, and so to take his journey to Warwick, and
here is every day 500. Horse expected for the Lord Wilmot, who is now resident
here to guard the University, so that here is like to be great opposition, but
what are all these being the Lord is not with them, but against them? for the
best things says a Heathen are overcome by the greatest difficulties, for they
are exceeding good things we expect, therefore I cannot expect but the Lord
will make us pass through some opposition to gain them.

But I will acquaint you with some more Oxford courage, this day the Lord
Lovelas and the Lord Wilmot being here, and hearing of the brave Cavaleers His
Majesty was like to have from Oxford, came to see them train, the whole Company
consisting of about 500, all being scholars, which the forenamed Lords seeing,
and in so complete arms acting their postures, they wonderfully applauded this
their design, protesting they would make heroicke Cavaleers; and the scholars
answering and protesting they would deserve their good opinion, and that the
Roundheads should know, for against them they would spend every drop of blood
in their veins, and they made no question but one of them were able to
encounter with half a dozen Roundheads, if they had some there to try their
courage once, for they feared not if all the World came against them, and many
the like expressions; so that one would have thought if the great Twelfth Army
were there, they would have conquered them all but in the interim while they
were thus courageously marching, every one looking like a son of Goliath, there
came unexpected nows, that there were Troopers making toward them, but now
see, the (...) courage of these before brave Cavaleers, for they hearing this
news, the major part was in such haste to be gone, that they never stayed to
examine the truth, or whether they were for them or against them, but run as
hard as their heels could carry them out of the field, leaving field and
courage all at once; the rest being encouraged by the two Lords to stand and
see the event, staid, but with such courage, that each of them were like to
fall down in the places where they stood, which did plainly appear by their
pale faces, so that I am confident had the imagined Troopers come in sight,
they would have showed them their backs, and made known what swift footmen
they could (on such an occasion) be. Thus you see the stout courage of these
our Oxford Cavaleers being thus terrified by imaginary fears; the Lord strike
such terror into the hearts of all that oppose his truth, which we have great
hopes God will effect accordingly, if we consider the parties on both sides,
for all men plainly see, that the opposers of the Parliament are either Papists
whose Religion is quite contrary to Gods Word, or Atheists who have no
Religoin, except prophannesse be a Religion.

FINIS.

