True News from our NAVY, now at Sea: Showing the most remarkable passages
there since his Excellency the Earl of WARWICKS departure thence, Including
these particulars. Namely, The taking of a ship near to Silley, laden with
Ammunition from Saint Maloes, and bound for Sir Ralph Hopton in Cornwall.

The intercepting diverse Letters, from the Malignant Fugitives, to diverse in
the Kings Army.

The taking two Turks men of War, being Argier Pirates, near unto our Coast.

The surprising of two Vessels, laden with Ammunition, and some Irish Friars,
bound for IRELAND:

With sundry other Passages.

LONDON, Printed for Francis Wright. Anno Dom. 1642.

True News from our NAVY, now at SEA.
SInce the departure of his Excellence the Earl of Warwick from our Fleet, we
have no way forgot our duty, but been in a constant posture of War about our
coasts ever since, watching the approaches of all Ships that might give any
assistance to the Malignants against the high Court of Parliament. On Saturday
the fifth of November two of our ships had in chase near the Island of Silley
a French bottom, who upon view of us stood out to Seaward: Sir David Murrey
therefore (being a nimble Sailer) undertook her, and after two hours chase
haled her aboard; but she made no answer, but clapped on more sails to get the
wind, which being somewhat scant she had no possibility of escape. After the
discharge of two Guns (one of which shore her Mizzen by the board) she came in,
being indeed a French Vessel, and of S. Malos; her loading (as her Master
affirmed) being Normandy-Canvas, and other Linen, and that they were bound for
Southampton: Being inquired of why they shunned us, they answered, they took
us for Dunkirk men of War. But going down into her hold, under some slight
packs of linen cloth (the serpent lurking under that grass) we discerned
some bales of Match, and barrels of Powder; three hundred Muskets, or
thereabouts; three Fieldpieces; five hundred Case of Pistolls, and as many
Carabines. So finding by the lading that there was some further mischief
convaied in that Vessel, Sir David examined the Master, for what end all that
Ammunition was prepared, by whom put aboard him, and whither bound? After some
flight excuses he told he was bound for Penrin in Cornwall; that he was fraught
with those goods by the procuration of some English Gentlemen in S. Malos; that
that man (pointing to one in a Sailors habit) could better inform; who being
strictly called to question, was found to be one Master Greenvill, a Kinsman to
Sir Bevill Greenvill that perverse Malignant, sent by him and Sir Ralph Hopton
to make purchase of those Arms and that Ammunition in France: which partly
with money from the foresaid Knights, and by the assistance of Master Termyn
(whose cred it is good in France) meeting him at S. Malos, was purchased.
Letters there were found about the said Greenvill, in certain mystic
characters, from Master Termyn to the said Sir Ralph Hopton and Sir Bevill
Greenvill, which with the Vessel we made stay of, intending as soon as
possibly she could be brought up the River (being an old leaky Vessel) to send
her to London, with the said Greenvill and ammunition, to the dispose of the
honorable the Court of Parliament.

On Sunday the sixth of November, our Fleet being twelve ships in company, to
the starboard of us we espied two ships, as far off as we could ken, which made
toward us with all sails: and upon their nearer approach we perceived them to
be of good burden, and (^s we conjectured) men of War: they taking us for
Merchants bound outward, were resolved to see our lading; and so coming within
something near distance, they were found to be Turks men of War: They
perceiving us not to be the men they took us for, tackt about, and feign would
have been gone: But the Fiddler played No such matter, we made account they
should not part so easily with us; and so our Rere-admirall Sir John Menns,
with two of our ships, the Assurance and a Merchant of five hundred Ton,
undertook them: the Rogues seeing no way but they must fight, their
wast-cloaths out, and all things ready, they gave us a broad side of at least
thirty Guns from both of them, making amain toward us, hoping (having a full
wind to friend, and being light nimble Vessels) to have got through our Fleet
and escaped: But Captain Millar that commanded in the Merchant gave their
Admiral a salute, that spoiled part of his haste, cutting his foremast clean
by the board: the Assurance also out of her Fore-castle shooting her great Guns
at her, tore her without mercy, so that the Rogues were but in an ill plight;
yet would they not yield, but stood stoutly to it, being very well mand,
playing upon us with their Muskets, and casting fire-pots over into the
Merchant-man with great fury and agility, but thanks be to God they did small
hurt. At last Sir John laid their Vice Admiral aboard, and though those
miscreants would have discharged their Murderers to clear their Decks, yet our
men were got into their Cabin ere they could give fire: with that they cried
for Quarter, which was granted; and their Admiral perceiving his companions
misfortune, struck his top, and submitted himself to mercy. There was in both
the ships a hundred and forty men left alive, threescore being in the fight
sent to their Prophets Paradise. We lost but four men. There was in them
threescore good brass Guns, eight and thirty in the Admiral, and two and
twenty in the other; abundance of ammunition, which was their lading, being (as
their Captain confessed) bound with it for Ireland, to sell to the Rebels, with
whom they have continual traffic for those commodities, since their
insurrection: those incarnate Devils being debard of all help from Christian
Princes (to whom they are detestable for their rebellion) trading with these
Turks. Howsoever, for this time we have mard their market, and made lawful
prize of men, vessels, and goods, which shortly shall be sent up to London, to
testify our good wills to serve the King and Parliament.

Within four days after this, one of our lesser ships brought in a Holland
Catch, which it had taken going toward Milford haven in Wales, whither it was
bound; there being in her a servant of my Lord Digbies, whose Pockets were well
stuffed with Letters; some of which, it should seem those of consequence, he cast
overboard: those that were found about him, were from his Lord to the Earl of
Bristoll, wherein he much bewailes his absence from his country, wishing he
were here to serve the King against the Parliament, entreating him to send him
over some money, for that he was in great want: that for ammunition, as powder,
shot, and the like, he was afflicted he could send over no more, having neither
credit nor money for that purpose; which if he had it were to little end, the
States being so desirous to comply with the Parliament, that they had
absolutely prohibited the exportation of that kind of merchandise. Other
letters there were, from him to Commissary Wilm^t, from Sir Frederick
Cornwallis to Sir Edward Stradling, Master Ashburnham, and other Malignants,
but of no importance: Howsoever, they are with us in safe custody.

The next day was brought in by the Assurance a French man of Nantz in
Britain, a very good ship; there was nothing aboard her but Wines and Linen
cloth: her Cocket spoke she was bound for London; and so finding nothing in her
that could be prejudicial to the State or high Court of Parliament, we
dismissed her in friendly manner. And that afternoon we had sight of two
Vessels, but they were so nimble we could not reach them all night; but in the
morning by that it was clear we had gotten within musket shot of them, and
found them to be French bottomes. We haled them aboard, and after we had well
ranged them up and down, we found great store of Ammunition in them; some
twelve great barrells of Gunpowder, an hundred Muskets or thereabouts, with
much Match: the men we found to be most part Irish, the owners of the Barks
being Irish Friars, Priests, and Jesuits, that had bought them at Dunkirk, and
fraught them with that lading, which they intended (as Father Phelim O-Connor
their principal Ringleader confessed) to have transported into Ireland, to
their Countrymen the Rebels; the said O-Connor having about him the Popes
Bull, wherein he gave full absolution and remission of all their sins to
those that assisted the Catholic cause in Ireland, proclaiming all those
Martyrs that should suffer death in that quarrel. Our Soldiers and Seamen
made very good sport with his Holiness Bull, which (with the Friars) nothing
fearing the Popes curses, we made stay of, as also of their ammunition, which
shall serve to better use then they intended it. There was also among other
Trinkets a sanctified banner, which the Pope had sent to that arch-Rebell Sir
Phelim O-Neale, creating him his chief Champion, and entituling him the great
O-Neale, and King of Ulster.

The next day, off from the Isle of Wight we had another vessel in sight, and
though we did what we could possible to bring her in, she made so fast to sea,
having a full wind, that we could not fetch her up: so after all that days
sailing, with the night we lost sight of her. What she was we could not
conjecture, but certainly she was laden with no good Merchandise, because she
refused to come in, and fled from us with such speed. Some were of opinion that
she was a Pirate, but I rather believe she was some French bottom, fraught
with Ammunition, and bound either for Ireland to the Rebels, or to some of the
Malignants; as either to the Marquess Hartford, or the Cornish Malignants.

The next day, which was Friday the eleventh of November, it was a mighty Fogge
at sea, so that we could not see a furlong before us: and on a sudden came
tiding down the channel three ships of good burden; and ere they espied us or
we them, they were upon us within half Musket shot: wherefore we shot off a
warning-piece for them to come in, but our Colors being not discernable by
reason of the Mist, they refused to strike their tops, but let fly a broad
side at us, and we again at them: but they finding the service too hot, ran
down the channel as fast as they could possible, striving to quit us; we
thundering on them with our great Guns as fast as we could possible. Now the
wind beginning to blow, the Fogge cleared, and we discerned them to be States
Men of War our friends. So heaving some Cans of Wine one to another, we were
very sorry for the harm we had done them, and departed.

These are all the passages of note that befell us here lately, where thanks be
to God we are in good health, resolving to spend our blood in the service of
the Parliament.

FINIS.

