A True RELATION Of the ARAIGNMENT Of eighteen WITCHES.

That were tried, convicted, and condemned, at a Sessions holden at St.
Edmunds-bury in Suffolk, and there by the Judge and Justices of the said
Sessions condemned to die, and so were executed the 27. day of August 1645.

As also a List of the names of those that were executed, and their several
Confessions before their executions.

With a true relation of the manner how they find them out.

The names of those that were executed.

Mr. Lowes parson of Branson. Thomas Evered a Cooper with Mary his wife. Mary
Bacon. Anne Alderman. Rebecca Morris. Mary Fuller. Mary Clowes. Margery Sparham
Katherine Teo^ey. Sarah Spinlow. Jane Limstead. Anne Wright. Mary Smith. Jane
Rivert. Susan Manners. Mary Skipper. Anne Leech.

Printed at London by I. H. 1645.

A true And perfect Relation of the Witches that were araigned, tried, and
convicted, at a Sessions holden at St. Edmunds-bury in Suffolk; and there by
the Judge of the Sessions condemned to dye, and so were executed the 27. day of
Aug. last 1645.
THIS abovenamed Mr. Lowes Parson of Branson in Suffolk, (being araigned
there for witchcraft,) confessed that he bewitched a Ship near Harwidge, so
that with the extreme tempesteous Seas raised by blusterous winds the said
Ship was cast away, wherein were many passengers, who were by this means
swallowed up by the merciless waves, further he confessed that he had done
many other most hanous, wicked, and accursed acts, by the help of six Jmpes
which he had that frequented him daily. This Mr. Lowes preached about
threescore sermons after he had made his Covenent with the Devil, and had a
teat on the crown of his head, and two under his tongue: and there is none
that makes a Covenant with the Devil but has from him a private mark.

Also Thomas Evererd a Cooper, and Mary his wife, both being employed in a
Brewhouse at Halsworth in the County of Suffolk, freely confessed that they
had bewitched Beer in that Brewhouse: and that the odiousness of the
infectious stink of it was such and so intolerable that by the noysomnesse of
the smell or taste many people dyed. And they further said that many other
mischiefs they had perpetrated and acted by their witchcrafts and damnable
Sorceries, and that they also had their Jmpes to whom they gave suck.

One old woman confessed that she had been a Witch the space of above fifty
years, in which time she also confessed that she had done many very wicked
things in bewitching Cattle, Corn* etc. but above all that she had bewitched
seven persons of one family to death to wit, a man together with his wife and
five childrens and that also she had her Jmpes which came to her in several
shapes.

Another of the women Witches consessed that she had bewitched a child to
death, and that she had been a Witch above five and twenty years, in which
time she had bewitched great store of Cattle so that the owners of them were
much impoverished and hindered both by the death of them sometimes; and
sometimes by the unserviceablenesse of them. And also she confessed that she
usually bewitched standing corn, whereby there came great losses to the owners
thereof, for that they could reap no profit, nor the benefit of there long,
hard, and by her made, fruitless labors: besides she confessed that she had
committed many other such like evil deeds to the hinderance of many.

These and all the rest confessed that cruel malice and he bred envy was
their chief delight, continually a long time before they made their Covenant
with the Devil, who also did often and sundry times and in several shapes
appear to them, before they entered into Covenant with him that they might be
made Witches.

Further also these with all the rest being searched as they were taken, were
found by the searchers to have Teats or Dugs which their Jmpes used to suck so
often as they came to them. And that some of them had such Teates or Dugs under
their arms, some under their tongue, some in the roof of their mouth, some on
the crown of the head some amongst their toes, some in their fundament, and
diverse other places: their Teats were but little, some of them are shaped like
a thunderbolt. These several teats or dugs their several Jmpes used to suck
who came to them often Sometimes in the shape of Mice, sometimes in the shape
of Kitens, sometimes in the shape of Snayles, and other-while in, the shape of
Snakes, Hornets, Waspes, and diverse other shapes.

Besides these are 120. more suspected Witches in prison, at St. Edmunds-bury,
who had all their Trial now: but that the Judge and Justices were compelled to
adjourne the said Sessions till another time by reason of the near aproaching
of the Cavaliers. And of those Witches some have confessed that they have had
carnal copulation with the Devil, one of which said that she had (before her
husband dyed) conceived twice by him, but as soon as she was delivered of them
they run away in most horrid long and ugly shapes.

And these confessed that they have bewitched diverse Men, Women, and Children
to death, as also, Horses, Oxen, Cowes, Sheep Swine, and other sort of Cattle,
as likewise Corn, Herbs, and plants etc. and have raised great and very
tempestious winds and storms, to the overthrowing and subuerting of Houses,
Stables, Barnes, Stacks of Corn, and Hay with Trees, etc.

Another of these Witches by her own confession affirmed that she owing a
grudg to a Gentleman and his wife in Suffolk, having no occasion (but that
they seemed discontented at her coming often to their house, and wishing her
to forbear coming) and only for this cause she sent one of her Jmpes in the
likeness of a little black smoth Dog to play with their Boy being very young
and their only child But the child at first refused to play with it, but it
coming often, at the length the Child made much of it till at last the Jmpe
brought the child to a water side, and there drowned the said child to the
great grief of the parents.

Amongst those remaining yet in prison there is one Witch they say to be
burned, who seems to be very penitent for her former lewd and abominable
indevours, and acts, and desires to have Petitions put up to diverse godly
Ministers that they would be pleased to pray in their several Congregations
that her said Jmpes may have no further power, to do any more such like hurt,
neither by Sea nor Land, as they have diverse times formerly done, to the
destruction, loss, or utter undoing of many sundry good and honest people,

Now for the manner how they usually find out these Witches.
THere are in the County of Suffolk four searchers appointed for the finding
of them out, two men searchers and two women searchers, the men are to search
those men who are suspected to be Witches, and the women searchers likewise are
to search those women that are supposed to be Witches.

And also their manner is, in what Town soever in the said County of Suffolk,
there be any person or persons suspected to bewitch or Witches, thither they
send for two or all of the said searchers, who take the party or parties so
suspected into a Room and strip him, her, or them, stark naked, and on whom
the searchers find any teats or dugs, that party or parties, the said
searchers set upon a stool or stools, in the midst of the Room, so that the
feet of him, her, or them, may not touch the ground. Nevertheless the party
or parties may sometimes walk up and down the said Room, so that there be
sure watch kept, that none of his, her, or their several Impes come at him,
her, or them, to suck him, her, or any one of them so suspected, during the
space of four and twenty houers and in that time (if they be Witches) either
their Impes will come to suck him, her, or them, or else the party or parties
that is a Witch or Witches will he mightily perplexed and much tortured for
want of his, her, or their sucking Impes, and will be strangely out of order,
and foam at mouth, or else be infome other extraordinary seeming tormented
posture, and many times they do apparently see their Impes come to them.

The Examination of Anno Leech of Misley in the County aforesaid, widow, taken
before the said Justices, April 14. 1645.
THis Examinant says; That she had a gray Jmpe sent to her, and that this
Examinant, together with the said Elizabeth Clarke, and Elizabeth, the wife of
Edward Gooding, did about a year since, send their Jmpes to kill a black Cow
and a white Cow of Mr. Edwards which was done accordingly: And this Examinant
says, that she sent her gray Jmpe, Elizabeth Clarke a black Jmpe, and
Elizabeth Gooding a white Jmpe: And this Examinant says. that about thirty
years since, she sent a gray Jmp to kill two Horses of one Mr. Brag of
Misley, which were killed accordingly; and that the occasion of her Malice was,
because Mistrisse Brag had told this Examinant, that she suspected her to be
a naughty woman; this Examinant confessed, that she and the said Elizabeth
Gooding, sent either of them an Jmpe to destroy the child of the said Mr.
Edwards; this Examinants Jmpe being then a white one, and Elizabeth Goodings a
black Jmpe; and that about thirty years since, this Examinant had the said
white Jmpe, and two others, a gray, and a black Jmpe, of one Anne, the wife of
Robert Pearce of Stoak in Suffolk, being her brother; and that these Jmpes went
commingly from one two another, and did mischief where ever they went; and
that when this Examinant did not send and employ them abroad to do mischief,
she had not her health, but when they were employed she was healthful and
well, and that these Jmpes did usually suck those teats which were found about
the private parts of her body; and that the said Jmpes did often speak to this
Examinant, and told her, she should never feel hell torments, and that they
spoke to her in an hollow voyee, which she plainly understood: And this
Examinant also confesses, she sent her gray Jmpe to Elizabeth the daughter of
Robert Kirk of Man^y^tree, about three years since, to destroy her; and upon
the sending of the said Jmpe, the said Elizabeth lanhished by the space of one
whole year, until she dyed, and that the occasion of offense this Examinant
took against her the said Elizabeth was, for that she had asked a Coife of the
said Elixabeth, which she refused to give to this Examinant. And further, this
Examinant says, that long since, but the exact time she cannot remember, she
sent her gray Jmpe to kill the daughter of the widow Rawlyns of Misley
aforesaid; and the reason was; because this Examinant was put out of her Farm,
and the said widow Rawlyns put in, where she dwells at this present. And
moreover, this Examinant confesses, that she was acquainted with the sending
of an Jmpe by the aforesaid Elizabeth Gooding, to vex and torment Mary the wife
of John Tailor of Mannyntree aforesaid about three years since; and this
Examinant being asked why she discover it to the said Mary, she said, the
Devil would not suffer her, and that the cause of the said Elizabeth Goodings
malice against the said Mary was, because the said Mary refused to give the
said Elizabeth some Beeregood. And lastly, this Examinant says, that about
eight weeks since this Examinant, the said Elizabeth Gooding, and one Anne West
of Lawford widow, met together at the house of the said Elizabeth Clarke, where
there was a Book read, wherein she thinks there was no goodness.

Whereas there was a Book (of the Essex Witches) came forth in print, wherein
on Mrs. Wayt a Ministers wife was nominiated for one, but it was a palpable
mistake, for it is very well known that she is a gentlewoman of a very godly
and religious life, and a very good conversation: and this was set on purpose
to vindicate her: and lay the fault on the Author, in whom it was a great
mistake.

FINIS.

