The true Portraiture of a prodigious Monster, taken in the Mountains of
Zardana^;
The following Description whereof was sent to Madrid, October. 20. 1654. and
from thence to Don Olonzo de Cardines, Ambassador for the King of Spain, now
resident at London. Its stature was like that of a strong well set man, with 7
heads, the chief of them looking forward, with one eye in its front; the other
heads have each two eyes in their natural situation, the ears of an Ass; with
its principal head it eats, drinks, and cries with an extraordinary and
terrible voice; the other heads are also moved to and fro: It has seven Arms
and Hands of a Man, very strong in each of them: From the middle downward it is
like a Satyr, with Goats feet, and cloven; it has no distinction of Sex.

To the Tune of, Summer time.


BEhold the Wonders of the Lord
In this same Creature pictured here,
Whose uncouth shape is full enough
To terrify your hearts with fear.
The Picture which you here do see
Is of a Monster fierce and strange,
The which was taken in high Spain
As he about the Woods did range.
And after brought unto Madrid,
As a Present for to show the King:
But when he did behold the same,
He counted it a miraculous thing.
Seven Heads in all this Monster has,
And Nature did them so contrive,
That every head has mouth and eyes,
And it is remaining still alive.
One head is bigger then any o'th rest,
Whose mouth for wideness does exceed;
And that one head does serve for all
The Monsters body for to feed.
So with one mouth six heads are fed,
And all the Carkas in like sort;
The like was never known nor seen,
As they that saw him does report.
His eyes do goggle to and fro,
Like to great saucers as it is said;
And when he glows on any Folks,
It makes their very hearts afraid.
His grinning teeth both sharp and long,
Like to a Mastiffs teeth appears;
And on his seven deformed heads
Grows fourteen long disguised ears.
The Second Part,
To the same Tune.
SEven arms and hands he also has,
With fingers well proportioned all,
And on his Legs does upright go,
Like to a man both strait and tall.
His Body from the Armpits down
Unto the knees overgrown with hair,
Is like unto a Satyr wild.
Or else some ugly sav^ge Bear.
The skin of him is Pistol proof,
As is for certain verified
A sword can do his flesh no harm,
Hair grows so thick on every side.
His feet indeed are cloven feet,
Just in the manner of a Goat;
But of a mighty length and breadth.
Of which the people takes much note.
His voice is extraordinary,
And terrible for men to hear;
For when it cries it makes a noise,
As if his throat would rend and tear.
But here the strangest wonder comes,
He never was known to speak at all;
But once before the King of Spain,
When he was present in the Hall.
Then in the Spanish Tongue he spoke,
Quoth he, look to thy self O King,
Thy Superstition at the last
Not vengeance on thy head will bring.
As Germany has been destroyed,
By Famine, Fire, and the Sword;
So will it be with thee O King,
Except the mercies of the Lord.
Do thee reclaim from what thou art,
From Pride and foul Idolatry;
Those Nations that are now thy friends,
Shall then become thy Enemy.
Thy Mines of Silver and of Gold,
Shall quite be taken from thee away;
The English soldiers brave and bold
Shall afterward the same enjoy.
All Christian Princes are in Arms,
Against each others for to fight:
The bad against the good does strive,
To overcome them with their might.
But now the Power of Rome must do^
The Triple Crown goes to decay;
Whereto the King made no Reply,
But shook his head and went away.
Which being done, the Monster ceast
His word, and never spoke no more:
Nor was it known by any one,
That ever he spoke word before.
But in Madrid the Monster still
For certain does remain alive,
And multitude of people comes,
Only to see him they do strive.
Wherefore the King of Spain has sent,
As by the subject may appear,
This News to his Ambassador,
Which now in London lives here.
But to conclude, let none suppose,
Nor think this News to be a Lie;
For there are many Englishmen
That saw him, and will justify
The same for truth which here is penned,
Being Eyewitness to this thing;
And was in presence when the Monster
Made his speech unto the King.
Another Monster fierce and stout
Since this appeared, has been seen,
Like a red Dragon range about
The mighty Hills and Dales of Spain.
From whence these Monsters first did come
There is no man alive does know:
But sure the Lord above does some
Strange things to us by them foreshew.
THe News of this Satirical Monster being noysed abroad throughout all Spain,
France, and Italy, made a desperate fear, and general distemper, amongst all
the Popish Prelates, Cardinals, Jesuits, Monks and Friars; yea, the very Pope
himself trembled to hear this strange Report. There is a Prophecy in the 13.
of the Revelation, of a great Red-Dragon, and a Beast with seven heads that
should arise out of the Sea, that should continue 42 months, which was to come
to pass before the great and terrible day of Judgment; which by the appearing
of these strange Monsters is near at hand now.

LONDON: Printed for John Andrews, at the White Lion in the Old-Bayly. 1655.


