TRUE NEWS FROM SOMERSETSHIRE.
SIR,
I Thought good for the satisfaction of Friends in London, to signify, that we
have bin in the County of Somerset, full of Fears: but the cloud ( God be
thanked) was soon blown over.

The Marquess Harford came on the 25. July, at the Assizes to Bath, with
diverse others, to execute the Commission of Array, where met him diverse of our
County. The Judge having received a Letter from His Majesty to forward the
Commission, and to give it in charge, but he declined that as also the Commands
of the House, for declaring it Illegal; so in his Charge he sailed betwixt
wind and water, very politiquely.

On Thursday following (having received little encouragement at Bath) the
Commissioners got to Wells, with the Cavaliers; in the interim at Bath, the
Constables of some 21. Hundreds Petitioned the Judge to Declare his opinion
concerning the Commission, which with some reluctancie, being soundly put to
it, he concluded to be Illegal; and according to a branch of the said
Petition, he oppointed the Votes of the Houses to be read in open Court,
touching the said Commission.

On Friday the Marquess sent for the Sheriff from his attendance on the Judge
to Wells, to require his counsel and Assistance (being joined in commission
with them) for the Array, who returned the Marquess this Answer, that he had
received commands from the Parliament, not to join, but further to suppress
such their Proceedings, whose commands he was resolved to obey, and further
sent him the Constables petition, with the Judges answer, which with the
unanimous consent of the County, to refuse except some discontented Spirits)
will cool their further going on therein; diverse also of the County have
petitioned him to depart out of their coasts. And one Master Stroud, a
Gentleman of constant fidelity to King and Parliament, who in execution of the
Militia, and meeting with the Marquess Hartford, in the execution of the
Array, showed such courage, with a few against his many Horse, which the
country people, seeing with admiration, got up their spirits, and so bestirred
themselves, that in short time, they had treeble the Marquess power, whereupon
he left the place: It was certain, that if the Commission had taken effect,
the King would have been shortly in our parts, and it was intended to be made
the Aceldama, you may Communicate this for truth.

London, Printed by R. O. and G. D. in the year, 1642.


