A TRAVE RELATION OF A great Victory obtained by the Parliament forces in
Lincolnshire, under the Command of the Lord Willoughby, Colonel Hobart, Colonel
Cromwell, Li^vtenant General Hotham.

Declared in several Letters, One from Colonel Cromwell, to Colonel Hobart,
Dated from Shasten.

And another from Master Bridge a Minister, to a Friend in London.

TOGETHER With Colonel Hobart his Answer to a Letter sent him from some
Gentlemen, who were imprisoned in CROWLAND.

LONDON, Printed for Benjamen Allen, in Popes Head Alley.

MAY 27, 1643.

A Letter from Collonell Cromwell to Collonell Hobart from Shasten.
Noble Sir,
THe god of glory has given us this evening a glorious victory over our
enemies, they were as we are informed one and twenty Colors of horse troops,
and three or four of dragoones: it was late^ in the evening when we drew out,
they came and faced us within two miles of the town, so soon as we had the
alarm we drew out our forces, consisting of about twelve troops, whereof some
of them so poor and broken that you shall seldom see worse; with this
handful it pleased God to cast the scale, for after we had stood a little
above musket shot the one body from the other, and the Dragooners having fired
on both sides for the space of half an hour or more, they not advanci^g
toward us we agreed (being thereunto enabled by the great God of heaven) to
charge them, and advancing the body after many shootes on both sides, came with
our troops a pretty round trot, they standing firm to receive us, and our men
chargeing feircely upon them, they were imediately rowted and rann all away,
and we had the execution of them two or three miles; I believe some of our
soldiers did kill two or three men a piece, my youngest corporal killed four
with his own hand give glory to God, give glory, let all that know God, say,
the Lord be pravsed; we have gotten some of their officers, and some of their
Colors, but what the number of dead is, or what the prisoners, we know not,
but great is the goodness of God to us.

Shasten, etc.

Good Friend.
SInce my last to you Gods providence has led me into the feil^, I shall
therefore give you an account of such passages as I met there: on satterday
last I came to Sleveford in Lincolneshire where Colonel Sir Miles Hobart was
quartered with his Norfolk forces to miles from Grantham where Leivtenant
General Hotham, the Lord Willoughby, and Collonell Cromwell lay with diverse
troops of horse. And on Satterday, it was noysed that the enemy was upon his
march toward us with some thousands of horse and foot. Our men therefore did
provide for them, and expecting that they should have fallen upon our quarter,
the Col. and Captains went their rounds all the night; but the enemy gave his
Alarm to Grantham, where they were bravely encountered, they drew toward
Grantham about 8 a clock in the evening our men all mounted in a short time and
drew out into the field, the commander in chief commanded our men that they
should not give fire till they came within half pistol shot of the enemy,
which being done, it was so dreadful a charge, that the enemy were immediately
routed and fled for their lives; as you may read in this letter which was sent
from Collonell Cromwell to Collonell Hobart thus. Noble Sir the God of glory
has given us etc.

Whereby you see how God has blessed this our association for there went into
Lincolnshire but two Regiments at first (though more are going daily) Col.
Cromwells of horse, and Col. Hobarts of foot and both of them severally, the
great God has done great things by Crowland being taken in by Col. Hobart,
and this victory attained through Gods blessing by Col. Cromwells troops, Whose
men fought like dragons, you have heard of the goodness and valor of Col.
Cromwell, Col. Hobart also is a brave gallant gentleman, whose resolution you
may read in these few lines of his, which he sent in answer to some Gentlemen
that were imprisoned in Crowland and were enforced by the Cavaliers there to
write thus to him.

Honored Sir, the lamentable cries of the women and children in this miserable
town of Crowland, moves our heart with much compassion toward them, in regard
whereof we are humbly bold to entreat that a Parley may be admitted, and that
you will be pleased to cause a Cessation of Arms til Propositions shall be
presented unto you, and to grant a safe conduct to the Messenger. Thus
beseeching the God of Peace, to give his blessing we rest

Two a clock this Friday morning. Your humble Servants,
John Harrington. Robert Ram. William Slater.


Colonel Hobarts Answer follows.
Gentlemen,
IT is one of our principal ends to relieve you, and, by Gods assistance we
will do it or die; But i will make your Captain speak your language, and deliver
you whom he basely surprised, and if he forthwith do it not, i will spare neither
man, woman nor child: the unworthy detection of Captain Dodsons Drummer,
contrary to the Law of Arms deserves no mercy but if you will refer your selves
to me, I Will do that which befits a Christian and a Gentleman, otherwise there
is nothing to be expected but the total ruin of Town and people. So Irest,

Your affectionate friend, Miles Hobart.

BOth these b^ave Colonels are now met, I hope at Lincoln; for on Tuesday last
Colonel Hobart was to march thither, and if the Enemy (who for this service had
drawn out all his special Forces from Gainsborough and Newark) were not able
to stand before part, I hope h^ shall never be able to stand before all: its
thought our men are 6000 or 7000 by this time at Lincoln. In the Army there is
good Discipline, men punished for swea^ing, drunkenness, and stealing: I was
many meals with them, and never heard an oath sworn by any of the Captains or
Officers. I saw one soldier whipped most severely for thieving. Boston was very
loving to our soldiers, sending in much provision, the train Bands of the
County came in from al parts, so that through the prayers of good people, I
hope, that County will be soon settled in peace, which the Lord grant unto all
other Counties in his due time. I rest,

Yours William Bridge.


