A true Relation of the Proceedings against certain QUAKERS, at the general
Court of the Massachusetts holden at Boston in New England October. 18. 1659.
ALthough the Justice of our proceedings against William Robinson, Marmaduke
Steavenson, and Mary Dyer, supported by the Authority of this Court, the laws
of the Country, and the law of God may rather persuade us to expect
encouragement and commendation from all prudent and pious men, than convince us
of any necessity to Apollogize for the same; yet for as much as men of weaker
parts, out of pity and commiseration (a Commendable and Christian virtue, yet
easily abused, and susceptible of sinister and dangerous impressions) for want
of full information, may be less satisfied, and men of perverser principles,
may take occasion hereby to caluminate us, and render us as bloody persecutors
to satisfy the one, and stop the mouths of the other, we thought it requisite
to declare;

THat about 3. years since diverse persons professing themselves Quakers, of
whose pernicious opinions and practices, we had received intelligence from good
hands from Barbados and England (arrived at Boston) whose persons were only
secured, to be sent away by the first opportunity without censure or punishment,
although their professed tenants, turbulent and contemptuous behavior to
authority would have justified a severer animadversion, yet the Prudence of
this Court was exercised, only in making provision to secure the peace and
order here established against their attempts, whose designs (we were well
assured of by our own experience, as well as by the example of their
predecessors in Munster) was to undermine and ruin the same. And accordingly
a law was made and published, prohibiting all Masters of Ships to bring any
Quakers into this Jurisdiction, and themselves from coming in, on penalty of
the house of Correction, till they could be sent away: notwithstanding which,
by a back door, they found entrance, and the penalty inflicted on themselves
proving insufficient to restrain their impudent and insolent obstructions, was
increased by the loss of the ears of those that offended the second time,
which also being too weak a defense against their impetuous frantic fury,
necessitated us to endeavor our security, and upon serious consideration,
after the former experiments by their incessant assaults, a law was made that
such persons should be banished, on pain of death, according to the example of
England in their provision against Jesuits, which sentence being regularly
pronounced, at the last Court of assistants against the parties above named,
and they either returning, or continuing presumptuously in this Jurisdiction,
after the time limited, were apprehended, and owning themselves to be the
persons banished, were sentenced (by the Court) to death, according to the law
aforesaid, which has been executed upon 2. of them, Mary Dyer upon the
petition of her Son and the mercy and clemency of this Court, had liberty to
depart within two days, which she has accepted of. The Consideration of our
graduall proceeding will vindicate us from the clamorous accusations of
severity; our just and necessary defense, calling upon us (other means
failing) to offer the point which these persons have violently and wilfully
rushed upon; And thereby become felons de se, which might it have been
prevented, and the Sovereign law Salus populi been preserved, our former
proceedings, as well as the sparing of Mary Dyer upon an inconsiderable
intercession, will manifestly evince, we desire their lives absent rather than
their death present.

EDWARD RAWSON Secret.

London Printed by A. W. 1660.


