A TRUE RELATION OF The taking of Sherborn-Castle.

WITH Six hundred Prisoners, One thousand Arms, and great store of other
Provisions.

Sent in two Letters, The one, To the Right Honorable, WILLIAM LENTHALL
Speaker of the House of Commons.

And the other, To Edmund Prideaux and Dennis Bond, Esqs Members of the said
House.

COmmanded to be forthwith printed by the Honorable, William Lenthall, Speaker
of the House of COMMONS.



Printed for Edward Husband, Printer to the Honorable House of Commons. Aug.
18. 1645.

A Copy of a Letter sent to the Honorable William Lenthall, Speaker of the
House of Commons.
SIR,
SInce this Army came out into the Field, God has done great things by it; I
have been an eyewitness of them all; but in my judgment, this of Sherborn
Castle (if God deliver it into our hands) as I hope he will within few hours,
is not the least; which, by the Valor of our Commanders and Soldiers, in
fourteen days time we gained ground of the Enemy by our approaches, and made
Galleries close to the wall, Bridges over the Moats, and drive a Mine to the
Foundation of the Wall, where they met with a Rock which lost us a days time:
Things being in this forwardness, Wednesday the 13. of August, the Country was
Commanded to bring in Ladders to Scale the Walls and Outworks: The whole
Cannon and Demy-Cannon were planted within twenty yards of the Wall that night,
(as on other nights) the Enemy had great lights of Torches Links, etc. on the
end of the Pikes, to see if they could discover our Mine, or Works, and how our
men stood, the better to shoot at them, and threw over fired Faggots, which
(the first time they did it) fired our Bridge, but our Soldiers instantly
quenched it, and saved the Bridge; our Soldiers and theirs discourse all
night, throw stones each at other; our men tell lack Cab, that Prince Rupert is
turned Sutler, and has nothing left but strong drink to comfort him. Thursday
the 14. of August, about eleven of the Clock, our great Guns began to Batter
the Wall between the two lesser Towers, and beat down one of the Towers, and
before six at night made a Breach that twelve a breast might enter; But it was
not held fit to fall on immediately; but the General (whose Person has been
too much hazarded in this business) sent in a Drum with a third Summons to
Surrender the Castle, that if we be put to Storm, they be left inexcuseable
within. And a gap is opened in the Wall, for Sir Lewis Dives with some honor
to come out, if he will, if he refuse, you will find (so full of Revenge are
our Soldiers against the Cabs in the Castle) that they will spare the life of
none if they be put to Storm, and much ado we shall have to save them if it be
Surrendered. The Drum is detained who was to return presently; the Lady Dives
sends not to come out, though the General sent twice to offer it, she may
desire it too late; we being in much want of Canon and Demy-Canon Bullets, were
enforced to invite the Soldiers to leap off the Gallery, and go under the Wall
and fetch back those Bullets that fell down, promising them six pence for every
Canon Bullet, and four pence for lesser; and this day, though the Enemy pelted
them with stones, they brought back about two hundred Canon, Demy-Canon and
Culve^ in shot, and had their reward duly paid them, and deservedly. I desire
you to lose no time, but hasten down great shot, and all things necessary for
Sieges to some Port Town, that they may be sent for as need is.

Sherborn, August 14. twelve at night.

Since the writing hereof, about two of the Clock this morning, Sir Lewis sent
out a Drum with this Message in writing:

SIR,
I Must acknowledge the advantage you have of me, by being Master of my walls,
and that you may not think me obstinate without reason, I have sent this Drum
unto you; to let you know, that if I may have such conditions from you, as is
fit for a Soldier and a Gentleman with honor to accept of, I shall surrender
this Castle into your hands: otherwise, I shall esteem it a far greater
happiness to bury my bones in it, and the same Resolution have all those that
are with me. And give me leave to add this, that your victory will be Crowned
with more honor by granting it, then you will gain glory by the winning it
with the loss of so much blood as it will cost,

Sherborn Castle Aug. 15. 1645. I am your servant, Lewis Dives.


What answer will be returned, I know not, I conceive if they have Quarter for
their lives, it will be all that will be granted them; for some time this day
the business will be decided by Conditions or a Storm; but to have Honorable
Conditions is too late to ask.

Sherborn this 15. of Aug. 1645. 3. in the morning.
To his Honored Friends, Edm: Prideaux, and Dennis Bond, Esqs these present.
Honored Sirs,
YOu may be assured Sherborn Castle is Surrendered upon mercy for their lives;
few men slain by the violence of the Soldier, and as few left unstript, the
Soldiers Plunder merrily: This is a place of great consequence, the Lord be
praised we have taken it; our Soldiers fight valiantly, In have I rest

Your most humble servant, Jo: Bingham.
Sherborn Castle Aug. 15. 1645. There were taken six hundred prisoners, a
thousand Arms, with a great deal of provisions, and other household stuff.



FINIS.

