A TRUE RELATION Of two great VICTORIES OBTAINED of the Enemy: The one by Sr.
William Brereton in CHESHIRE, The other by Sir John Meldrum in Lancashire;
relating the death of Col. Marrow, and the Lists of prisoners taken in both the
Fights: and of about 1800. Horse of Ruperts; As also some remarkable
Proceedings of Col. Fox, and his Cubs; with the late condition of the LORD
GENERALS Army in the West. All sent up from good hands to the Parliament, and
to Citizens of good quallitie.

Published acccording to Order.



LONDON, Printed for Thomas Underhill at the sign of the Bible in Woodstreet,
1644.

A TRUE RELATION of two great Victories obtained of the Enemy; the one by* Sir
William Brereton in Cheshire, the other by the LANCA-SHIRE Forces, etc.
SIR,
IN my last I gave you an account of the Skirmish in Lanca-shire, where the
Lord Ogleby, Collonell Mine, and diverse other persons of quality, Scotts
Commanders and Gentlemen were taken prisoners. Since which, upon Sabathday
last, some of our Forces from Northwich skirmished with Collonell Marrow near
Crowton-house, wherein we had a garrison kept, where we lost fourteen men,
which were taken prisoners. But the enemies loss was far greater, for
Collonell Marrow, a second Nymrod, received his mortal wound, upon which he is
since dead in Chester. Both he and his Regiment of horse die at one time. And
it is reported by some, that the bloody Prince Rupert is going toward the King.

I shall now acquaint you with Gods continued goodness unto us, Upon wednesday
the 21. of Aug. Sir William Brereton that active, and faithful patriot of his
Country, sent forth a party of horse and foot from Northwych in Cheshire,
who marched from thence to Froodsham, hoping to have found the enemy there.
From thence they marched over the Forest of Dalamore to Ashton, (where we
heard they quartered) to have met with them there, but having intelligence that
they were at Tarvine, within four miles of Chester, marched toward them, and
meeting some of their Scouts, pursued them into Tarvine, and there fell upon
the enemy and soon routed them.

Some fled into the Church, others out of the Town toward Chester, but were
pursued gallantly by that valiant Captain Zanchy, who commands Sir William
Breretons own Troop, within pistol shot of the walls of Chester. A Gentleman
of Sir William Breretons Troop, named Mr. Dury, killed one of the enemy close
at the works of Chester. And that while they were in pursuit of the enemy
toward Chester, the rest were not idle in Tarvin: For that worthy valiant
Lieutenant Colonel Jones, who commanded the Horse, behaved himself gallantly:
and so did that valiant Major Trevas, who commanded the Foot. The enemy fiered
very fast out of the Church, they took some horses into the Church, the
service being very hot, there was one brave horse they could not get in, but
one of the enemy held him in his hand under the Church-wall: A Corporal of Sir
William Breretons Troop, named John Cooper, seeing the horse, ventured to
fetched him, but they fiered so fast out of the Church, that he retreated twice,
but the third time ventured up, pistoled the enemy, and brought away the horse;
which horse was valued worth fourscore pounds. There was taken at the same time
between forty and fifty prisoners, and about three hundred horse, some very
gallant ones, and when they had done, marched away with their prisoners and
horses, and lost but two men. Had not the enemy at Chester had such an alarm,
and made such haste toward us, we should have taken the Church.

Prisoners taken at Tarvin, the 21. of August, 1644. as follows.
Captain Ed. Gibson. Cornet Clemence. Gent. Anthony Shewer. Mr. Sam.
Saltonstall. Henry Rowbothem. Edward Low. John Penkit. Edward Boden. Godfrey
Boden. John Shelton. Humfrey Millington. George Sykes. William Burdingham.
Edward Botham. James Swinthel of Colonel Chal^rosse Regiment. Thomas Benson.
William Reynolds. Peter Wright. William Bennit. Jeremy Adderton. Thomas
Philips. Sam: Bold, a Boy. Robert Morris, of Captain Swinningtons men. Rich.
Shaw. Tho: Roberts. Edward Ogden. Rich. Roberts, Lieutenant Colonel Grosvens
men. Micha. Parney. John Wells. Thomas Thornley. William Barlow. Ralph Bradshaw
William Morris. Thomas Cooper, a little Boy under Lieutenant Colonel Leigh.
John Burks. William Linniker. Robert Davenport. Thomas Walker, of Captain
Philips Troop. Robert Hughes of Captain Woodhas troop. John Read, under
Captain Prichard. Richard Bloore, of no Company.
And it is to be observed, that the very same day, and at the very same present
time, that the Cheshire Forces were engaged at Tarvin, that the Lancashire
Forces had a great Victory over the enemy.

An extract of a Letter from Lancashire of credit.
OUr Major General Meldrum having notice of the enemy marched toward Ormskirk
made have after them, overtook them on Tuesday in the evening, on a moor near
Ormskirk, where they stood in batalia, and upon the first charge of our Musket,
that were under the command of Col. Booth, they fled, whereupon our Horse
bravely fell upon them, and totally routed them. In the pursuit they took about
eight hundred horse; some letters report a thousand, and three hundred
prisoners. By reason of the night we could not improve the victory as otherwise
we might have done.

The Lord Byron, and the Lord Molleneaux were forced to leave their horses and
to hide themselves in a cornfield.

Yours, etc.
Manchester, August. 24. 1644.
A List of the names of such persons of quallity as were taken near Ormskirk on
Tuesday, Aug. 20. 1644.
Colonel Sr. James Prestwich, Captain James Anderton, Lievt. Col. Cottingham,
Capt. Ecceston, Capt. Atherton. Capt. Butler. Capt. Brooks. Capt. Lea. Mr.
Worthington, Esquire. Abraham Laughton, Esquire. John Sturbane, Gent. Lievt.
Thomas Mossoike Lievt. Walter Chamberlain, Lievt. John De Hurst, Lievt. John
Morgrow, Lievt. Nathan Jones, Liev. William Johnson, Coronet. Edward Stauley,
Coronet. Rich. Wright, Gent. Coronet. Henry Gilibrand, Coronet. Peter Bland,
Gent. William Scot, Gent. Th^mas Sherburn, Gent. (...) Marshall, Gent. Arthur
Butler, Gent. James No^icon, Gent. Thomas Wotton, Gent. John Fox, Gent. John
Fulme, Clerk. James Bold, Clerk. John Brown Quartermaster. Abraham Jones,
servant to Mr. Blunt. Will. Noricon, Quartermaster.
and about two hundred and fifty common soldiers.

Out of a Letter from Cheshire.
THe strength of this bloody Prince in his Horse, is much abated: For at
Welshpoole there was taken by Sir Thomas Middleton, Colonel Mitton, with the
assistance of Cheshire Forces, three hundred forty six horses of Ruperts own
Regiment. And the same week was taken by Colonel Ashton, at Holland in
Lancashire, two hundred Horse; and at Preston in Lancashire about threescore
horse: And at the last skirmish by the Lancashire Forces at Ormskirk in
Lancashire, about nine hundred horse, and by Sir William Brereton at Tarvin,
three hundred horse, which in all make up near upon a thousand eight hundred
horse, besides prisoners.

THough some time be over-past, yet I cannot altogether let sleep in oblivion
those many noble actions of Colonel Fox, not yet in public view: A little
while since upon the discovery of the quartering of Worcester Forces in Upton
Warren, some twelve miles from his Garrison, he went forth with a party of
horse, and took in their quarters Captain Milward; one Lieutenant Colonel
Dudley, as appeared by a commission found in his pocket, Lieutenant Newbery,
quartermaster Dod, two Corporals, ten other Soldiers, and twenty horse; with
these he also brought a drove of beasts from the Earl of Shrewsbury. A little
after he took Captain Knight in his quarters at Stoak, near Bromsgrove.

The 16. of this August, upon intelligence that the Commission of Array sat in
execution thereof at Ombersley four miles from Worcester, and 17. from Egberson
garrison, desired my Lord of Denbies forces to join with him for their
apprehension, which was accordingly attempted, where they took 40. prisoners,
diverse being men of note, 130 brave horse, 150 beasts, most of the Commissioners
very hardly escaped, which they had not done, but by reason of some delays of
those that commanded the Earls forces, being busied with some other designs
nearer Worcester, contrary to the Colonels direction and desire, yet
notwithstanding by reason of the Colonel and his cubs pursuit after them over
the river Severne, where they were enforced to swim, he recovered diverse
excellent horse and Arms, and returned with this prize in safety. In this
expedition young Capt. Cotton behaved himself very valiantly. Upon the 20. of
this month the Colonel having intelligence of some Cavaliers to lie in
Bromsgrove, sent forth a party of horse under the command of Capt. Tadman, and
Capt. Johnson, who surprised in that place, Capt. Barnsley and his soldiers,
he being a Gentleman of quality, and a Worcester Captain: This noble Colonels
practice is such, that no Cavalier is heard of in the country, but he brings
him to his den: neither dare any enemy come out of Worcester to oppose his
proceedings, insomuch that the greatest malignants, and Papists seeek to make
their peace with us, confessing their errors.

N. N.
August. 20. 1644.
From the west several letters express that the King with his whole Army,
being far greater then the Lord Generals, set upon the Lord Generals Army on
thursday last Aug. 22. and were gallantly beaten back with great loss, and
that both Armies continued fighting by parties for several days, and that
they so continued on Sabathday last when the messenger came away.



FINIS.

