A true RELATION OF THE PROCEDINGS OF The Scotch Army Since their advance from
Nottingham until 30. July 1645.

Expressed in a LETTER from the Lord Generals Quarters.

Published by Authority.

LONDON, Printed by M. B. for Robert Bostock at the Kings head in Paul's
Churchyard. 4. Aug. 1645.

A true RELATION Of the Proceedings of the Scotch ARMY Since their advance from
Nottingham. until 30. July 1645.
SIR,
WHen our Army advanced to Nottingham, we were desired by the Parliament to
march to Worcestershire; when we came there we were desired to pursue the enemy
in the Field, we have done accordingly; the King and Colonel Gerard had about
four thousand Horse and three thousand Foot, we have driven them out of
Worcestershire, and by parties have pursued them from the one end of
Herefordshire to the other, we put our great Ordnance into Gloucester that we
might the better follow them; their Foot are now all dissipated so that we
cannot hear of them, their Horse are out of Herefordshire and dispersed into
several Counties of Wales, some in Monmouth, some in Glamorganshire, some in
Brecknock, others toward Ludlow, so that we have no considerable body of the
enemy to follow; and I hope none will blame us that we do not fight with
those that will never stay in our view, but run to Rocks and Mountains in
divided and inconsiderable parties. We were also desired to hinder the enemies
Recruits, and live in their Quarters; I hope we have done the first to good
purpose; but concerning the last, we know not where they are; for we do no
sooner come to any place (though yesterday) all in the enemies possession, but
within a day or two the Country calls it the Parliaments Quarters, and desire
us to remove to some other place. If there be any part in England the Enemies
Quarters, we are now in them, for there cannot be a more malignant people in
Britain; they give all the intelligence and assistance they can to the enemy,
and will afford us no manner of entertainment that they can withhold: Our
Soldiers in a weeks time have scarce got three days provisions, and these
eight days past, except once, have not seen bread. We sent to Gloucester, but
could get nothing there, but for ready money; and if Major Dobson (who has
been very kind and active for us,) had not given his word in assurance
thereof, we had been forced to advance the Money before we received the
provisions.

Many promises were made for the care of our Army, before our advance
Southward; jf they had been performed, and that respect had to us, as to other
Armies in the Kingdom, the Common Enemy had been in a lower condition, and our
assistance of greater advantage to our friends; What the cause is that has
obstructed all our Supplies, or what the ends of it are, I will not take upon
me to determine; but I doubt if any Age can parallel our condition. We have
weakened our own Kingdom, by bringing supplies to this, and have exposed it
to the merciless fury of Irish Rebels, and unnatural Countrymen, out of an
earnest desire to quench the flames here: Our Soldiers have not wearyed to
march with hungry bellies both day and night, when occasion requires; yet we
hear there be some Egyptian Taskmasters, who withhold the straw, and call
for more brick, being never satisfied with what we do; the worst I wish to
such, is, that they were eye witnesses to our sufferings and actions; I am sure
(if they have any affection to the Cause) they would lend us more of their
help, and speak less to our prejudice; If they be Enemies I regard not what
they say: But to return; The General sent a Convoy to the English
Commissio-weake and a thin Army. But we bless the Lord ners, and they came
hither upon Monday; yesterday we had a meeting with them, where it was debated,
whether we should pursue the Enemy in the Fields, or fall upon some other
design, but there being no considerable body of the enemy together, the first
was by all conceived no ways for the public advantage; there remained nothing
but a siege; the Question was, whether Worcester or Hereford, at Worcester we
could be more easily and better provided of all necessaries, both for the siege
and the entertainment of the Soldiers; the King had not another pass upon
Severne, and it brought much trade to London, upon the other part Hereford was
nearer the Enemies Quarters, we could be more able to annoy the Enemy, hinder
his Recruits, and break his Forces, the taking thereof gained the whole County
where now the Parliament had no interest, and so enlarged their Quarters.
Worcester also would thereby be in a manner blocked up, the Parliament having
already three sides of it. These reasons were found the stronger and more for
the advantage of the public service, and this day the Army is marched toward
Hereford, and are to lie down before it. I trust care will be taken to furnish
us with Materials for that purpose, wherein for the present we are unprovided;
but our greatest fear is, for want of Victuals for the Soldiers, for they had
never worse entertainment; and if they were not constant in their affections to
the Cause, the difficulties and discouragements they have met with in these few
days had made us a for his assistance, and though we should be yet more
neglected by men, shall never be wanting in the Cause of God, wherein we are
confidentt he will ever enable us to dee what he requires at our hands, I am

Your most humble servant, Michell Deane.
30. July* 1645.
FINIS.

