A true Relation of the taking of BRISTOLL CONTAINING The several
circumstances thereof: as it was sent in a Letter by an eyewitness to the
Governor at OXFORD, July 30.
Together with his Excellencies Propositions to both Houses of Parliament,
August the 1.
AT the assault of Bristoll the outworks were made very strong, and cost near
500. common men's lives on the Kings side. Colonel Herbert Lunsford was flaine,
and the Lord Viscount Grandison shot, and Master Balasis wounded in the head by
his own sword, which was struck to his head by a Mu^ket, when they rushed in
upon the Works: neither of them in any great danger. It was the hottest service
that ever was in this kingdom since the war began. In his Majesty's Army
there is at least 1400. armed men, some other Gentlemen were lost in the
service, whose names we shall know hereafter. The City was surrendered upon
Wednesday upon this composition.

The Commanders were permitted to ride out with swords, and the common men
marched out with sticks in their hands, so many as were pleased to go: but at
least 1000. of the Garrison Soldiers very willingly remain in the Castle to
serve his Majesty. Colonel Fines marched out without ^olestation or hurt, who
attempted before to escape, but was stopped by the sea men, which are hi^
Majesty's friends. The Royalist fou^ds in the City 1700. Barrels of Gunpowder,
with Match and Bullets proportionable: 60. Brass Pieces of good Ordnance: and
all the arms. 18. good ships in the River belonging to Merchants, and 4. Ship
belonging to the Earl of Warwick, (that came lately to relieve it) which have
good store of Ammunition in them. The City gives 14000. pound by way of
composition to save them from plundering: Upon which Hi^ Majesty has sent a
Proclamation strictly to prevent it, that it shall be death for any soldier
to plunder. Sir Arthur Ashton came post to Oxford on friday to inform His
Majesty of the state of things there: Upon which, the Counsel of war, and
the Counsel of state agreed to send away Sir John Pennington speedily to
Bristoll to have the command of the Ships: and a Proclamation to all Mariners
that are willing to serve the King, to this effect. That they shall have their
pardons that have served under the Earl of Warwick, and also their pay that is
due from him presently paid at Bristoll; and his Majesty's pay and his favor
for the future. It is thought Sir Ralph Hopton, or Sir Arthur Ashton shall be
Governor or Commander in chief at Bristoll, and we think the King will remove
his Court thither. The Queen was abroad upon saturday last, she looks very ill.
Oxford is very strongly fortified; but men dye daily there of a Callenture,
being a burning Fever. It Is reported that his Excellency is much incensed with
the City (for saturdayes business for making Sir William Waller a General,
and for their neglect and slighting of him. He sent Sir Phillip Stapleton the
last night to the houses, with a letter showing how much he is undervalued and
abused: together with some Propositions to them, and some Resolutions of his
own: Some of the Lords are also discontented, if not prevented they are likely
to be of the Earl of Essex his opinion, and be ready to side with him in that
course which he intends ere long, God direct him and them. Informations 31
July, of the Bristoll taking, Excester shaking, Gloucester quaking, The report is
that Bristoll is to pay but 50000. in money, for composition but that they are
also to cloth 15000. of the Kings Soldiers according to their quality, all
common men allowed 3. l. a suite, and Gentlemen or Comanders 6. l. If this be
so it amfounteth, to little less then 140000. l. according to the former
Intelligence. There was found in the Castle of Bristoll much money, 100000. l.
as is reported.

Five Propositions from his Excellency to both of Parliament.
FIrst, that he should have the arrereages paid to his Soldiers, Secondly, His
army to be recruted, Thirdly, to have 400. horse pressed, and afterward 200. a
month, Fourthly, that he will have satisfaction from some Citizens whom he
shall nominate that have scandalize and disparaged him, Fifthly, that he will
have no army raised but with his commission and authority,
OXFORD, Printed by LEONARD LEICHFIELD 1643.


