A TRVE RELATION Of the late Occurrences in Jreland in two Letters; One brought
over by a Noble Gentleman, Sir Hards Waller, of a sharp Skirmish there
happened the 29. of June last, betwixt the Right Honorable the Lord Inchguin,
Captain William Jephton, and Sir William Courtney, of the English party, and
the Rebels on the other side in the Province of Munster, Dated from Ireland the
8. of this instant July.

The other Dated the fourth of Iulie from I.H. to his Uncle W.E. wherein
Relation is made of three several Defeats given to the Rebels by the Lord of
Kelonmikie, the Lord of Broughall and others.

With the taking of 6. Ensigns, 8. Drums, and Arms for 500. men, with great
store of Booty.

LONDON, Printed by A.N. for Edw. Blackmore.

July 18, 1642.

A true Relation brought over by a Noble Gentleman Sir Hards Waller by name, of
a sharp Skirmish which there happened on the 29. day of June 1642. Betwixt the
Right Honorable the Lord Inchguin, Captain William Iephton, and Sir William
Courtney, on the English party, and the Rebels on the other side, in the
Province of Munster.
IT happened that the Enemy lying within seven or eight miles of our English
quarter at Downarayle aforesaid; and consisting of about twenty five hundred
foot, and a Troop of Horse, had a Design (as we knew by good intelligence)
to confront our Forces there, if not to fall foul with us. The said Lord
Inchguin with the advice of the other Commanders, resolved by way of
prevention, to march away toward them all night from Downarayle, which
enterprise they so dexterously pursued, that with five hundred Musketeers, and
two hundred Horse; they were ready to give them a Breakfast the next morning
very early: and albeit those Rebels had gotten some private advertisement of
our coming, and had therefore stood all that night to their Arms. Yet did our
said Commanders find the means to approach them; and to try their mettle,
began to salute them with a Volley of shot, which seconded by our forward
Troops did so daunt them at the very first encounter, that they presently were
Rowted, and betook them with all possible diligence to their heels, toward a
Wood and Bogge, about half a mile off from that place. And our valiant Troops
then pursuing them, did through Gods especial favor lessen their number by
about six hundred men, and took some of their Commanders Prisoners, with five
of their Colors; they have hereby also augmented their store of Arms with
many Muskets, and many more Pykes in this Conflict which I may say, was a very
sharp one on their side, but miraculously favorable on ours. As having lost
but one man, nor any hurt but one Sergeant, (thanks to the Lord of Hoasts.)
This and the like strange Victories we now and then obtain against the Rebels,
do give us no small heart and courage amidst the great wants we often undergo
in this now almost desolate Country; And makes our men go on with such
incredible resolution, as we read of the old Romans amongst the Barbarous
Nations, without being any more daunted with the present distractions betwixt
the King and Parliament, then were those Romans abroad, when their Emperors
and Consuls brought the Scene of war within the Walls of Rome.

It has pleased God nevertheless to temper our late Triumph with some sorrow.
For upon the fourth of July last, our most Noble and never-enough lamented Sir
William Ledger, President of this Province is departed this life, dying in his
bed, of an infirmity which his Physician says was occasioned by this restless
care and study in his Charge.

We daily are put in hope of fresh supplies out of England but they are so
long a coming, that we begin to doubt there is some power does malign the
maine Design, God send us some good news of an Accommodation of the great
Differences in England; And then we shall have a redoubled courage against all
dangers and difficulties here.

To my loving Uncle Master VV. E.
Most dear and loving Uncle:
HAving the convenience of sending by this Bearer, I am bold to write of our
last Occurrences in these parts.

The 29 of June, we marched with our English forces being four hundred foot,
and four Troops of Horse toward the Enemy, and having discovered them, we
found them to be three thousand Foot and Horse, and yet we gave them battle,
and such was the goodness of God unto us that we forced them to retreat into
a Town, where continuing our pursuit beat them out again, and forced them
utterly to flight, in this service our Horse and Foot killed six hundred of
them, took their Ammunition and Wagons, and having pillaged their Town, we
burnt it to the ground, and brought away six Ensigns, eight Drums, and took
Arms for five hundred men, had we been furnished with sufficient forces, we
might have saved the Town and left a Garrison in it, which (through Gods
assistance might have much advanced the service.

The 30 of June, my Lord Keloumikie, (son to the Earl of Gork) his Horse being
in number but 38, marched out of Bandonbridge, and in the compass of six miles
brought in a thousand sheep and four hundred head of Cattle, but in their
return, the Rebels (being one thousand strong) were got between our men and the
Town, yet they kept their pray, brought it into the Town, and killed threescore
and ten of the Rogues with the loss of two men.

The third day of July, my Lord of Broughall marched out to relieve Sir Philip
Percivals Castle, with his own troop only, and two hundred and fifty foot,
and was encountered by a thousand of the Rebels horse and foot, who after a
fierce assault killed one hundred of the Rebels, and relieved the Castle, and
in their return skirmished again with the Rogues, and killed one hundred and
fifty more of them, with the loss of two men only, blessed be God who puts
courage into the hearts of our men, teaching their hands to war, and their
fingers to fight, and gives them victory, we have taken of late many brave
Castles with much provision.

Surely according to these experiments of Gods wonderful assistance to our
poor forces, it may well be hoped that if we had money to pay our Soldiers,
five thousand foot with a proportionable number of horse would enable us to bid
our friends welcome, and to repel enemies, and therefore I earnestly beg of
God to compose the unhappy distractions of England, that the wished, and long
expected assistance may come.

This morning we have intelligence that my Lord President of Munster is dead,
and now my Lord of Cork sends a ship to certify the State of England, by
which this is conveyed, I have not time, and therefore crave pardon for not
expressing the passages more at large.

Thus with my duty and best respects to you, and the rest of my friends I
remayn;

Your dutiful Nephew I. H.
Youghall, the fourth of July, 1642.
FINIS.

