the punishments of James Naylor

The manner how James Naylor stood in the Pilory, and was whipped from the
Pallace-yard at Westminster, to the Royal Exchange in London, December the 18.
1656.

A true RELATION OF The Life, Conversation, Examination, Confession, and just
deserved Sentence of James Naylor the grand Quaker of ENGLAND.

Who for his Blasphemous and abominable Opinions, and Practices, was Whipped at a
Carts-taile, from Westminster to the Royall-Exchange ^n L^^don, December the
eighteenth 1656. and thereto stand in the Pillory, and to have the letter B set
upon his forehead, and to be burnt through the tongue with a hot Iron, and to be
kept in prison during life, without being allowed any sustenance, but what he
shall earne with his own Labor.

London, Printed for Thomas Vere at the Angill without Newgate. 1657

THE Life and Conversation of JAMES NAYLOR.
James Naylor was born at Anderslow in Yorke-shire, his Father being a
Sow-gelder, brought up his Son James to the same Trade, who used it a long
while, until the late wars, at which time he went for a Soldier and since
that married a Wife who lives now in Wakefield with her Children: formerly he
was of the Church of one Mr. Christopher Marshall in Yorke-shir, and for his
seandalus practices was cast out of the said Congregation, and so can away from
his Wife and Children to London; and being asked why he left his Wife, he said
he had an imediate can for it: in his stay at London he presantly became
familiar with one Ropers Wife, whom he often set upon his knee and she kill
him, being asked why she did so, she said she kill him not out of wantonness,
but in a dsere relation yet not withstanding we proud with Child, 47 w\l=e'\eke
after her husband was gone from her. As also one Rebecca Purnell a bansome
Maid, whom the said Naylor solicited to lie withal, who did refuse him, though
she let another Quaker do it; and such was his base desire after her, that
many questioned him for it, be said that he would give his Wife the same
liberty he desired of her. And that he could as freely lie with Rebecca Purnell
of any other of his society as his own Wife.

The said Naylor and his company met often at Mr. Roberts his House in St.
Thomas Apostles: where met him one Stephen a Cloth drawer, at which time same
one Buroughs and rubbed something one his wrist, after which time he was so
adicted to that wicked company, that he could not but run after them and do
what he supposed the Spirit in him dictated to him, which did advise him to eat
and drink nothing but Bread and Water for 12 days upon which he was convicted
that their practiced were bad, and so he now forsakes and abominats them.

THE EXAMINATION OF James Nailor;
November the 15. 1657.
BEing asked his name, whether it was not James Naylor or not? and whether he
went not into Bristoll on Horse back, a Woman leading his Horse, and others
singing before Holy, Holy, Holy, and whether any Garments were spread.

A. That Men call him James Naylor; but what the name of the Town was he
knows not, and that he did ride into a Town, and a Woman held his Horse by
the bridle, and that some cast down clothes and sang Praises unto the Lord,
such songs as the Lord put in their hearts; and it is like it was the song of
Holy, Holy, Holy.

Q. Being asked whether he reproved them or not.

A. Nay but I had them take heed that they sang not any thing but what they was
moved of the Lord.

Q. Being asked whether he owned Hanna Stangars Letter? and the Letter showed
him,

A Yea, he did own the Letter.

Q. Being asked if according to the Letter to him, if he was the fairest of ten
thousand,

A. As to the visible be denies any such atribute due to him but if to that
which the Father has begotten in him he owneth it.

Q. Being asked if he were the only Son of God.

A. That he owneth not the only Son, but that he is the Son of God, for he
has many Brethren,

Q. Have any called; ou by the name of Jesus.

A. Not as to the visible, but as the Jesus the Christ that is in me, he
denies not, but that it was written to him.

Q. Do you own the name of the King of Israel.

A. As a Creature be denied it, but if they gave it Christ in him, he owneth
it; and says that be has a Kingdom, but not of this World.

Q. Whether he was the Prophet of the most high.

A. That he was a Prophet, he owneth.

Q. whether he owneth that Attribute, the judge of Israel.

A. The Judge is but one, and is witnessed in me, and is the Christ, there must
not be any joined with him, if they speak of the Spirit in me, I own it, only
as God is manifest in the flesh according as God dwells in me, and judges
there himself.

Q. By whom were you sent.

A. By him who has sent the Spirit of his Son in me to try, not as to carnal
matters, but belonging to the Kingdom of God, by the indwelling of the father
and Son, by the judge of all Spirits, to be guided by-none.

Q. Is not the written word of God the guide.

A. The written word declares of it, and is not according to that, is not true.

Q. Whether he be more sent then any others, or whether others are not sent in
that measure,

A. As to that I have nothing at present given of my Father to answer

Q. Whether was your birth immortal.

A. Not according to the natural birth, but according to the Spiritual birth,
borne of the immortal seed.

Q. Whether any one has called him the Lamb of God.

A. I look not back to the things behind, but it may be some such thing in the
Letter, and says yt he is a Lamb, and has sought it long before he could
witness it.

Q. Who is your Mother, whether a Virgin.

A. Nay, according to my Natural birth.

Q. Who is your Mother according to the Spiritual birth.

A. No carnal Creature.

Q. Who then.

To that he would not answer.

Q. Is the hope of Israel in you.

A. The hope is in Christ, and as Christ is in me, so far the hope of Israel
stands; Christ in me the hopes of Glory.

Q. What more hope in you then others.

A. None can know but them of Israel, and Israel must give an account.

Q Whether he be the everlasting Son of God.

A. Where God is manifest in the Flesh, there is the everlasting Son, and I do
witness God manifest in the Flesh.

Q. Whether he be the Prince of Peace.

A. That the Prince of everlasting peace is begoteten in him.

Q. Whether he reproved them that gave him these Attributes.

A. He said nothing to them, but says sach things was Written?

Q Did any kiss your feet.

A. It might be they did, but he did not mind them.

Q. Whether when you was called the King of Jsraell, did you not answer [thou
say it.]

A. Yea.

Q. Did you not say, if ye had known me then ye had known the Father.

A. Yea, and says that none can know his life, but they that know the father,
for he is his life.

Q. Where was you borne,

A. At Anderslow in Yorkshire, and his Wife lives in Wakefield and lived
there until he went into the Army, and was first under him they call Lord
Fairfax, and after under Collonell Lambert; and then into Scotland and was a
Quartermaster, and returned sick to his Wife, and was called into the North.

Q. What went you for, to Exeter.

A. I was going to Lawson to see the Brethren.

Q. What Estate have you.

A, I take no care for that,

Q. Does God in extraordinary manner feed you; or sustain you without,

A, Man lives not by Bread alone, but by every word that proceeds out of the
mouth of the Father, and that the same life is in him, as in Christ, but not in
the same measure.

Q. How are you clothed,

A, I know not.

Q Do you live without Bread,

A: As long as my heavenly father win, I have tasted that Bread, that he that
eats, shall not dye.

Q How long have you lived without corporal sustenance, having health,

A, Some fifteen or sixteen days sustained by Gods word, without any
corporal sustenance.

Q. Was Dorothy Erbery dead two days in Exeter Goal and did you raise her.

A, I can do nothing of my self, there is a power within me far above, and I
shall not bear witness of my self, the Scripture bears witness, to the
power in me, which is everlasting; its the same power we read of in Scripture.

That the Lord has made him a sign of his coming.

That that honor belongs to Christ Jesus, in whom he is revealed, may be
given to him, as when on the Earth at Jerusalem according to that measure

Dorothy Erbery answered not.

Martha Simmons confesses that she knows James Naylor, and she came from
Bristoll to Exeter with him.

Q. Being asked whether he be the Prince of Peace,

A, She says that he is a perfect Man, and he that is a perfect Man is the
Prince of Peace.

Q. Whether she sang before James Naylor,

A. It Is our life to praise the Lord, and that the Lord my strength, that
fills Heaven and Earth is manifest in James Naylor, and that she spread her
Garments in obedienc to the Lord

She confesses all the Bristoll Examination.

HAnna Stangar says she came from Bristoll to Exeter with James Naylor, and
that she flung her Handkerchiefe before him, because commanded so of the Lord;
and that she did sing Holy, Holy, Holy, before him, or else she does witness,
that the Lord is risen in him.

Q. Being asked about the Letter, wherein she calls him the Son of God

A. She owneth the Letter and believes nothing added.

Q. whether she called him Jesus.

She would not answer.

Q Did you kiss his feet.

A, Yea.

Tho. Stangar confesses he saw Garments spread, but he now owneth a Letter in
which he calls James Naylor Jesus: and says he was moved of the Lord so to
do.

Monday December 8 1656.
UPon serious consideration of these his horrid Blasphemies and wicked
practices, it was voted that James Naylor upon the whole matter of Fact is
guilty of horrid Blashemy.

That the said James Naylor is also a grand Imposter, and a great Seducer of
the People.

James Naylor his Sentence.
FOr these his Blasphemous opinions and practices, the said James Naylor is to
he whipped at a Carts-taile from the Pallace-yard in VVestminister, to the
Royal Exchange in London and there to stand in the Pillory, and the letter B to
be set upon his fore head, and to be burnt through the tongue with a hot Iron,
afterward to be carried down to Bristoll and to be whipped though the streets
of that City, afterward to be put into Bridewell, and there to be kept during
life and to have no sustenance allowed him but what he shall get by his own
labor.

FINIS.

