A True RELATION OF THE LATE BATTLE NEAR NEWBERY. SHOWING The happy success
of his Excellencies Forces against the Cavaliers, upon Monday, Tuesday, and
Wednesday, with the manner of their Fight, and how many slain, and taken
Prisoners on both sides. Also how his Majesty and the Prince standing on a hill
near, and viewing the said Fight, concluded that it was a worse bout then
Edgehill. With a perfect Relation of the taking of Cyrencester, the number of
Prisoners, Horses, Arms, Ammunition, and Provisions: As it was sent in a
Letter from one in the Army, to his Friend in London; Dated from their quarters
in Reading, 23 of September, 1643.

London Printed for John Wright, in the Old-Bailey, 26 September. 1643.

A true Relation of the late battle near Newbury, Sept. 23. 1643.
Loving Master,
MY service being presented to your self and my Mistress, with my love to my
Brother, Sister, and all the rest of my Friends, These are to inform you that
I am in good health, at present, I praise God, and so is all our Company.

At our first entrance into Gloucester I sent a Letter to my Brother, if it
miscarried not, wherein was a Relation of that Skirmish at Stow, in which as we
heard, it was reported in London that we were all miserably killed, when indeed
Prince Rupert and his now terrified Cavaleers ran away before 20 Muskets was
shot on our side, for their parts I think they had none there to shoot, the
noise of my Lord Generals Ordnance and the sight of the Citizens, is now an
ordinary forerunner of their running constitutions, from thence we chac't them
before us till we came to Gloucester, and there rowz'd them from their nests, made
them burn their Cabins, wheel about to the left, and leave some of the
Cabbages without, and all their glorious pillage so much gaped for within the
City.

On Friday Sept. 8. we entered the City and there quartered till Sunday
following, and from thence we marched to Teuksbury, where we lay till last
Friday, on which morning some of the Cavalers set upon a party of our Horse,
which were quartered at Oxenton four miles off, who being not so vigilant as
they ought to have been in their watches, were routed, some few were spoyld
and taken, and the rest made to fly: The day before we caused a Bridge to be
made over the Severne, and sent some Forces to Upton Bridge, in policy, as if
we intended to march for Worcester, which caused the Enemy to draw all his
forces together forth defense of that place, planted their Ordnance, and
thought to tickle us by the way; but the fools were cozened, for on Friday
morning we went clean another way marched all day and the greatest part of the
night from Teuxbury to Citencester 18 miles, where we took 200 and odd of
them napping in their beds, though we thank God their Horses were feeding in
the Stables, who as themselves say, were going into Kent as soon as their
companies could be filled: the manner was thus, On Friday night we thought to
have quartered in the fields 8 miles off from Cicester, but having intelligence
that such a party was there, we plucked up our spirits, drew up a forlorn hope
of about six hundred Musketeers, and so we marched lustily for Cicester, we
drew near it about one of the clock in the morning; and because we expected
some knocking work, for we heard that Prince Maurice with two thousand horse
was there: we had all white handkerchiffs in our hats, and the word GOD in our
mouths for distinction, our forlorn hope bravely entered the Town, whilst the
rest of our forces surrounded it, and as soon as we werein, commanded all the
inhabitants upon pain of death to keep their doors and windows shut, and if
any man presumed to look out or stir, we were commanded to shoot them, or knock
them down: they had set out a guard of four men, but the Centry was asleep,
whom we straight knocked down for quietness sake; the rest took house, and we
marched up to the Market place, according to order, without any opposition, the
Cavaliers supposing we had been Prince Maurice and his forces, who it seems
were that night expected, tilwe entered their houses; dragged them our prisoners,
and put them into the Church together till the next morning. Among the
Prisoners was one Captain Hacker, a late City Captain, and some other
Captains, Officers and Citizens of worth and quality, and one Mason an
Vpholster in Newgate-market: the Prisoners we bring along with us, but what
service we are next designed for, as yet we know not: I think if it please God
to preserve us, as blessed be his name he has hitherto wonderfully done, it
will not be long before we be in London.

At Cicester we took between thirty and forty Cart-load of Bread and Cheese,
the Cavaliers had got and ready provided for their own eating, all their
Horses, some Pistolls, Swords, and Carabines, with some Money, and good
Clothes, to God be the glory and honor for ever.

From our Quarters at Reading Sept. 23. 1643.
SIr, since this Letter, which till now I had no opportunity to send, we have
had three bouts with the Cavaliers, who have been so enraged ever since we
disappointed their purposes at Gloucester, and got away their bread and cheese
at Ciciter, that they have often sworn we should never see London again, and
our Prisoners have bragd of the same as a thing impossible, yet the Lord be
praised we are now pretty well on our way. On Monday last we quartered at
Chilleton, and that afternoon the Cavaliers faced us on Mavern hills, two miles
on this side; we made as if we had retreated, and sent out a party of horse to
meet them, they joined, fired bravely upon each other, and our horse wheeled
off: Then my Lord General fell on with his Foot, and gave them a gallant
charge, which accompanied with a Volley of our Dragooners ratled for the space
of an hour without any cessation. Then the trained Bands and Auxiliaries were
drawn on, but the darkness of the night prevented out further sport for that
time. We took about 60 prisoners, and marched away that night to Chelton, and
from thence the next day to Newbery, where the Cavaleers pitched a field against
our coming, planted their Ordnance, and having joined the King and Queens
Army together with Prince Maurice his foot, and all the forces they could
possible make, thought themselves sure of our destruction, but God had
otherwise determined it: for on Wednesday morning my Lord General by Sun rise
espying their body set in a battalia upon a place called Newbery-common, d^^^
up toward them, fell to it pell-mell, and the fight continued without any
intermission all that day and the next night till one or two of the clock the
next morning: Many men were killed on both sides, but God be praised we won
the field of them, and beat them into the Town: The most we lost were out of
the Blew and Red Trained-Bands, who nevertheless have gained themselves
eternal honor. Lieutenant Colonel Tucker and Captain Hunt of the Red
Trained bands are slain. The fight was long and terrible, some talk of
thousands slain on the Kings side; I viewed the field, and cannot guess above
500, but this the Townsmen informed us, that they carried 60 cart load of dead
and wounded men into the Town before I came to view the place, and such crying
there was for Surgeons as never was the like heard. The King, Queen, and Prince
stood all the day upon a hill hard by, in sight of us, and beheld all: and the
King himself has said, That this was a worse bout then Edgehill. The next
day we faced them upon the Common till eleven or twelve of the clocks but they
drew not out to meet us, which caused us to march away, our business being
only to break through their Army home. But Colonel Hurry, as soon as we were
gone, with a strong party of horse made after us, but such was the base
cowardice of our horse, which that day brought up the Rear, that upon a weak
assault of the enemy they ran away, rode quite through our foot in a narrow
lane, pressed many of them down under their horses feet, and for the present
utterly routed us, which caused the enemy to fall on with great eagerness and
resolution; but God be praised our Foot got over into the fields out of the
lane, lined the hedges with Musketeers, and killed them like Dogs, making them
quickly retreat, and take time to repent their hasty bargain. I know but of
three slain outright in our Company, of which Thomas Master Glovers Journeyman
is one.

The consideration of all our protection from our enemies, for all their
inveterate rage and malice against us: the preservation of our bodies in health
and strength, for all our many hard shifts and necessities, with many other
mercies, makes us sensible of this conclusion, This is the Lords doing, and it
is mavelous in our eyes. So desiring your prayers for us, I commit you to
God, and rest,

Yours, T. V.
In our first fight we killed a great Marquess of France his son, whose body
we brought with us to Hungerford, and thither the King sent a Trumpeter to my
Lord General about it, but I know not what answer was returned: and on
Wednesday my Lord Falkland, the Earl of Carnarvan, and my Lord Spencer, as I
certainly hear are slain, also a Bishop, about whose body the King also sent
a Trumpeter to my Lord General the next day. His Majesty sent from Oxford on
Friday for the burying of sixty Lords, Knights, and gentlemen of great quality,
at several places in and about Oxford, and there were many of their chief
Commanders slain, (and as a great Commander of theirs said) that there was not
one Commander that charged upon us, but were either slain, wounded, or had his
horse shot under him.



This is licensed, and entered into the Register Book of the Company of
Stationers, according to Order.


