A True RELATION Of VERY GOOD SERVICE Done by the ANTILOPE And some other
ships, under the Earl of Warwicks Command, at Barwicke, Newcastle, and the
Holy Island, the latter end of May, and beginning of June last 1643.

Faithfully expressed in a Letter from a Gentleman of Quality, who was in the
Service, to a friend of his in London,

woodcut of person standing beneath a tree

LONDON: July 4. Printed by Elizabeth Purslow. 1643.

From Aboard HIS MAJESTY'S SHIP called the ANTILOPE.
In Holy-Island Road, upon the Coast of Northumberland, this 11 of June, 1643.
SIR,
I Have thought good hereby to acquaint you with our prosperous success in the
North parts of this Kingdom, which is thus. On the 19 of May we set sail out
of the Downs with a Convoy of ten Ships for Holland, and arrived safe at
Amsterdam the 21, on which day we saild again for New Castle Bar, and ten
Leagues to the Southward of New Castle, we met with 7 or 8 sail of our own men
of War, which we sent away from the Downs when we went for Holland, so we
took them under our Command and gave them the Colors of our Squadron. May the
24 we came right before Tynmouth Bar, and with our Ship stood right in before
the Castle, and within shot of it to see if they would shoot at us, but they
did not, neither did we at them, the wind then being fair, and West
North-West, we discovered two Ships coming over the Bar, before they were
aware of us, and when we were within ken of them, they could not go back
(being much amazed to see our Ships on such a sudden) but checked into the
Shore, thinking to stand to their heels, but we firing six pieces of Ordnance
at them, made them submit, whereupon they bore up to us, and so we made them
lawful Prize, upon examination we found them to be of Lyn, and had carried
Corn to Newcastle, for the relief of the Romish Rout, and Antichristian crew
there, whereupon the Castle was presently in an upreare, we observing the
soldiers running too and again, expecting still when they would shoot at us,
but they did not, being belike jealous of the lower-Townes men, whom they
feared would have taken our Part, and doubtless they would have done so, had
we proceeded on: we came then to an Anchor before the Bar, about Sun set, and
that night we had a well-wisher who stole off in a boat, and gave us
intelligence of a great Papist that lived about a mile North from the Castle,
within half a mile off the shore, the House I knew well, and the owner
thereof, one Mr. Cramlington of Newsham, who had made ready half a dozen
Horses and Men to go to the Earl of New Castles Army, whereupon I animated
the Captain to p^event his going, and likewise I undertook to be their guide,
so about 12 a Clock at night, we armed fourscore men, well provided, whom we
landed on the shore, and thence marched up in order unto the House, and
placing our Sentinels, round about it, we repaired first to the Stable,
thinking to make all sure there, but we found not only all the Horses gone, but
the Gentleman himself, the day before? after some small opposition, we entered
the House, but found no Ammunition at all therein, whereupon our Soldiers
plundered it, and so returned on Shipboard. The next morning we set sail for
Barwick, and that day came before the Town, the Mayor and Townes-men were
wavering, but upon sight of our ships became firm for the King and Parliament:
that night we set about a hundred soldiers on shore, and marched to Colonel
Haggerstons of Haggerston Castle, five miles south of Barwicke, which Castle we
presently took in, and the Colonel and his son Prisoners, having them ab card
at this present, to be sent up to the Parliament, by the next first convenient
prize we take: we are certainly informed he was raising a Regiment of Horse
for the Popish Army, I was of his acquaintance, and likewise knew him to be
one of the most Arch-Papists in those Parts; but my forwardness in this
service against him, he took most unkindly, that I should have my finger in
such Pies. Our Plunder there, worth 300 li. was the next morning divided before
his face aboard the ship. Leaving Barwicke in a posture of Defense for King and
Parliament, and a man of war to ride before the town as they desired, on the 29
of May we set sail from thence for the Holy-Island, (six miles from Barwick)
and summoned the Castle for King and Parliament, but being denied by the
Captain, we let fly a broad side at it, and were answered again in our own
language, the Cann^ns thus playing a while on both sides, and yet no hurt done,
we running in with our ships under the Castle, and landing a hundred men they
came to a Parley, and yielded upon condition to have paid unto them a years
pay due to them from his Majesty, the which we promised to do; And so the
first of June we took the impregnable Castle of Holy-Island (which forty men
may keep against four thousand without any blood) this Castle we have
fortified with our own men, and some of the old Soldiers who refused to
fight, we have now some fourteen sail this day with us. The generality of
the people in and about Newcastle pray for us, and hope that we will freethem
from the cruelty they suffer at this time, I hope it will be the first news
you hear from me.

These things are well known for truth, therefore you may be bold to acquaint
your friends with them if you please; we have secured Barwick, taken the
Holy-Island, Town and Castle; one of the greatest Soldiers in Northumberland
is prisoner with his son a Captain, plundered the Papists, and struck the
Country thereabouts into a Feavor, we take diverse prizes, pray for the Coming
of the Danes, with whom we are ready to Encounter, chase the Dunkirkers,
cherish the commons of Newcastle, fright the Magistrates, and shut up their
Haven, the next News you hear from me, will be about some service, we expect
to perform against Newcastle it self and then I will write to you more at
large.

I had almost forgot to signify to you, that this great Colonel whom we have
taken had like to have made an escape away, for at our first entrance into the
Castle, he slipped out at a back door and was mounted on horseback, but being
espied by the Soldiers, they fired four Muskets at him, killed his Horse dead
on the place, shot his man through the boot top, but killed neither of them,
both he and his son were newly come from the Earl of Newcastles Army, and were
then raising a Regiment of Horse for his service; that night there was 7.
Troops of Horse within two miles of his Castle, which we knew not of, but I
wonder how they could forbear laughing the next morning, when they came to
hear their Colonel snapped up by a Ship, we had no sooner brought them to
our boat, and got all our men and luggage into them, but down came his Troop
to the Seaside, (our Ship riding a mile and half from the shore) where
sitting on Horseback, they discharged their Pistols at us, but we being out of
thereach of them, fired some of our Muskets again at them from the Ship, and
so we parted.

FINIS.
July 3. 1643.

Imprimatur,

H. Walley.


