A True Relation OF THE FIGHT Between Mayor Genesis Lambert, and the Scots Army
near Appleby, July 24. 1648.

WITH A Letter written from Colonel Charles Fairfax, touching the Surrender of
Thornhill House in Yorkshire, with all the Arms and Ammunition therein, for
the service of the PARLIAMENT.

Written to a Member of the House of COMMONS.

WITH The Summons, Answers, and Replies from the said Colonel, and Governor
thereof.

July.27. LONDON, Printed for Robert White, 1648.

Sir,
Conceiving you may have many false reports concerning our retrent, I thought
fit to give you this true action following.

Upon the approach of the enemy with their whole body within two miles of
Fenrith, on Friday night July 15. it was thought fit upon advice of a Counsel
of War to draw off our forces from thence, and to retreat to Appleby, and
further, if occasion should be: The reasons moving, were, First, The paucity of
our forces, compared with the Enemies conjoined bodies. Secondly, We had some
additionall forces coming up to us out of several Counties, as Yorkshire,
County of Durham, and Northumberland, and it was not held wisdom to hazard a
fight with our small number, considering the consequences to these parts, and
to the whole Kingdom, if it had not proved well; when we might easily retreat
to such advantages. Thirdly, We were tender in being too forward to engage, in
regard we had not understood the pleasure of Parl. upon the coming of the Scots
Army into this Kingdom. Accordingly that evening we retreated from Penrith to
Appleby; very safe, (the Enemy neverappearing in our Rear at all) where we lay
from Saturday till Monday morning without disturb, ance, (some illness of
weather,) though the enemy marched after-and pitched with their foot between
the two Bridges, near Brougham Castle, seven miles from Appleby, and their
horse about them, but on Monday morning, they marched again with their whole
body toward us, (it being a very dark rainy morning) were within a mile of our
horse guards, before they were discovered, all our horse having been that night
drawn together in expectation of their approach, and continued together till
the morning, and then not hearing of the enemies march, and through the great
rain and cold, in which they had been all night, and not in quarters a
fortnight before, they were dismissed to some Towns near about Appleby for
refreshment: Before they had well gotten to their quarters, came this Alarm,
the enemy presently appeared in three great bodies, upon three hills, very
advantageous for them, within half a mile of Appleby, so that our horse guards
were forced to retreat toward the Town, and the enemy followed, our foot, were
presently in readiness, and were drawn down, and placed at the several
Passes, and Baracadoes to prevent the enemies horse from careering into the
Town, which they attempted to do, but were gallantly repulsed, and one of them
taken prisoner, and wounded; hereupon most of our foot were drawn out of Town
toward the Enemy, to line the hedges, and stop the Enemies approach, (till our
horse could be imbodied,) being placed near the Enemies body, and much to their
annoyance; the enemy drew out several parties both of horse and foot; and
attempted diverse times to force our men from their Stations, and break into the
Town upon us, before our horse could come together, fresh parties relieving the
other every quarter of an hour, but were repulsed, and forced to retreat as
fast as they came on, by our brave foot, seconded with some horse, so that our
men did get, and not lose ground of them; nay, a small party of our foot
advanced up to one of the hills, where a great body of the enemies horse were,
viz. the Gallows hill, where the Gallows is, and gave them such a charge, that
they forced their body to retreat, and came off with Freedom, Safety, and
Honor; during this time, our horse were advancing up from their several
quarters, the enemies bodies standing as before, and not attempting any thing
upon our particular horse quarters dividedly, and at last came all safe
together, rejoicing much by great shouting, etc: to see their Enemy in the
field, the foot continually crying out for a Field, a Field. This skirmish
continued from 12 at noon, till 9 at night, that they could see no longer; and
upon Consultation at a Counsel of War what was fit to be done, it was
resolved, for the reasons before mentioned, (though our men, both horse and
foot, would gladly have engaged in the field) to draw off, and go to Kirly
Stephen, which was pursued, and our foot drawn off accordingly from their
hedges, guards, etc. into the Town, and so we marched off.

In this service, viz. upon the first charge of our guard with the Enemies
first party, Col. Harrison, who ventured very far in his own person, and
farther then his men would follow, (for he had hold of one of the Enemies
Colors) received three wounds, viz. a cut on the wrist, a prick in the back,
and thigh, but we hope not mortal; Captain Cromwels Lieutenant, and one foot
soldier of ours, were slain upon the place, and two or three of our men
wounded, and Lieutenant Sh^^rs taken prisoner, which is all the loss we know
of; the enemy had many slain, many wounded, and some taken prisoners,
particularly one of Duke Hamiltons Chirurgions, and some others; the enemies
foot, both Scots and English, were very unwilling to come upon service, and
would go on no farther then they had horse on back to force them. The Scots;
when any charge was given by our men, presently threw down their Arms, Poles;
and Meal-bags, and ran away, diverse of their Arms were brought off by our men,
and some left behind. It must not be forgotten that the Lancashire foot did
play their parts very well in this service: our horse were drawn off on the
South side of the Town, and the Enemy and the Northside, the River being
between, which was so high with the rain, that neither party could ford over,
and the bridge which we maintained against them so narrow, and barrocadoed, and
the Enemies body so near drawn up, that they could not well be drawm over to
do service. After we came to Kirly Stephen, it was not thought fit to stay
there, conceiving the Enemy might interpost between the Pass and Yorkshire,
and so we came on to Bows without any trouble of the Enemy, who never appeared
in our Rear, and came no further then Appleby after us, which if they had done,
and sought to have engaged us, we should have adventured, and left the success
to God; but this night at Bows, we meet with Major Sanderson; and Capt.
Bradfords Troops, out of Northumberland, Colonel Wrens five Troops, and Captain
Harleys, and Captain Persons company, who are grown very thin by their lying at
York.

Sir,
Being ordered with about 500 of my Regiment of foot, accompanied with 200 of
Col. Sir Henry Chalmleys horse; to march to Thornhill gasrifort, I intended to
have been there last Saturday night, but too much of that day was spent in
pacification of the soldier, that ^^^laimed for pay! (and indeed they are
gallant men, if they were not too clamourous.) It was past nine next morning
before we came thither, we possessed our selves of the Church, and Barsonage
house, (a stones cast from the hall) without opposition, sent them the summons;
to which we have these answers, and replies here enclosed, we intended that day
only to take a view, but it proved an engagement. Very opportunely came to our
assistance four Troops of horse, and two of Dragoons sent by Lieutenant
General Gramwell, we fell on the work, entered the barns, stables, and
malt-house, within the fould, but without the Mote; it was a very sharp dispute
betwixt one and six; we spent most of our ammunition, viz. four barrells of
powder, sent presently to York and Leeds for more; we have about twelve men
slain, and thirty wounded, whereof a few of them mortally. On Monday we cut
off their fresh waters, then set work men to draw out the Mote. And on Tuesday
toward night completed the work; Sir Henry Cholmley then come to us, we sent
them that last summons, appointed Hostages, and Treators, had a Rendition upon
articles to this purpose, That they should deliver to Sir Henry Cholmley, and
me, the house and arms. Only the Governor and Mayor Bonifant to have their
horses and swords, as likewise a horse to one Iennings, a south country man,
who was one of their Treators. They were to send us eleven of those Troopers of
my Lord Generals Regiment (surprised at the ferry.) And the common soldiers
only to march away with his apparel, An hour before their march (which was
seven at night) merely by accident the fire from their own party took hold of
their powder, blew up part of the house, slew 4 or five of theirs, but none of
our men, and miserably scorched about seven or eight more, and the same flame
has consumed all the buildings. I account it a mercy that it was done by
themselves, and cannot be objected against us, some few arms the soldiers
rescued, but got little prize: The breach was on their part, in not rendering
the powder, but chiefly, for that one of them took out a pistol, and many
marched with their moneys, therefore it is confessed some lost their clothes,
for which cause the Governor and Bonifaut refuse to send the eleven Troopers,
or render themselves prisoners according to engagement. Sir, I cannot at
present enlarge my self more, then all humble respects to my Noble good
friends being there, and your servant

C. Fairfax:
This 22. of July, 1648. Thornhill.
Sir,
WE thirst after no man's blood, but desire that God will scatter the people
that delight in war. I do therefore, as here Commanded for settlement of
these parts, and prevention of insurrections and tumults, demand of you the
hold wherein you now are, together with your arms, to be forthwith delivered
into my hands for the use of the King and Parliament. If this motion be
rejected, expect hostilities, and the Lord look upon each of us according to
the sincerity of his heart, as we desire our peace, to the greatest honor both
of God and the King.

C. Fairfax.
Thornhill the 16. of July, 1648.
Sir,
IN answer to your demands I return, That we are equally with you desirous to
prevent Christian bloodshed. But to your demand of the house, we answer, that
we may not part with our Loyalty, but together with our blood; we were
Commanded hither by our lawful Superior, and may not in honor or duty part
hence, without their order. But if you please to suffer a Messenger from us to
go to the Governor of Pontefract Castle, at his return you may expect to hear
a further Answer from.

Sir, Your servant Thomas Paulden.

To Colonel Fairfax, Commander in chief in Thornhill Town.
Sir,
I am engaged to make good my proffer. The Rendition of that house will forseit
no Loyalty; though blood be precious, yet we cannot condenscend to so long a
Cessation, as to expect any answer from Pontefract, but a speedy Surrender to*

C. Fairfax.
Thornhill 16. of July, 1648.
To the Governor of Thornhill Hall.
Sir,
YOu may not expect any thing here but what you can win with your sword, until
I receive further Commands from my Superiors.

Yours Thomas Paulden.

Sir,
IF God shall give you so compassionate a heart to pity the lives of so many of
your soldiers, with diverse others that be now in your garrison, we shall
become humble suitors unto the Parliament (whose former mercies some of you
have liberally tasted) that you may have the latitude of favor, where of your
several conditions will admit you capable. But if our offer be now rejected,
you must expect a pursuance of our advantages with all extremit^y. And be
assured that the blood of those that die in the slaughter, (a work we abhor,
if you did not enforce it) will be required at your hands, and of them that
advise you.

C. Fairfax.
Thornhil 18. July, 1648.
Sir,
TO infer your conclusion, that the blood spilt shall be required at our hands,
before you have proved that we ought not to defend our right and the Kings,
with our blood, is very bad logic; your Rhetoric not so pregnant, as may
persuade us to assent to so dishonor able Conditions, upon so small reason;
but in order to the tenderness we have of Christian blood, if you please to
appoint two of like Condition with ours, mentioned in my Letters to Sir Henry
Cholmley, and send us Hostages, we shall embrace a Parley. This is all can be
returned from

Your servant Thomas Paulden.
July 18. 1648.
To Colonel Fairfax these present.

