A True Relation of the Earl of Warwicks Encounter Personally with his own
Ship against two French Ships.

Also a true Relation of the brave overthrow my Lord of Stamford gave to Prince
Robert and his Cavaleers, having but 600. Horse and Foot against 1300. of the
Princes, being done in Harborow.

Likewise News from Ireland, with a Relation of Oneales conspiracy against
our men at Derry with the Overthrow he had by the Encounter.

Wherein is set down the Rebels desire of composition, with certain Articles
they propound for peace, each which particular truly and exactly set down and
sent over to England by Coronell Willow of Bedford to Mr. John Haughton of
Oxenford.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Butler, Septem. 26. 1642.

A true Relation of my Lord of Warwicks Encounter.
PRince ROBERT being landed at Dover, and having fully recovered his health
(which he lost by a fall from his horse) made haste unto his Majesty, where he
was so courteously entertaind, being made Knight of the most Noble Order of the
Garter, that it gave him great encouragement for to attempt any enterprise were
it never so dangerous, many malicious practices he used upon the Northern
parts, especially Cumberland and Northumberland, but my Lord of Stamford having
intelligence that he had seizd upon Harborow a small, yet well fortified
Town, in those went both Horse and foot to the number of 600 to meet him,
marching toward the said place and to Prevent his further wicked intentions
thought to have seized upon some of his Cavaleers, but the Prince his forces
were two for one, being in all about the numbe of 1300 horse besides certain
small quantity of foot which my Lord hearing took it to Consideration whether
it were for their safety to march forward or no and asking the advice of the
Commanders, putting the question to the General vote of the soudiers, who with
and unannimous consent were more willing to go forward then retire, so that my
Lord under God still went on, being within a small distance of the City,
intellegence was brought his Lordship that the prince his Cavaleers had
ransaked the town took^^ way all their goods, fired many of the houses,
maliciously trampld down and beaten down all their C^^ne, to the gre^^
prejudice and damage of the whole country, that they intended to return
thither again to take possession of the place very suddenly, all which my lord
hearing gave strict charge to the Chief men of the Town by no means to let
them have entrance, which they did, for when the Prince came with his forces
the Town stood up in arms to resist him in the interim my lord of Stamford
wheeld about him with his forces and so invirond him round, that the prince
with most of his followers were feign to take water and swim over a great River
for the safety of their lives, wherein the cavaleers suffered and were
drownded, some my lord took prisners, whom he sent under a safe guard to be
conducted to London where as yet they remain.

Thus has the Parliaments party obtained the day, and won the victory over the
Welsh Cavaleers, which I believe diverse of their Country men will take warning
by them, and learn how to keep within their own bounds and liberties.

News is brought over that Oneale, General of the Irish Rebels, had bribed
certain poor Protestants to set on fire Dublin, the Metropolitan Town of
Ireland, and that he himself went thither disguised, with some others to be
assistants in the same, but his treachery was prevented and divulged by the
said Protestants, who at their examination confessed the same, which thing
Oneal having intelligence of, privately hastened to his fellow Soldiers.

Likewise joyful News is brought over, that the Rebels are brought to such a
straight, that they must very shortly yield or perish, and they would come to
composition upon reasonable conditions, of which these are the chief.

First, That every man should have that freedom and scope, as to be of that
Religion, as best agrees to his own particular conscience (alleging that King
James did allow of the same, and that our King Charles did not gain say it.)

Secondly, that the Parliament here in England should not proceed over severe
against their ancient Roman Religion.

Thirdly, that they should not be liable to pay any taxation whatsoever,
whether for their Religion, or any temporary accident, but only what
voluntarily they condescend unto.

Lastly, that certain Laws should be established and enacted according to
their wills, and to be obeyed and kept by none but their Sexaries, namely that
none should be compelled to keep them but they themselves, not excepting others
that voluntarily would.

But it is to be noted, that these Articles were not by the universal consent of
all the Rebels propounded, for many of them were more resolutely bent to dye in
the defense of their Faith; but by some certain of them that were pend up in a
nook by our men, so that they could hardly escape away.

Much malicious and wicked tyranny do the Rebels use toward many of our men
whom they take prisoners, cutting out the tongues of some, scaring the members
of others, and most inhumanely strangling diverse by dozens in halters;
therefore I think it were not much amiss to give them Lex Talionis, and use
them with the like severity here in England, since their malicious proceedings
is such against our Brethren in Ireland.

Certain joyful News is brought of my Lord of Warwicks Encounter with 2.
French ships, who after a long chase he took prisoners, and received from them
great store of Ammunition, sufficient for 300 men, besides the store of field
pieces, all which was thought was intended for His Majesty's assistance against
the Honorable Houses of Parliament. Likewise there were great store of Muskets
and Pistols in the said ships, being hid in false Cabines, which by a diligent
search were all found out and sent by his Lordships command to Northampton to
my Lord of Essex.

FINIS.

