A TRVE RELATION OF THE Re-taking of HOWHUM Garrison in LINCOLNE-SHIRE, Which
was surprised by the Newark Forces the 10 of June, and re-gained the 12 of June
by the Forces of Grantham, under the Command of Colonel Gray. With a List of
the Prisoners taken in the said Garrison. As it was sent in a Letter from the
said Colonel Gray, to a Member of the House of COMMONS.

And dated at Grantham June 12, 1645.

Printed at London for I. T. 1645.

A TRUE RELATION Of The Taking of HOWHUM Garrison in Lincolnshire, which was
Surprised by the Newarkers the 10 of June, and regained the 12 by the Forces of
Grantham, under the command of Colonel GRAY.
Honored SIR,
I Should have answered yours of the 27 of May before; but being still in hope
of some Action, I deferred to give answer, until I might give you an account
of something worthy of you. The last Tuesday, being the 10, the Garrison of
Howhum, by the neglect of the Guard, was surprised by a Chief Party of
Newarke; Colonel Rossiter being presently advertised of it* drew forth all his
Horse with that speed, that he released all his Men which were taken, whom the
Enemy had left bound at the foot of the Bridge ready to be sent to Newarke.
Upon this fortunate beginning, he sent me an order forthwith to march with 200
Foot from Grantham to him, which was observed; and as soon as I arrived, I
presently ordered my men to Storm in three several places: Colonel Rossiter
having dis-mounted forty of his Troopers, commanded by Captain Norwood (a
very gallant Gentleman) to Storm with me, which was performed with much
Resolution and Courage in the Soldiers, as I ever was witness of, although
we encountered with no small difficulty at the first, a large Wet More at
least forty foot over, extreme muddie, and in no place less deep then the
waste, (through which of necessity I must lead my men; And beyond it a Rampire
of ten foot high* Yet it pleased God, without whom we could have done nothing,
and to him be the glory, to give us entrance after a very smart Dispute of
half an hour, only with the loss of five slain, and about twenty wounded,
whereof two were Ensigns; my self, I praise God, received no other hurt then
a bruised head, being twice beaten down from the top of the Work with a
stone, and the butt end of a Musket. Colonel Rossiter lost twelve Horses and
one Trooper by facing too mere the Works which he did almost within Pistol
shot, the more to encourage my Foot. We took Prisoners in it sixty five; for
their quality, I refer you to Colonel Hacher, and Colonel Rossiter his List,
sent to the Committee of both Kingdoms: Sir, having thus given you an account
of the Action, I shall only beseech you to believe that I am

Grantham June 12, 1645. SIR, Your most humble Servant HEN. GRAY.

A List of the Prisoners taken.
Major Broughton, Major to Sir Richard Willis, the Governor of Newarke:
Captain Will. Tharold* Captain Io. Johnson. Lieutenant Strickland, who, some
say, is a Major. One Coronet. 55 Gentlemen, Volunteers, and Soldiers. And
about 50 or 60 Horses: Some whereof were worth 20 or 30 pound a piece.
FINIS.

