A true Relation Of the most Horrid and Barbarous murders committed by Abigall
Hill of St. Olaves Southwark, on the persons of sour Infants; Parish Children,
whom she undertook to Nurse, and her most deceitful borrowing of other
Children of her poor Acquaintance, whom on every Quarter day she would bring
to the Overseers of the Parish, and receive her Quarters pay for them, as if
they had bin the same Children which had bin committed to her charge to Nurse.

For which most cruel Murders, being convicted and condemned at the Sessions
held at the Old Bailey. Wednesday December. 15. She was accordingly Executed on
Wednesday, December. ^2. in Cheapside near unto Woodstreet.

Together with a true Account of the strange and stubborn end she made, and her
jeering of her Executioner at the hour of her Death.

And a Caveat to all other Women that are suspected for the like unnatural and
most unmercifull Practices.

December LONDON, Printed for F. Coals, 1658.

An exact Relation of the most horrid Murders committed on four Children, by
their cruel Foster mother Abigall Hill, of St. Olaves Southwarke, etc.
The first Sin remarkable in the posterlly of Adam was a crying Sin. The
blood of Abel cried unto Heaven for bengeance. No doubt, but Cain before
committed many actual fransgressions Sin lies at the door says GOD; Mark
what have. sin, and the punishment thereof do make to overtake the sinner;
we shall find Sin lying at the door when there was scarce a door in the
world.

The shedding of innocent Blood is a Sin that lies at the door of the
Conscience, and knocks thereat as loud as Thunder; but custom in sinning
both take away the sense of Sinue. In a man or woman of a bloody Spirit, one
murder makes way for another her Conscience was seared as was this wiched
woman's who is the subject of our present discourse; There are some who delight
in Murder, and the Ruin of the world and these persons though they thirst
after Fame and immortality, and after their deaths have Monuments raised to
eternize their Names, yet they go in an indirect and cross way both to GOD
and Nature; It to the endeavor of Nature to preserbe it self; now, what cnn be
more contrary to this endeavor then to destroy one another which to the way to
destroy Nature: And we shall find God so tender in shedding of Blood, that his
Commandments are always and altogether express against it; David was not
permitted to build the Temple unto God, because he had in his blood, although
it was red only in the blood of his Enemies, and the Enemies of God.

The Children of Israel were forbidven to eat any thing in which was the blood,
and the same mandate was giver also the Christians; Although St. James and the
Elders of Jerusalem determined, that the converted Gentiles should not observe
the laws of the Jews, yet they were expressly commanded to keep themselves
from Blood, and from that which is strangled, they should be so far from the
shedding of the blood of one another, that they should refrain from the blond
of the Creatures allowed by God for the nourishment of men, that was shed.

And this shedding of the Blood of one another, has been so odious to God that
he always left some tokens of his high displeasure against it, and the
Murderet has seldom escaped undiscovered or unpunished.

For besides the checks of the Conscience which flasheth forth terror, and
flies in the face of the Murderers, we shall find that it has pleased God
oftentimes in a miraculous manner to make discoveries of Murders committed,
sometimes by Binds sometimes by Beasts, and sometimes by the appaition of the
Person murdered, of which Histories can furnish us with abundant examples, and
no ages have been exempted from giving many remarkable demonstrations of it.

We need not go into foreign Countries to fetch Examples to prove this truth.
It is not yet two years since the notorious Murder was committed by Nathaniel
Butler on the person of his dearest friend and companion John Knight; The
bloody design being put in execution, how was his Conscience tormented with
the horror and apprehenston of his guilt, we shall find it was so much startled
that he was not able either to tarry at home or to fly abroad; what a deep
impresson did the blood of his friend leave upon his soul. How many tears did
he shed to purge it. How unquiet was his soul, how perplered was that body which
could find no rest but by death only.

This so startied him that he could enjoy no intermissions, no respits of any
comfort but by Death only, and in this manner many being tormented in their
Consciences do need no further discoveries, it being impossible for them to be
at quiet until they do discover themselves, and offer themselves as
Sacrifices to that Justice which they have violated.

Sometimes Murders have been discovered by the souls of the air; In the same
manner a Gentleman in Norfolk, Ralph suckey by name, having Murdered one who
as he said, had done him great injury, could not afterward be satisfied within
himself. Walking one time in the field he beheld a company of Crows flying by
him and making such a noise as they are accustomed when they fl^ in stocks.
The noise they made was but ordinary but the guilt of this Murderer was
extraordinary; for reflecting on the horror of his ^act applying all things to
himself, he believed that the Crows did articularly reprove and far him for
his Murder; walking not long afterward at a town called Burnham, be beheld
three or four more Crows flying by him, and making the like noise, the
apprehension thereof working open the guilt of his conscience did so much
affright him, that of himself be expressed words of great suspicion of which
notice being taken by a stander by he was presently had before a Justice to
whom be confessed his long concealed Murder and said moreover. that if his
tongue should deny it, yet his conscience would proclaim it.

Having Confessed it, be seemed to be at great ease, having discharged himself
of a borthen that did so greatly oppress him, and seemed to be worse then
Death unto him, the pains whereof, being condemned by Justice, be willingly
did undergo at Thetford the Assizes following.

If you please to descend into the Theater, it will present you with a History
more rare and remarkable then this; It will give you the sight of a cruel and
a covelous young man, who to enjoy the state of his Brothers Son did under the
pretense of Hunting draw him into a neighboring wood. where most inhumanely be
bereaved him of his Life, and buried him under a great Tree. This being done,
be divulged it forth abroad, that his Kinsman having a great mind to see
novelties, and the Government of foreign Countries was traveled beyond the
Seas, and in his absence had ordained him to be Overseer of his estate being
very sorry that he could no ways dissuade him from such rash and heady
counselo. This Report was entertained into the belief of all his Kinsmen, and
continued current for certain years; At the last be caused it to be spread
forth abroad, that his Kinsman was dead beyond the Seas, and being the only
Heir that was left, be for many years without any disturbance did inherit
his Estate but not without some visible Judgment; for his Children dyed. It was
the mit of Justice that he should be left Childless himself, who had destroyed
his brothers Child, to enrich his own family

In the process of Time, walking in the fields which so unjustly he had
possessed, and thinking himself secure, and free from all dangers whatsoever,
beheld where two Robens soaring over his head did stoop lower to it, as they
came nearer to him. This sight was strange unto him, but the noise they made
was more terrible. he used all the means that possibly he could to fright them
from him but neither the shoutes which he made, nor the noise of his Gun would
prevail, for the Ravens still hovered over his dead, or were near unto him
either on the one side of him or the other. Eatring into house they made a
great noise, and soaring upward they wheeled abrut the house and then pearched
on the top of it; He caused them to be shot at, but they were not hurt, and if
they rsse from the top of the house they presently again would alight upon it.

Night coming on, the Master of the house entertained a hope that they would be
gone, and commanding Horses to be made ready be withdrew himself with his
ordinary train of Servants to another place, but all in vain, for these two
dreadful and black winged Summoners did still attend him. On the morning
following be offered a round sum of money to any one that could kill those
Ravens, which although it was often attempted, as before yet could never be
effected: At the last his hope and his heart sainted and caving with despair
be confessed the Murder he had committed. Its words at the first were taken as
proceeding from a Man that had lost his senses and his health. But the place
being searched where in the Wood be acknowledged that he had buried his
Brothers Son, after a little digging in the ground the Spade grated against
the skull and several Bones were taken up which no sooner were brought unto
the house where the Murderer was, but the two Ravens (having done the business
in which the divine Providence did employ them) did By away and they were seen
no more about the houses. The Murderer being dragged to the Tail was brought
not long afterward before the Court of Justice, where being Condemned for his
murder be answered for the guilt of his ^act with the forfeit of his life

Sometimes we shall find that Dogs have been made instruments to bring to light
Murders that have been co^mited: sometimes inanimate things have been made
isntrumental in it; and the judgment of GOD upon Murderers have amongst the
Heathen been so remarkable, that we shall find they have seldom escaped
unpunished. The censure of the Barbarians when they saw the Uiper to leap out
of the fire, and to hang on the hand of Paul is most considerable, surely said
they, this man is a Murderer whom though he has escaped the Sea, yet
Vengeance will not suffer him to live.

But to proceed to our Subject in hand, It is an ancient Proverb in this
Nation, That seldom any notorious Murder is committed, but a Woman has a hand
in it. To this the several Jailes in this land and places of Execution have
given many testimonies. How merciless were those female furies who came over
from Ireland with recruits for the late King, Their Knives were more bloody
then were the Swords of their companions.

It is not much regarded but very true it is, that the finest and softest
Tempers being depraved do grow most obdurate, the purest Natures do prove
most vitions. Had not Lucifer been the Son of the morning it id possible that
he had never been the Prince of Darkness* had not the Complexions of some Women
been so tempting and their Inclinations so tender by Nature, It is likely they
had never been such Devils as they are.

It is a Principle in Philosophy, that Corruption optima est possima. The best
Corruption is the worst, and it holds true as well in the Intlinations of the
mind, as in the Constitutions of the Body. Who would have thought that love and
tenderness should be corrupted into cruelty? Who would have thought that the
Nurse of Children should become the Murderer of Children? O horrid fruits of
unruly Avarice; And O the wickedness of a Woman's haart, hardened into the
practice of all manner of villainy.

This woman Abigall Hill, was looked upon by all her Neighbors, for a Woman
inclined to much Compassion, she seemed much to pity young Children, that were
in distress, and according to be power to relieve them, She was therefore
supposed to be a good nurse into whose charge and care the Nursing up of young
Children should be committed.

She lived many years in the Parish of St. Olaves in Southwark with her
Husband who to yet living, and some Children she brought up carefully, and
returned them after the time was out unto the Parish who paid her for them,
thinking her to be a careful and good Woman; And this was the reason that many
Children were brought uncover, and if at any time any Child forsaken by the
wicked Mother was left upon the Parish, we would be ready to receive and
undertake to bring it up being a Nurse as wicked, and more cruel then the
Mother.

Seven years thus she lived, and no notice was taken of what became of her
Children if any were missing, it being blesesed that they dyed by sickness, or
having too many of them lying on her hands she thad delivered the charge of
them to some oher poor woman to be careful of them.

It was oftentimes murmured indeed amongst her Neighbors, that such and such a
Child was conveyed away, and much suspicion there was amongst them because they
could not tell what was become of it and the sodennesse of the removal of the
Child without anr noise of Sickness or discontent, did add much unto their
jealousy: At the last, it pleased God, that this wicked Woman and her Husband
did fall out where in the beat of his passion be did upbrain her with the
Children she had made away.

This presently was taken notice of by the Neighbors, who affirming it was
pity that such a wicked Creature should live upon the Earth. did acquaint the
Constable with it, who carrying her before a Justice of the Peace (she having
but little to say for herself) was sent to Newgate, and at the Sessions
following which began on Wednesday, December. 15. her Indictment was read, for
Murdering of four Children and she being not able to say any thing for her
self, as to give answer what became of the Children, or if they were dead to
satisfy where they were buried, the Jury sound her guilty, not only for that
bortid murder, but for the charge against her, that she had made a Trade of it,
and that at the Quarter day, she would borrow Children of her poor
acquaintance, and being them to the Masters of the Parish as if they were those
she had taken into her custody to Nurse, and having received her pay for them
she would return them again unto those of whom she had borrowed them.

All the Confession which she made at the Bar was, that indeed once one of
her Children lying sick, and but little h^pe of Life, she did wring it by the
neck and killed it, to put it out of its pain; For this and her other horrid
Murders, she was condemned to suffer Death and be hanged at Cheapside. which
accordingly was performed on Wednesday December, 22. 1658.

Being come to the place of Execution, either the stubbornness of her
resolution or the desperatnesse of her condition had made her almost
senseless; for she made no Confession at all, and being advised of the
shortness of her Life and to meet with God by repentance, she would return no
answer to the admonitions of the Divine, nor of any other that did give her any
saving Counsels. It is observable that being on the Ladder, as the Executioner
was sitting the fatail Rose about her neck, she turned suddenly unto him as if
she had been in some passion. and said unto him, What! Do you make account to
choke me? She had Time given on her to make her Confession, but the people
perceiving that she abused their expactation, the Hangman at the last turned
her off the Ladder and she dyed miserably, as she dyed mercilesly.

We hear of some Women, the one in Shoreditch, and the other in Shoo-lane,
who although they have made no trade of kaine of it, have brought their
Children, or their Apprentices to the like untimely ends. These are sad
Stories, but I bopa not true. But this Woman may be an Example unto all to take
bees how they run into the same Onilf, least they partake of the same paublike
punishment.

The End.

