A TRVE RELATION OF THE QUEENS MAJESTY'S Return out of HOLLAND, AND, Of Gods
merciful preservation of Her from those great dangers wherein Her Royal
Person was engaged both by Sea and Land.

ALSO, Her MAJESTY'S Letter sent to the STATES about the stay of Her
Ammunition-Ship.

Written by one in the same Storm and Ship with Her MAJESTY.

Printed at York, and Reprinted at Oxford. 1643.

A TRVE RELATION OF THE QVEENES MAJESTY'S return out of HOLLAND, etc.
THe States General of the United Provinces, Her Majesty's first setting out
of Holland with a Navy of fourteen Ships.
(notwithstanding many Arts, and means used to persuade the contrary) having
prepared for Her Majesty's Service nine Men of War, with five lesser Ships
for the Baggage: Her Majesty on Thursday January the 19. 1642. in the
afternoon, at Sciveling, two miles from the Hague, embarked in a more
threatening, then promising Weather. The wind then was so slack that it made
little further way that Night, then to carry the Ships out of those perilous
Shoares; where, had a storm risen, they had been in very great danger. The
next day, when God had blessed us with Sea-roome enough, the winds began to
rise very high, and about midnight, blew a fearful and furious storm; which
with the intermissions of some hours, (one day only) Tuesday, excepted, for
six days together continued yet very vehement and terrible. And by reason of
the often variation of the winds, made a most raging Sea, and so very
tempestuous that the Ship was many times let to drive, and hull it at Sea, not
being able to make any Sail with safety, having been in great danger to be
underset, by the sudden gusts and blasts, which duck't and drowned the sails
in the Seas. In this sad and unsafe condition, did we live out all those days,
being tossed and driven to and fro on the Doggar Sands, threatening to be our
graves; in which we had surely been buried, if the care of Heaven had not more
mercifully come in to our help.

Her Majesty saw and suffered all this so long with a Princely Patience and
Courage, and then Perceiving how little She did advance in Her way to
Newcastle, took a Resolution (there being no English Port else near where She
might safely adventure Her Person) rather to return for Holland, then to tug on
and work out Her Way with contrary Winds and Weathers, in such enraged Seas. It
was presented and pressed to Her Majesty, That if any storm should arise and
meet Her in that shore, the danger would be greater then in the open Seas
where She was, Her Ship being tydie and good. The Sir Martin Van Tromp.
Admiral most skillful and careful of his Royal Charge, and the Masters and
Mariners answerably able and willing to do their best service.

But Her Majesty kept still her resolution to return. Whereupon, the Thursday
Sennight after She embarked, we made our Course for Holland again, and the
next Day came on the Coast before Sciveling; God blessing Her with the freedom
from a Tempest in that place of peril, where four Ships had been wrack't, of
which we saw the bulk and ribs of an English one, which had perished in the
late Tempests on the shore, before our eyes.

The Admiral upon his coming in, shot off a Piece of Ordinance to give notice
of his return; which they of the Town took presently and carried to the
Hague, so that some hours before Her Majesty could get to shore, the Queen
of Bohemia, the Princess Royal and other of the Princesses; the Prince
Elector, the Prince and Princess of Orange with diverse Persons of Quality and
Honor, were all ready in their Coaches at shore, to attend Her landing; and
did drive and ride into the Sea for joy and haste to see that happy sight of
Her Majesty's safety for whose great perils heavy fears had layn upon them,
all the time of these Tempests.

That Evening a Fisher-boat being found out at Sea, (for contrary Tide and
Wind would suffer none to come from Land) the Admiral commanded and called it
in, and in it, Her Majesty with some Persons of chief quality, not without
some dangerous weltrings of the Boat, by reason of the high Waves and Sands in
that shallow shore, came, at last, safe to Land; And having rested and
refreshed Her Self some time at the Town, went after to the Hague to Her Bed
that Night.

On Saturday (the next Day after) the rest who came in the three Ships with Her
Majesty (for but three came) landed all in safety. What was become of the other
eleven, was not then known; but after it was. That two missing or mistaking
the Admiralls warning, went on to Newcastle, the propounded Port; The others,
with some leaks, and wounds, and losses of Masts, and sails, and tacklings,
came in after us, or got safe to other Shoares. But the two Ships wherein the
Horses were, one of them was run on ground, all the Men and some Horses being
saved, only that, wherein the Coachmen were, is not yet heard of; and
therefore feared, to be utterly lost.

All they in Holland, who were in great anxiety and fear for the Queen at Sea,
(not having ever known a greater storm by Land) were very jocund and joyful,
to hear and see Her in safety.

Some said, Her Majesty would never heaveadventured Her Self to Sea in such a
Weather, but to show, That a Queen feared not to be drowned. Others thought,
that some Witches were made use of, to raise those Winds. But all saw, That if
any such villainy came from Hell, it was curbd by Heaven, in the merciful
preservation of the Queen, and that, When God will help, the Devil cannot
hurt us.

Her Majesty was entertained at the Hague by the Prince of Orange all the time
of her last stay, which was from Friday January 27. to February the 13.

And then 7 greater Ships being got ready for Her Majesty, and five lesser for
the Baggage, with one of Her own, bought before, and now laden with Ammunition
(thirteen in all:) On Monday afternoon, She went to Sciveling, and in that
poor Fisher Town lodged three Nights, upon an unexpected occasion. For Her
Ammunition ship in the River of the Maze was watched by two Parliament ships,
(as they call them) the Providence and Greyhound;) who gave out, that they
would take that Ship, or fire it, or sink it, or sink with it. Her Majesty
knowing how much the Kings Service, and his good Subjects and Soldiers in the
North were concerned in it, resolved not to go without it, but to stay there
till She had it.

The Admiral thereupon having this Warrant from the States General, and the
Prince of Orange, went with two Men of War to fetch it off, and was bringing
it away; But was met, and bourded, and charged by the States of Holland (the
Provincialls as they call them) to have that Ship searched for Arms, and not
to carry it further, but the Arms to be taken out, or kept safe in some other
place fitting for it. The Admiral upon this Arrest, stopped and cast Anchor; and
came to acquaint the States General, and the Prince, with what was done, and
to do further, as it should be directed.

Now began all Eyes to see that good Providence, which guided the Queen to
return to Holland, that Ship of Arms having been absolutely lost by Her
absence; which was so hardly redeemed and preserved by Her Royal Presence, and
Courage.

And by that it was. For the Queen, touched with the sense of so visible an
indignity, by the hands of Sir William Boswell, See Her Majesty's Letter
Printed after the Relation.
resident in Holland for His Majesty, sent to the States General a round and
quick Letter, of the deep resentment, which She justly had of that great
affront then done Her; and that the bands of Amity betwixt the King and them,
must needs be dissolved, if that were done and endured.

This begat a Meeting of all the States, the Prince of Orange being with them,
whose spirit this affront had moved much.

In it, the matter was argued with the States of Holland, who made the stay.
The Arrest by many condemned, and concluded by all, that the ship of Arms
should come away with the rest to the Queen; and the Admiralls Commission
enlarged to fight with any, that should attempt to hinder it, or any with the
Queen besides it. The States of Holland now saying, they took the ship of Arms
till then for a private man's, and not the Kings, for which cause (or color)
they before had stayed it.

The Admiral (thus armed) went to fetch it away; and after some expostulations
by Letters with the two Parliament ships, and the Messenger their Ministers
vain persuasions to the contrary; bid them to lie still, till the ship was
gone, or to keep off out of Cannon-shot, or he would shoot at them. The ship
being got out to Sea, the Providence made three shots at it, none hitting it:
upon this, the Admiral shot at them, who instead of answering him, shot off a
Piece on the other side from him, and so went their way. So on February
sixteenth, being Thursday, that ship with the rest came to Sciveling to the
Queen.

THat Day, Her Majesty embarked again in the Princess Royal of great
Britain (Her first ship. The Queens second coming out of Holland with a
Navy of 13 Ships, Feb. 16. 1642.
) And with a most blessed Weather, on a quiet Sea, by a soft and gentle Gale,
was brought on Sunday after, within sight of Flamborough-head. The Heavens and
Winds for so long a time (and many Days before) continuing in those Winter
Days and Northern Seas, almost miraculously Fair, and Intempestuous.

On Monday we got on as far as Scarborough; But then the Wind blew from
Newcastle, our only intended Haven, just in our Teeth; and as God in great
Mercy would have it, said to us (in the Language of His Providence) Go no
further. So we fell back into a safe Harbor (Burlington-bay) and cast Anchor
hard by the Shore. As Her Majesty rid at Anchor there, some of the Gentry and
Country People sent, and came, to present to the Queen some of their Country
Provisions, with their Joys for Her Safety and happy Return. Her Majesty
graciously accepted them, doing them the Honor to let them kiss Her Hand.

Here God put into Her Heart another blessed Resolution. It was to send to my
Lord of Newcastle, to give him word of Her being there, and Her will (if he so
direct) there to land. His Excellency having but the Week before, beaten the
Forces out of Stamford Bridge, and made his way into the East-Ryding of
Yorkshire, was then very happily at Pocklington with his Army, about twenty
miles from Burlington. On Tuesday came a messenger with tidings, That the
General the horse, next day about noon, would wait on Her Majesty at shore
with a thousand horse: and my Lord General the next day after, with the rest
of the Horse and Foot Army. This was done accordingly. For on Wednesday after
Noone, the the Horse appeared on the shore; whereupon, Her Majesty landed that
Night at Burlington Key. All the Ordinance of the Ships speaking as much to
those who were not near enough to see it. Next Day (as the Queen was at
Dinner) came His Excellency, and General King, with the Army of Foot, and
fifteen hundred more Horse.

His Excellency told the Queen, Her landing so, was in a most happy place and
time, for the Country and Army, and Her self and Her Retinue. So apparently it
was. For besides the great moiling of Men and Beasts, this would save the
Country a very vast expense of Moneys for Carriages in those long and ill ways
from Newcastle to York, this being but thirty miles, and good way, from it And
the Army (already much wearied, in chases of the Enemy, from which they came
but the Day before) would have been overtoyled and weakened in so long Convoyes
and Marches to and fro, for the Queens necessary conduct and Attendance; of
which great trouble Her Majesty now gave them a present ease. And both Country
and Army magnified the merciful Providence of God to both, who disposed so of
his Winds, and the Queens thoughts, to bring them such an unexpected ease and
happiness, to the great joy and encouragement of them all. And Her Majesty and
Retinue had their share in the happiness, too. For by this means, the Queen
came much sooner to York now, then she could, had she landed at Her first
coming at Newcastle: And much safer too, then if she had now arrived there,
considering the Dangers both of the Haven, and ships, which lay in wait for Her
there, fitted with Men of desperate minds, to do all possible Mischeife, and
the many Accidents and Perils, which might have befallen Her in coming thence.

Besides all this, great advantage would have been necessarily given, and as
greedily taken from the Diversion and Division of the Army, to make the Enemy
more bold and busy to work his ends, by the absence, now frustrated by the
keeping of it in one body and place.

The Army being now by Burlington, the Queen after Dinner rid out in a Coach
to see it; which received great encouragement from Her coming, and welcomed
Her into the field, with many hearty Acclamations and expressions of their
Joys, such, as much moved many to see them; and in them the true old Genius
and Spirit of the English Nation to their Princes, of late degenerated into the
strange Tongue of rude Invectives and Outcryes. After fight of the Army, which
Her Majesty rid through and through, even to the new raised and unarmed
Companies; She returned to Her Lodging at Burlington Key.

The names of the Captains and Masters of the Ships were, C. Hadock. Commander
of the Fleet. C. Lee. C. North. C. Bedwart. C. Peacock. Master of the Pinnace.
But had another manner of Salutation sent Her from the Sea next Morning, in a
strange and (till that time) utterly unknown and unparallelly barbarous
Language. For four Ships and a Pinnace, Voluntaries in the Parliaments
Service, which came over Night into the Road, betwixt five and six of the
Clock next Morning made above an hundred shots at the houses in the Key; for
two hours shooting cross bar-shots, and many Bullets of twelve pound weight,
and thereabouts, and the while. One of those Ships was directly planted against
the House where the Queen lay; and that, and the other made many shots over
it. Her Majesty hereupon was suddenly called up out of Her Bed to avoid the
Danger, and leaving the house, went and sat down under the Brow of an hill,
which secured Her from the shot.

The Lords and Ladies (who were all thereabouts lodged) made have to go with,
and after the Queen; some of their houses having been shot through before;
and the Bullets, then flying about them in the Streets and Fields as they went.
And as they sat under the hill, some slew over their heads, casting some
rubbage and dust, though no Danger then upon them: so that of all the Queens
Company (God be thanked not one was killed, or hurt, or touched, though one of
the common Soldiers was sore torn, and a Sergeant slain out right, not far
from the Queens Lodging.

These Ships, (upon advertisement brought them of the Queens coming) were
seen to hie away presently from Newcastle, where till then, they lay to do
such Service as they were directed to. And where, they are said, to have
bragged, they would board, sink, or sink with the Queens Ship, could they
meet it. Gods Goodness gave them not the power of trial by Sea, though the
Devils malice in them made them attempt to do that Mischief by Land. And to
do it the better, in the Night they landed some of their Men on shore, who
were heard to enquire for the Queens Lodging at three of the Clock, which
they shot at by six, a shroud suspicion (with the rest) what was the Mark they
aimed at.

Whether by Commission, and by whose, these bold Men did this barbarous
Outrage, the Justice of Heaven and Earth will doubtless concur to examine
and punish, that so great a Blot, and Burden of shame and Guilt may not lie on
the Nation.

Upon this deliverance from the shot, Her Majesty went that Day further out of
their reach, from Burlington Key, to the Town. And the Ammunition ship (all
this while in the Key, hit, though little hurt with all shots) was unladed, and
the Arms carried to the Town, and there carefully kept, in the old Church of
the Monastery, now decayed. The Parish for that Sunday, being desired for fear
of danger, to go to their Neighbor Churches at hand, or to come so many as
could, to the Queens Court; where by Her Majesty's leave (there being
elsewhere no convenient Room to be had,) Her Household had Service and Sermon
for that Day.

At this the Country People wondered much, who believed all with the Queen to
be Papists; though of all the English in Her Majesty's Household; not one Woman,
and but four men be all. So willing are some to deceive, and others to be
deceived.

On Sunday after (necessity pleading the Pass) Her Majesty in the afternoon,
Marched with the Army and Ammunition from Burlington to Norburton (about four
Miles off.) Thence next Day to Malton. And (there the Foot being left) was
next Day conducted by the Horse to York: No Enemy all this while opposing, or
appearing. That Ancient City received Her Majesty with many hearty welcoms, and
shouts, and blessings accompanying Her all the way She went: Sir Edmund Cooper,
Lord Major, (that true and tried Lieutenant to his Liege) and Sir Thomas
Widdrington, Recorder of the City, with Speeches to that purpose.

So She was brought with much Joy and Honor on Tuesday, March the seventh, to
Her Lodging in Sir Arthur Ingrams House, where a Court of Guard attends Her
Majesty's safety, which the Guard and Bliss of Heaven make good to Her, as it
has hitherto been most mercifully and visibly with Her and for Her, in Her
Departure, Absence, and Return; which has been happy, healthy, and safe,
almost to a Miracle.

The Circumstances of Her going out, were strange beyond all belief, both at
home and abroad: but the issues have appeared good and happy above all
expectation. And Her staying as wonderful. That Her Majesty and Her Retinue
being about, or above two hundred Persons (for Eleven Months time) in a
strange Lands, and unwonted Diet and Dwelling, should but bury one Consumptive
Man in Holland, who brought his Death with him out of England; but keep in,
and come out with so good health, was an unlook't for, but not un enjoyed
Blessing. And Her safety in Her coming out, as singular.

At Her Majesty's first coming out to Sea, the Storms were most fierce and
terrible for many Days; But at the second, the Winds and Weather most fair
and comfortable all the time. God Allmighty most mercifully preserved and
blessed Her Majesty in both. And at last gave Her an Arrival most happy both
to Her Self, and to many Since that He delivered Her from the villainous
attempts of the ships at Sea, which put Her precious Life to a manifest Peril
and hazard. A Sign from Heaven of Blessings to come upon the King and Queen,
to which the Majesty of Heaven long preserve them, and the Kingdom by them.

Her MAJESTY'S Letter sent to the STATES, concerning the stay of Her
AMMUNITION-SHIP.
THe QUEEN OF GREAT BRITAIN, out of a desire by all means to conserve the
friendship betwixt the King, and the Lords the States; Having omitted to take
notice of very many indignities, by which She has been provoked here; does
find Her Self at this present offended in so high a degree, that She cannot
any longer, with the Honor of the King (Her most Dear Husband) withold this
Complaint, which She now makes unto the Lords the STATES, concerning an Order
made to search and make stay of a Vessel, which is Fraughted and charged with
goods belonging to Her: for which notwithstanding the STATES have already
accorded their free Passe-Port. The QUEEN makes no difficulty to avow the
transport of Ammunition, as being absolutely necessary for Her safety: and She
has chosen to furnish Her self by this way, rather then that of demanding a
License: by reason of an Order formerly made by the STATES, to forbid the
transport of Arms, or Ammunition, either for the KING, or Parliament Which
Order, the KING has great cause to believe, very partial for the Parliament,
by putting them in equal rank with Him: But the default of Observation of that
Order, has been yet more displeasing to Her; For, that since that time great
quantities of Ammunition have been transported for the service of the Rebels,
and Ships also bought to be employed against the KING. If the QUEEN has not
asked a pa^^^cular License for all the things necessary for Her Service, it ha^
been out of this consideration, that she might not cast the STATE^ upon the
inconvenience, either of contradicting their own Order, (...) of giving just
offense to the KING. But since all the care Her Majesty has taken, and the
precautions used to conserve a good intelligence between the KING and the
STATES (which is established by so many past Treaties) has produced nothing
but a continuation of affronts, and prejudices to the KINGS Service. Her
Majesty is obliged to make this Declaration; That She receives this Order,
given for the stay of that Ship, for a notable and high injustice, and an
indignity which She is obliged very nearly to resent. Wherefore Her Majesty
does expect, That the Lords the STATES, having better considered the matter,
will give way to the departing of that Ship, together with whatsoever is
charged upon it, for Her Service; without which, Her Majesty cannot resolve to
depart Her Self. The QUEEN is obliged to represent to the Lords the STATES,
that this injustice, and Affront, which She has received by the arrest of this
Ship, cannot pass for less then a violation of the Friendship betwixt the
KING and the STATES; the consequences whereof will be very dangerous. Wherefore
She does hope, That they will not offer so just a cause of offense unto the
KING, nor so great a displeasure unto Her Self.

FINIS.

