A TRVE RELATION OE THE LATE BATTLE Before WORCESTER, taken on Sunday last,
Sept. 25. by a Gentleman of the Innes of Court, (now in his Excellences Army)
from the mouths of Master Nathaniel Fynes, and many other Commanders who were
in the said Skirmish, and sent up to Master PYM.
Upon Thursday, the 22. of September, our Forces being ten Troops of Horse,
under the command of Colonel Brown, Commander in chief, also six Colors of
Dragooners, being in number about four hundred, came within a mile and a half
of Worcester, on the South-west side thereof, where we made good a passage at a
bridge over the River Teame, and drew up our Horse upon the Green, on the left
hand of the River, where we abode till Friday about four of the clock, in
expectation of some strength, either from Gloucester-shire, or else from my
Lord General. Then there came a Messenger with a false Alarm from the enemy,
informing that Sir William Belfoard, Lieutenant General of the Horse, was
drawn up on the further side of the City, and required us in his name, that
when a Canon should be shot off, which should be the sign of their onset,
then we should fall on, to make good some nearer passages, to stop the enemies
flight, which was expected, but this was the enemies plot, to get us into a
straight way. Presently after this, some Dragooners on the enemies part
appeared, in opposition of whom, Colonel Brown sent out some from us, which
begun the skirmish, which Colonel Sands (who commanded all the Horse) hearing,
was then earnest to fall on, but Captain Nathaniel Fynes, and Captain Wingate
desired rather a stay till the Piece of Ordnance was discharged, but his answer
was, that the present was the Captain Wingate prayed him not to mistake them,
their affection to the service was as his, only they desired to proceed
advisedly. Nevertheless Colonel Sands was so extreme earnest to march, that
the Captains condescended, only stayed to sing a Psalm. Before which was
ended, in the last Division, Colonel Sands marched over the passage, where
only could go four abreast, till we came into the lower part of the field,
in the upper whereof, the enemy was placed in Battalia, whom we could not
discover till we came to the top of the hill, up which Colonel Sands made such
haste, that we were forced to gallop. Then we made all possible speed to
dispose of our men in order, but before the first five of our Troops could be
drawn up, the enemy advanced close to us, and both sides discharged both
Carbines and pistols, and was resolutely performed by both, and presently fell
to the sword, and charged one through another, and Colonel Sands broke
courageously (though dangerously) into the left wing of the enemy, being
seconded by his Front, but had his Cornet killed. The Colonel himself did fight
very valiantly, was much wounded, and taken prisoner, but the rest of his
Troop, too many of them being swearing, ill disposed fellows, ran away,
however we still maintained the field with courage. At our first onset we
apprehended but some five troops of the enemies Horse at the most; we conceived
they had only the Forces that formerly kept in Worcester, but afterward it
appeared Prince Robert and Prince Maurice were both come to them that very day,
and brought eleven Troops of Horse, and some six or seven colors of
Dragooners, in all about sixteen hundred that they brought, besides the
Worcester Forces. Which supplies coming on so unexpected to them, occasioned
us somewhat disorderly to retreat to our passage, which notwithstanding we were
so much over-matched, we in despite of them made good, and forced them to
retreat three times, and killed twenty of their men dead upon the bridge,
besides many in the field, which they have conveyed away. We have lost some
twenty five, and that I am confident is the most: of them Sergeant Major
Douglis was one, also one Captain Berry; the rest are well come off, and there
is some hope of Colonel Sands recovery, whom the enemy have left in Worcester,
from whence they are fled. Captain Wingate on our side is taken prisoner, and
in a most barbarous manner is made to ride through the towns before the enemy,
naked, in their flight to Ludlow. They reviled our men in the fight, calling
them Parliament dogs. We took diverse of their men prisoners; And some of ours
whom they carried into Worcester, and there left, have informed us, that Prince
Robert and Maurice are both wounded, and some of their choice Commanders
slain, whose death they bemoaned. They expected ten-fold greater advantage by
their stratagems then God gave them; though if we had been but prepared for
them, and not under so many disadvantages, we had been visible victors. However
they have no cause to boast. And one of our Prisoners says, that Prince Robert
swore a great oath, that the Roundheads (to give them their dues) are valiant
fellows, and came on roundly.

FINIS.
Printed at London for T. Underhill. Sept. 30. 1642.


