A TRUE RELATION OF THE LAST Great Fight at Sea, July 29. and 31. between the
ENGLISH and the DUTCH, As it was presented to the Council of State in two
Letters sent them from GENERAL MONCK: AS ALSO An Estimate of the Enemies Ships
taken, fired, and sunk, with the Number of Prisoners; together with what loss
we sustained on our side.

SATURDAY AUGUST 6.
At the Council of State at White Hall, Ordered, That these Letters and
Estimate be forthwith Printed and Published.

John Thurloe Secr.

London, Printed for Giles Calvert, Henry Hills, and Thomas Brewster, Printers
to the Council of State, MDCLIII.

For the Right Honorable the Council of State at White Hall.
RIGHT HONORABLE,
AS I was dispatching the other Letter coming herewith, the same morning our
Scout ahead discovered a Fleet, which in a short time appeared to be the Dutch
Fleet come from the Wellings, consisting of 97 sail, or thereabouts, whereof 90
men of War; we made what sail after them we could, which the enemy discerning,
stood away from us, so that it was five a clock in the evening before any of
our Frigots could engage them, and near seven a clock before this Ship came up
with them, the greatest part of our Fleet being a stern, so that not above
thirty of our ships and frigots came to engage; yet we continued fighting until
9 at night, at which time being dark, we were forced to forbear. The enemy this
night got the weather gage of us, by standing to the Northward, when we
supposed they had stood to the Southward, as we did; and yesterday being much
wind, and durty weather, nothing was done, both Fleets finding it hard work to
get off from a Lee shore, which was the worst to us, being in an enemies
Country; but this morning, being fair weather, and little wind, both Fleets
prepared for a second Engagement. To this time the Lord seemed to encourage the
enemy, by laying the scales in the balance, so that neither could tell which
had the better, but good was the Lord unto us, who knew when to appear for his
own people, though unworthy of so great a mercy; for this day after their great
ships from the Texel were joined with them, being twenty five in number, the
Engagement began very hot from seven in the morning, and continued till one in
the afternoon, the enemy having the weather-gage of us all the while; yet may
we truly say, great was the Lord, and mavelous worthy to be praised, by his
appearance on our behalf; for by this time the Lord so daunted their spirits,
they now began to stand away from us, with all the sails they could, there
being sunk, fired and taken of them, about thirty or forty sail, so far as we
can discern, and are now in pursuit of them, some of our Frigots being near up
with some of the sternmost, and am in good hopes that the same mighty presence
of the Lord will still follow us, to the disabling, taking or distroying of
some more yet. There were nine flagge ships amongst them, when we first engaged
this morning, and they have but one left now so far as we can see. At present I
am not in a capacity of giving your Lordships a more particular account, our
hands and hearts being wholly taken up with the end of the work, and if the Lord
will, you may expect (about two days hence) to have a further account thereof.
Two of our ships were fired, (as supposed, by the enemy) some others disabled
by the loss of their masts, of which I have given the Commissioners a further
account, for a present and speedy supply, which I shall not trouble you with;
but subscribe my self,

Resolution off of Camperdown, the 31 July 1653. Your Lordships most humble
Servant, GEORGE MONCK.

For the Right Honorable the Council of State.
Right Honorable,
SINCE mine to you yesterday (wherein I gave you an Account of the goodness of
God toward us, and appearance for us in the Engagement with our enemies the
day before, and that we were then in pursuit of them) there has little more
been done, night drawing on, and the Dutch making directly for the Texell with
what sail they could, so that it was not thought fit to be so bold with the
shore as they might, not knowing how the wind might take us, many of our Ships
being much disabled; but gave order to a small vessel or two to keep sight of
them till the morning, and observe what course they steered, who returning gave
an account that the enemy steered the same night into the Texel harbor, and
had boats with lights to show them the way in, whereupon yesterday at a
Council of War it was resolved, that the whole Fleet should forthwith set sail
for Southold Bay there to dispose of such Ships as are disabled, also to send
away our wounded men and prisoners, of which a certain account cannot be given
at present, but hope to do it very suddenly being now upon it; but I do present
your Lordships here enclosed with a general Account, referring the condition
of the Wives and Families of those who are slain, to your Lordships tender
care, wherein I doubt not but you will have respect to their necessities. I
remain,

Resolution Aug. 2. 1653. 18. Leagues to the Westward of the Texell. Your
Lordships most humble Servant, GEORGE MONCK.

An Estimate of Prisoners taken, also how many Ships of the Enemies sunk and
fired, and how many men of our own wounded and killed in the Engagement with
the Dutch, July 29, and 31. 1653.
Prisoners taken 1000 Ships of the Enemies sunk and fired, of which some were
taken and afterward fired, 30 or thereabouts. Men of our own slain 250 Wounded
700
The Oak and one fire-ship of our own burnt.

FINIS.

