A True RELATION OF THE PROCEEDINGS OF COLONEL LANGHARNE, and others, in the
County of Pembrooke, against the Earl of Carbery and his Forces.

Together with The names of the Ships appointed by the Right Honorable ROBERT
Earl of Warwick, for the guarding of the Coasts of Ireland.

WITH A Schedule of the Prisoners of note and quality, with the Ordnance and
Arms, together with the Ships there taken.

Attested under the hand of Captain Richard Swanley Rear Admiral.

Printed according to Order

LONDON, Printed by L. N. for Francis Eglesfeild, and are to be sold at the
sign of the Marygold in Paul's Churchyard. 1644.

A Copy of the Relation of Colonel LANGHARNE, and also their proceeding in the
County of Pembrooke.
A True Relation of the discomf^^ting and routing of the Earl of Carbery and
his Forces out of the County of Pembrooke. Managed and performed under God, by
the valiant and courageous Gentlemen, Colonel Rowland Langharne, John Poyer,
Major of Pembrooke, Esquire: Mojor Thomas Langharne, Simon Thelwell, and Arthur
Owens, Esquiers; Captain Powel, Captain Kenne, and other well-affected
Commanders and Gentlemen; with the aid and assistance of the renowned Seamen,
ordered by the Admiral, to be landed out of the several ships for that
service, under the command of Captain Whittey, and John Green Lieutenant; The
Fleet consisting of five ships and a Friggate, appointed by the Right
Honorable Robart Earl of Warwick, Lord High Admiral of England for the
service of King and Parliament, for the guarding of the Coast of Ireland, etc.

The names of the Ships, etc.
LEopard Rear, Admiral, Captain Richard Swanley. Swallow Rear,
Vice Admiral, Captain William Smith. Prosperous, Captain Nicholas Gettonby.
Providence, Captain William Swanley. Leopard, Merchant, Captain John Gilson.
Crescent Friggate, Captain Peter Whittey.
The Squadron of ships arrived in Milford-Haven the 23. of February 1643. and
at that time the said Earl of Carbery, His Majesty's Lieutenant general for
those parts, had possession and command of the whole entire Country and County
of Pembrook (only part of the Hundred of Castlema^tin) his Garrison Towns and
places, were Tynby Haverfordwest, Treflyn, Stackpoole-house, Carew Castle,
Roach Castle, Prick-spill, and the Dale, all which were considerable places,
well manned and fortified. The next day after the arrival of the Fleet, there
came aboard the Admiral, the said Colonel and Captain Poyer, with some other
Gentlemen of Pembrook, in the Hundred of Castlemartin, who declared the sad,
miserable, deplorable state and condition of the well affected Protestants of
Pembrook, and the country adjacent; and that the Enemy gave out and reported,
that they would kill the Dogs, and ravish the Bitches, and root them out to the
third and fourth generation: and how it pleased God, by his outstretched
powerful arm, and infinite mercy, (mauger the Earl of Carberies Forces) with
their infernal adherents, they had kept the Town with plunder of the Hundred,
being not above 200. foot and 50. horse, and with forcing importunity, not
silencing their heavy pressures, and weighty cares, prayed the aid and
assistance of the Fleet, presuming with Gods help and mercies, and the
furtherance of them, to expel the said Earl with his unworthy rabble of
Damy-boyes out of the country, and upon agitation, it was agreed to land 200.
Seamen, one Demy-culvering, one Sacor, and one Faulconet of brass, with
powder, shot, match, etc. The 30. of January last, Colonel Langharne with his
Sea and Land Forces, being about 300. foot, and 50. horse, with his Artillary
and Ammunition, advanced to Stackpoole-house, some two miles distant from
Pembrook, and approaching near the Enemy, they played with their small shot
uncessantly upon them, and our Ordnance at the House, but the walls thereof so
strong, that they performed little execution: At last our men gaining some part
of the outhouses, near the walls; the Enemy seeing the place no longer
wardable, and themselves hard beset, yielded upon Quarter, which was granted,
and nobly performed. In this action and assault, there was two of our men
slain, eight or nine wounded, and some few of the Enemy fell, and were hurt
also, there being sixty soldiers in the House all completely armed; the House
being taken, the Colonel left a Garrison, and returned to Pembrook, where
after a short time of repose to refresh his men, they martched to
Treflyn-House, where was a strong Garrison of 150. foot, and forty horse, with
one piece of Ordnance. Our Forces making their approaches, the Enemy played
their parts manfully, by plying their small shot, and using all marshall
endeavors in matter of defense and opposition; yet our Forces martched up to
their walls, gained their Outhouses, our Ordnance playing upon them, having
made an assaultable breach; the Enemy without hope of relief, and seeing an
impossibility of maintaining their hold, without a present dis-ingagement:
After some loss of blood desired Quarter, which was granted, and honorably
performed. In which enterprise some few were killed and hurt of each side, and
there were taken in the said House forty horse, with their arms and furniture,
and 150. Foot arms. All this while the said Earl durst not march out of his
strong hold, which was at that time at Tinby, which was not above a mile from
the said House (to show himself in the field) only himself with some of his
Forces faced ours, keeping a River betwixt them, upon which our Gunners making
some shot, they retreated, the said Colonel slighting the walls thereof,
retired to Pembrooke to refresh his men. That done, seeing God had given such
prosperous success and encouragement in their proceedings at the beginning
with unanimous consents, and courageous hearts, resolved to go over on Rous
side, possessed then by the Enemy, there to engage themselves, and try their
fortunes against the Enemy. Upon which the said Colonel and Captain Poyer,
came aboard the Admiral, desiring further aid and assistance to set forward
and advance the design, which was willingly condescended to, and the time
agreed on, to send up all the Boats belonging to the Fleet, with a great
Gabbard which God sent accidentally out of Ireland, which stood in very great
stead for transporting the soldiers and Artillery, and accordingly the 22. in
the night, the Boats were sent to the place appointed, being near Pembrooke
Ferry, and the Crescent Frigate to enable and guard their landing the three and
twentieth by eight in the morning the Forces and Artillery were landed on the
Enemies side. And that morning the Admiral appointed Captain Gettonby and
Captain, Gilson, to go to the East-wards of the Fort, the Admiral and
Vice Admiral, anchored on the West Side, and Captain William Swanly left to
guard the two Vessels of ammunition: part of our forces drawing up two pieces
on a hill, which commanded the enemies works on the East Side, where they
guarded all night, and the Colonel next morning with the rest of the forces
bringing up his men in three devisions, and coming near the enemies
ambuscadoes on the north-side, after a small skirmish ware routed and beaten
into their Fort, the ships then playing upon them, and the two pieces on the
east side flanckoring their works, the Demy-cannon on the south side, and our
forces giving a gallant and fierce assault, the the enemy dismayed as in a toil
or laborinth, cast down their arms and cried for quarter: And there were
taken in the said Fort about 240. prisoners, whereof some of note and quallity,
whose names with the ships lying in Pricks-pill, near to their said works
then also taken, with the number of their Ordinance, as in a Schedule herein
contained appears. Our forces being landed, intelligence thereof was brought
to Sir Henry Vaughan, who was then in Haverfordwest in Garrison two or three
hundred foot and horse, guarded with ten pieces of Ordnane, upon which he
presently dispeeded away Captain Richard Steel with a letter to the Admiral
and the rest of the Commanders and Gentlemen, praying a Parley or Treaty for
Peace, but before the messenger arrived, the said Fort was taken: News thereof
was carried to Haverfordwest; the old Knight with the rest were stricken with
such horror and amazement, and a palsy or anguish condition fearing our forces
would presently march thither, that they caused a strict watch or centrey to be
duly kept, to give notice of the enemies approach, that when they saw them
coming, they might the more safely make their escape: And at that time there
was one Wheelor a Grasier, who had a heard of Cattle grasing upon the hills,
the watch having a circumspect vig^lant eye to perform their duty and charge,
looking sharply forth in the evening, the said cattle then getting head and
running toward the Town, the watch conceaved them to be our Army, poasted
amain into the Town, and cried God dame them, The Round-Headed Rogues were
coming; The which struck such further terror into the said old Knight and
Cavaliers, that happy was he that could run away first and fastest: By that
means the Town was freed and acquitted of them; and in their escape they
endeavored to have carried three or four barrels of powder along with them.
But fearing the Roundhead black cotes (as they termed them) which were the
beasts, cast the said powder into a river, leaving behind them ten pieces of
Ordnance, with a good quantity of provisions and red coats made ready to
cloth our Soldiers. Thus has the great Jehovah the Lord of Hoasts blessed our
endeavors and proceedings hitherto, and made the the wicked to fly, when none
persued them; to whom with all reverence be attributed all praise and glory
etc. The people of that Town and Country before inslaved and titannicably
entreated, being heavily oppressed, declared great joy of this victory and
deliverance, and by authority Summons issueing forth, for the Gentry and able
Inhabitants, on a certain day to meet; the Town aforesaid with the rest of the
Country therabouts came in, submitted, and presented their service to the
Colonel; Whereupon was placed a Garrison into Haverfordwest, the whole
Conntrey reduced and freed from the Catterpillers or Cavaliers (saving Tynbye
and Carew Castle) which places are strongly fortified (as informed:) The
Colonel and well-affected Gentlemen conceaving themselves in no safe
condition, till they had gained and taken in Tynbye also, to extirpate and
root out the Ante-christian Malignant party, out of the said County: desired
the Admirals further aid for the recovering of the foresaid Town, which would
satisfy their religious and warrantable desires, and reduce the whole Country
into a happy and peaceable condition and government, to the advancement of Gods
glory, the Kings honor, the Countries safety, and Subjects liberty. The which
tendered to a considerat debate, it was granted, and with all allacrity
furthered; and the Admiral for the better effecting of the design, sent a
Demy-canon into Pembrooke, with as many seamen more, as could be well spared
out of the Fleet, with powder, shot, match, etc, The same day sent away his
vice admiral, Captain Gettonby and the Crescent Frigate into Caldye road,
near to Tynbie, there to do such service against the Town as God in mercy
should enable them. Upon Wednesday the sixth of this instant March Colonel
Rowland Langharne with the rest of the Commanders, drew their forces into the
field, which consisted of 500. horse and foot, or thereabouts, with a
demy-canon, demy-culvering, and a sacree of brass, with other Ordnance and
ammunition, and marched to Tynby, where planting their Ordinance, summoned the
Town on Thursday following, being the seventh, by trumpet to surrender the
Town to King and Parliaments use, the which obstinatly refused: The Ordinance
played at the town from Sea and Land, and the Garrison of the Town with great
resolution defended the same; but after three days siege, a great party of the
Town beaten down, a breach made, and one of the chief Commanders in opposition
wounded, their courage was rebated, and our forces making a gallant and
desperate assault, entered the breach, gained the Town by the sword, with the
lose of one man, and some few hurt; where many of the enemy fell and were hurt
also: And there took betwixt 3. or 400. prisoners, whereof some Commanders of
note, as relation being had to the Schedule may appear: eight pieces of
Ordinance, about 300. foot arms, with store of plunder for the soldiers. By
gaining which Town the whole and entire Country and County of Pembrook was
reduced saving Carew Castle, which the tenth of this present, was upon summons
surrendered upon quarter, to acquit the said hold, and to leave their arms,
and to have convoy for their secure passage out of the Country etc.

The SCHEDVLE mentioned, of the Prisoners of Note and Quality, with the
Ordinance and Arms, together with the Ships then taken, etc. Viz.
At the PILL.
Captain John Barlow, Master of the Ordinance, and Captain of a Troop of
Horse; a Church Papist. Capt. Edmund Bradshaw. Capt. John Bradshaw. Capt. John
Butler, Capt. Arnold Butler, Capt. William Mauriechurch. The Globe and
Providence of Bristoll.
HAVERFORDWEST. The Commanders names that Ran away out of Haverfordwest,
being thereto forced by the Horned Beasts, as before mentioned, etc.
Sir Henry Vaughan Sergeant Major general of the three Counties viz.
Pembrooke, Carmarthin, and Cordagin, Sir Francis Floyde Major of the Horse. Sir
John Stepney, Governor of Haverfordwest Leiutenant Colonel Butler, High
Sheriff of the County of Pembroke, Capt. John Edwards, Commissioner of Array
in Coram. Capt. Hull of Bristoll with a 100. Seamen, who all run away, and
acquitted the place as before declared.
March 9th. 43. Prisoners of Note taken at TYNBYE.
John Guyn Governor of Tynbye. Colonel David Guyn. Leiutenant Thomas Butler,
High Sheriff of the County of Pembrooke, that ran away from Haverfordwest,
Capt. George Leweis. Capt. Metholl. Capt. Rice Prickhard. Archdeacon Rudd a
Malignant Priest.
A particular of the Ordnance, Arms, Powder taken, etc.
Taken at the Pill, aboarde the Ships, Haverfordwest, Tynbye, Treflyn, and
Carew Castle of Ordnance 53. Arms for Foot and Horse, fixed, and unfixed 700.
Powder barrelles 6. or 7. Seamen slain 6. Seamen wounded 20.
Rich: Swanley.

FJNJS.

