Maij 14.

A True RELATION OF THE PRESENT STATE OF IRELAND, With the victorious
proceedings of the Protestants against the Rebels there: being sent in a
Letter to a Merchant of note in London, Maij 13.

LONDON, Printed for Benjamin Allen in Popeshead Alley, Anno Dom. 1642.

A True RELATION OF THE PRESENT STATE OF IRELAND.
Sir,
LIttle News is to be expected, but God be blessed it is good: Eight days
since Lord Lisle, Lord Dygbie, and the Lord Folliat went toward Castle Goshel,
where the Lady Dygbie was besieged by the Rebels; and Sir Charles Coot
accompanied them from the Naas; they were not 500. in all that went, which
Castle they relieved, hanged many of the Rogues, from thence they came to Trim,
in the way took Phillips Town, burnt it, and the Navan, relieved more Castles
by the way, took Trim, and abide there still; a Garrison of a 1000. Foot, and
500, Horse will be put there. It is a Town of great consequence, six Castles
in it, all this while there was not 500. Men of ours, and they saw above a
1000. of the Rebels, 6.7. or 800. in a place, in some places 1500. and not
daring once to oppose our men, but run away and gaze afar off, Deere-like;
this we must not attribute to the strength of man, but God must be glorified in
it.

Last Saturday the Newrie was taken by the Lord Conway, and the Scots, joining
together, without loss of one man, after they had been before it two or three
days: for they were not willing to fight for fear of destroying the English
Prisoners, which the Rebels had in the Town; at last they yielded the Town
upon condition, what I know not, and all the Prisoners are freed; the chief
Sir Edward Tre^ers, Sir Charles Point, Captain Smith, and many others, who
have endured much sorrow. Sir Con. Mac. Genis was the chief of the Rebels
there.

Now God be thanked the way is clear in a manner betwixt this and Carickfargus.

Some came from the Newrie this day, which is 44. miles, burnt Carlingford,
which is 5. miles from the Newrie, and the Rogues are beaten in all places
where they are met withal.

If we had now Men and Money here, I verily believe this Summer would be an end
of this Rebellion, except it be some straggling Rogues in Bogges and Woods. I
pray God send us good News from you, and for the present I cease.

Sir Charles Coot was not here since he went first out, does continue at the
Naas, where he does fortify and make Forts, and at the first put out a
Proclamation that all the Irish that were left there should depart the Town in
24. hours, else be hanged. He has many there at work, Spinners, Glovers,
Weavers, Knitters, Tanners, and all kind of Trades, and all things is plenty
there, abundance of Cattill, two quarts of Milk a penny; and he makes the
Soldiers work duly, and gives them 6 pence a day for their work, besides
their pay; hangs and kills all that he meets, of the Rebels.

May 4. 1642.
FINIS.

