A true RELATION Of the reducing The City of Naples To the OBEDJENCE Of the
KING of SPAIN, WHICH Happened on the 5, of April 1648.

Being Palm Sunday.

TOGETHER, With the Imprisonment of the Duke of Guise, and liberty of the Duke
of Tursis.

WITH The Resolution and Declaration of the Spanish General, concerning the
French Fleet, and their proceedings thereupon.

LONDON: Printed by J. C. for I. I. MDCXLVIII.

A true RELATION OF The reducing of the City of NAPLES to the obedience of the
King of SPAIN.
THe troubles of the City of Naples, begun and continued for these ten
months space, with so great a destruction and revolution of almost the whole
Kingdom, to the great distraction of the King of Spains forces, and prejudice
not only of that peace of Italy, but even of the universal peace so necessary
to all Christendom, which troubles were fomented partly by the French, who in
all diligence were preparing a succor of four thousand foot, and eight
hundred horse; partly by the private intelligence and practices with the Turk
to invite him to the ruin of all Jtaly. It pleased his divine Majesty, to end
in a happy and much desired peace, and this with so much cas^ and speed, that
he whose understanding is not blinded, cannot choose but confess, that
Kingdoms, and States, are only his gifts, who is the God of Heasts, I may not
omit to relate unto you, the glorious catastrophe of this Tragedy; for though a
more eloquent pen may undertake it, none shall tell it more ingenuously, and
truly then I will do.

His Excel. therefore the Coud d'Ognate Viceroy of Naples, having been advised
that the French Fleet, was preparing in all diligence to come and succor the
people, and that the Spaniard was not in a sufficient forwardnes to prevent it,
and that the leavies made at Rome, marched on but slowly, and that even great
part of them was of necessity to stop in the way to reinforce the chief holds
in Abruzzo, supposing the perpetual invasions the French made in that
province, having already taken some places, and still reinforcing with new
supplies of Soldiers, Commanders, and ammunition. And further perceiving that
the men he expected from Milan^ came not, he was extremely aflicted,
apprehending that he should not manage his Majesty's affairs with that
happiness as he had promised unto himself.

Yet desiring at least to make his service appear remarkable by some glorious
enterprise; having visited all the fortifications and works the Spinads had,
and the Castle of Saint Elmo, providing each with all sort of ammunition; on
Thursday the second day of April, he imbarqued wi h the field Master General,
Dionysio d^ Gusman, and other Commanders to go visit the Island of Nisita,
where he made account the French fleet would cast Anchor; leaving there two
pieces of Artillery, and fifty Spaniards; a sufficient provision, as was
esteemed, for that time. This served as an issue to draw thither the bad
humors, and so to free the more noble parts of the body, for the Duke of Guise
resolving to secure that place where the Fleet he so much longed for, was to
anchor, hastened with 300. Horse to the Captain of Pussilipo, right against the
aforesaid Island, that he might there build a Fort which might command it.

This absence of the Dukes out of Naples, seemed unto his Excellency a most
fit opportunity to put in execution the enterprise he had designed. Wherefore
not confiding in the weakness of his arms, but in the assistance he expected
from heaven; he resolved in the mean time to give an assault upon some of the
Fortifications made by the people. According to which resolution, he gave
order, that the Commanders should be furnished with necessary provision, and he
demanded a list of the Spaniards, which could be spared for this purpose; the
which he found to be far inferior in number to what was necessary for such
an enterprise.

On Sunday at night, the fifth of the said Month, his Excellency acquainted
his Highness, Don John d' Austria with his design, who much approving so
generous a resolu ion, sent for the N^bility, and laid before them their
obligation, and the example his Excellency gave them, who was come to Naples,
out of pure obedience, to serve his Catholic Majesty, at a time it seemed to
every one impossible to reduce that people, and part of that Kingdom to their
duty, exposing his life to so many dangers, for his King and his subjects, who
were there present. And he represented also unto them, the want he had at that
time of men, and other provisions, for such a business; wherefore in
correspondence of their affection toward him, he required of them all to meet
again secretly in the same place, at midnight, with their Arms, and such
trusty men, as they could lead on an enterprise, where his Excellency would
appear in the head of them.

They all ^ff^red their lives in his highness service, as became loyal and
faithful vassals of his Majesty. And though in regard the number was so small,
the Enterprise seemed not only hard but Rash; yet the Duke of Guises absence
gave him hopes of a prosperous success. But he did most of all rely on the
assistance he expected from his Divine Majesty, whose help he commanded all
to implore, and for that purpose ordered prayer to be made in all the Chu^ches;
forbidding all his Soldiers under most grevious and exemplar punishments all
sorts of excess, and deboistnes.

At midnight, the Nobillity met together, with those they brought along with
them; and they disposed themselves for the attempt, and marched quietly along
to Jesus Church; and his highness would needs accompany them, who together
with the Count and other Commanders entered into the said Church, where after
that they had prayed a while, the Count went forth to see whether all was ready
for the assault, according as he had appointed, his highness remaining ^till
in the Church.

And his Excelencie having found all things in order, he told them the sign at
which they were to begin their assault, and so returned back into the Church,
and soon after he gave the sign, to fall on the trenches and other works.
The onset began at the gate called Porta Alba, where they found some resistance
of the People, and some blood was spilt on both sides. But finally ours brake
through, and Marched on to the other gates, which they gained without any
resistance; and then they heard them cry out from within the City, Viva Spagna*
At which acclamation, his Excellency entered the City with his men, and his
Highness expected at the Gates, guarded by the Nobility unto whom he gave
express command not to enter without his Order.

Upon his Excelences arrival, the same acclamations increased, and many of the
more civil sort of people accompanied him with their swords drawn, crying out
all in one voice; God save the King, our Sovereign.

Then the Cardinal, Archbishop Filomarino, met him in Coache, and his
Exelencie also lighted; But presently both of them got up again on Horsback.
And soon after came the chief man amongst the people, called the Elect of the
People, who casting himself at the Condes feet, crying out with a loud voice,
that in the name of all the people, he came to tender him obedience, as to the
Kings Viceroy, whom God preserve. His Excellency understanding who he was,
bade him rise, and get up on horseback.

And passing by the Prisons, he commanded all the prisoners to be set free,
except only the French, the cause of whose imprisonment he would first know,
before he would let them enjoy the favor.

Being come to the Marketplace, his Excellency found such a multitude of
people, that he could scarce break through, and it seemed a rashness to
adventure it. But His Excellency made his way, the people crying out with
acclamations of joy and praise, upon the King and Count.

And so he came to the great Tower to the Carmelites, where Iennaro Annesse,
the Peoples chief Commander, made a show of resisting; but presently demanded
that three of the Nobility whom he asked for by name, would come. But these
being absent, as remaining still with his highness, the Archbishop went up
first, and then the Count; and after a short time, those within came all down;
and they presented to His Excellency the keys of the Tower, who gave them to
keep to Don Alvaro della Torre.

His Highness was now acquainted from His Excellency of the happiness of the
success, and that he might freely come forward. He did so: and being arrived,
with the Nobility nigh the Tower, Genna^o Annese, as he was instructed by the
Count, cast himself at his feet.

But his Highness having set at liberty, the Duke of Turci and his Nephew, who
were Prisoners, entered with all his treasure into the Carmelites Church, and
caused the Te Deum to be song. After which, his Highness mounted on
Horseback, and accompanied with all the Nobility, he rode about the City,
with an incredible joy to all the people, who cried out, not only in the
streets, but also out of the windows, Viva Spagna, bestowing freely on the
Soldiers a refreshment.

The Ceremony ended, the Archbishop went home, and his Highness, and his
followers retired to the Palace; still accompanied with the signs of a common
joy, and acclamations of the people, which lasted for diverse days, crying out,
God save the King of Spain, and the Count of Ognale, who has brought us this
Peace. Before his Highness was come to the Duke of Guises house, the people
had sacked it, without doing any further harm to any creature.

The notice of this happy success being brought to Capua, Luys Roderico,
Governor of the Arms in those parts, marched out with 1500. Foot, and took
S. Maria de Capua; where having understood, whither the Duke of Guise was fled,
he gave order to Don Prospero Tutt^villo, and D. Tomaso Guiriaso to lay wait
for him with some Troops of Horse, who lighting on the Duke, took him
Prisoner, and brought him to the Fort of Capua, with 25. of his followers.

Upon the news, many Cities round about returned to their Kings obedience; and
it is hoped the rest will do the same, even in Abruzzo where the French have
most footing, and have strengthened some places, having taken 2. days before
the City of Aquila, from whence they battered the Fort, the which was otherwise
well provided except of men, four thousand together with the Governor being
marched out to succor Pescara, a Fort of very great importance.

This is the story of an exploit, which may be accounted miraculous, not only
in regard of the aforesaid circumstances, but also for happening on Palme-Sunday,
the day of our Saviors Triumph; by whose particular protection, the Catholic
King has obtained this favor.

Together with the imprisonment of the Duke of Guise, and liberty of the Duke
of Tursis.

THis Relation was sent from the Vice King of Naples, to the Spanish
Ambassador, now Resident in England.

FJNJS.

