The true Relation of the Entertainment of my Lord of Essex at NORTHAMPTON.

With the just number of horse and foot that flockt from Neighboring Countries
to assist His Person.

Also the Relation of 4. Holland Ships that p^rposely arrived thither for to
help his Excellency in his pretended proceedings: With just number of men,
Ammunition and money they brought over.

Here is likewise the true Relation of Captain Legs discoveries, who being
taken by our men upon condition of free pardon, did divulge all the Cavaleers
projects and intentions.

Showing how many of them were sent to the I Will of Wight and the I Will of Man, to
take away and seize upon the money pretended for the relief of our poor
Brethren in Ireland. Also the manner of my Lord of Hollands taking a Seminary
Priest amongst the Cavaleers, with his Confession and Examination before my
Lord.

London, printed for Tho. Banks. Septem. 2r.

The true Relation of the Entertainment of my Lord of Essex at Northampton.
It Is well known that my Lord of Essex his undertaking so pious an employment
does not a little joy the heart of every good affected Subject Christian, yea
the whole Kingdom (bearing share of the benefit) may in like manner, or at
least wife ought to be assistants in the same; Northamtonshire men not being
ignorant of so great a benefit, having intelligence of my Lords coming thither
with about the number of three hundred to meet his Excellency besides the
Trained Bands, and diverse of the Neighboring people, many for very haste
riding without Saddles, others for joy to be revenged on the Cavaleers (who had
robbed and pillaged them of all their goods) brought presents for his
Excellency, but my Lord refused them, saying, That what he intended was for
the public good of the King, Kingdom, and Parliament, and the maintaining of
Gods true Religion, and not for any private benefit and gain of his own, or
any that he expected, alleging that he was sorry that such occasion should be
given by the Cavaleers, or any other ill-affected persons, as must force him
either to draw the Sword, or leave three whole Kingdoms to perish in a mutual
blood; his Lordship being brought to the Town, gathered together his Forces,
to see his own strength, which he found to amount (both Horse and Foot
Volunteeres, and those that accompanied him from London) to the number of
forty thousand and upward, to all whom he gave strict charge and command, not
to be any way offensive in their carriage and behavior toward any of the
Neighboring people; My Lord is allowed by the Honorable Houses of Parliament
toward the maintaining of this his Army fifty hundred pound a day.

On the Twelfth of September both the Honorable Houses of Parliament having
intelligence how that His Majesty with all his Cavaleers were billited at
Chester, and had there endeavored to fortify the City in a readiness to be
against both the Honorable Houses of Parliament, and for the resistance of my
Lord of Essex and all his Forces, the Cavaleers doing much hurt and spoil, to
the terror and loss of that Country, therefore the Honorable Houses of
Parliament sent unto his Excellency for to send some of his Forces thither to
still the Cavaleers for the safety of the Country, which thing my Lord having
intelligence of, went himself personally with most of his Armey, only leaving
some for guard in such places as necessity did require it; Four Holland
Ships are come over with great store of Ammunition and money for the service
of the King and Parliament, the men that were in them did amount to five
hundred, with five pieces of Ordnance and Armor for two thousand men, three
hundred Muskets besides Pistolls, Caleevers, Carbines, and Dragoones, with
sixteen Barrels of Powder, who being landed, and having intelligence of my
Lord of Essex his Intentions, marched unto him, yielding their Ammunition and
money to his Lordships disposing, and themselves unto his Lordships protection,
which being done, my Lord humbly thankt them, and took them to his tuition.
There were certain intentions of the Cavaleers discovered by Captain Leg, who
being taken in my Lord Brooks Regiment, upon condition of pardon did divulge
all their Intentions, of which the chief were these particulars:

First, that some of the Cavalers that were in Lecestershire dib intend to
join with certain of Sommersershire Cavaleers (for there were private Letters
sent to that purpose between them) for to go to certain neighboring
Villages, and to fire and burn the houses, which things he no sooner divulged
but tha^ my Lord Brooks sent some from his own forces to remain and lie in
watch in such p^^ce^ as were w^^ke of themselves, and such as he thought they
might best attempt upon, and other of their exploi^s was to und^rmine certain
places in Southern field, where they thought my Lord Brooks would have come
with his forces, which being known by this Captains relation, was avoided, for
my Lord sent thither imediatly to see the truth of the matter, and found all
things as he had said; and in the said undermining; was found great store of
powder laid under faggots and billets, and great wedges of Iron, all which my
Lord caused to be carried away. Also Captain Leg, related how the Cavaleers
kept certain balls in their pockets to fire houses and towns withal, and how
that many of them went under the Command of Captain Calliford, (being a sea
Commander) toward the Isle of Wight and the Isle of Man, thinking to lie
inwaite to seize upon the money that the honorable house of Parliament
pretended for the relief of the Irish Protestants, but notice thereof was
presently sent to the Lord of Warwick for the prevention of the fame, who sent
two or three of his smallest Vessels to scowre those places, Another of their
pretended projects for their obtaining of money, was to seize upon certain
Cloathiers that did deal in those parts, bu^ the said Clothirs being once
before robed by those Cavaleers, came so well Armed against them, that at their
first meeting, that the Caveleers were glad to fly, leaving 1. or 2. of their
fellows to be slain in the encounter; news was brought from my Lord of
Holland of the taking amongst the Caveleers a Jesuiticall Priest.

The Relation of a late Conspiracy used for the taking of the Magazine of HULL.
THe Cavaleers having diverse times attempted to take Hull, and finding so many
repulses by Sir John Ho^ham and his Soldiers, now thinking it best to make no
^urther attempt upon so unvanquishable a piece with open assault but fall to
underminings and treachery. Therefore he^ring of certain laboring men that
Sir John Ho^^^m had employed for the better defense of the City to raise
certain ditche^ for the convayance of the Water^ out of the mar^h grounds,
went to them, thinking to have bribed and fee'd them to make certain sluices in
the dit^hes, with such convayances that being opened the water might ^^sh upon
the City, thinking that by this Plot Sir (...) for the safety of his person,
must have come out (...) forces to a pitch-field, and there being overcom^* and
he (...) again (...), they might have safe (...) the City, the laboring men
hearing of this propounded by the Cavaleers Under took the perform^^^^, (...)y
they should be rewarded before hand* which was g^^^^^^d unto them, and when
they had their full reward, they f^ll the clean contrary way to work, and
(...) that being opened the wa^^^ (...) that had determined to be in the (...)
of the Town in exp^ction (...) (...)* But what they met was a deluge of water
that did so (...) them* that they were quickly feign to (...) like fools as
they came, without any further ^^^^^ing the Town.


