A TRUE RELATION, of the Horrid and Barbarous MURDER, Committed on the Bodies
of Mr. Loggins, Gent. and the Ostler of the King's- Head in COLESHILL, in the
County of WARWICK, By Four Persons; whereof Three were Apprehended, and
Committed to the County-Goal.
STRANGE it is, to see how frequent of late, Murders are Committed, and
nothing can deter the Blood-thirsty; and it is as often observed, that the
Actors of those Cruelties seldom or never go undiscovered, by one means or
other, if they are not taken in the Act before they can make their Escape; for
as the Devil is the Instigator of all Wickedness, and brings mankind into
Snares by his Delusions, as by Drunkeness many times Murder is Committed, and
other Acts of Violence, so at last he leaves them, when they have acted their
utmost parts of Wickedness, and nothing is so certain as Death; and therefore,
if Man would consider aright, what answer he must give at the last Day, for
imbruing his hands in the Blood of his Fellow Creature Man, and the
Masterpiece of his Creator: I say, if he would consider aright, he rather
ought to Love, Assist, Protect, and Help, than to Wound and Destroy: But
Wickedness is grown to the highest in this our Age, and Acts of the blackest
Hue and deepest Dye, as that of Murder, are accounted the greatest Acts of
Bravery.

But not to be too long in the Prologue of this Bloody Tragedy, the Story is as
follows.

There is a considerable Town in Warwickshire, called Coleshill, Situate high
upon an Hill, well known to all Travelers that Ride the North-West Road, it
being a Through-fare, and the Randevouze of the Neighboring Gentry; Situate
near the Midway, between the two great Towns of Coventry and Lichfield; it
happened lately to be the Scene on which was Acted the following Bloody
Murder; the manner as follows.

The Ostler of the King's- Head in the aforesaid Town, having done some
Courtisie for a Gentleman Stranger, was invited over by the same Gentleman to
the Swan-Tavern over the way, to take share of a Pint of Wine, till Supper
might be made ready at the King's- Head; they were no sooner seated in the Room
to Drink, when came into the same Room four Persons, Strangers, who seemed to
be Gentlemen by their Habits, though only one of them had a Sword; they had
been drinking very hard, and presently began to show the dire Effects of their
Debauchery: First, they began to quarrel with the Ostler, and to abuse him,
calling him a Saucy Fellow for offering to stay in their Room, and likewise to
revile the Gentleman, for being of so low a Spirit, to keep such a mean person
Company; the Gentleman seeing them in such a drunken condition, gave them good
Words, wisely thinking he should have been as mad as they if he should have
done otherwise, but the Ostler was not so smooth, upon which, they began to be
very boisterous in Words, and threat'ned him very sore, upon which, he slipped
out of the Room, as conceiving himself to be in great danger, whipped over to
his Masters House, the King's- Head, and went up to a Room above, where some
Neighboring Gentlemen were drinking, to give them an account of what a Danger
he had escaped at the Swan-Tavern; but he had scarce well began his Story, when
the Persons that had been so boisterous at the Swan Tavern, came swaggering up
the Stairs, crying, Where is the Rogue, where is the Rogue that has affronted
us, we will have his Hearts Blood; at last they staggered into the Chamber
where they saw the Ostler, upon which, the three that had no Swords, presently
cried to the other that had a Sword, draw and Kill him, Kill them all, so he
presently fell upon the Ostler, and ran him through the Body, at which, the
Gentlemen in the Room being unarmed were astonished, and showed themselves much
concerned at so bloody a business, particularly one Mr. Loggins, a Gentleman of
a very civil Carriage and considerable Estate, well beloved by the Neighboring
Gentry, showing by a compassionate gesture, his resentment of this bloody
Tragedy, which the Murderer perceiving, and being instigated by the other
three, he presently fell upon Mr. Loggins, and wounded him mortally three
times, so that he presently dyed; while this last Murder was acting, the other
persons that were in the Room made their escape, or else it is probable they had
born a share in this dismal Story; after they had Killed these two aforesaid
Persons, they began to think of making their escape, but three of them were
presently seized, and are now in Warwick Goal, but the fourth who was the Sword
man, and the principal Actor, got to the Stable, got out his Horse and fled, it
being Night through the Town, without his Hat, and is not as yet Apprehended,
where we leave him pursued by the Guilt of his own Conscience till Justice
Apprehend him, when time which brings all things to light, especially Murders
discover this abominable Assassine; the three that are in the Goal are very
Penitent, but it is thought they must expiate the Crime with their own blood, as
being Abettors and Instigators of this Execrable Fact.

FINIS.
This may be Printed,

R. P.
March the 16th. 1686. The Truth of this Relation is attested by a very
Credible Person.



LONDON; Printed by E. Mallet, next Door to Mr. Shipton 's Coffee-House, near
Fleet-Bridge, 1686.

ADVERTISEMENT
These are to give notice, that the Trial of Charles Bateman Surgeon,
together with the Trials of John Holland, William Davis, and Agnes Wearing, who
were Tried at the Old-Bayly, for a Felony and Burglary committed on the House
of Mr. Leonel Gatford, Minister of Lyme-street; may be bad at E. Mallets as
above directed.


