The true RELATION Of the QVEENES DEPARIVRE from FALMOVTH into the BREAST in the
west of FRANCE.

After whom our Lord Admiral sent all his Ships to overtake her, who made
above a hundred shot at the Ship, especially our three Ships called the Vice
Admiral, the Warwick Frigor, and the Paramour, but she having a Galley of
sixteen Oars, it is thought that all the Ships in the world could not overtake
her.

Representing also, How that a Ship called the Golden SUN, belonging to the
King of Denmark, was taken by the Lord Admiral, and sent into Portesmouth, to
attend the pleasure of the Parliament.

LONDON, Printed for MATTHEW WALBANCKE, July 22, 1644.

A true Relation of the Queens departure from Falmouth, to the Breast in the
West of France.
THe Forces of the Parliament by Sea have done their utmost endeavors to
maintain the cause, which by so solemn a Covenant they have professed: What my
Lord Admiral performed at sea in the relief of LYME is already expressed, and
what until this time he has done since the great ship called the JAMES lay at
anchor before TORBAY, is sufficiently declared by former Pens. We shall at this
time but only point unto you what mistakes by misintelligence have grown upon
our discourses and belief, and that whiles for many days we have believed that
the Queen was removed to Excester, we must now assure you, that she was
all that while in Cornevvall, until on Sunday, being July 14. she took from
Falmouth her shipping into France.

But the design of her expedition could not be carried with so much secrecy,
but it was discovered to the Lord Admiral, who on the first information of
it, knovving of what consequence was her departure into France, did command
all the ships then in the Western parts to overtake her: they could not (at
the first command) come so easily in as was desired, but having knowledge of
what importance was the business, with Wind and sail they made haste to
overtake her.

And indeed had the vvind bin more propitious to them, they had gone near to
have possessed themselves of this mighty prize, I will acquaint you word for
word with what, in a Letter sent from a special Friend, I send you here
Related.

SIR,
ON Sunday was sevennight, all the Ships my Lord had with him were sent to plye
about Falmouth, the place where she imbarqued, and till Sunday last had no
tidings of the Enemies coming forth; when in the morning some of the Ships in
harbor were seen to set sail, our Vice Admiral betook himself to a
readiness. The first of the Enemies was a Flemmish man of War, who coming
within shot the Vice Admiral gave him twelve Guns in his quarters, but he
without any replye, got to windward, and then made out all his sail, the rest
of the Ships being ten in number, followed him, and getting the advantage of
the wind, avoided all annoyance from our Ships; three whereof lay so far off
to Sea, as they could not come in to do service, till the Vice Admiral gave
chase: at last a nimble Frigot of ours got into play, and m de the Enemy use
their Ordnance for their own safety, this interlude of shot continued as long
as our Ships could tacke with the Enemies, but they coming out tallowed and
traind for so important a service, had a maine advantage in flight: however
they were chased to the very borders of France, where they took in at Breast,
and there landed her Majesty. Her Majesty fearing such a storm, had provided
for her securer escape (in case those other vessels should have been worsted)
a Galley of 16 Oars, which the best vessel in the world could never have
coapt with, so as now we must only salve all with patience, yet if my Lord had
bin furnished with other ships, we should not have doubted but to have given a
good account of this business. No other news I can for the present acquaint
you with.

My Lord Admiral has also taken a Ship of the King of Denmarks of great
value, called the Golden Sun, carried it into Portsmouth, where it is to remain
till the Parliaments pleasure be further known.

Printed according to Order.


