A TRUE RELATION OF The proceedings of the Cornish Forces under the command of
the Lord MOHUNE and Sir RALPH HOPTON.

Wherein is contained a List of the Commanders in Chief, the Colonels,
Lievtenant-Colonels, Serjeant-Majors and Captains, with the Total of their
strength, and Garrison-townes.

Also the names of those Delinquents that have left their habitations in that
County, and follow the Army.

LONDON, Printed for Philip Smith. 1643.

The Copy of a Letter, relating the places and Garrison towns of the Cornish
Forces, with the number of soldiers therein, and also a list of the Commanders
in chief, the total of their strength, and the names of those Delinquents
which leave their habitations in that County.
KInd Sir, for the many favors which have been by me received from you, I
cannot but impart my knowledge of the proceedings of our Western Armies: and
although I cannot stamp so good a letter as the Pamphlets I lately received
from you, yet the reality of my pen shall far exceed your knowledge therein.
Whereas several writings largely expressed the death of Sir Ralph Hopton, and
how he was taken, stripped, and for greediness of plunder let pass, I can
assure you there is no certainty in any of it: but for certain he is yet alive,
for I have seen many Warrants issued forth under his name for the raising of
money toward the payment of the soldiers, since those untruths have been set
abroach. The Cornish Army we understand lies upon the borders of our Shire,
and at these places: viz. Liscard, Saltash, Launceston, Bridgerule, Stratton,
and other Parishes near the river: and first the L. Mohune his Regiment,
consisting of about 900. quartereth at Liscard, and the Parishes thereabouts,
toward his mansion house near Lostithell. At Saltash Sir Nicholas Slaning his
Regiment, consisting of about 1000. are garronized, whereof old Sir William
Courtney is governor. At Launceston M. Trevanian his Regiment is quartered,
consisting of about 700. foot. At Bridgerule in Cornwall Sir Francis Haley his
Troup of horse, consisting of 200. At Stratton, Sir Bevil Greenvil with the
number of 1200. a great strength to defend his House there, and sixthly the
Reformado Captains being a company of younger Brothers, not having means to
raise men, are quartered in the out parishes, and feeds upon the spoil of
the Country, and indeed upon any fight they are very diligent if opportunity
serve, and they seeing a good booty to seize thereof, the forces there be which
lies in the arreare of each town to fall upon an onset if occasion serves, now
to prevent their further rage amongst us, I have set down in order the strength
of our force appointed to be billited near each place and under whose command
first about Plymouth, Plimton and Stoke, there are in Garrison 2000. Foot, and
500. Horse, under the command of that worthy gentleman Sir George Chudleigh,
Knight and Baronet, and governor of Plymouth, Mountwise and other Castles
thereabouts, Secondly, to hinder the Cornish passage from Salt-ash into Devon,
there quartereth Barronet Noreot, his Regiment consisting of about 1200. at a
place near Ruberdown, nevertheless the Cornish here breaks the limits and
daily roweth over the passage, and steals our horse sheep and Oxen, but by
chance we have met and taken some of the thieves, of which master Blight is
chief, the main person that does the spoil amonst us, we imprisoned him and
his crew at Plymouth, but we hear since he is broken away and at liberty we
conceive it a treachery in some of the townsmen that had made the way for his
escape, of which you shall hear the truth by the next Post, there was a worthy
Gentleman proffered to be ransomed for him, but our Deputy Lievtenants refused
it, because he was the first and chief agent that drawed and preferred the
Cornish Petition to his Majesty, a petition very full of malice and
wickedness, and when he was denied by our Deputy Lievetenants, to be exchanged
for Sir Shilston Colemany, Sir Ralph Hopton worked a cunning plot and way for
his escape as thus disguised in face and head, by the Barbers shaving off his
long hair, and in soldiers apparel walking in the ranks of others as though
his fellows, and so passed through all the Ports of Plymouth, our Sergeant
Major General, Sir George Chudleigh his son, I know you have heard of his
valor and wit at the last Fight at Ochampton, for which work of renown the
Citizens of Exeter have presented him with a rich present, a Basin and Ewer,
worth a hundred pounds as I hear, now for the Town of Bridgerule, where Sir
Francis Haley quartereth, we have appointed Captain Tompson his Troop with a
Foot Company of Captain Lutterels, I take it to keep him within compass at
that place, at Stratton we have received intelligence that there is a great
stir and unrulinesse between Sir Bevil Greenvil Horse and Foot, and some
spoil and hurt have been done about Holsworth, by his Forces, but we are
sending of a Regiment of Foot, and 500. Horse, which we hope will appease the
soldiers rage there: One passage I would not willingly omit: a Captain of his
Regiment with a Company of soldiers came to plunder, and in a Farmers house
they were entertained with a great deal of respect and abundance of good cheer
and beer they had, insomuch that Captain and soldiers were drunk therewith,
and in the interim of their jollity a Company of our trained Bands apprehended
them all unawares, and not one man slain on either side, but a Lievtenants hand
cut, which we much lament: but since it is our fortune to take such a company
of rebellious persons, we may rejoice thereat, and so we hope shortly to regain
our losses at Liscard, occasioned by the neglect of our Lievtenant-Generall,
who is since gone from us, both for that and the ill service he did at the last
fight at Modbury. We hear that at Pendennis Castle a Captain brought from
Gersey and S. Mallows great store of Ammunition for the Cornish, I believe
they are in great distress thereof, let them make merry therewith, for I can
assure you the Cornish will be frustrate of other hopes that way, for what with
Plymouth, Dartmouth and other havens in our Country, we have shipping ready
for sea, and hope to prevent it. We have lately taken two Spies coming from Sir
Ralph Hopton, and as I am informed, he was sent to the Papists in Dorset and
Somersetshire, for raising of money for payment of his soldiers, the Cornish
sum of 1000. pound a week begins to fail, and the Commonalty weary of the
taxations: two or three prizes have stood them in great stead; for as yet the
Spanish silver flourishes amongst them. I will conclude with these few words:
Both the Trevanians for certain would leave their Commands, but they have so
engaged themselves in this unnatural war, and being the two first ringleaders
that raised the rebellion in Cornwall, Sir Ralph Hopton by his policy has so
bewitched their good intentions, that they know not where to turn, lie or go in
rest, wishing that the third part of their estates would reconcile them to the
Parliament. And thus much for the present, the next week you shall have a full
telation of what is now preparing on both sides, which God grant may be for his
glory and our good.

Plymouth, May 15. 1643. Yours, etc. J. T.

A List of His Majesty's Commanders in chief, also the names of the Colonels,
Lievtenant-Colonels, Serjeant-Majors and Captains of his Majesty's Forces in
Cornwall.
Lord Mohune L. General. Sir Ralph Hopton Lievtenant-Generall. Colonel
Ashburrham Sergeant Major General. Sir Nicolas Staning Colonel of one Foot
Regiment. Sir John Barkley Lievtenant-Colonell. Serjeant-Major Mannington.
Captain Weeks. Captain Cook. Captain Foster. Captain Rich. Captain
Smallacombe. Captain Rous. Captain Piper. Captain Poulson. M. Basset Colonel
of a Foot Regiment. M. Alexander Lievtenant-Colonell. M. Button Serjeant-Major.
Captain Butler. Captain Winter. Captain Fisher. Gaptain Rose. Captain Friar.
Captain Reynolds. Captain Ware. Sir Bevill Greenvile Colonel of one Foot
Regiment Sir Peter Courtney Lievtenant-Colonell. M. Deroy Serjeant-Major.
Captain Piper. Captain Estcot. Captain Ford. Captain Porter. Captain Smith.
Captain Watts. Captain Penvowne. M. Trevanian the younger Colonel. M.
Edgecombe Lievtenant-Colonell. M. Carey Serjeant-Major. Captain Wise. Captain
Southcot. Captain Hollyard. Captain Bates. Captain Stokes. Captain Newton. L.
Mohune Colonel of one Foot Regiment. Sir William Courtney Lieutenant Colonel.
M. Parrey Serjeant-Major. Captain Lambert. Captain Glyn. Captain Saul. Captain
Williams. Captain Mannington. Captain Cory. M. Kadol^hin Colonel of a Regiment.
Sir Thomas Lieutenant Colonel. M. Peter's Serjeant-Major. Captain Hill.
Captain Mountforke. Captain S^lter. Captain Wotton. Captain Furlow. Captain
Willis. Captain Vpton. M. Trevanian Colonel of one Foot Regiment. M. Arundell
Lieutenant Colonel. M. Trelawny Sergeant. Major. Captain Gross. Captain
Burlacy. Captain Haswarse. Captain Boskoyne. Captain Ballard. Captain Frost. M.
Crew Provost Martial. M. Fuller Secretary of the Army. M. Weekley Captain of
the Carriages. M. Cory Quartermaster.
The horse under the command of the L. General consists of about 1400.
whereof the L. Generals two Troops are about 150. some of which are very
serviceable: the rest under the command of other Captains are for the most part
of the Country plowing horses, all which number of horse and foot consists
of about 6000. and no more.

There are diverse Captaine-Reformadoes, and Delinquents of Devon, Somerset, and
Dorset, which follow the army, to wit, the Sheriff of Devon, Collonell Thomas
Fulford, of Fulford, Ackland of Ackland Esquire, Gifford of Brightley and Huish
Esquires, Yeoman of Upton Esquire, Archdeacon Cotton one of the Prebends of
Exceter, the Clergymen of all parts in abundance and of all sects of
religion, following them, so that they may pick and chose, some of the
Commonaltie and of all towns in those shires which are fled and left their
habitations, and although the Cornish give out they are 10. nay 12000 strong,
these Delinquents and runawayes will amount to a great number, but of fighting
men in pay we know for certain is not full six thousand.

FINIS.

