A TRVE RELATION OF THE LATE FIGHT Between the RIGHT HONORABLE THE Earl of
Manchesters Forces, and the Marquess of Newcastles Forces, on Wednesday the
11. day of this instant October, 1643.

The Battle being near Horn Castle in LINCOLNESHIRE.

LONDON, Printed by Richard Cotes, 1643.

A TRVE RELATION OF THE LATE FIGHT.
MY Lord of Manchester had notice when he was at Lynne, of a great force of
horse and Dragooners, come into Lincolneshire, under the command of General
Henderson, That upon the retreat of Sir Thomas Fairefax and Colonel Gromwell,
from about Lowth, they were much heightened with confidence of their success,
when ever they could draw out Forces here to an engagement.

The want of Foot and Dragooners, made Sir Thomas Fairefax, and Colonel
Cromwell very unwilling to fight with them, until they had acquainted my Lord,
and tried what supplies he could afford them, and withal his Lordship was
assured, if he could draw any Forces toward Bolenbrook Castle, the enemy was
so confident of his strength, that he would bring down all his force to fight
with him. Upon these grounds my Lord drew all his force both of Horse and Foot
from Lynne the last week, excepting one Troop of Horse, and six Companies of
Foot, which he left for the guard of that Town with Colonel Walton, whom he
made Lieutenant Governor.

Upon Monday my Lord drew out all his Foot out of Boston, ten Companies he
laid in Bolenbrooke Town, under the command of Major Knight, Sergeant Major,
to Sir Miles Hobart; Colonel Russels Regiment was quartered at Stickford,
within a mile of them, and my Lords own (being but three) companies (the rest
being sent to Hull, and left at Lynne) at Stickney, and the Horse were all
quartered in the Towns round about, at eight and ten miles distance.

Upon Monday night Major Knight summoned the Castle in my Lord of Manchesters
name, but was answered, that his bugge-beare w^rds could not make them quit the
place that night, our men took in a little house, on the right hand between
the Castle and the Church, and resolved the next night to endeavor to break
open the Church doors, and there to mount a Morterpiece, and thence fire the
Castle.

The enemy had notice upon Friday that my Lord was coming, or come into these
parts, and thereupon drew out all their Horse and Dragoones from their several
Garrisons, at Lincoln, Newarke and Gainesbury, with a resolution to find him
out and fight with him. Upon Tuesday those of the Castle killed one or two of
our men, and as Major Knight and Quartermaster General Vermeyden were viewing
of it, made some shot at them, one of them hit the Quartermaster General a
little below the Anckle, but did not pierce the skin, only bruised his leg.

That afternoon my Lord of Manchester came himself to Kirkeby, which is
within a mile of Bolenbrooke with Colonel Cromwell, my Lord Willoughby met him
there, and Sir Thomas Farefax was then at Horn Castle about five miles off;
one of his Regiaments having the watch at Edlington about three miles further,
nearer the enemy. My Lord had not been long there before he received a letter
from Sir Thomas Farefax, that an Allarome was given to some of our Quarters,
and that himself had sent out some Horse to discover what it might be, and
would immediately give him a further account, which he did by another letter
about an hour after; the party being returned and could get no information of
any enemy near, but conceived it to be a mistake.

Sir Thomas Farefax resolved however to stay there until the evening, and then
come to Kirkeby to my Lord. My Lord conceived it fit, and so did all those that
were with him, to give the Allarome to all his Quarters, and to appoint
Hornecastle to be the Allarome place, and to go himself immediately thither
to Sir Thomas Farefax; and when all their men were thus drawn together, to
take further resolutions. And immediately with my Lord Willoughby and some
Officers with him took horse for Hornecastle. Sir Thomas Fairefax in the mean
time getting no intelligence of the enemies approach came away toward Kirkeby
to my Lord.

Before my Lord reached Hornecastle, the Allarome came to him in good earnest,
that the enemy was fallen into our quarters, and was marching toward
Hornecastle. Coming nearer the Town he could hear great shouting and noise,
which he conceived to be the enemies triumph, having beaten our men out of the
town, but it proved otherwise; for some of our men falling upon the enemies
Forlorne-Hopes, though (but part of two Troops) seeing themselves desperately
engaged, resolved to put the best face on it; and fell upon them with crying and
shouting, which did exceedingly amaze the enemy, and gave our men the easier
passage through the midst of them.

My Lord finding the enemy come into his quarters before he could have any
certain information where he was; and the Allarome place possessed, appointed
Kirkeby and Bullenbrooke hill, for all his men to repair unto, and accordingly
sent word to all the quarters whither all our men came that night except three
Troops that were directed to Stickney, and three or four Troops that went by
the way of Tattershall, and came not in until next morning. Many of our
Troops came to Hornecastle according to the first orders, but finding the
enemy there came away without any loss at all or very little. The enemy had
fallen into our quarters at Thimbleby and some towns thereabout, where four
or five of our Troops were in a manner surprised; but finding themselves
engaged, gave so good proof of their courage that the enemy will hardly brag
of that nights work. The Troops that were engaged were Captain Johnsons,
Captain Players and Captain Samuel Moodies, they did all of them come off
very well, with little loss (except Captain Moodie his colors) and brought
half a dozen prisoners with them. I do believe upon good grounds that the
enemy lost some Officers both of Horse and Dragooners that night, but truly we
lost not one. The enemies Word was Cavendish and ours Religion. All that night
we were drawing our Horse to the appointed Randezvous.

The next morning being Wednesday my Lord gave order that the whole force both
Horse and Foot should be drawn up to Bolenbrooke hill, where he would expect
the enemy, being the only convenient ground to fight with him. Colonel
Cromwell was no way satisfied that we should fight, our Horse being extreme
wearied with hard duty two or three days together.

The enemy drew that morning their whole body of horse and Dragooneers into
the field, being 74. Colors of horse, and 21. Colors of Dragooneers, in all
95. Colors. We had not many more then half so many Colors of horse and
Dragooneers, but I believe we had as many men, besides our foot, which indeed
could not be drawn up until it was very late. I believe that as we had no
notice of the enemies coming toward us, so they had as little of our
preparation to fight with them. It was about twelve a clock, ere our horse and
Dragooneers were drawn up, after that we marched about a mile nearer the
enemy, and then we began to descry him by little and little coming toward us;
until this time we did not know we should fight, but so soon as our men had
knowledge of the enemies coming they were very full of joy and resolution,
thinking it a great mercy that they should fight with him. Our men went on in
several bodies singing Psalms, Quartermaster General Vermayden with five
troops had the forlorn hope, and Collonell Cromwell the Vanne, assisted with
other of my Lords troops, and seconded by Sir Thomas Fairefax; both armies met
about Ixby (if I mistake not the Towns name) both they and we had drawn up
our Dragooneers, who gave the first charge, and then the horse fell in.
Collonell Cromwell fell with resolution upon the enemy, immediately after their
Dragooneers had given him the first volley, yet they were so nimble, as within
half Pistol shot they gave him another; his horse was killed under him at the
first charge, and fell down upon him, as he rose he was knocked down again
by the Gentleman that charged him, who we conceive was Sir Ingram Hopton; but
afterward he recovered a poor horse in a Soldiers hand and mounted himself
again. Truly this charge was so home given that the enemy stood not another,
but were driven back upon their own body that was to second them, and put
them into disorder, our men charged all in with him, and then they ran for
it, leaving all their Dragooneers which were now on foot behind them. Our men
pursued them, and did execution on them about five miles, all the way being
strewed with broken arms, dead men and horses. We know not yet what persons of
note were killed among them, some fair and white ksins I saw among the dead
bodies both upon the place where the fight was, and in the highway much
farther off. Sir Ingram Hopton is certainly slain, and they say Sir Charles,
or Sir George Bolles: we have many prisoners, some of note, Lieutenant Colonel
Aires being one. What Colors are taken I cannot certainly say, but I saw many
in several hands we do not agree upon the number of the slain, I guess them
under one thousand; the fight continued not above a quarter of an hour, but
the execution until almost night: our word was Peace and Truth, the enemies,
Newcastle. We lost very few, none of note, I know but of one Officer hurt, and
that is Colonel Cromwels Captain Lieutenant. The foot were not drawn up to
the place where the fight was, until after the fight and chase was over. Horse
and foot though very weary marched on toward Horn Castle, where my Lord lay
this night with all the foot, his horse being sent to their old quarters in the
towns adjoining. Both Officer and Soldier did their duty very well and
bravely, my Lord took wonderful pains in bringing it to this pass, and
drawing up all the foot to have relieved the horse, in case they had needed
it. But God did all, taking away the enemies hearts, and giving resolution to
our men, to God only be the glory.

FINIS.
LET the Reader note that there was a mistake in the Bills sent to the Ministers
of every Parish for Thanksgiving, for in the note given by direction from the
Lord General, there was only mention made of 95. Colors of the Marquess of
Newcastles in the field; the transcriber of the note mistook, and says there
were 95. Colors taken. Which when his Excellency heard of, he was very much
displeased,


