To the Parliament of the Commonwealth of England Scotland and Jreland
Shows,
THat about the year 1642 one Mr. John Clark made a contract with Part of the
County of Kent to serve then in several Cattle for Provisions for the Late
Kings house and did serve them in more then he received money for by the sum of
34 l. or thereabouts That about the year 1644 the said Clark Died and made his
wife Executris of his will and about 1646 the Petitioner intermaried with her
And between 1651 and 1652. the Trustees for sale of the late Kings and Queens
Goods etc. called the Petitioner to account and charged him with 238 l. 28. 8
d. which they pretended his predecesser had concealed and kept in his hands but
the petitioner knowing nothing of it nor receiving any assets of the said
Clarks Estate with his wife desired a small time to put in his answer to their
charge, which being ready the petitioner waited upon the said Trustees near
half a year with it but could not in any wise be heard, Therefore not knowing
what to do he retained a Counselor thinking they would hear him and upon his
motion they ordered them to attend about 9 or 10 of the clock the next day and
then they should be heard Counsel, and the petitioner attended them at the
time aforesaid but could not be admitted into them, till they were forced to
press in after 8 of the Clock at night, and as soon as the Counfell began to
speak in the bufines they asked him what he was what his name was and where he
dwelt and then rose up and told the Petitioner except that he would give them a
100 l. they would not here his cause and gave the like answer several times
after to the Petitioner and his friends.

That shortly after the petitioner having occasion to go into the Country
about his affairs the said Trustees sent their officers with an order and
entered his house and shut up his doors and told his wife they were come for
238 l. 2 s. 8 d. she told them her husband was not at home but she expected him
that night, or the next morning and desired them they would be satisfied till
his return but they replied they came for so much money or else they would
seice the goods in the house and sell them and there upon caused many Trunks
and Chests to be opened, where upon the petitioners wife sent for two of her
neighbors who when they came; the said officers refused to let into the house
one of them being a Comonconusellman, sent for a Constable but still they
denied them entrance at last being got in, they desired them to be civil till
the Petitioner came home and to forbear any violence, and in case he did not
give them satisfaction that night or the next morning they should have as fair
a Seisvre as then they had, but they answered if there were any thing too hot or
too hevie in the House they would leave it, then two other Gentile-men hearing
of it came in and they likewise entreated them that they would be sparing
whilst her husband came home and offered them security of 1000 L. that he
should give satisfaction but they replied they would not leave her a ragg to
wind about her finger, And one Jackson an informer who was with the said
officers Commanded two Brokerly fellows to praise the goods and not over value
them for they were like to have them at the valuation they set upon them and
used many threatening words and expressions to the petitionets wife in so much
that she took a very great fear and suddenly after died this being done they
took afireforke and broke down a place made up of double deal board and
took out money and Plate to the value of 185 l. which would not satisfy them
til they had seized more of the Petitioners goods and carried them away.

That the Petitioner for Reparation in the premeses made his adresses to the
first Parliament who ordered him to apply himself to the Committee appointed
to examine the abuses of several officers etc. And they upon examinations and
hearing of his cause by their order of the three and twentieth day of March,
annexed to the original petition did declar that the said monys were Leavied
upon the petitioner contrary to Law and Justice, and without warrant by the
Acts of Parliament and did order the said Trustees to repay the same to the
Petitioner, having then money remaining in their hands not charged to the
States Acconut, That the said Committy determining in the Disolution of that
Parliament, the said trustees took advantage there of and refused to obey the
said order and there upon your petitioner by advice of Council brought an
action at Law against the said Trustees and much money was spent therein and
the suit being ready for hearing they appealed to the Commite for Jndemnity,
which Commit thought by their Order annexed to the original Petition they do
acknowledge the Petitioner was not liable to the payment of the said 238 L. 2
S. 8 D. as a debt to the Commonwealth yet they do there by order the
Petitioner to give them releases of the said Action and upon the Petitioner
refu sall have committed him to the Custody of a Sargant at Arms where he has
lain at a very great charge two Months and upwards by means whereof he is not
only like to be jnforced to the Loss of his Just debt but to be uterly
ruened in his Estate.

That the Petitioner for his good affections to the State has suffered many
losses, had a great part of his estate Plundered from him by the Kings forces in
Northamton-sheire and never had any satisfaction has lent money, plate and
horses, And has lost two Sons in the Stats service to purchase the Benifite
of the Laws and freedom from oppression, the Birthright of true Euglishmen.

The Petitioner does humbly pray that this Honorable house will be pleased to
take his sad and most oppressed condition into serious consideration, And that
for preventing of the Jii Consiquence which may befall his aged Body by
restraint and the Presant Jnsoportable charge which lies upon him may be
relesed out of prission and that according to the fundamental and known Laws
of this Nation he may have his legal remedy against those many injuries and
wrongs he now suffers by the Dealing aforesaid or that he may be otherwise
Relieved as to your Wisdom shall seem most meet and agreeable to Justice and
equity.

And he shall ever Pray, etc.

