Truths from Leicester and Notingham AUGUST I. Anno Dom. 1642.
I Do hereby give you some short notion how things stand in these Northern
parts. I met His Majesty at Notingham this day seven night (where His Majesty
was) to make Observation. The Major was expected to have been Committed, for
refusing to go to York to His Majesty, being twice sent for, not publishing
Proclamations sent to him and other things. The King accepted his Mace, and
delivered it to him again, but gave him no hand to kiss. The Town presented
the Prince with a Purse, and 50. pieces. From thence I went to Leicester with
the Court on Friday, where the King was earnestly put upon it, to have by force
of Blowing up, or Battering down the Magazine House recovered it: for which end
3. great Ordnance was brought to the Town: but upon a Petition from the Grand
Jury to the King, that the Powder, Match, and Bullets therein might be
distributed to every Town in the Country; It was approved of by the King. He
disclaiming to have interest in it, for it was the Countries, which I saw done
accordingly; the Keepers of it being allowed to go free to their Houses, who
was resolved to have lost their lives there, if they had not agreed upon these
terms. I was in the Magazine every day, which was a place of that strength,
that those 40. Men that were in it (all Roundheads, as they call them) would
have kept out 500.

On Friday night Captain Bastwicke, Captain Ludlow, and a Lieutenant, were
brought in, being by force of 9. Cavaliers (whereof Sir Henry Hungate a
Courtier, was chief) compelled thereunto without any Authority showed them,
being all Armed with 2. or 3. Pistolls a piece. Captain Bastwicke only of them
3. having a little Pistol. The next day it was expected an Indictment would
have been preferred against them all 3. for which I and another Friend that
morning did consult with them about their Answer thereto, which was a
Protestation against the proceedings there, and an Appeal to the Parliament,
there to be tried: but I thought the Judge durst not try them at all, and so
the conclusion is. The King has taken them with him Prisoners to York;
Captain Bastwicke is wondrous courageous, and so are the rest. I was daily
with them. Captain Ludlow is (Son to a Knight in Parliament) a stout man
with whom the King is much displeased.

The Lord Ruthen and Sir Arthur Haslerigge (who are Knights of Leicestershire,
and Deputy Lievtenants, did Train a good part of the Trained Bands, two days
last week; and hearing the King was coming with a great Force to bring in
Hastings to the Assizes, the High Sheriff that he had lately made, they
departed toward London for avoiding bloodshedding, which would have followed
(as was conceived) had they stayed; their Train men being resolved to have
stood to them, with the loss of their Lives. The King came in with about 200.
Light Horse, which Guarded Him; and there came 5. or 600. other Horse, of all
sorts, Gentlemen, Yeomen, and meaner sorted. The Gentry of the County are most
of them for the King only, and were very active with Him. His Majesty did on
Tuesday morning last return from Leicester to Beverley, 5. miles from Hull,
where he was yesterday to meet the Parliaments Answer to His Propositions sent
by the Lord of Holland, which if he did not like, it is thought he will
presently set upon Hull, and so march to London, etc. Hull is very strong, and
fears no opposition; yet the Cavaliers give out it will be fired in 4. days
space. I believe it not. The Bishop of York rides about with His Majesty. The
Women of Leicester Petitioned the King against Hastings, the Copy whereof
follows:

To the Kings most Excellent Majesty.
Humbly shows,
THat whereas your Petitioners, the Wives, and others of their Sex, Inhabitants
within this Town of Leicester, have of late been exposed to great fears by
the turbulent carriages of Master Hastings (whom your Majesty has lately made
High Sheriff) in assaulting our said Town in the dead time of the night with
Troops of Horse and armed men, by reason of which sudden affrightments, many
of the Wives then with child, (there and about us) have since miscarried, and
others thereby so wonderfully amazed and dejected, that at this day they
continue under great weakness, this we are able to make good.

In consideration whereof, And that because the like, or greater causes of
terror and perplexity may be again administered by the said Master Hastings or
his agents (wherewith our weak Natures become too soon affected) we are all
of us from hence emboldned to become humble suitors. That out of the deepth of
your Princely wisdom such course may be taken, as that we may be secured
from these our after fears, that so the like aforesaid woeful effects may be
prevented. And as we have, and ever shall express those dutiful and loyal
affections which are requireable from our condition; so do we daily pray for
the wisdom of Gods holy Spirit to be powered upon your sacred Heart, whereby
all your Actions may render us hope that we shall still enjoy our Husbands,
Children, and Friends, in godliness and peace under your Majesty's Reign, which
the Lord long continue.

This Petition was presented to his Majesty the 24. of July at his being at
Leicester, by many women of the best rank there.

London, Printed in the year, 1642.


