The Truest, most happy, and joyful NEWS THAT EVER CAME FROM IRELAND: BEING
SENT OVER IN A LETTER, and read in the Honorable House of Common, February
29. 1641.

Relating the renowned Victory of the Protestant Party, in Repelling the Rebels
from Dublin, under the Commands of the Earl of Ormond, Sir Charles Coot, and
Sir Simon Harcourt. With the Noble Service of Captain Thomas Stenvile, near to
the Town of Trohedagh.

As also, the Apprehension of MacBrian, Con Magenis at Care, Rory Magwire at
the Town of Clogham, and others who are principal Conspirators and Actors in
the Rebellion.

The three Commanders aforementioned having (according to the late
Proclamation set forth by the Lord Justices of Dublin) six hundred pounds a man
for the Apprehension of those three Rebels.

Mar. 3. London. Printed for William Reynor. 1641.

THE TRUEST, MOST Happy, and Jovfull News, that ever came from IRELAND.
LOng have tyrannical insolency of the Rebels in Ireland exalted over the
liberties, lives, and Consciences of the Protestants: and has hitherto
continued so cruel, bloody, and inhumane, that it supifies almost amaze meant
it self: and withal, has endangered the hazard of the Kingdom, But although
they have triumphed thus in the continuation of their barbarous inhumanity. Yet
the All-seeing eye of the Almighty, whose impartial Justice will not permit
nefarious deeds to sleep in impunity, the omnipotency (I say) of the same eye
has frowned upon the Rebellious proceedings of those savage miscreants, which
causes no only alacrity in the hearts of all, but also to heaven, for so just
an overthrow. Their repulse was thus, as shall be subsequently declared.

The City of Dublin was supposed to have bin in great peril, being
dangerously environed, and begirt with the enemy both by Sea, and Land: Yea,
moreover there were diverse Letters sent from Westchester, directed to the House
of Commons, and read; whose meaning did strengthen the former suspitiou: for
they did intimate that Dublin was so circumvolved with the enemy, that it was
almost thought to be destitute of Relief: Then it was forthwith Ordered by the
House, that present Aid should be immediately raised, and sent thither with
great expedition, for fear if they should procrastinate the business, any
danger might ensue,

Hereupon the Commission to press (both for Land and Seamen) did issue
forthwith to His Majesty's Officers. But in the mean time the Protestants
gathered a head together, and unanimously consulted to have a skirmish with the
Rebels, and so to relieve the City of Dublin.

The Earl of Ormond, Sir Charles Coot, and Sir Simon Harcourt mustred up their
forces, and marched courageously against them: whereupon at their first first
Onset, there was a hot fray on both sides, till at length Captain Thomas
Stanvile came with three hundred men afresh, and then they slew many of the
Rebels, and made them recant, some fled, others hid themselves: but still they
followed them, slaying a great number, rooting them from one Town to another:
and so they rook Mac Brian Prisoner, and driving them still forward, they took
Con Magenis at Care, and at the Town of Clogham they took Kory Magwire all
Prisoners, and committed them to the Castle in Dublin.

And there was (according to the (...) Proclamation set forth by the Lord
Justices of Dublin g^ven to all ingenerall both English and Irish) given to
those Commanders that apprehended those three six hundred pounds a man. So that
hereby Dublin is made free at this present from any enemy, to the great comfort
and consolation of those worthy Members that are now Fathers of our Country.

We hope likewise, that by the auxiliary assistance of Almighty God, that when
our King and Parliament shall be graciously pleased to send more aid thither,
that we shall subdue the barbarous rage of those Rebels with facility. In the
mean time, we have just cause to pray for the propitious success of those, who
are there already arrived: that God would so animate them with valor and
courage, that they may undantedly stand for the defense of his holy Gospel,
and propagation of his divine Name: That they be so strongly armed with the
true faith of Christ, that withal they should become more propense, and ready
to oppose all those enemies, that shall dare ^r presume to derogate the least
title therefrom. God grant that all our battles may prove as fortunate, and
successive as this has, and then we doubt not but we shall become tr ly
victorious: That the Protestant Religion do not thus initiate, and be first
ascribed with the Characters of blood: That the prosperous security of the
British Nation, be not overwhelmed with the turbulent barbarism of those
Wolvish Rebels. That the heart of our gracious Sovereign may be consolated with
more active alacrity: That the heaven-guided Parliament may be likewise
comforted and not to receive such strange obstacles, and dangerous obstructions
to their quotidian proceedings: That lastly, the honor of God may be advanced
to the great security of the Realm.

FINIS.

