TVRNE OVER BEHOLD And VVONDER.

blazon with spread eagle

Printed at Layghten Buzzard (Brother) within 10 miles of Dunce stable, by the
Assigns of Tom Ladle, and are to be sold at the sign of the 7 Wisemen of
Goatham.

a version of the "we be seven" motif: 3 men mounted on 3 asses WE BE SEVEN


TO THE MOST MIGHTY and Manifold Numberless Multitude of Natural and
Artificial Fools and Asses.
Kind Fellows, Brothers and Friends, (I dare not call you Gentlemen, though
some of you were borne, and some esteemed or made so)
I have made bold to dedicate this Herculean labor to your Various Censures;
entreating everyone of you in particular to do me the favor as to make the
six here depictured, to be in number seven; If you be free from all
Aspersions and Imputations which are Repeated of in the following Lines: then
you are unfit for the Brotherhood; for all fools are not so that wear
Coxcombes, Pyde Coats and Bables, and there may be a Golden Ass as well as a
Gray one; Will Summers was a Fool by Art, to King Henry the eight, and Patch
was an Idiot to Cardinal Wolsey. John Garret, was an indifferent Iester, (but
all Iesters, Ieerers, Flowters, Scoffers and Mockers are not to be safely
Ranked amongst the number of Fools or Asses,) Tom Derry, was Harmless and
Simple, and therein came nearest to the nature and estimation of a silly Honest
Fool: But all that is nothing to Archye, for he is of a wise and more wary
Garb; he knows a piece of Biefe from an Iron Wedge, and a Velvet Purse from
a Sowes Ear. He is well known from others, and may be trusted with untold
Milstones: the truth is, that he is much to be beloved for those Good parts he
has, and sure there are many that did never receive harm by him, or do desire
it; And so my good Patrons I leave my Lines and Labors to you, and you to
fortune and the world, whose favorites you are or may Be, as she pleases to
be friend you.

We be Seven.
TWo Brothers walking in a Starry Night,
And viewing well the Skies Illustrious light,
And how the spacious spangled firmament
Was wonderful in compass and extent,
They fell into a serious discourse,
From Mad to Bad words, and from Bad to Worse.
The one did wish he had a piece of Ground
As large or Ample as the Skies great Round,
The other wishd for Oxen, Bulls and Kine
As many as the Stars, which then did shine:
The first said, where should all these Beasts have Bait,
In your ground Sir, the second Answered strait.
With that the one began to storm and swear
Without his leave they never should feed there.
The other said that in his teethes despite,
His cattle should Graze there both day and night,
And that they in his Ground should feed and fill,
Without his leave, or favor, or goodwill,
Thus were there angers Raised, both scorned to yeald,
And both each other dared into the field.
The quarrel great the danger dreadful was,
Each one well Mounted on his warlike Ass,
In furious form, and armed as you see
For bloody Combat, both prepared be.
When lo! a third man horsed as well as they,
Rode poasting in, and thus took up the fray.
Brethren, quoth he, put up your murdring tools,
Though we want wit, yet lets not play the fools.
Our Beasts and we are six, the number's even,
Except some looker on do make up Seven.
We are but half a dozen, but before
We can turn round, our number will be more.
Though some for beauty, wealth, descent, or place
Or rich attire, may hold us in disgrace,
Let each one judge himself, and I durst lay
A wager, that we shall be seven straightway.
He that has past his word, or used his pen
In Bonds, and paid the debts of other men,
And lives in woe and want for doing thus,
Has been a kind man, and is one of Us.
He that has Gam'd away a good estate,
And now does want, does cheat for clothes and meat,
Or beg, or bravely steal, or poorly starve,
To make our nnmber seven, does well deserve.
He that has drab'd away his Time, his Wealth,
His Credit (if he had it) and his health,
Although he is poor, and his diseases many,
He Will make our number seven as well as any.
He that is Jealous, and no cause can tell
Wherefore he is so, does live half in hell,
And is a Cuckold only in conceit,
We six will make that man our brother straight.
The Glutton whom nor Sea, nor Land, nor Skies
With Fishes, Beasts, Fruits, Fowls cannot suffice,
Though he be near so rich, I tell him thus,
He Is better fed than taught, and one of Us.
He that will let his wife live as she list,
And please her, fearing both her tongue and fist:
And lets her go, come, eat, wear what she will,
He is our Brother, and shall be so still.
He that often drinks a friends, or Great man's health
And drinks his own away, and wastes his wealth,
It Is not his dropsy or his Giddy Brain
Shall make us his sweet Brotherhood Refrain.
He that will for the wagging of a straw
Or for each toye or trisle go to law,
And loves contention better than his food,
He makes our number seven it is understood.
He that delights in Brawles and quarrels picking,
In rough uncivil words, or dangerous striking,
Though for acquaintance we do never crave him
Yet he is our Brother, till the hang man have him.
He that is toucheous, tasty, washpish, froward,
And fretfull, hasty, every way untoward:
I do assure you such a tempred man,
Shall make our number seven, do what he can.
He that our Churches government does leere,
And hates our Reverend Ceremonies here,
Striving to mar what is well, what is Good to alter,
He Is one of Us, until he catch the halter.
All these, and many more our Brothers are
And each of us with him shall have a share:
Ambition is a stumbling Rampant Ass:
An Alcumist may for our brother pass:
Empson and Dudley, were proiectors twain,
And both our Brothers, so are all their train,
For whose sake, Such proiectours that are bad,
Are wishd to have such wages as they had.
These that trust Palmistry, or Augury,
Of fortune telling mad Ass-trology,
Or to be Great or Rich does toil and plod
And makes their belly or their Gold their God,
All fond Inamour^t^es that are Mad
For Love (Sir Reverence) That cannot be had,
How ever such, by wise men may be deemed,
They shallbe of our brotherhood esteemed.
In Brief the Worlds a Mass of Vanity,
A Gallemalfrey of mixed foolery.
And though men have not all one self condition
Yet every man's a fool or a Physician.
Fools will be meddling and what ere he be
That Is angry at these lines, is one of we:
And we do hope that wisemen have such powers
In Wisdom, not to set their wit to ours.
And it is a Proverb amongst age and youth
That Fools and Children still will tell the truth:
Besides an old said saw is not forgot
Which says a fools Bolt's soon or quickly shot.
We seven are fools, six of us are to sell,
But if we all were Rich, we know Right well,
For love of us, our lands, our goods and gold,
We should be begged for fools, not Bought and sold.
We were esteemed in learned Erasmus days
Who wrore a worthy Book in follies Praise,
And this much may be learned in Natures school
It Is better to be Borne than made a fool.
Thus every man that lives one way or other
Does make our number seven, and proves our Brother;
For Mighty States, and powerful Potentates
That seem to oversway and Rule the Fates
And with a Nail through Fortunes wheel can drive it
And at that Point that Nail can clench and rivet,
Where ^he cannot turn her wavering wheel
They are Wisemen indeed, (if such there be)
And are no fellows for such fools as we.
But till such time as we such men can find,
(As sure they are excluded Humane kind)
The Race of man to folly being subject,
And in one Point or other Fortunes abject.
For why if any men have Earthly Rest,
It Is only We that are Right fools professed.
Thus welcome Brother whosoere thou art
If thou will make us seven, we will take thy part.
The Mad-Foole.
ALL common Drunkards, Swearers, Thieves and Roarers,
Decoyes, Sharkes, Cheaters, Runagates and Shifts,
All vagabonds, Nims, Prodigals and Whores,
All Stales, Stands, Rogues, all Cutpursses, and Lifts,
These are the Mad fools men, a wicked Crew,
Whom Heaven Abhors, and Hell on Earth does spew.
The Sad-Foole.
ALL Moody, Melancholy, Malcontents,
The Sons of Envy, Troublers of a State:
Projecting Hum'rous Politiques, whose events
Are Machivillian to beget debate.
Who laugh at Mischief, Greive at all that's good
These are the sad fools Best Beloved Brood.
The Merry-Foole.
THose that can Iybe, and Ieere, Scoff, Mock, or Jest,
Dance, Fiddle, Iuggle, Tumble, play the Ass,
Rhyme Roguishly, prate nonsense, smell a feast
And laugh at nothing All this Crew may pass,
For Troins true, mad Greeks, and drink old sherry,
Under the Banner of the Fool that's merry.
FINIS.

