Terrible and bloody NEVVES From the disloyal Army in the NORTH

Declaring their perfidious and tyrannical proceedings to the whole Kingdom of
England: As also the raising of new Forces in the Kingdom of Scotland, to
assist Monro against Lieutenant General Crumwell. And the Lieutenant Generals
Declaration touching the Scots. Likewise, a Declaration of the proceedings of
the Levellers in Liecester-shire, under the command of Col. Martin, and their
Proclamation at Market-Harborom. Also, strange News from the Prince of Wales,
and the Resolution of the Soldiers in Holland, touching His Highness.



Printed in the Year, 1648. Sept ye ii

STRANGE NEWS FROM THE LEVELERS.
Declaring Their proceedings, under the command of Col. Martin, in
Liecester-shire, and other parts adjacent, to the great terror and amazement
of all his Majesty's liege People.
SIR,
COlonel Martin's approach with his Levellers in these parts, has alarmed the
Country, and put themselves into a posture to receive him, (...) for
preservation of their ancient rights and libertes, against their new design of
levelling, who by their strange, politic, and subtle delusions, have wrought
into the hearts of diverse people to engage with them, especially, among those
who are of a desperate fortune, and mean condition, the basest and vilest of
men resorting to him.

They rob and plunder exceedingly wheresoever they come, saying, They will
level all sorts of people, even from the highest to the lowest, and that he
that has the most, shall be equal with him that has the least; but we hear
that Col. Martin has given command, That no soldier whatsoever shall dare to
plunder or use violence against any, but that they behave themselves civilly,
executing nothing contrary to order.

If these Orders be truly observed, in all probability they will grow very
numerous, if not timely suppressed.

Major Fincher using all means possible to accomplish the same, but as yet he
has found great opposition, notwithstanding the late blow given them in
Berkshire, the manner thus.

Major Fincher being commanded against the aforesaid Col. Martin, fell upon his
forces, routed them, and took some prisoners, but rallying again, its reported
that they did some execution upon Major Finchers men, and afterward forced
their way into these parts, who of late deports themselves with far more
civility then formerly.

On Tuesday last a party of them came to Market-Harborow, which put the Market
people into a great fear, some running one way, and some another: whereupon the
Levellers perceiving this, made Proclamation near the Swan, and at the Cross,
That no violence or wrong should be executed upon any, neither would they in
the least disturb or hinder the Market. After which, they staid a while at the
Crown, and so departed peaceably: the Lord Gray is with his forces about
Ashby-de-lazouch, and Col. Martin since the fair carriage of his men continues
about Rockingham, which is all at present, from

Your most assured friend, W. TURVIL.
Liecester 7 September. 1648.
Terrible news from the Scottish Army, concerning the proceedings of the Scots
and Irish Forces, against the English forces, etc.
SIR,
The proceedings of the Scots and Irish appears more visible and inhumane then
formerly, their actions are tyrannical, their ways most insufferable, and
executes nothing but bloud-thirstinesse and cruelty, tending only to utter
ruin and desolation: they have burned down diverse stately buildings in these
parts, executed some of my Lord Whartons Tenants, and threatens others, which
causes the Country to rise and join with Lieu. Genesis Crumwell, insomuch that
there will be a sudden engagement. The L. General has declared himself very
gallantly to the Country people, touching the preservation of their lives and
estates from the Scots, which takes exceedingly amongst the Inhabitants The
Committee of estates have given out orders for raising of more forces to assist
Monro.

We hear that Gen: Munro with his Army is marched on this side Appleby,
preparing for an engagement, his forces consisting of about 8000. and it is
reported that 5000. more are joined with him from Scotland. Our Intelligence
says that he is resolved to fight Lie. Genesis Crumwel, and the rest of the
English Forces, resolving rather to die, then yield ground, unless upon
advantage.

Our forces desires to engage, but could not pass by the way of Cumberland for
want of provision, that County and Westmerland being exhausted, besides the wet
weather and mountainous ways makes cariages and Artillery unpassable had there
been provision; in hose respects we passed by Skipton upon Craven, and so by
the East Coast, where we shall have better opportunity to meet our enemy, who
we are informed is past at Steinmore in the Bishopric of Durham, where is
plenty of provision and Anti-covenanters, who bid them welcome to as much
benefit, as Colchester got by entertaining the Royal party.

Upon Satterday last Munroes Army randezvouzed at Borough near Stainmore in the
Bishopric, who mastered near upon 8000. horse and foot, English, Scots and
Irish, well armed and resolute.

At which Randevouz we hear, that Munro declared himself at the head of each
Regiment, intimating His resolution to live and die with them, add to fight it
out to the last man.

Then he called a general council of all his Officers where it was agreed,
That the Scots and Irish should be commanded back to Perith, and the English
into the Bishopric, and that within two days they march up to the Randezvouz
at Hexam Moor in Northumberland, which accordingly they did, where was a great
appearance, Sir Philip Musgrave joining with them with a strong party of horse:
the train of Artillery likewise came up, as also 20 piece of Ordnance: and its
generally reported here that 5000. more are coming out of Scotland, which if
true they will make a very considerable Army. Diverse English resorts from these
parts to Munro, who are by their great Landlords encouraged, and promised to
sit rent-free for the future.

We march slowly, because we wait the coming of Col. Genesis Lambert with 4
Regiments whom we expect daily. Sir Will. Huddleston (a papist) has raised a
considerable party for the King, and besieged Cockermouth the Lancashire forces
are gone to suppress him.

Col. Fenwicks horse and some Dragoons went near Barnick, relieved the Holy
Island, stormed Fenham Castle near the Isle, in which was a Scots Garrison,
took diverse prisoners, put the rest to the sword: they summoned Hagerston
Garrison, but the Scots sallying out of Berwick forced them to retreat.

Richmond 6 September. 1648.
The last News from the Prince.
Letters from Holland say, That great preparations is made at the Hague for the
entertainment of the Prince of Wales, and that diverse Courtiers are gone from
thence with Coaches, to attend his Royal person from the Brill. The common
report is, He is to rig the ships again, and those prizes which be got in the
Downs, he intends to sell, and with the money to levy some forces. Among the
States it was disputed, whether he should be entertained by them in a public
way, or whether so much per diem should be allowed unto him for some time. The
result its said was, that one hundred pound should be allowed unto him per day.

Hague September. stylo novo.
Other Letters say, That diverse of the old soldiery are much discontented at
the proceedings in England, and vexed at diverse great Ones who were at sea with
the Prince, being resolved never to engage where such perfidiousnesse and
treachery abounds. The Duke of York is come from the Brill to this City, the
Prince daily expected but loath to leave his shipping. Diverse of the Lords are
come ashore, and the greatest part of the Navy gone to Gorce.

Haugue 8. Sept. 1648.
FINIS.

