Tub-preachers overturned OR ^ndependency to be abandoned and abhorred ^s
destructive to the Majestracy and Ministry, of the Church and Commonwealth of
England.

Proved in a satisfactory Answer to a Lybellous Pamphlet, Entitled A Letter to
Mr Thomas Edwards, with an infamous Dedication.

Showing the Vanity, folly, madness of the deboyst Buff-coate, Mechanic
Frize-coat, Lay illiterate men and women, to usurp the Ministry, and
Audaciously vent their own Heretical opinions, in their house- (alias Tub) --
Preachings. viz.

Wiet a Cobbler. Robine a Sadler. Sammon a Sho-maker. Barde a Smith. Kiffin a
Glover. Patience a Tailor. Tue a Girdler. Willkin the Meal-man. Fletcher a
Cooper. Hobson a Tailor. Oats a Button-maker. Ives a Box-maker. Barbone a
Lether-seller. Parvis a Goldsmiths. Lamb a Sope-boyler. Bignall a Porter.
Henshaw a Confectioner, alias infectioner. Bulcher a Chicken-man. Hawes a
Broaker. Duper a Cow-keeper.
Reader, I cannot inform thee of their christen names because it is questionable
whether they have any.

Jude ver. 13. Raging waves of the Sea, foaming out their own shame, wandering
stars, to whom is reserved the blackness of Darkness for ever.

London, Printed for George Lindsey and are to be sold at his shop over against
London-stone. 1647.

Tub-Preachers overturned, or Independency to be abandoned and abhorred, as
destructive to the Magistracy and Ministry of the Church and Common -- wealth
of ENGLAND: Proved in a satisfactory Answer to a Libellous Pamphlet,
(Entitled, A Letter to Mr Thomas Edwards with an infamous Dedication.)
SIR, Worthy Sir, Reverend, Honored, Grave, Dear Friend, Father, Good Master.
WE cannot wonder at the loftiness of your looks, nor at the exorbitant humor
of your spirit, when we find you so woefully bespattered and courted from every
part of the Kingdom, where Satan we fear has his Throne.

Sirrah, you the Dictator, that in the first word and line call your self we,
what loftiness of looks; what humor of spirit behold you in Master Edwards, or
how woefully be spattered and courted from every part of the Kingdm, which is
(in the first place) amongst your too too many Errors, a Contradiction; to be
bespattered and yet courted. Sir, I verily believe good Mr Edwards (as in your
ridiculous title) is first good in withstanding to your face your most
blasphemous evils: secondly Master, because by him you are ta^ght to amend your
manners both of words and doctrines: Sir, He sets the sadle upon the right
hose, and has rid you till your gall^d backs compel you to kick.

But, say you, these courtings come from every part of the Kingdom, where
Satan, you fear, has his Throne. By which I hope, though ye, like him, have
name and nature; for name legions, nature compassing all the parts of this
Kingdom; So, like to him, shall you fall like lightning: if ye have two natures
this is one of a Sectary.

The erring spirit transforms and makes to vary

From what men should, do most, yea quite contrary.

Page 1. line 12. Our thoughts are extremely divided; we know not well whether
to look upon you under the blindness of a deluded brother, or perverseness of a
resolved enemy; having once (we once believed) received the knowledge of the
truth, we will put our charity on the tenters (as you have put the Covenant).
What ribble rabble is this.

Sir, I truly believe your thoughts are extremely divided, so your hearts, your
judgments, I spare to say your wives: Division is your delightful Harmony; your
musick's Concord: your thoughts, hearts, households, Churches are divided. You
look upon him under the blindness of a deluded brother, yet ye believe he once
received the knowledge of the truth. In this see your own blindness which your
wall-eyes look under; Not all your delusions of profits, advancements, which
your party has encroached upon in your new molded
Church-Conventicle-gatherings, could be able to shake his foundation; nor could
he, having once the knowledge of the truth, be deceived by your errors by all
your glozing specious pretenses of New-Light, Christ upon his Throne, Godly
Party, Free Grace, Saints, Comfort of believers, Divine Light, Pilgrim of the
Saints, and Honeycomb, and a thousand sweet lies in them to have a man go
slumbring to hell in a feather-bed. If Mr Edwards recites to the world the
ungodly blasphemous unworthyness of your ways in your own Dialect: you fell
foully with him, and cry out Persecution, the ruin of the Saints, etc. As
though you should go on in your crooked erroneous paths uncontrouled or
unrecalled, and then if you afford him (as you have but few) a good thought or
word, you stretch your charity upon the tenters as he the Covenant, when it is
notoriously known there has not been in any age in Christendom like
Covenant-breakers to your selves Malignants or others, for which I thus brand
you.

The Independent Crew, throughout this Nation,
With eagerness pursue a Toleration
For all Religions; break their Covenant
They once did make with God, true Protestant
Religion to maintain; Sects Heresy,
To 'bandon and extirpate Popery,
Blasphemy, Avarice, by which I gather
You THEN, Delinquents were, NOW, perjured rather. If you rock not the Covenant.

Page first, line last, Sir in the so desperate Carreer, give us leave sadly to
ask you whence and whither so fast? Sir, I shall gladly resolve you, this
post-hast is to overtake you that so madly gallop into all the parrs of this
Kingdom, where you have vented your blasphemies the doctrine of devils;
therefore ask you, so I believe, Satan may be truly said to have his Throne
there; where ye have crept into widows houses, and have bewitched or deceived
silly women, men and women servants, children; and since your entrance ye have,
like Fezabel, painted your brazen faced pretenses, and look out of those
uppermost windows. No wonder then if Mr Edwards, like Jehu, drive on furiously
for your outhrowing and destruction; putting behind him all your messengers of
threats and flatteries) to peace with you; I dare be bold to affirm, (if ye
persist) that if the dogs lick not up your blood yet the black Ravens of the
valley shall pick out your eyes.

Page 2. line 14. God shall smite thee, thou whited wall, that thut in the pride
of thy heart flyest in his face and strikest at the very apple of his eye.

Sirrah, call you zealous Mr Edwards a whited wall? Sir, pray observe the
Apostles doctrine and fellowship, judge your selves: and then if your feared
conscience and judgment blinded through too too much New-Light, I Will inform them
and tell truth: Your painted Sepulchers, naught but ignomy and hollow-hearted
rottenness within; a noisome cage of unclean birds, I should say beasts. Sir,
call not your party (that brood of crocodiles) the very apple of Gods eye, for
very shame, to them that know you to be the devils spectacles; but because he is
old and crased, your New-Lights (alias old Heresies and Blasphemies long since
adjudged and condemned by all former Councels and Sinods) makes him behold you
the clearer; you, Sir, are Arrians, Antinomians, Libertines, Soul-sleepers,
Anti baptists, Socinians, Pelagians, Self-seckers.

Are these, dare ye say, the very apple of Gods eye? No, I Will tell ye of what
kind of apples ye are, much like those goodly apples of Sodom that are of a
fair aspect, but touch them they fall to ashes, or of that fruit or kernels of
those temping apples of Paradise; that were pleasant to the eye and seemed good
for food, yet had a most deadly rotten coar; and therefore the most fit for the
devils use to deceive our silly mother Eve, whose practice is yours; because ye
know they are the weaker vessels, or rather vassels to you: ye act the devils
part of a strong man and take possession.

Page 2. line 26. Lay aside the sqiut-eyed byasing respects of this adulterous
generation, and let conscience speak.

Sir, first I most credulously believe what Mr. Edwards does do to inform of
your vicious ways, is for conscience sake that you reform them, and not for any
sinister or byassing respect. Sir, your calling this an adulterous generation,
I believe it more then others heretofore, and increases with your New-Light,
because it is adulterate, your name shows your nature; Sir, I could give you
twenty more of those very apples you put into Gods eyes to put out ours, with
all their several workings, Antiscripturians, Antisabatarians, Adamites,
Millenaries, Apostolicks: all of the brotherens holding, yet the sisters are
and hold but one, are loving familists, hold divorce, however they differ in
other your fundamentals, in this they are absolute.

We Saints more freedom have then other men, * Tho. Watson in Duck-lane married
in Moor-fields by one Smith a Tailor, and many more I can nominate.

To marry at midnight, or no matter when;
When ever a sister promise, she' lindeaver
To keep her word, or do the deed however.
No wonder ye call this an adulterous generation when ye account it a light
thing to say put cut the candle and kiss me.

Page 2. line 27. Who (under God) have been the pillars and only supporters of
a reeling and tottering State?

Hold, lets have no swearing: sure I am there is lying (if you intend your party
of Ildependents;) you the only Pillars and Supporters? do you not (in this) act
the part of Allexander the Copper-smith, to Brazon out your untruths and
notable lies thus? Sir, I know the Ambition of the party that falsely assume to
themselves the Repairers of our breach, and restorers of our paths to dwell
in. Sirrah, I did verily believe, ye had bin so fully satissfied in this point
by that Right-worthy Dr. John Bastwick; that he had stopped all the mouths of
such Railing, Lying, Black-mouth connicatching adversuries, that you had not
had the Brazenfacest impudence once more to assert it, in his most industrious
Book entitled, the utter Routing of all the Independents and Sectaries etc.
Which Book is to be bought or borrowed at the Bookseller shop over against
London stone. Unto which Book I recommend the Reader, for this full
satisfaction there shall he read a catalogue of our worthy Pillars, Heroes,
Patriots of this Reeling and tottering state; nor then were, or, now are
Independents, those that injured she most trouble and danger in the heat of the
day.

Page 3. line 14. We could tell the world and you, a truer story of the late
Pranks of Mr. etc. (whose name you know; but we will spare) of his late
suplanting the Merchant: and getting his espowsed Mistress with child: (which
act with all its Circumstances, we find not in all your gangrein Parralle'd) of
Sir, I very well know where your shoe pinches you; the late Pranks of Mr. etc.
or etcetera, Sir, I had thought etc. had been such a former vexation to you in
the oath Exofficio; that ever after you would forbear to charg it upon another,
Sure this is one like the rest: if any Presbitarian should so disorderly walk,
you would not be so meal-mouthed as to forbear to name him; But I rather beleev
(in this) you (Iackan-apes like) immitatet the actions of Auicus the Oxford
Scribler (Saving in this your Simplicities, you discover your self the
contrary) that when he wanted novellties; could forg them; so you because Mr.
Edwards in his Gangrena does justly, truly reprove you, you unjustly, and
untrewly intimate, you could say so or so; but I will tell truth of one of a
100000 thousand (Mr. Edwards has not heard of) Mr. Armstrong that on the 10.
of March 1647. The day the Parliament ordered, to be set apart for Public
humiliation: to beseech Almighty God to stop the growth or, increase of
Herisies, Blassphemies etc. He being of a quesie stomach to this came into
Foster-lane (he is well known at the dagger) before that Godly minister Mr.
Norton and Mr. (...) had ended their afternoons Sermon, Armstrong said, have
not these Fellows done cursing us it? will teey curse us all the day? I think
they will never have done cursing of us.

P, 4 l. 4. To carry on the design you dewel usher in a foreign force; the
Neatherlands have done you good service, Sir, your party has done the devil
more. Let any indifferent Reader judge between us, whose design? yours, or ours;
(for now I am of the plural number too) your design are Rebellions Irish
Hodg-Podg, curdled mess of all together: or, ours a united, conjealed,
Semented, Selected, government whose design I say; is the most like to give
way too or usher in a foraine force: further whether the Netherlands have done
us good service, is referred to Judgment; whether I, or no, I am sure like
Factions to your own has done Germany an evil service, yea, has been their
utter ruin, and (almost) total desolation. He referte my Judicious Reader to
the History of Anabaptists of High and Low Germany; in which, to his grief
of heart, he may justiy fear the like sad events approaching upon this, by
this reproachful adulterate generation of Vipers.

Page 4. line 27. Sir, you with your Gangrene have been weighed, and are found
too light, and verily your expected Kingdom is departing. Sir, do you put
your Foole-point here? me thinks your semy (alias) silly Colon, is a stop too
much: Sir, you with your six-leav'd scurrulous Pamphlet have been weighed in
the Scale of Judgment, and you are found a worthless, witless Noddie; Sir,
it proclaims you a mere Mechanic: my Genius prompts me, you are by
Profession one of these two, a Weaver, or Cobbler; a Weaver I guess, by that
homespun, course, grosse-weaved Fustian in your Book; a Cobbler, by your
Patching and Borching, nicknamed Heresy, malignant-Prelacie,
wyre-drawne-Covenant; yea, a Cobbler I could wish you the rather, then should I
hope in time you would mend. Reader, I shall be careful to avoid prolixitie, (a
thing extremely affected by my Antagonist) therefore for brevitie sake I shall
not trace him in his nonsencicall reiterated lines, but in those of most
concernment, remembering the wise man's Mandamus, Answer not a fool according to
his folly, lest thou be like him.

Page 5. line 19. Know you not who says, the weapons of our warfare are not
carnal: why then, as men distracted, cry ye out so loud for Magisteriall
external force? Sir, we know the Apostle so says: in that insancie of the
Gospel-Doctrine of Jesus Christ, the whole world (almost) in opposition against
them, they had nor, nor could have, such Magisteriall or outward force; yet God
invested them with Miracles, mightily to compel or convince their (like yours)
stiff-necked and uncircumcised of heart, which you more cunningly appropriate
to tender conscience: but we have the Precept of Jesus Christ for our example,
to inflict corporal, penal punishments upon such incorrigible blasphemers and
offenders. Sir, with a three. string'd whip he yerkt out of the Temple those
abusers of it, John 2. inferior to your selves. Sir, can you deny this Legal
punishment to be a Gospel-right? and know, if through our silence to God, the
Magistrate, and Ministers, you should persist in your unholyed unsanctified,
unwarranted progress, the very stones in our streets (I verily believe) would
cry out against us.

Page 5. line 36. Ye war indeed, but it is after the flesh; no wonder your
conquest is no more, for the Spirit of the Lord we fear is departed from you.
Pray ye speak softly, give your charity to there stretch upon the Tenters, or
I Will give you rope enough to stretch necks. If you, the troublers of our Israel,
were all departed far enough, good enough, to your good new Canaan, a good
riddance: because you separate from us, account your selves all the Spirit of
the Lord. There is more reason, and I rather believe it, ye are of your father
the Devil, his work ye do; then at least, ye are the Devils Journeymen, and I
fear he will recompense ye. Sir, we war not after the flesh, but against it,
we hold, fight the good fight of Faith; and our conquest over you, is the
overthrow of your Babel, so vast and unlimited, and all you that contribute
your utmost assistance, carrying up your Dung and untempered Mortar to make up
the Bulk: in this Fall, or Confusion, themselves are lost in the Rubbish.

Page 6. line 22. Tell us not, Sir, of a specious Ordination, any farther then
you can attest its Divinity by the concomitancie of the Sp^r^t, we shall else
look upon it as a means to delude the simple; tell us not (as your
predecessors did) of order and decency in the Church. Sir, this specious
Ordination, which your Faction does restractorily oppose we can (and have done
with all circumstances) prove its Divinity by the un-erring Spirit of Truth,
by the example of Christ, that at one time ordained 70 Disciples, and then sent
them forth, the practice of his blessed Apostles, and since in the Primitive
Church, in all Ages successively; which I here omit (as I said) to avoid
prolixitie. But now Sir, I do demand of your Il dependant illiterate party,
man or woman, by what specious Ordination, or Call, ordinary or
extraordinatie, do ye intrade your selves into our Pulpits, to infect or touch
our Congregations with your Leprous Doctrines? In this ye imitate the Devils
practice. Job 1. In the day the sons of God appeared before God, Satan
likewife came in amongst them but for hurt and affliction of godly Job: and
therefore, this Ordination we use it not as a means to deceive the simple
(were ye so wise as to believe it) but as an Ordinance of Christ.

Tell us not of order and decency in the Church. Shall I tell ye? if not,
worthy M. Edwards shall tell the world of you: of your too too many disorders,
irreverent Antichristian behaviors in all Churches (where ye come) by your
pragmaticall schismatic preaching (alias) prattling Buffe-Coats, and others:
I Will name but one of 100000, where they pissed in a Font, and brought a bald
horse in the Church to the Font, and baptized him by the name of Ball-Esau,
because said they he was Harry. Gangrena 3. And although you will not be told
of order and decency in the Church, I tell ye these disorders and undecent
distractions and confusions, the God of order and peace is not the Author of,
but the Devil, 1 Cor. 14. 33.

Page 7. line 18. Sir, were you a messenger of Christ, your work would be to
go and preach, and hold forth the everlasting Gospel, which alone is the arm
of God to salvation, you would more cry up the sword of God then of Gidion,
you would see more cogent convincing authority to subdue the heart by one
Evangelicall scriptum est, then a thousand political fiat Justitia's, or all
the arbitrarie boundless Canonical Ipse Dixit's in the world. Sir, this I
profess your Masterpiece. Sir, to doubt M. Edwards to be a messenger of
Christ, I account it impertinent, not worth resolving: His servants (or
messengers) ye are, to whom ye obey. That he obeyes and follows Christ's
precepts, or example, I prove thus: Christ his great and principal work was,
to redeem the world and save it; but his first work, as most necessary, was to
confute or convince the world of sin, and this he began at 12 years age: He had
a greater work to do; yet this (though inferior) was first, as most
requisite, to confound and put to silence such Rabbis and Ringleaders (as
your selves, that opposed his Kingdom and Doctrine, when he disputed with
those Doctors that were astonished at his Wisdom and Doctrine. This was S. Paul's
practice (a chosen Vessel of Christ's by a Call extraordinary) who fought the
good fight of Faith with Beasts of Ephesus (as M. Edwards does in England)
after the manner of men: he wrought with his hands, not that every dispenser of
the Gospel should do so (as ye do) but because he would not bring a reproach
on the Gospel of Christ (as ye do.) Sir, tell me now, is there nothing to be
done by a Minister, or messenger of Christ but only to preach? you (as we)
well know, where God has his Church, the Devil has his Chapel; and though
his messengers give all diligence, yet the Devils Agents will make Books to
sow their Tares: therefore, there is something more to be done, then only to
preach the everlasting Gospel. Surely, M. Edwards (in these sad times) holds
forth this contention between the seed of the woman and the seed of the
Serpent, to be Evangelicall, and approved of by the everlasting Gospel, and as
the right and strong Arm of God to salvation.

You would more cry up the sword of God, then of Gidion. Sir, why must we have
this distinction, as if the sword of Gidion was not the Lords? The Israelites
(as we do) cried up, the sword of the Lord and of Gidion, or Magistrate: This
we well know is your way of babbling. Sir, this way of M. Edwards, reprehending
you and reproving you sharply (as the Apostle commands) is of a great
convincing Authority to subject the heart, and rip off that foreskin, were
not your Adamite hearts harder then the Adamant; yea, it would be to you an
Evange^icall Scriptum est.

Page 8. line 8. The way to Heaven ye tell men, is by the gate of Hell; and
more then halfe-damned they must be, ere they must think of being saved: and
who but ye (in the despair of poor creatures) ordained to speak peace? Sir,
indeed this Doctrine, so much of it as we maintain, is far different or
separate from your pleasing one: yet this we know, the way to Heaven is not
strewed with rushes, and that those which will live godly in Christ Jesus, must
suffer Persecution, Tribulation, Anguish, grief of heart and mind, etc. This
is not (as yours) to nihilate the Doctrine of Repentance, but to bring them to
humility to whom God gives grace; when he resists such proud, Pharisaicall,
high-minded, Soule-murtherers, Braggadochio's, as your selves. Is this by the
gate of Hell? I am sure it is the way to know themselves; a thing ye are most
ignorant of.

And who but ye ordained to speak peace. Why Sir who but they? who are ye?
are any of you the Prophets, or the sons of the Prophets? Sir, remember that
Uzziah was struck (by God) with a Leprosy, for inrruding presumptuously upon
the Priests Office: I hold you (if Prophets) to be the sons of that old lying
Prophet, which countermanded that Prophet sent on Gods message, who believing
his lies, was destroyed by a Lion in the way. If we should believe your peace,
when you squeale out pax, pax, (as I could instance in many your blasphemous
doctrines) we should wholly neglect our eternal and everlasting peace.

Page 8. l. 35. But Sir, in good earnest let us have more sense, and less
volumes, four tales and more truths, smaller books and bigger Arguments (these
bum bast Editions tire all, but satisfy none) Reasons are sold by weight, and
not by tale. Yea Sir, in sober sadness, ye shall have more sense when your
illiterate numbers learn to read, then they will love to write and speak sense
when they cry up Humane earning, and other external properties, as these
unlearned Rabbis account them; till when these volumes of necessity must
increase with your Numbers; you shall have fewer tales and more truths, when
you forget your lying Mother Tongue, as well as your Latin one; for take this
for truth, so long as vee pray, preach, dispute nonsense, lies, and those
knaveries you are ashamed to own; in your own dialect they shall be repeated,
and thrown as dung in your face; and then shall you have more weightier Reasons
of the Sun, when such Moon-calves shall be brought to the Knowledge and Love
of God and of his Wisdom and Truth, and to love and Charity to their brethren.

Now he comes to a ru^fe draught of a simple Inventory of Mr Edwards Books;
this hairy ruffenesse shows them to be of the hated brood of Esau, whose
hoary-hairy scapes God does and shall smite with a frenzy lunacie, which they
call illumination of the spirit. Imprimis, given to the Honorable House of
Commons, out of hopes to find favor there, so many Books. Sir, what you call
hopes. I can affirm is, he has assurance to find favor with the Honorable
House of Commons, the King, and House or Lords too, yea with the Assembly of
Divines, and all the knowing Orthodox men in Christendom: Sir seed not your
fancies with vain hopes of the late brags you made of the strength of your
Party in the Parliament-Houses, Armies and Kingdom; these are but mere
scar-crow^s which your unlicensed Printing-Presse has divulged, of which
Overton in Newgate can give testimony, as well as Lilburne in the Tower. Item,
given to your reverend self for your reverend Copy so many 40. s. in dry money
(too much by 39. in so dry a bargain) See Reverend Mr. Edwards (if you were
not of the viperous Generation) is Right Worthy by you to be revernced as your
best and most reverend Master or Tutor, and therefore take warning that if you
persist to bristle up your prick-eares at him, with your wildlookt meager
countenance, that he, or some in his behalf shall pick your guberd teeth with
such a bed staff as Dr. Bastwick did. Item, given to a Schoole-boy, to correct
your false Latin, and other amendments, 40. s. in dry money, (too much by 39.
in so dry a bargain.) Sir, he that can write true Latin, can as truly correct
it as Mr. Edwards does himself. But Sir if you have not broke Priscians head
more than once, I Will give you leave to break mine: But I Will take the pains as I
would give you correction, to correct your Page last, line first, Ambobus
manibus iterum iterumque approbatar, which I thus correct, Ambabus manibus
iterumque iterumque approbatur. Sir, for the rest of the Inventory, it is so
full of nonsensicall simplicity not worth the repeating, or answering; yet for
the Readers satisfaction let him judge. Item, given to the Grecian, for helping
you to the Originalls, and filling up the Hebrew blanks 59. shillings and 3.
groats: I fear you want one groatsworth of wit. Item, so many sold for little
or nothing, to the Exchange, to Grocers, Cooks, etc. Item so many sequestered
for my own proper use, in my study behind the door (alias the house of
Office) and for my servants so many; and many more such like Items: But Sir,
take this one Item from me, that if these thin leaved empty volumes of a sheet
and a half, and your saucy lies in them shall still be vented against the
Parliament, Assembly, Church of England, Mr. Edwards, Dr. Bastwicke, Mr. Pryn,
etc. I Will publish to the world your illicerate, mechanic, nonsensicall
cobled-fustian-Tubbers, men and women, the names and qualities of some of them
for this time I Will but nominate, viz.

Wyet a Cobbler, Robin a Sadler, Lamb a Sopeboiler, Bignall a Porter. Kiffin a
Glover, Tue a Girdler, Major Tulidagh a Scot. Patience a Tailor. Parvis a
Goldsmith. Barebones a Leatherseller. Henshaw a Confectioner, (alias Infector.)
Bulcher a Chicken-man (alias, dead and alive.)
These and 40. more for the men-preachers; and for your women-Tubbers, alias
Dubbers, my Muse shall only sing of one.

The Church of Revel. 2.
Thyatyrah threatened sore,
For suffering Jezabell, that Scarlet Whore,
Thus to seduce Gods people, and to teach
Them disobedience, ye (poor souls) bewitch
Them her to follow; Like her, such another,
Sold Bone-lace in Cheapside, that had a Brother
Did walk disorderly, him to befriend
For his Conversion, at a Tables end
Did take a Text, and boldly did descant,
The lawfulness to Preach of a she-saint,
Informed her Auditory, that there was
More need she edify 'em, then sell Lace;
And that her zeal, piety, and knowledge,
Surpast the gravest Student in the College,
Who strived thus Humane Learning to advance,
She with her Bible and a Concordance,
Could Preach nine times a week, morning and night,
Such revelations had she from new light.
The tedions, godless, nonsense sermon ended,
Her sainted Convert, whom she thus befriended,
Desired a private Application,
Unto the point in Agitation.
The Feast when ended, and the Saints all gone,
Who left behind a large Collection.
"Dear Brother, said she, if you would be wise,
"I Will teach you how your gifts to exercise;
"One Concordance will serve us both to note;
"Such Scriptures as we will easily get by roat:
He with her wind of Doctrine led away,
For sooke his wife, with her went over Sea,
So she her husband, where they both expressed
Each others gifts, I blush to preach the rest.
Sir, that this estimate is more infailible than yours, to which ye: subscribed
R. S. I have likewise annexed G. L. for the honest Reader to judge. Reader this
R. S. or Ralph Smith is the Bookseller that prints and publishes Mr. Edwards
Gangrena's; Sir, if he should make such a lame account as you bring, he would
show little wisdom to re-print such volumes: But sirrah, this is like one of
your falsities you said of Dr. Bastwicks, viz. That his Books had made more
Independanss then they had desswaded from it. And Sir, for that whibling
scandalous Pamphlet, called A sudden Answer to Dr. Bastwicks utter routing of
all the Independants and sectaries, of one sheet of paper, in which you
undertake to answer his 100 sheets; But because it is not worth his while to
reply to it; I shall (God willing) give any indifferent Reader a full and good
account to answer in your own Dialect excepting your railing and lying, etc.
Sir, let me (for your own sake) desire you as a Christian Brother, to recall
these passions, and reclaim them, to set Christ before you as the truest
pattern to learn of him to be meek, humble, lowly in your own eyes, this will
raise you to a high pitch of piery and acceptance with Almighty God.

Sir, let me exhort ye as a Christian Brother, to set Christ's blessed Apostle
S. Peter as a true pattern before you to imitate him (in your unerring Church)
although S. Paul reproved S. Peter, Gal. 2. 11. But when Peter was come to
Antioch, I with stood him to the face, because he was to be blamed; yet Peter
of that godly knowledge does acknowledge and approve of all S. Paul's Epistles,
2 Pet. 3. 15. 16. And accouns that the long-suffering of our Lord is salvation,
even as our beloved brother Paul aso, according to the wisdom given unto him,
has written unto you. As also in all his Epistles speaking in them of these
things, in which are some things hard to be understood, which they that are
unlearned and unstable, wrest as they do also the other Scriptures, unto their
own destruction.

FINIS.

