A BRIEF TREATISE Concerning the chief dispute of this time about TITHES.

Wherein is shown, 1. That the Tenth or Tithes are the Clergies right, by the
Laws of God, of Nature, and of this Nation. 2. That no person ought to pay
above the tenth part of any Rate or Charge, imposed upon the whole Parish, for
his Parsonage, Tithe and Gleabe also.


By Bevill Turmiger, Gent.

MAL. 3.8, 9, 10. Will a man rob God? yet ye have robbed me: But ye say,
Wherein have we robbed thee? In Tithes and Offerings. Ye are cursed with a
curse; for ye have robbed me, even this whole Nation. Bring ye all the Tithes
into the Storehouse, that there may be meat in mine house, and prove me now
herewith, says the Lord of Hosts, if I will not open you the windows of
Heaven, and power you out a blessing, that there shall not be room enough to
receive it.

LONDON, Printed for R. LOWNDES, at the White-Lyon in S. Paul's Churchyard,
1653.

THe maine business now in agitation at Westminster, is, concerning the
taking away the Tithes from the Clergy, and is the subject of every man's
discourse, wherein two opinions are most eagerly maintained; the first (and
most violent) is, That Tithes ought not at all to be paid to the Clergy. The
second is, That Tithes or tenth ought to be paid, but not as now they are in
most Parishes, which chiefly consists of Tillage, where the Parson receives a
sixth part in stead of his tenth, and yet many times pays but the tenth part
of the Contribution; To satisfy both which, I thought it not amiss to publish
these Collections, which formerly I gathered for my own private satisfaction;
by which it will appear against the first sort of people, that Tithes are due
to the Clergy by the Laws of God, of Nature, and of this Nation; and against
the second sort, that no Parson receives above the tenth part of the fruits of
the Parish, and that he ought not to pay above the tenth part of any Rates or
Charges imposed upon the Parish, for his Tithe and Gleabe also.

The Clergies right to Tithes, by the Law of God, of Nature, and this Nation,
and that no Parson ought to pay above the tenth part of any Rate or Charge,
imposed upon the Parish for his Tithe and Glebe.
TITHE in old English or Saxon, signifies to cull or choose out; and because
the Priest might cull or choose his tenth out of the other nine parts, the word
Tithe came to be used for the tenth, for Decima or Decimae, is the Tithe or
tenth of that we lawfully possess, rendered by us to God by way of
thankfulness for the blessings bestowed on us, which is due by the Law of God,
of Nature, and of this Nation.

The Law of God is contained in the Old and New Testaments; in the Old
Testament Tithes are fully and often commanded (as all acknowledge) but some
pretend that it obliges not us, since there is no express place injoyning the
payment of them in the New: Yet the same Argument is of the same force against
keeping the Lords day, Baptizing of Infants, or women's receiving of the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper; and sufficient it is, that they are plainly
commanded in the Old, and never fulfilled, abrogated or abolished in the New;
and if the letter of the Leviticall Law, be fulfilled by Consummatum est, yet
the Spiritual and Moral sense remains still, and that in three maine
particulars. 1. Piety toward God, as being for his Worship and Service. 2.
Gratitude, as being Sacrificium laudis, an offering of thanks for his benefits
received. 3. Justice being appointed by him for the just remuneration, and
wages of his Ministers, 1 Cor. 9.13, 14.
Do you not know that they which wait at the Altar, are partakers with the
Altar? so also has the Lord ordained, that they which preach the Gospel
should live of the Gospel: We owe to God our great Landlord, both Rent and
Service, our Rent is the tenth of our increase, Mal. 3.8, 9, 10, etc. Will a
man rob God? yet ye have robbed me, but ye say, wherein have we robbed thee? in
Tithes and Offerings: ye are cursed with a curse, for ye have robbed me, even
this whole Nation: bring all the Tithes into the storehouse, that there may be
meat in mine house, and try me if I will not open the windows of Heaven, etc.
Our service must be performed every seventh day, 7. is the number of
Evangelicall Sanctification, 10. the number of Legal Justification: as Faith
is nothing without Works, so neither the Sabbath without Tithes; for they who
administer to us the spiritual blessings of the Sabbath, must receive from us
the temporal blessings of Tithes, 1 Cor. 9.11. if we sow unto you Spiritual
things, is it a great thing if we reap your Temporal things? for by giving
God the tenth part, we put the other nine parts in his protection: Much is said
of the Figure and Number 10. by the Ancient (as who please may read in Sir
Henry Spelman) the Romans so admired the secret virtue of the number 10. that
they canonized it amongst their Gods by the name of Decima, the letter X.
signifies commonly the number 10. and the Tithe, and Christ, and was and is
commonly written, Xs Xi Xum, Christus, Christi, Christum, and Xs Xi Xum,
Decimus, Decimi, Decimum.

X. Exprimit antiquis, haec Christum litera scriptis,
Exprimit, and partem quam petit ille sacram.
Ergo citus, Christi qua sunt dato munera Christo,
Caesaris accipiat Caesar, uterque suum.
The X. of old expressed Christ's holy name,
And so the holy tenth which he does claim.
Give then to Christ, what is Christ's without delay,
Give Caesar Cesars due, and both their pay.
And as for the Practique, the payment of Tithes by all pious men ever since
there was a Church, Jewish or Christian, is undeniable, 1 Cor. 11.16. but if
any man seem contentious, let him know, that we have no such custom, neither
the Churches of God. It seems in Saint Paul's time, the customs of the
Churches were sufficient to stop the mouths of any Gaine-sayers, the custom
of paying Tithes, was not only by, but before the establishment of the Jewish
Church or Commonwealth; for Abraham paid Tithes to Melchisedeck, who is held
to be Sem, Noah's Son (and it may well be, for he lived 600. years, whereof
502. were after the Flood, and 209. of them with Abraham) so as to those of the
new World, he might well seem without Father or Mother, being borne 100.
years before the Flood. So Jacob and Levi himself in the loins of Abraham,
paid Tithes 400. years before he was borne, and although after some robbed God
of them, Mal. 3.13. and others sacrilegiously amongst the Christians, yet was
the payment of them never abrogated by any Law, but confirmed by all the
Fathers and good Christians, and never gaine-sayed by any honest single Author,
till our unconscionable days.

2. What God taught his people the Jews, and Christians by his Word, that he
taught the Gentiles by the Law of Nature: Aug: Quis scribit in cordibus hominum
naturalem legem nisi ipse Deus, that is called the Law of Nature, which is writ
by God in the hearts of all men by the pen of Nature; grounding it self upon
such manifest rules of Reason, that all the Nations of the World perceive them
to be just, and know they ought to practice them. As the Philosophers call this
the Law of Nature, so the Logicians and Orators call it, the Law of Reason, the
Civilians, the Law of Nations, and Divines, the Moral Law: All Nations, says
Lactantius, agree in this, that there is a God, that that God ought to be
served, and that those who are set aside to perform that particular service,
ought to be maintained, which generally has been performed by the payment of
Tithes: The first Tithe that we read of paid by the Gentiles, was that of
Dyonisius, commonly called Bacchus, after his Conquest over the Indians. Magno
Jovi, 600. years after Abraham paid Tithes to Melchisedeck, which is as ancient
as we have any History of the Gentiles; and before Moses his settling the
Commonwealth of the Jews, so the Sicilians, Athenians, Arabians, Aethiopians,
and (as Paulus Diaconus says) all the Gentiles, decimas veteres diis suis
offerbaut, and Diodorus Siculus, who lived with Julius Caesar, says it was the
constant course of all people, and that not only of the fruits of the Earth,
but of that also which they got by labor and hazard of their lives; for he
that gives all, with have some acknowledgement of all, and from all, even from
the Military men, out of the spoil they got by War: So Abraham, so Bacchus,
so Cyrus, so Furius Camillus, so Alexander the great, and so do the Turks to
this day. See Herodotus in Clio, fol 36. Livi. lib. 5. Plin. lib. 12. cap. 14.
Diodorus Siculus, etc.

3. Concerning the Law of this Nation, if it was not plain and manifest, few I
doubt in these times would pay them, many accounting them a great grievance and
oppression, daily Petitioning against them, and although enough is said already
to satisfy any honest rational man, yet to show how unreasonable their
demands are, and how unjust it would be to take them away, or otherwise employ
them: I intend to show how they first came to the Church in this Nation, and
how by Law to be established: as Moses the temporal ruler of the people of
Israel was counted amongst the Priests, Psalm. 99.6. so the Law of this Land
accounted the King, Personam mixtam, medium and commune quiddam inter
Sacerdotes and Laicos, and has assigned unto him a politic body composed of
Ecclesiastical and Civil Subjects, Cook de Jur: Eccles. and as he was girt
(at his Coronation) with a Sword by the Lay-Peers, so was he Anointed by the
Bishops with Oil, having jurisdiction several over all, as well
Ecclesiastical as Civil, as head of the Commonwealth, so of the Church,
being the supreme Bishop over all Bishops in England, whence his style was,
Vicarius summi Regis, not summi Pontificis: This anointing with Oil was not
common to all Christian Kings, for in King Henry the seconds time, of 24.
Christian Kings in number, only 4. of them besides the Emperor were anointed
and Crowned, namely the Kings of England, France, Jerusalem and Sicily: Famours
Alfred or Allured about the year 860. was anointed and Crowned at Rome by Leo
4. since which his successors have been ever anointed and Crowned, and thereby
with David, Jehoshaphat, and Hezekias, made capable of spiritual Jurisdiction,
so also the Kings of France from Clodovius, so also the Kings of Jerusalem and
Sicily, the right of which two Kingdoms now resideth in the King of Spain,
who before he had their rights, was neither anointed nor Crowned; and for
France, that right was in the King of England, though de facto, another has it
in possession; the King of Spain also holds in feudo, of the Sea of Rome,
Jerusalem and Sicily, so that in this point of anointing and spiritual
jurisdiction, the Kings of England have been peerless: and for their
Temporal power also, had more to say for themselves, then any King in
Christendom, for Edward Son to Edmon Ironside, (surnamed the Outlaw, because
he was banished all the reigns of Canutus and his Sons the Danes) yet recalled
when Edward the Confessor younger brother to Edmon Ironside obtained the Crown;
he Married Agatha, Daughter to Hen. 2. Emperor, by whom he had Edgar Etheling
confirmed Heir, by his great Uncle Edward Confessor, but deprived by Herold
his protector; his sole Heir Margaret was Married to Malcom, 3. King of
Scotland, from and by whom, in a lineall descent, King James in his person
united the Britains, Saxons, English, Normans, French and Scottish Crowns in
one, though now possessed of none; by whom and whose just power the Tithes came
first to be legally invested in the Church, for though they were ever due by
the Law of God, and Nature, and paid in England, as soon as Christianity was
established here: for Anne 596. they were preached by our Concersioner
Augustine, and granted by King Ethelbert, Leges Confessoris concessae a Rege
and Baronibus and Populo (whence some would prove the antiquity of Parliament)
yet he being King of Kent only, does not include all the rest of England; but
as Cook in Litleton, lib. 1. cap. 9. Sect. 73. It appears by the Law, that
the first Kings of England had all the Lands in Demesne, etc. now the first
King of all England was Egbert, who reduced the Heptarchy into his sole
Monarchy, and his Son Ethelwoolfe the second Monarch of England, conferred the
Tithes of all this Kingdom with the Tenth part of all the Land in England for
Glebe upon the Church; the Charter it self is extant in Ingulphus, Math: of
Westminster, etc. The title of it is thus, Quomodo Ethelwolfus Rex dedit
decimam partem regni sui Ecclesiis, and concludes thus, Qui augere voluerit
nostram donationem, augeat omnipotens deus dies ejus prosperos, siquis vero
mutare vel minuere praesumpserit, noscat se ad tribunal Christi rationem
redditurum; reserving the chief Manors and Royalties to himself, he gave the
lesser Baronies and Lands to his Nobles and others, for defense of the
Kingdom, reserving to himself and his successors, the Homages, Rents and
Services due from them, with the tenths to the Church, so that Anno Dom. 855.
says Ingulphus, Ethelwolphus decimam omnis possessionis suae, and totius regni
sui partem deo immolavit, this was confirmed by King Ethelstone, An. 930. and
after by Canutus the Son of Sweno, the Dane, as soon as he was settled in the
Government of this Kingdom, and this we read in our best most ancient and
authentic stories of Ingulphus, Math: of Westminster, Rog: Hoveden, Hen:
Huntington, etc. injoyning the true payment of them upon the pain of
Excommunication, besides the loss of the other nine parts, and set down when
and how every Tithe of Corn, Hay, Woole, Lamb, etc. should be paid: and
Edward the Confessor, 1042. if they had but one Calfe or two, then to pay for
every of them a penny, and to this price is the Parson generally holden to this
day, though ten of our pence now is not worth one of them, and so of Bees,
Wood, Water, Mils, Parks, Fishings, Warrans, Negotiations, etc. and the Law
says of all things that the Lord gives, the Tenth: After William the Norman
Conquering this Kingdom, 1066. as Bacon, Cook, and all our Chronicles
affirm, led by the example of the former Conquerours, as well Saxons and Danes
seized upon all the Lands in England (except the Church Lands and some in Kent)
caused the Kingdom to be admeasured, reserving the chief Manors and
Royalties, with the Homages, Rents and Services to himself, and his
successors, and the Ecclesiastical Lands, with the Tithe of all other Lands to
the Church, he parted for the defense of the Kingdom, with all the rest to his
Nobles, Servants and Soldiers; and the Lands thus charged have been
transmitted and passed over from one to another, until they came unto the
possession of the present owners, who have no other right to their Lands, but
by tenure from the King, performing their enjoined services to him, and paying
the Tenth or Tithes to the Church. This was confirmed by Magna Charta, ninth of
Hen: 3. and 30. several Parliaments successively, and Bishops appointed to
curse those who should dare to inact any thing against it, and all those people
who would obey any such Statutes being enacted, and in the 31. of Edward 3. May
13. Boniface Archbishop of Canterbury, and five other Bishops solemnly
denounced the curse mentioned in the 25. of Edw: 1. in Westminster Hall, the
King with his Peers being present against all them which should willingly or
maliciously deprive the Church of her right. Secondly, against all those who by
any act or device infringe the liberties of the Church or Kingdom, granted by
Magna Charta, and de foresta. So that whatsoever right the owner has to the
nine parts, either of fee simple, Lease or Copy, yet has he no pretense at all
to the Tithe or Tenth, either by grant or purchase: by grant he has no right
to the other nine, but upon condition of payment of the Tenth to the Church,
and as for the Purchase it could be no more then was in the Grant, wherein the
Tenth was reserved to the Church; neither did the Purchaser buy any more then
nine parts only, for suppose a man purchase 100 l. per an. which at 20. years
purchase, it will cost 2000 l. but if this 100 l. per annum had been Tithe
free, it would have been worth 120 l. per annum, which at 20. years purchase
would have cost 2400 l. so that he buying but nine parts of the Land, has 400
l. abated him in lieu of the Tenth. Neither does the Tithe cost the Farmer any
labor or charge at all, for suppose the Farmer pay to the Landlord 100 l. per
ann. if it were Tithe free his Landlord would make him pay 120 l. per annum for
it, so that he has 20 l. per annum abated in his Rent, in regard of his
payment of Tithes, which fully recompenceth him for his labor and cost, upon
the tenth* part of the Land; in effect then no man in England paid any Tithes
to the Parson, but the King only or his successors, in acknowledgement
whereof, every Parson pays yearly his Tenths to the King and his successors.
Seeing then the Parson has as good right to the tenth part as the possessors
to the other nine parts, and he no ways obliged to the Landlord or Tenant for
his tenth part, nor either of them indamaged by it, they ought as well to pay
nine parts of all rates and charges, for the nine parts which they possess, as
he the tenth part for the Tithe which he possesses, as may more manifestly
appear by these reasons,

1. Every Parson ought to be rated in the same manner with the Parishioners: If
the rate be according to goods, then there is reason the Parson should pay (if
there be no customs) the tenth part of the Rate, receiving the tenth part of
the Commodities; and if the Rate be according to Lands, then the Parson is to
be rated with the rest of the Parish according to the Glebe Land,
proportionable to their Lands, but he cannot be rated for his Goods or Tithes,
and his Gleabe Land too, unless the Parishioners be rated for their goods or
other nine parts, and their lands besides. If it be objected, that then the
Parson pays not proportionable to the Parishioners, that they pay either for
their Lands or their goods, or commodities which grow on them; whereas the
Parson neither pays for his Glebe Lands, nor the commodities which grow on
them; I answer,

1. That if the Parson be rated the tenth part, by reason that he receives the
Tenth or Tithe of the fruits, then the Parishioners ought to pay the other nine
parts of the rate, because they receive the other nine parts of the
commodities: So that they paying nine parts of the rate, and the Parson the
tenth, the whole rate is paid, and there remains nothing more to be paid,
either for his Gleabe or their Lands. 2. In most Parishes there are customs
for Cows, weaned Calves, etc. whereof the Parson receives not the thirtieth
part, as Ob. for a weaned Calfe or Colt; he ought not then of those things to
pay the tenth part, whereof he receives not the 30. part. 3. No Parson receives
the tenth of men's personal Estates, though personal Tithes are due, both by
the Law of God and Man, as appears by the Preface of the Statute for personal
Tithes. 4. No Parson receives the tenth part of men's personal Estates,
Annuities, Moneys put out to use, or otherwise employed in buying and selling,
for Timber, Horses, Swine and other goods which are rateable, and therefore
ought not to pay the tenth of that, whereof he receives no benefit at all. Some
object that the Parson receives the sixth part of the Parish, but if they
account this according to the Rent of their Farms, then they are to consider
that the Tenants livelihood, as Meat, Drink and Clothes, is to be accounted
into the value of the Lands besides the Rent, which if the Parsons livelihood
be so deducted, there cannot remain to him the tenth part of the Rent of the
Parish: and if they speak of goods or Tithe of the commodities which he
receives, then by reason of the several customs, no Parson receives so much
as the tenth part, and therefore ought not to pay above the tenth part of the
rate of the whole Parish: This will appear more plain if we consider 1. That
the whole Tax or Rate is laid upon the whole Parish, and the commodities
therein, and not upon things Titheable only, but upon untitheable also, as
Rents, Annuities, Moneys, Goods, Timber, personal Estates, gain by Trade,
which pay no Tithe at all, therefore for so much of the Rate, as is to be paid
for them, the Parson is to be at no charge at all. 2. If we consider things
which are Tithable but in part by reason of customs, as 2 d. a Cows milk,
worth 3 s. 1 d. for a Garden worth a Noble: Ob: for a weaned Calfe or Colt
worth 2 s. wherein he receives not the tenth part, and therefore ought not to
pay the tenth part of these things undervalued by Customs, and the other
things rateable, yet not Titheable at all, be deducted from the Parsons Tax,
and added to the Parish charge, we shall find that if the Parson pay the tenth
of the rate, he is not recompensed by the addition of his Glebe Land taxe-free:
and if any Parish be of the contrary opinion, I believe their Parson will
willingly pay the tenth part of the rates for his Tithe, and for his Glebe
besides; so that they will pay him the Tithe of all rateable commodities, and
forbear their customs in Titheable commodities. For all men know that if the
Rents of any Parish be worth 500 l. per annum, the fruits of that Parish are
worth at least 1500 l. per ann. whereof the Parsonage Glebe and all, is not
worth the tenth part, per annum. Therefore the determination of the King and
Counsel, in Doctor Belcanqueis Case, that no Parson should be rated above the
tenth part of the Parish for Tithe and Glebe and all, was agreeable to reason
and equity.

I conclude also Negatively for the first Proposition, viz. That no former
Parliament consisting of King, Lords, and Commons, or future Representative (as
I conceive) ever had, or can have just power to take away the Tithes from the
Clergy.

1. Because they are due to them by the Law of God. 2. Because they are theirs
by the Law of Nature. 3. Because the Law of the Land says, Ab omnibus tractari
debet, quod tangit omnes, the Clergy having there no Representation nor voice
in the Election of any of the Representative in it, it cannot in Law or Reason
be concluded by it. Lastly, because the taking away of the Clergies Tithes, is
against Magna Charta, the ground of the Statute or Parliamentary Law confirmed
by 36. succeeding Parliaments, whereby it was Enacted, that to Enact, or to
obey any Act made against it, was to incur the Sentence of Excommunication;
by this great Charter, Chapter 1. And also the last, it was Enacted, that the
Clergy or Church should be free and enjoy all her Immunities, Liberties and
Rights inviolable, and also Chapter 29. says, That no Freeman shall be deprived of
his Freehold, but by lawful Indictment of his Peers according to the Law of
the Land, which Law of the Land makes every Parson a Freeholder for life
admitted in perpetuum holding by Frank Almoyne, the surest Tenure (says
Littleton) because God the Feoffee cannot forfeit his Right, nor the Clergy its
Right, though a particular Clergyman may: and although a Parliament have power
to impose a Tax of four pence an Acre more or less upon every Freeholders
Lands for the General or Common good, yet can it not (I speak de jure, for id
potest quod jure potest) take an Acre from One without Legal Trial, and give
it to another, nor dispossess any man of his Freehold without a Crime and
Trial by his Peers. Therefore not justly deprive the Clergy of their
Freeholds or Tithes.
FINIS.

