TVSTINS OBSERVATIONS, OR, CONSCIENCE EMBLEM: The Watch of God, similized by
the Wakefull Dog.
THe Dog behind the Door does lie,
his Masters Goods to keep,
And lays his Head betwixt his Legs,
as if he were asleep:
But if thou do his Master wrong,
he will it quickly spy,
Although thou think he be asleep,
i'thy Face he will quickly fly.
So And the Lord said unto Cain, Why art thou wroth, and why is thy
countenance fallen? If thou do well, shall thou not be accepted, and if thou
do not well, sin lies at the door: Genesis 4 Chap. 6, 7. verses.

For when the Gentiles, which have not the Law, do by nature the things
contained in the Law, these having not the Law, are a Law unto themselves,
which show the work of the Law written in their hearts, their consciences also
bearing witness, and their thoughts the mean time accusing, or else excusing
one another, Romans 2. Chap. 14, 15. verses.

For if any be a hearer of the Word* and not a doer, he is like unto a man
beholds his natural face in a Glass: For he beholds himself* and goes his
way and straightway goes away, and forgets what manner of man he was; But
who so looks in the perf^ct Law of Liberty, and continues therei^, he being
not a forgetful hearer, but a doer of the Word, shall be blessed in his deed,
James 1 Chap. 23. 24, 25 verses.

And because iniquity does abound, the love of many shall wax cold, Mat. 24
Chap. 12 verse.

The Earth shall be filled with knowledge, as the waters cover the Seas, Jsay
11 Chap. 9 verse. Mat. 7 Chap 12 verse.

Nevertheless when the son of man comes shall he find Faith upon the earth?
Luke 18 Chap. 8 verse.


Conscience is within thee placed,
as a Dog he does thee watch:
If thou do well, he will thee praise;
if ill, he will thee catch:
For God has Conscience placed in thee
most like a Sovereign Judge,
No Bribes he will receive of thee,
from him thou can not budge;
But he will still attend on thee,
so long as Life shall last,
And when to Judgment thou shall go,
he will with thee make have.
And testify before the Lord
the things that thou have done:
If well, he will thee justify;
if ill, where can thou run?
See that thy Conscience purify,
made simple as the Dove,
Compare it with the Glass, Gods Law,
and with the Law of Love.
For Christ himself in short does tell
a Doctrine very true,
As you would have to others done,
so let be done to you.
For Charity is waxen cold,
yet knowledge does increase,
Bu^ Faith is very hard to find,
that is joined with Love and Peace.
By me John Tustin, who has been plundered and spoiled by the Patentees for
white and gray Soape eighteen several times* to his utter undoing.

