A true Report of the great Costs and Charges of the five Hospitals in the City
of London, under the care of the Lord Mayor, Communalty and Citizens of London,
in the maintenance of their great number of poor this present year 1648. as
follows:
CHildren kept and maintained at this present, at the Charge of Christ's
Hospital in the said House, in diverse places of this City and Subburbs, and
with sundry Nurses in the Country -- 735.

The names of all which are Registered in the Books kept in Christ's Hospital,
there to be seen from what Parishes, and by what means they have been from
time to time admitted.

Children put forth Apprentices, discharged, and dead this year last past -- 64.

In respect of the troubles of the times, the means of the said Hospital has
very much failed for want of charitable Benevolences, which formerly have been
given, and are now ceased, and very few legacies are now given to Hospitals,
the Rents and Revenues thereunto belonging, being also very ill paid by the
Tenants, who are not able to hold their Leases, by reason of their Quartering
and Billetting, of Soldiers, and the taking away of their Corn and Cattle
from them; And likewise, the said Children are not now permitted to do their
service at Burials as formerly, which was a good help toward their relief:
yet notwithstanding there has been admitted into the said Hospital within
these two years last past 280 Children by reason of these hard times, the great
number of poor suitors and their extreme necessities, which number of
Children now upon present charge is more than the Hospital is well able to
maintain, unless it please the Lord the times become better, and that
Charity do more increase.

THere has been Cured this year last past at the Charge of S. Bartholomewes
Hospital, of maimed Soldiers, and other diseased persons, to the number of --
831.

Most whereof being Soldiers, have been relieved with money, and other
necessaries at their departure.

Buried this year after much Charge in their Sickness -- 170.

Remaining under Cure, at this present, at the charge of the said Hospital --
300.

THere has been Cured at the Charge of S Thomas Hospital, this year last
past, of diseased persons, whereof a great number have been Soldiers, who have
been relieved with money, and other necessaries at their departure -- 961.

Buried this year after much charge in the time of their sickness -- 153.

Remaining under Cure, upon the charge of the said Hospital at this present --
246.

THere has been brought to the Hospital of Bridewell, within the space of one
whole year last past, of wandering Soldiers, and other vagrant people, to the
number of -- 545.

Many whereof have been very chargeable to the said Hospital, for Apparel,
sick diet, and Surgery, besides their ordinary diet, and other provisions and
charges expended about them, which could not be avoided by reason of their
necessities; and many of them have been passed into their Countries, with
Clothing and Apparel to cover their nakedness, which could not be otherwise
considering their miseries, nor they thence passed without such charge. And
there are now kept and maintained, in Arts and Occupations, and other several
works and labors, at the charge of the said Hospital, Apprentices and other
persons, to the number of -- 197.

The Hospital of Bethlem is of great Antiquity, use, and necessity, for
keeping and curing distracted persons, who are of all other the most miserable,
by reason of their wants, both for soul and body, and have no sense thereof.

The charge thereof is very great, there being kept and maintained with
Physic, Diet, and other relief, 53. distracted persons constantly at least,
besides the charge of Servants to look to them, they being most unruly and not
able to help themselves, and the Rents and Revenues of the said Hospital
being very small, not amounting to two third parts of the yearly charge, and
therefore this Hospital is a fit object of charity, there having been of late
by the blessing of God, upon the charge of the said Hospital, and the care of
those that are entrusted with the said distracted people, diverse reduced to
their former senses.


