An Elegiack Memorial of the Right Honorable General DEANE, etc.
Aetatis suae 42.

depiction of the tomb of General Richard Deane, 1610-1653.

BE dumb ye Muses who speaks rightly Him
Needs the high Accents of a Seraphim,
A Cherubs quill, and so perhaps his Verse
May not profane (though it approach) his Hearse.
The Ancient and the Modern Hero's seem,
Compared to ours, a poor low barren Theme:
Poets and flatt'rers raised them to the skies,
And who were scarce good men made Deities.
Like China-dishes hid an age in mold,
By great-grand children Gods and Saints enrolled.
They from men's fancies after death did grow:
This was a Saint on Earth, a Star below.
The Ethnic, Roman, Calenders are crossed,
What they pretend to have found we are sure we have lost
Their actions after death still greater grew
By lying legends; His, in the worlds view,
Stand high above the Paraphrase of men,
And need no flattering, fear no envious pen.
Hence then Detractors, for (if understood)
The ill of him was better then your good.
An humble soul hid in a stern aspect
The perfect'st friendship in supposed neglect.
A learned head without the boast of books,
A devout heart without affected looks.
His great profession did in practice lie,
Religion locked up in sincerity.
Nature and Grace did two extremes unite,
To make a blessed sincere hypocrite.
This present Age had never known his worth,
Had not high Providence produced him forth,
To stop the floods of Greatness, and chastise,
The insolence of swelling Monarchies:
And by his acts the purblin'd world convince,
Who chain Nobility unto the Prince.
A Princely soul he had, though Countrey-borne,
That greatness could chastise, teach, use, and scorn.
He in himself drew the Epitome
Of a complete well-governed Monarchy.
Where reason ruling did the Scepter sway,
To which the rest did willingly obey;
If his Affections 'gan rebellious grow,
Religion quickly forced them to bow;
Whilst in his dealings following Justice laws,
By exercise her noble habit draws,
Till at the length her Champion he is made,
And her defense converts into his Trade.
Then long ten years he posteth to and fro
To help the oppressed and suppress the foe:
For whom three Generals had a high respect,
For Council wise, and valor to effect:
Till, England cleared, he curbs the British broiles,
Then into Ireland sails ( Herculean toiles!)
The Irish men, or rather Roman Frogs,
He makes for safety leap into their Bogs.
But he must leave them there, a greater cause
Commands his presence (maugre Neptunes Laws)
The swelling Seas and crossing tides cannot part
Brave Deane from him for whom he kept his heart.
Let others chase the Pirates, he on shore
Must serve his General till Wars give over:
Who having quite subdued the numerous Scots
Their Government unto his Deane allots;
Where he atchieves another Victory
Over their hearts by honest gallantry;
Whilst wise men judged it a propitious doom
Unto their land so to be overcome.
For now his greatest business seems to be
To keep their factious selves in unity;
He at their instance climbes the rugged hills
And darksome Groves that Caledonia fills;
Whilst the fell Natives stand aloof and gaze,
From craggy Rocks, in a profound amaze,
To see the Hors-men march in places where
They never saw ought but the wildest Deer:
And in affright their Chiefes come falling down,
And vow they will never more plunder Field nor Town.
His march was a quick journey, his retreat
A pleasant walk with little blood or sweat.
And now may he in pleasure rest a while
With his dear consort, and the time beguile.
In Dalkeith turrets or her shady groves
Whilst to her Lute she sweetly sings their Loves.
But this soft Music thundering Cannons mar,
Which send quick tidings of approaching War.
And is a Duty or a Danger near
On Land or Sea, and Noble Deane not there?
Away he shoots like to a Star that brings
The tidings of the fall of States and Kings:
A Star in motion, brightness, influence,
He does not lead the Dutch, but drive them hence;
Twice beats them, first from Ours, then to their Walls,
Which done, alas our Star to Heaven falls.
And it was time, so saw great Providence;
'Twas time to call this Heavenly spark from hence:
His growing luster might have dimmed us all;
His value did percipitate his fall:
For had he held his Course some few more years
The world (with me) had turned Idolaters.
Sic fatur Lachrymans. (...) Th: Tw:

LONDON: Printed by M. S. for Tho: Jenner at the South-Entrance of the Royal
Exchange. 1653.


