None but Christ, OR A SERMON Upon Acts 4. 12. Preached at St. Mary's in
Cambridge, on the Commencement Sabbath, July 4. 1652. To which is annexed, an
Enquiry after what hope may be had Of the salvation of 1. Heathens. 2. Those of
the old world, the Jews and others before Christ. 3. Such as die Infants, and
Idiots, etc. now under the Gospel.


By Anthony Tuckney, D. D. and Master of St. John's College in Cambridge.

Qui dicit hominem servari posse sine Christo, Dubito an ipse per Christum
servari potest Augustine. London, Printed for John Rothwell, and S. Gellibrand.
1654.

None but CHRIST.
ACTS 4. 12. Neither is there salvation in any other: for there is none other
name under Heaven given among men, whereby we must be saved.
IN the beginning of the Chapter, we meet with the first persecution of the
Gospel, recorded in Scripture, after our Saviors Ascension. Sad, that so good
news should find so bad entertainment! but happy for some, that as it was
raised for so good a word, so occasioned by so good a Mat. 13. 21
deed done to an impotent man in the foregoing Chapter. Such may ever our
sufferings be, that if a black shadow must needs follow us, it may be only
because we walk in the light; and that if it prove our lot to hear and fare
ill, it may be for doing well, 1 Pet. 3. 17
and that the Apostle says, is to suffer as a Christian, 1 Pet. 4. 16. Nay, as
Christ himself; for such good works he was once to have been stoned. John 10.
32. and for the like, Peter and John were here arraigned and questioned, (...),
Verse 7.
by what Name or Authority, or by what power or virtue. Qua art Medica vel
Magica (as it was ordinary to account both Christ and Christians in the
primitive times, to Grotius Lyranus.
be Conjurers) they had done This: Theophylact and Oecumenius observe they were
ashamed to name it, being an high act of charity, and must it be made a matter
of accusation by their malice and envy? Cursed men! who accounting it a credit
for them to do evil, make it a crime for the Apostles to do good; enviously
malicious, that men may not act charity, without purchasing their License ad
practicandum: and withal, apparently ridiculous, in asking, by what power,
when the thing it self proclaimed it to be done by the power of God.

And therefore, to this their foolish proud Question, verse 7. Peter returns
Matthew* 2^ 69, 70.
a plain and round answer from verse 8. to 13. And so He, who sometimes full of
himself, was baffled by a Damosel, now being filled with the holy Ghost, verse
8. silenceth and confounds his not more potent then malicious accusers and
Judges, v. 13, 14. How wosully weak are we, when we rely on our own strength;
but how able to do all things, when Christ strengthens us? In te stas and non
stas, Phil. 4. 13.
says Austin. Thou art sure to come down, when thou stand on thine own
legs; but how mightily upheld and carried on, when supported and conducted by
Gods hand? As the Ship, which when the sale is filled with a strong gale, goes
on amain; in a calm, notwithstanding all our rowing, is carried down the
stream. And therefore when Moses had prayed for Judah, that his hands might be
sufficient for him, he added (as there was need.) And be thou an help to him,
Deuteronomy. 33. 7. In hoc signo vinces. Go out in this thy strength, and thou shall
prevail. Judge. 6. 14. Ithiel and Vcal here are Twins, the first of those names
says, God is with me, and then Prove. 30. 1.
the second assures me, that I shall be able to prevail, whatsoever, or
whosoever is against me.

If you look into the fifth and sixth verses, you shall see a very full Bench,
not of Justices, but of professed potent enemies: and this of all parties, who
in other things could not agree; and from all parties, Its said, they were
gathered together, (...), at or unto Jerusalem, as though there had not been
enough in the City, all were sent for out of the Country, but enough, one would
have thought, to have dashed a poor prisoner in bonds, and now at the Bar,
quite out of countenance; But O the ingenuous boldness of a good conscience in
a good cause! Peter there makes an open Proclamation, with a Noverint Vniversi.
Be it known unto you all, that by the name of Jesus Christ, does this man stand
before you whole. He dare bear witness to Christ, and against their sin
together, that as so many (...) they had rejected that stone which God had made
the head of the corner, and as so many (...) had killed him, who had given to
that poor man, health and life, verse. 10, 11. yea, and salvation to all, in the
Text. Neither is there salvation in any other, etc.

In which words we have

1. A confident Assertion. That there is no salvation, but by Christ.

2. As strong a proof of it, taken from Gods designation, because no
Explication of the words.
name under Heaven is given us, whereby we may be saved.

Neither is there salvation. i. e. not so much as any temporal, much less any
spiritual and eternal salvation.

In or by any other.

For, here he gives a sufficient reason Alius, vel alia vis cuju squam Sive
auto ritas: Beza: Grotius. in 2 Timothy 2. 1^.
of it.

There is no name, i. e. Person, as Act 1. 1. 15. or Sec^ (which were wont to
be called by the names of their Masters,) or way, or Authority.

Under Heaven. Not as though we may hope for any other Saviors, (as Saints and
Angels) in heaven; but to express the place where our salvation was purchased,
and that was here on earth under heaven, which the Socinian will have
accomplished only in Heaven; but although the blood of the sacrifice was
presented in the holy of holies, yet it was shed without Levit. 16. 11, 12. etc.
to make an atonement: and so Christ our blessed High Priest, who for us men
and our salvation came down from Heaven, returned indeed again to Heaven, and
entered into the holy place with his own blood, yet it was Heb. 9. 12.
having obtained eternal redemption for us, by that his blood shed here on
earth; de coelo est salus, sed sub coelo Lorinus.
medium salutis.

Or (it may be) this expression under Heaven holds forth rather the extent of
our Saviors Empire, and so (...) is as much as Vspiam. So Beza, and so Dan. 9.
12. We find that phrase under the whole Heaven, used in this sense, in which
no name under Heaven, here signifies, None at all, or any where.

(...). Either the same with (...), as we so find the like phrase, Chap. 7.
44. and so the vulgar here reads it Hominibus, to men. Or as Ours render it,
among men, who were very many, and had amongst them many other conceited ways
of salvation, and many of them were very great Names in the world; and yet
amongst them All, no other name (...), given. i. e. by God designed, appointed,
and that indeed of free gift.

(...). In or by which we must be saved. Not as though there were any necessity
in regard of us, or our worth, that therefore we must needs be saved; but to
express thus much, that if through Gods free grace we be saved, it then
necessarily must be only in and by Jesus Christ, which is the Doctrine of the
Text, and which we are now to insist on.

Besides, or without Christ no salvation:

The Gospel of Jesus Christ says, Doct. Evange^^um Jes^ Christi non est
Evangelium ^^tra Ch^istum. Ca^^. wright.
Mark Chap. 1. 1. It is so in his Gospel, that there is no such good news, but
by him, (...). The Christ, The Savior. John 4. 42. spoken not only
emphatically, but also exclusively. The Christ is so the Savior, that he is
the only Savior. But your Christian belief will not need the proof of this
fundamental sum of the Doctrine of Christ. It would be hard to be put upon the
proof of first Principles, and sometimes proves hard, when unreasonably put
upon it, to do it, which would be but the emblasoning of a sunbeam, or the
laying on a color to make Ivory or Snow the whiter: A man has never less to
say, than when, that which he is to prove or clear, is more certain and
manifest than his proof; omni ^uce Mornay. de veritat. Cap. 1.
clarius, omni interpretatione notius. Such hard tasks are we now put upon in
these our sinful days, which attempt to raze the most grounded Fundamentalls
of Religion; but blessed be GOD, that there is less difficulty in proving
this, which is of such absolute necessity to salvation, That out of Christ
there is no salvation. Haec Petri sententia, (as he says) est Sarcerius.
Decretum super omnium conciliorum decreta, not to be doubtfully disputed, but
yet may be fully proved. Psalm. 118. 22. Isa. 28. 16. Ephesians. 2. 20.


1. From the Titles given to Christ in Scripture, as The corner stone and
Foundation. So that if, either it be laid aside (as in the verse before the
Text) or we be not laid upon it, we build upon the sand, and utterly ruin all,
Matthew. 7. 26, 27. The Apostle is peremptory, that no man can lay any 1 Cor. 3.
11.
other foundation, and therefore besides him no salvation.

The Root and true Vine. And therefore Colos. 2. 7.
if not implanted and rooted in him, we shall certainly wither, and become
fuel for everlasting burnings. John 15. 1. to 9.

The head of the body. And then, C(...). 18.
though Popish Legends can tell you of men walking without their heads, yet
sober Christians are no (...) Heretics. The strength of the sheep of Christ's
pasture is in their Head, and all their life and vigor from union with it,
Ephesians. 4. 16. so that the body may as well live without the head, as we without
Christ gain salvation.

The beloved-Husband, by whom alone the chaste spouse brings forth 2 Co^. 1^ 2.
fruit unto God, Romans 7. 4. and she is but an Harlot that embraces the bosom
of a stranger.

The Mediator and the only one, even as God himself is one, one God, and one
Mediator between God and Man, and that only the man Christ Jesus. 1 Timothy 2. 5.
A proof which St. Austin very often and strongly urges Contra Julian.
to this purpose. It is no Platonic faith (as some call it) which can unite us
at so great an odds to God, without Christ, our alone Mediator, to come
between, and make up the breach, there will for ever remain (...), an infinite
distance, and immortal emnity.

The Door, which a blind Sodomite Joh. 10. 9 Revel. 22. 15.
cannot find, and therefore remains without with Dogs. Besides which no
entrance, either into the Church here, or Heaven hereafter.

Lastly, The way, the truth, and the Joh. 14. 6.
life. The true way to life, (...), via illa certissima, qu a un a, etc. As
Beza upon the place, the only way, by which we may certainly, and out of which
it is impossible we should ever come to life, or the God of our life, as our
Savior adds in the very next word, none comes to the Father Joh. 17. 3.
but by me. As elsewhere, This is eternal life to know thee and Jesus Christ,
whom thou have sent, who is so the way, the truth, and the life, that out of
him, we shall perish from the Psalm. 2. 12.
way; shall deceive our selves with a lie, if we believe not in this truth; and
abide for ever in death, if not made partakers of this life.

2. This truth, that out of Christ no salvation is further made out from all
the parts of this salvation, in the whole progress from first to last, all is
in and by Jesus Christ.

Elected in him, Ephesians. 1. 4.

Redeemed by him; in whom we have Redemption through his blood. verse 7.

If Adopted. It is in ou^ Elder Brothers right, unto the Adoption of Children
by Jesus Christ. v. 5.

If justified. It is by his righteousness imputed; accepted, but in the
Beloved. v. 6.

If sanctified. It is by his spirit communicated, He has chosen us in him to
be holy. v. 4.

If sa^ed. It is by his merit imparted. In whom also we have obtained an
Inheritance. v. 11.

And blessed with all spiritual blessings in heavenly places, but still in
Christ. v. 3.

It is the grossest darkness of ignorance, that we lie in, unless he be our
light and Prophet, to inlighten and instruct us. Mat. 4. 16.

It is the heaviest guilt that we lie under, unless he be our Priest, to make
expiation for us, be our (...), 1 John 2. 2. Romans 3. 25.

And when that is done, a thousand miscarriages and mischiefs from others, and
(should all else fail) from our selves, would betide us, unless he be
Melchizedeck King of Salem; Heb. 7. 1.
Our King to govern and defend us, Isa. 9. 6. and 33. 22.

It is he only, who of God is made unto us, wisdom, righteousness,
sanctification and redemption, 1 Cor. 1. 30. even all in all. Col. 3. 11. And
then if he be All, All besides him are nothing. And so still without him, no
one part of salvation.

3. And this is true of all persons in all places, as he is (...), so (...).
All, and this unto All, Col. 3. 11. The Apostle there makes a large enumeration
of Greek, Jew; circumcision, uncircumcision; Barbarian, Scythian; Bond, free;
He was as well a light to the Gentiles, as the glory of his people Israel. Luke
2. 32
From East to West, this Sun of righteousness enlightens all, And if any
without the Tropic of the more visible Church should have the light of John 8.
12
life, it is from more oblique beams, which by ways best known to himself, he
dart^th upon them where ever they be, if they be under the whole Heaven, or
amongst men: the Text tells them to whom they must be beholden for salvation.
Of which if we yet doubt, Austin, I am sure, is certain. Certus sum non esse
animam ullam Epist. 28.
in genere humano, cui non sit necessarius ad liberationem Mediator Dei and
hominum, etc.

4. And thus, lastly, in reference to all Times and Ages, whether of our life,
or of the world.

1. Of our life.

If we be grown up to be men, it will be more easily granted, that he that
believes not shall be damned, Mark 16. 16.

And for those that die Infants, although we cannot so easily understand how
they should actually believe, yet we must believe, that unless unto us a Child
were born, and a Son given, they, who in themselves are Children of wrath,
would never become heyrs of life. This also is another Article of Austins
Creed, which Epist. 157.
he would have kept inviolate. Illa fides in nobis salva sit, qua credimus,
nullum hominem sive majoris sive parvulae, quamlibet and recentioris aetatis
liberari e contagione mortis aeternae, et obligatione peccati quam contraxit
prima sua nativitate, nisi per unum Mediatorem Dei et hominum, Jesum Christum.
Whether old or young, we must have the everlasting Father to be the Isu. 9. 6.
Prince of our peace, or else our breach is irreconcilable.

2. And the like is to be said of the several Ages of the world, from first to
last. Christ is the first and last, which Rev. 1. 11. Epist. 157.
made St. Austin still confidently affirm in reference to this my Text. Ex ^o
tempore valet ad servandum genus John 1. 29. Rev. 13. 8.
humanum; ex quo in Adam est vitiatum, etc. Christ the Lamb of God, that takes
away the sins of the world, was slain from the beginning of the world. Which
believers in all their sacrifices (almost as ancient as the world) De
Demonstrat.
looked after, as Eusebius shows, which made Ignatius conclude, that (...)
Lib. 1. cap. 10. Ad Magnes. Histor. lib. 1. cap. 4.
and Eusebius in another place, to the same purpose calls them (...)
Christians indeed, though not then so named, for in the faith of a Messiah, a
Christ to come, they lived and died, and so were saved, as the Apostle shows
at large, Heb. 11. So that as the whole body is under the Head, It a omnes
sancti qui ante Domini nostri, J. C. nativitatem erant, quamvis ante nati
erant, tamen corpori universo sed capiti cohae serunt. Augustine. Gregor. homil.
17. in Ezekiel.
though one part of it be born after another. So here also in this mystical
body of Christ. As Austin compares it; or as Gregory alluding to that passage
of the Gospel, expresses it, Some went before, and some came after; but both,
all, cry Hosannah, (and that word signifies salvation) to the Son of David.

In a word, to conclude this general proof, it is Paul's full scope in his most
divine Epistle to the Romans, to prove that neither Jew nor Gentile can be
justified or saved, but only by the faith of Christ, the second Adam, by whom
are saved all that are saved, as all were undone by the first. But should I
recite all Scripture-proofs of this truth, I should transcribe the greatest
part of the old and new Testament. Bernard says of some, that by Dum multum
sudat quo modo Platonem faciat Christianum, se probat Ethnicum, Epist. 190.
laboring to prove Plato to be a Christian, proved themselves no Christians,
which makes me fear I should too much wrong both my self, and this most
Christian Auditory, as though it were scarce Christian, if I should labor too
long in the proof of this fundamental and characteristical Article of their
Christianity; And therefore I the rather come to the ground of it in the

salvation in none other, because there is no other name given, whereby we must
be saved. And it is taken (as Calvin observes, from Explicatio est proximae
sententiae, in Christ^ solo est salus, quo ^iam it a Deus decrevit etc. Calvin
in locum.
Gods free purpose, which is especially to be heeded in matters of his free
grace, and if he appointed no other, then it is high presumption in us to
fancy any other. When in our selves we are all justly condemned, we must give
God leave to choose, as whom he will save, so by what means he will procure and
dispense this salvation. And if for that he has made choice only of Christ, as
in some respects necessary, but in all respects, as Austin truly says,
absolutely most convenient, Sa^andae nostraemiseriae, convenientiorem modum non
fuisse. August. de Tem. lib. 13 Cap. 10 aliter absolute potuit salvasse mundum,
licet ad satisfactionem de rigore justitiae videtur necessari^ hypostatica unio
Lorinus. Orthodox. Eplicat. Lib. 3.
then he was not more blasphemous who said he could have told God a better way
to have made the world, then they are presumptuous, who dare be so bold as in
their wanton fancies to conceit another way of redeeming the world then by
Christ alone, which was the most happy product of the most divine Counsels of
all the three Persons in the blessed Trinity from all eternity. And shall we
then attempt to be wiser than God, and in effect say, that He might have spared
his Counsels, and Christ his death, Seeing there may be a way for such as never
knew him, to come to life without him? so Andradius sticks not to accuse God
for cruelty, if it should be otherwise. But when the Q^estion in the Prophet
was, is there any other God besides me? God thought he had sufficiently
answered in the Negative, when he said, I know none, Isa. 44. 8. and so if the
like question be made of a Savior, whether there be any other besides Christ?
let us sit down satisfied with this, it is he only who of God is made 1 Cor. 1.
30.
to us wisdom, righteousness, etc. He it is whom the Father has sealed, and
let John 6. 27
that make this impressio^ on our hearts that although there be many that are 1
Cor. 8. 5. 6.
called Gods, and Lords many, and accordingly, many conceited ways of
Religion, and thereby of salvation; yet to us, as there was but one God, so but
one Mediator between God and man, the man Christ Jesus. And therefore 1 Timothy 2.
5
let us have a Savior of Gods choosing and making, and not of our own framing
and fansying; for how miserable should I be, if whilst I have been looking out
for other ways to save me, God who has appointed this way, which I have
neglected or missed of, should damn me? It is my security, if when I can say,
I have a manifest token of salvation, I can add Phil. 1. 28.
with the Apostle (...) and this of God, because in and by Act 5. 31.
Christ, whom he has appointed, and exalted to be Prince and Savior.

that salvation is dispensed to us by way of Covenant: and had it been by the
first Covenant of which the first Adam was head, his name might have been
written on it; but seeing it is by the second, of which Christ the second Adam
is the only Head (as the Apostle shows in that divine parallel between the
two Adams, Romans 5) as he is made our Covenant, so also our salvation, Isa. 49.
6, 8. guilty we were and condemned by the first Adam, and therefore justified
and saved we Council. Trident. de justific. Cap. 3.
must be by the second, (...). This opportet in the Text, is now not only of
convenience, but also of necessity. Nemo ad mortem nisi per illum, nemo ad
vitam nisi per istum.

Christ is so the head of this saving Covenant, that Gods glory in this
exaltation is the chief end intended in it. In which Christ is not brought in
per accidens, or in an inferior subordination, as a subservient means to us and
our salvation as the end, (though even so there would be no salvation without
him, as no attaining the end, without the means, and if there be but one only
means to the end, it is as necessary as the end.) But Christ's and Gods glory in
him is the prime design of it, Ephesians. 1. 6. That our salvation wrought by him
should be as a subordinate means to his glory, as the chief end. And therefore
as on the one side, we should not so much look at Christ for our salvation, as
at our salvation for Christ and his glory; so on the other side, if whilst we
take in salvation we leave out Christ, we cut off the stream from the fountain
from which it flows, and so our salvation would be an empty dry pit, prove
vain, and fall short of its end, and we of the comfort of it, if (whilst we are
saved some other way) he should not have the honor of being (as he most
certainly is) the Author of Heb. 5. 9.
it.

Savior also should have suffered and died in vain. It is Austins inference,
gratis enim Contra Jelianum. Lib. 4. Cap. 3.
Christus mortuus est, si homines ulli absque Christo ad fidem veram, virtutem
veram, etc. quacunque re alia, quacunque freti ratione perveniant: and Paul's
before him, Gal. 2. 21. if righteousness come by the Law, (and so it must if
not by Christ) then Christ is dead in vain. If any without him may now come to
life, then ad quid perditio Lib. 3. Cap. 47.
haec? to what purpose was all that wast? was he so prodigal of his blood, that
when (according to this opinion) we might have been saved, and that (as
Bradwardine shows) by an easier and readier way, without it? A damnable
error! and fully confuted

By the dear experience of every humbled sinner, which fully convinces him of
an absolute necessity of having Christ, and of his most certain and inevitable
perishing without him. As on the contrary, it is observable, that they who are
most for the other opinion, and so can lick themselves and others whole, are
least acquainted with what a wounded conscience means, and the work of
Gospel-humiliation. Who, did they more know themselves, would thereby come more
to know the necessity of Jesus Christ, and that such a Demoniack Mat. 17. 17
cannot be cured without being brought to him. As the Scripture all over
proclaims that it was this our good Samaritan only, that pitied, when all
else pass^d by, and undertook the cure, when all else had given it over as
d^sperate, even when there was none to help, then at such a dead lift, and case
of such extreme necessity, his arm only brought salvation, Isa. 63. 3, 5. And
yet rather then a Philosopher should not be dubbd a Saint, and his moral
virtues prove saving graces, and we have nothing inherent in our selves to stick
to; Imputed righteousness not only by Papists must be derided; But be too much
slighted and undervalued by too many amongst our selves; the great mystery of
godliness, and the whole counsel of God in Christ must all at once be dashed,
and all the links of that golden Chain snapt asunder, pie scilicet! And a fair
requital it is, that we so make of Christ's kindness, when in effect we tell
him, he might have kept it to himself, and we have fared never the worse,
seeing so many have been, and all might have bin 1 Cor. 15. 17.
saved without him. I say, Christ should so have died in vain.

faith must needs be in vain, if Christ were not necessary, our faith would be
needless; Strom. l. 1.
which yet Clemens Alexandrinus (much forgetting what elsewhere he says of the
Gentile, being justified by Philosophy) calls (...). I am sure the Scripture
requires it as the necessary Instrument of justification. Romans 5. 1. and inlet
to salvation, Ephesians. 2. 8. and that not only necessitate praecepti, but Medii,
as Valentia Tom. 3. did. 1. qu. 2. p. 317.
concludes, and as the Apostle plainly shows in that divine connection. Romans
10. 13, 14. whosoever shall call on the name of the Lord shall be saved; but
how shall they call on him, on whom they have not believed? and how shall they
believe on him, of whom they have not heard? and accordingly, we read, Acts 11.
17, 18. that upon their believing by Peter's preaching, the Disciples inferred,
that Then (and not till then) God had also to the Gentiles granted repentance
unto life: as also chap. 15. 9. Then it was that he put no difference between
Jew and Gentile, when once he had purified their hearts by faith. Thus we see,
that faith is necessary, and that the word of faith, Romans 10. 8. is the word of
life. Phil. 2. 16. But what need of either becoming Proselytes, under the Law
or of sending out Apostles for the Ministry of the Gospel, to them who had
enough at home, to instruct them in the ways of eternal life?

What necessity of reading the Scriptures, if the same lesson may be taken out
of the Book of the Creature?

Or of hearing the Sermons of the Apostles, when Sun, Moon, and Stars were
sufficient preachers.

And so by this means, with this faith of Christ, if not all Religion, yet all
Christian Religion is gone too.

Two things are here said: Zuinglius de^peccat: orig. Tom. 2. page 118.


1. That faith is required only where the Gospel is preached. Mark 16. 15, 16.
but as for them who never heard of Christ, and so are invincibly ignorant of
him, They hope their Negative Infidelity shall not damn them.

I answer, not as an Operative cause, and containing new guilt, if the
ignorance be really and totally invincible; But yet as (if I may so call it) a
defective Cause it will, they thereby falling short of the only means to take
away the old guilt, and so the man indeed dies of his old wounds; but withal,
he necessarily dies, because he has not the Medicine which only could have
cured him. And the Traitor is executed meritoriously for his Treason; but
unavoidably, because he wants his pardon, either not accepted, or not so much
as heard of, which only should, and could have saved him.

2. But secondly they will grant, that indeed, without faith it is impossible
to please God, and they must grant it, because the Scripture expressly says it,
Heb. 11. 6. but then they will tell you, that such a faith will serve the turn,
as the Apostle here speaks of, viz. such as believes that God is, and that he
is a rewarder of them that diligently seek him, as it is there described, and
such a faith the Gentiles, and such as never heard of Christ, may have, and so
please God, and be saved by it. This (...) Nature's Champions, and the Heathens
Advocates apply to their wound, that it may not prove mortal, which they
distinguish of an explicit and implicit faith; they conclude, that an
implicit faith may be sufficient, and such the Heathens might have, and had.

For when they believed that there was a God, eandem habuerunt fidem in unius
Dei credulitate inclusam. So Sixtus Senensis.

And when they believed that he was a Rewarder of those that seek him, they did
believe Gods providence, et per consequens modum salutis humanae, saltem
implicitum, and by consequence, at least implicitly the way and manner of man's
salvation. So Orthodox: Explic. page 292. quam late pateat Dei providentia, and
quanta c^m vigilantia provideat rebus humanis, satis intelliget humani generis
per Christum redemptionem in divina providentia implicit and abscondite
contineri.
Rike^.

To which Andradius adds, that he who shall consider how far Gods
providence reaches, and how watchfully it intends man's concernments, he
cannot but understand that the Redemption of man by Christ is implicitly
contained in it.

And some Mr. J. G. in his Gentiles debt and dowry.
of late have told us, that whilst they see heaven and earth, and the frame of
nature continue, they may by Gods patience gather, that his wrath is pacified,
and so come to the knowledge of a Mediator.

To all which I say

1. And first grant, that the like explicit faith which is required of some, is
not alike necessary to all for their salvation. For

What is now (...) with open fa^e revealed to us in the times of the Gospel,
was under the 2 Cor. 3. 18.
Law veiled over with shadows and Ceremonies, even to the godly then, who yet
through them, looked at a Messiah for their salvation.

Nor is it now prejudicial to weaker Christians (as to their salvation) that
they cannot so clearly and distinctly understand all the particulars in the
several Articles of the Christian faith, as some do, who are more learned and
able. The dim-sighted man may certainly see his friend standing by him, though
not so clearly as he who has a quicker eye; and I may as truly see him
standing in the shade, though not so distinctly, as if he were in the Sunshine.

2. But as the Popish implicit faith has been a snare and ruin to many
Christians, so this farre-fetched, and fa^re more implicated faith will at last
be found insufficient for the salvation of Heathens, and to evade the Apostles
Sorites, viz. They that have not heard of a Savior, do not, cannot believe
Romans 10. 13, 14, 15.
in him; They that believe not in him, cannot call upon God; they that call not
upon God, cannot be saved; and therefore a primo ad ultimum, they that have not
heard of a Savior cannot be saved. Lib. 1. ^orol. 132


I need not here insist on what Bradwardine and other Schoolmen dispute for the
necessity of an explicit faith. This I am sure of, that Christ himself says,
that this is eternal life, not only to know the Father to be the only true God,
but also Jesus Christ whom ^e has sent, John 17. 3. and therefore would not
have his Disciples rest in their believing in God, but would also have them
believe in him. John 14. 1. And therefore.

1. For that in Heb. 11. 6. of believing that God is, and that he is a
rewarder: however (as Hugo observes) before the fall, faith in God as a De
sacram: Lib. 1. Part. 10. Cap. 5. Isa. 45. 22.
Creator was sufficient, yet not since, but we must of necessity look at him in
a Redeemer, if we would (as the Prophet bids us) so look at him, as to be
saved by him.

And although a Christian Believer must by his justifying and saving faith,
tanquam ex praesupposito believe that God is, and that he is a righteous Judge,
(which is all that Sentent. Lib. 3. did. 25.
can necessarily be inferred from that place) yet Lambard rightly adds non
sufficit. It is not all, not sufficient and enough, either savingly to please
him (else the Devils should) or to make us come to him, and diligently to seek
him; for then many desperate and despairing sinners should, who yet, (even upon
thought and conviction of it) run away from him. And so we find that the faith
of all those many believers, which the Apostle in that same Chapter instanceth
in, went further: which plainly evinceth, that it is not a Philosophical, but a
Thelogical, not a natural but a supernatural knowledge that he there G.
Valenti^ M. Canus.
speaks of. A belief that God is, but a God in Christ, and that he is a
rewarder, but in an evangelical way.

2. And therefore for S. Senensis his in unius Dei credulitate, etc. that in
the belief of one God, the faith of Christ God-man should be contained
sufficiently to salvation. It will bring in a Savior before the Fall, and
find him in the Covenant of works, as well as in the Covenant of grace, and
make the Turk the true Musulman (as he calls himself) as true a believer as the
best Christian.

3. And for Andradius his conceit, that the belief of Gods Providence, and how
vigilant it is in the behalf of man in general, should imply and contain the
knowledge and belief of this particular Providence of his saving man by a
Messiah. It will take in all the men that have ever been in the world, except
some few Atheists and Epicureans, that denied a Deity and a Providence: nor it
may be would they be excepted, if they had been rightly understood and reported
of, who perhaps were taken to deny a Deity, when they only denied the false
Deities which were then adored by others, and so possibly were less Atheists
than many then were, and now are: and so by this means, quae coelo ducit semita
facta via est, the way and gate to Heaven, which our Savior says, is narrow,
and strait, and which Mat. 7. 14.
few find, will be made far wider then either they or any will find it.

4. And for what was said, that by Gods patience in continuing the world, they
may infer that he is pacified; I only say two things.

First, if they might possibly from thence infer a Mediator, yet for all that
they would be still to seek who that Mediator should be, and so they would
only erect an Altar to an Acts 17. ^3
unknown God, but mean while have no knowledge or thought, that this Mediator
is Jesus Christ: but the Jews may think it is their longlooked-for Messiah,
and the Turk may put in for his Mahomet, both which, and their salvation by
either will come together. And if the Heathen stay till they both get in, he
may come to be kept out for ever.

Secondly, I add that although a true believer by light from the word may from
Gods patience infer Christ's mediation; yet others from these men's principles
cannot necessarily conclude so much, but only might infer that God is
gracious and merciful, and so without the intervention of a Mediator to
pacify his anger, does of himself either for some time forbear, or wholly
forgive, as the Socinians positively affirm that he has done, and many both
Papists and others, say (but for his purpose and decree) he might have done.

So that if this be all the Dowry of the Heathens, neither true faith nor
salvation may be entailed upon it, and will be but the Concubines, childrens
gifts, but will fall short of the free-womans heirs inheritance; It was of old,
Faith in a Messiah to come, and in Jesus Christ now that he is come, that ever
did, does, or will bring any to salvation. And although they who are otherwise
minded, may seem the more candid and charitable, yet I must account it not pity
but folly and pride, to make our selves more merciful and wise then God; and
that therefore S. Austin was more Gredendum est neminem ulla unquam at ate ad
spiritualem Jerusalem pervenisse, nisi cui divinitus revelatus fuerit unus
Mediator Dei and hominum, etc De Civitat. Dei l. 18. cap. 47
sound in the faith, who makes this one Article of it. That it is to be
believed, that none ever belonged to the spiritual Jerusalem, to whom Christ
was not revealed, as Mediator; which he looks at as so Fundamental a truth,
and which he was so fully possessed with, that he is not afraid to speak a
very great word, and if I tell you it, I hope you will not be offended at it.
It is this. Qui dicit hominem servari posse sine Christo, dubito an ipse per
Christum servari potest. He doubts whether that man can be saved by Christ,
who believes and maintain's that any man can be faved without Christ. But
notwithstanding all this, Satan and Antichrist are deadly enemies to Christ,
would have him robbed of his glory, either in whole or in part, and therefore
would have us either not as beholden to him, or at least as little as may be.

And our proud hearts too self-full are loath to go out of themselves to
Christ. His imputed righteousness is to us a riddle, and something inherent in
us we make our idol. Something in us some way our own. The Pharisees and Jews
of old, and Romans 10. (...)
Pelagius, with all his heirs and allies in their several shapes to this day,
they would have some way or other to commend us to God. And so out of an
overweening of a selfmoral righteousness which they adore, and out of a fond
pity of Philosophers and others whom they admire, they cannot be persuaded but
that many such might be saved without faith in our only Savior. The more full
clearing of which point I must in the following Enquiry refer to another place,
and for the present close all with some Application.

Use 1. If no salvation but by Christ; then Calvin's inference is Ergo patres
veteris Testamenti ejusdem Redemptioris Incarnatione and Passione salvati sunt.
Augustine Ep. 157.
good, that Believers under the Old Testament and the New, have one and the
same common Savior, they all drank of the same spiritual rock that followed
them, and that Rock was Christ, 1 Cor. 10. 3, 4. Our Christ was their Messiah,
the precious foundation, corner stone, which did unite both sides of the
building and uphold both, as it was the same brazen serpent which from contrary
quarters of the Camp they looked at for healing. They looked forward at him as
to come, we backward as already come, but both their faith and ours meet in the
same Jesus, yesterday, and to day, and for ever, Heb. 13, 8.
who being lifted up on the Cross, and by faith looked upon heal's and saves
all that ever were, or shall be saved; for besides him no salvation.

And in this let us admire and adore the vast exten^ and unvaluable worth of
our Saviors merit, that reaches to so many, and operateth at such a distance.

How ductile and precious is this finest gold that spreads so far, and
purchases the Redemption of so many? Of them in the beginning of the world by
a price that was paid four thousand years after? According to men's ordinary
rates, its little that they would part with for the present, for a payment to
be made, or a purchase to be enjoyed a thousand years after. That price
therefore must be of infinite value, which at a far greater distance pu^chased
the salvation of so many precious souls, one of which a whole world could not
redeem. For this you shall once and again in the Revelation have the whole
Chorus Rev. 5. 9. Rev. 7 9, 10.
singing Amen, Hallelujah.

Use 2. With the like humble awfulness, let us adore and tremble at the most
dreadful, and yet most just Judgment of God upon the Heathen, the far
greater part of the world then, whom yet he over-looked, Acts 14. 16. and 17.
30. and left in darkness without the true knowledge of a Savior, and so
without means and hopes of salvation; and i(...)ead of flattering them, and
thereby hardening others, (by cutting out new ways invented by our selves,
besides the King of Heavens highway to life, and not sticking as some do
loudly to accuse God of partiality, injustice, and cruelty, if it should be
otherwise.) Let us lay our hands upon our mouths, when standing upon the brink
of this bottomless depth, we have first cried out (...). Lord, who will not
fear Romans 11. 33.
thee, for thy judgments are made manifest. Who show mercy on whom Rev. 15.
3. 4.
thou will show mercy, and whom thou will thou hardnest. Even so, O Father,
Romans 9. 18 Matthew. 11. 25, 26.
for so it seemed good in thy sight, and what is good in his eyes, let it not
be evil in ours.

Use 3. And as we are to tremble at the thoughts of them then, so let us pity
the forlorn condition of Pagans, Infidels, and Jews now; who either do not
know, or will not acknowledge the only Savior which is Christ the Lord; and so
while Luke 2. 11
they are deadly sick, either hear of no Physician, or spit out their Physic;
though they will not, yet their most undone condition cries out aloud that
they have greatest need of our pity and prayers.

Use 4. And God may as much expect our humblest and heartiest praises, who has
provided better things for us, to whom he has made known the riches of the
glory of this Col. 1. 26, 27. Ephesians. 3. 5
mystery among the Gentiles, which is Christ in us the hope of glory, and who
has abolished death, and brought life and immortality to light by the Gospel.
That he in whose hand our times 2 Timothy 1. 10.
are, has not cast them and us into those former Ages of Heathenish blindness
and darkness, but has reserved us to such times, and settled us in such
places, in which Christ and salvation by him have been fully manifested, freely
offered, nay strongly urged and pressed upon our acceptance. What was his being
a Grecian, an Athenian, a Philosopher, to thy being a Christian, a Protestant,
a Scholar, especially if such an one, as savingly knows Jesus Christ, and how
will his so great thankfulness for the former, condemn thy great ingratitude
for the latter?

1. The mercy being great of the largest size. It is Salvation. Now how joyful
and thankful was Zacheus, when upon his entertainment of Christ salvation came
to his Luke 19. 9
house?

How much more should we be, if upon our enjoyment and answerable entertainment
of the Gospel, this salvation be come to our souls?

2. The distinguishing mercy in it is as great, and therefore calls for greater
praises, That we should have that which others are, and have been deprived of.
How does Haman enhaunce and ingrandize his Esth. 5. 12.
honor, that he should be invited when none else were? That was to a royal
banquet, but nothing to this Marriage Feast which the King of Heaven makes us,
and in which they that minister to us, are Ministers of Christ and salvation.
This non Ps. 147. 20.
fecit taliter, renders it a singular mercy. This made Christ himself rejoice
in spirit, and say, Father I Matthew. 11. 25, 26.
thank thee; and what there follows, adds

3. A third argument of greater praise, That as it is a great and pe^uliar
favor, so when others of greatest worth are passed by, it is bestowed on them
that are more unworthy, concealed from the wise and prudent, and revealed unto
babes: To the Gentiles, whose style was that they knew not God, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 5.
without God, and without hope too* Ephesians. 2. 12. not only helpless, but
hopeless, and so (as in our selves) wholly desperate.

And yet more particularly amongst them to us here without the Tropic, extra
solis vias, in the uttermost end of Heaven, and in the skirts of the Earth, and
might have been as much divided from God, as we Et penitus toto divisos orb
Britannos.
are from the rest of the world; whose Ancestors in times of Heathenisme were
as barbarous as any, if we believe Caesar; and in times of Popery as idolatrous
and superstitious as any, nay, afforded more Schoolmen avowed Champions for it,
then any other Nation, if you will credit either your own computation, or some
others that have taken the pains to make it. And yet even into this dark corner
has this glorious light shined; and then as she said, (...); whence is this
that God has respected (...), Luke 1. 43
our very low estate and condition? that V. 48.
this dayspring from on high has visited us, which sat in darkness and V.
78, 79.
the shadow of death? The Psalmist begins and ends the consideration of
such a mercy, with a Hallelujah, Ps. 147. 1, 20. And if they through such veils
could see such cause to bless God for such darker glimmerings, how much more
should we in the brighter Sunshine? who are either not left in the Heathens
midnight, or the Jews twilight, but live in the Gospels noonday brightness,
and have salvation so openly and clearly revealed and manifested?

4. And (which is yet a further ground of thankfulness) this salvation only in
and by Jesus Christ. Now blessed be God, as for so blessed a gift; so that it
is both wrought and kept for us by so safe a hand: for had it been in any
other, our own or others, it might have proved either so weak or false, that
our salvation might have never been wrought, or at least not ensured. What
Prodigals we were of it in Adam, our present broken condition in our selves
does too sadly evidence. But blessed be the Lord God of Israel, who has Luke
1. 68 69.
raised up an horn of salvation for us in the house of his servant David. Has
laid help upon one that is mighty, Ps. 89. 19. Isa. 63. 1. Isa. 9. 6.
even mighty to save, and so the mighty God prove's the Prince of our peace.
Has chosen every way the best for us, that he only is our Savior, who is the
only Potentate; alone 1 Timothy 6. 15.
all-sufficient, and most faithful and merciful, that in all our straits we may
stand still, and see the salvation Exodus 14. 13.
of a God. We need no other, we can have no better, none so good, and therefore
it is infinite mercy that we can have none but him only.

Use 5. And therefore from our souls, let us abhor that loose and profane
opinion, that every man may be saved in any Religion, if he be true to it, and
live orderly in it. Maintained of old by Apelles, as we find Hist. lib. 5.
cap. 13. Philast^ius
in Eusebius. By Rhetorius in Austin, and the Lampetiani in Damascen. Mahomet
promises Paradise to every Sect that lives lively. And it were well if too
many Christians in this turned not Turks, in thinking they may be saved in any
Religion; for else they would stick more firmly then they do to the true: The
Germane Familists held the like in the former Age. Our Church then cursed it in
their eighteenth Article, (which is the only one Anathema that we find in the
whole number of the thirty nine) but that accursed Josh. 6. 26. 1 Kings 16 34.
Jericho is fast building up again in this of ours, whilst all Sects are so
much suffered, which (it may be feared) is strongly acted by them, who when
they have gotten power, and with it fire and faggot into their hand, will
suffer none but their own. God in mercy prevent and disappoint all such
designs: Mean while, let us think, how our present Indifferency in matters of
Religion agrees with this one only way to salvation in the Text.

Which further condemns the obstinate blind Jews, who whilst they worship
and look to be saved by a God, reject, curse, and blaspheme the only Savior as
an Impostor, and in their prayers make (...) (which is Buxtorf. Synag. Judaic.
cap. 5.
the name of our Jesus) an abreviature of that their ho^^id petition (...) in
which they blasphemously pray that his most blessed Name and memory may be
blotted out, by which only the Text assures us, that all, that ever shall,
must be saved.

Which also condemns the sublimated Deists of our Age, who, it seems, are
such intimate friends to God, that they can have free access to him, without a
Mediator, whom yet the Scripture, out of him, holds out to us, as a
consuming fire; and therefore it was Luthers Canon, as he calls it, and which
he often inculcate's, Abstinendum esse a specuculatione In Gal. 1.
Majestatis. Gods dread Majesty, if not pacified by the Son of his Love, will
frown the stoutest sinner into Hell, which will never be quenched but by his
blood. He is the bridge by which alone we can pass over to eternal life; tread
beside, and we are irrecoverably plunged into that bottomeless gulf, that
Jacobs Ladder by which God comes down to us, and by which alone we get up to
God, if put by it, ware* a break-neck fall.

Add to these the complete Moralist, who also prove's the self-sufficient
Justiciary, who looks at faith, but as a notion, and at an imputed
righteousness, as a putatitious ridiculous absurdity. His rational and
virtuous morality is his Religion. And an Aristotle's Ethics, or a Tullies
Offices, or some such like Book his Bible. Which were he of S. Austins
Religion, would not satisfy him, because he cannot find the name of Christ
there. But he that is well, needs not the Physician; and he who is in his own
thoughts so safe and complete, has as little thought of a Savior, or of any
but himself, and his own fair, just, and sober dealing, which he claims
Heaven by. But would such know, that when the gulf is to be shot, to clasp
their own arms about themselves is the certain way to sink irrecoverably.

Nor must we here forget the Papists, with their followers, who have invented
many other names; as Masses, Indulgences, Free Will, Merits, Pilgrimages, etc.
whereby they hope to be saved, which made Bullinger on this Text cry out, Sed O
Deus bone, etc. Good Lord, how long has this blessed doctrine lien hid, and
been obscured, that it has been but to a poor few that the mystery of Christ
has been manifested. And Calvin upon it says, that were we thoroughly
possessed with this one truth, it would have silenced most of the Popish
Controversies. In which, although they dare not deny, but that we are saved by
Christ, yet dum tot adminicula confingunt vix certissimam salutis partem illi
faciunt residuam. Stapleton Stapleton Antidot.
here plieth it fast with his Antidotes, as though these their inventions were
subservient to Christ. But his Antidotes will never take away this poison, that
many of them are contrary to Christ, and derogate from him, and that their
Free Will and Merit set their own name, at least in part on their salvation,
when the Text will own no other name whereby we must be saved.

Use 6. And therefore our duty on the contrary, is

1. Out of a tender care of our selves, if there be no salvation but by Christ,
then above all things to make sure of Christ, As ever we would make sure of
salvation, If saved only by him. O then with the woman in Matthew. 9. 20, 21.
the Gospel, let every believing soul say, That I may be so happy as to touch
the hem of his garment. If he John 1. 14
be the only begotten Son of God, he shall be the only beloved of my soul,
(...) unus and unicus meus, my only One, my only Savior; and how then shall
we escape, if we neglect so great Heb. 2. 3.
salvation? And what an overwhelming confusion shall we lie under, if Christ
our Savior finding us yet in our sins, shall say to us, quae utilitas in
sanguine meo? As for any profit or benefit that we through Ambros. de virgin.
l. 3.
our neglect of it, shall gain by it? were there but one only remedy for some
deadly disease that we are sick of, if it might be had, we would not rest till
we had got the receipt of it, and made use of it; O let us not be more careful
of our bodies then of our souls, or for the health and life of the one then for
the eternal salvation of the other. How sick of love should the faint Spouse be
for her only beloved? That she may Cant. 2. 5.
once be able to embrace him, and say, My Beloved is mine, and I am Ver. 16.
his. What ever it cost's me, my salvation lies upon it, and therefore through
all difficulties and dangers, I will make out after him, and not rest till I
enjoy him; and if in this pursuit I perish, I perish. Let me perish for him,
who am sure to perish everlastingly without him. This in care of our selves.

2. But upon this account something it is, yea very much that we owe in way of
gratitude to him.

1o As he is our only One, so let the chaste Spouse be his, Cant. 6. 9* only
for him, and not for another, Hos. 3. 3. The Apostle tells us that he died
for this very end, that we might not live to our selves, but to him, 2 Cor. 5.
15.

2o And as we in and by him enjoy that peculiar and singular blessing, which
(as we heard) the wisest of the Heathens fell short of, so let us be a peculiar
people to him, do 1 Pet. 2. 9. Matthew. 5. 47.
some singular thing for him, and labor to outstrip them as much in
performance of duty, as we do in enjoyment of mercy; at least let us not in
the light stumble in that way, wherein they walked more uprightly in the dark,
by being worse then 2 Chro 9.
they, which the Prophet Ezekiel sadly Ezekiel. 16. 47, 48. 51.
bewailed in his time, and Salvian in his. O be ashamed that the morality of a
Pagan should outstrip the Religion of a Christian, that our rebellions should
justify their abominations. Ezekiel. 16. 51, 52. M. Pemble.
For (as He said well) God certainly will shame that servant that dishonors
his Master.

3o And Lastly, because salvation is only by Christ, therefore in all matters
of salvation, with a single eye let us look to Christ, and to God in him, and
at our selves as receiving all from him, as Elected in him, Redeemed by him,
Justified by his grace, and the imputation of his righteousness, in which is
the ground of our comfort, and Sanctified by his Spirit, not by a Philosophical
faith, or the use of right Reason, or a virtuous morality, too much now adays
admired and cried up. As of old, The Temple of the Lord, The Jer. 7. 4.
Temple of the Lord. So now, The Candle of the Lord, The Candle of the Lord. I
would not have that Candle put out, I would have it snuffed and improved as an
handmaid to faith, but not so (as when the Candle is set up) to shut the
w^ndow, either wholly to keep out, or in the least to darken the Sunshine, as
it is with men's eyes, who can read better by a candle in the night, then by
daylight. A profane ingratitude for Gods infinite bounty! To feed on Akrons
and Husks, whilst the Heavenly Manna falls round about our Tents, preferring
a good saying or precept of Morality found (as we use to call them) in some
gallant or noble Philosopher, before the spiritual and divine commands of
Christ in his Word, not being so much taken with the Mass of Gold in the Mine,
as with a piece of baser aloy found here and there in the dunghill. But what
ever Nature Ennii Sterquilinium. Col. 3. 11.
and Morality may be to others, yet to us let Christ be all in all. Nor let us
be Deists, but Christians; let us not take up in such a Religion, as a Col. 3.
11.
Jew, or Turk, or Pagan, in a way of Nature and Reason only may rise up unto,
but let us indeed be, what we are called, Christians. It is not Abanah, or
Pharpar, nor all the 2 Kings 5. 12.
Rivers of Damascus, but Isreal's Jordan only, that will cleanse our sinful
Leprosy; not a Philosophical dull Morality, but the Law of the Spirit of life,
which is in Christ Jesus, Romans 8. 2.
that will quicken us to a spiritual walking with God; not that Candlelight,
but this Sun of righteousness, ^nk. 1. 79.
that will guide our feet into the way of peace. Let all things else therefore
be loss and dung in comparison Phil. 3. 8.
of this (...), this super-excellent and transcendent knowledge of Christ Jesus
our Lord; and let the life that we now live in the Gal. 2. 20.
flesh, be by the faith of the Son of God, who has loved us, and given himself
for us. And seeing there is no other name but this under Heaven given, by which
we must be saved. Say we with the Psalmist, whom have I Psalm. 73. 25
in Heaven but thee? and there is none on Earth that I desire in comparison Mr.
I. Lambert. Fox Acts and Monuments, Tom. 2. pa. 427.
of theee. If salvation be in none other, then with the Martyr, in life and
death, let our word be None but Christ, None but Christ.

Tibi Domine Jesu.
AN ENQVIRIE AFTER What hopes may be had of the Salvation
Of 1. Heathens. 2. Those of the old world, the Jews and others before Christ.
3. Such as die Infants, Idiots, and distracted persons now under the Gospel.
THE Doctrine before delivered, That there is no salvation but by Christ, is
such a Fundamental in Christianity, that whosoever denies it, may seem scarce
to be a Christian: and yet too many, who go in that number, can very hardly
digest it, and are ready to object against it. The instances of

1. Diverse Pbilosophers, and other virtuous Heathens, altogether strangers from
Christ.

2. The Patriarchs and others of the Church, before the Flood, and after it,
but all before Christ.

3. Many Idiots, and distracted* ones, and such as die Infants in the Church
since Christ.

Of all which, they are ready to think and say, that its very hard to conceive
how any of them did or could, do or can believe in Christ, and yet as harsh to
say that for want of it, they should be cast off by him.

Now because the first instance of virtuous Heathens, and especially of their
Philosophers, occasioneth the greatest dispute, and the other two are brought
in but as pleas for them, by their Advocates, I shall especially deal with
them, and more briefly tou^h upon the other two; and that it may better appear,
whom I have herein to deal with, I shall crave leave to premise and hint the
Rise and Progress of this Controversy.

Now for this, you know, that although In initio: Annaliam apud v(...) res
patres omnes in confesso (...) Casaub. Exercit. 1*
Barouius look's at salvation only by Christ, as so plainly Fundamental, and so
generally received, that he is bold to say, that it is in Confesso with all the
Ancient Fathers; yet from Casaubon and others, it plainly appears, that

Chrysostom held, that before Christ's coming in the flesh, God Homil. 3^ in
Matthew.
required not the acknowledgement or knowledge of such a Christ, but that such
then as abstained from Idols, worshipped the true God, might be saved.

And that Clemens Alexandrinus Stomat. l. (...)
says, that God then gave two Testaments, the Law to the Jews, and Philosophy
to the Gentiles; which (...), by which he justified the Greeks or Gentiles: a
very high and bold lib. 1.
speech, for which (it may be) Gelasius thrust him among the Apocryphals, his
words expressing much more then per modum, (...), as Vossius and Andradius,
would interpret him; and much more also then his (...) and (...), by which he
elsewhere qualifieth it, and (I would be glad to think) revoketh that his
error.

And Justin Martyr plainly asserteth, Apolog. 8.
that both Jews and Gentiles at that time (...), That lived according to the
rule of right Reason, though before Christ, yet were indeed Christians, and in
that number reckons up Socrates, Heraclitus, and other Heathens, and joineth
them with Abraham, Elijah, and others of the chiefest of Gods servants,
mentioned in the Old Testament. Saying further, that Christ was that (...):
upon occasion whereof, Casaubon rightly minds us of Basils Caveat, (...), as
though because (...) signifies both Christ the Word, and also Reason, that
therefore every one that has the one, should also be partaker of the other.

To which some add that of Tertullian, Apologet.
O Testimonium animae naturaliter Christianae.

Thus of old.

And since of late, for the Socinians and Arminians, that they may Corvinus in
Tilenum.
better maintain their opinion of a general sufficiens auxilium. It is too well
known how favorably they speak of the Gentiles, And how Venator follows the
chase with a full mouth, and like a resolute Doctor or F^st. Hom. specim. art.
27.
peremptory Respondent, saith^, Nego hanc propositionem. Nemo potest sal^us
fieri, qui Christo per veram fidem non sit insitus.

But of our other more sound Divines, Zuinglius is especially noted, for what
he says of the Gentiles, as De peccato Originali.
elsewhere in his works, so especially in his Explication of the Christian
faith, (which yet not he himself, but Pareus in Irenico.
others put out five years after his death) he tells the King of France, to
whom he dedicateth it, That in Heaven he shall see not only the two Adams,
Abel, Enoch, Noah, and others of the faithful in the Old Testament, but also
Hercules, Theseus, Socrates, Numa, and others of the Gentiles, and all his
predecessors, quotquot in fide hinc migraverunt. From which last words, some of
our Divines would excuse him, as though he meant only of such as died in the
Rivet. Pareus in Irenic. cap. 28. Vedellius Rationale cap. 9. page 106, 107,
108. Prideaux lect. 8.
faith which it seems then Herculess and Theseus, according to him had, but
the words and discourse to them that read them are too plain to admit of such a
salvo. And therefore some others say that none of ours defend them, which I
cannot say; for Gualther in his Apology prefixed before Zuinglius his works,
purposely and at large endeavors it. But whilst he defend's him, and others
would excuse him, I am sure the Papists on the one hand, and the Lutherans on
the other, with open mouth do all fall upon him, railing, and some of them
jeering, and bidding their Scholars take ^eed of Zuinglius his Heaven, for they
will Vitus Vinscinius Professor Wittenber.
there meet with Hercules and his club. To whom I wish no worse place then
Zuinglius his Heaven, and then should they possibly find Hercules there; yet
he would not have his club there to terrify them. But both parties might well
have abated of some of their fervor and keenness. See Pareus ^bi prius.


The Lutherans if they would remember how moderate their Melancthon was in his
thoughts of the Gentiles, and that Luther himself hops well of Tully, and
Brentius places even the Devils themselves in Heaven.

And much rather might the Papists have forborne to fall so foully upon him,
seeing so many of their own have spoken full out as much, in this kind as ever
Zuinglius did. Cassalius one of the Council of Trent, leaves it free to us
which way to take, seeing their Church had not determined it, as indeed the
Council of Trent does not speak out in this point. And it is well known, that
in that Council whilst sitting, a Franciscan in his Sermon to them, proved the
Gentiles Advocate, without Sleidan ad ann. 1552.
their censure. I am sure that Soto and Vega, two of their great Divines in
that Council, in the main are clearly of Zuinglius his judgment; and that
Andradius a third of great note amongst them in his Orthodox Explications,
(wherein seems to explain what their mind and judgment was) speaks out
Zuinglius his opinion to the full, and that with more copiousnesse and
earnestness. Seissellus another of theirs See Collii lib. 1. cap. 11, 12. de
animabus paganorum.
makes two sorts of the better Heathens, viz. of such as with their whole might
sought and worshipped God, and perfectly fulfilled the Law of Nature: and such
according to his account went bolt-right up to Heaven. And for the second sort
of others of them, which kept the Law of Nature too, but did not so earnestly
seek after God, although (as he thinks) they got not to Heaven, yet they
escaped Hell, and without punishment and pain were in some other place they
cannot tell where. The Colonien^es wrote a Book de salute Aristotel^^. And
Balaei Centue andC. Agrippa. Chemnit: exam:
Thamnerus says, that Aristotle was Christ's sore-runner, in naturalibus, as
John Baptist was in gratuitis, and accordingly maintained his opinion de Fide
and salute Philosophica, sine verbo Dei, and sine spiritu sancto; and
accordingly Bruno maintains it, that satis erat Gentibus si crederent quod
Creator unus esset, and singulis pro eorum actibus retribuerit: only Rikel
adds, dummodo implicitam habuerint fidem de adventu and incarnatione Christi,
which Zuinglius never excluded. So that Erasmus in comparison of some of these,
according to his facetious temper, was but in jest, when he said that he could
hardly forbear saying sancte In praefat. ad quaest:
Socrates, ora pro nobis; or if he were in good earnest, it was* not so much to
adore Socrates his Saintship, as to Tuscul: Non tam ex animi sui sententia,
quam Romanae mercatur^ reprehendedae causa. M^ntacut. Analect. pa. 77. In lib.
18. cap. 47. de Civit. Dei.
deride many of the Popish Saints, as thinking that Socrates was a better Saint
then many of those whom the Pope has Canonized: To all the former I only add
one more, who is L. Vives, who speaks as loud in this cause as any, and says,
that qui ex Gentilibus naturam sequebantur d^cem. The Gentiles who followed
only the guidance of Nature, were as pleasing to God as the Jews, who o^eyed
the Law, and makes only this difference, that the Jew was like a travellour
who travelleth by his Map, the Gentile like him ^ho goes his journey by his
own knowledge and memory, and so thereby makes him the more skilful travellour.
And that those now who in the remotest parts of the Earth hear not of Christ,
but love God and their neighbor, (such of them no doubt he will find in some
Nova Atlantis, or Eutopia) want nothing but water, having received the same
Spirit that the very Apostles had, to whom their Conscience is their Law, and
to whom he applies that in the Psalm, Memor est in nocte nominis Dei, and
custodit ^egem ejus.

So that although Zuinglius was unhappy, in a more harsh expression, and in his
instancing more particularly in Hercules, Theseus, etc. yet he needed not have
been so harshly dealt with, eithen by the Lutherans, or Papists, seeing that so
great Names of both their parties were of his opinion.

Text, there be no salvation but by Christ, what shall we think of those
Heathens* that never knew Christ?



1. First, I would premise this, that I would be very loath to undergo a N.
Culverwel of the light of Nature, ca. 18. pa. 208
late Authors imperious check, which he gives to some, whose censure (he
says) is too harsh and rigid, (it may be his is so of them) who as if they
were Judges of eternal life and death, damn Plato and Aristotle without
question, and do as confidently pronounce they are in Hell, as if they saw them
flaming there. And therefore I could say, (...), that silence were the best
answer; and so that their Morality may not be cried up for good Divinity, and
their virtues idolized to the disservice of Christ, and the disparagement of
his Grace and Gospel, for me they shall sleep quiet in their dust; I Will not rake
in their graves, but let them stand or fall to their own master, only for his
glory, I now must, and shall always believe and openly profess, that if this
their Lord and Master be not Jesus Christ, or God in him, they are fallen
irrecoverably.

2. This I premise in the second place, that under the name of those Heathens,
Gentiles, and Pagans, which we enquire after, are not to be comprehended, all
that lived before the Flood, or before the giving of the Law of Moses, and are
usually (though untruly) accounted to have been under the Law of Nature; for in
Seths line the Church of God was continued, and so in Sems after the Flood, and
so in Abraham's, Isaaks, and Jacobs afterward; nor will I restrain all saving
knowledge to Abraham's, and Isaaks seed of promise, although the Scripture is
more plain about Esau, Heb. 12. some Divines are not without hopes of Ishmael;
but however it was with their persons, yet Abraham so instructing his family,
Genesis 18. 19. I dare not deny, but that some of both Ishmaels, and Esau's race,
and of those children which Abraham had by Keturah, Genesis 25. 1, 2. might retain
for some time what they had learnt of their pious Ancestors; but they
deceasing, other generations rose up which knew not the Lord, (like that Judges
2. 7. 10. and the further the descent went, the more they fell off from God,
and as the greatest sound fails by little and little, and at last comes to
nothing, so here at last they came quite to lose the sight of Land, and the
light of that evening growing less and less, at last closed up in a dark
night of Ignorance, Idolatry, or Atheism) especially after God had made choice
of Israel as his peculiar people, and fenced them in by the pale of his Law
given to them; other Nations grown then into greater impiety, were more fully
excluded by the wall of partition, Ephesians. 2. 14. and excepting some few
Proselytes, and by name Naaman, and the Ninivites, and Nebuchadnezzar, and
Cornelius, (whom they mention as instances, all which if saved, either lived
among the people of God, as Cornelius, had Prophets of God with them, as
Nebuchadnezzar, and the Ninivites, or came to the Prophet, as Naaman, and so
had means of saving knowledge;) The rest, for any thing we know, continued in
their blindness and ignorance: Now if such, in those times, and at such a
distance from the godly Patriarchs, when Israel was a distinct people of God,
severed from the rest of the world, when Poets and Philosophers, and the Devil
himself were their Oracles and guides; of such (I say) is this question
especially to be understood.

3. This I also pr^mise that this Question is to be understood, not of Collius
ae animabus Paganorum, l. 1. cap. 3.
those more abominable Pagans, who did prostitute themselves to all wickedness
and uncleanness, who are generally given for lost, and find no Patrons to
defend or excuse them; but of the more sober and virtuous Philosophers, and
other Heathens, who after their fashion worship God, and lived (as their Books
tell us, and many amongst us believe) piously and virtuously, and so they come
to have so many Advocates.

4. Nor in this Discourse do I intend to dispute, whether those more refined
Heathens did attain to any true moral virtues, (I mean moral, as opposed to
such as are truly Theological) which Saint Austin up and down in his disputes
with the Pelagians, constantly denies, (whom Prosper, and De Incarnat. Christi
cap. 25, 26, 27. Lib. 1. a capite 4. ad 10. Joh. 4. 17.
Fulgentius his Scholars De vocat. gent. l. 1.
and others follow) but many of the Ancients seem to affirm, and Collius at
large endeavors to make good. That which I am now to enquire after, is,
whether they attained to any such saving virtue or grace, which only comes by
Christ our Savior, that thereby we may probably conclude for their salvation.

5. Now as to that, in the general, I must say, that I dare not deny, but that
some who (as for their birth and place of abode) were Heathen, might be saved;
for I confine not Grace and Salvation (no not in the time of the Law, when
Israel was the only People of God) within the De Civi^. Dei lib. 18. cap. 47.
See Bellarmin. de verbo Dei non scripto lib. 4. ca. 4.
bounds of Palestina. Saint Austin dare boldly affirm, that the Jews
themselves, (who yet were sufficient Monopolizers of their own privileges)
durst not say, that none besides themselves belonged to God. Populus enim ex
vera, qui proprie Populus Dei diceretur, nullus alius fuit; homines autem in
aliis Gentibus fuisse, negare In Apologia. To these Genebrard adds Pharaoh in
Egypt, Nahor and Laban in Mesopotamia, Jobs three friends, and Elihu in Arabia,
with the sons of Ketura, Ishmael, and the Ninivites. Epist. 99.
non possint. As he instanceth in Job, who was neither Jew, nor Proselyte, to
whom Gualther adds Melchizedek the Jebusite, Abimelech the Egyptian, (or
rather Canaanite) Jethro the Midianite, Naaman the Syrian, Nebuchadonozor the
Chaldean, and the Eunuch Ethiopian, with some few others. Qui vel apparent in
Scripturis, vel in genere humano latent, as Austin elsewhere expresses it;
esp^cially such as lived near to the people of God, or with whom Abraham, or
other the Patriarchs, or Prophets of God sojourned, and so had some more light
from them: As another of our own says, we deny Montacut. Analect. p. 22. In
which account come Melchizedek, Job, and most of those which they instance in
out of the Old Testament.
not, quin ad alios interdum scintillaverit lux illa Israelis, atque aliquando
e vicinis praecipue Gentibus, and conterminis Israelis, hunc vel illum, unum
alium, (...), irradiaverit, modis multis, miris, extra ordinem, (...), quia
placuit, tanquam aliud subinde agens. This we grant, but what is this to the
(...), to the rest and greatest part of the world, more remote from Judea, and
yet farther off from the least hearsay of a Messiah, of whom (as it was with
the poor Americans, and many others in the then habitable parts of the world)
they never thought, ne per febrem uuquam somniarunt?

6. If any shall importunately urge, that some of the Philosophers and other
virtuous Heathens were in the number of these saved ones, I shall as
peremptorily aver, that if they were saved, (of which more hereafter) it was
only in and by our alone Savior; for my Text will abide for ever most true and
certain, that besides him there is no Savior or Salvation. So Austin, In and
sub lege Coutra Julian l. 4. c. 3
naturali viventes salutem nonnulli sunt adepti, non tamen ex vi naturalis
legis; and even Zuinglius himself, who (as we showed) thinks some of them were
saved, yet maintain's it to have been by Jesus Christ; per De peccat. Orig.
page 118, 119. In Apologia
Christum enim accedere oportet quicunque ad Deum veniunt, unde Socerum Mosis,
etc. And so Gualther testifies of him. Quoscunque e Gentilium numero Sanctorum
numero adjudicandos esse censuit, non alia ratione quam Dei gratia per Christum
praestita salutem consecutos fuisse sensit. Not as In Orthodox: Explicat:
Andradius roundly and boldly, sine lege Mosis, and Evangelica nobis per Jesum
Christum data sola lege naturae permultos fuisse Dei gratia justificatos and
salvos.

But what ever He may, yet the Scripture acknowledges no saving grace out of
our Savior. Epiphanius speaking of those, says that God (...), saved men by
many ways, but yet meant not this in opposition, but in subordination to
Christ; but (as he well says) Margarita in mari nascitur, Montacut:
ver^^m ex rore coelesti; a gemme may be generated in the Sea, but of the dew
of Heaven; so if there were any such gemme found in them Like that which they
say is in some Toads head.
, it was not from the Sea of this world, but from Heavens influence; not from
the strength of nature, or their Free Will, as though they who were dead in
sin, could rise up out of the grave, and walk, and work o^t their salvation; It
was not Justin Martyrs (...). Of which (as he says) all partaked, not their
right use of right Reason, or their practice of their moral virtues, that could
bring them to Heaven, which even a Christians graces, as they are prescinded
from Christ cannot do; if either of them be saved, it is because God in Christ
forgave both. I say, it was by Christ, which (it may be) none of those who are
their greatest Advocates, will much deny: and therefore

7. I add in the seventh place, as, if this ever was, it must be by Christ, so
by Christ, in some measure, and by some means or other revealed to them; for as
Christ, so also faith in Christ, is in the Scripture required as necessary to
salvation, Ephe. 2. 8. Heb. 10. 3. Acts 13. 48. This was a piece of Saint
Austins Creed, That none belonged to the spiritual Jerusalem, nisi cui
divinitus revelatus fuerit Christus, but such as to whom Christ was revealed.
And so Lombard after Lib. 3. did. 25.
him, dici potest nullum fuisse justum, cui non facta esset Revelatio vel
distincta vel velata, vel in aperto vel in mysterio. It was not, as though a
Captive should be redeemed by a price paid by one, whom never before nor after
he had any knowledge of. So that God for Christ's sake should save them, and yet
never by any means, or in any measure, should make that Christ known to them.
He must by some means or other be revealed to them, who being grown up to the
use of Reason, were ever saved by (...). In Orat. ad Graecos.
him, which made Justin Martyr who had so good thoughts of their salvation, to
have this other concerning the means of it, that in some part he was made known
to them: but how that was it will be very hard (as we shall see by and by) to
demonstrate.

Indeed for the measure and degree of this Revelation of Christ to them who are
saved by him, I easily grant that it is not necessary that it should be equal
and alike to all, but that to some it might be more obscure and indistinct,
according both to several men's estates and conditions, as also to the times and
places they lived in.

And so in the time of the Law under those Types, and through those Vailes, we
may say Christ was revealed to the believing Jews, velata revelatione, by a
veiled revelation, without a contradiction, in adje^to. And yet I believe that
revelation Aquin. 22. q. 2. a. 7. Clem. Alex.
which they had of Christ was necessary, and withal more distinct and full, then
what some say was sufficient, as though it were sufficient for them to believe
God to be liberatorem secundum modos sibi placitos, their deliverer by some
means or other, which he pleased, but they knew nothing of. And as for many of
their far-fetched consequences, and strange implications of their implicit
Faith before mentioned, I may boldly say they were so large, as would wrap up
in the bundle of life; not only their Philos^phers, and other more virtuous
among them, but also the whole bulk of the Heathen, if not the worst of them,
whom yet they themselves would have excluded from this privilege. Mean while
we must hold, that if they can prove, that any of them were saved, I suppose we
have proved, that it was not only in and by Christ, but also by him some way,
and in some measure revealed to them.

8. But whether Christ was thus revealed to them, and by what likely means it
was, this is the question; to which they will very hardly give a probable, at
least a satisfactory answer: For although I doubt not of the power of God
(which they plead) but that he is able variis and occultis modis fidem eorum
^cordibus instillare, (as they speak) by various (and to us unknown) ways to
instill faith into their hearts, he being able (as the Apostle says) to do
above all that Ephesians. (...). 20.
we can ask or think, (which place some produce to this purpose, though I think
not so fitly, because it speaks of them who had already believed) yet we are
not here to consider what God absolutely and extraordinarily could, and was
able to do for them, but what either certainly, or probably he has done, and
this according to his ordinary Power and Providence, and in that way by which
he has ordained and revealed in Scripture, to bring men to life and salvation.
And truly according to this, they were as far out of the way of salvation, as
they were from the Church, extra quam non est salus, and unto which God uses
to add those that are to be saved; and so they Acts 2. 47.
were much out of the way, and sat in darkness and the shadow of death,
Matthew. 4. 15, 16.

And as for the ways and means which are propounded by diverse, by which Christ
and Salvation should be revealed to them, in my weak eye (and it is not an evil
one) they seem no way promising, as sufficient or likely to effect it. And that
for them, their case look's as very doubtful, if not extremely dangerous. For
which purpose let us a little take view of those ways that are suggested.

1. And here not to trouble our selves with those ways of their illumination,
which Collius in his second Book at large insisteth on, viz. by apparitions of
Angels, Saints, nay damned souls and Devils, such Legendary stuff is not
vendible with us, as being to the Jews, and I cannot but think to the very
Pagans offensive and ridiculous: besides that many of those brave exploits he
instanceth in were since Christ, and in places where the Gospel was Preached,
and therefore nothing to our present purpose.

Let the Areopagites conceit be first De coeles^^ Hierarch. cap. 9.
considered, which was, that in such of them as lived virtuously God always at
some time or other sent some man or Angel savingly to illuminate them. A piece
of news it is, confidently enough reported by him, which it may be he heard
when he was amongst his Celestial Hierarchies, but is as Apo^^yphal as they,
and his Books are; for the Book of God, Matthew. 11. 21. in the case of Tire and
Sidon, tells us otherwise, and that although they had been likely to have
proved more tractable, yet they were not so visited.

2. Clemens Alexandrinus therefore Strom. li. 6.
suggest's another way of Christ himself, preaching to them in Purgatory. To
which I say, it was well that they were all gotten into Purgatory, and that
none of them were left in Hell; for there they think Christ preached not. And
truly, if they heard no more of him then they heard from him preaching to them
in their Limbus or Purgatory, they will be left far enough out of the hearsay
of salvation. This therefore is but a vain folly, nay, Philastrius calls i^
an Heresy. Austin de Here Is. 79. Aquin: 22ae q. 2. a. (...). ad 3. De Civit.
Dei lib. 18. ca. 23.


3. And therefore as weary of that conceit, the same Author elsewhere pitcheth
upon some other of their Instructors, as Hydaspes, but especially upon the
Sybills, one of which S. Austin hops may belong to the City of God, and so
might direct others to the way thither. Now that such some Sybills there were
(though there be great difference of opinions both about them, and the number
of them) what we read in Virgil, and others may persuade. But what they were, I
will not, I cannot say; but y^^ can say this, that if the proofs brought for
the Heathens illumination to salvation, be not more authentic then the
supposititious Books are, which now go under the name of the Sybils prophecies,
there would be but very weak proof of their hopeful condition.

4. If Balaams prophecies, which Numb. 24. 17.
makes mention of a Star to come out of Jacob, at which Star that was
lightened which directed the wise men of the East to Christ, Matthew. 2. I say,
that that Prophecy as well as that Star was not of an elevation high enough to
prove an universal Luminary; that Vide Grotium in Matthew. 2.
last from which those wise men came, not being so remote from Judea, as
sometimes was conceived, and besides those wise men (it seems) were not so
sufficiently directed by it, but that they came to Jerusalem for better
guidance.

But to leave these four ways, there are three other which some of late have
principally insisted on.

5. As the contemplation of Gods I G. Gentiles debt and dowry: see also
Collius, lib. 2. c. 13. ad finem.
works of Creation and Providence, as though we could spell Christ and
Salvation out of that Book, or that the Sun, Moon, and Stars had been to them
sufficient Gospel-Preachers. Indeed what the Psalmist, Psalm. 19. 4. says of
the Sun, and Stars of Heaven, the Apostle, Romans 10. 18. by way of allusion
applies to the Apostles; so that that place says, that the Apostles were like
Stars, but not that the Stars are true Gospel-Preachers or Apostles. I think
that in the exposition of these two Scriptures, Interpreters have gone wide on
both hands, some thinking that the Psalmist did not literally mean Stars, but
Apostles; others that the Apostle really means Stars and not Apostles.

6. Nor will that other way be more helpful which Arminius insisteth on; that
upon their worthy improvement of their Naturals, God might, and did reveal to
them Christ and Spirituals, because habenti dabitur. But

1o That is but a Popish Polagian strain, to say, that they ever rose up to
such a worthiness of improvement of Nature, as might come to such a congruity
of merit of Christ and grace.

2o That habenti dabitur spoken of in another case, will not reach this, though
some do operose endeavor to evince it.

3o Should it, we should yet be to seek after what manner, and by what means
God did reveal Christ to them, which is the thing we are now enquiring after.

7. The last way therefore comes nearer to it, viz. Intercourse with the
Jews, by which they might come to partake of this saving knowledge, as they
might of any other Commodity or Merchandise.

Either by the Heathens coming to them, as Pythagoras, and Plato, and other
Philosophers, traveled and trafficked abroad for Learning, and thereby (as
some think) came to the sight and use of Moses his writings:

Or on the other side, the Jews trafficking with them might impart this
knowledge to them for their spiritual cure, as the Israelitish maid did to
Naaman for his bodily. And 2 Kings (...) 2, 3.
so Zebulon and Issachar, dwelling at the haven of the Sea, Genesis 49. 13. did
call the people to the mountain, Deuteronomy. 33. 18, 19. as the Scribes and Pharisees
afterward compassed Sea and Land to make Proselytes, Matthew. 23. 15. And besides
many of the Prophets prophesied of other Lands and Countries, as well as of
Israel and Judah, by which they might come to the knowledge of their duty, and
of the means of their salvation.

Nay, Jonah in person was sent to Niniveh, and that with success to their
conversion.

The Seventy two Interpreters also translated the whole Old Testament, Masius.
as some conceive, or at least (as others think) the five Books of Moses into
^ehickard.
Greek, which many of the Heathen reading, and believing, and practicing, might
be saved.

In general, the Jews were Feoffees in trust, of Gods Oracles, and that Romans 3.
2.
not for themselves alone, but for all the world, and therefore those Oracles
committed to them were called (...), Gal. 4. 3. Col. 2. 8. (as some think) the
elements or rudiments of the world, i. e. whereby the world (by the means of
the Jews, with whom they were betrusted) might be trained up in the knowledge
of God, and the things of their eternal I. G. ubi prius.
peace, as they would prove out of Athanasius.

For answer whereto, I say,

1. That it was late before the Pharisees arose, and were so busy; and what
then became of all the Heathen before that time? And if then their Proselytes
were by them made twofold more the children of Hell then themselves, as our
Savior expressly in the same place says it; what proof will thence be of such
Heathens salvation? Much like that of the Jesuits Indian Converts, whom they
turn from Heathenish to Popish Idolatry and Superstition.

2. As for Zebulons calling the people to the mountain, i. e. (as Interpreters
generally expound it) to mount Zion, or the mountain of the house of the Lord,
to worship him there; yet the people they called, might only be themselves
mutually; so Calvin or the other Tribes nearer to the Temple, whom they (living
more remote in the out-borders) called upon as they came by them in the way to
it: So the Chaldee and Piscator, or in part be meant of the other Nations which
they trafficked with; so Junius and some others, it A^nsworth.
is said, they should call them, but its not said, how many came; and if some
did by that or some other means, 1 Kings 8. 41, 42. that only proves, that
some neighboring, or it may be possibly some more remote Heathens came, (of
which number Collius will have the Queen of Sheba to be one) and became
Proselytes, and joined themselves to the people of God. But yet what is this to
the salvation of those Heathens, which never had, or heard of such a call, and
were farther off from the Jews in heart then in habitation?

3. If Plato, or any other of them got the sight of Moses writings, or if
others by the use of the Septuagints Translation attained to the saving
knowledge of a God in a Messiah, let it be said and proved, and we will not
Jew-like vilify or envy them, but rejoice with them in this their happiness.

Something we may find in their writings, (as we see Ovid in his Metamorphosis
treading much in Moses steps, as concerning the Creation, Deluge, etc.) which
we Christians may take notice of, as consonant to the Scriptures, and thereby
gather, that they had a sight or rather some hearsay of them.

But when in most (if it not in all) of their writings, we find so much
Heathenish Error, Superstition, Idolatry, and many other abominations, wholly
inconsistent with the saving knowledge of God in a Messiah, which they yielded
to, approved, lived and died in; we cannot but conclude, that they were far
enough from salvation, if not from the sufficient means of the knowledge of it;
but that for the generality of them, they were

Either wholly ignorant of the Jewish Religion,

Or if they had any knowledge of it, they did not so much understand it, as
loathe and deride it, as we may see in Juvenal, Tacitus, and others.

And whether their Philosophers did not come under one of these heads, (should
we judge either by their own writings, or by what others write of them) it
would require a very quick eye to espy that which cannot be seen, or an
over-large lasted charity to believe the contrary.

3. What the Ninivites gained by Jonah his prophesying amongst them, Jonah 3. 4.
that within forty days their City should be destroyed, (which for any thing we
read, was the sum of his Sermons) we cannot say, we indeed read that thereupon
they believed God, so as that they were humbled, V. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9.
and turned from their evil ways, so far as was available to the avoiding of
that threatened destruction; but whether savingly illuminated and converted, is
more then can be proved; or if they then were for the present, yet not so, as
that thereby their posterity retained that knowledge, nor more then they did
that preservation of their City, which for their iniquity afterward was
destroyed.

4. And for the other Prophets prophecies, though I deny not but that some of
them were sent to those people, which the Prophets themselves in person went
not to, as may appear from Ier. 25. 15, 16. etc. and 27. 3. yet they contained
especially threatenings of judgments against them for their sins, of which we
read of no good effect wrought in them thereby. Such prophecies indeed being
rather for the information and comfort of the Jews at home, then for those
other Nations abroad.

5. For that instance of traffic and commerce which the Jews had with other
Nations, it is very well known that it was but very small, and not far off. And
(except it be of Solomon's Voiages to Ophir, and his traffic with Egypt, 1
Kings 9. 26, 27, 28. and chap. 10. 28, 29. and that with Tire, Ezekiel. 27. 17.
which last were not far off; and of Jehoshaphats making of ships, which were
broken, and so sped not in the Voyage, 1 Kin. 22. 48.) we read not much, that
so thereby the Nations might be instructed by the Jews, who were envious enough
to impart to the Gentiles that their peculiar treasure. And indeed the
situation of their Land was such, and their Ports so few, that their traffic
with other Nations was not great, and this wisely so disposed by God, that they
might be the less corrupted by the Nations they conversed with, Deuteronomy. 17. 16,
17.

So that notwithstanding all that from these instances can be proved, although
possibly some few of the Gentiles by some of these means might become
Proselytes, or be brought on to the knowledge of God, yet for the generality
of the Heathen, yea, and of their Philosophers, their case in regard of these
two things seems to be extremely dangerous, if not desperate.

1. That they were wholly devoid of any saving knowledge of God in a Messiah,
whom to know (he himself says, John 17. 3.) is eternal life. (...), Romans 1.
19. viz. a natural knowledge of God, but that (...), which you read of in the
tenth verse of this Chapter, and chapter 13. 38. Be it known unto you, by this man
is preached unto you forgiveness of sins, is a point not of Philosophical, but
Apostolical Doctrine; so that whatsoever is, or may be said to the contrary,
the Scripture in this is plain and peremptory, That God dealt not so with all
Nations, Psalm 147. 20. That the Gentiles knew not God, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 5. That
they sat in darkness, and the shadow of death, Mat. 4. 16. Having their
understanding darkened, being alienated from the life of God through the
ignorance that was in them, because of the blindness (or hardness) of their
hearts, Ephesians. 4. 18. where we have words multiplied, to express the certainty
of the things. Their dim Lamp did show them some glimmering appearance of a
summum bonum, at a great distance; but could not sufficiently inform them in
it, or direct them to it, no more then a candle can the traveller in the dark,
when he is ignorant of the way. And hence were their so many multiplied
opinions (no fewer then 288) in Varro's time about it. But as for the way of
salvation Augustine de Civit. lib. 19. ca. (...) 22 ae. q. 2. a^t. 7.
by a Messiah, Adam before his fall, what ever Aquinas thinks to the contrary,
and some others object concerning the Sacramental Tree of Life, (which Christ
now only indeed is, Rev. 22. 2.) knew it not. And although after his fall, and
the first promulgation of it, Genesis 3. 15. He knowing of it, it is more then
likely he instructed his offspring about it, as Abraham did his family in the
things of God, Genesis 18. 19. yet the greatest of them soon forgot it, as they
did Gods Sabbath and worship, yea, and many other things which were even of the
Law of Nature; so that Plato (as Ficinus in his life shows) acknowledged that
he had not found out the true way; and Porphyrie does not like communem illam
Augustine de Civit. Dei l. 10.
viam homines sanandi. Austin could not find the name of Christ in Tullies
writings; nor is Faith one of the virtues in Aristotle's Ethics. And when
Mornay would say something of their knowledge in this kind, me thinks he speaks
very faintly. Adiverant Morn: de veritat. ca. 27.
ii forte, necesse esse ut homo pro peccatis mundi vitam traderat, and ergo
Diabolus suadebat hominem immolandum esse, and Civitatis, regionisque (si Deo
placet) sceleribus onerandum, i. e. It might possibly b^, that they heard that
a man should die for the sins of the world. And therefore the Devil persuaded
them to sacrifice a man (a (...), some notorious malefactor) on whom they might
cast all their sins, as the filth of the street into the Scavingers dung-cart;
which yet He himself confesses was most vain and ridiculous in it self, ut qui
Deum sibimet ipsi iratum habet, aliis propitium redderet. That the execution of
some abominable malefactor, should be any fit means to lead them to the
knowledge and belief of a Messiah, who was indeed a sin-offering for us, but
had no sin in himself, 2 Cor. 5. 21. and so was fit to satisfy for others; a
glimmering of which truth, the Gauls in Caesar De bello Gallico, l. 6.
may seem rather to have had, who Diti suo quam maxim innocuos immolabant,
sacrificed the most innocent, in which they more increased their guilt, but
thought that the more likely way to expiate it. And as for that which the same
Author alleges out of Porphyrie, that our purgation is per principia, and
that Morn*
by those principia are meant the Persons of the sacred Trinity, and that of
Julian his making Aesculapius, who was Jupiters son to be Man's Physician,
signifying thereby that the Son of God should be Man's Savior. It may well be
his Moral beyond their meaning, or if it were their sense, yet (you will say)
make's nothing to the question in hand, if you consider who Julian and
Porphyrie were. Heathens indeed, but of apostatized Christians, and therefore
might well come to the knowledge of that, which their malice could not suffer
them to believe and acknowledge; but what is that to others of them who were
before Christ, or more remote from Christians? who either had not that
knowledge, or despised as much as they had of it; and in that other knowledge
which they had, (...), they became most vain and foolish, even in what they
accounted themselves most wise and Romans 1. 21, 22. 1 Cor. 1. 20. Vide Gratium
in utrumque locum.
acute. They first wanted the true knowledge of God in Christ.

2. And (which was worse) ^^ey were positively possessed and poisoned with
contrary Atheistical or Idolatrous persuasions and practices inconsistent with
the very Fundamentals of Christianity; as how many of such do you find in the
writings of the best of them, even of your divinest Plato, who is so much
admired, and well-nigh adored, and out of whom and his followers, so many
things are produced as agreeable to Christian faith, that he is half baptized
Christian? And hereupon when Christ came indeed to be revealed to the world, he
and his Gospel were by none more scornfully derided, and more maliciously
opposed and persecuted, then by these Philosophers, those Patriarchs of
Heretics, as Tertullian calls them.

Such Disputers had about with the Proto-Martyr Stephen, Acts 6. 9. and after
the Epicurean and Stoic Philosophers with Paul at Athens, Acts 17. 18. and so
from Crescens (Justin Martyrs Persecuter) and downward, Eusebius. hist. l. 1. cap.
15. Graec: 16.
we shall find none more frequent and fierce opposers of Christians, then
Philosophers and Conjurers, the preaching of a crucified Savior was to these
Learned Greeks foolishness. Vt quisque ingenium habet multa eruditione 1 Cor.
1. 23.
magis subactum, it a maxim ei sordet simplicitas Evangelii. And then as
Austin argues, quomodo sunt vere Contra Julian: l. 4. cap. 3.
justi, quibus vilis esi humilitas vere justi? quo enim propinquaverunt
intelligentia, inde superbia recesserunt. Their knowledge brought them not so
near, as their pride ^et them off at a distance from Christ, as Ambrose speaks
of Polemon, si resipuit a vino, lib. de Elia and jejunio cap. 12.
fuit tamen semper temulentus sacrilegi^; though he was not drunk with wine,
yet he was with sacrilege.

And thus these two particulars render their case (as I said) extremely
dangerous, if not right out desperate.

If saved, they must be justified, Romans 8. 30. but that is by the knowledge of
Christ, Isa. 53. 11. Children of wrath they were by nature, Ephesians. 2. 3. and the
Scripture speaks of no way of reconciliation but by the Son of Gods love, 2
Cor. 5. 19. Nemo Deo, sine Deo placere potest. Guilty they were, and that guilt
could be taken away only by his sacrifice, and righteousness, and therefore
they being out of Him, were out of that way by which God appoints, all that do,
to come to life, John 14. 6.

But yet let us consider what on the other side, is, or may be said to prove
their state to be safe, or at least more hopeful; and here

1. I may confidently first say, that nothing is said for it from sound
Scripture proof, for it no where speaks so favorably of them as our pitiful
Remonstrants, and others Pemble.
do, we can there find no such promising evidences of their safe condition, but
the quite contrary. It confineth Grace, and the ordinary means of it to the
Jews, opens a fountain for Judah and Jerusalem, Ps. 147. 29 20. Zechar. 13. 1.
but tells us not that Plato was baptized in it. It says, that they knew not
Gods judgments, Psalm. 147. 20. that they sat in darkness, Mat. 4. 15, 16.
that they knew not God, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 5. that they had no hope (what ever we have
of them) living without God in the world, Ephesians. 2. 12. God suffering all those
Nations to walk in their own way, (and that was none of Gods, which led to
salvation) as Paul told them at Lystra, Acts 14. 16. And therefore you may
observe, that usually in Scripture mention is made of their vices and
abominations, as of Rocks in the Sea to avoid them, Mat. 6. 32. Romans 1. 21, 22,
etc. 1 These. 4. 4, 5. rather then of their virtues, as to be patterns of our
imitation.

Indeed the Scripture sometimes to convince the Jews of their guilt in breaking
the Law given to them, produces the Gentiles by the Light of Nature doing
something, which for the outward act, were agreeable to the Law of Nature, Romans
2. 14, 15. etc. But that make's not them a fit pattern for us to imitate, much
less proves that they so doing were in a safe condition, which is directly
contrary to the general scope of the Apostle in that discourse, as we shall
see by and by.

Sometimes also the Lord shameth his people for doing worse then they, Jer. 2.
11, 12. 2 Chronicles. 33. 9. Ezekiel. 16. 46, 47. But that is far enough from proving
that they did well.

Sometimes likewise God threatens that he would provoke Israel to jealousy by
them, Deuteronomy. 32. 21. But that was not while they continued in their Heathenish
blindness, but when upon the Jews rejection, they were called to the grace of
Christ, as the Apostle expounds it, Romans 10. 19.

But yet there are three ordinary Augustine contra Julian: l. 4. c. 3.
places which Julian of old objected to Austin, and which Andradius with other
Papists, Corvinus, and other Arminians, yea, and Gualther in his Apology for
Zuinglius, and others usually produce in their behalf, which yet will not be a
sufficient Rowler to bind and strengthen their Ezekiel. 30. 21.
broken arm.

1. The first is Romans 1. 19. where the Apostle says, that (...) (which
Gualther stretches too far, when he renders it omne illud quod de Deo sciri
and intelligi potest) was manifested to them, and that (as he adds in the two
next following verses) was so perverted by them, that it left them unexcusable.
But is this Natural knowledge of a Creator, (of which only he there speaks)
which they had, and so abused, as that it aggravated their damnation, a
sufficient proof, that they had the true knowledge of a Redeemer, and that
sufficient to salvation? No, but in Gods just judgment (as one says) they
were left as without Pemble Vindiciae gratiae.
sufficient direction for well doing, so without all lawful excuse for ill
doing.

2. The second is, Romans 2. 14, 15. of that (...), The work of the Law written
in their hearts, whereby they did for the matter of the work (...), the things
of the Law. Whereupon their Consciences sometimes so far excused them, as
otherwhile, for the contrary they accused them.

But when a true Christian cannot be justified by his best spiritual works done
by faith, shall the bare outward bulk of their actions, without faith, and
other due requisites, be able to justify and save them?

Again, is not this (as I said before) directly against the main scope of the
Apostles whole discourse in those three first Chapters? which was to prove both
Jew and Gentile (what ever were the privileges of the one, or the
accomplishments of the other) to be fallen short of the glory of God: and so to
lie under the guilt of sin, so that if ever any of them come to be justified
and saved, it must be by the faith of a Mediator.

And therefore because Julian urged these places to prove that sine fide
Christi, lege naturae, they did please God, Austin deservedly tells Vbi ^rius.
him, that therein he manifestly showed himself an enemy of the grace of
Christ, and adds that grave and heavy expression, Hoc est unde maxim
Christiana vos detestetur Ecclesia.

3. The third is that of Acts 17. 30. where it is said, that the ti^es of that
ignorance God winked at, but now commands all men every where to repent.

But although our English word winked, there used, may seem to look toward
such a sense, as a man is said to wink at that fault, which he does not punish;
and that so God all that while spared and pardoned the Gentiles in their
ignorance, which now he would not, if when the Gospel was preached, they should
not, if they should not repent, but reject it.

And so far as concerned Gods much sparing of them then in regard of outward
punishment, is true in the thing, as he is said to forgive when he does not
destroy, Psalm. 78. 38. yet it is not the true meaning of that place, or of the
wo^d (...) there used, which signifies indeed to overlook, but not so to wink
at their faults, as to be pleased with their persons, so as not at all
eternally to punish them; for the same Apostle elsewhere says, that they who
sinned without the Law, should perish without the Law, Romans 2. 12.

But the true meaning is, that he so over-looked (not their sins, but) them and
their times, as not in a saving way to regard them, but to let them walk in
their own ways, (as it is in that other place, Acts 14. 16. which Interpreters
make parallel to this) without taking that care of Calvin. Cornel. a lapide.
them which now he did in sending the Gospel to them; so that this over-looking
is far from that winking which they mean. Not a sparing and pardoning, but a
neglecting of them, and suffering them to perish in their own ways, and sins,
so that they are wet to the skin under that bush, from which they thought to
get shelter; for this Scripture speaks Gods wrath and their damnation, rather
then his favor to their salvation.

And yet these three places are the chief Scriptures produced for the Heathens,
by their Advocates, which we see stand them but in little stead.

And as these afford them but little relief, so others speak so sadly of them,
that if they should but speak the like of them who must plead for them, I doubt
they would judge themselves to be but in a very doubtful condition, and be glad
to look out for more grace in Christ, and some better evidence of salvation.

We may consider then that it is not from any Scripture-evidence that either
the Heathens or any for the^, can plead their claim to life and salvation.

2. But it is from proud Reason, which as in many other things, so in this,
will take the boldness to control and give check to the counsels of God.
Though they, whom the righteous sentence of Scripture condemn's, may justly
fear, that all the Reason of Man, will not be able to dispute them out of their
guilt and punishment.

And here the faulty cause is especially an Idolizing of Nature, and of man
principally, of whom as he is in his Naturals, they are wont to have too high
thoughts and expressions, as having looked at Philosophers, and other virtuous
Heathens, in none of the truest (but too flattering) glasses, of their own
writings or other discourses and relations of them, and so they look so
beautiful and amiable, that our pitiful humanity and ingenuity, what ever the
Scripture speaks of them, cannot entertain a misgiving thought of them,
cannot be brought to think that such richly gilt, and curiously carved pieces
should ever prove fuel of everlasting burnings: As Austin to this purpose
says, Virtutes Gentilium quadam indole animi it a delectant, Epist. 99.
ut in quibus hae fuerint, vellemus, praecipue ab Inferni cruciatibus liberare,
nisi aliter se haberent sensus humani, aliter justitia Creatoris. Whence it
has come to pass, that rather then we will condemn them, we will not stick to
blaspheme God; and in case he should not accept and save them, we dare impeach
him as guilty of three heinous crimes: 1. A (...), or of an undue respecting of
persons. 2. Of injustice, in not rewarding their virtues. 3. Of cruelty and
tyranny, in rejecting and condemning them who were so virtuous. All which deep
and desperate charges, let us a little consider distinctly.

1. And first they cry out of an inordinate respecting and accepting of
persons, if they should be rejected who were so virtuous, whilst others both
Jews of old, and Christians how were and are accepted, who had been more
vicious. Whereas Peter upon the H. Ghosts being given to the Gentiles, with an
open mouth says, Of a truth I perceive that God is no respecter of persons,
but in (...).
every Nation he that fears him, and works righteousness, is accepted of
him, Acts 10. 34, 35.

Which objection, although made by many, yet to me seems very strange: For,

1. I hope they think that that only is properly a vicious accepting of
persons, Deuteronomy. 1. 17
which is in point of Judicatu^e and Justice, when one is favored, and another
is discountenanced in his right, from some extrinsecall respects and
considerations, beside the merit of the cause; as when a Judge does acquit one,
because he is his friend, and condemn another, because he is his enemy, when
both were alike innocent or guilty, or (it may be) his friend more guilty then
the other. It is not in matters of mere grace and favor due to neither, as
even Collius their Champion confesses, lib. cap. and therefore without
injustice may be given or denied to either or both, as we please. So when two
men are equally unworthy, I may give that out of affection to my friend, which
I will not to a stranger. Or when two Malefactors are both justly condemned,
the King may out of his Princely favor pardon the one out of his love to him,
and not the other, whom he does not so affect without injustice. And therefore
although God be no partial unjust Accepter of persons, yet I pray give him
leave to accept of whom he will in his Beloved, Ephesians. 1. 6.

2. In gratuitis, it would look more like a partial respecting of persons, if
when they were otherwise alike, for some not considerable circumstance, one
should be favored, and the other dis-respected. As for the instance in the
place produced, the partition wall being now broken Ephesians. 2. 14.
down; in case a Gentile that feared God as much as a Jew, in all things else
like or inferior to him, should be preferred because he was a Jew: So the
Apostle there says, that God accepts not persons, but those Gentiles now
fearing God, and working righteousness, are as well accepted as the Jews. But
is it not strange, that that which the Apostle in that case applies to such
Gentiles, as unto whom God had given repentance unto life, Acts 11. 18. and who
had received the H. Ghost, and the grace of Christ, and now feared God, and
wrought righteousness, should be pleaded in the behalf of such Philosophers,
and other Heathens, who lived in their ignorance and infidelity. How specious
soever their virtues and actions were, yet

1o What worth were they of Epist. ad Bonifac. P. Martyr loc. com: page 160.
without Christ? Quid tu cum virtutibus, qui Christo Dei virtute cares? as
Bernard truly, sordet Natura sine gratia. So Austin: Paul accounts them but
dung, Phil. 3. 8. and Chrysostom, but as gay clothes on a stinking dead
carcass.

2o Had they in themselves been of more price and worth then they were, yet
could they discharge the old arrear? Their Advocates forget this, when they so
plead for them and justify them, as though they were upon even terms with
God, and not originally indebted, or that their virtues, had they been much
greater then they were, falling infinitely short of their present duty, could
discharge the old reckoning.

3o As though their actions and virtues were perfect, or so truly good (as some
would make them) that God himself should be a respecter of persons, if he did
not accept them; Can they say, and make it good when they have said it, that
indeed they truly feared God, and wrought righteousness, as those accepted
Gentiles Peter says did in the place mentioned? Seneca himself (who I hope
must go in the foremost rank of their worthies) consesseth that in their
devotions they did rather, morem sequi quam rem, and then if their fear of God
were taught and learnt by the precepts, and customs of men, our Savior will
tell us how they were like to speed, Matthew. 15. 9. Indeed we somewhere read of
a Platonic faith, that uniteth to God; and sometimes we hear much of their
souls abstraction from, and dominion over their bodies, of their freedom from
passion, their love, justice, etc. and we are to think the best of all, and for
many of their actions we freely say with Saint Austin, that non solum
vituperare non possumus verum etiam merito recteque laudamus, we are so far
from discommending, that we rightly and deservedly praise them, yet
notwithstanding all this, without breach of charity, I may safely say,

1. That we are not infallibly to build upon what some of their Authors say of
them; for pictures are wont to flatter, and therefore it would be a piece of
too simple credulity, to give credit to all their relations. The Greeks had wit
and words at will, and could tell how to Hyperbolize, and that sometimes Graeca
fide, and when they do so idolize their Emperors in their Panegyricks, it
would go hard if their Scholars should not do as much for the Philosophers
their Masters.

2. Nor are we to judge of them by their own sayings, or writings, which were
often better then their actings, and their precepts then their practice.
Philosophi sententia, vita ignavi. Like Pharisees, who were better in the
Chair, then in their walkings, as it is not very strange even now in the days
of the Gospel, to hear the same men to inveigh much against those very sins in
the Pulpit, which they themselves are known to be notoriously guilty of in
their conversations.

And that this may not be taken for an uncharitable surmise and suspicion, let
us reflect a little upon some of the forementioned particulars, for which they
have been and are so much applauded: whereas they are cried up for their
freedom from passion, although it be very far that either affectation, or
morality, may carry an Heathen in matters of this nature, which were their
highest perfections, and so brute creatures often exceed men in matters of
sense, as being their highest top; yet it is well known how greater pressures
and dangers have uncased them, and put them out of their Spanish gravity, the
storm affrighted the stiff Stoic out of his Lethargicall Apathy. I need not
tell you, how Cato, Brutus and Cassius handled themselves when brought to such
extremities. Seneca would discourse and write elegantly of Bounty and
Liberality, who yet was notoriously covetous, and that even our England in part
paid for.

And as for their high soaring souls, Abstractions from, and Dominion over
their bodies, the very best of them are very much wronged, and that by their
own Authors, if they were not foully debauched, and that with unnatural bodily
lusts, and unclean practices. Fornication not accounted a fault, especially in
young men, which some think was the reason why the Apostles reckoned it amongst
the Indifferents, Acts 15. 29. And even (...), that unnatural boye's-play
Plutarch indeed dare not justify, nor (...).
yet dare he condemn, because ^ven Socrates practiced it.

And what ever others may say of them, I am sure the Scripture gives another
character of them, and that foul enough, (...), not in the lust of
concupiscence as the Gentiles that know not God; and this not of the basest and
worst (as some would so put off such places) but of the wisest and best of
them, as appears from Romans 1. 22, 23, 24, etc. (...). (...).
1 Cor. 1. 19, 20. their knowledge in it self being too dark and uncertain to
cause any powerful and vigorous impression on their wills and affections,
natural conscience being overpowered by the weight of natural corruption, and
God taking vengeance on their abuse of natural light, by giving them up to
unnatural works of darkness.

3. But how true soever they were to their own principles, or how true soever
others reports may be of their virtuous carriages, yet in the third place I may
safely and boldly say, they were not truly good works, or saving graces, urenda
flammis, non condenda horreis, as Leo speaks.

This (what ever it may be accounted by any of us now) was of old esteemed true
wholesome Christian Doctrine; so Cyprian treating De bono patientiae.
of patience, says, Hanc sectari Philosophi quoque profitebantur, sed tam
illis falsa patientia est, quam falsa sapientia.

And Hierome is bold to say, that sine Christo omnis virtus in vitio est, and
In Gal. 3.
Theophylact is punctual and peremptory, (...) In Johan. 3. 19.
(...) (...), He grants that there may be bad Christians, but that there may
be any good Heathens, he can in no wise believe. Prosper allows them nullam
veram virtutem, but only virtutum imaginem. But Austin the most serious and
faithful Champion of the grace of Christ, is herein most full, ever and anon
upon this argument, up and down in his writings against the enemies of it; he
calls them virtutes non veras sed verisimiles, nay, he Contra Julian l. 4. c.
3.
averreth them to be truly and really peccata, though splendida, sinful
although they made a great deal of glittering. He does not believe that Extra
veram Ecclesiam veras virtutes reperiri non posse, lib. de patientia. Contra
Julian: ubi prius.
there were any true virtues out of the true Church (of which God himself
says, all my springs are in thee, Psalm. 87. 7.) and abhorre's with an absit
the very thought of any true virtue out of Christ: Absit ut sit aliqua vera
virtus, nisi fuerit justus; absit autem ut sit justus vere, nisi vivat in side,
justus enim ex fide vivit. And so in particular for Chastity; Quomodo vera
ratione pudicum corpus asseritur, quando a vero Deo animus fornicatur? Quis
infidelis ita, quis haec sapiat, nisi desipuit? and therefore he urges Julian
with that of our Savior, that an evil tree cannot bring forth good fruit; and
when he answered that the Heathens were steriliter boni, he tells him, aut
jocaris vel deliras, qui sterilium fructus arborum laudas. He choaketh him also
with that of the Apostle, That we are Gods workmanship, and that we are created
in Christ Jesus unto good works, Ephesians. 2. 10. not brought to them either by
natural disposition or moral acquisition. And he tells him again and again,
that he must bear with him, if he still object that of the Apostle to him, That
without faith it is impossible to please God, Heb. 11. 6. And he would not have
him think to terrify him with the great names of Fabritius, Fabrius, etc. for
sit licet Fabritius, etc. quorum me nominibus putasti esse terrendum, yet of
the best of them all he dare say, that voluntas infidelis and impia non est
bona, that an unbelieving will is no good will, nor can any live well, who
lives not by faith in Christ, and that only hac fide, prudenter, fortiter,
recte sapienterque justus vivit, quia fideliter vivit. It is faith which
works by love, that effects any thing that is truly good, and I must needs
say, they have too low thoughts of Christ and his grace, who think that those
dull Moralities of the Heathen should reach that salvation, which faith only
lead's to.

That they who never truly knew their first fall, though they bemoaned some
felt effects of it, as the blind man may mourn in fense of the pain of that
wound, when yet, he knows not how he came by it.

That never knew what Original sin means, nor the true sinfulness of any sin,
as the breach of a spiritual Law of God, and so could never truly repent.

Were wholly strangers to the true means of our recovery by Jesus Christ, and
so could never truly believe.

Were notoriously blind and abominable in their Ignorance, Superstions, and
Idolatries, and in a total neglect (in a manner) of the first Table.

Were also manifestly guilty of (and yet approved themselves in) many notorious
breaches of the second Table. So that in their writings and doctrines of
Morality, they made vices virtues, as Arisiotle does (...), which Paul
condemns Ethic: lib. 4. cap. 14.
as unseemly for a Christian, Ephesians. 5. 4. and in his description of (...), or
noble generosity, are diverse Lib. 4. c. 7, 8.
particulars, which agree not with Christian humility. And what in this kind
they laid down as rules in their writings, you may be sure they observed and
followed in their practices, and so allowed themselves in many open
transgressions of the law of God.

Vega their friend, confesses, that Orthodox: Explic page 207.
none of them did as much as they could, although Andradius their Champion,
takes it for granted that they did.

And although for the outward act they did many of those (...), many things of
the Law, Romans 2. 14. yet non omnia, non constanter, non recto modo. Not all
required, not constantly, not rightly. It would be too tedious and needless to
recount the many gross failings which our Divines do truly observe in their
most virtuous actions, their righteousness being

1. Not general and universal, as it should be, Psalm. 119. 6. but although some
of them were eminent in some virtues, yet as foul in some vices, as its said of
Cataline, and is true of others of them who were much better then he.

2. It was often rather negative then positive, magis extra vi^ia quam cum
virtutibus, many of them were Pemble vindic. gratiae.
rather not vioious, then virtuous.

3. Or if positive, yet more outward, test populo, then inward, testibus Deo
and conscientia, attested more by others, then by God and their own consciences.

4. Though in some (it may be) more inward, that they did revereri seipsos, and
so for the substance of their actions they were virtuous, yet for those great
and most material circumstances, by and according to which bonum been fit, that
which is good in it self may be done well, and acceptably to God, they were
wholly defective, or rather quite contrary: as,

1. For the Principle and Efficient. They were not done out of faith, by which
the person should first be accepted, and then the work, without which it is
impossible to please God, Heb. 11. 6.

2. For the End, (which as it is the goodness of every thing, so it is most
necessary to be looked after to make our virtues or actions truly good; for non
officiis sed finibus disc^rnendae virtutes sunt, as Austin tells us) here
they were wholly wide; for as the same Austin says in sum, Daemonibus vel
humanae gloriae servierunt, it was either the Devil or vainglory that they
served in all; it was either to a bad end, or if to a good, yet

It was particulari non universali, See Vossii Theses de virtutibus Gentilium,
p. 258, etc.
to some narrow particular end, and not (as it should have been) to a more
common and universal.

It was not with a spiritual eye, fingly looking at the glory of God, which is
full in faiths eye, and should be in all our actions, 1 Cor. 10. 31. but rather

At best, at the safety and honor of their Country,

Their own outward quiet, or inward satisfaction.

But most commonly, and oftentimes most notoriously, and affectedly, others
applause and their own praise and commendation. Vicit amor patriae, laudumque
immensa cupido. So that Austin concludes, Si Virgil. De spirit. and litera,
cap. 27. and Epist. 99.
discutiantur quo fine fiant, vix inveniantur quae justitiae debitam laudem
desensimemque mereantur. I cannot therefore believe, that Timoleon was a very
godly man, as some in the M. H.
Pulpit have here styled him. Nor can I but be offended at Zuinglius his
expression, De peccat: Origin: Tom: 2. pa: 118. In Apologia.
when speaking of Seneca, he admireth, viri sanctissimi fidem. And at Gualthers
question speaking of Numa, An ergo tam piis and sanctis studiis coeleste numen
defuisse putabimus? As Austin detesteth a like Vbi prius
question of Julians, Erant ergo condemnatione sempiterna, in quibus er at vera
justitia? with his O vocem impudentia majore praecipitem, which we might also
return to as bold a question, but in many more words Orthodox: Explic. page: 289.
made by Andradius to Kemnitius, Qui verum Deum quem assidua meditatione
totisque animi viribus inquisiverunt, etc. venerati sunt, in ipso omnes spes
suas collocarunt, illi perpetuo placere studuerunt, illos tu Kemniti, illa
fide, Deique cognitione destitutos diees, etc. But why should we now labor to
boulster them up, whom their own Philosophers and Rhetoricians, (who better
knew them then we can) saw cause to leave as in a dangerous condition.
Lactanti^s had been one of them, and what says he of them and their way, when
he left them and turned Christian. Quae professio multo melior, ^utilior, De
falsa Relig. ca. 1
gloriosior putanda est, quam illa Oratoria in qua diu versati, sed plane ad
argutam malitiam juvenes erudiebamus. And afterward he adds, Omissis ergo
hujus terrenae Philosophiae Autoribus, nihil certi asserentibus aggrediamur
viam rectam, etc. He could find no certainty in their assertions, nor true
virtue, but argute malice or wickedness in their institutions, and therefore he
thinks he has reason to leave them, and to betake himself to Christianity, as
a better and more profitable and glorious profession.

And what need then of all that ado which some make to stick over and
mangonize a Heathens beauty, consisting at best, but

In a bare civil conversation, without true spiritual sanctity.

In a dark knowledge of a God, muffled up in superstition and Idolatry.

In a bare natural knowledge of a Creator, and none of a true Savior.

In some cold affections of love and fear of a God, wholly differing from that
which is truly filial in those who by the Spirit of Adoption can cry Abba
Father.

Dull Religion! and apt to work the like in them that so admire and affect them.

One Paul to me is more then a thousand Socrates's and Seneca's.

How dead and wan in a spiritual eye is Heathenish virtue, when it looks out
even in its loveliest countenance, in comparison of that divine beauty which
sparkleth in a lively faith, and that in the poorest, meanest lively spiritual
Christian, there is life in faith, and but deadness in dull Heathenish morality.

So that I cannot but account it a most unworthy and disingenuous ingratitude
in them, who otherwise most of all cry up ingenuity, when God in the Gospel
has held forth Christ, that we may be enamoured with his beauty, so to dote
upon, and to commit folly with such dead pictures, to feed on akrons, when as
Ezekiel: 23. 14, 15, 16.
God has afforded us the bread of Heaven, in so admiring the Heathens virtues,
as setting them in a safe condition, when Christ and his saving grace only is
held out to us in the Gospel, as the way to salvation. And therefore I cannot
say less, then to avouch it blasphemy in case God should not accept them to
life, to impeach him as gulty of a (...), or an undue respecting or accepting
of persons.

2o And this blasphemy higher, if upon this ground he be accused (as he is by
some) of injustice in not rewarding their virtues.

1. Who might most justly condemn the very best of them for their foul
abominations, and if their best virtues and actions were so foully faulty, (as
was shown in the former particular) if they will needs have them in justice
rewarded, by right then it must have been in that kind which the Scripture
speaks of, when it speaks of rendering a reward to the Psa. 94. 2.
proud, (for such were they) which God explaineth by its Synonymam, I will
punish them for their ways, and reward them their doings, Hos. 4. 9.

2. But God who is infinite in bounty and goodness, not suffering the least
degree or appearance of it in the creature to go without a proportionable
acceptance and reward, as he would not let Nebuchadnezzar go without his hire
for his service against Tire, though therein he intended to serve his own
design rather then Gods Providence, Ezekiel. 29. 18, 19, 20. much less would he
suffer any of the more virtuous Heathens to go unrewarded.

1o Partly in this life

With inward tranquillity and Bonum a^iquod temporale and and conscientiae
tranquillitas. Prideaux Lect. 8.
quiet of their mind, their consciences excusing them, Romans 2. 15.

And outward peace and prosperity, together with safety and honor, which was
that which they themselves especially aimed at, and which accordingly they were
answered in, and so as our Savior said of the Pharisees in a like case, Mat.
6. 5. they had their reward: so the virtuous Romans and others, had their City
and Country preserved, enlarged, enriched renowned, and their own memories
perpetuated to posterity. Thus the children of the Concubines were not without
their Genesis
gifts, but yet sent away with them, and not possessed of Isaaks inheritance.
Hic ei prodest opus ejus, and hic ei addit Deus bona pro opere suo; Contra
Collatorem, ca. 22. 28. De vocat: Gent. li. 1. cap: 7. Epist. 17. Fulgent. de
Incarn. li. 1. cap. 7. Chrysostom. ad Pop. Antioch. Hom. 67.
in illo autem saeculo nihil ptodest opus ejus. So Prosper. And again, Hujus
tantum temporis vitam ornavit, ad veras virtutes aeternamque beatitudinem non
profecit. And so Austin. Primi Romani etsi non habentes veram pietatem erga
Deum verum, quae illos etiam in aeternam Civitatem possit salubri Religioni
perducere, custodientes tamen quandam sui generis probitatem quae possit
terrenae constituendae augendae conservandaeque sufficere, etc. Those ancient
Romans, although by their virtues they could not attain the Heavenly City, yet
they by them founded, augmented, and preserved their Earthly, and so wanted not
their reward here, which was that which they aimed at.

2o Partly in the life to come, although not advanced to Heaven, yet by this
means they were not so deeply sunk in Hell; which Athanasius phraseth (...),
and Contra Julian l. 1. c. 3 Vide Prideaux. ubi prius.
Austin sometimes by mitius urunt, and otherwhile by tolerabilius puniuntur,
their torments are less proportionably as their sins were: Minus enim Fabritius
quam Catilina punietur, non quia iste bonus, sed quia ille magis malus; Et
minus impius quam Catilina Fabritius, non veras virtutes habendo, sed a veris
virtutibus non plurimum deviando. So Austin.

And yet for all this, if these Heathons be not saved, their Advocates dare
accuse God not only of partiality and injustice, but also

3. In the third place even of cruelty and tyranny, for casting them away, and
condemning them for want of that which (as they object) they might be
invincibly ignorant of; at which Andradius fi^rcely and giganteo Orthodox:
Explic: pa. 291.
impetu let us fly with his Neque eni^ diri^as atque inhumanitas tetrio^ ulla
esse pote^^, quam sempiternis cruciatibus homines mancipare propter fidei ill^^
inopiam, ad quam nullus pa tebat adnus.

Answ. To which bold and direful expressions, an awful Christian, whose heart
trembles at such blasphemies, in stead of other answer might only return that
of the Angel, Dominus Zech. 3. 2.
increpet te Satana, The Lord rebuke thee Satan. Or was Kemnitius too Exam. C.
T. page 109.
harsh when he called these Cerbereos Andradii Latratus. I am sure what he
after adde's is true; what is, if Quid est, si hoc non est, ve^bum Dei
procul^are, fidem justificantem ludificare, and judicia Dei blasphemare?
this be not to kick at, and trample on the Word of God, to make a mock of
justifying faith, and to blaspheme Gods righteous judgments? But for a more
particular answer,

1. As though God had nothing to reckon with them for but their bare
infidelity. As though they had not been obnoxious to Gods revenging justice in
Adam, which deserved wrath, Ephesians. 2. 3. and by which also they had contracted
this impossibility which they speak of; and in this and other their disputes in
which they advance the power of man and free will, they generally take it for
granted, that it is an impious absurdity to think that God commands
impossibilities, taking no notice of any difference herein of man's collapsed
estate from that of his primeve integrity. But I hope such an impossibility
will not accuse Gods most righteous commands, nor excuse their defect or
neglect, if it were not antecedent but consequent to their miscarriage in their
first parent, and that not ex tyrannide Prideau^, ubi prius.
obligantis, sed ex temeritate obligati.

2. As though besides that, they were not guilty of other actual sins, and
wilful personal violations of that very Law of Nature which they might justly
perish in, Romans 2. 12.

3. And yet further, as though the infidelity (at least) of some of them had
been merely and only negative, and that they were not at all guilty of any
positive neglect of such means as they had, and of what they might have done by
the help of them; for although the Papists themselves will grant, that whatever
Collius de animab. Paganorum lib. 1. cap. 20, 21, etc.
those Pagans could do, could not bring to Heaven, or even prepare to grace as
a disposition to it, yet they might have abstained from many sins which more
indisposed them to it; and it is the common maxim amongst Papists and
Arminians, Facienti quod in se est Deus non denegat gratiam, and in this very
dispute about Pagans Collius, l. 1. cap. 24, 25.
it is one of their conclusions, that it is most agreeable to Gods most sweet
Providence and Bounty, to vouchsafe the light of faith and grace to such
Gentiles, as did observe the Law of Nature as they were able, by which they
might come to everlasting felicity; so that according to them there was in them
some positive, and wilful, if not malicious neglect, and not a bare negative
infidelity, Calvin Instit. l. 1. c. 4
whilst they damped and corrupted that light which they had, which not only
our Divines assert, but even the Papists also freely grant; and amongst others
Ambicatharinus enquiring after the reason why the Philosophers who acknowledged
God as Creator, and in his infinite Providence, Goodness, and other perfections
to be worshipped, should yet fall short of his grace, resolves it thus:
Supernaturalis gratiae donis ditandos eos etiam fuisse, ni terrenae scientiae
superbi a elati, hoc ipsum coelestis gratiae donum haud disperissent. That they
had also been blessed with saving grace, but that being puffed up with conceit of
their earthly wisdom and knowledge, they despised that which was saving and
celestial, as is evident and manifest in many of them, in whom not so much
ignorance and negative infidelity, as positive malice and pride, and
prepossession of false and wicked principles and practices were the obex which
kept them off from saving knowledge and grace; and although for many of them
they had not (as we have seen before) sufficient means of it, yet they might
have advanced farther and come nearer to it then they did: For Jerusalem and
the Church of God was even then as a Beacon or City on the top of an hill, and
what God did there, was not done in a corner; so that Andradius his ad quam
nullus patebat aditus, was an overlasted Hyperbole. For they might have done
more then they did, and might have gained so much knowledge, as that, although
it might not have made them wise to salvation, yet the careless, and wilful,
and (in some) malicious neglect of it, may justly render them inexcusable, and
fully clear Gods righteousness in their just condemnation.

And thus I have endeavored to clear it from this threefold blasphemous
imputation, in which not only Papists, but also many of our own are extremely
bold and presumptuous, so as cannot but make any good heart tremble to read and
hear what too often in this kind is written and spoken; it would be well
therefore that they would be more wary, for if vera de Deo loqui periculosum
sit, if to speak truth of God in some cases may be dangerous, to speak
blasphemies of him will be desperate; and therefore that they would sadly
think and repent of it, and lay their hands on their mouths, and never open
them this way any more, lest at last when God will be able to declare the
holiness and righteousness of his decrees, and proceedings to them, above what
they can or will now see, they be not left altogether speechless, when after
all their presumptuous querying of his Matthew. 22. 12.
counsels, he shall ask them this question, like that of Zebul to Gaal, Judge.
9. 38
Where is now thy mouth, wherewith thou said, etc.

There now remain's but a Plea or two more for the salvation of those Gentiles
which fell, or do fall short of the knowledge of God in Christ, and they are
taken from the two other forementioned Instances.

And the first of them is of the men of the old world before the Flood; Of the
other Patriarchs after it, and of the Jews under the Law before Christ.

Many of whom we must believe were certainly saved, and yet for the most part
they knew no more of a Christ or a Messiah, then the very Heathon; the faith of
Christ Mediator being no where (if you will believe Stapleton) written or made
Nec fidem Mediatoris Christi usquam scribi in toto V. T.
mention of in the Old Testament.

To which I answer,

1. That this bold assertion is very injurious to the Jews, the then people of
God, in putting them and the Heathens into the same condition. Nay, Lud: Vives
(as before was shown) makes the Heathens condition the better of the two; as he
is the more expert traveller, who knows his way of himself, then he that
look's for it in his Map; but the Apostle is of a far other mind, who makes
the privilege and advantage of the Jews much more every way, and especially in
this, that unto Rom 3. 1, 2, 3, etc. and cap. 9. 4, 5.
them were committed the Oracles of God. Which the Psalmist before in the Old
Testament had fully declared, when he said, That God had not so dealt with any
other Nation, and as for his judgments they had not known them, Psalm. 147. 20.
which the Jews had v. 19. and therefore our Savior himself faith, that
salvation was of the Jews, John 4. 22. An happy privilege of them, as on the
contrary (if well considered) a very heavy word, expressing the woeful estate of
the Gentiles.

2. I confidently avouch, that all Augustine de Civit. Dei, l. 10. cap. 25.
the Jews and others both before and under the Law that were saved, were saved
by the same faith in a Messiah to come, that we are now that he is come, as the
Apostle shows at large, Heb. 11. where, having in the last verse of the tenth
Chapter, spoken of our now believing to the saving of the soul, in the eleventh
Chapter he shows the same faith to have been in the believers of the Old
Testament to their salvation. And he begins with Abel, who by faith offered
his sacrifice, v. 4. as in it by faith looking at the all-sufficient sacrifice
which our blessed high Priest should afterward offer up for all Believers; and
so he goes on to Enoch, Noah, Abraham, and other of the Patriarchs who lived
and died in faith, not having indeed received the promises, but yet saw them
afar off, and were persuaded of them, and embraced them, v. 13. according to
that of Austin, Christi saluberrima fide etiam illi justi salvi facti sunt, qui
priusquam veniret in carne crediderunt in carnem venturam; which also Lombard
averreth to be the joint sentence of all the holy Fathers, Sine fide Mediatoris
nullum hominem vel ante vel post fuisse s^lvum sanctoru^ authoritates Lib 3.
did. 25.
contestantur.

I acknowledge indeed, that the eye of their faith in general was more dim, or
that the Types and Veils and Shadows which they then looked through, were more
dark, so that a less measure of faith, and of the S. Sinensis.
distinctness and clearness of it might save them which now will not save us,
as Chrysostom himself asserteth, Hom 37. in Matthew.
who although he required of them no knowledge of Christ as necessary to their
salvation, or (as some favorably interpret him) no explicit Casaub. ex^rcit.
1.
knowledge; yet he adds (...), God expecting that we now should see more in
the Sunshine; then they could in the Twilight, in which, as many Articles of
the Christian Religion, were more obscurely delivered, so they were more
imperfectly apprehended and believed. But as they came down nearer and nearer
to Christ's time, the more distinctly they had them revealed to them, as the
nearer it grows to Sunrise, we may see the more clearly; and so according to
Bonaventure, Fides crevit successu temporis, non Articulorum In 3. Senton:
did: 28. q. 4. 22 ae q. 2. (...). 7.
numerositate, sed credendorum explicatione; or as Aquinas has it, for
substance and in the general their faith and ours was the same, though some
more particular Articles are now revealed, which they did not so particularly
and distinctly apprehend; but yet so as that in the general they agreed with us
in the faith of a Messiah. Some (in Lombard) are bold Vbi prius.
to name particulars, as Christ's Birth, Death, and Resurrection; and Aquinas
Vbi prius.
concludes for the necessity of explicit believing of his Incarnation in all
times, because it was the means of salvation; which reason will hold also for
the necessity of belief of his Death and Resurrection. For my part, I dare not
be over-confident to determine for particulars, but that in general, that all
that were saved then and always, were saved by faith in a Messiah and Savior.

Nor this with such an implicit faith as Lombard speaks of, viz. in believing
what their Majors or Governors believed, quibus fidem suam committebant, to
whom they committed their faith, and pinned it on their sleeve, to which
purpose they ridiculously apply that in Job, Boves Cap. 1. 14.
arabant, and asinae pascebantur juxta eos, too Collier-like, or rather
Asselike a faith for them that are made wise to salvation.

Much less may we grant, that they knew more of Christ then the very Heathens
did, in whom there was not so much as an implicit faith of a Savior in any
tolerable construction. See Prideaux, ubi prius.
At best were but Deists, (as I may so call them) i. e. that after their woeful
manner worshipped a God without any true knowledge of a Redeemer, indeed were
without God, and without hope, as well as strangers from the Commonwealth of
Israel, Coloss. 2. 12.

Of which number Cornelius was not, as they would have him, and accordingly
bring him in frequently in their writings, as an instance of an Heathen, who
yet feared God, and and whose alms and prayers (and therefore Acts 10. 2. 4.
Lombard, ubi prius. Austin de praedest. c. 7 Gregor. Hom. 19. in Ezekiel. Aquin.
3. in part tertia, q. 69 art. 4.
his person) were accepted by God. For he was a Proselyte, and living among the
Jews, had the same faith of a Messiah, that they had. Believed that he was to
come, but was at first ignorant that Jesus Christ was he, and so that he was
come; to certify him whereof, Peter was by God sent unto him. And thus much
for their Plea taken from the Jews, and others before Christ; The last is from

Infants,

Or the children of Christians dydying Infants, and others that are distracted,
or were deaf and blind from the womb; and so without this possibility of having
Christ so revealed to them, as for them by faith to lay hold on him, and yet
who dare say, that none of them have been, are, or shall be saved by him?
Especially the children of believing parents dying in their infancy, whom the
Scripture gives us better hopes of. And therefore as these are saved Christo
satisfaciente non recepto, so why might not the Heathens also be sine Christo
Christiani, (as he calls them) or if they had not Christ revealed to them in
an extraordinary way, and faith infused into them, yet why might it not be by
his own power and Spirit, imputing and applying the merits of a Savior unto
them, although N. Calverwell of the light of Nature.
they wanted an hand of faith to lay hold on him. For although wheresoever
Christ is offered and displayed, there iudeed is necessarily required the
mutual and reciprocal act of the creature to embrace and entertain him; yet
where he is not at all, or not clearly made known, even there God according to
his distinguishing goodness (if he will) can accept of some for his sake,
which is but a kind of preventing and anticipating love, as all the love of
God is, and in his infinite wisdom can find out several ways of saving such by
the pleonasme of his love in Jesus Christ. So that what in an extraordinary way
may be granted to Infants, for want of age, or to distracted ones for the want
of reason, the like may seem may justly be indulged to Heathens, invincibly
ignorant of a Savior, for want of means to manifest him unto them.

Answ. To which I answer, that indeed I find Zuinglius putting these together,
and making their case alike, which yet is much different: For,

1. It cannot rationally be said, that there was an equal invincibility of
ignorance in those Heathens, to that which is in Infants and distracted
persons, which want the use of reason, which they had; and therefore might have
made more use of it then they did; and therefore their sin was more wilful, and
so made them more obnoxious to Gods wrath, which therefore these Infants, etc.
as less guilty, may in reason better escape.

2. How God works in, or deals with elect Infants, which dye in their
infancy (for any thing that I have found) the Scripture speaks not so much, or
so evidently, as for me (or it may be for any) to make any clear or firm
determination of it. But yet so much as that we have thence ground to believe,
that they being in the Covenant, they have the benefit of it, Acts 3. 25. Genesis
17. 7.

Whether God may not work and act faith in them then, (as he made John Baptist
leap in the womb) which Beza, and others of our Divines deny, Luke. Luther in
Gal. 3. Kemnit. in Sess. 7. Council. Trident.
and others are not unwilling to grant, I dare not peremptorily determine. Yet
this I may say, that he acts in the souls of Believers in articulo mortis,
when some of them are as little able to put forth an act of reason, as they
were in articulo nativitatis. But the Scripture (for any thing that I know)
speaks not of this, and therefore I forbear to speak any thing of it. Only (as
I said) it gives us ground to believe, that they being in the Covenant may be
so wrapped up in it, as also to be wrapped up in the bundle of life, and did it
give us but as good hopes of the Heathens (of whom it rather speaks very sadly)
as it does of such Infants, I should be as forward as any to persuade my self
and others, that they were in a hopeful condition.

For such infants, suppose they have not actual faith, so as to exert it, yet
they may have it infused in the habit, they are born in the Church, and in the
Covenant, and what the faith of the Church, and of their believing parents may
avail them, I do not now particularly enquire into! The Heathens (I am sure)
came short of them in these advantages, nor will the pity or piety of the
Saints, or their Tutelary Angels (to which Collius has recourse, as to an
Anchora sacra, for De animabus Pagan. lib. 2. ca. 14
their safety) save them from a wrack, which he thinks they may, although they
did not pray to them: This difference between them, and children of believing
Christians, is evident, that these by virtue of the Covenant they are in may
and ought to be baptized, which no Heathen till he profess his faith, can lay
any claim to, no more then till he believe, he can to the Covenant. And if God
did not vouchsafe him sufficient means of salvation, it is a misgiving sign,
and ground of fear, that in his just Judgment, he let him fall short of
salvation, which both by his original and actual guilt he had justly forfeited.

And whereas mention was made of an anticipating and preventing grace of God,
by which without faeith he might be saved; I conceive and believe that it is
abundant anticipating and preventing grace, when either in Him or in any, God
begins and works faith to lay hold on Christ. But such a preventing grace
as to accept us for Christ's sake without faith in Christ, the Scripture
mentions not, is a new notion of a young Divine, which without better proof
must not command our belief, or impose upon our credulity.

And the like I may say of imputing Christ's righteousness and satisfaction to
them without their receiving of it, and him by faith. For it is that which the
Scripture owneth not. It makes account that it is indulgence enough to impute
Christ's merits to us, in and upon our taking hold of him by faith, which is
therefore said to be imputed to us for righteousness, Romans 4, 5. 22.

And whereas it was said, that God could do it if he would, we do not dispute
of his extraordinary or absolute power, and what by it he can do; but what in
the dispensation of grace he does, and declares in Scripture he will do. And
as for that, although he is able to do more then we can think, yet his will
must not Ephesians. 3. 20
be measured by our thoughts, nor may we pitch upon ways of salvation of our
own devising; for what rare contrivances here would self-love and a luxuriant
fancy make? But must hold to what he in his word has revealed, to be his own
way, which in the matters, as of his worship, so of his free grace, he will
have the liberty of making the choice and appointment of.

And therefore in the last place, for that Pleonasme of love, by which this way
(it was said) they might be saved. I, with Paul, thankfully acknowledge not
only a Pleonasme, but even an hyper-pleonasme of love as the Apostles word is
(...), 1 Timothy 1. 14. but I pray read on, and see what immediately follows
there in the very same sentence, where it is added, (...), it is in Christ
Jesus with faith and love; but to extend it to them (especially in this way)
that were wholly strangers to Christ, never knew him, never believed in him, or
loved him savingly, and above all, (whatever Collius weakly dispute's to the
contrary) is a Pleonasme indeed of a sparkling wit and pen, according to
Quintilians description of a Pleonasme. Qui Lib. 1. cap. 15, 16, 17.
fit, quoties verbis supervacuis oneratur Oration; a neat expression, and a
piece of a strong line, but no solid Divinity, which in the Text tells us, that
besides or without Christ, we must look for no salvation. Which therefore

1. As before, should teach us with an holy and awful trembling and reverence
to adore Gods holy counsels and righteous dispensations toward those Heathens,
which (by what has been said) appear to be in a very doubtful and dangerous
condition, which though to us may seem severe, yet take we heed of blaspheming
them for being unjust, lest God at the last clear his righteousness in our
confusion. His Justice is as infinite and incomprehensible as his Mercy; and
therefore we who easily grant that his mercy is more then we can comprehend,
shall then as plainly be made to see, that his Justice is more then we can
fathom, which yet because we cannot now comprehend, we too presumptuously take
the boldness to implead and blaspheme; to be sure God will be cleared Psalm. 51.
4.
when he is judged, and therefore we had need take heed that we be not
condemned when God shall at last come to judge us, as for other matters, so for
those hard speeches, which some Jude v. 15
have spoken against him, and those horrid imputations which they not more
frequently then boldly load his decrees and proceedings in this kind with,
which although they blaspheme as none of his, yet should they at last prove
indeed to be so (as many as gracious and able as themselves judge they are)
such a question as you read, 2 Kings 19. 22. will not be then to be answered,
or not without confusion when God shall ask, Whom have thou reproached and
blasphemed, and against whom have thou exalted thy voice, and lifted up thine
eyes on high? if with him, thy conscience shall then be enforced to make that
answer there following, even against the holy One of Israel.

Such I say, therefore had need be more wary, and forbear such horrid
expressions and imputations, lest their present confidence do not happily, or
rather most unhappily end in confusion.

2. This should rather teach us with all humble thankfulness to admire Gods
distinguishing mercy to us under the Gospel, who by the revelation of it has
removed those difficulties which made their estate (at the best) so extremely
doubtful.

Has so ordered that we should be born and live, neither in the midnight of
Heathenisme, where no light of salvation by Christ shined, nor in the twy-light
of the Law, under whose veils this saving light appeared so obscurely.

Has not suffered us to die Infants, but has let us live till we could put
forth acts of Reason, that so also we might act faith in a revealed Savior.

Has not bereaved us of the use of of our Beason, as in those distracted ones
instanced in, or of our Senses, as those who are born deaf and blind, etc. but
that we may read the Scriptures, hear the Gospel preached, and know the
mysteries of our salvation.

3. Which therefore should be our serious care and endeavor so to improve
these blessed helps and advantages in laying hold on Christ by faith thus
revealed, and in working out our salvation by him purchased, that as we are the
children of the light, so we Ephesians. 5. 8 Matthew. 11. 20. to 25. Heb. 2. 3.
may walk as such, lest our condition prove far worse then the Heathen^,
whilst we so manifestly neglect so great salvation, concealed from them, but
openly manifested to us; for which with the Psalmist, let us humbly Psalm. 147.
12.
and heartily bless the Lord, and so let the last word of his Psal^ be the last
of this Discourse. Halelujah. Ps. 147. 20


Halelujah, Salvation, glory, and honor, and Rev. 19. 1. 2. Ver. 3, 4.
power unto the Lord our God, for true and righteous are his judgments.
Halelujah, Amen, Halelujah.

FINIS.

