Truths Discovery OF A black Cloud in the North: SHOWING Some
Antiparliamentary, inhumane, cruel, and base proceedings of the Scotch Army
against the well-affected in the North of England. Set forth in several
letters from Northumberland, Bishoprrick: and Yorkshire: some whereof were
signified to the Parliament.

ISAIAH 33.1. Woe to thee that spoylest, and thou not spoiled; and dealest
treacherously, and men dealt not treacherously with thee. When thou shall cease
to spoil thou shall be spoiled. When thou shall make an end to deal
treacherously, they shall deal treacherously with thee. ISA. 58.4. Behold, ye
fast for strife and debate, and to smite with the fist of wickedness. The
Publishers to the Readers.
To all that stand for Truth and Peace, Truth and Peace be multiplied.
FRiends and Contrymen, Though you are the friends of truth, yet (it may be)
you are ignorant of truths discovery of this black cloud in the North. But
behold, here we present it unto your view, as a thing worthy of your diligent
perusal, and serious consideration. And though it be a small foreshortned
piece, yet herein is discovered the evil dealing of those who pretend
themselves to be the friends of truth, but are not so in deed and in truth, for
if they had intended as they pretended, sure they would not have showed
themselves as they now appear to be, even deceitful, falsehearred, covetous
plunderers and oppressors, tormentors and destroyers of the Countries, If they
were, as they would by us for the present, be accounted to be, then they would
not so entertain the Papisticall and Prelaticall Snakes in their bosoms, hold
secret consultation with such enemies of God, breathe out threatenings against
the good, protect, encourage, and uphold the bad, nor preserve and reserve
them, to act their mischievous purposes. If these men were indeed as they ought
to be, then would they not make their solemn League and Covenant to be as the
Serpents tail is, to turn which way their mind is bent, to wrap in rapes,
murders, robberies, persecutions, and what they please; as if the Scots will,
must be a Law, to force the freeborn subjects of England, contrary to their
Fundamental Laws. O thou virgin-daughter of Israel in England, stir up thy
strength, mount on high with thy Eagles wings of divine protection, and though
these thine enemies have gathered the corrupt and putrified waters, from diverse
places, to make up one Sea to spue out at once upon thee, to swallow thee up
alive on a sudden; they shall not be able to prevail against thee, though hell
gates be on their side, and hand join in hand, they shall not go unpunished.

Consider one thing more, which is, that the Papists, Prelates, and
Antichristian Presbyters, are now linked all in one chain, and doing one work,
even opposing the heavenly powers, and these three are like, (if not the very
same) with those three unclean Spirits like Frogs, which came out of the
mouth of the Dragon, and out of the mouth of the Beast, and out of the mouth of
the false Prophet, Revel. 16.13. Such Spirits of Devils which delude sinful
men with their false miracles, are the prime fomenters and raisers of bloody
wars and sedition, under the pretense of Religion and Reformation.

The information of Thomas Hanmer, June the 12. 1646. At the Committee for the
Army, and after reported to the house of Commons.
Having some cause to believe, the latter end of March last, that there was a
private treaty between the King and the Scots, and that the King was upon a
resolution to go into Scotland, or to the Scotch Army, and that this treaty was
m^^iged by the intervention of Montrevill the French Agent, and designed in
France, I conceived this Council and intention of the Kings not only
infinitely prejudicial to himself and this Kingdom, but dishonorable to the
English Nation, in discerting them, and thereby rendering their sinclity more
suspected then the Scots, and thought it my duty both as an English man, and as
his Majesty's servant, to discover my knowledge thereof in season, to such as I
thought might possibly prevent the mischiefs which I fear would attend the
design, I therefore acquainted some of the Committee of both Kingdoms with
what follows, according to the times hereafter mentioned.

The 4. of April; That one of the Scots Commissioners told me, that he
believed and would lay a waiger that the King would be in London or in the
Scoch Army very speedily, perhaps before Wednesday night next, if he could
pass, and that if he came to the Scots, they would receive him, and entertain
him civilly, and stand to him in his rights.

Another Scottish Gentleman, being a brother in law of the said Commissioner,
told me the same evening, that the said Commissioner had in great secresy,
assuer'd him, that the King would be very suddenly with the Scots, and that a
messenger was sent to the King the night before, from a party here, to advise
him what to do, and that Newarke would be very speedily surrendered.

10. of April, the said Commissioner told me that the King would endeavor to
get to their Army before Newarke, and if he came safe thither would send to the
Parliament, to offer to pass the Propositions of Vxbridge, and there upon if
the Parliament refused a peace, he doubted not but 2. parts of 3. in England,
would be for the King, and he was sure that the whole Kingdom of Scotland
would be as one man for him: for then there would be no Montrosses.

29. of April, Being the fast day, the said Commissioner and his brother in
law called at my lodging, and the Commissioner with great joy told me the news
of the Kings getting safe out of Oxford, and that some of the Scottish horse
before Newarke would advance to meet him, to bring him to the Parliament here,
which he said smiling. I then asked whither Lesly would receive him? and his
brother answered that my Lord Lauderdall had gone down to take order for that.

The 4. of May, the said Commissioners brother told me that they did not yet
hear where the King was, but perhaps he would go to Scotand first (and not to
the Army) that he might first disband Montrosse and settle that Kingdom, that
the Scots would keep all fair correspondency with the Parliament, until they
had satisfied the people with their papers and declarations: that they expected
5000. more out of Scotland, and that if they came to a breach with the
parliament they could (with the forces they would draw out of Ireland and
Scotland) make an Army of 6000. and 26000. Foot, and should be assisted out of
France, with 3000. Horse, and 10000. Foot; And Horse were excepted out of
Denmark, And the Sweed would certainly aid them, And they doubted not of a
great party in England.

The 7. of May, he confirmed this assurance of foreign Succors, and said that
Newarke would be offered to the Scots, but it should be delivered to the
Parliament to carry all appearance of fairness, and then the Scots Army would
immediately retreat to Newcastle, and that the King would suddenly send
letters to the Parliament here, and to the City of London, to offer peace upon
the propositions of Vxbridge; the same night the said Commissiondrs told me,
the City of London would be for them, and that the King would send letters to
the Parliament and City to the aforesaid purpose.

The Saturday morning before the Kings last letters were delivered to the
Parliament, the Commissioners said brother in law, informed me of the tennour
thereof, and that my Lord Balcarrisd had brought copies of them to show before
hand to their friends here, and that the Messenger stayed by the way with the
letters, and should not come with them to the house till they had consulted
here, and agreed upon the fittest time for the delivery of them.

I understood also out of France, before the Kings going from Oxford, that they
expected daly to hear of the Kings safe arrival in the North, and was
informed that Montrevill the French Agent had treated the business betwixt the
King and the Scots, and when he had concluded on all things with the King, he
went before to Leslys Army to take order for his reception there, and that the
King had the honor and faith of the Scots engaged to him, to stick to him in
the business of the Militia, and to be used well in all things, if he would
comply with them in the Church Government, which they must in honor stand
for,: and that the Queen Regent of France, and the Queen of England had
agreed to the design of the Kings going to the Scots: who labor now to have
the Prince there also: I mean the Scots labor, his highness coming to
Scotland.

THO: HANMER.
This (being thus subscribed) was after by the said Gentleman Thomas Hanmer
(being called into the bar) owned and avou'd is that he would stand too.



A letter from sundry of the Committee of York to the Committee of the Lords
and Commons.
Although we are a most ashamed still to trouble you with the sad story of the
condition of that part, and this poor County which lies groaning (and now
ready to expire) under the burden of Scottish horse, being very confident that
if something of a more general concernment had not intervened you would ere
this have provided and applied such a plaster, as might have either cured or
cased our fore, yet we must crave leave to put you in mind, that if relief
come not presently, it will be too late to think upon us, when we are
perished, and the whole Kingdom endangered in our ruin, for we are brought to
so low an ebb that a very few days will now serve to stop our breath, and quit
you of our further Clamor, and it cannot be expected but that nature will make
some reluctance in its dissolution, our fear is, that extremity of misery
will produce despair, and that men will not be able with patience to see their
wives and children dye for want of bread, before their faces, which unevitably
they must do if not speedily prevented, Sir, some of us have seen the
sufferings, and all of us the tears of the Cuntry, which are such as we cannot
express, nor expect you can conceive them to be so great, and many as they
are; besides their extraordinary losses, and charges, their ordinary essesments
where the Scottish forces are quartered, are levied and paid after the rate of
about 140000. l. a month upon the whole County which is 2^ times so much as
they ought to levy by the Ordnance of Parliament of the association, a burden,
by continuance grown so insupportable, as that the Country, redacted to this
weakness is not able to undergo it, and when they can pay no longer, we do not
know (but may well fear) what will ensue; Whereas we understand that you were
informed that Vanderhursts Regiment was reduced: it is true, they were lately
reduced forth of Cleaveland, into Richmondshire, where the most of them are
dispersed among other Regiments, and so we fear it may prove a greater plague
to the Country then before, they being for the most part English Caviliers, and
disorderly beyond belief; Yesterday a Major of Sir John Brownes Regiment, came
to us, with a message from his Coll. out of Cleaveland, that they desire
inlargment of Quarters, which we not being able to grant, he returned
displeased. Thus having given you this account, and implored your speedy care
of our fainting condition, and of the danger to the public which is imminent,
we conceive we discharge our duties, and hope we shall be free from the blame
of what we fear may unhappily fall out, if not timely prevented, by taking
such speedy course for the removal of the Scottish horse out of this poor
wasted County, as to your wisdoms may seem fit, which is the cry of the dying
people, and request of

York, June the 26. 1646. Your most humble servants. Io: Bourchier, vic. Com:
Rich. Darly, To. Barwicke, Darcy Wentworth, Ric. Robinson, Jo. Farrer, Io.
Wastall, Will. Ingilby, Tho. St. Nicholas. Ra. Rymore. Bar. Bourchier.


Here follows the Copy of a Letter, sent from a Gentleman of good Worth in
York, touching the Scots proceedings in England, being worth our observation.
SIR,
HAving seen and perused some Papers presented to the Parliament by the
Committee of Scotland concerning their intentions, I was desirous to satisfy
my self by the best grounds and knowledge I could of the reallity thereof, and
their performances accordingly, having heard much talk, that no Papists nor
Cavaleers were admitted to the King since his coming into the Army. I found
that observed as it was when the King set forth his Oaths to Men and Vows to
God, That no Papist should come to his Court, nor into his Army; for at his
being at Doncaster the Gentlemen principally, that kept him company there,
were, Sir James Lashly, a Papist, and a Cavaleere; Colonel Ashburnham, and Mr.
Hudson, and to color the surrender of these Gentlemen to the Parliament, they
had a Message brought from London post, by Colonel Stockdall to Sherburne, of
the approach of 5000. Horse of Sir Thomas Fairefax his Army, which occasioned a
sudden march away with the King and a Guard to be kept against York, who at
his coming to Durham had no small number of Cavaliers to welcome him thither,
whose words, and gestures, did so terrify the well affected (considering the
access they had to kiss the Kings hand, and make known their conditions and
complaints unto him) that it made many well affected to the Parliament to
retire to places of security, fearing then that, which subtilty and time will
without question produce.

At his coming to Newcastle, further to color their design they set a
Citizen to guard every post, that no Englishman should come into that Town
without knowledge what he was, where (by experience) I know the free egresse
and regresse the Cavaliers have had into the Town and to his Majesty, namely
Sir Hugh Carth-Wright, Sir James Lashly, Lieutenant Colonel Carr, with many
more which I could name, the last of which named (its said) has gone eight
several times betwixt the King and Montrosse [but for certain betwixt the
King and Montrosse he did go and carried the Message for him to cease
Hostility,] and since that, Sir Jacob Lashly, carried the Message likewise for
the Earl of Antrim to cease Hostility, besides the Messengers the King has
sent both from Newcastle and Sunderland to the Queen in France, and the
Messengers come to him from beyond Sea, and the retinue of Cavaliers about him,
Servants, attendants now to his Person, which (when considered) puts me in mind
of a paper from the Commissioners, dated the 25. of May, 1646. Wherein the
Lords of the Committee at Newcastle declare, that directly, nor indirectly,
they had no hand in Mr. Ashburnhams escape (which is as true, as they knew not
of any intentions of the Kings coming to their Army before he came amongst
them, notwithstanding Master Hudson told Mr. Bribeck of the County of Durham,
that he had gone four times betwixt the King and them, and that it was
concluded on, before he came from Oxford) when the day before, Ashburnham was
declared to be wanting: A Lord of that Kingdom went forth of Newcastle with
him, and Ashburnham came not into Newcastle again. After his Lordships
servants parted with him, which occasions resemble a speech lately made by the
Earl of Argile, wherein he mentions a Declaration to be set forth, of the good
affection and intention of that Army, which makes me wonder with what face any
man of that Nation dares express so much as is already in many Books, when it
is very well known to all impartially affected that knows them, that the
generallity of Officers and Soldiers in that Army, do express themselves in
opposition and dislike of the Parliament's proceedings, banning with many
Oaths, that they will fight for the King against the Parliament of England,
alleging, that the Parliament has dishonourably abused the King, the truth
whereof If it were required I could make appear by 100. testimonies on both
sides.

And if their intentions were for Peace, and a resolution to go home and to be
satisfied with their pay, considering the words of their agreement with our
Commissioners at Edenborough the 29. of November, 1643. following (it not
amounting to the full months pay shall be monthly allowed and paid the sum of
30000. pound starling by the Parliament of England, and in case that
notwithstanding, the said monthly sum of thirty thousand pound paid as
aforesaid, the States and Kingdom of Scotland shall have just cause demand
further satisfaction of their Brethren of England; when the Peace of both
Kingdoms is settled, for the pains, hazard, and charges they have undergone in
the same) If that would satisfy them, then what means the increase of their
Army since the Kings going Northwards? their bringing 3000. men into this
Kingdom, many of which to my knowledge never were in England before, though
they bring them under a notion of Old Soldiers run from their Colors, What
means their bringing 5. Companies out of Scotland of the Earl of Calenders
Regiment that was sent thither formerly, and now recruted to 500. men, and put
into Hartlepoole Garrison? (What means then bringing 160. men (most new
raised) for the Recruit of the Garrison of Tinmonth, and the Lieutenant
Colonel of that place, when he shall dare to say he keeps the Castle for the
King, and will keep it for the King against the Parliament? What means the
fortifying of that place [for 12. months past to this present day] so strong?
and the fortifying of Barwick 3. times] stronger then it was? what means their
now raising every sixth man fit for service [which will be 10000. men at the
least] in Scotland? Is it think you to war against Montrosse? who themselves
report to be of no strength, notwithstanding their numbers to oppose him, under
the Command of Lievt. Genesis Middleton, are 4000. horse, And 8. Regiments of
foot, under the Earl of Argile, and those under him in the West parts about
2000. horse, and 3000. foot, Besides an order from the States of Scotland 3.
months ago for Major Genesis Monro to bring 2500. of his 4000. mer out of
Ireland. Upon the refusuall of that Command, another sent after from the States
and General, though in the Interim he is defented, notwithstanding all the
gallantry and wants the Earl of Argile seems to declare of them, they never
fought on field against the Rebels from their first going over to this time
they were routed, but have driven many English men from their Habitations. And
not withstanding all their reports that the Earl of Montrosse was to be
degraded, to be bannished, that he was weak, sometimes rowted, and had no
Army. Can any man be so senseless as believe those reports? when [of 6. battls
some of themselves have confessed be has gotten 5. victories] how could he
come to Abirdeene into the heart of that Kingdom, and burn Aberdeene, destroy
3. of their best Regiments? consider besides the 4000. men he had which were
not in the battle when he was routed by David Lesly, the strength he has
raised, and supplies he has had, since that time; sure the Earl of Antrius
would not bring over 2000. men our of Ireland to assist him, if he wore
nothing, neither would 500. Lords, Colonels, Knights, and Gentlemen, English
Caviliers, resort to him, and reside with him if they had not some hopes.

I profess Sir, the Mystery of all this is difficult, when I consider the
fruitfulness of that land to raise, send for, and support, such vast, now,
Armies; when they have a sufficient one in England, that may be very well spared
to their assistance and yet shall bring new raised men to be (as themselves
say) at his May. Command in England, where there is no need of them; but that
which will undoubtedly resolve both you and me in this particular will be its
conjunction, (there being already a cessation betwixt Montrosse and them both)
which will be a force sufficient to make good the Covenant according to their
Construction which they put upon it, and if that will not serve they have
already promised Commissions to diverse Caviliers in the North, to raise men and
shall have the assistance of Genesis King, with 9 Ships, laden with men and
Ammunition from Hambrough [as letters come in at Newcastle reports,] besides a
relation made by Mr. Lanson a Merchant of Newcastle who see Genesis King at
Hambrough and some of those Ships laden there ready with an intent to come for
the North.

Observe in all their declarations and vows how intentive they are to
maintain the Covenant, which we find interpreted in such like minner as is
contained in their papers the 11. of April 1646. by which and the like
interpretations and constructions, they will, as they do, be possessors of the
whole estates of the well affected in the Northern parts, otherwise what
means those vast sesments demanded of the Northern Counties as in many places
the charge demanded by them, is more in 3. months then the revenew of the
places is worth in 12. months, having demanded of the County of Durham 5000. l.
a month for their infantrie, besides all their women, Children, and baggage
horses, which charge will be near as much more, what means their many
threats and bannishments of the well affected, of the County of Durham, and
this County, their protecting papists, and delinquents, where I could name many
in both places, but for fear of a farther evil to them; however it has been
proved of some at the Northern Committee of Parliament.

Oh friend, were ye but sensible of our miseries, it would make your heart to
bleed, to know the rapes, murders, roberies, oppressions, and abuses which is
and has been acted on the well affected in these parts, and upon complaint
very, small redress, as the Commissioners of Lords and Comment in Parliament,
can testefie concerning Tickell, where though some were imprisoned before them,
yet never punished after their departure; and yet notwithstanding all these
things what means is there used or rather not used to render them with a fair
Character to the Parliament; have not they their Agents both at home and
abroad? I have seen their letter of complaint against Genesis Payntz. from David
Lesley notwithstanding those two, are as gracious as is possible, and have had
several meetings lately at Bedall one of which was 2. days before Genesis Poyntz
took Journey for London and, some officers in that Army have declared a gallant
opinion of Genesis Payntz, by reason he has expressed to them a dislike of the
Parliaments proceedings; have they not an Agent at Durham, Col. Chidwick who
has layne there certain weeks acting his great ability to render that
Government with a fair Caracter, as on the contrary he has not been wanting
in his letters from Nettingham to Mr. Pierpoint at York, in the time of the
redusement there, to be Careful to out all Independents out of that Army,
which has been accordingly performed: and their Commands given to Caviliers,
one of which was first a Cavilier, then came and took the Covenant: went
again, and took Command, and fought against the Parliament, and came and
served under the Parliament again, was C^^^red for such his fact: and now is
in Commission in the new Modall, much like were those wise Officers, that when
the case was Judged at a Court Martial at York betwixt Commissary Genesis Wood,
and his deputy Bradford; Wood complaining of others false mustering, his
threats, and twice swearing God dam him gave judgment that they were civil
Officers and not within the cognisence of that Court Martial. Have not the
Scots their Agents, the Priests of the County of Durham, with many more to whom
they have given protections to pay no sesments, not billet soldiers? which
without question will not be wanting in gratifying that Army with a Character
of honor, so far as in them lies, Sir having impartially considered all these
passages and carriages, the best construction that (in my apprehension) can be
made is, that if upon the exposition of the Covenant there continue a
difference betwixt the Parliament and them, they have an Army ready to defend
or offend as occasion requires, I rest.

York 1. July 1646.
The Information of Captain Henry Stone.
I Having some private discourse with Sir Thomas Tidsley, about a week before
the surrender of the Garrison, he told me he had an order from the King, that
when he heard Oxford, was surrendered, he should make his conditions for the
surrender of the Close, and reserve his forces in their several Counties, as
privately as might be, till there were an opportunity.

He further said, that the parliament should have all the Garrisons, but when we
thought all was our own, we should see a force which would cut our throats,
and this would be done before the next Spring.

He also said, the King he thought would come to London, and speak you fair,
and seem to comply, but he will not lie down so, but take his advantage when
time serves, and so would he and many more.

These words, or to this effect, being delivered to me, I thought it my duty to
declare it.

July 19. 1646. Henry Stone

FINIS.

