THE BALM OF GILEAD, FOR The Wounds of ENGLAND: Applied in A SERMON Preached
at Westminster, before the Honorable House of COMMONS, At the late solemn
Fast, August 30. 1643.

BY ANTHONY TUCKNEY, B. D. sometimes Fellow of Eman. College in Cambridge, and
now Pastor at Boston in the County of Lincoln.

Published by Order of that House.

MAL 4. 2. Unto you that fear my name, shall the Sun of Righteousness arise
with healing in his wings.

2 CHRONICLES. 7. 14. If my people which are called by my name, shall humble
themselves, and pray, and seek my face, and turn from their wicked ways: Then
will I hear from heaven, and will forgive their sin, and will heal their
Land.

LONDON, Printed by Richard Bishop for SAMUEL GILLIBRAND, at the Brazen Serpent
in Paul's Churchyard, 1643.

TO The Honorable House OF COMMONS, Now assembled in PARLIAMENT.
WHat Your Religious attention welcomed from the Pulpit, by your command is now
come to the Press; where it humbly craveth your Patronage, as it there enjoyed
your acceptance: A plain piece it is, but mourning Suits use to be plain,
and so should mourning Fast Sermons be also: Fidling Jigges are now out of
tune, when God has turned our Harp into mourning, and our Organ into the voice
Job 30. 31.
of them that weep. May it therefore be but any help this way, that the
mourning Turtles voice may be yet more heard in our Land, I should even in
these Cant. 2. 11. 12.
sad times of our heaviness rejoice in hope, that the Winter were already
well-nigh past, and the rain blown over and gone: mean while your faithful
continued endeavors, that the Sun of Righteousness may yet draw nearer to us
in brighter and warmer beams of his truth and grace, will much encourage our
hearts after all winter storms, comfortably to expect a Summers flourish, and
Harvests joy: You have indeed hitherto had a wet Seed-time of it, whilst you
have for so long a time been sowing in tears; but be pleased to go on still
in Gods work and strength, though it should be yet weeping, if withal it be
but bearing of precious seed, for then doubtless at last you shall come again
with rejoicing, and bring your Psalm. 126. 5. 6.
sheaves with you. Great is the Work whereunto the Lord of the Harvest has
called you, in which the eyes of God, Angels, and men are upon you; so that if
you should now faint and quail, it would be with a witness. O quit your
selves like men, and be strong.

God by your hand has begun to thrust his sharp 1 Cor. 16. 13.
sickle into the Romish tares, the time is come for you to reap, for the
Harvest of the Earth is ripe; let not God therefore now want workmen, nor they
courage and strength to bear the heat and burden of the day, you will so at
length come to a more comfortable evenings reckoning, a more quiet nights rest
in death, and a most blessed up-rising at the last great day, in that Harvest
of the end of the World (and we hope before) you and yours, will reap the
fruit of all your labors, then it will be no grief of heart to you, that you
have been constant and unmovable, abounding always in the work of the Lord,
when you shall find that your labor has not been in vain in the Lord; then
whilst you shall hear your Masters Euge's, and be in the midst of Angels
Hallelujahs, we with all the Host of Heaven will join with you, and help you
to shout aloud for joy: He that shall then beyour Judge, be now your Counselor
and Protector; both now, and then, and ever your Savior. So prays

The unworthiest of his Servants, and yours in him, ANTHONY TUCKNEY.

Die Mercurii 30. August. 1643.
IT is this day Ordered by the Commons assembled in Parliament: That Sir Edward
Ascough, and Sir John Wray, do from this. House give thanks unto Master
Tuckney of Boston, and Master Coleman of Blyton in Lincolnshire, for the great
pains they took in the Sermons, they this day preached at the entreaty of this
House at S. Margarets Westminster, It being the day of public humilition, and
to desire them to Print their Sermon. And it is Ordered that no man shall
presume to Print their Sermons without license under their hands.

H. Elsynge Cler. Parl. D. Com.

I appoint Samuel Gellibrand to Print this Sermon,

ANTHONY TUCKNEY.

Errata
PAge 3. line 18. read all diseases, p. 6. l. 6. r. System, l. 26. r (...) p.
17. l. 25. r. this p. 19 l. 12 r. longer, l. 13. r. for, p. 20. l 20. r. care
p. 24. l. 7. dele to, in the margent r, (...) p 26 l. 16 r. bodies, l. 22 r.
knew, p. 27. r. l 16 r. was poured into, p. 28. l. 6. r. cheer p. 29 l 13. r.
is then, over against l. 25 set Use 1. p. 30. l. 22. r great head, l 33. r.
into best, p. 35. l. 10. r. biggen. p. 41 l. 35. r. want of power, p. 42. l. 2.
r. Gods.

A SERMON Preached before The Honorable House OF COMMONS At the Public Fast,
August 30. 1643.
IEREM. 8. 22. Is there no balm in Gilead? is there no Physician there? why
then is not the health of the daughter of my people recovered?
THE wound is mortal, when the patient dies under his Surgeons hand: and
such a deadly wounded Body of his people had our Prophet here under his cure;
which when he could not heal, he weeps over; they swoune, and he faints, verse
18. they are confounded, and he is astonished, verse 21, and as a man in
passion and amazement expresses a greater (...), by asking questions, then by
speaking sentences: As Ahashuerus, Esth. 7. 5. Who? where? so the Prophet does
the like here in his, Is there not? And again, Is there not? and then, Why is
not? Is there no balm in Gilead? is there no Physician there? why then is not
the health of the daughter of my people recovered?

The first question, Is there no balm in Gilead? etc. had it been made by any
of the poor unbeleiving people affirmatively, Thus, Is there any balm in
Gilead? especially relating to the bad success which might seem to intimate
the contrary, (as theirs, Exodus 17. 7. Is the Lord amongst us?) would have
expressed a doubt, whether indeed there had been any balm, seeing there was no
healing by it: but when made by the Lord himself, or by the Prophet in his
name, with the negative (...), as aggravating that ill success; so it is a
stronger, even a double affirmation, that indeed there was both balm in
Gilead, and also a Physician there, which not only he affirms, but also
appeals to them, whether they could deny, and taking it for granted that they
could not, He proceeds to his

Second question, Why then is not, etc. Which is a question, partly of inquiry,
Why? And partly of a bemoaning and As 2 Samuel 13. 4. Ezekiel. 18. 31.
expostulating complaint: That such admirable helps should be no more helpful,
means so proper and precious, so unsuccessefull, that Gileads balm, (the best
medicine) and Gileads Physician, (who best knew how to apply it) could work no
better a cure on a poor dying people. Is there no balm in Gilead? is there no
Physician there? and then why, O why then is not the health of the daughter of
my people recovered? A little for the explication of the words.

By Gilead, understand either the City so called, Hos. 6. 8. Gilead Schindler
(...) ad vocem Leut. 34. 1. 1 Kings 4. 19. Mercer. in Genesis 31. 47.
which is conceived to be a chief Emporium, where such commodities were sold:
or the Land and Country of Gilead, as it is elsewhere called in Scripture,
containing the whole lot of the two Tribes and half on other side Jordan, as
appears from 1 Kings 10. 33. where the plant that afforded it, especially
abounded: so we read of the Ishmaelites that bought Joseph, carrying balm
from Gilead to Egypt, Genesis 37. 25. and the daughter of Egypt is bidden to fetch
balm from Gilead, Ier. 46. 11. and accordingly, Ezekiel. 27. 17. we find it to
be one of the special commodities that Judah and the land of Israel traffiqued
with Tyrus in, according to that of Pliny, Balsam^^ (...). 12. cap. 25.
uni terrarum Iudeae concessum, as though balm were a peculiar largess
vouchsafed by God to Judea only, there only to be had, or at least (as Sylvius
observes) the best there only, God willing that all other Nations should be
beholden to Israel for balm, it may be thereby hinting to us that he would
have the whole world beholden to his Church for healing.

Balme] for nature and kind the juice or oil, which a lower Balm
shrub growing especially about Ab (...) sui suavitate nomen tobi dedisse
creditur, Mol^er. in Psalm. 133. 2.
Jericho (the bark of it being cut with glass, or bone, or Ivory knives) weeps
or bleeds out. For price and worth such, as Dioscorides says, that in his
days it was sold for double its weight in silver: Pliny affirms that in his
time a thousand of their pence (one of which was the sixth part of an ounce)
was given for a quart of it, so that (as Rhenodeus conceives) only Kings and
great men had it, and used it: For virtue and efficacy, (...), says the
forementioned Author, most strong and sovereign, Medicina difficillimorum
morborum, welnigh a Catholicon for diseases, and a cure for the worst: I list
not here Shindler.
to reckon up to you all that they say its good for, whether applied inwardly
or outwardly, how it helps the eyesight and breathing, eases the headache,
qualifieth fevers, etc. but especially to my purpose, ulcera purgat, etc. it
cleanses foulest sores, heals deepest wounds, and cures the most venomous
stinging of Serpents, and the like. This was in the letter Gileads balm.

To which the Prophet in the Text joyneth its Physician: Artists Physician.
using to abound where they have such great plenty of materials: many good
Physicians whereso much good physic.

Both which put together, in the true meaning of our Prophet, hold out complete
means, fully able (in genere mediorum) to work a perfect cure, even when the
wound or disease is otherwise most deadly and desperate.

And yet here they failed, for notwithstanding them the latter part of the Text
says, that the health of the daughter of that people was not recovered; for
the clearing of which expression, I should abuse your attention and time (both
better now to be improved) should I be large in Grammatical criticismes upon
this Hebraisme of [The daughter of my people;] lesser Towns and Villages, in
the simplicity of that holy Tongue, are called the daughters of the Metropolis
or mother City; and the Citizens Josh. 17. 16.
or Inhabitatants of any City or Country the Sons of it, (...) fil^ populi
mei, for populares mei: but leave we those Genesis 2^. 1^.
observations, and take it here plainly, the daughter of my people, for the
body of that people; that Virgin daughter of Zion, (...).
who though as tenderly beloved of God, as tenderest daughter by dearest parent
is or can be yet by her wilful casting of her self into a desperate sickness
of sin, she had made the wound of her misery incurable, incorrigiblenesse in
sin against all best means ended in ^rrecoverablenesse of misery, notwithding
all best medicines; this latter I conceive is here especially intended, though
the former is presupposed, because in point of sin, therefore also in point
of misery; although there was balm in Gilead and a Physician there, yet the
^rophet complains that the health of the daughter of his people was not
recovered.

From which words thus explained, we may observe these three particulars.

1. That there is balm in Gilead, and a Physician there.

2. That for all that, the health of Gods people for the present may not be
recovered.

3. That in such a case the cause hereof is diligently to be ^nquired after,
and most sadly to be bemoaned and complained of.

Is there no balm in Gilead? as much as if he had said, Yes there is; there is
the first: The health of the daughter of my people is not recovered, there is
the second: (...) quare ^gitur; Why then, O why then! So the Prophet
expostulates with his people, and mournes over their misery: there is the third.

There is balm in Gilead, and a Physician there, i. e. means in the Church
and amongst the people of God, sufficiently, abundantly, able to cure their
deadliest wounds, and to recover them from desperatest miseries: The meaning of
the question, Is there not, being (as we have heard) yes for certain there is;
as in every Country there is usually a medicine for its own proper diseases,
so in Gods inheritance there is balm to cure all: and as some conceited
Physicians say there is a natural balsom in man's body, so for certain there
is a most sovereign balm (dropped down from the head) in the body of Christ,
which can heal all its sicknesses and wounds: it being

Our Fathers house, in which there is bread enough to relieve the poorest pined
prodigal, Luke 15. 17.

Gods inheritance, in which all his springs lie to refresh the mo^^ thirsty
fainting creature, Psalm. 87. 7.

The very myrothecium or repository, in which God has laid up all his most
sovereign oils and balsomes, fully able to maintain and recover his peoples
health in all their deadliest extremities: so that in them all, in the worst of
all, we may say, Yet God is good to Israel, Psalm. 73. 1. and as desperate as
the case seems to be, Yet there is hope in Israel concerning this, Ezra 10. 2.
or that, or what ever it is, there is hope in Israel concerning desperatest
evils, because balm in Gilead for deadliest dangers and miseries.

But because the goodness of the Physic will be evidenced by the greatness
of the cures wrought by it; one of the best ways to prove that there is balm
in Gilead, and a Physician there, will be to show under some general heads,
what great cures have been wrought there.

1. Of deepest wounds, and most violent and malignant diseases; I mean of most
grievous and deadly dangers and miseries; for such in all ages have the
Churches miseries used to be: as in purest airs sometimes accutest fevers, so
purest Churches, and holiest men, have been wont to conflict with extremest
miseries: man's rage will do what it can to make and inflame the wound, and the
old Serpents poison would make it incurable. No afflictions like to the
Churches persecutions: No sorrow like mine, said the lamenting Church; yea and
add too, and say, Lam. 1. ^^.
No salvation like thine also: it has been (...), from so great a death, that
Gods people have been delivered; 2 Cor. ^. 10.
none have been more deeply wounded, nor any so admirably cured as the Spouse
of Christ; in the midst of all these deaths (blessed be God!) she lives still,
and will for ever: there is balm then in Gilead that has healed such deadly
wounds and diseases, which the body of Christ above all has labored under,
taking out of them the venom of the Serpents sting, yea the inflammation of
Gods wrath, that in the first place has been the cure of deadliest wounds,
such as (the Lord knows) ours now are.

2. When there are many of them, even a complication, and as it were a whole
systerne of diseases on the body of Christ at once: not in one part only, but
totum pro corpore vulnus, when sick and sore all over, as Isa. 1. 5, 6.

Nor in one kind only, but of all sorts, as Pineda labors in Jobs maladies to
find out all kinds of diseases. Pineda in Job 2.


In which case the cure is wont to be harder; because as all diseases are
contrary to health, so one of them often to another; so as that which helps the
one, may wrong the other, as it sometimes falls out when the Liver and Spleen
are distempered together. And yet so the body of the Church (alas! of our State
and Church at this present) conflicts at one time with many, and them contrary
miseries, in time of war, (and such times our sins have now brought upon
us) in truth with all; (...), most true in this sense, then a troop comes,
war and changes together, Job 10. 17. in this universal scare-fire the flame
is kindled in every corner of the house: this general (...) leaves no part of
us free, we are ill all over, every where, (...) P^^v. 5. 11.
and almost every way; yea and in contrary ways very miserable, as in sad
convulsion fits, one nearest member plucked from another, and which is most
miserable, so, as heal the one and you wound the other. We go through fire
and water, as the Psalmist said, in which case that which quenches the one
increases the other, such an ague and purgatory of hot and Psalm. ^. 12.
cold fits, of various and contrary miseries the whole land now labors of, and
sinks under. But is there such a medicine as can help both, and heal all? Yes,
if you will believe David, who could set his probatum est to it, who met with
as many and cross sad passages as the most; and yet after all, out of his own
experience, could say, I sought, and this poor man cried, and then God
delivered him from all his fears, and saved him out of all his troubles, Psalm.
34. 4, 6. and ver. 19. (...) great and many (for the word signifies both) are
the afflictions of the righteous, but the Lord delivers him out of them all:
where there is a [many] in the disease, you see there is an [all] in the cure,
in our God, that which can cure an all of sicknesses, Psalm. 103. 3. in our Lord
Jesus that can heal, (...), all manner, as of lighter diseases, so of more
grievous sicknesses. The Matthew. 4. 23.
people of God have been rescued from multitudes of Bulls, Psalm. 68. 30. from
swarms of angriest Bees, Psalm. 118. 12. from innumerable evils compassing them
round about, Psalm. 40. 12, 13. have not sunk, when deep has called upon deep,
and at the Psalm. 41. 7, 8.
noise of Gods water-spouts, all his waves and billows have gone over them:
when like a wrackt man tossed with billows from below, and almost drowned at
the same time with showers and spouts of rain from above, when earth shakes
and heaven thunders, even out of greatest crowdes of evils and enemies that
have been plucking the body of Christ apieces, quite contrary ways has it yet
been delivered; such a Panacea, such an All-heale has God provided for his
Church: Sure there is balm in Gilead, and a Physician there, that has cured
such varieties and contrarities of diseases.

3. And this further in the third place, when grown Chronicall; now old soars
are hardlier healed, and hectic fevers usually incurable. Ours now begin to
grow in years, and the maladies of the Church of God in former ages have not
only (according to former particulars) been sore and many, but also of long
continuance; not only dead, but even dry bones: if meant of the Jews in
Babylon, they lay seventy years unburied; Deuteronomy, 28. 59, 60.
if of the other ten Tribes, it is three thousand years since their Ezekiel. 37,
1, 2, etc.
first death, now so buried in obscurity and oblivion, that we cannot tell
where they are to be found (which is much longer then our miseries shall
continue, though they should prove yet more deadly) and yet these, after all
this, shall live; and therefore though for the present we be very sick, yet let
not our hearts die; for this is more then Gileads balm or Physician, for our
blessed Savior as easily to raise up a dead Lazarus when he stinketh, as the
Centurions servant that is but ready to die; John 11. 39. Luke 7. 1.
and make his people glad, not only after days of affliction, but even after
years wherein they have seen evil: the Sun of Psalm. 90. 15. Mal. 4. 2.
righteousness arising with healing in his wings, as certainly, and it may be
more comfortably, after the longest Winters night, as on the earliest Summers
morning: there is balm then in Gilead, and a blessed Physician there, that can
cure so grievous, so many, so contrary, so invererate diseases.

4. And then when all, upon all the former particulars, for any humane help or
skill, is proved desperate and incurable: and so judged,

First, especially by Enemies, who use to think as they would have it, and so
ante-date as their own deliverance, Ier. 28. 1, 2, 3, 4. so the Churches
destruction, before God intends either. So you may over-heare David's enemies
whispering, that an evil disease so clave to him, that now that he was down,
for certain he would never rise more; but even then God was both Psalm. 41. ^^.
Physician and Nurse to him, making his bed for him when they accounted him
bedridden: thus they set the clock too much forward, but it hastened never the
more holy David's sunset; as in another place, when they conceive that God has
forsaken him, and what then but persecute and take him, for there is none to
deliver him; even then Faith can look at him, as not far Psalm. 71. 11, 12.
from him, and making more haste toward him to help him, then they could to
destroy him. It is mercy that Gods hand is not tied up, when Pharaoh thinks
Israel is shut up, and when he had already swallowed them up in his thoughts;
then the Exodus 14. 2. Exodus 15 9.
good Shepherd plucked the lamb out of his mouth. How far those black
mouths that have been so wide open to blaspheme God, have already in their
thoughts, Leviathan like, quite swallowed up his people, I say not, but this I
may. That it would Job 40. 23.
be very sad with us, if our God should not be better to us, then the thoughts
and expectations of our enemies are now of us; but let it help to stanch the
bleeding wound, to remember that God can easily heal when the cure is
accounted desperate, especially by enemies.

Secondly, commonly by all (which our present case is making haste to) I will
restore health (says God) when the common vote was, This is Zion which no man
seeks after; as a dying man with curtains drawn, whom friends have no hope
of, and Ier. 30. 17.
therefore look off from; or rather like a dead man laid aside Psalm. 31, 12.
out of sight, and out of mind together, and buried more in oblevion then in
his grave; when the news is, She is dead, why trouble ye the master? Then it
was that Christ answered, Fear not, only believe and she shall be made
whole, and she was so: Luke 8. 49. 50.
When all is given for lost by all, then its a fit time for Christ to show
himself all in all; when he can find no faith Co. 3. 11. Luke 12. 38.
in the earth, he then comes, Luke 18. 8. in the second or third watch of the
night; good husbands that rise early and go to bed late, may not be gone to
bed in the first watch, and they may be up again betimes in the morning by
the fourth, so that in both those, the Master may come, and happily find them
waking, but by the second they use to be gone to bed, and not to be risen by
the third, and therefore if he come in either of them, he is likely to find
most (if not all) sleeping; and yet then our Lord comes, when none looked for
him; then heales, when the cure is accounted desperate by all,

3 Yea, even by the godly themselves, (which is worst of all) whose faith
should not fail them, and yet when it does, Gods faithfulness does not: the
sick man's heart is ready to die before he does; we are cut off for our parts,
said they, Ezekiel. 37. 11. But the skillful Surgeon often heales that leg or
arm which the despairing patient thinks must of necessity be cut off: Thus
God upholds David with his hand, when he himself thinks, he shall one of
those days fall by the 1 Samuel ^7. 1^
hand of Saul: When Asaphs heart fails as well as his flesh; God is then The
rock of his heart and his portion for ever: Psalm. 73. 26.
When the Disciples as well as the people are at a stand for the cure of him
that had been so long possessed with so many Devils, then bring him to me,
says our Savior: The case is in a manner Matthew. 17. 17.
ours, many evil Spirits have too long possessed us, the Disciples and
Servants of Jesus Christ have fasted and prayed, and done what they could
toward an ejection, but it will not yet be; so that we begin to grow faint
and weary, and to lay the business out of our hands; but before we do, it
would be well if we would remember that its now fittest to bring it to Christ,
to see whether he can do any thing, when our very faith can believe but a
little, and our selves do just nothing: Sometimes indeed our Savior would say
to them that besought him for their cure, According to your faith be it unto
Mat. ^. 29.
you: but if our faith should always be the measure of mercy to be bestowed on
us, the Lord knows it would be too often very ill with us; a weak faith would
leave but a faint heart, if God were not able to do oft-times, nay at this
time, exceedingly above all we can ask or think, little should we be Ephesians. 3.
20.
able to know or think what to do: But (blessed be God) a short hand can
receive more then it can grasp, and the weak palsy hand of our faith, may in
some measure apprehend that salvation and mercy which it cannot fully
comprehend; its our happiness, not that our vessel is so little, but that the
fountain is so full that we cannot comprehend the fullness of it, that our
thoughts and hopes are too short sighted and handed to reach to all that
salvation, which the outstretched arm of Jesus Christ can reach to us, who
is, and ever well be, The wonderful, Counselor, Isa. 9. 6.
the mighty, (the Almighty) God, as he is the Prince of his peoples peace, and
therefore it is, that he uses to work these wonderful cures for his sick
Spouse, when according to former particulars, her diseases and wounds, have
been, first great, secondly many, thirdly of such long continuance, that
fourthly in the judgment of all they seem to become desperate; So that enemies
hope, and the faithful fear, and all think they are now proved incurable; but
although some diseases are said to be other Physicians shames, yet none ever
shall be Christ's; for all, for the worst of all, there is balm in Gilead, and
a Physician there: And thus much for the (...), that it is so.

But for the (...), if you ask, what this balm is, and who is this Physician?

1 I answer, First, God and his presence, so the parallel question, verse 19.
has it, is it not the Lord in Zion? answerable to this here, is there no balm
in Gilead, etc. God and his presence, Christ and his blood, the holy Ghost with
his Grace and peace, these are in Gilead, i. e. in the Church of God, and these
are most sovereign balmes, and most blessed Physicians there.

God amongst many other his glorious appellations in Scripture is pleased to
make, (...), the Lord that heals thee, Exodus 15. 26.
one of those sweet names which he both is, and will be known to his people by.

The Lord Jesus is our Sun of righteousness, and as the Heathens Ph^bus was
their Physician, so he is Man. 4. 23.
ours, for he arises with healing in his wings.

The giving of the holy Ghost also is expressed by anointing Isa. 61. 1. 2.
with such sovereign oil as can heal broken hearts; and that is a greater
cure then to cure the outward wounds of broken States and Kingdoms.

So that the saving presence of God in Christ cannot but bring with it great
salvation: Lord if thou had been here (said Martha to our Savior) my brother
had not died: O were he but here John. 11. 21.
amongst us as he might be, and as his servants desire he would be, we should
not be so much as sick, though we now lie a dying; a time is hastening when the
new ^erusalems name shall be (...), the Lord is there and then (I read) there
will be no Ezekiel. 48. 35. Revel. 21. 4.
pain nor sickness there, but a tree of life in the midst of the street of
it, whose very leaves all heal the Nations: for if the presence Revel. 22. 1,
2.
of a dear friend oft-times does very much refresh the very sick man, How much
more will the powerful and gracious presence of a more dear God in Jesus
Christ put a new life into a dying either soul or people? What arm so strong
as to make such a wound, as that the Almighty arm of God cannot bind it up?
or what malice so venomous so to poison it, as the mercy of our God, and the
precious blood of our Savior (sprinkled upon whole Nations as well as upon
particular persons, Isa. 52. 15.) cannot cure it? be his blood ever our balm,
were I as sick and as deadly wounded as that poor man in the Gospel, yet some
drops of Luke 10. 33. 34.
this good Samaritanes oil would make me well again: so soveraignly healing
is Gods presence, and his Sons blood.

And for his Spirits grace, and peace, some Interpreters upon Hieronym. and
Deodat. in locum.
this Text understand by balm here Repentance, which though it may seem as
vinegar in the wound to make it smart and anger it, yet could we rightly apply
it, and let it have its kindly and perfect work before it had done, it would
most kindly and fully heal it; for if our sins be our deadliest wounds then
this grace of the Spirit is the proper Recipe for our cure, 2 Chronicles. 7. 14. and
if our unquiet heart-burnings and contentions make the inflammation in these
angry soars, (as the Lord know's they do) how would the peace of God cool
all this heat, and take up the controversy? Col. 3. 15. Gods peace would help
us better to keep the Kings; had (...).
we more of the one in our hearts, we should have more of the other in the
Kingdom; in these smoothered glowings, nay out-breaking flames, there is too
much of the fire of hell, which would be put out (as the fire is by the Sun)
if this alma lux this blessed light of heaven shone more upon it.

2 But next under God, good Magistrates and their wholesome administrations are
another part of Gileads balm and Surgery, and so it follows in that
forementioned nineteenth verse, Is not the Lord in Zion, is not her King in
her? Her King under her God was her chief Physician, and of five of them in
Ieremiahs time, one was Josiah, and it may be when he spoke these very words;
who, had not the body of that sinne-sick people been past cure, by that blessed
Reformation which he wrought he might have said fair for a perfect recovery.
And so for all other lawful Magistrates in their lawful administrations, as
they are fathers, so they are also the Physicians of their people; Galen
accounted it the great happiness of his times, that their Emperors gave the
people their (...) Commentario (...) Theriac^.
Theriaca with their own hands, so as that their Palaces were resorted to as to
the sick men's Hospitals; and although all Monarchs now cure not the Kings
evil; yet all both Kings and Magistrates should, as occasion and need shall be
have both skill and will to cure greater and more dangerous diseases in the
Body Politic; and therefore you may observe, that whereas Isa. 3. v. 6. you
read of some laying hold of their brother, and desiring him that he would be
their Ruler; in the seventh verse, he refuses and says, he will not be an
Healer: It seems therefore that in those times although Rulers and Healers
were two words, yet they made account that they should be and do one and the
same thing: and so indeed if God be with them, they both are and do
occordingly.

Their wholesome Laws are their fit Prescripts and Recipes.

Their encouraging of the good with favors and rewards, their (...), their
Malagmata and Lenitives; (...).
Gileads gentle balmes.

Their discouraging and punishing the evil their sharp, but necessary,
Corrasives; even their cutting off the incorrigible, is but the careful
Surgeons cutting off a rotten member that is incurable; so that even whilst
they wound, they cure, and so are not (as Chrysostom said of Herod, that he was
(...), Tom. 4. Sermon. 115. in Act.
(...)) executioners but Physicians still.

3. Thirdly, Gods Ministers and Ordinances come under the notion of Gileads
balm and Physicians: the Prophet in this expression (as Interpreters observe)
having reference to Elijah the Prophet (and some add other Prophets also) who
had their abode, C. a Lapide
yea and a School or College of their young Prophets there; and therefore it
might seem as strange that there should be no healing from Gilead where such
Prophets dwelt, as to have no balm from Gilead, where it most of all abounded:
Indeed Elijahs ministry (like his garment) was a little more rough, and in that
respect the less resembling Gileads gentler balm; but yet he 2 Kings 1. 8.
then (as some Ministers accounted more rough now) was sent to be the great
Reformer, and so the great Physician and recoverer of that sinful sick people.
And so

In the Old Testament throughout, what were all the Prophets of God, but as
Physicians or Surgeons sent from God in their ministry to cleanse sowlest
sores? to eat proud flesh out of them with corrasives, and then to pour gentle
healing oil into bleeding wounds?

And in the New Testament, what were the Apostles, and those other first
Preachers of the Gospel, but Physicians too, sent into Mark 6. 13. James 5. 14.
the sick world with oil to anoint their bodies; but especially with the Sun
of righteousness arising in their ministry with healing to their souls, yea
and their outward estates also; for valles florent cum Evangelio; there was an
abundance of the blessing of the Gospel of Christ, Romans 15. 29. as manifestly
appeared in the outward flourish and prosperity of those Eastern Churches and
Countries, when that morning Sun-arose upon them in the East, which is now set
in a cloud of slavery and misery, since it has left them, and is come, and is
yet further going westward. In those former times under the Law, you shall
observe, that when the Ark went before, it led them safe through an
overflowing Jordan; that Josh. 3. 11, 13, 14 etc. Psalm. 128. 5. 134. 3.
God was wont to bless them out of Zion; that as long as the anointing oil
was kept holy in the Sanctuary, it proved an healing oil to the whole body of
that people, the State ever continuing safe, whilst Gods Ordinances were kept
pure; as on the contrary, it was not till Gods Temple was wholly defiled, and
his servants and Prophets horribly abused, that their City and Kingdom were
totally and finally ruined, and their cure came to be desperate, to an (...),
so that there was no remedy, 2 Chronicles. 36. 16.

And for all after ages under the Gospel (and that in all places and Countries)
the Temple has ever helped to shore up the Townhouse, the Church the State,
which have been like Hypocrates his twins, smiling and weeping, living and
dying together: most of the deadliest wounds that the Church, nay, that the
world has gotten, have been from God in the quarrel of his Temple; and as
poisonous Doctrines in the Church have ever proved invenomed wounds to the
Commonwealth, and bad Ministers in the one, worst plagues to the other; so on
the other side, the holy Ordinances of God have been found to be sovereign
balmes and blessings to each wholesome Ordinance of man, even sharpest
Church Censures most wholesome State-medicines, and ablest godly Ministers
amongst best Physicians in their right applying and dispensing of them
accordingly.

4. Nay, in the last place, leave we not out the least and meanest of Gods
Servants; for balm (we heard) dropped from a lower shrub, and the health of
the whole body of Christ may have much contributed to it by the lowest and
weakest member of it; the little finger in some posture of the hand, may reach
that which the great finger cannot, and the lowest member of Christ may be
fittest to do some good office in this kind, which the highest cannot so well
stoop to; at least (I am sure) the little child may reach its sick mother her
physic, nay the poorest child of God (in the sense we now speak of) may help
to make it too; The poor wise man saved the City, and the poor Christian, if
he Eccles. 9. 15.
be wise, may help to heal a whole Nation: here (pardon my homeliness, nor
take it as a light expression in a sad day) we are all either fools or
Physicians, for certainly he is a fool or worse that knows not how to say or
do something toward the healing o^ the body of Christ; The just deliver the
Island, the Lord grant they may deliver ours. Job 23. 30.


Their several graces, according to several occasions, are in this kind very
isntrumental and effectual; they are saving graces every way, accompanying
their own eternal salvation, and much advancing the temporal salvation both
of themselves and others: Heb. 6. 9, 10.
Whilst Faith in the tempest gets to the rock, and Hope casts anchor, Love
pities, and Christian courage ventures, Meekness angreth not the sore, but
Patience quietly endures the searching, and as quietly waits on God for
healing.

Their very presence is both antidote to prevent a disease, and an healing
medicine to keep it, when it is come from proving mortal; God could not
destroy Sodom, as long as Lot was in it; Genesis 19. 22.
and Paul being in the ship, though he did not prevent the storm or save the
ship, yet he saved the lives of all them that failed with Acts 27. 24.
him in it.

Their prayers especially use in this case to be most soveraignly healing, 2 Chronicles. 7. 14. The prayer of faith saves the sick, both man and Kingdom, such
strong breathings, like strong winds, James 5. 15.
whilst they are up, keep great showers from falling, can blow away the most
black and bloody cloud, yea even blow the most smarting wound whole; such sweet
lips are ever dropping balm into the wounds of the Church, and such of all
other may truliest come under that (...), that healing tongue, which Solomon
Prove. 15. 4.
says is a t^ee of life; and it would seem not more sad then strange to see
that Eden where many such trees grow to become a wilderness: As long as I
shall see God maintaining and increasing the number of his gracious praying
servants in any place or people, whatsoever or how deadly soever their wounds
otherwise may be, I dare yet say, that so long there is hope in Israel, there
is some balm left in that Gilead, and so many good Physicians there.

cap. 15. 18. we may perhaps begin to fear are grown half incurable. The sad
face of things, like the Physicians facies Hypocratica of a dying man, I
confess looks very ghastly, and the symptoms tantum non deadly; but pine not
away ye sons of Jacob, there is corn in Egypt, die not quite away
deare-bleeding A^ Genesis 42 1, 2.
hearts, you Israel of God, there is balm in Gilead we have heard, there is
yet a Physician there.

For according to former particulars.

Is not the Lord in Zion? is not God where he was, in heaven and in his Church
as well now as ever? Yet thou O Lord art in the midst of us, could our Prophet
say in that sick hour of theirs then; Ier. 14. 9.
and Lord thou art not quite gone from us, may we thankfully say now in ours.
Indeed (as you there have it) it is as a wayfaring Ver. 8.
man coming and going, now in this discovery and deliverance coming to us in
mercy, and ere long being driven away by our unkindnesse, turning the back on
us, and seeming to leave us in displeasure; and as a mighty man, (in the mighty
works that our eyes have seen) yet standing so amazed and astonished at our
sins, as that he cannot save; and yet as a most loving Physician, when he
cannot as yet cure us, yet he cannot leave us.

His discovering and preventing many direful plots, speaks out the wisdom of
our discerning Physician in his prognostics.

His dealing with us in a more through way, choosing rather to pirch us, then not
to press corruption out of us; declares his faithfulness, that he means
rather to heal then only to skin the sore, and rather to profit then to please
his distempered patients.

But the many intermixed passages of sweetest mercy proclaim the tenderest
bowels of his compassion and pity; he has weighed the path of the just, every
dose to the least scruple, and has put in Isa. 26. 7.
no more bitterness then needs must to make it medicinable; it has not been
all Aloes and Wormwood, at worst a (...), that we as yet have tasted of.

Lay fast hold then, seeing that our God, our best Physician has not quite
left us: sigh we and cry aloud, Jesus thou Son of David have mercy on us,
seeing he our good Samaritan is not as yet quite Matthew. 9. 27.
past by us; Has the eye of none your faith seen him come near to us, as once
to Jerusalem, and weeping over us with an O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, O England,
England, if thou had known, even thou at Luke 19. 41, 42.
least in this thy day, etc. Have none of you in his answer to your prayers,
overheard him saying to your hearts, as once to him Mat. 8. 7. I will come and
heal him? For certain, more of his blood has been sprinkled, and more of his
spirit poured out upon this Nation of late then formerly, and does not all this
make out some of Gileads balm, and say plainly that there is yet a Physician
here? is not the Lord in Zion? and is not her King in her? the Lord restore
ou^s to us in an healing way: but does not the College of our State-Physicians
consult, and our Ministers preach, and our people pray, that Ordinances of both
Religion and Justice may be applied for the cure of a sick Church and State?
and is all this balm only to enbalme a spent body of a poor people that must
needs die? and are all these Physicians met only as Mourners to follow the
hearse, and to accompany our dear Mother that cannot live, to the grave? Did
our merciful Savior pity the poor widow when he saw her following of her
dead son to the burial? and Luke 7. 12, 13.
has he no bowels (think you) left to commiserate so many sorrowful sons,
that are ready with their sighs and tears to attend upon a dear mothers
funeral? nay though our sleepy Eutychus should fall yet lower from the third
loft, and be taken up for dead; yet Acts 20. 9, 10.
trouble we not our selves too much, seeing there is yet some life in him, and
dum anima est, spes est, as long as there is any the least life in the
business, so long at least let there be some hope kept alive in our hearts,
and let us never wholly despair of the cure, as long as God declares himself
willing to be the Physician. O have faith Mark 11. 22.
in God, do him now the honor to trust him, when the case seems to be
desperate; nay, let the desperateness of the cure prove an handhold for our
faith in prayer to fasten on, the more earnestly and confidently to solicit
God for his own greater and only praise, now to undertake such a cure, as all
else in a manner give over as desperate: And as dying Jacob at the news of his
son Joseph coming to him, strengthened himself, and sat up on his bed, so
now when we are fainting away upon this bed of our languishing, Genesis 48. 2.
let us by faith lift up our hearts at the good news, that as deadly as our
disease in it self is, yet there is balm in Gilead, and a Physician there.



First, that all such as (according to former particulars) in their 1 Duty
place and office are Gileads Physicians, do now, if ever, show themselves such.

Dear Christians, I speak to the meanest of you, for even you has God
honored (if you will) to have your share in this blessed work: mean and
obscure men and women have oftentimes done great cures, which great Artists
have given over; and therefore do you now set in, and put forth your selves to
the utmost, and so yet something may be done toward this our present cure,
which some of greater power and skill have laid aside as desperate. If
therefore you have any oil in your vessels, any least measure of that Spirit
of anointing, let it now appear, it could never have been 1 Ioh. 2. 27:
in a more needful and fit time, if now, it will be like a Joseph's opening of
his storehouses in a famine, when all faint, Genesis 41. 56. Luke 10. 34.
a good Samaritans pouring of oil into the wounds of the half dead man; and
therefore break, O let every one of us break his Alabaster box before the Lord
this day, our hearts (I mean) that the precious ointments of his graces may
flow forth; we cannot think how fragrant and pleasing they would be in Gods
nostrils, and how soveraignly healing to a poor bleeding, dying Kingdom. I
therefore earnestly beg your healing prayers. I solicit all your saving
graces, your love, wisdom, Christian courage, and wash your repentance this
day with your tears to wash your wounds, and your faith in the blood of Christ
to heat them: And the rather, because although you may (with Lot) in a general
confusion fare the worse for ill neighbors, (...).
yet I fear me, (seeing the danger lies heaviest on you) that you are wounded,
especially for your own sins; For the transgression Micab. 1. 5.
of Jacob is all this, God not using to visit the sins of the wicked upon his
own children, if they have had no hand in them; and therefore, Physician heal
thy self, take a course by selfehumiliation and reformation first to cure your
selves, if ever in a right method of Physic you would heal others.

Next you faithful Ministers of Jesus Christ, whom God has appointed to set
in joint distressed consciences, lend, O do you Gal. 6. 1.
especially lend, medicam manum, and that a tender gentle one in your way, to
bind up the breaches of these distracted Churches and Kingdoms: it was the
Priests office in the Law both to view the plague and heal it; let not
therefore both Levite and Priest when the wounded man lies bleeding and dying,
pass by. Elijah, Leuit 13 and 14. Luke 10. 31. 32.
Iehoiada, Ezra, did much in this kind in their times, let us (with the help
of God) do something now in ours; that Elijah may yet dwell in Gilead, and yet
and yet, and ever; (for our parts) there may be, not poison (as the common
complaint is) but (...) in Gilead, and we healing Physicians there.

But especially to you Noble Worthies, (who next under our God and our King,
are our (...) our chief Physicians, under whose hand this desperate cure long
has been, and yet is) as he said to Ezra, does this appertain, and therefore
give leave to Ezra 10.4.
one of the unworthiest Servants of Christ, who can do little more toward the
cure, then to call upon you, who through God may do much, to beseech you to
be yet, and ever your selves, i. e. healing Physicians to a very sick Church
and State; now your selves more then ever, because never so much need as now.

Be not therefore wearied out with your long attendance on so hard a cure; the
more indeed has been your pains and patience, but the more withal your
patients need: Some good drugs full of Spirit (I confess) in a less time will
evaporate, but I pray you remember, Gileads balm uses to continue sovereign
for a long time; Be not weary, therefore, of well doing, so, so in due time,
what ever becomes of us you will reap if you faint not. Gal. 6. 9.


No nor (I beseech you) be beat out with the unrulinesse and frowardness; yea,
or raving rage of a distempered patient and people; they (it may be) will be
ready to say, you are Physicians of no value, and so despise you, nay that the
remedy is worse then Job 13. 4.
the disease, and so hate and oppose you; but notwithstanding this, be you yet
like,

1 Your God, who is kind to the unkind, knows how to heal an angry (...),
looks upon Ephraim and heales him, when he went Luke 6. 35. Isa. ^7. 17. 1^.
on frowardly in an evil way: Can not you remember that he has sometimes done
more for you, when you have been more froward toward him, then others are now
against you, though never so engaged to you, then you are to his people? in
this therefore, be like your God, Luke 6. 36.

2 Nay, like your selves: now you are State-Physicians, and what then, though
the distempered distracted Patient rage and rave, spit and strike at his
Physician that would cure him? if he be wise, think whether it will move more
anger or pity in him, for all that medicinam parat, non vindictam: be pleased
therefore still, Bernard Sermon. 25. in Cantic.
like such a Physician, to go on with your work, and labor rather to heal
then to humor a distempered Patient: So however, your reward will be with God.
But if he please further to bless your endeavors, when your sick Patient
shall once recover of his disease, he will be recovered of that frenzy also,
and will then thank you, and posterity will bless you: Mean while let this
satisfy you, that to do well, and hear ill, is no less then a Been agere
and male audire regium est.
Royalty; and withal remember, that the great Physician of your souls could
not effect that cure without being ill thought and spoken of, and dealt with;
he met with that quip [Physician heal thy selfe] in his life and yet he went
on to heal them, and Luke 4. 23.
when in his death he made a plaster for them that wounded him to the heart
with his own blood (enough to have moved pity and love) they revile him, with
that bitter taunt, more sour then the vinegar they gave him to drink, He saved
others, himself he cannot save; and yet when they thus poured vinegar into his
wounds, he Matthew. 27. 42.
dropped balm into theirs: Did it not drop from his lips, when he died with
those gracious words in his mouth, Father forgive them for they know not what
they do? This did our good Samaritane, and let Luke 23. 34.
me say, what he did upon that occasion, Go you, and do likewise; Luke 10. 37.
Your forwardness herein (I hope) needs not a spur, and therefore I give but
a light touch or two, for the quickining of your hearts, and strengthening your
hands in God; please to consider but these three particulars:

1 The case is very sad, and the cure, without Gods great blessing upon your
cure, in all outward probability is likely to prove desperate: for (I beseech
you) what do you see now before you? a Lazarus lying at your door full of
sores? I believe were all the petitions and complaints considered, that since
your first meeting, have from all parts come crowding to your Parliament door,
as so many sad letters from sick patients to their Physician; the whole Kingdom
would seem to be no better then a common Lazary; But what see you? a man going
down from Jerusalem to Jericho, fallen amongst thieves, stripped, and wounded,
and left half dead, with so much life only as might help him to see, and so to
increase his misery: I say unto you, more and worse then so, Semineces artus,
the trembling halfe-dead sinews, and arteries Brugensis.
of three poor dying Kingdoms miserably torn asunder, at home a rent Church, a
divided Kingdom, a most sad face of things looks out every where, and plurima
mortis imago; but yet looking up with a long look to you, as he in the Gospel
to Christ, with tears in its eyes, and his words in its mouth, If you can do
any thing, have compassion on us and help us: So many bleeding gaping wounds
being (...). 9. 2^
as so many wide opened mouths, crying aloud for your compassion and mercy; we
heard in the beginning that the plant when cut and wounded, wept and bled forth
balm; we can show you our wounds, but we look up to God and you for balm to
heal them.

2 The patient should be (and I know is) dear unto you, expressed here by the
Prophet to be the daughter of his people, which holds her forth under two of
the nearest and dearest relations of his native Country, and of the Church of
God, both which now lie gasping before you.

1 The daughter of your people, (that is) your native Country, indeed your
dear mother, that now lies sick to death, and as it were breaking her
heart strings with her dying groans, and closing now her eyes, and bidding
goodnight to you, and to all her comfort in you together obtestes you by the
womb that bare you, and by the paps that gave you sick, to express your piety
in your pity, if it were possible, that you would be a means that she which
has suckled you with her milk, may not be slocken in her own blood, that you
would do your utmost to prevent her death, which has been a means of your
life, and the comfort of it.

2 The daughter of your people (as here of the Prophets) is the people of God,
as your dear mother, so the dearer Spouse of your dearest Savior, the Virgin
daughter of Zion, the dearly Ier. 12. 7.
beloved of his soul: its the Church as well as the State that now lies
bleeding, and of all others in the whole Kingdom, they are the people of God,
whose comforts, liberties, lives, are in most danger, of dying quite away. Now
what an oath did Hypocrates that great Physician lay upon his Scholars to look
well Vide Hypocratis opera.
to his children? And should not a stronger obligation from your heavenly
Physician lie upon you to look better to his? if they thought it a strong
argument to hasten Christ to come and heal Lazarus, by sending him word, that
he whom he loved was John 11. 3.
sick; how much more prevalent will it be to quicken your both endeavor and
speed toward our cure, when you are now told, that its the dearly beloved
Spouse of Christ, that is so deadly sick, never since recovered from the poison
of that venefica of Rome, never so sick as now: And therefore it is by all the
bowels of Jesus Christ that I move for the yearning of yours; as you love him,
pity his Church. Think, O think you see your Savior for your sakes conflicting
with the pains of death and his Fathers wrath, the goare of his bloody sweat
in the garden, the wanness of his dead look upon the Cross; and then if you
can, do not pity his dying Spouse now conflicting with the like deadly
extremities; as ever you would have your bodily Physician, nay Christ your
heavenly Physician, faithful and kind to you, when you lie on your deathbed
(which how soon it may be, you know not) be you faithful and pitiful to your
own Fathers dear children, and your dearest Saviors beloved Spouse, now at
this dead lift, if ever.

3. And this yet the rather, because your present employment, and call to it,
has many things in it which may justly challenge your greatest care and
diligence; that you may to God and man, both now and at the last day, give up
your account of it with comfort.

It being,

1. Such as Gods peoples prayers are much interested in: it being indeed at
first the happy birth of the earnest prayers and endeavors of all the people
of God all the land over, and which have humbly and constantly attended you at
the Throne of grace ever since, more it may be then ever Parliament was in this
kind attended and assisted formerly: now these prayers in their return look
for much from God, and not for a little from you. He indeed spoke truth, who
said, that he that promises himself but little from the creature, shall not
be much deceived; but it will be your faithfulness, that Gods peoples prayers
and expectations thereupon may not be disappointed; where they are engaged,
they lay on strong engagements. Unless men would turn the Canons mouth upon
themselves, so as that the same suppliants prayers that have strongly pleaded
for them should as strongly plead against them: How sad would it be to us (that
I may not say to you) Si filius tot lac hrymarum periret?

2. Such as the blood of many of the Saints is engaged in, and has been shed
for: now it is precious in Gods sight, and therefore Psalm. 72. 14.
I know will be in yours; and then indeed it will be, when by your further care
and endeavor something of an answerable value shall be purchased with so great
a price; and that will be, if hereby Gods Worship and Truth amongst us come to
be purged, Church and State reformed, Religion and a righteous Peace settled, if
these great blessings bought indeed of God only by Christ's blood, may in some
sense be purchased of man by their blood: those happy souls now in bliss will
never grudge it, but say much good do you with it; but let not our sinful
negligence and faithfulness incur the guilt of it, it will at last fall
heavy where ever it lights. O let it be Babylons, but never Zions Ier. 51. 35.
burden.

3. Such, as in which Gods admirable Providence has been very much engaged and
manifested, in particularly eyeing and choosing you, as so many David's, out of
the midst of your brethren: sure it was with hopes and expectations that you
would be all like him, men after Gods own heart, to fulfill all his will. Be
you Acts 13. 22.
therefore pleased to walk with God fully. In as carefully eyeing and watching
over you ever since, he it is likely has preserved and delivered many of you
in former times of your lives, and some of you since your sitting here, from
particular and personal sicknesses and other dangers, all I am sure of you
from deadliest plots and mischiefs: and then as Mordecai said to Esther, Who
knows whether thou art come to the Kingdom for such a time as this? so let me
say to you, Who knows (it would be good for you seriously to think) whether
God has not preserved and kept you alive on purpose to see what now you will
do for him, whether now you will be faithful unto him, or fail him?

4. Such and so great, as this latter age (I believe) has not brought forth
the like, and the greatest, that in all probability either God or man is likely
ever to employ you in, and which your Lord and Master will call you to the most
strict account of; by which he will most fully try you, and according to which
(it may be) above all other services, he will at the last day finally judge you.

5. Such also, in the last place, as by your faithfulness herein (as you are
our State-Physicians) you may keep the disease from proving Epidemicall: for as
for the general body of this people, it has welnigh overspread all; and
therefore the representative bodies integrity (if any thing do) must stand for
all, one body for another; you representing us all, as well to God as to man,
and so being for the present the only means that is left of keeping off a
National guilt, and so the wrath of God from this whole Nation.

Thus in the first place, labor we, that such as are by their place and office
Gileads Physicians, may themselves indeed prove such.

Secondly, take we heed also for others, that we do not hinder, 2 Duty.
but what in us lies to further them to be so.

1 For the people, I beseech you, that neither our jealousies nor our
malignacies may hinder our Rulers from being our Healers, which would be but to
poison the plaster that should heal us; but let the Patient concur with the
Physician, even your earnestest prayers and assistances with their endeavors
to help on the cure; as its said of the returned Jews, they clave to their
brethren the Nobles: as before that, Shekaniah said to Ezra, Arise, Nehem. 10.
29.
this matter belongs unto thee, but we also will be with thee; As also
before that, we read that Hezekiah humbled himself for Ezra. 10. 4.
the pride of his heart, and not he alone, but its added (he and the
Inhabitants of Jerusalem;) enclosed in a confortable parenthesis, as employed
in the same blessed work, and so wrapped 2 Chronicles. 32. 26.
up in the same common blessing; for it follows, So the wrath of God come not
upon them in those days: and so (namely) in the same blessed way of an happy
union of hearts and hands, of Prince and people, it might not come upon us in
our days neither, which for want hereof hastens fast; these mutual jealousies
poisoning the wound, and so hastening our death, and at least delaying, if not
preventing our cure; The peoples infidelity hindered Christ from working
miracles; the Lord grant that our peoples diffidence and Matthew. 13. 58.
frowardness do not as much hinder our Physiciars working the present cure,
which (if wrought) will be little less then miraculous.)

2 But for you (our much honored Worthies) to whom I again make bold to
address my speech, in whose power in part it is, and whose further happiness
it may be, not only your selves to be, but also to make others our Physicians,
be pleased to improve your ability and skill herein to the utmost.

Are Saints Surgeons? let them then (I entreat you) have not only your license,
but also your countenance and furtherance, that they may hold forth their
profession more boldly.

Are good Magistrates good Physicians? you may now in making good Laws, make
up (as it were) a more perfect Dispensatory for them, by which they may give
every one his right dose more duly and safely.

Are good Ministers, as well State as Soule-Healers; I then humbly beseech you,
that they may yet more and more enjoy the benefit of your Patronage; I speak
not in point of fat Benefices, but that they may be admitted into that sacred
College (as I may call it) more regularly; and then dispense the things of God
more freely, that they may have that liberty which the Word allows them, to cut
off rotten members by Church censures, and not be enforced (as by Law now in
some cases they are) to pour cordials into foul stomachs, whilst they must
administer to most unworthy ones the holy Sacrament. And to this purpose, let
me not forget to beseech you, to have an especial eye to our Gileads, where
Elijahs do or should dwell, the Schools of the Prophets, as they are called,
I mean out Universities; where I wish there were not too many distempers that
have need of a more perfect cure, and that in stead of balm, poison were not
too often dropped into green wounds; our diseased Youth there, have great need of
much better Nurserie and Chirurgerie; How seasonable would it be to have some
more salt cast into our Iericho's springs? And 2 Kings 2. ^1.
therefore I again beseech you, let it be one special part of your most
serious care, in this general cure, that we may (with Gods blessing) find
more sovereign balm there, and have better Physicians thence.

3. But above all, the greatest care of us all in this kind should be, that we
may keep God and Christ with us, and that his blessed Spirit may not by our
sins be driven away from us, this would be the spilling of the balm that
should heal us, and (with the distracted sick man) the driving away the only
chief Physician, that should cure us; we cannot be injurious to him but we
must be cruel to our selves; the driving of him away, is more then the
forsaking of our own mercy: if we be of David's temper, the health of his
countenance, Psalm. 42. 5. is the health of ours, verse 11. our Jonah 2. 8. (...)
unprofitablenesse will discourage him, and occasion our Physician to leave us
when he can do us no good. But O let the daughter of Babylon, and not the
Virgin of Zion ever hear that word said, We would have healed her, but she is
not healed, forsake her.

But our frowardness and base unwillingnesse to be at any Ier. 51. 9.
pains or cost for the cure, will quite drive him away from us, and leave us
just in the swinish Gadarens stie; who, because the healing of their bodies,
and casting out of devils, cost them their hogs, They desired him to depart out
of their Coasts, which he did, and we read not, that he returned thither ever
after. (...). 8. 28. 29, etc.


But thus much for the first point, which holds forth the sufficiency of the
means; I come to the second which expresses the unanswerablenesse of the
success:

That although there be both balm in Gilead, and a Physician there, yet the
health of the people of God (at least for the present) may not be recovered:
Its less wonder if you read of the daughter of Ni^veh, Nahum 3. 19. of Egypt,
Ier. 46. 11. of Babylon, Ier. 51. 9. that their wound was incurable, as its no
wonder at all, if the wounds and sores of corrupt sores be hardfier cured; but
its more pity that good flesh should heal so ill, that the daughter of Zion^
E^s. ^. 1.
health, who is made partaker of Gods saving health, should be so hardly
recovered; that Ephraim should grow more desperately sick under the cure; nay,
that this should reach unto Judah also, that Micah 9.
her wound should be past cure, that best Churches should sink deeper and
deeper into the worst of miseries. Sad is that other expression Ier. 14. 1^.
of our Prophet to this purpose, in a parallel place to this Text, in which the
poor afflicted Church washes her wounds with her tears, whilst she we^ps
over them as incurable, Have thou utterly rejected Judah? has thy soul
loathed Zion? Why have thou smitten, and there is no healing? we looked for
peace, and there is no good, and for the time of healing and behold trouble.
But the Text and the foregoing verses of this Chapter are so full, that they
need no foreign supply; in the Text we have Gileads both balm and Physician
means most likely, and in themselves sufficient; Gileads balm; the best
Receipt and Gileads Physician, that best know how to apply it, and yet he
knows not how to work a cure by it: but that you may take a fuller view,
please but to look to the 18. 19. 20 verses foregoing, and you shall find all
hopes and expectations dashed, as v. 15. All ankers coming home, and all
playsters falling off without healing, the patient fainting with the cordial
in his mouth, and sinking quire down, whilst beset round with supporters to
hold him up.

1 A good heart; that should be vinum in pactore, do good, like Prove. 17. 22.
a medicine; but alas, its wounded, v. 18. and heart-wounds are deadly: if the
eye, the light that is ^^thes, be darkness, how great Math. 6. 23.
is that darkness? and so, if the heart, the life that is in thee, be dead,
how great is that deadness? which yet may betide the people of God in sad
hours, their hearts failing as well as their flesh, as we have heard; the
Spouse of Christ inwardly fainting Psalm. 73. 26.
and sinking down in such a swoone; and if the weak man's staff that should
especially support him be broken, how unavoidably and heavily does he fall?

2 A good God, in his holy ordinances; Is not the Lord in Zion? verse 19. which
was the place of Gods Ark, and it of his residence and presence, enough (one
would have thought) to have prevented all wounds (Zion so high as not to be
reached by the hand of violence) or at least presently to have healed them, as
long as sanctuary oil poured in them, and yet the cure is not wrought for all
this; the Lord and his Ark are in Zion, and yet the daughter of Zion continues
wounded, and her wound not healed: Which holds out, that a people may live
under good ordinances, and yet sadly groan under heavy pressures and miseries.

3 A good King, and righteous administrations; Is not her King in her? verse
19. Zion being not only the place of the Arc, but also the Kings Palace, and
therefore called the City of David; in which therefore besides the Ark of God,
was David the servant 2 Samuel 5. 7.
of God, or some of his posterity, there sitting on the Throne, as Josiah for
no less then eighteen years of Ieremiahs time; And what Kings evil so
dangerours as that he might not cure? but for all that, the cure could not be,
the inflammation of the wound continued; notwithstanding all that he was and
did, the Lord ^urned not from the fierceness of his wrath, that was kindled,
and could not be quenched: Which further shows, that the case sometimes 2
Kings 23. 26.
may be so far gone, as that neither Church Ordinance, nor Civil Government,
can (for the present at least) recover a poor fainting, dying Church and
People.

4 All likeliest outward supplies, either at home or from abroad, verse, 20.
The Harvest is past and Summer is ended, and we are not saved; Harvest uses to
be the income of our Store, but its past, and no provision laid in of our
selves, nor help come from our friends or Allies, now that after harvest they
might be most likely to be at best leisure; but is there any thing yet behind,
which may supply us, or for the time detain them, that with any comfort and
hope we may wait yet any longer? Yes Vintage is after Harvest, stay therefore
till that be past, and it may afford something to cheer us, and then they may
have nothing to do, but to come and help us. The next clause answers that, and
says that is past too, not only Harvest is past, but also summer (and so
vintage also) is ended, after which no crop is to be expected, and we are not
saved; Which last expression says expressly thus much, that hopefullest
outward helps in likeliest times and seasons may fail the Church of God, and
she droop still, even pine in Harvest and faint in Vintage. All but further
explaining the metaphor of the Text, that the daughter of Zion may be so deadly
sick and wounded, that notwithstanding best means used, even Gileads balm
applied; Yet,

1 Her health (at least for the present) not at all recovered, she no whit
mended.

2 That Is not all, not recovered, is but a (...), the Prophet means more then
he expresses, he would say or at least have you understand, that its much more
endangered, as sores if they do not heal they rankle, and the sick man's
sickness, if his physic work not, proves more deadly.

1 Old diseases whether inward or outward, are more discovered, it may be
confirmed, or at least for present, much more exasperated; its usually so with
diseased bodies, and we now full sadly see it so in the bodies of these woefully
distempered Kingdoms. When I would have healed Israel, then the iniquity (the
perverse crooked iniquity) of Ephraim was discovered, and the wickedness, (...)
nay, the wickednesses, as the word is in the original, the manifold and
monstrous wickedness of Samaria, we may say as truly of England, never so
desperately sick of both sin and misery, as since of late we have been under
cure, our old lurking distempers are now fully manfested.

2 New ones multiplied, as in bodily diseases one begets another, and the sick
man that lay down with one disease, before he get up again has gotten many,
too sadly made good in the sins and miseries of a distempered (of our
distempered) people. There is a new rising in the old bile, which of old was
dangerous and omnious; new sins and sinners discovered by an affliction,
which before were never suspected; and new judgments Levit. 13. 18, 19, 20.
multiplied, even to four times seven times more, which before (it may be)
were never feared: and the worst of it is, that the Levit. 26. 18, 2^, 24, 28.
Devil appears to be much in it, when the latter end does prove so much worse
then the beginning of it, Matthew. 12. 45.

3 So as that to present sense she may seem to be incurable, and her health
wholly irrecoverable, when after all helps, she not only negatively is nothing
better, no mends, as though she had had no means; (which is the meaning of
the question, Is there no Balm? whilst there is no healing by it) but also
positively grows much worse, that her physic proves her poison, and her very
Balm envenoms her wound; it is a poisoned one indeed, and in man's eye
absolutely incurable. Of this point, if Judah of old, and England now for the
present were not too sad instances, I should add further proofs, but they
spare me that labor; and therefore I come to a third point, which will serve
partly for the reason, and partly for the use of this second.



And this we had from the second question, Why then, etc. which was (as we
heard) a question partly of enquiry, and partly of an expostulating and
bemoaning complaint, and so let it be to us this day of our selfe-searching
humiliation.

First, matter of enquiry, of what should be the reason of this ill success,
when in the beginning of the Parliament we were as a ship under sail before
the wind, bound amain for the fair havens of the peace and happiness of
Church and State, that now retro omnia? but what unhappy remora or Anchor under
water not yet seen, has stopped us in this happy course? from what quarter has
this cross blast blown, that has driven us again into the depths, and dashed
us so against the rocks, that all threaten shipwreck? or rather in the
expression of the Text, when all promised so happy a cure, Physicians so able,
balm so precious, the daughter of our people so sick of her sickness, and so
desirous of a recovery, all in such a fast healing way; what is the matter,
that we are fallen into so desperate a relapse, that all lies a bleeding,
gasping, and in the view of most, dying quite away?

For answer whereto, we must needs say, that the cause of all this must be in
one of these three: either first, in the Physician and his physic; or
secondly, in the Patient and his distemper; or thirdly, in some other negligent
or ill-minded Attendant, or stander-by.

1. I begin with the last first: and for it; when the question was, How came
such choking tares to spring up in a so well-sown field? the answer was, that
surely an enemy had done it: So for certain, Matthew. 13. 23.
some enemy or other has done this also. If you ask, who? you need not doubt,
but that the old Serpent has poison enough to invenom both the wound and the
plaster; nor wants he his instruments and under-workmen, by the same means
(viz. poisonous slanders, and malicious oppositions) that he retarded the
returned Jews in their so hopefully a begun work, to hinder us also that are
now returning from Babylon in a greater cure. I beseech you therefore, as Paul
did the Romans in a like case, to Romans 16. 17.
have a more watchful eye, whilst you are applying balm to the wound for the
cure of it, to mark who they are that sliely cast in venom to poison it.
Italians (they say have great skill in poisoning of bodies, and they of the
Italian Religion (I am sure) have as great in poisoning of Churches and States;
not caring to burst the body, to make their great swell. If some poison were
not so subtle, and so subtly conveyed, as not, but by the deadliest effects of
it, to be discovered; I should less fear these Romish Artists having any
influence in best counsels and actions; and so have less cause in this matter
of enquiry to desire your greater care: but if they be so crafty, you cannot be
too circumspect.

2. For our Physicians, they are principally our God, and our Governors.

1. Now for our God, He you see in the Text complains of the slownesse of the
cure; and therefore he can be no faulty cause of it: and yet in this enquiry,
it may be of great use to consider for what holy and wise ends he permits and
orders it: namely,

1. The wound may not be so soon healed, that it may be the more deeply
searched, and the corruption of it more fully discovered: so we read that God
was leading Israel through a wilderness no less then forty years, but it was
thereby to prove them, and to know what was in their hearts: a short spurt does
not try me, Deuteronomy. 8. 2.
but the length and hardness of the way will at last tell me what leg I halt
on. Many a particular Christian (I doubt not) can say, that he should never
have thought there had been so much infidelity, pride, frowardness,
impatience, worldliness, and such like corruption in his heart, if such an
affliction which God laid on his estate, name, body, soul, etc. had been
sooner removed, which by the longer on-lying of it, has been (at least to
himself) more fully manifested. And may not the like be as truly said of a
whole State and People? that the falsenesse and rottenness of many had never
been so discovered, if the cure now in hand had been more speedily effected?
great has been our gain in our loss of them; for some of them otherwise
might have been made as chief pillars in the building (think you with what
scandal and mischief) who now by an heavier weight lying on for some longer
time of their probation and seasoning, have manifested themselves to be rotten
posts. They are certainly now (...) times of trial, Luke 8. 13.
that sooner or later will discover us all. God (we hope) is about to set up
his Tabernacle, nay his Temple; and therefore will have the gold that is to be
employed in it, more purely refined, and therefore more fully tried; so long
being in the fire, has already manifested some to be dross look we to it, for
the fire may be yet kept in, and we in it, to try whether the rest of us be any
better metal. Our wound in the first place may therefore be the longer
continued, that it may be the more thoroughly searched:

2. And we the more deeply humbled: Which is the duty of this day, and the main
work which (I believe) God is doing in England at this day, viz. to bring down
our loftiness and pride to prick the swollen bladder, and to take down the
Typhus of a Britannia triumphans, as some few years since we vainly boasted;
because then in our own thoughts we were triumphant, we are therefore now
sadly militant, and may so yet continue longer, till our hearts be brought
lower. For so, if one years wandering in the wilderness will not humble
Israel, forty shall; and what submission a fewer Deuteronomy. 8. 2.
months of war and trouble could not bring our English Israel unto it may be
God will see if some years continuance can effect; that if the lusty strong
man will (...) out one or two fits of the fever, try whether the third or
fourth will not make him stoop, and whether many more and long continued will
not lay him down on his bed, if not in his grave. Truly, for our parts, we are
now at the very brink of it, in many respects we are brought very low, and yet
in our clothes, diet, jollity, and bravery, especially in our high liftings up
of our hearts against God and his ways, we are as high as ever; but shall a
proud heart and a proud people be able to carry it out thus against a great
God? O England, be instructed lest thou be yet, and yet, and yet seven times
more plagued, and Ier. 6. 8.
that till thine uncircumcised heart be at last humbled: God certainly is
eating the proud flesh out of it, and therefore it is that Levit. 26. 41.
he yet continues the corrasive.

3 And (as a fruit hereof) to take the creature quite off from its own legs and
other crutches, and so in prayer and faith to cast it upon God only: for as
long as we can make any shift of our selves, or can think of any help from the
creature, so long God shall not be sought after; for to him naturally we will
not be beholden till we needs must; and so when not only Ephraim feels his
sickness, but even when Judah sees his wound, the Assyrian and King Iareb,
are their next Physicians that are first sent to, Hos. 5. 13. (as Baal-zebub
before God by sick Ahaziah,) and thereupon 2 Kings 1. 2, 3.
the Moth is turned into a Lion, verse 12. 14. (Judgments as its most just,
not only continued, but also increased when the creature is preferred, and God
neglected) which does so rend and tear and carry away, that they cannot heal,
verse 13. nor any else rescue, verse 14. that so at last, cap. 6. 1. God may
hear of them, and that word from them, Come and let us return unto the Lord;
for he has torn, and he will heal us, etc. Jehoshaphat must be brought to
that pass, that he knows not what to do, that his 2 Chronicles. 20. 12.
eyes may be up to God, when he can look for help no where else: and it is
out of measure and above strength, that even Paul must be pressed, so as to
despair of life, and to receive in himself the sentence of death; that so he
might be brought, not to trust 2 C^r. 1. 8, 9.
in himself, but in God that quickneth the dead. This I conceive is another
piece of that great work, which God in this Kingdom has been long about, and
is yet doing to this day, viz. to take us off from relying on Counselors and
Soldiers, our own strength at home, and friends abroad; with Asa, trusting
more 2 Chronicles. 16. 12.
to our Physicians then our God: in which case it is his faithfulness to let
the present issue yet run, to prevent a more dangerous and deadly mischief.

4 And hereupon, that in case health and healing do come, we may know to whom
to give all the praise: (...) Aesculapio, praise to our God: it being the great
praise of a Physician to cure that at last which many others had been long
about, and given over as desperate; as it was in Christ's curing of her that
Mark 5. 26.
had suffered much, and spent all on other Physicians, and yet proved rather
worse then better: How wonderfully would the glory of God appear, if now that
all help on earth seems to fail us, he from heaven would save us? none could
then share with him in his praise, when none joined with him in the work: we
should then thrust away all the praise from our selves, as it were with one
hand, and say, Not unto us O Lord; and as though Psalm. 115. 1^
it were not yet far enough from us, thrust it yet further off with the other,
and again say the second time, Not unto us, but unto thy name be all the
praise: When lanched thus into the deep, out of sight of land, and in the midst
of the storm, when nothing appears but Sea and Heaven, should we then by the
tempest be driven into Harbor; we must needs lift up hands on high, and
thankfully say, This Sea did not drown us, because that heaven saved us: For
which end it is, that God oftentimes, either early prevents us with salvation
before we ever dreamt of it, is up before us, before we went out to work, that
we might not say we wrought it; or some other time stays long till we be
quite wearied out and gone to bed having done nothing; comes not to his
Disciples till the fourth watch of the night, and when Matthew. 14. 25.
they are quite beat out with the storm, that so when he comes, he may say, It
is I, and we may not have to say otherwise, but Verse 27.
that it is thou Lord only.

5 Lastly, that as he then may have all the praise, so that we may learn
thereby to have more care how we expose our selves to such dangers and wounds
ever after: This use they made of it in their return from Babylons captivity,
After all this is come Ezra 9. 13. 14.
upon us, and thou have given us such deliverance as this, should we again
break thy Commandments? would thou not be angry with us till thou had
consumed us? etc. As if they had said, upon our slow recovery, we had need be
the more fearful of a relapse; for if the last wound were so long in healing,
^ware lest the next prove not altogether incurable.

Beloved, should we yet be more sick; if yet thereby we might be made the more
careful to go away and sin no more, John 5. 14.
it would be but the healing of a lethargy by a fever, a greater disease by a
less, and so we should have no cause to blame our heavenly Physician, our God.

2 But what say you to our Governors, under God our Physicians? enough and often
too much, as its usual; if the unruly Patient be not cured, the Physician (do
he what he can) is wont to be blamed. Noble Senators, what you have been, or
are to God and us, we bless him and you for; and the Lord add to it an
hundredfold; but the present day and duty (were there nothing else) forbid the
giving of flattering Titles to lift you up, who came hither as well as the
meanest of us to be humbled, and lie low at Gods feet for mercy: and for this
purpose, the less others may, the more I beseech you, that you your selves
would make an inquiry, whether there be any thing amiss either in balm or
Physician, in your persons or actions, as men, or as Parliament men, that may
be the cause, why, after all your care and pains, the health of the daughter
of our people is not yet recovered, but rather more endangered; Now the Lord
help you in a further search, as into other men's sins; so into your own
hearts and ways, that there may be both ways a more perfect discovery and
recovery together.

3 But let the Physician be never so skillful and faithful, and his physic
never so sovereign and useful, the Patient yet may grow worse rather then
better, and the whole faulty cause be in himself only; and that first, either
in the nature of his disease, or secondly, in his own miscarriage of himself,
whilst he is under the cure.

1 And first, for diseases and wounds, though the balm in it self should be
able to heal all, as we saw in the first Doctrine; yet some may be at least
longer under the cure, and some in the event at last prove indeed incurable; As
in particular,

First, wounds, when great and deep, and diseases, if more violent and
malignant: answerable whereunto are great sins which cause great and deeper
wounds, especially when sinners grow virulent and malicious, they thereby
poison the wound, and make the fever malignant, and so hardly, if at all,
recoverable: So Judah, when their sin (viz. Idolatry) was great, and withal
they malicious, in wounding and killing Gods Prophets that were sent to cure
them; their case then proved incurable, there was then (we heard) no remedy. 2 Chronicles. 36. ^^. 15. 16.


Its now our present case, and as likely to be incurable, if God be not more
merciful: for our sins, for kind, are very great, and if circumstances can
bigger them, of the largest size; if their Idolatry made them without remedy,
ours may well keep us under a longer cure: and the Lord grant it at last. For
if imbitterednesse of spirit against God, his grace, truth, ways, and
servants, can make it, I fear me, Englands present disease, as much as, if not
more then any other Nations, is grown pestilentially malignant.

Secondly, sometimes the wound is secret, like the Philistims 1 Samuel 5. ^^
blind Emerods, not so easily discerned; or its some lurking disease, that is
not of a long time discovered, and therefore the longer before it be healed:
Answerable hereunto, are secret sins, not suspected, or at least not
discovered, and therefore very hardly cured; as Achans accused thing hid in his
Tent, made such a wound in the body of that people, as even Joshua's prayer
could not heal, till it was laid open and discovered. Josh. 7.


A fair Item for us, in this day of our searching into our wound, which will
not heal, to take the Probe and search yet deeper, whether some envenomed
Arrows head lie not yet hid in it, that hinders the healing of it, I mean some
sin or other of this Nation, which has not yet been discovered, or if seen,
yet over-looked, or at least nor openly and solemnly confessed and bewailed,
either in the Parliaments Ordinance, or our Church Assemblies: it may be there
is; it would be well therefore when we see the finger swell and rankle, to look
a little more narrowly, if there be not some thorn or thistle in it, which
before we minded not, that thus causes and continues the pain; some Jonah
hid under the Deck, which makes the Sea work, and the storm increase, and row
the Mariners as Jonah 1.
hard as they can, keeps them yet from the haven.

3. We heard that Chronicall diseases were hardly cured, and old sores heal
very slowly, especially in old age, and toward winter: Answerable whereunto
are old sins long continued in, upon which usually follow long continued
judgments, hardly delivered from. There are but two places in Scripture that
speak of sinners settled on their lees, and in both Ier. 48. 11. Zeph. 1. 12.
we read of their deep sinking in judgments.

Do I not here again touch our sore? and withal point at one cause of the
slow healing of it? we have been (as we think) long in suffering, but is it
not because we have been longer in sinning? We that are already almost out of
breath, should be quite out of all patience, if God and our Governors should
be as long in healing of our wounds, as we have been in making them; though in
other cases we know it is ordinary, that the wound is sooner made then cured,
and the sickness easilier fallen into, then risen up out of. We that are sick
of new fashions, are stark dead, and grown stiff in retaining old sins. I
fear me, God is now upon an old reckoning with us, he speed us to a good end
of it; for the daughter of Jeremiahs people, grown old in adulteries, when
thereupon grown Ezekiel. 23. 43.
fick of her filthy diseases, died out right before she recovered.

4. As any old diseases are long in curing, so especially those that are
hereditary, and so become natural to our temper and constitution: the son
inherits more often his fathers gout or stone, then his lands, and is sooner
rid of the one then of the other. Answerable hereunto is the sin of our
nature, either in the general depravation of it, in our first parents; or in
some more particular veins of it, derived to us from our next Progenitors.
David in sense of that irrecoverable sickness of his child, Psalm. 51. 5.
ascends to the first distemper of his nature which occasioned it; and the
Jews so fast sticking to their forefathers sins, Ier. 44. 17.
brought judgments that clave as fast to them, and their posterity after them.
Ver. 21, 22, 23.


O that in washing this day with our tears our still-bleeding wounds, we could
(as we should every day) weep over our first old sore, acknowledging it to be
bad flesh that is so ill to heal, and that sure our blood is tainted, that
continues the quartane thus long, and turns it into a continued fever.

And in particular, that we would have some recourse to our next or more remote
forefathers sins, which we indeed inherit more then their estates, and in
these plundering times are hardlier plucked from them, then from their
inheritances; accounting it piety toward them to be impious against God,
whilst we choose rather to tread in their steps, then to wal^ in his ways;
their vain, profane, superstitious, and sometimes ridiculous customs and
ways we have been borne to, and brought up in, and therefore can by no means
endure to be plucked from; which I fear God now visits for, and it may be our
posterity may smart for, that the tent may be as deep as the wound. O that
these Devils that have possessed us Matthew. 17. 21.
from our youth, may this day go forth with prayer and fasting! These and such
like particulars in the disease may protract the cure; but were there none
such, yet,

2. In the second place, the distempered mis-carriage of the Patient, whilst
under cure, may not only protract it, but even wholly intercept it. And for
this, I desire that in our present search, we would carefully enquire after
this one particular; namely, Whether our not being willing wholly to give up
our selves to our heavenly Physicians ordering and disposal, for our cure,
together with the time, way, and means of it, be not one chief cause of the
longer delay of it. When it came to a [Father, not my will, but thine be done]
though (it is true) Matthew. 26. 39.
death ensued; yet it is as true, that a glorious resurrection shortly after
followed upon it.

Could we now be but fully meekned under our heavenly Fathers hand, be freely
willing to be and to do, to suffer and to want whatever our God will; so that
our heavenly Physician may diet us, and our Surgeon at his pleasure bind
us, if we were made willing to abstain from what he forbids, and to do and
take whatever he prescribes, and quietly suffer and undergo what in this his
lanching and searing of us he inflicts, without making a sour face at a bitter
potion: I durst assure you in Gods Name, that either no death would follow upon
it, or if the witnesses, with us, should not yet be slain, yet that after the
third day there would follow upon it a like happy resurrection.

I doubt me, that here I have unguem in ulcere, my finger once again upon our
present malady, and on one maine cause of the continuance of our misery. God
finds us (I fear me) as yet an unsubdued people, like the Prophets wil^^ Bull
in Isa. 51. 20.
a net, as impatient to be bound to our better abbearance by these cords of
affliction, as we were before by the sacred ties of his holy commands. We will
do, and suffer, and part with as much of our estates and comforts, for God and
his cause, as we think fit, (and that with many of us is but little, with some
nothing) but not so much as he and it call for: our conclusion with our selves
is, that we mean not to be so bad husbands as Paul was, to lose all for the
gaining of Christ, to be so poor or pure, as we foresee he and his Phil. 3. 8.
cause will make us, and that makes us leave both him and it together: And from
hence, I verily think, in a great measure comes the continuance of that misery
which we would shorten, if not prevent.

We are not willing to lie still whilst we are cut and lanched, and therefore
our blessed Surgeon is enforced to bind us yet faster: we cannot endure to
be brought so low, as God would have us; and therefore (it may be) he will
have us yet lower: nor to stay so long under his cure, and it may even
therefore prove the longer: we love our ease more then ou^ health; and
therefore may come to be more sick: nay the corruption of our wound more then
the cleansing of it, (for old corruptions we love, and an holy Reformation we
loathe) and therefore may expect yet more sharp abstersives: we are sick of our
physic, and were not so much before exasperated against them that made our
wounds, as now against them that would heal them. It was Livies sad complaint
of his times, that they could endure neither their malady, nor medicine: the
same is the unhappiness of ours; before the Parliament took us in hand, we
were so sick, that without cure we could not live; and since, we are grown so
froward, that we will not be cured. Now the good Lord pity us; but must we
thus die?

Thus much for this first use of examination, as this [Why is not, etc.] was a
question of enquiry.

O thou that art named the house of Jacob, is the Spirit of the Lord straightened?
(say, have we been straightened in his Micah 2. 7.
bowels, or not rather in our own hearts? are these his doings? Look on all
that is done, on all the deep bleeding wounds of this poor dying Kingdom; are
they deep? and do they indeed smart and bleed, and fester? O look upon them
yet again with a sad heart and wet eye, (they bleed, and should not we weep?)
and see whose doings they are, Gods or ours, as whether the malefactors
branding and executing be his or his Judges; the unhappy child, whipping, his
or his fathers; the malefactors in sinfully deserving, or the Judges in
righteously punishing; the childs in offending, or the Parents incorrecting;
the desperate man's in making his wound, or the faithful Surgeons in
searching it: and let not the just Judge bear the blame of the Malefactors
crime, or the tender Father of the untoward Childs wantonness, or the
careful Surgeon of the distempered Patients unrulinesse. No, thy ways and
thy doings have procured these things to thy self, says God, Ier. 4. 18. and
chap. 2. 17. he dare appeal to them whether they could say otherwise; Have
thou not procured this unto thy self, in that thou have forsaken the Lord thy
God, when he led thee in the way? The Lord has not been unwilling to be our
God, to be Englands God, but we have forsaken him, and that even when he led us
in the way, ever since he led us in the way out of Egypt toward Canaan, as
far as we got in the first Reformation; but especially since of late after
our recoiles backwards toward Egypt, he has been about to lead us the second
time in a more direct and full way Canaan-ward; have we not since this forsaken
him? and many of us more then ever turned our backs on him? and whom then shall
we complain of, for these our longer wanderings? of God? no; of our selves
only, and that in regard both of God, and our selves.

1 First, of our selves, that we should be so cruel to our selves, that either
for the Popes, or our own sinful lusts sake, we should at first make such
deadly wounds, and now more cruelly hinder the cure of them: for as Esther said
of Haman, that the enemy could not countervaile the Kings damage: so can our
Esther 7. 4.
lusts, or the Whore of Babylon (think you) make the Virgin of Zion amends, for
thus making her a selfe-murderer? Now where is the heart of the true English
man? of old so zealous of its Nations honor and happiness? Where the bowels
of a true Christian, that should do good to enemies? and shall we wound
friends? even kill our selves? Is it the daughter Matthew. 5. 44.
of my people in the Text, that God is so tender of? and what is become of her
Virgin tender heartedness? it was of old a part of Jeremiahs Lamentation, That
the daughter of his people was become cruel like the Ostriches in the
Wilderness, in that they Lam. 4. 3, 4.
suckled not their children, when in truth the cause was, that they had no
milk for them: but may it not then be a sadder note in ours, when the daughter
of our people makes her self drunk with her own, and her childrens blood? and
(which is worst) cannot be satisfied with it; and therefore takes a course that
it should bleed still? Oh how unlike to her self is the tender daughter of our
people, that is become so cruel and unnatural! It is not the tender Virgin of
Zion, but the cruel man (says Solomon) that troubles his own flesh; nay the
Apostle Prove 11. 17. Ephesians. 5. 29.
un-manneth him that hates it; yea, the Gospel tells us, it was a man possessed
with no less then a legion of devils that cut and wounded himself, and
(which was more devilish) that cried out of Christ when he came to heal him:
whereby Mark 5. 5. 7, 9.
it appears, that there is more then the rage of a man, no less then
Satanicall malice and cruelty in this our present malady, when we can endure to
tear out our own bowels; and what legion of devils has possessed us, that
we can see our dear mother lie gasping in her gore, and yet more cruelly
widen and deepen the wound? and most poysonously hinder (at least protract) the
cure? O that this day we could abhor our selves that in these respects we
should be 1. thus cruel to our selves 2. And alike injurious to God.

1 In making him thus deadly to wound us, which he would not, has no heart to,
Lam. 3. 33. has no instrument of his own for, but must hire it, Isa. 7. 20.
accounts it his strange work, Isa. 28. 21. and therefore would be a stranger
to it: Now then if an earthly father would not willingly make use of the rod,
why should we enforce our heavenly Father to take the sword? though we be
cruel, yet our God is not; and why then should we make him? 1. in constraining
him to wound us, when he would not; 2. in Crudelem Med^um, etc.
bindring him to heal us, when he would; We cannot but say, that this our
woeful wound has diverse times been in a fair way and forwardness to be
healed, and yet suddenly (we know not how) cast back again, and inflamed more
then ever; and what comes this to, but to our Saviors I would, and ye would
not? it plainly shows, that God has desired and furthered, but we have Mat.
23. 37.
hindered our own healing, and thereby him of the praise.

1 Of his tender bowels of mercy, which he most delights in, as though they
were shut up from pitying us, which we know have been strongly yearning
toward us.

2 Of his faithfulness, as though in this our greatest strait he were wanting
to us, who (our consciences can witness) has never failed us: nay, as though
he intended to betray us, by engaging us in his cause and then leaving us, as
the Egyptians were ready to make a like exposition of the like case, that God
for mischief should lead out his people to destroy them in the wilderness: Exodus
3. 12.
Whereas those of us that are most disappointed cannot (I am sure) stand out
and say, that our faithful God in any thing, wherein he ever engaged us, has
deserted us.

3 Of his Power, as though he were not able to save us, the Egyptians like
gloss upon the like Text, Numb. 14. 16. whereas the mighty acts that our eyes
of late have seen, cannot but convince the most either dull or obstinate, that
although by reason of our sins, it should never be done, yet it never was,
nor will be for want in our Almighty God to do it.

4 Of his Wisdom, as appointing means either weak, or improper, or importune,
not able, not fit, at least not at this time, to effect it; which was the
allegation of the returned Jews for their delay, but cannot be for God here in
the Text, for it was balm, a medicine most sovereign, Gileads balm, an
homebred Hag. 1. 2.
Medicine of their own, and therefore most proper; applied when they were deadly
sick and wounded, and could it be in a fitter time? all which agreed in the
course which God took, and the means which he has used for our cure,
instruments most precious, admirably fitted for the work, and them of our own
brethren and then, when we stood in most need; and yet if now by reason of our
sins all should miscarry, in the eye of the perverse world, God and his
servants shall be accounted to have mistaken, either in the time, they were too
hasty, the bile was not ripe as yet to be lanched, popery should have been
suffered to have festered a little longer, till it had poisoned all: or in the
means, this was not the way; but a Quid pro quo; nay of the very cause and
person, disease and patient, for piety and not Popery shall then be avouched to
have been the disease, and nor the Atheist and Papist, but the zealous
Protestant the true malignant, and so Gods cause shall be none of his, and so
God not himself; but shall we so requite the Lord, O foolish people and
unwise? because we will be our selves, shall not God be himself? Deuteronomy. 32. 6.
because we will stand to our cause, shall God desert his? because we will be
desperate and unthankful, shall not he therefore be holy, wise, just,
faithful and merciful? and yet all this in case after all that is done, by
reason of our sins, we should yet quail, will be called in question, as the
unruly patient in hindering his own cure, wrongs indeed himself; but withal
wounds his Physician in his repute for skill or will, faithfulness or love, or
something or other that will be thought was wanting: as in case Israel lose
themselves in the wilderness, the fault will be laid on their guide; and yet
our case will be worse then that, De^^. 9. 28.
for there Moses feared that Egyptians, i. e. strangers and enemies only would
make such perverse constructions, but it is to be feared that in case of our
miscarriages some of the Israel of God themselves may be ready to prove such
weak Interpreters, that when we have by our sins poisoned the wound, even
we our selves through frowardness or unbeleef may be ready to call Gods love,
faithfulness, power, and wisdom in question about the cure; and out of unjust
distrust be ready to say, what God here in the Text says by way of just
complaint. But is there was there, no balm in Gilead? what, no Physician
there? is there any help in God, when we find none? any faithfulness in him,
when no faith in us? is not his mercy clean gone for ever, seeing our hopes
are? Does not his Psalm. 75. 8, 9.
promise fail, when our expectations do? For so indeed sick children are often
very froward; and thus when we get no good, God gets much dishonor, from us,
as well as others; not only Gileads balm is spilt, too precious (as we heard
in the beginning) so to be lost; ad quid perditio haec? but also Gileads Matthew.
26. 8.
chief Physician wronged, too good to be so ill requited: let us think that
Christ speaks thus to every one of us. Amice, ut John 18. 13.
quid me percutis? friends, but why through your own sides, do you wound your
best friend and Physician to the heart, who heartily has both desired and
endeavored your healing? Let this above all be our present shame and grief,
and let it be our greatest care for ever hereafter so to comply with God, and
that cure he is yet about, that at last, to his praise and our own comfort, it
may manifestly appear to us, and to all, that there has been balm in
Gilead, and a faithful Physician there, when the health of the daughter of our
people shall be recovered.

Quod faxit (...) per Christi vulnera, Amen. FINIS. Exodus 15. 26.


