A true RELATION Of a late Skirmish at HENLEY upon THAMES: WHEREIN A great
defeat was given to the Redding Cavaliers, lately assaulting the aforesaid
Town of HENLEY.
BEING The true Copy of a Letter sent from one Captain Samuel Turner, then in
the said service, to his brother in LONDON.

Si Deus nobiscum, Quis contra nos? London Printed for Henry Overton, and are
to sold at his Shop in Popes-Head-Alley. Jan. 26. 1643.

A true RELATION OF A Late Skirmish at HENLEY upon Thames.
Loving Brother,
I_ Know ere this you expected to have heard from me concerning our welcome to
this Town of Henlie, where now we are, and indeed I had answered both your
expectation, and mine own desire before this, could I have heard but of any
one that had gone from hence to London: I know you have already heard in part
what friends came from Redding hither to visit us, within few hours after we
came here. But to give you a full and true Relation of what my self was an
eyewitness of, from the beginning to the end: About nine of the clock at
night we came to this Town, where before we could get in, by reason the bridge
was not quite laid down, we were enforced to stay an hour and an half at the
least; So soon as we were come in, and our men gone to their quarters, some of
us, amongst which my self was one, rid round to view the Town how it lay,
which when we had done; we appointed 4. Companies to watch that night, one
toward Redding, and the other at the Bridge, at third at the upper end of the
Town, and my self having the maine guard, it being mine for that night as I
was eldest Captain of those that watched: I divided my Company, and sent my
Lieutenant, with about 40. men to guard some works which the Town had made on
the way to Oxford, I having the rest on the maine guard, which was kept in a
little round house close by the Town Hall, where the 4. ways divide
themselves, having thus ordered our men, and having placed our Ordnance, which
were but 3. in all, one of our biggest pieces toward Redding road, and the
other, which was our best, toward Oxford, and the third, which was but a Drake,
we planted toward the upper end of the Town, by that time this was done, it
grew near eleven of the Clock; half an hour after, being in company with
Captain Beton, it being my place to go the grand round, he desired to go
along with me, we went with 6. Musketeers round about the hills which compass
the Town, half an hour after twelve we came in again, and found all quiet
and well, about two of the Clock in the morning, being in a house with the
Mayor, and most of our Gunners, discoursing together, news was brought that the
enemy was come, and had fired upon our Sentinels, which caused an Alarm
through the Town, we all (though Gods assistance) put on resolutions to
withstand them to the utmost, they came furiously on, with a loud cry, the
Town is ours, and did no way question to have broke through all, being most of
them Troopers, and Dragooneers; the number as we hear by a Ensign whom we
took prisoner, who was mounted for the service, was about one thousand horse,
riding two and two on a horse; the first Centinell who made discovery of them,
having given fire, presently ran away to the Court of guard, who presently were
in a readiness, and came forth and fired upon them, so as that they could not
come into the Town so soon as they made account of, but being all horse, save
only ten or twelve of their Dragooneers which were on foot, at last they broke
their way through, and came along the Lane toward the Town, the way they came
being but narrow, and not above a flights shot, or little more in length, from
their first entrance, we being in readiness to have fired upon them, durst
not, by reason they drove our men before them all along the way, our Parliament
dog lay ready to fire upon them, which being laden with one great shot, and two
cases of shot, containing 120. Musket bullets, at length the way being clear
of our own men, but full of theirs, we let fly, my self being within a yard
or two at most when it gave fire, and saw the execution it did; some of their
horse came so desperately on, that they were even ready to enter upon the mouth
of the Canon, as presently after the shot was given appeared, for we found 3.
men, and 4. horse lie dead within less then a quaites throw off the mouth of
the piece, and an Ensign which was found half dead, and half alive, having
his Leg shot short off, and some three shots more in his body beside, yet
living, who confessed the whole business; I think they were so bit, that they
will scarce brag of their Victory, or come again in have; the number of men
which we found of theirs were but 4. which were killed outright, and 5. horse,
one horse the Gunner took alive, and another, which by reason of their great
have in running away, as we conceive, crowding along a narrow way, who should
get first away, fell into a muddy ditch, and there was left till morning, where
we took him out, one of these 4. men, as our Soldiers were stripping of them,
spoke a word or two, and so dyed, That he was the first Captain of the Lord
Grandisons Regiment, and desired to be remembered to his Colonel, and dyed
immediately, he having received above a dozen wounds, another as we hear was a
Sergeant Major, and since we hear of six that were found dead in a wood,
lying together on a heap, one of them a Captain, and we are informed by some
who came from a place called Causome, that there are diverse lie wounded there,
beside our men saw them lift up on their horses which they carried away, some
dead, others wounded, so that we conceive they lost thirty men at least, The
whole Skirmish from the time they entered, to the time they ran away, was not a
full quarter of an hour; We lost of our men but 3. in all, one of which was
mine, who was first slain, he was shot as he was standing on the left of my
Company as I had drawn them up, with a Musket bullet, which went in at his
left breast, and came through at his back on the right shoulder, so as he fell
presently down, with his arms spread out, not moving any part of his body, so
that I conceive the shot went through his heart, he was honorably interred the
next day, attended with a great number of Soldiers out of every Company,
another of my Soldiers, one Tho: Hyat, a Fishmongers man, who lives in your
division, was shot through the body with a pistol shot, as he was coming
from his quater to the Court of guard, he was forced to make use of their
language to save himself, and to cry out, where are these Roundheaded rogues,
but they pursuing of him, struck him through the hat with a Pole axe, but
missed his head, I have great hope of his recovery, he has told me since, he
hopes to live to have a revenge on them; Thus as well as I can remember, I have
given you a narration of what passages happened: Truly he is more then blind
which could not see God mainfestly in every particular working deliverance for
us, and confusion to our enemies, we may truly say, never less of Man seen,
and more of God, for I had almost forgot to tell you that two Troops of horse
which were appointed to be with us, left us at the Towns end, and went away to
their quarters, so that we were left naked, only God fought on our sides: if
the enemy had got into the Town, I believe few of us had been alive at this
present, thus fearing to be over-tedious to you, I rest.

Your ever loving Brother, Samuel Turner.

FINIS.

