AN ABRIDGMENT OF Christian Doctrine: WITH Proofs of SCRIPTURE for Points
controverted. Catechistically explained, by way of Question and Answer.

Esa. chapter 30. v. 21. This is the way, walk ye in it.

1 Cor. chapter 14. v. 38. If any man know not, he shall not be known.

Permissu Superiorum, Printed at DOWAY. M. DC. XLVIII.

To the truly virtuous, and no less honorable Lady, the Lady E. B. Wife to
Sir W. B. Baronet.
THe deep sense, as well of my own proper, as of the common obligations of my
poor friends unto your Ladyships charitable Bounty, has moved me to address
this little Treatise of Christian Doctrine to your perusal and Patronage;
partly for a Pledge of our respectfull gratitude; and partly for a testimony of
your exemplar and excelling virtues, which never have appeared more
conspicuous, then in this dark and ftormy time of Persecution, in which they
always yielded to your self, a plentiful light to see and discern the Vta
Lactea, or white way of Heaven, and the revealed verities of Christ, from the
black way which leads unto Hell, and the fictirious Novelties of Antichrist,
shining like a bright and steadfast landmark to all your wavering and
weather-beaten Neighbors, to guide them to the haven of Security.

Nor can I doubt of your acceptance of it, who have so cheerfully exhibited
your self not only a religious Professor, but also an indefatigable Sufferer
for all the Articles contained in it. Witness the many Robberies and plunders
acted against you under that only notion since the late unnatur all war.
Witness your own captivity at Cannon-Froome, a cruelty not usual to your
sex. Witness the arbitrary and most illegal Sequestration of your whole
estate. Witness your long deprivement and separation from your beloved Husband
and dear Children; whose sole Malignity is Christianity; whose delinquency is
nothing else but loyalty. All which notwithstanding have been by you embraced
and sustained with such a Masculine Courage and Christian confidence; that you
have caused much confusion to your enemies, and singular consolation to your
friends, by turning that which was intended for your temporal depression, into
the greatest improvement of. your Soul, and highest pitch of spiritual
advancement both to your Name and Family.

What shall I say of these your gallant trialls? of these your stigma's
received for the Faith? I will say only what S. Paul said in a like case, That
in the same measure you are partaker of the passions, you shall be also of the
consolations of Christ, 2 Cor chapter 1. v. 7.

I will give only this Elogium to the whole catalogue of your pressures and
perfections, That you are now truly a Christian, one that may worthily say with
the Apostle, I am fastened with Christ unto the cross. One who have written on
your life and actions in lively characters of self-denying patience, that holy
Doctrine, which I here present you impressed in characters of ink and paper.

Accept it therefore as your own Epitome, that as the world has seen your
sufferings, so it may see in this for what you suffer.

Do but deigne it the protection of your Piety, and it will yield you the
protection of its Sanctity.

Do but persevere in the practice of it unto the end in the same measure that
you have begun, and it will bring you safe to the fruition of the first Master
and Teacher of it, JESUS; which is the constant wish, and daily Prayer, of

Madam, Your Ladyships humble Beadsman, and devoted Servant, H. T.
April 1. 1648.
An Address to the Reader.
Courteous Reader,
HAving lately compiled this little Catechism of Christian Doctrine for the
use and instruction of some ignorant friends, I have been much pressed and
importuned by some, whose age and judgment is of more maturity, to expose it
to public view; from whose request, though I found at first, some motives to
dissent, as well by reason of the multiplicity of books already printed on
this subject, by grave and learned Authors; as also for the slender
apprehension I had framed of this draught of mine. Yet I was at length induced
to acquiesse thereunto for these reasons.

First, to give check to certain Pamphlets lately published in our Country
under the same (though falsely pretended) Title: that so the verity and
Antiquity of the Catholic Faith (according to the Rule of contraries) being
compared with the falsehood and novelties of Heretics, might seem the more
illustrious and refulgent.

Secondly to increase a new supply of books for such as have been plundered of
the old stock.

Thirdly, to revive the memory of that which never ought to be forgotten, nor
can be learnt too often, the Law and Doctrine of Christ.

And finally (which was indeed my principal design) to furnish the unlearned,
with certain proofs of Scripture for points controverted, together with the
Rudiments of Christianity: A thing already copiously done in many of our Books
of Controversy: But in regard the purses of some, and the capacities of others
cannot reach such Books, I deemed it a work well worth the labor, to make
them also some provision out of that store in this Edition of a lower Key, and
lesser cost.

Wonder not at the plainness of the style, for I purposely affected it,
minding rather the profit of the ignorant, then the pleasure of word-affecting
Critics.

Peruse it therefore with such Charity as I have penned it. If thou art
ignorant, accept it for thy benefit; if thou art knowing in the Law already, at
least commend it to thy ignorant friends, and by so doing, thou shall oblige
him, who is, ever to remain

Thy Friend and Servant, H. T.

IHS AN ABRIDGMENT OF Christian Doctrine, Catechistically explained by way of
Question and Answer.
CAP. 1.
What a Christian is; And of the Blessed Trinity.

Question. CHild! what Religion are you of?

Answer. Sir, by the benefit and Grace of God, I am a Christian.

Q. Whom understand you by z Christian?

A. Him that believes and professes the Faith and Law of Christ.

Q. When are we obliged to make an external profession of it?

A. As often as Gods Honor, our own, or our neighbors good requires it.

Q. How prove you that?

A. Out of S. Matthew. Chapter 10. Ver. 32. where Christ says, Every one therefore
that shall confess me before Men, I will confess him also before my Father
which is in Heaven. But he that shall deny me before Men, I also will deny him
before my Father which is in Heaven.

Q. Are we bound also to venture the ruin of our estates, the loss of our
friends, and to lay down our very lives for the profession and defense thereof?

A. Doubtless we are, seeing the reward which we expect in Heaven does
infinitely exceed all the pleasures and punishments of this life.

Q. What other reasons have you for it?

A. Because Christ the Son of the living God has suffered far greater
things for us, even to a disgraceful death upon the Cross, and therefore it
were base ingratitude in us, not to be ready to give our lives for him, as
often as his Honor shall require it.

Q. In what does the Faith and Law of Christ chiefly consist?

A. In two principal Mysteries, namely, the Unity and Trinity of God, the
Incarnation and death of our Savior.

Q. What means the Unity and Trinity of God?

A. It means that in God there is but one only divine Nature or Essence,
although there be three Persons, the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.

Q. How show you that?

A. Out of the 1. of S. John chapter 5. v. 7. there be three which give testimony
in heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost, and these three be one.

Q. Why are there but three Persons only?

A. Because the Father has no beginning, nor proceeds from any other Person:
the Son proceeds from the Father, the Holy Ghost proceeds from the Father
and the Son.

Q. Why are these three Persons, but one God?

A. Because they have but one and the same Essence, one and the same Power, one
and the same Wisdom, one and the same Goodness.

Q. What means the Incarnation and death of our Savior?

A. It means that the second Person of the Blessed Trinity was made man and
died upon a Cross to save us.

Q. In what are these two Mysteries contained?

A. In the sign of the Cross, as it is made by Catholics.

Q. How declare you that?

A. Because when we put our right hand to our head saying, In the Name, we
signify Unity, and when we make the sign of the Cross faying, of the Father,
and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, we signify Trinity.

Q. How does the sign of the Cross represent the Incarnation and death of our
Savior?

A. By putting us in mind that he was made man to die upon the Cross for us.

CAP. II.
Faith explicated.

Q. WHat is Faith?

A. It is the gift of God, or a supernatural quality, infused by God into the
Soul, by which we firmly believe all those things, which he has revealed any
way unto us?

Q. Why is Faith necessary to Salvation?

A. Because without Faith it is impossible to please God, Heb. chapter 11. v. 6.

Q. What other proof have you?

A. Because he that believes and shall be baptized, he shall be saved; but he
that believes not, shall be condemned, S. Mark c. 16. v. the last.

Q. Why must we believe matters of Faith so firmly?

A. Because God has revealed them, who neither can deceive, nor be deceived.

Q. If a man should deny, or obstinately doubt of some one Point of Faith,
would he thereby lose his whole Faith?

A. Yes, he would; because true Faith must always be entire, and he that
fails in one is made guilty of all, by discrediting the Authority of God
revealing it.

Q. Is it not enough to believe all that is written in the Bible?

A. No it is not; for we must also believe all Apostolical Traditions?

Q. How prove you that?

A. Out of 2 These. c. 2. v. 15. Therefore Brethren stand ye fast, (says S.
Paul) and hold ye the Traditions which ye have learned, whether by word or by
our Epistle.

Q. What other proof have you?

A. The Apostles Creed, which all are bound to believe, although it be not in
the Scripture.

Q. Is Faith only (as excluding good works) sufficient to salvation?

A. No it is not, according to S. James his Epist. c. 2. v. 24. you see then
Brethren, how that by works a man is justified, and not by faith only.

Q. What other proof have you?

A. The 1 Cor. chapter 13. where S. Paul says, If a man have all faith, so as to
remove Mountains, and have not charity, he is nothing; and if he distribute
his goods unto the poor, and give his body so that it burn, and have not
charity, it profits nothing.

Q. What faith will suffice to justify?

A. A Faith working by Charity in Jesus Christ, Gal. chapter 5. v. 6.

Q. What vice is opposite to Faith?

A. Heresy.

Q. What is Heresy?

A. It is an obstinate Error in things that of Faith.

Q. Is it a grievous sin?

A. A very grievous one, because it wholly divides a man from God, and leads to
infidelity.

Q. How prove you that?

A. Out of S. Matthew. chapter 18. v. 18. where Christ says, If he will not hear the
Church, let him be unto thee, as a Heathen or a Publican.

CHAP. III.
The Creed Expounded.

Q. WHat is the Creed?

A. It is the sum of our Belief?

Q. Who made it?

A. The twelve Apostles.

Q. At what time did they make i^?

A. Before they divided themselves into the several Countries of the world.

Q. For what end did they make it?

A. That so they might be able to teach one and the same Doctrine in all places?

Q. What does the Creed contain?

A. All those chief things, which we are bound to believe concerning God and
his Church.

Q. What is the first Article of the Creed?

A. I believe in God the Father Almighty, Creator of Heaven and Earth.

Q. What signifies, I believe?

A. It signifies as much as, I most firmly and undoubtedly hold.

Q. What means, I believe in God?

A. It means not only that there is a God, and that all is truth which he
teaches, but also that we move unto him by Faith, Hope and Charity.

Q. What signifies the word Father?

A. It signifies the first Person of the most Blessed Trinity, who is by
nature the Father of but one only Son, who is by Adoption the Father of all
Christians, who is by Creation the Father of all Creatures.

Q. What means the word Almighty?

A. It means, that God is able to do all things as he pleases, that he
sees all things, knows all things, and governs all things.

Q. Why is he called Almighty in this place?

A. That we might doubt of nothing which follows.

Q. What signify those words, Creator of Heaven and Earth?

A. They signify that God created Heaven and Earth, and all the creatures in
them out of nothing by his sole Word, Genesis chapter 1.

Q. What moved him to make them?

A. His own mere goodness, that so he might communicate himself to Angels
and to men, for whom he made all other creatures.

Q. When did God create the Angels?

A. When he created Heaven which was on the first day, for he made that full
of Angels.

Q. For what end did he create them?

A. To be partakers of his glory, and our Guardians.

Q. How prove you by Scripture, that they be our Guardians?

A. Out of S. Matthew. chapter 18. v. 10. where Christ says, See ye that ye destise
not any one of these little ones; For their Angels which are in Heaven,
always see the face of my Father which is in heaven.

Q. Do the Angels know our necessities and hear our Prayers?

A. Doubtless they do, since God has deputed them to be our Guardians.

Q. How else prove you it?

A. Out of Zachary, chapter 1. where an Angel prays for two whole Cities, the
words are, Then the Angel of the Lord answered and said, O Lord of Hosts, how
long will thou not have m^rcy on the City of Judah and Jerusalem, against
which thou have had indignation these threescore and ten years?

Q. What Scripture have you for praying to Angels?

A. The 48. chapter of Genesis v. 16. where Jacob on his deathbed prayed to an Angel
for Ephraim and Manasses, saying, The Angel of the Lord that delivered me from
all evil, bless these Children.

Q. How did Lucifer and his fellow Angels fall from their Dignity in Heaven?

A. By a rebellious sin of Pride.

Q. With what shall their ruins be repaired?

A. With holy men.

Q. When and to what likeness did God create man?

A. On the sixth day, and to his own image and likeness, Genesis 1.

Q. In what does that similitude consist?

A. In this, that man is in his Soul an incorporeall, intellectual and
immortal Spirit, as God is.

Q. In what besides?

A. In this, that as in God there is but one most simple divine Nature or
Essence, and yet three distinct Persons, so in man there is but one indivisible
Soul, and yet in that Soul three distinct powers of Will, Memory and
Understanding.

Q. How do you prove the Soul to be immortal?

A. Out of S. Matthew. C. 10. V. 28. where Christ says, Fear not them that kill
the body, and cannot kill the soul.

Q. What other proof have you?

A. Out of the 12. Chapter of Eccles. where we read, That at our death the dust
returns to the earth from whence it was, and the spirit to God who gave it.

Q. In what state did God create man?

A. In the state of original justice, and perfection of all natural gifts.

Q. Do we owe much to God for our creation?

A. Very much, seeing he made us in such a perfect state, creating us for
himself, and all things else for us.

Q. How did we lose original Justice?

A. By Adams disobedience to God, in eating the forbidden fruit.

Q. In what state are we now borne?

A. In state of original sin, and prone to actual sin, subject to death.

Q. How prove you that?

A. Out of Romans chapter 6. v. 12. where we read, That by one man sin entered into
this world, and by sin death, and so unto all men death did pass, in whom all
have sinned.

Q. Had man ever died, if he had never sinned?

A. No, he had not, but had been conserved by the Tree of Life, and been
translated alive into the fellowship of the Angels.

The second Article.
Q. SAy the second Article.

A. And in Jesus Christ his only Son our Lord.

Q. Of what treats this Article?

A. Of the second Person of the B. Trinity, in whom we also believe and put our
trust.

Q. What is the second Person?

A. He is true God and true Man in one Person.

Q. How prove you that?

A. Out of S. John's Gospel, chapter 1. where we read, In the beginning was the
Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God, etc. And the Word was
made Flesh, and dwelt in us.

Q. What other proof have you?

A. Out of Philip. C. 2. V. 6, 7. where S. Paul says, That Christ when he was
in the form of God, thought it no robbery to be equal to God, but he has
lessened himself, taking the form of a servant, made unto the likeness of
men, and found in habit as a man.

Q. Why would God be made man?

A. To redeeem and save lost man.

Q. Was his Incarnation necessary for that end?

A. It was, because our offenses against God were in some sort infinite, as
being against his infinite goodness, and therefore required an infinite
satisfaction, which none could make but God, and he made man.

Q. What other proof have you, for the necessity of the Incarnation?

A. Because God is in himself so spiritual, sublime and abstract a thing,
that if he had not in his mercy attempred his own inscrutable greatness, unto
the littleness of our sensible capacity, by being made man, scarce one of a
thousand (and those great Clerks only) would ever have been able to know every
thing to the purpose of him, or consequently to love and serve him, as they
ought, (which is the necessary means of our salvation) seeing that nothing is
efficaciously willed, which is not first well understood.

Q. What benefit have we by the knowledge of God, made Man?

A. It much inflameth us with the love of God, who could not more have
dignified man's nature, or showed more love unto the world, then to send down
his only Son to redeem it in our flesh.

Q. What signifies the Name Jesus?

A. It signifies a Savior, S. Mat. C. 1. V. 21.

Q. Is any special honor due unto that Name?

A. There is, because it is the highest Title of God, made man.

Q. How prove you that?

A. Out of Philip. chapter 2. ver. 9. where we read, That God the Father has
given unto Christ, because he humbled himself unto the death of the Cross, a
Name which is above all names, the Name Jesus.

Q. What other proof have you?

A. Because there is no other name under Heaven given unto men, in which we
must be saved, Act. 4. v. 12.

Q. How do you prove that we must bow at this name?

A. Out of the said Philip. chapter 2. v. 10. At the Name of Jesus every knee shall
bow of Celestialls, Terrestrialls and Infernalls.

Q. What signifies the Name Christ?

A. It signifies Anointed.

Q. Why was he called Anointed?

A. Because he was a Priest, a Prophet, and a King, to all which unction
appertains.

Q. With what was Christ Anointed?

A. With all the plenitude of divine grace.

Q. What mean the words, his only Son?

A. They mean, that God has but one only Son by nature co-equall to
himself, begotten of himself without a Mother, though by Adoption he have
many Sons, to wit all Christians.

Q. What understand you by the word Our Lord?

A. I understand that Christ has all power given him in heaven and earth, and
that he has bought us with his precious blood, and therefore we are all his
slaves.

The third Article.
Q. WHat is the third Article?

A. Who was conceived by the Holy Ghost, borne of the Virgin Mary.

A. What means, who was conceived by the Holy Ghost?

A. It means, that the second Person of the Blessed Trinity took flesh of
the Virgin Mary, not by humane generation, but by the work of the Holy Ghost.

Q. How prove you that?

A. Out of S. Luke. Chapter 1. V. 25. Behold (says the Angel) thou shall conceive
and bear a Son, etc. the Holy Ghost shall come down upon thee, and the
virtue of the Highest shall over-shadow thee.

Q. What understand you by the words, borne of the Virgin Mary?

A. I understand, that Christ was borne of her at midnight, and in a poor
Stable at Bethlehem, betwixt an Ox and an Ass.

Q. Why at midnight?

A. To signify, that he came to take away the darkness of our sins.

Q. Why in Bethlehem?

A. Because that was the head City of David's family, and Christ was born of the
Race of David.

Q. Why in a poor Stable?

A. To teach us the love of poverty, and a contempt of this world.

Q. Why betwixt an Ox and Ass?

A. To fulfill that of the Prophet, Thou shall be known O Lord betwixt two
beasts.

Q. What does the birth of Christ avail us?

A. It perfecteth in us Faith, Hope, and Charity.

Q. What means, borne of the Virgin Mary?

A. It means, that our Lady was a Virgin, not only before, but also in, and
after Childbirth.

The fourth Article.
Q. WHat is the fourth Article?

A. Suffered under Pontius Pilate, was crucified, dead and buried.

Q. What understand you by, Suffered under Pontius Pilate?

A. I understand, that Christ after a painful life of 33. years, suffered
most bitter torments under that wicked President Pontius Pilate.

Q. Where did he begin those sufferings?

A. In the garden of Gethsemane, that as sin began in a garden by the first
Adam, so might grace also by the Second.

Q. What were those torments?

A. His bloody Sweat, his whipping at the Pillar, his Purple Garment, his
Crown of Thorns, his Scepter of a Reed, his carrying of the Cross, and many
others.

Q. What understand you by the word, was crucified?

A. I understand that he was nailed to a disgraceful Cross betwixt two
Thieves for our offenses, and to save us.

Q. Is it lawful to honor the Cross?

A. Yes, with a relative honor it is, because it is a special memorial of
our Saviors Passion, and is called the sign of the Son of Man, S. Mat. chapter
24. v. 30.

Q. What other reason have you?

A. Because a Cross was the sacred Altar on which Christ offered his bloody
Sacrifice.

Q. What Scripture have you for it?

A. The Gal. chapter 6. v. 13. God forbid (says S. Paul) that I should glory, but
in the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Q. What other proof have you?

A. Out of Philip. chapter 4. v. 18. many walk (says S. Paul) whom I have often
told you of, and now again weeping I tell you of them, enemies to the Cross of
Christ, whose end is perdition.

Q. What other yet?

A. Out of Ezekiel. chapter 9. v. 4. where we read, that such as were signed with the
sign Tau (which was a picture and figure of the Cross) were saved from the
exterminating Angel, and only such.

Q. What means the word dead?

A. It means that Christ suffered a true and real death.

Q. Why was it requisite that he should die?

A. To free us from the death of sin.

Q. Why died he crying out with a loud voice?

A. To show that he had power of his own life, and that he freely gave it up
for us, being strong and vigorous.

Q. Why died he, bowing down his head?

A. To signify his obedience to his Father in the acceptance of his
disgraceful death.

Q. What means was buried?

A. It means that his body was laid in a new Sepulcher, and buried with
honor, as the Prophet had foretold, Esa. chapter 11. v. 10.

The fifth Article.
Q. WHat is the fifth Article?

A. He descended into Hell, the third day he rose again from the dead.

Q. What means he descended into Hell?

A. It means, that as soon as Christ was dead, his blessed soul descended
into Limbo to free the holy Fathers which were there.

Q. How prove you that?

A. Out of the Acts, chapter 2. v. 24, 25, 26, 27. where we read, that Christ being
slain, God raised him up, loosing the sorrows of hell, as it was foretold by
the Prophet, Psa. 15. thou will not leave my soul in hell, nor will thou give
thy holy one to see corruption?

Q. What other proof have you?

A. Ephesians. chapter 4. v. 8. where we read, he ascending on high has led captivity
captive, he gave gifts unto men, and v. the 9. that he ascended; what is it,
but that he first descended into the lower parts of the earth?

Q. Did not he also descend to Purgatory, to free such as were there?

A. He did, according to the 1. of S. Pet. chapter 3. v. 18, 19, 20. where we
read, that Christ being dead came in Spirit, and preached to them also which
were in prison, who had been incredulous in the days of Noah when the Arc was
building.

Q. What understand you by, on the third daey he rose again from the dead?

A. I understand that when Christ had been dead part of three days, on the
third day which was a Sunday, he raised up his blessed body from the dead.

Q. Why did he rise again no sooner?

A. To testify that he was truly dead, and to fulfill the figures of him.

Q. Did he reassume all the parts of his body?

A. He did, even to the least drop of his vital blood, and the very scattered
hairs of his head.

Q. Why did he retain the Stigma's and marks of his sacred wounds?

A. To confound the incredulity of men, and to present them often to his
Father, as a propitiation for our sins.

Q. What benefit have we by the Resisrrection?

A. It does confirm our Faith and Hope, that we shall also rise again from
death; for he which raised up Jesus, will raise us also up with Jesus, 2 Cor.
chapter 4. v. 14.

The sixth Article.
Q. What is the sixth Article?

A. He ascended into heaven, sits at the right hand of God the Father
Almighty.

Q. What means, he ascended into heaven?

A. It means, that when Christ had conversed forty days on earth with his
Disciples after his Resurrection teaching them heavenly things, then he
ascended triumphant into heaven by his own power.

Q. From what place did he ascend.

A. From the top of Mount Olivet, where the print of his blessed feet are seen
to this day.

Q. Why from thence?

A. That where he began to be humbled by his Passion, there he might also
begin to be exalted.

Q. Before whom did he ascend?

A. Before his good Apostles and Disciples, Act. chapter 1.

Q. In what manner did he ascend?

A. Lifting up his hands and blessing them.

Q. Why is it added into heaven?

A. To draw our hearts to heaven after him; If ye have risen with Christ seek
ye the things which are above, Col. chapter 3.

Q. What understand you by, sits at the right hand of God?

A. I do not understand that God the Father has any hands, for he is
incorporeall and a Spirit; but that Christ is equal to his Father in Power and
Majesty.

The seventh Article.
Q. What is the seventh Article?

A. From thence he shall come to judge the Quick and the Dead.

Q. What understand you by this Article?

Q. I understand that Christ shall come at the last day from the right hand of
his Father to judge all men according to their works.

Q. Does not every man receive a particular judgment at his death?

A. He does; but in the general Judgment we shall be judged not only in our
souls, as at our death, but also in our bodies.

Q. Why is that necessary?

A. That as Christ was openly rejected, so he may there be openly acknowledged,
to the great joy and glory of his friends, as also to the confusion of his
enemies.

Q. How prove you, that in this Judgment all men shall receive according to
their works?

A. Out of 2 Cor. chapter 5. v. 10. We must all be manifested (says S. Paul)
before the judgment seat of Christ, that every one may receive the proper
things of the body, according as he has done, whether good or evil.

Q. What other proof have you?

A. Out of S. Matthew. chapter 16. v. 27. The Son of Man (says our Lord) shall
come in the Glory of his Father, with his Angels, and then he will render to
every one according to his works.

Q. Is there any merit in our good works?

A. There is, according to Apoc. chapter 22. v. 12. Behold I come quickly (says
our Lord) and my reward is with me, to render to every man according to his
works.

Q. In what place shall this Judgment be made?

A. In the valley of Iehosaphat, betwixt Jerusalem and Mount Olivet.

Q. What sign shall go before it?

A. The Sun and Moon shall lose their light, there shall be Wars, Plagues,
Famines and Earthquakes in many places.

Q. In what manner shall Christ come unto it?

A. In great power and Majesty, begirt with Legions of Angels.

Q. Who are they that shall be judged?

A. The whole Race and Progeny of man.

Q. What are the things that shall be judged?

A. Our thoughts, words and works, even to the secrets of our souls.

Q. Who will accuse us?

A. The Devils, our own guilty consciences; and above all, the Books of life
and death, in which all our actions are recorded, and shall be then laid open
to the whole world.

Q. How shall the just and reprobate be placed?

A. The just shall be on the right, the reprobate on the left hand of the Judge.

Q. What shall be the sentence of the just?

A. Come o ye blessed of my Father, and receive ye the Kingdom which is
prepared for you; for I was hungry, and ye gave me to eat, I was thirsty, and
ye gave me to drink, etc. S. Matthew. chapter 25. v. 35, 36.

Q. What shall be the sentence of the reprobate?

A. Go ye accursed into eternal fire, which has been prepared for the Devil
and his Angels; for I was hungry, and ye gave me not to eat, I was thirsty and
ye gave me not to drink, etc. the same chap. v. 41, 42, 43. You see of what
weight good works will be at that day.

Q. Why is it added, The quick and the dead?

A. To signify that Christ shall judge, not only such as are living at the
time of his coming, but likewise all such as have been dead, from the Creation
of the World; as also by the quick are understood Angels and Saints: by the
dead the Devils and the damned souls.

The eighth Article.
Q. What is the eighth Article?

A. I believe in the Holy Ghost.

Q. Of what treats this Article?

A. Of the third Person of the B. Trinity, in whom we also believe and put our
trust, who proceeds from the Father and the Son, and is the self-same God
with them, distinct in nothing but in person.

Q. How prove you that?

A. Out of 1 S. John, chapter 5. v. 7. There be three (says he) which give
testimony in Heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost, and these three
be one.

Q. Why is the Name of Holy Ghost appropriated to the third Person, since
Angels are also Spirits and holy?

A. Because he is such by excellency and by essence, they only by
participation.

Q. At least why should it not be common to the other two Persons?

A. Because they are known by the proper Names of Father and Son, but we
have not any proper Name for the Holy Ghost.

Q. In what forms has the Holy Ghost appeared unto men?

A. In the form of a Dove, to signify the purity and innocence which he
causes in our souls; in a bright Cloud, and fiery Tongues; to signify the
fire of Charity which he produces in our hearts, as also the gift of Tongues;
and hence it is, he is painted in these forms.

The ninth Article.
Q. WHat is the ninth Article?

A. I believe in the holy Catholic Church, the Communion of Saints.

Q. What understand you by this Article?

A. I understand that Christ has a Church upon earth, which he established in
his own Blood, and that he has commanded us to believe that Church in all
things appertaining unto Faith.

Q. What kind of Faith must we believe her with?

A. With the same Faith that we believe her Spouse the Son of God, that is,
with divine Faith, but with this difference, that we believe in God, though we
only believe the Church, but not in her.

Q. What is the Church?

A. It is the Congregation of all the faithful under Christ Jesus, their
invisible head, and his Vicar upon earth the Pope.

Q. What are the essential parts of the Church?

A. A Pope or Supreme head, Bishops, Pastors, and the Laity.

Q. How prove you that Bishops are of divine Institution?

A. Out of Act. chapter 20. v. 28. where we read, take heed unto your selves and to
the flock wherein the Holy Ghost has placed you Bishops to rule the Church of
God, which he has purchased with his own blood.

Q. How prove you S. Peter, and the Pope his Successor to be the visible Head
of the Church?

A. Out of S. John, chapter 21. v. 16, 17, and 18. where Christ (for a reward of
his special faith and love) gave S. Peter absolute power to feed and govern
his whole flock, saying, feed my Lambs, feed Lambs, feed my Sheep; therefore
the rest of the Apostles were his sheep, and he their Head or Pastor.

Q. What other proof have you?

A. Out of S. Mat. chapter 16. v. 18. where Christ says, thou art Peter, and upon
this Rock will I build my Church. Therefore the rest of the Apostles were
built on him; and hence also it is, that as often as they are named in
Scripture, S. Peter is still named first.

Q. What are the marks of the true Church.

A. Unity, Visibility, Sanctity, Universality, and Infallibility.

Q. How declare you its Unity?

A. Because all the members of it make but one mystical body, and are governed
by one Supreme Head.

Q. How prove you that?

A. Out of 1 Cor. chapter 10. v. 18. being many (says S. Paul) we are one bread,
one body, all that participate of one bread,

Q. What other proof have you?

A Because all the members of it live under one Law, obey the same Magistrates,
profess the same faith, even to the least Article, and use the same Sacraments
and Sacrifice.

Q. Why may not a well meaning man be saved in any Religion?

A. Because there is but one God, one Faith, one Baptism, Ephesians. chapter 4. v. 5.
And without that one Faith it is impossible to please God, Hebr. chapter 11. v. 6.

Q. What other reason have you for it?

A. Because, as in a natural body, that part which has not a due connection
to the heart or root, presently dies for want of continuity: so in the Church
(the mystical body of Christ) that member which has not a due subordination
and connection unto the head and Common Counsels thereof (that is the Pope and
General Counsels, from whence under Christ, we have our spiritual life and
motion, as we are Christians) must needs be dead, and not a living member of
that body.

Q. Who I beseech you are those dead members which you speak of?

A. All such as are not in the unity of the Church, by a most firm belief of
her Doctrine, and due obedience to her Pastors.

Q. What if a Protestant should tell you that the differences betwixt them and
us, are not differences in fundamentalls or in faith, but in opinion only, and
therefore do not exclude them out of the unity of the Catholic Church.

A. I would answer. That he contradicted his own Tenets, for they accuse us of
Sacrilege, of robbing God of his honor, and committing Idolatry, because we
believe Priestly absolution from sins, adore the Blessed Sacrament of the
Eucharist, and pray to Saints, which are no matters of indifferency, but high
Fundamentalls of the Catholic Faith.

Q. How do you prove all obstinate Novellists to be Heretics?

A. Because they appeal from Masters to Scholars, and from the Pastors and
General Counsels of the Church unto the Layetie, for the decision of points
controverted, which is the proper nature of Schism and Heresy.

Q. What other reason have you?

A. Because they wilfully stand out against the definitive sentence of the
Church of God, and will not submit to any Judgment or Tribunal which Christ
has left on earth, for the deciding of such doubts as they themselves are
pleased to move, but will be tried only by their own idle brain, and the dead
letter of the Scripture.

Q. Why may not the letter of the Scripture be a decisive Judge of
Controversies?

A. Because it never has as yet been able from the first writing of it, to
decide any one, as the whole world does experience, all Heretics pretending
equally unto it, for the defense of their Novelties and Heresies, and no one of
them ever yielding to another.

Q. What other reason have you?

A. Because resting in the dead letter only, we can have no assurance or
moral certainty of any one Text or Chapter of the whole Bible, that it has
come to us uncorrupted, or what the meaning of it is, or that it is the very
word of Christ; so great are the corruptions which have crept into it, and so
innumerable are the Languages, Translations and Copies through which the Bible
has passed, since the first writing of it.

Q. How then are we assured of these things?

A. By the infallible authority, definition, and proposition of the Catholic
Church.

Q. What other reason have you yet for this?

A. Because the Scripture was never ordained for that purpose, all the Books
thereof being either Poetical, as the Psalms; Historical, as the Gospels;
Epistolarie, as the Epistles; or Allegorical, as the Apocalypse, and Prophets;
and therefore, as appears by their very names, are no way fitting for the
deciding of Controversies.

Q. For what end then was the Scripture written?

A. The writing or committing of it to dead letters, was only for
superabundant consolations, and that by a sensible and common reading of it,
without any critical or controversiall libration of words, we might be able to
know that God is, and what he is, as also that there is a heaven and a hell,
rewards for virtue, and punishments for vice, with examples of both, all which
we find in the Letter of the Scripture by a plain and ordinary reading of it.

Q. How declare you the Churches visibility at all times?

A. Because it consists essentially of a visible Hierarchy, which can never
fail.

Q. How prove you that?

A. Out of Ephesians. chapter 4. v. 11, and 12. where we read, that Christ gave some
Apostles, some Evangelists, some Doctors, some Pastors to the consummation of
the Saints, to the edifying of the body of Christ, and to the work of the
Ministry, until we all meet in the unity of faith.

Q. What other proof have you?

A. Out of S. Mat. chapter 5. v. 14. and 15. where Christ says of his Church, you
are the light of the world; a City seated on a Mountain cannot be hid.

Q. Why then would Protestants have the Church to be invisible?

A. Because we have convinced them that there were no Protestants to be seen or
heard of in the world before Martin Luther.

Q. Why is it said the holy Church?

A. Because she has a holy faith, a holy Law, holy Sacraments, and is guided
by the Holy Ghost to all truth and holiness.

Q. How else prove you her Sanctity?

A. Because Christ gave himself for his Church, that he might sanctify it,
cleansing it by the laver of water in the Word, that he might present it to
himself a glorious Church not having spot or wrinkle, but that it might be
holy and unspotted, Ephesians. chapter 5. v. 26. 27.

Q. Why are we bound to believe the Church?

A. Because she is the Pillar and ground of truth, 1 Timothy chapter 3. v. 15.

Q. What other proof have you for her Infallibility?

A. Out of S. Matthew. chapter 16. v. 18. where Christ says, upon this Rock will I
build my Church, and the gates of hell shall not prevail against her.

Q. What other yet?

A. Out of S. Joh. chapter 14. v. 16. But the Paraclete, (says he) the Holy Ghost,
he shall teach you all things whatsoever I shall say unto you: and chapter 13. v.
16. But when the Spirit of Truth comes, he shall teach you all Truth.

Q. How declare you, that the definitions of a Council perfectly Oecumenicall,
that is a General Council approved by the Pope, be infallible in matters of
Faith?

A. Because such a Council is the Church Representative, and has the same
Infallibility that the Church diffused or spread over the world has.

Q. What other reason have you?

A. Because the Definitions of such a Council are the Dictates of the Holy
Ghost, according to that of the Apostles defineing in Council, it has seemed
good unto the Holy Ghost and to us, etc. Act. chapter 15. v. 28.

Q. What think you then of such as accuse the Church of Errors in Faith, and
Idolatry?

A. Truly I think them to be Heretics or Infidells; for our Lord says, He
that will not hear the Church let him be unto thee as a Heathen or a Publican,
S. Mat. chapter 18. v. 18.

Q. What understand you by the word Catholic?

A. I understand that the Church is Universal, both for time and place.

Q. How for time?

A. Because it has been from Christ unto this time, and shall be from hence
unto the end of the world.

Q. How prove you that?

A. Out of S. Matthew. chapter 28. v. 20. Going therefore (says our Lord) teach ye
all Nations, and behold I am with you all days, even to the consummation of
the world.

Q. What mean you by Universality of place?

A. I mean that the Church shall be spread over all Nations.

Q. How prove you that?

A. Out of S. Mat. above cited, teach ye all Nations; and out of the 62. Psalm.
v. 2. where we read, All the earth shall remember and be converted to our Lord,
and all Nations whatsoever thou have made shall come and adore before thee o
Lord.

Q. What other proof have you?

A. Out of the Apoc. chapter 7. v. 9. where we read, that the Church shall be
gathered out of all Nations, Peoples, Tribes, and Tongues.

Q. Why do we call the Church the Roman Church?

A. Because since the Translation of S. Peter's Chair from Antioch to Rome, the
particular Roman Church has been the Head of all Churches, and to her the
Primacy has been affixed.

Q. What is the Rule of faith, by which the Church conserveth her Infallibility?

A. Apostolical Tradition, or receipt of Doctrine by hand to hand from Christ
and his Apostles.

Q. How prove you that?

A. Out of Romans chapter 16. v. 17. Therefore I beseech you Brethren, (says S.
Paul) mark them which make dissentions and scandalls contrary to the Doctrine
which you have learned, and avoid them; for such do not serve Christ our Lord.

Q. What other proof have you?

A. Out of S. Paul, saying, But although we or an Angel from heaven Evangelize
to you besides that which we have Evangelized to you, be he Anathema, or
besides that you have received, be he Anathema, Gal. chapter 1. v. 8, 9.

Q. Can the Church err in faith standing to this Rule, and admitting nothing
for faith, but what is consented by the whole Church to have been so received?

A. She cannot, otherwise the whole Church must either conspire in a notorious
lie to damn her self and her posterity, or else she must be ignorant what has
been taught her for faith by the Church of the precedent Age, which are both
grand possibilities.

Q. How prove you these to be impossibilities in nature?

A. By the constancy and immutability which is found in the Universality of
contingent causes, whose particulars may be defective, but the universalls
cannot.

Q. Declare that a little?

A. I explain it thus: because one man, or two, or three may be borne but with
one arm, or one eye only, through the defect of their particular causes, but
that all nature should fail at once, and all men should be so borne, is
totally impossible in nature; so in like manner one man or two may conspire in
palpable lies to damn themselves and their posterity, or be deceived in what
has been taught them for faith from their very cradles, but that the whole
Church should so far break with the nature of man, (which is reason) to
conspire in such a lie, or be so mistaken, is as impossible in nature, as it is
for men to be no men.

Q. Does not the learned Richworth, alias Blackloe (out of whom you have
borrowed both these and many other excellent convincing reasons) demonstrate
the Churches infallibility a little plainer yet?

A. Yes he does, and chiefly by this argument, to move the whole Church to
conspire at once in such a palpable and pernicious lie, such a force of hopes
and fears is necessary, but it is totally impossible for such a force of hopes
and fears to fall on the whole Church at once as is sufficient to make them
break with nature, and contradict the very light of reason by such a lie;
therefore it is totally impossible for the whole Church at once to conspire in
such a lie, or consequently to err in Faith?

Q. May not some errors have been received for faith, and crept insensibly
over the whole Church, no man perceiving or taking notice of them?

A. No: that is as impossible as that the Plague or burning Fever should
infect or spread it self over a whole Kingdom for many years, no man
perceiving it, or seeking to prevent it; for nothing causes greater notice to
be taken, then any public or notorious change in matters of Religion.

Q. May not the power of temporal Princes, or the over-prevalency of humane
wit and reason have introduced errors into the Church?

A. Neither is that possible, seeing we are not regulated in things which are
of faith, either by power o^ any strength of reason, but by the rule of
Apostolical Tradition, and by inquiring of the whole Church of every Age, what
has been taught by our forefathers from Christ and his Apostles.

Q. At least do not Heretics say and aver that the Church has Apostatized
and erred in Faith?

A. They do indeed, but it will not serve their turn barely to say it,
unless they were able also to prove it (which they neither are nor ever will
be) by evident, convincing and undeniable proofs.

Q. How prove you that?

A. First, because the presumption and possession of her integrity and
infallibility is on the Churches side, and therefore ought not to be yeeded up
without clear evidence of her prevarication.

Q. What other reason have you?

A. Because he that accuses his neighbors wife of Adultery without
convincing and manifest proofs thereof, is not to be hearkened unto, but to be
hated of all good men as a most infamous slanderer, much more ought they who
shall accuse the Church, the Spouse of Christ, of Errors and Apostasy, unless
their proofs be evident and undeniable, to be detested as blasphemous
Heretics.

Q. What other proof have you yet?

A. Because if less then manifest and convincing evidence be sufficient to
prove matters of this high nature, it is not possible but very false, and shall
set dissension betwixt man and wife, and stir up the most faithful Subjects
in the world to a Rebellion against their Princes both spiritual and temporal.

Q. What means, The Communion of Saints?

A. It means, First that the faithful do all communicate in the same Faith
and Sacraments, in the same Sacrifice, and also in the merits of one another.

Q. How prove you that?

A. Out of 1 Cor. chapter 12. v. 25. where we read, And if one member suffer any
thing, all the members suffer with it; or if one member do glory, all the
members rejoice with it. You are the Body of Christ, and members of a member.

Q. What else means it?

A. It means also, That the faithful on earth do communicate with the
Angels and Saints in Heaven; we by praising and praying to them; they by
praying for us.

Q. How prove you this Communion?

A. Out of S. Luke chapter 15. ver. 10. where we read, That there is joy before the
Angels of God, upon one sinner that does Penance.

Q. How prove you that the Saints have any power to do us good?

A. Out of the Apoc. chapter 2. v. 26, 27. where Christ has promised them power
above us; To him (says he) that shall overcome, and keep my works unto the
end, to him will I give power over Nations, and he shall rule them in an iron
rod.

Q. How prove you that it is lawful to pray to Angels?

A. Out of the Apoc. chapter 1. ver. 4. where S. John did it: Grace (says he) to
you, and Peace, from Him that is, that Was, and that Shall come, and from the
seven Spirits which are in the sight of his Throne.

Q. What other proof have you?

A. Out of the Apoc. chapter 8. ver. 4. where we read, That they present the
Churches Prayers to God; the smoke (says he) of the Incense of the Prayers of
the Saints ascended from the hand of the Angel before God.

Q. How prove you that we may pray to Saints?

A. Out of Genesis chapter 48. v. 16. where Jacob taught his children to do it,
saying, And let my Name be invocated upon them, the names also of my Fathers,
Abraham and Isaac.

Q. How prove you that they pray for us?

A. Out of the Apoc. chapter 5. v. 8. where we read, Then the four and twenty
Elders fell down before the Lamb, having every one Harps, and Violls full of
Odours, which are the prayers of the Saints.

Q. Is it no dishonor unto God, for us to pray to Saints, to pray for us?

A. No it is not, yet to beg it of men; for S. Paul did it, we hope (says he)
that God will deliver us, you also helping in prayer for us, 2 Cor. chapter I. v.
II.

The tenth Article.
Q. WHat is the tenth Article?

A. The forgiveness of sins.

Q. What understand you by this Article?

A. I understand, that God is both able and willing to forgive us our sins,
if we be heartily sorry for them, and confess them, and has given power to
his Church to remit them by Baptism and Penance.

Q. How prove you that?

A. Out of S. Matthew. chapter 9. v. 8. where it is recorded by the Holy Ghost, That
the multitude glorified God who had given such power unto men, as to forgive
sins, (Christ having before proved the said power by a Miracle) v. 6, and 7.

Q. Is any sin so great, that God cannot sorgive it?

A. No, there is not; for his mercy is far above our malice.

Q. Can any one mortal sin be remitted without the rest?

A. It cannot; because the remission of mortal sin is a renewing of friendship
with God by his grace, which can never be effected so long as there remains
in us any one mortal sin.

Q. Can we have absolute certainty that our sins are forgiven us?

A. Without special Revelation we cannot, I am not guilty in conscience (says
S. Paul) of any thing, but herein I am not justified, 1 Cor. chapter 4. v. 4.

Q. What other poofe have you?

A. Because the just man knows not whether he be worthy love or hatred.

Q. Can we be certain of our final perseverance?

A. Not without special revelation, and therefore S. Paul said, I chastise my
body and bring it into subjection, least when I preach to others I my self
become a Reprobate, Cor. chapter 9. v. 27.

Q. What other proof have you?

A. Out of Phil. chapter 2. v. 12. where he exhorteh, saying, with fear and
trembling work out your salvation.

Q. How then shall we have peace of conscience?

A. Because we may have moral certainty, and a most lively hope that our
sins are forgiven us by the due use of the Sacraments, which is enough for
our security.

The eleventh Article.
Q. WHat is the eleventh Article?

A. The Resurrection of the flesh.

Q. What means this Article?

A. It means that these very bodies in which we now live, shall at the day of
Judgment be all raised up from death to life.

Q. By what means shall this be done?

A. By the omnipotent command of God, and the Ministry of Angels.

Q. How prove you that?

A. Out of 1 These. chapter 4. v. 16. where we read, for our Lord in commandment,
and in the voice of an Archangel, and in the Trumpet of God will descend from
heaven, and the dead that are in Christ shall rise again first.

Q. Shall the same bodies rise again?

A. The same in substance, though different in qualities.

Q. How prove you that?

A. Out of Job chapter 19. v. 26, 27. for I know (says he) that my Redeemer
lives, and in the last day I shall rise out of the earth, and I shall be
compassed again with my skin, and in my flesh I shall see God, whom I my self
shall see, and mine eyes shall behold and not another.

Q. What shall be the qualities or dowries of a glorified body?

A. Immortality, Agility, Clarity, Impassibility.

Q. How prove you its Immortality?

A. Out of 1 Cor. chapter 15. v. 52. For this Mortal (says S. Paul) shall put on
Immortality.

Q. How prove you its Agility?

A. Out of the same Chapter, v. 44. It is sowed a natural body, but it shall
rise a spiritual body, (that is in motion and some operations equal to a
Spirit.)

Q. How prove you its Clarity?

A. Out of the same Chapter v. 42. For star (says he) differs from star in
glory, so also the Resurrection of the dead.

Q. How prove you its Impassibility or incorruptibility?

A. Out of the same Chapter v. 53. For this corruptible must put on incorruption?

Q. In what space of time shall the Dead rise, and the Elect be thus changed?

A. In a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, v. 51. 52.

Q. At what age and stature shall men rise?

A. At perfect age which is 33. and in that stature which they should have had
at perfect age.

Q. How prove you that?

A. Out of Ephesians. chapter 4. v. 14. and 15. where we read, that the Church shall
last until we all meet into a perfect man into the measure of the age of the
fullness of Christ.

Q. What example have you in nature for the Resurrection?

A. A grain of Corn which first rotteth in the earth, and then springs up
and lives again.

Q. What benefit have we by the knowledge of the Resurrection?

A. It imboldeneth us to suffer persecution and death it self in hope of
future glory, according to that of S. Paul, for the sufferings of these times
are not condign to that future glory which shall be revealed in us, Romans chapter
8. v. 18.

The twelfth Article.
Q. WHat is the twelfth Article?

A. And life everlasting.

Q. Why is this the last Article?

A. Because everlasting life is the last end of man, and the last reward which
we expect by Faith.

Q. What understand you by this Article?

A. Iunderstand, that such as keep the commandments and die in state of grace,
shall live with God in bliss for ever.

Q. How prove you, that keeping the Commandments is of necessity for the
obtaining of it?

A. Out of S. Mat. chapter 19. v. 17. where Christ said to the young man, asking
what he should do to obtain it, if you will enter into life keep the
Commandemens.

Q. Is everlasting life given as a reward of our good works.

A. It is, according to Romans chapter 7. v. 6. and 7. where we read, that God will
render to every one according to his works, to them truly that according to
patience in good works seek glory and honor, and incorruption, life
everlasting, etc.

Q. Were all men created for everlasting life?

A. They were; for God would have all men to be saved, 1 Timothy chapter 2. v. 4. he
wills not the death of any sinner, but rather that he be converted and live.

Q. Why then are many damned?

A. By reason of their own wilful transgression of Gods Law and final
impenitence.

Q. How prove you that man is the free cause of his own sin and damnation.

A. Out of Ioh. chapter the 24. v. 23. God (says he) has given him place for
Penance, but he abuses it unto pride.

Q. What other proof have you?

A. Out of Hos. chapter 13. v. 9. Thy perdition is from thy self O Israel, in me
only is thy aid.

Q. What other yet?

A. Out of Romans chapter 2. v. 4. The benignity of God calls thee to repentance,
but thou heapest to thy self wrath and indignation, according to thy own
impenitent heart.

Q. In what consists everlasting life?

A. In the clear vision and fruition of God, according to that of our Savior
in S. Joh. chapter 17, v. 3. this is life everlasting, that they know thee the
only true God, and whom thou have sent Jesus Christ.

Q. Shall we see nothing else in Heaven but God?

A. Yes; all the Attributes and Processions of God, and in him also as in a
mirror or looking-glass, the natures and perfections of all Creatures, for he
contains all things in himself in a most eminent manner.

Q. How prove you that?

A. Out of the Apostle, saying, from whom all things, by whom all things, in
whom all things.

Q. What effect will follow out of the clear vision and fruition of God?

A. Divine love, steadfast possession and ineffable joy, and out of that praise,
jubilation and thanksgiving for ever.

Q. What means the word Amen?

A. It means that the whole Creed is divine truth, and therefore we must
heartily assent unto it.

CHAP. IIII.
Hope and Prayer Explicated.

Q. WHat is Hope?

A. It is a Virtue infused by God into the soul, by which we have a confident
expectation of Bliss and Glory to be obtained by the grace and merits of
Christ, and our own merits proceeding from his Grace.

Q. On what is that confidence chiefly grounded?

A. On the merits and promises of Christ, who has promised glory to such as
hope in him, and do good works, as also grace whereby to do them.

Q. Are our good works then meritorious of a reward of glory?

A. As proceeding from the grace of Christ and built upon his promises, they
are.

Q. How prove you that?

A. Out of S. Mark. chapter 9. v. 41. where we read, for whosoever shall give you
to drink a cup of water in my Name, because you are Christ's, Amen I say to
you, he shall not lose his reward.

Q. What other proof have you?

A. Out of 1 Cor. chapter 3. v. 9. where we read, and every one shall receive his
own reward according to his own labor, for we are Gods coadjutors.

Q. What other yet?

A. Out of S. Mat. chapter 5. v. 12. Blessed are ye (says our Lord) when they
shall revite and persecute you, for very great is your reward in heaven.

Q. Is it lawful for us to do good works in hope of a reward?

A. Not only lawful, but laudable, according to that, I have inclined my
heart to do thy justications for ever for a reward, Psa. 118. v. 112.

Q. What other proof have you?

A. Out of 1 S. Joh. chapter 3. v. 22. Whatsoever (says he) we shall ask of God
we shall receive of him, because we keep his Commandments, and do those things
that are pleasing before him.

Q. How declare you the necessity of Hope?

A. Because it produces in us obedience to the Law of God, as also a
willingness to suffer for his sake, and final perseverance.

Q. How prove you that?

A. Out of Job chapter 13. v. 15. Although he kill me. (says Job) yet will I hope
in him; and Psalm. 55. v. 5. In God have I hoped, I will not fear what flesh can
do unto me.

Q. Is Hope availeable to the remission of sins?

A. It is, according to that of the Psalmist, for him that hops in our Lord,
mercy shall incompasse. And again, Our Lord is well pleased in them that hope
and trust in his mercy, Psa. 146. v. 11.

Q. What is the principal Act of Hope?

Devout and humble prayer.

Q. What is Prayer?

A. It is a lifting up of the mind to God, by which we beg for good things, and
to be freed from evils, or by which we bless and praise God.

Q. What are the conditions of good Prayer?

A. That it be made with reverence, attention, humility, and perseverance.

Q. What vices are opposite Hope?

A. Despair and Presumption.

Q. What is Despair?

A. It is a diffidence in the power of God and merits of Christ, as if they
were not of force enough to save us.

Q. What is Presumption?

A. It is a foolish and desperate confidence of salvation, without endeavoring
to live well, or keep the Commandments.

Q. How is Despair the cause of sin?

A. Because despairing men are wont to say, if I shall be damned, I shall be
damned, and so use no endeavor to do good, or avoid evil.

Q. How is Presumption the cause of sin?

A. Because presumptuous men are wont to say, God is merciful, and will
forgive our sins, how great soever, and at what time soever we do penance; and
out of this take liberty to sin.

Q. How must our hope be balanced betwixt these two extremes?

A. By filial fear, and an humble distrust of our own works, as they are
ours.

Q. Is Prayer good against both these?

A. It is, according to that of S. Luke, Pray ye, that so ye may not fall into
temptation, chapter 22. v. 40.

Q. For what else avails Prayer?

A. For the avoiding of all evils, and the obtaining of all benefits.

Q. How prove you that?

A. Out of S. Joh. chapter 16. v. 23. Whatsoever (says our Savior) ye shall ask
my Father in my Name he will give it you; and in Luke chapter 11. Ask and it shall
be given to you, etc.

Q. Is it lawful to pray in an unknown Tongue?

A. It is; for he that speaks in a Tongue (to wit unknown) speaks not to
men, but to God, 1 Cor. chapter 14. v. 2. and a Petition has the same force, if it
be understood by him that is petitioned, whether the Petitioner understand it
or not.

Q. What other proof have you?

A. Out of the same Chapter v. 16, 17. where S. Paul says, but if thou bless in
Spirit (that is in a Tongue unknown) he that supplyeth the place of the
vulgar, how shall he say Amen? etc. thou indeed give thanks well, but the
other is not edified; you see in it self the thing is good, for he gives
thanks well.

Q. What other yet?

A. Out of S. Matthew. chapter 21. v. 19. where it is recorded, that the Hebrew
Childrens song of Osanna to the Son of David pleased God, although they
understood it not.

Q. What means the Apostle, when he exhorts us to pray always, 1 These. chapter
5.

A. He means, that we should daily spend some time in prayer, according to
that, Pray for one another that you may be saved, for the daily prayer of a
just man avails much, S. I am. chapter 5. v. 17.

Q. Is it possible to pray always?

A. In some sense it is, namely by offering up all our actions to Gods honor.

Q. In what place is Prayer best?

A. In Churches, because those are places consecrated and deputed to prayer,
and there our prayers are elevated by the common spirit of the Church, and the
peculiar presence of God?

Q. How prove you that?

A. Out of S. Mat. chapter 18. v. 20. Where there be two or three gathered together
in my Name (says our Lord) there I am in the midst of them.

Q. How prove you that material Churches are of Gods appointment?

A. Because God commanded Solomon to build him a Temple, and dedicate it to his
service, 2 Par(...)lip. chapter 7.

Q. What other proof have you?

A. Out of S. Luke chapter 19. v. 45, 46. where Christ calls the material Temple
his house, casting the Buyers, and the Sellers out of it, My House (says he)
is the House of Prayer, but ye have made it a Den of Thieves.

Q. What other yet?

A. Out of S. Luke chapter 18. v. 10. and 14. where the Publican is commended for
ascending to the Temple to pray, and descended into his house justified.

Q. How do you prove it lawful to dedicate or consecrate material Temples?

A. Out of the 2. of Paralip. above cited, chapter 7. and out of S. Joh. chapter 10. v.
22. where it is recorded, That Christ himself kept the dedication of the
Temple in Jerusalem, instituted by Judas Machabeus, Mac. chapter 4. v. 56. 59.,

Q. How do you prove it lawful to adorn Churches with Tapestry, Pictures and
the like?

A. Out of S. Mark. chapter 14. v. 15. Where Christ commanded a great Chamber
adorned to be prepared for his last Supper.

Q. What proof have you for the order and number of the Canonical hours?

A. For Mattins, Lauds, and Prime, that of the 53. Psalm. Early in the morning
will I stand up to thee, early in the morning will thou hear my voice.

Q. What for the third, sixth, and ninth hour?

A. For the third out of Acts chapter 2. v. 16. where we read, that at the third
hour the Holy Ghost descended on the Apostles; for the sixth out of Acts chapter
10. v. 9. where we read, that Peter and John went up into the higher parts to
pray about the sixth hour: and for the ninth out of Acts chapter 3. v. 1. where we
read, and at the ninth hour Peter and John went up into the Temple to pray.

Q. What for the Evensong and Complin?

A. That of the Psalmist, Morning and Evening will I declare the works of our
Lord; and again, The lifting up of my hands is as an Evening Sacrifice.

Q. Is it good to use outward Ceremonies in time of Prayer, as kneeling,
knocking of the breast, and such like?

A. It is; for they declare the inward reverence and devotion of the heart; and
Christ himself prostrated when he prayed in the garden, S. Matthew. chapter 26. v.
39. and the poor Publican beat his breast and cast down his eyes in that
prayer by which he merited to descend justified, S. Luke chapter 18. v. 13.

Q. Why is the morning so fit a time for prayer?

A. To open the windows of the soul unto the light of divine Grace, and offer
up the works of the whole day unto Gods honor.

Q. Why is the evening also?

A. To shut the windows of the soul against the darkness of sin and the
illusions of the Devil; as also to render thanks for all the benefits of the
day past.

Q. What things ought we to pray for?

A. For all good things, both spiritual and temporal, and to be free from all
evil; for so our Lord has taught us by his Prayer.

CHAP. V.
The Pater Noster Expounded.

Q. WHat is the Pater Noster?

A. It is the most holy Prayer that ever was.

Q. Who made it?

A. Christ our Lord, the eternal wisdom of his Father, S. Mat. chapter 6. v. 9,
10.

Q. Why did he make it?

A. To teach us a set form of Prayer, and how we ought to pray.

Q. Why did he make it in so short and plain a way?

A. That all men might be capable of it?

Q. What does it contain?

A. All those chief things which we can ask or hope for of God.

Q. How many Petitions has it?

A. Seven.

Q. What understand you by those words which are prefixed to the Petitions, Our
Father which art in Heaven?

A. I understand, that God is our Father both by Creation and Adoption, and
therefore we may confidently come unto him and beg all blessings of him.

Q. How prove you that?

A. Out of 1. S. Joh. chapter 3. v. 1. See (says he) what manner of charity the
Father has given us, that we should be named and be the Sons of God.

Q. Why do we say our Father, and not my Father?

A. Because God is the common Father of all, and all good Christians must pray
for one another, according to that, the Communion of Saints.

Q. What understand you by the words, which art in heaven?

A. I understand that God who fills heaven and earth, and is in all things,
times, and places, is in heaven in a peculiar manner, declaring and manifesting
his glory to the blessed, and therefore when we pray we must lift up our minds
to him in heaven, and keep them fixed upon heavenly things.

Q. How prove you that?

A. Out of Jer. chapter 48. where we read, Cursed be he that does the work of God
negligently.

The first Petition.
Q. WHat is the first Petition?

A. Hallowed be thy Name.

Q. What do we beg by this Petition?

A. That God may be known by the whole world, and that he may be worthily
praised, served and honored by all his creatures, which cannot be effected but
by his gift of Grace.

Q. Who are those that say this Petition ill?

A. Such as dishonor and tear the Name of God by blaspheming, swearing,
iying, cursing and scurrilous discourses.

The second Petition.
Q. WHat is the second Petition?

A. Thy Kingdom come.

Q. What do we beg of God by this Petition?

A. We beg that our miseries and afflictions in this life may be ended, and
that we may be made partakers of his joyful and heavenly Kingdom.

Q. What else do we beg?

A. That Christ may reign in us in this life by Grace, and in the next by
Glory, presenting us a Kingdom to his Father.

Q. Who say this Petition ill?

A. Such as are willing slaves to sin; and to the Devil.

The third Petition.
Q. WHat is the third Petition?

A. Thy will be done in earth as it is in heaven.

Q. What do we beg by this Petition?

A. That God would enable us by his holy Grace to keep his Commandments, and
be obedient to his will in all things.

Q. What mean you by the words in earth as it is in heaven?

A. We beg by those, that we may be as ready and as willing to do the Will of
God on earth; as the blessed Saints and Angels are in heaven.

The fourth Petition.
Q. What is the fourth Petition?

A. Give us this day our daily bread.

Q. What do we beg by this Petition?

A. All food and sustenance for our souls and bodies.

Q. What is the food of the soul?

A. The Word of God, the holy Sacraments, especially the blessed Eucharist, and
Divine Grace.

Q. How prove you that by this Petition Christ intended the blessed bread of
the Eucharist?

A. Because although we read in S. Luke our daily bread, chapter 11. v. 3. in S.
Matthew. we read our supersubstantiall bread, chapter 6. v. 11.

Q. Why is the Eucharist called our daily bread?

A. Because it is daily offered for our sins upon the Altar, and we ought
daily to receive it, at least in spirit and desire.

Q. Who say this Petition ill?

A. Such as are cold and careless in coming to the Sacraments, and in hearing
divine Service, or Exhortations?

Q. Who else?

A. Such as ascribe their temporal goods and blessings to their own industry
and providence, and not to any special bounty or gift of God.

The fifth Petition.
Q. What is the fifth Petition?

A. And forgive us our debts as we forgive our debtors.

Q. What do we beg by this Petition?

A. That God would pardon us the sins of our life past, as also the
punishments which are due unto them.

Q. Why are sins and the penalties of sin called debts?

A. Because they make us debtors to the Justice of God, whom by sin we rob of
his due honor.

Q. Why is it added, as we forgive our debtors?

A. To signify that God will not forgive us, unless we also forgive our
Brethren, if you will not forgive men, (says our Lord) neither will your
Father forgive you your offenses, S. Mat. chapter 6. v. 15.

Q. Who are they which say this Petition ill?

A. Such as bear malice against their neighbors, and seek revenge.

The sixth Petition.
Q. What is the sixth Petition?

A. And lead us not into temptation.

Q. What do we beg by this Petition?

A. That God would not permit us to be tempted above our strength.

Q. Does God tempt any man to sin?

A No he does not; for God is not the tempter of evils, he tempts no man, S.
Jam. chapter 1. v. 13.

Q. What other proof have you?

A. Out of the 5. Psalm. where we read, Thou art not a God willing iniquity,
and out of Romans chapter 9. v. 14. where we read, Is there iniquity with God? No;
God forbid.

Q. By whom then are we tempted?

A. By the Devil and our own concupiscence, S. Iam. chapter 1. v. 14.

Q. Can a man live in this world and be free from all temptations?

A. Morally speaking he cannot; for the whole life of man on earth is a
temptation, Job chapter 7.

Q. Why then do we pray to be delivered from temptations?

A. That we may not be overcome or vanquished by them.

Q. Is temptation of it self a sin?

A. No, not without consent on our part, nay it is a great occasion of merit,
if we resist it as we ought.

Q. How prove you that?

A. Out of Apoc. chapter 2. v. 10, and 11. Be thou faithful until death, says
our Lord, and I will give thee a Crown of life, he that overcomes shall not
be hurt of the second death.

Q. What other proof have you?

A. Because Christ himself, who never sinned would be tempted, and the Tempter
came unto him saying, etc. S. Mat. chapter 4. v. 3.

Q. Are we never overcome but by our own default?

A. Never, according to that answer which was given to S. Paul, desiring to be
freed from a temptation, my grace is sufficient for thee.

Q. What other proof have you?

A. Out of S. Iam. chapter 4. v. 7. where we read, Resist ye the Devil and he will
fly from you.

Q. Who are they that say this Petition ill?

A. Such as seek after occasions of sin, and wilfully expose themselves unto
temptations.

Q. What are the best remedies against temptations.

A. To have recourse by humble Prayer to God and to his Saints, and to such
especially, as have been tempted in the same kind, to resist them valiantly at
the first entrance, and to remember often our last things, Death, Judgment,
Hell, and Heaven.

The seventh Petition.
Q. What is the seventh Petition?

A. But deliver us from evil.

Q. What do we beg by this Petition?

A. That God would free us, and deliver us from all our evils both spiritual
and temporal, and especially from the evils of sin past, present, and to come.

Q. Who is the Author of all evil of sin?

A. The Devil, for sin in God there is none, 1 S. Ioh. chapter 3. v. 5.

Q. What other proof have you?

A. Out of Wisdom, chapter 14. v. 9. where we read, hateful to God is the impious
man and his impiety.

Q. Who say this Petition ill?

A. They which commit their evils before God, and multiply their sins
without remorse.

CHAP. VI.
The Hail Mary, or Angelical Salutation Expounded.

Q. WHat is the Hail Mary?

A. It is a most holy Prayer in honor of the blessed Virgin Mary.

Q. How do you prove it lawful to honor and pray unto our Lady?

A. Out of S. Luke chapter 1. v. 48. where, by inspiration from God, she
prophesied, saying, All Generations shall call me blessed.

Q. How many parts has the Hail Mary?

A. It has three parts.

Q. What is the first part?

A. Hail Mary full of grace, our Lord is with thee.

Q. Who made this part?

A. The Holy Ghost, although it were delivered by the Angel Gabriel, S. Luke
chapter 1. v. 29.

Q. What signifies the word Hail?

A. It signifies Rejoice, be glad, O Mother of God.

Q. Why do we invite her by this Prayer to rejoice.

A. Because it renews the memory of her blessed Sons conception, which is
an infinite cause of joy to her and the whole Court of heaven.

Q. What signifies the word Mary?

A. It signifies Star of the Sea.

Q. Why is she fitly called Star of the Sea?

A. Because she shines unto us by her exemplar virtues in this Sea of miseries
like a most glorious Star.

Q. What mean you by the words, Full of Grace?

A. I mean that the blessed Virgin had a special fulness and prerogative of
Grace caused in her by the conception of her Son.

Q. What means, Our Lord is with thee?

A. It means that the whole Trinity was with her at that time in a particular
manner.

Q. How declare you that?

A. Because the Father was with her as with his Spouse, the Son was with her,
as with his Mother, the Holy Ghost was with her, as with his choicest
Tabernacle.

Q. Are they now also with her?

A. They are in glory, and will be so for all eternity.

The second part of the Hail Mary.
Q. WHat is the second part of it?

A. Blessed art thou amongst women, blessed is the fruit of thy womb, Jesus.

Q. Who made this part?

A. S. Elizabeth, being inspired by the Holy Ghost, S. Luke chapter 1. v. 42.

Q. What understand you by blessed art thou amongst women?

A. I understand, that she alone was chosen out amongst all women to be the
mother of God, and therefore ought to be blessed and praised by all women.

Q. Why by married women?

A. Because their children are made the Sons of God by the nativity and
merits of her Son, for whom she also daily beggeth blessings.

Q. Why by Virgins?

A. Because she is their Queen, and chiefest Patroness, and does obtain for
them of her Son Jesus the gift of Chastity.

Q. Why by Widows?

A. Because she is their best example, and Advocate unto their Spouse her Son.

Q. What means, blessed is the fruit of thy womb Jesus?

A. It means, that Jesus is her true and natural Son, and that in him she
is the Author of all our blessings, and to be blessed both by men and Angels.

Q. Why are we Catholics such great honourers of the Name Jesus?

A. Because it is a name above all names, as you have heard in the Creed; and
S. Paul exhorts saying, all whatsoever ye do in word or work, do all in the
Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, giving thanks to God the Father by him, Col. ch
3. v. 17.

The third part of the Hail Mary.
Q. WHat is the third part of the Hail Mary?

A. Holy Mary Mother of God pray for us sinners now, and at the hour of our
death, Amen.

Q. Who made this part?

A. The holy Catholic Church in the Council of Ephesus, the year of our Lord
43 1. Pope Celestine presiding against Nestor the Heretic, who denied our
Blessed Lady to be the Mother of God, and would have her only called the
Mother of Christ. See Baronius, Tom. 5. An. 431.

Q. What means, Pray for us sinners now?

A. It means that we need divine assistance every moment.

Q. What means, and at the hour of our death?

A. It means that we then especially shall need the aid of blessed Mary and
her Son Jesus, and therefore do now daily beg it: the word Amen signifies, let
it be done, or so be it.

CHAP. VII.
Charity expounded.

Q. WHat is Charity?

A. It is the gift of God, or a supernatural quality infused by God into the
soul of man, by which we love God above all things, and our neighbor as our
selves.

Q. Why is it called supernatural?

A. Because it is not in the power of nature to obtain, but by the special
grace and gift of God.

Q. Is Charity imputed only as Protestants would have it, or is a quality
truly inherent in the soul?

A. It is truly inherent in the soul, as wisdom is inherent in a soul that is
wise, and love in a soul that loves.

Q. How prove you that?

A. Out of Romans chapter 5. v. 5. where we read, the charity of God which is powered
out in our hearts by the Holy Ghost which is given us.

Q. What other proof have you?

A. Out of Dan. chapter 6. v. 22. before him (i. God, says he) justice has been
found in me.

Q. What other yet?

A. Out of Ephesians. chapter 3. v. 17. and 18. where S. Paul prays for his Brethren,
that Christ may dwell in their hearts by Faith rooted and founded in Charity.

Q. What is it to love God above all things?

A. To be willing to lose all things rather then the Grace and Love of God by
mortal sin.

Q. Who are they which have this love?

A. They who keep the Commandments of God, according to that, this is the
charity of God that we keep his Commandments, and his Commandments are not
heavy, 1 of S. Joh. chapter 4. v. 20.

Q. Has not he charity then that breaks any of the Commandments?

A. He has not, for he that says, he knows God and does not keep his
Commandments, he is a liar, and the truth is not in him. 1 of S. Joh. chapter 4.
v. 20.

Q. What is it to love our neighbor as our selves?

A. To wish him as much good as we wish unto our selves, and to do him no wrong.

Q. Who is our neighbor?

A. All men, women, and children, and especially Catholics.

Q. Why so?

A. Because they are the Images of God, and redeemed with the blood of Christ.

Q. Why especially Catholics?

A. Because they are all Members of the mystical body of Christ, which is the
Church.

Q. Whence arises the obligation of loving our neighbor?

A. Because God has commanded it, and if any one shall say, I love God, and
hates his brother, he is a liar, 1 S. Joh. chapter 4. v. 20.

Q. Are we not also bound to love our enemies?

A. We are, according to that, It was said of old, Thou shall not kill, but I
say unto you love your enemies, S. Mat. chapter 5. v. 44.

Q. What kind of love are we bound to show unto our enemies?

A. We are bound to use a civil carriage toward them, to pray for them in
general, and to be in preparation of mind to do any charitable office for
them when their extreme or moral necessity shall require it.

Q. What is the highest act of Charity?

A. To give our life for Gods honor, or the salvation of our neighbor.

Q. Why is Charity the greatest and most excellent of virtues?

A. Because it is the Queen and life of all the rest, Faith without Charity is
dead, S. Jam. chapter 2. v. 22.

Q. What state of life do you conceive to be of greatest perfection?

A. That which of its own nature and proper institution obliges to the highest
and greatest Churity, for Charity is perfection; and such is the state not only
of Bishops, but also of Pastors, which have the charge of souls.

Q. How prove you that?

A. Out of S. Joh. chapter 15. where we read, Greater Charity then this no man
has, that a man yield his life for his friends, which is the proper Obligation
of every Parish Priest, according to that, the good Pastor gives his life for
his Sheep, S. Joh. chapter 10. v. 11.

Q. How prove you the necessity of Charity?

A. Out of 1. S. Ioh. chapter 4. v. 17. where we read, He that remains in Charity
remains in God, and God in him, and chapter 13. v. 14. He that loves not,
remains in death.

Q. What are the effects of Charity?

A. It remitteth all sin, charity covers a multitude of sins, Romans chapter 5.
v. 5. and gives spiritual life unto the soul. In this we know (says S.
John) that we are translated from death to life, because we love the Brethren,
Ep. 1. chapter 3. v. 14.

CHAP. VIII.
Concerning the Commandments in general.

Q. WHat is the principal aim or end of the Commandments?

A. To teach us the will and pleasure of the eternal God, or the love of God,
and of our neighbor, he that has loved has fulfilled the Law, Romans chapter 3. v.
9.

Q. Why are the Commandments (excepting the determination of the Sabbath day)
called the Commandments of the Law of nature?

A. Because God wrote them in the heart of man at his creation, being the very
Dictates of natural reason.

Q. When did he renew them in the written Law?

A. When he gave them to Moses on Mount Sina in Thunder and Lightning, written
in two Tables of stone, Exodus chapter 20.

Q. Why in Thunder and Lightning?

A. To move us to a careful observance of them.

Q. Are all men bound to know the Commandments?

A. For the substance of them they are; because they are the rule of our whole
life and actions.

Q. How do you prove them to be but only ten?

A. Out of Deuteronomy. chapter 3. v. 13. where we read, And he showed you his Covenant
which he commanded you to do, and the ten words which he wrote in the two
Tables of stone.

Q. By what kind of sins are the Commandments broken?

A. By Mortal sins only; for Venial sins are not contrary to the end of the
Commandments, which is Charity, and therefore not against (properly speaking)
but beside the Commandments.

Q. How declare you that?

A. Because a Venial sin (for example, an idle word, an officious or jesting
lie which hurts no body, and the theft of a pin or an apple) is not of weight
enough to break Charity betwixt man and man, much less betwixt God and man.

Q. Is it possible for us to keep all the Commandments?

A. Not only possible, but necessary and easy, by the assistance of Gods
grace.

Q. How declare you that?

A. Because God is no Tyrant, to command impossibilities under pain of eternal
damnation, as he does the keeping of his Commandments.

Q. How prove you that?

A. Out of Exodus chapter 20. and 34. and out of Deuteronomy. c. 27. 28. 29. 30. 31. where
he often commands them to be kept, threatening grievous punishments to such as
break them.

Q. What other proof have you?

A. Out of S. Matthew. chapter 5. v. 20. where we read, He therefore that shall
break one of these least Commandments and teach men so to do, he shall be
called least in the Kingdom of heaven; but he that shall do and teach them,
he shall be called great in the Kingdom of heaven.

Q. What other yet?

A. Out of S. Matthew. chapter 11. v. 30. Take up my yoke upon you, (says our Lord)
for my yoke is sweet, and my burden light.

Q. Has God ever promised to enable men to keep them?

A. He has, and also actually to make them keep and do them.

Q. How prove you that?

A. Out of Ezekiel. chapter 36. v. 27. where we read, I will put my Spirit in the
middle of you, (says our Lord) and I will make that ye walk in my Precepts,
and keep my judgments and do them.

Q. What other place have you?

A. Out of Ezekiel. chapter 37. v. 24. They shall be my people, (says the Lord) and I
will be their God; there shall be one Pastor of them all, they shall walk in
my Judgments and keep my Commandments and do them.

Q. How do you prove that any have ever kept them?

A. Out of S. Luke, chapter 1. v. 6. where we read, That Zachary and Elizabeth were
both just before God, walking in all the Commandments and Iustifications of
our Lord without reproof.

Q. How prove you the keeping of them to be necessary to salvation?

A. Out of S. Mat. chapter 19. v. 17. If thou will enter into life (says our Lord)
keep the Commandments.

Q. What other proof have you?

A. Out of S. Luke, chapter 10. v. 25. 28. where, when the Lawyer had asked what he
should do to possess everlasting life, and had repeated the sum of the
Commandments, Christ answered him saying, Do this and thou shall live.

Q. What other yet?

A. Out of Romans chapter 2. v. 13. where we read, not hearers of the Law, but doers
of the Law shall be justified.

Of the Commandments in particular.
The first Commandment Expounded.
Q. WHat is the first Commandment?

A. I am thy Lord thy God, thou shall not have any strange Gods before me, thou
shall not make to thy self any graven thing to adore it.

Q. What are we commanded by this Precept?

A. To serve, love, adore, and worship but one only true living, and Eternal
God, and no more.

Q. What are we forbidden by this Precept?

A. To worship any Creature for a God, or give it the Honor, which is due to
God.

Q. What is the Honor due to God?

A. Supreme and Sovereign Honor, that which is called by Divines, LATRIA, We
must honor him as the great master of Life and Death, as our Creator,
Redeemer, Conserver, and Last End.

Q. How do men sin against this Commandment?

A. By worshipping Idols and false gods; By erring or doubting in Faith; By
Superstitions and Witchcraft.

Q. How else?

A. By going to Church with Infidels or Heretics, by believing Dreams etc.

Q. How do you prove it a great sin to go to Church with Heretics?

A. Because by so doing we outwardly deny our Faith, and profess their false
Faith, at least in our Country, where going to Church is by the Laws of the
Land made a distinctive sign betwixt Catholics, and Novellists.

Q. What Scripture have you against it?

A. Out of S. Luke, c. 17. v. 22. where Christ forbids it, saying, And they
will say to you, Lo here Christ, Lo there Christ, go ye not, neither do
ye follow them.

Q. What other proof have you?

A. Out of Titus, c. 3. v. 10. and 11. A man that is an Heretic (says he)
avoid, knowing that he that is such an one, is subverted, and sins.

Q. How do you prove it unlawful to go to Witches and Fortune Tellers?

A. Out of Deuteronomy. chapter 10. v. 10, 11. where we read, Let there not be found in
thee any that demands of Southsayers, and observes dreams, neither let
there be a Witch or Enchanter, or that consulteth with the Devil; for all
these things our Lord abhors.

Q. What understand you by those words, Thou shall not make to thy self any
graven thing to adore it?

A. I understand, that we must not make Idols nor Images, nor any graven thing
whatsoever, to adore it as a God, or with Gods honor.

Q. Why are not these words expressed in many of our short Catechismes?

A. Because they are sufficiently included in the precedent words, Thou shall
not have any strange (or other) Gods before me.

Q. How declare you that?

A. Because if we must have no other, but one only true, living, and uncreated
God, who created heaven and earth, then it is clear to the reason of every
child, that we must not have many Gods, or any graven Images for Gods.

Q. Why do Novellists instead of graven thing translate it graven Image?

A. Because they have a will to corrupt the Text, in hope by so doing to
scandalize the ignorant people with our honoring of Images.

Q. How do you prove that they corrupt the Text?

A. Because the Hebrew word is PESEL, which signifies a graven thing, the Greek
word is IDOLON, an Idol, and the Latin is SCULPTILE, a graven thing, therefore
the word Image is a mere corruption.

Q. Is it lawful then to give any honor to the Images of Christ and his
Saints?

A. Yes, an inferior or relative honor, in as much as they represent unto us
heavenly things, but not Gods honor, nor yet the honor due to Saints.

Q. How prove you that?

A. Out of Exodus chapter 25. v. 18, 19. and 22. where God himself commanded 12.
Cherubins to be made of beaten gold, and to be set on both sides of the Arc,
before which the people were to pray, and promised that he would speak unto
them from the middle of the Cherubins; therefore it is lawful to make Images
and pray before them.

Q. Do not Catholics pray to Images and Relikes?

A. No by no means, we pray before them indeed, (to keep us from distractions,
and help our memories in the expression and apprehension of celestial things)
but not to them, for we know well, that they can neither see nor hear, nor
help us.

Q. What other proof have you for the lawful use of Images?

A. Out of S. John, chapter 3. v. 14. where Christ approves the making, and
exalting of the Brazen Serpent, by which the Israelites were healed in the
Desert, and owneth it to be an Image or Figure of himself, exalted on the
Cross.

Q. What other yet?

A. Because we read in Baronius that famous Church-Historian, in the year of
Christ, 31. That Christ himself sent his own Image to King Abdagar, and made
it also by miracle on the handkerchief of S. Veronica and on his own shroud.

Add unto this, because the second Nicene Council in the 7. of the Acts, does
Anathematize Imagebreakers, and all such as allege the places of Scripture
which are against Idols, against the sacred Images, and also those who say
that Catholics do honor Images as Gods with Sovereign honor.

Q. What benefit do we receive by Images?

A. Very great; because they movingly represent unto us the mysteries of our
Saviors Passion, as also the martyrdomes and examples of his Saints.

Q. Is there not some danger of Idolatry in the so frequent use of Images?

A. Truly none at all; for it is not well possible, that any rational Man, who
is but meanly instructed in Christianity, should conceive or think that a piece
of painted Wood or Marble is that God and Man Christ Jesus, who was borne of
the Virgin Mary, died upon the Cross, arose from the dead, ascended into
Heaven, and sits now at the right Hand of God.

Q. But how if such inconveniences do happen, at least by accident?

A. Let the abuse be mended, and not the good institution be taken away or
blamed; For man's nature is subject to do it self hurt, even in the best
things, which must not therefore be given over.

Q. How do you prove it lawful to paint God the Father like an old Man,
seeing he is a pure Spirit, and has no Body?

A. Because he appeared to the Prophet Daniel in the shape of an old Man, Dan.
chapter 7.

Q. Is it lawful also to honor Angels and Saints?

A. It is with DULIA, or inferior honor, proportioned to their Excellency;
but not as God, nor with Gods Honor.

Q. What utility does acerue to us, by our honoring and canonizing of Saints.

A. Very great; seeing it much conduces to the breeding of virtue and the love
of God, making us know that it is possible even for us our selves, to come unto
the like rewards.

Q. How declare you that?

A. Because the higher esteem we have of the Saints, and of the excellency of
their state, the more ardent must needs be our desire, and the stronger our
courage, to do and undertake, what they did, and practiced?

Q. How prove you that?

A. Out of Joshua chapter v. 14. 15. where Joshua did it: I am the Prince of the
Host of our Lord, said the Angel to Joshua, and Joshua fell flat on the
ground, and adoring said, what speaks my Lord unto his servant?

Q. What other proof have you?

A. Apoc. chapter 22. v. 9. where S. John did it, (though the Angel had once
before willed him not to do it, in regard of his Apostollicall dignity, chapter 19.
v. 10.) And I fell down (says he) to adore before the Feet of the Angel, who
showed me these things.

Q. Is it lawful to honor the Relics of Saints?

A. With a relative Honor it is, but not with Gods Honor.

Q. How prove you that?

A. Because a dead man was raised from death to life, by touching the bones of
Elisaeus the Prophet, 4 Kings chapter 13. v. 21.

Q. What other proof have you?

A. Out of S. Matthew. c. 9. v. 20, 21. where we read, That the woman was healed
of her Bloody Flux, by but touching the hemme of our Saviors Garment, and
believing that it would heal her.

Q. What other yet?

A. Out of Acts c. 19. v. 12. where we read, That the Handkerchiefs and Aprons
which had but touched the Body of S. Paul, cast out Devils, and cured all
diseases.

Q. How prove you, that dead and inanimate things (for example Medalls,
Crosses, Churches, Bread, Water, and the like) are capable of sanctity and
honor?

A. Out of Josh. chapter 5. v. 15. and out of Numb. chapter 22. v. 21. where the Angel
says to Moses and Joshua, Loose the shoes from thy feet, for the ground
whereon thou stand is holy ground.

Q. What other proof have you?

A. Out of S. Matthew. chapter 23. v. 17, 18. where we read, that the Temple
sanctifies the gold, and the Altar the Gift. Ye fools and blind (says our
Lord) Whether is the greater, the Gold, or the Temple that sanctifies the
Gold? The Gift, or the Altar that sanctifies the Gift?

Q. What other yet?

Out of 1 Timothy chapter 4. v. 4, 5. where we read, That every creature of God is
sanctified by the Word of God and Prayer: And out of 2 S. Pet. chapter 1. v. 18.
where he calls the mountain Tabor a holy hill; because Christ was
transfigured upon it.

Q. How prove you that Pilgrimages to holy places, as to Mount Calvary, Mount
Tabor, and the Sepulcher of Christ) be laudable and pious practices?

A. Out of Deuteronomy. chapter 16. v. 16. where God himself commanded, That thrice a
year all the people should come up unto Jerusalem, to adore and make their
Offerings to him.

Q. What other proof have you?

A. The example of Christ himself, our blessed Lady, and S. Joseph, who went
up unto Jerusalem at the solemn day of the Pasche, S. Luke chapter 2. v. 41, 42.

Q. What other yet?

A. Out of Acts chapter 8. v. 29, and 38. where the Ethiopian Eunuch going on
Pilgrimage to Jerusalem, was in his return converted and baptized on the way
by S. Philip: so pleasing was his Pilgrimage to God.

Finally, because it was foretold by the Prophets, that those places which
Christ sanctified by his Passion, should be places of great Pilgrimage and
adoration. We will adore (says David) in the place where his feet have stood,
Psalm. 131. And in Isa. chapter 11. v. 10. we read, To him shall the Gentiles pray,
and his sepulcher shall be glorious.

Q. How do you prove it lawful to go on Pilgrimage to the Shrines of Saints?

A. Because (as you have heard already) their Relics are holy and venerable
things, and God is pleased to work great Cures and Miracles by them, for such
as are devout honourers of them.

Q. Is there any power now in the Church to do Miracles?

A. There is, according to that unlimited promise of Christ, Them that believe
in me, these signs shall follow; in my name they shall cast out Devils, they
shall speak with new tongues, they shall lay hands upon the sick, and they
shall be whole, S. Mat. chapter 19. v. 17, 18.

Q. Have these things been done in latter Ages?

A. They have, and are, as you may see in the unquestionable Histories and
Records of all Catholic Countries, where many great Miracles. wrought by the
Servants of God, and especially at the Pilgrimages, and Shrines of Saints, are
yearly registered under the Depositions of eyewitnesses, men above all
exceptions, which cannot be denied; unless we may deny all History.

Q. Why then do the pretended Reformers say, that Miracles are ceased?

A. Because they and their Sect-Masters, have never yet been able to do any in
confirmation of their Errors.

Q. Why are so few done here in England

A. By reason of the incredulity of Sectaries.

Q. What necessity is there of the Belief of Miracles?

A. Doubtless, very great: because the Belief of Miracles well grounded,
makes men extremely apprehensive of the presence of God, and his immediate
Government of humane affairs; so that he who absolutely denies miracles, is
to be suspected of not believing particular Providence, which is the maine
string, on which all Christianity depends?

The second Commandment Expounded.
Q. WHat is the second Commandment?

A. Thou shall not take the Name of the Lord thy God in vain.

Q. What is forbidden by this Precept?

A. All false, rash and unnecessary Oaths.

Q. What kind of sins are false and rash Oaths?

A. Mortal sins, if they be voluntary, and deliberate, because by such Oaths
we call God to witness to a lie; or at least, to that which is uncertain.

Q. What are the necessary conditions of a lawful Oath?

A. Truth, that we hurt not Gods Honor; justice, that we wrong not our
neighbor; and judgment, that we swear not vainly.

Q. What is a just cause of an Oath?

A. Gods Honor, our own, or our neighbors lawful good, and defense.

Q. If a man Swear to do that which is evil, is he bound to keep his Oath?

A. No: He is bound not to keep it; for an Oath is no bond of iniquity.

Q. How prove you a vain or jesting Oath to be a sin?

A. Out of S. Matthew. chapter 5. v. 34. It was said of old (says our Lord) Thou
shall not commit perjury; But I say unto you not to swear at all, that is,
without just cause.

Q. What other proof have you?

A. Out of S. James. chapter 5. v. 12. But above all things (says he) swear ye
not; neither by Heaven nor earth, nor any other Creature. But let your talk be
yea, yea, no, no, that ye fall not under judgment.

Q. What else is prohibited by this Precept?

A. All cursing and blaspheming.

Q. What is commanded by it?

A. To speak always with reverence of God, and of his Saints.

Q. How else do men sin against this Precept?

A. By breaking lawful Vows, and by making, or keeping unlawful ones.

Q. What is a Vow?

A. It is a diliberate and voluntary promise made to God, of some better good.

Q. How do you prove it lawful to make Vows?

A. Out of Esa. chapter 19. v. 21. They shall make Vows unto our Lord (says he)
and shall pay them.

The third Commandment Expounded.
Q. WHat is the third Commandment?

A. Remember thou keep holy the Sabbath day.

Q. When began the Sabbath to be kept?

A. From the very Creation of the world: For then God blessed it and rested on
it, from all his works, Genesis 2. 2.

Q. When was this Commandment renewed?

A. In the old Law, when God gave the Commandments to Moses on Mount Sinai,
written with his own finger in two Tables of stone, Exodus chapter 20.

Q. Why was the Jewish Sabbath changed into the Sunday?

A. Because Christ was borne upon a Sunday, rose from the dead upon a Sunday,
and sent down the Holy Ghost upon a Sunday; works not inferior to the
Creation of the world.

Q. By whom was it changed?

A. By the Church; by the Apostles, who also kept it, for S. John was in Spirit
on a Sunday. Apoc. chapter 1. v. 10.

Q. How prove you, that the Church has power to command Feasts and Holy Days?

A. By this very act of changing the Sabbath into the Sunday, which Protestants
allow of; and therefore fondly contradict themselves, by keeping Sunday so
strictly, and breaking most other Feasts, commanded by the same Church.

Q. How declare you that?

A. Because by keeping Sunday, they acknowledge the Churches power to ordain
Feasts, and to command them under sin, and by not keeping the rest by her
commanded, they again deny in fact the same power.

Q. What other proof have you?

A. Out of S. John chapter 10. ver. 22. where we read, That Christ himself was
present, and kept the Dedication of the Temple in Jerusalem, a Feast ordained
by Judas Machabaeus, 1 Machab. chapter 4.

Q. What other yet?

A. Out of Acts chapter 2. v. 1. where the Apostles, keeping the Feast of
Pentecost, were all filled with the Holy Ghost.

Neither do Protestants as yet dissent from this, though some have lately
prohibited and profaned both it, and the most holy Feast of the Resurrection.

Q. What command have you from God for obedience to the Church in things of
this nature?

A. Out of Acts chapter 15. v. 4. where we read, that S. Paul went about confirming
the Churches, and commanding them to keep the precept of the Apostles, and the
Ancients. And out of S. Luke c. 10. v. 16. He that hears you bears me, and
he that despises you (the Church) despises me.

Q. May Temporal Princes and the Laity make a Holy Day?

A. With consent and approbation of the Church they may; otherwise not: because
that is an act of spiritual Jurisdiction.

Q. For what end does the Church ordain Holy Days?

A. For the increase of piety, and in memory of special benefits received from
God?

Q. If keeping the Sunday be a Church-precept, why is it numbered in the
Deealouge, which are the Commandments of God, and of the Law of Nature?

A. Because the substance or chief part of it, namely, That a day be set apart
for the service of God, is of divine Right, and of the Law of Nature, though
the determinating of this particular Day, Sunday, rather then Saturday, be a
Church Ordinance and Precept.

Q. Did not Christ, when he confirmed the rest, confirm also this Commandment?

A. Inasmuch as it belonged to the Law of Nature, he did, but not as it
belonged to the Ceremonial Law of the Jews, and was affixed to Saturday;
therefore now we are not bound to keep the Saturday.

Q. Why so I pray you?

A. Because that particular Day was a Command of the Ceremonial Law of the
Jews, which was abrogated, and ceased to oblige after the death of Christ.

Q. To what are we obliged by this Precept?

A. To spend the Sunday in Prayer and Divine Service.

Q. What is the best means to sanctify the Sunday?

A. By hearing of Mass, confessing our sins, communicating, hearing Sermons,
and reading good Books.

Q. What is forbidden by this Precept?

A. All profane employments, and servile labors, excepting such as are of
necessity, as dressing meat, serving cattle, etc. or such as appertain to
Piety, and the Works of Mercy.

Q. Who are they that break this Commandment?

A. Such as without necessity spend any considerable part of the Sunday in
servile labors.

Q. How else is the Sunday profaned?

A. By spending all the morning in lazy lying in bed, or vain attiring our
selves; by missing Divine Service when we may hear it; or spending the
greatest part of the day in drinking, gaming, dancing, or the like.

Q. Is there any thing now in this first Table of the Law impossible to be
observed?

A. No certainly: for nothing can be more easy and delightful to the true
lover of God, then to do all things that are here commanded.

The second Table of the Law.
The fourth Commandment Expounded.
Q. WHat is the fourth Commandment?

A. Honor thy Father and thy Mother.

Q. What are we commanded by this Precept?

A. To love, reverence, obey and relieve our Parents in their wants.

Q. Why to love them?

A. Because under God they are the chief causes of our very Life and being,
and do not only bring us forth with much grief and pain, but also bring us
up with much love, labor, and solicitude.

Q. How are we bound to reverence them?

A. Not only inwardly in our hearts, but also outwardly in our carriage and
comportment.

Q. Why to obey them?

A. Because they are Gods Vicegerents, and have received power from him, (from
whom is all Paternity in Heaven and Earth) both to direct us, instruct us, and
correct us.

Q. In what things are we bound to obey our Parents?

A. In all that is not sin, according to that, Children obey your Parents in
all things, for that is well pleasing unto God Col. c. 3. v. 21.

Q. What is prohibited by this Precept?

A. All sowernesse, stubbornness, and disobedience to Parents.

Q. What is the reward of dutiful children?

A. A long and happy life, good children (if they marry) and a good death.

Q. What is the reward of undutifull ones?

A. A short and sinful life, accompanied with an untimely death, witness the
example of Absolon, 2 King. chapter 18. v. 14.

Q. What other proof have you?

A. That of the Proverbs, The eye which lowres on parents shall be plucked out
with Crows and Eagles.

Q. What signifies the word Father?

A. It signifies not only our corporal Parents, but also our Ghostly Fathers,
and all lawful Superiors.

Q. What do we owe to Ghostly Fathers?

A. Love, reverence, obedience and sustenance.

Q. Why love?

A. Because they are the Fathers and Feeders of our souls, and under God and
his Saints, the isntrumental causes of all our spiritual goods: According to
the flesh (says S. Paul) you have many fathers, but in the Gospel I have
begotten you.

Q. Why reverence?

A. Because they are Gods Anointed, and represent the person of Christ.

Q. Why obedience?

A. Because God has appointed them to be our spiritual Pastors, Guides and
Governors.

Q. In what are we bound to obey them?

A. In all things belonging to Faith and Doctrine, and the government of our
souls.

Q. Is any great honor due to Priests and Ghostly Fathers?

A. There is; according to that of S. Paul, The Priests that rule well, let
them be deemed worthy of double honor, especially they that labor in the Word
and Doctrine, 1 Timothy chapter 5. v. 17.

Q. How may we sin against Priests and Ghostly Fathers?

A. By disobeying, or detracting them, or believing slanderous reports against
them, upon mere hearsay, or the testimony of insufficient witnesses, or without
witness.

Q. What testimony is sufficient against a Priest?

A. I will tell you out of S. Paul's mouth: Against a Priest (says he to
Timothy, the Bishop of Ephesus) receive not an accusation under two or three
witnesses, 1 Timothy chapter 5. v. 19. And v. the 21. I testify before God and Jesus
Christ, that thou keep these things without prejudice, and do nothing by
declining to the one part.

Q. Is it convenient to ask a Blessing of Priests?

A. It is, because they give it in the name and Person of Christ.

Q. What warrant have you for it?

A. Out of S. Mark. chapter 10. v. 17. where Christ, laying his hands upon the
Children, blessed them.

Q. What other proof have you?

A. The example of Melchizedek, blessing Abraham, upon which S. Paul says, For
without all contradiction that which is less is blessed of the better, Heb.
chapter 7. v. 6.

Q. What Scripture have you for obedience to Priests?

A. Heb. the last chapter v. 17. where we read, Obey the Prelates and be subject to
them; for they watch, as being to render an account for the souls: And in the
old Law, disobedience to the Priest was punished with death, Deuteronomy. chapter 17. v.
12.

Q. In what are we bound under sin, to obey Princes and temporal Magistrates?

A. In all things (which are not sin) belonging to the good and peace of the
Kingdom or Commonwealth.

Q. How prove you that?

A. Out of Romans chapter 13. v. 12. where we read, Let every soul be subject to the
higher Powers, for there is no Power but of God; he therefore that resists
Power, resists the Ordinance of God.

Q. What other proof have you?

A. Out of 1 S. Pet. chapter 2. v. 14, 15. Be ye subject (says he) to every
creature for God, whether to the King as excelling, or to Magistrates as sent
by him to the revenge of Malefactors.

Q. What if Kings or Magistrates command us to do sin, or things against our
consciences?

A. Then we must answer them with the Apostles, we must obey God rather then
men, Act. chapter 5. v. 25.

Q. In what are Servants bound to obey their Masters?

A. In all things that are not sin, belonging to their charge.

Q. How prove you that?

A. Out of Col. chapter 3. v. 22. Servants (says S. Paul) obey in all things your
Masters, according to the flesh, not serving the eye as pleasing men, but in
simplicity of heart, as pleasing God.

Q. How do Servants sin against their Masters?

A. By neglecting their commands, stealing or spoiling their goods, etc.

The fifth Commandment Expounded.
Q. WHat is the fifth Commandment?

A. Thou shall not kill.

Q. What is prohibited by this Precept?

A. All murder, unjust shedding of blood, fighting and quarrelling.

Q. Is it lawful to kill in no case?

A. Yes in a just War, or when public Justice requires it; for the
Magistrate bears not the Sword without cause, Romans chapter 13. v. 4. As also, in
the blameless defense of our own or our innocent neighbors life, against an
unjust Invader.

Q. Is it lawful to fight Duells, appointing a set time and place for private
Interest, or Puntilio's of honor?

A. No, by no means; for the Church has forbidden it under Excommunication,
to be incurred Ipso facto, and such as die in Duells, can neither have
Christian burial, nor be prayed for by the Church.

Q. How prove you all fighting and quarrelling to be unlawful?

A. Out of S. Mat. chapter 5. v. 39. You have heard (says Christ) that it was said
of old, an eye for an eye, and a tooth for a tooth, but I say unto you, not to
resist evil, but if any one strike thee on the right cheek, turn to him also
the other.

Q. What else is forbidden by this Precept?

A. To seek, wish or desire our own, or any other man's death out of
impatience, or passion, or to cause women with child to miscarry.

The sixth Commandment Expounded.
Q. WHat is the sixth Commandment?

A. Thou shall not commit Adultery?

Q. What is prohibited by this Precept?

A. All carnal sin with another man's wife, or another woman's husband, and
chiefly Adultery, as also Fornication, and Pollution.

Q. How prove you Fornication and Pollution to be mortals sins?

A. Out of Col. chapter 3. v. 5. Mortify therefore (says S. Paul) your members
upon earth, fornication, uncleanness and Avarice, which are the service of
Idols, for which the wrath of God comes upon the Children of Infidelity.

Q. In what case is it lawful for a man to dismiss his wife?

A. In case of evident Adultery or Fornication.

Q. Can he that has so dismissed his wife, marry another during her life?

A. He cannot; for he that dismisseth his wife, and marries another, he
commits Adultery, S. Mar. chapter 10. v. 11. and in S. Luke chapter 16. v. 18. we
read, be that marries her that is so dismissed commits Adultery.

Q. Why is Adultery a far greater sin then Fornication?

A. Because it is a great injury to our innocent neighbor; as also to to the
Sacrament of Matrimony.

Q. How prove you that a Wife so dismissed from her husband cannot marry
again during her husbands life?

A. Out of 1 Cor. chapter 7. v. 10, 11. To those that are married (says he) not I
give commandment, but the Lord, that the wife depart not from her husband: and
if she depart, to remain unmarried. And v. 39. A woman (says he) is bound to
the Law so long time as her husband lives, but if her husband sleep (that is,
be dead) she is at liberty, let her marry to whom she will.

Q. What else is forbidden by this Precept?

A. Whoredom, Incest, Sacrilege, and sin against Nature.

Q. Why is lust hateful in the sight of God?

A. Because it defiles in us the Image of God, the Member of Christ, and the
Temple of the Holy Ghost.

Q. What more is here prohibited?

A. Unchaste touching of our selves or others, with all delight in lustful
thoughts and kisses.

Q. What is the hire of unlawful lust?

A. Death and damnation; For Neither fornicators, nor adulterers, nor the
effeminate (that is, such as defile themselves with voluntary pollution) shall
possess the kingdom of God, 1. Cor. chapter 6. v. 10.

The seventh Commandment expounded.
Q. WHat is the seventh Commandment?

A. Thou shall not steal.

Q. What is forbidden by this Precept?

A. All unjust taking away or detaining of that which is another man's.

Q. How many kinds of theft be there?

A. Three kinds; simple Theft, which is a secret taking away of that which is
another man's; Rapine, which is a violent open taking away, or keeping of that
which is another man's; and Sacrilege, which is a stealing of sacred things, or
out of sacred places.

Q. When is Theft a mortal sin?

A. When the thing stolen is of a considerable value, or causes any notable
hurt unto our neighbor.

Q. How prove you that?

A. Out of 1 Cor. chapter 6. v. 10. where we read, that neither Thieves nor
covetous men, nor Extortioners shall possess the Kingdom of God.

Q. What does a sin of Theft, oblige us to?

A. To make restitution of the thing stolen to the right owner, if we be able,
otherwise the sin will not be forgiven us.

Q. What else is here prohibited?

A. All Usury, Bribery, Cozenage in gaming, and unjust gain by buying or
selling.

Q. What is Usury?

A. It is a studious will to receive something by a legal contract, above the
principal, immediately out of the consideration of loan.

Q. How prove you Usury and Bribery to be great sins?

A. Out of the 14. Psalm. where we read, O Lord, who shall dwell in thy
Tabernacle? or who shall rest in thy holy Mountain? he that has not given his
money to use, nor taken Bribes upon the innocent man.

Q. How are rich men soonest brought to beggary?

A. By mingling other men's goods amongst their own.

Q. How do men generally sin against this Precept?

A. Princes by imposing unjust Taxes on their Subjects; Subjects by not paying
their due Taxes to their Princes; Buyers and Sellers by deceitful weights and
measures, or by exceeding the just price; Masters by defrauding Servants of
their wages; and Servants by imbezelling their Masters goods.

The eighth Commandment Expounded.
Q. WHat is the eighth Commandment?

A. Thou shall not bear false witness against thy neighbor.

Q. What is prohibited by this Precept?

A. All false testimonies, rash judgments and lies.

Q. Why is false witness so great a sin?

A. Because it is against the justice of God, and our neighbor.

Q. How prove you that corrupt judgment is a great sin?

A. Out of Isa. chapter 5. where we read, Woe be to you that call evil good, that
justify the impious man for bribes, and rob the just man of his justice; for
as fire devoureth the stubble, so shall the root of these men be ashes.

Q. Why is rash judgment a great sin?

A. Because it robs God of his Judgment, and our Neighbor of his good
Name: Do not ye judge (says S. Paul) and ye shall not be judged of our Lord,
1 Cor. chapter 11. v. 31.

Q. Why is it a sin to lie?

A. Because the Devil is a liar, and the Father of lies, S. Joh. chapter 8. v. 44.

Q. What else is prohibited by this Precept?

A. Backbiting, Flattery, and Detraction.

Q. What is Backbiting?

A. It is to break friendship betwixt others, by speaking ill of one unto the
other behind his back.

Q. What is Flattery?

A. To attribute to another some perfection which he has not, or to praise him
for that which is not worthy praise.

Q. What is Detraction?

A. It is a secret staining and blotting of another good name.

Q. What is he bound to, that has hurt his neighbor, in any of these kinds?

A. To make him satisfaction and restore him his good name.

Q. How for example?

A. If he have told a hurtful lie of him, he is bound to unsay it, or if he
have revealed his secret sin he is bound to speak well of the same party, and
to mitigate the matter all he may.

Q. Is it a sin to hearken to detraction?

A. To do it willingly and with delight, or so as to encourage the detractor,
it is; for by so doing we cooperate with the detractor.

Q. How then must we behave our selves amongst detractors?

A. If they be Inferiors, we must reprehend them; if Equals or Superiors, we
must show our selves at least not pleased with that discourse.

Q. What is rash Judgment?

A. That which is grounded on mere hear-sayes, jealousies and surmises,
without any moral certainty, or great probability.

Q. When is a lie a mortal sin?

A. When it is any great dishonor to God, or notable prejudice to our
neighbor, otherwise if it be merely officious, or jesting, it is but venial
sin.

The ninth and tenth Commandments Expounded.
Q. What are the ninth and tenth Commandments?

A. Thou shall not covet thy neighbors wife, thou shall not covet thy
neighbours-goods, nor any thing that is his.

Q. What is prohibited by these Commandments?

A. The inordinate will or desire of unlawful lust, especially Adultery, and
of all Theft.

Q. What else?

A. Not only all deliberate desire, or consent; but likewise all voluntary
delight and complacence in covetous or impure thoughts.

Q. How prove you that unchaste desires are mortal sins?

A. Out of S. Mat. chapter 5. v. 28. 29. where we read, It was said of old, thou
shall not commit Adultery, but I say unto you, that whosoever shall see a woman
to lust after her, he has already committed Adultery in his heart.

Q. How prove you covetous desires to be great sins?

A. Out of 1 Timothy chapter 6. v. 9. where we read, They that will be made rich fall
into temptation and the sn^^e of the Devil, and many desires, unprofitable and
hurtful, which drown men into destruction and perdition.

Q. Is there any sin in those motions of concupiscence, which we fe^^e and
suffer against our wills?

A. There is not; for nothing is sin which is not voluntary and deliberate.

Q. What think you now of this second Table of the Law, is here any thing that
savoureth of impossibility to be kept?

A. No certainly; for here is nothing commanded us which the very Law of nature
and right reason does not dictate to us: And therefore ought to be observed
and done, although it were not commanded us.

Q. Is here any thing but what every man expects and desires to have done
unto himself by others?

A. There is not; therefore we must do the same to others, according to that,
All things whatsoever you will that men do unto you, do ye also to them; for
this is the Law and the Prophets, S. Mat. chapter 7. v. 12.

Q. Why then do Novellists pretend and teach, that the Commandments are
impossible to be kept?

A. Because they are not willing to oblige themselves to the observance of
them, but had rather make God the Author of sin, by commanding impossibilities,
(a most high blasphemy) and justify their own iniquities by saying, they
cannot help, then humbly acknowledge and confess their sins with purpose to
amend by an acceptance of the Law of God.

CHAP. IX.
The Commandments of the Church Expounded.

Q. HOw many be the Commandments of the Church?

A. There be six principal ones.

Q. What is the first?

A. To hear Mass on all Sundays and Holy Days, if we have opportunity to do
it, and there be no just cause unto the contrary.

Q. Why on all Sundays?

A. In a Thanksgiving for the benefits of the week past, as also to sanctify
the present day.

Q. For what other reason?

A. In memory that the same Christ which is offered upon the Altar in the
blessed Sacrament for our sins, was borne, rose from the dead, and sent down
the Holy Ghost upon a Sunday.

Q. Why on all holy days?

A. Either in memory of some special benefit, or else for a commemoration of
some peculiar Saint, so to move our selves to imitate his example.

Q. How prove you that the Church has power to ordain and command Feasts?

A. By the example of the Church in the Apostles time, which ordained the Feast
of Christ-Masse in honor of the Nativity of Christ; the Feast of Easter in
honor of his Resurrection; Whitsontide in honor of the coming of the Holy
Ghost, in Tongues of Fire.

Q. What other proof have you?

A. Out of S. Clement, the Disciple of S. Peter, in his eighth Book of
Apostolical Constitutions, where he witnesses, That the Apostles gave order
for the celebrating of S. Stephens and some other of their fellow-Apostles
days after their deaths.

Q. What other yet?

A. Out of Col. chapter 3. v. 4. We have confidence of you in the Lord (says S.
Paul) that the things which we command, you both do and will do. And ver. 14.
If any obey not our word, do not ye company with him, that he may be
confounded.

Q. What other yet?

A. Out of These. chapter 4. v. 8. where, speaking of the Precepts which he had
given unto his Brethren, Paul says, He that despises these things, despises
not man, but God, who also has given his holy Spirit in us. See what was said
above in the third Commandment of God.

The second Church-Commandement Expounded.
Q. WHat is the 2d. Commandment of the Church?

A. To fast Lent, Vigills commanded, Ember Days, and Fridayes also, by custom
of England, with abstinence from flesh on Saturdayes.

Q. Why Lent?

A. In imitation of Christ our Lord, who fasted forty days and forty nights in
the Desert for our sins, without once eating or drinking.

Q. Can we fast in that manner?

A. We cannot: but we must do at least what we are able.

Q. How prove you Fasting to be a pious Practice?

A. By the example of Christ and his Saints: and out of S. Luke chapter 2. v. 37.
where we read, That Anne the Prophetess departed not from the Tempte, serving
day and night by Fasting and Prayers.

Q. How prove you Fasting to be meritorious?

A. Out of S. Matthew. chapter 6. 16, 17, 18. Where we read, And when you fast, be
not ye sad like the hypocrites; but when thou do fast, anoint thy head, and
wash thy face, that thou appear not to men to fast, but to thy Father which is
in secret, and thy Father which is in secret will repay thee.

Q. How prove you abstinence from certain meats?

A. Because it was prescribed by an Angel to S. John, He shall be great (says
he) before the Lord, Win^ and Cicer he shall not drink, S Luke chapter 1. v. 15.
and in S. Matthew. chapter 3. v. 4. we read, that His meat were Locusts and wild
Honey.

Q. For what is Fasting availeable?

A. For the remission of sins, and the appeasing of the wrath of God,
according to that, Be ye converted unto me in your whole heart, in fasting,
weeping and mourning, Ioet chapter 2. v. 12.

Q. For what else?

A. To mortify the lustful desires of the flesh: and it has also special
force against the Devil; This kind of Devil (says our Lord) can go out by
nothing but by Prayer and Fasting, S. Mark chapter 9. v. 24.

Q. Why Vigills?

A. To prepare our selves for a devout keeping of the Feasts that follow.

Q. Why Ember Days?

A. Because on those days the Church gives holy Orders, and ordains
Priests, and for that cause has dedicated them to public Prayer and Fasting.

Q. What ground have you for that?

A. Out of Acts chapter 13. v. 2, and 3. where we read; And as they (the Apostles)
were ministering unto our Lord, and fasting, the Holy Ghost said, separate ye me
Saul and Barnab as unto the work whereto I have taken them, then fasting and
praying, and imposing hands upon them, they dismissed them.

Q. Why Fridayes in England?

A. In memory that Christ suffered for us upon a Friday, drinking gall and
vinegar upon his Cross for our gluttonous excess, but specially by custom,
which is as good as Law.

Q. Why abstinence on Saturdayes.

A. To prepare our selves for a devout keeping of the Sunday, as also in honor
of the blessed Virgin Mary, who stood firm in faith on that day, the Apostles
themselves wavering.

The third Commandment of the Church Expounded.
Q. WHat is the third Commandment of the Church?

A. To confess our sins at least once a year.

Q. Why was that commanded?

A. Because otherwise Libertines would not have done it once in many years.

The fourth Commandment of the Church expounded.
Q. WHat is the fourth?

A. To receive the blessed Sacrament at least once a year, and that at Easter,
or thereabouts.

Q. Why at Easter?

A. Because Christ instituted the blessed Sacrament of the Eucharist at his
last Supper on the Thursday before Easter day.

Q. Why is it said, or there abouts?

A. Because it will satisfy the Precept, if it be done any time betwixt Palm
Sunday, and Low Sunday.

The fifth Precept of the Church expounded.
Q. What is the fifth?

A. To pay Tithes to our Pastors.

Q. Why so?

A. Because they feed us spiritually, and therefore it is fit that we should
feed them corporally.

Q. How prove you that?

A. Out of Gal. chapter 6. v. 6. Let him that is catechized in the word (says S.
Paul) communicate to him that catechizeth him in all his goods: And in another
place, he that serves the Altar, let him live of the Altar.

The sixth Commandment of the Church expounded.
Q. WHat is the sixth?

A. Not to celebrate Marriages on times prohibited; that is, from the first
Sunday of Advent, until Twelf-day be past, nor from Ash Wednesday till
Low-Sunday be past.

Q. Why so?

A. Because those are times of special piety and penance, therefore not to be
spent in feastings and carnal pleasures.

Q. What sin is it to break any of these Church-Commandements?

A. A mortal sin of disobedience, according to that, he that will not hear
the Church let him be unto thee as a Heathen, or a Publican, S. Matthew. chapter 18.
v. 18.

CHAP. X.
The Counsels of Christ and his Church Expounded.

Q. HOw many Counsels be there?

A. There be three principal ones.

Q. What is the first of them?

A. Voluntary Poverty, which is a willing leaving all things to follow Christ.

Q. How prove you that to be a work of Perfection?

A. Out of S. Matthew. chapter 19. v. 21. If thou will be perfect go and sell the
things which thou have and give to the poor, and thou shall have treasure in
Heaven, and come and follow me.

Q. How prove you this to be meritorious?

A. Out of the same chap. v. 28, 29. where when S. Peter had asked Christ,
saying, Behold we have forsaken all things and followed thee, what therefore
shall be our rewards? Our Lord answered him, Every one that has left his house
or his Lands, or his Brethren, or his Sisters for my Name sake, be shall
receive a hundred fold commodity, and possess everlasting life.

The second Council.
Q. WHat is the second Council?

A. Perpetual Chastity, which is a voluntary abstaining from Marriage and all
carnal pleasures for the love of God.

Q. Is this also a work of Perfection?

A. It is; for Christ himself was born of a Virgin and counsels Virginity,
though he command it not.

Q. How prove you that?

A. Out of S. Mat. chapter 19. v. 12. There be Eunuchs (says he) which have gelded
themselves for the Kingdom of heaven, he that can take it let him take it.

Q. How prove you that Virginity is a more perfect state then Marriage, or that
it is lawful to vow Virginity?

A. Out of 1 Cor. chapter 7. v. 37, 38. He that has determined in his heart being
settled, not having any necessity, but having power of his own will to keep his
Virgin does well; therefore he that joyneth his Virgin in Marriage does well,
and he that joyneth her not does better.

Q. Who was the first that taught Marriage to be better then Virginity, and
persuaded Priests and Nunns to marry?

A. Jovinian an old condemned Heretic, according to S. Augustine in his book
of Heresies, Heresy the 82. and in his second book of Retractations he calls
him a Monster for it, and says, the Church stoutly resisted him, Chap. 22.

Q. What other proof have you?

A. Out of 1 Timothy chapter 5. v. 5. But she that is a Widow indeed, (that is a
vowed Widow) and desolate, let her hope in God, and continue in prayer and
obsecrations day and night: And. v. 11, 12. But the younger Widows avoid, for
they when they shall be want on in Christ, they will marry, having damnation,
because they have made void their first Faith, that is, their Vow of Chastity,
according to the fourth Council of Carthage, Canon 104. and all the Fathers on
this place.

The third Council.
Q. WHat is the third Council?

A. Obedience, which is a voluntary submission to another will in all that is
not sin.

Q. What warrant have you for that?

A. The example of Christ himself, who was obedient to our Lady, and S.
Joseph; And he went down with them, and came to Nazareth, and was subject to
them, S. Luke chapter 2. v. 51.

Q. What other proof have you?

A. Out of Hebr. chapter last, v. 17. Obey your Prelates and be subject to them;
for they watch, being to render an account for your souls.

CHAP. XI.
Of the Sacraments in general.

Q. HOw many Sacraments be there?

A. Seven.

Q. How call you them?

A. Baptism, Confirmation, Eucharist, Penance, Extreme Unction, Holy Order,
and Matrimony. See the Council of Trent, Sess. 7. Cannon 1.

Q. How prove you the necessity of 7. Sacraments, neither more nor fewer?

A. Out of the proportion, which is betwixt spiritual and corporal life.

Q. In what consists that proportion?

A. In this; that as in corporal and natural life there be seven principal
or chief necessities, so be there likewise in spiritual, to which the seven
Sacraments do correspond.

Q. What is our first corporal necessity?

A. To be born into this world; And to this Baptism correspondeth, by which we
are regenerate to God, and borne the Heirs of God, Coheires of Christ.

Q. What is the second corporal necessity?

A. To be confirmed in our strength and growth, without which we can never be
made men: And to this answers Confirmation, by which we are made strong and
perfect Christians, able to profess our Faith before our enemies?

Q. What is our third corporal necessity?

A. That (being now made men) we have a competence of daily food and
sustenance: To which the B. Eucharist correspondeth, by which our souls are
fed with divine grace, as often as we worthily receive it, or offer it with the
Priest upon the Altar.

Q. What is our fourth necessity of the Body?

A. That we have Physic when we are sick and wounded: And to this answers
the Sacrament of Penance, by which our maladies and sores of sin are healed.

Q. What is our fifth necessity of the Body?

A. That we have Cordialls and Restoratives against the agonizing fits and
pangs of death: And to this correspondeth Extreme Unction, by which our soul
is strengthened in her last agony, against the violent onsets of the Devil.

Q. What is the sixth corporal necessity?

A. That we be governed by Laws and Magistrates, so to avoid justice and
confusion: And to this correspondeth holy Order, by which we are provided of
spiritual Magistrates to guide and govern us.

Q. What is the seventh corporal necessity?

A. That we be multiplied in a lawful manner: And to this correspondeth
Matrimony, by which we are not only multiplied in a natural, but in a holy and
Sacramental way.

Q. What is a Sacrament in general?

A. It is a visible sign of invisible grace, divinely instituted by Christ,
for our sanctification.

Q. How do you prove, that Christ ordained them all?

A. Because it is not in the power of any pure creature, to give infallible
virtue, to cause grace to sensible and material things, such as the Sacraments
are; According to the Council of Trent, Sess. 7. Can. 1.

Q. From what have the Sacraments their force and efficacy?

A. From the Blood and Passion of Christ, which they apply unto our Souls.

Q. How prove you that?

A. Out of Romans chapter 6. v. 3. Are you ignorant (says S. Paul) that all we which
are baptized in Christ Jesus, in his death we are baptized?

Q. What other proof have you?

A. Out of Rom, chapter 5. v. 9. Much more therefore now (says he) being justified
in his blood, shall we be saved from wrath in him.

Q. For what end did Christ ordain the Sacraments?

A. To be external and visible marks and professions of his holy Faith, by
which the faithful might be known from Infidells and Heretics?

Q. For what other end?

A. To be effectual means of our salvation, and certain remedies against
sin.

Q. What things are essential to a Sacrament?

A. Matter and form.

Q. Do all the seven Sacraments give grace?

A. They do, according to the Council of Trent Sess. the. 7.

Q. What is grace?

A. It is a certain special participation of the divine Nature, by which we
are made like to God, in some degree; as Iron is made like to fire by heat.

Q. How many of the Sacraments give a Character?

A. Three; Baptism, Confirmation, and Holy Order.

Q. What is a Sacramental Character?

Q. It is a spiritual mark in the Soul, by which we are marked for the
servants of God, which can never be blotted out.

Q. In what manner do the Saoraments give and cause Grace?

A. Instrumentally only, for God is always the principal cause thereof.

Q. Who is the ordinary Minister of a Sacrament?

A. A Priest, excepting Holy Order and Confirmation, which are reserved unto
Bishops only.

Q. Why did Christ tie the administrations of the Sacraments to the Hierarchy
and to Priests only?

A. To give them a super-eminent Power, Credit and Authority with the people.

Q. Why was that necessary?

A. Because if the Clergy be not held in great reverence by the Laiety, it
cannot cause that effect in them for which it chiefly was ordained, to wit,
credulity in things above Nature, together with a prompt obedience, to hazard
lives and fortunes, when they shall say the Law of God requires it. And if this
be not done, the Law of Christ will not be kept, nor can Salvation be had.

Q. Is the intention of the Minister to do what Christ ordained, a condition,
without which the Sacrament subsisteth not?

A. It is, as also the intention of the receiver, to receive what Christ
ordained, if he be at years of understanding.

Q. Why said you, If he be at years of understanding?

A. Because for Infants in the Sacrament of Baptism, the intention of the
Church, and of their Godfathers and Godmothers suffices.

Baptism Expounded.
Q. WHy is Baptism the first Sacrament?

A. Because, before it, a man is not capable of any other.

Q. What is Baptism?

A. It is an exterior ablution, or washing of the body, under a set form of
words.

Q. What is the necessary matter of Baptism?

A. Natural water only; for artificial water will not suffice.

Q. What is the form of it?

A. I Baptize thee N. N. in the Name of the Father, and of the Son. and of
the Holy Ghost.

Q. What if a man leave out the word (I Baptize) or any one of the three
Persons?

A. Then the Baptism is invalid.

Q. Where did Christ express the form of Baptism, and give us a command to
Baptize?

A. In S. Math. chapter 28. v. 19. Going therefore (says he) teach ye all Nations,
baptizing them in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy
Ghost.

Q. Can a man be saved without Baptism?

A. He cannot, unless he have it; either actually, or in desire, with
contrition, or be baptized in his own Blood, as the Holy Innocents were, which
suffered for Christ.

Q. How prove you that?

A. Out of S. John chapter 3. v. 5. Unless any one be borne again of Water and
the Spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God.

Q. Can no man, but a Priest baptize?

A. Yes, in case of necessity any Layman, or woman may do it, but not
otherwise.

Q. What is a case of necessity?

A. When a child is in danger of death, and a Priest cannot be had.

Q. What are the effects of Baptism?

A. It makes us the children of God, and remitteth both original and actual
sin, if he that is baptized be guilty of it.

Q. What else?

A. It infuseth justifying grace into the Soul, with habits of Faith, Hope,
and Charity, and all supernatural gifts and virtues.

Q. How prove you that?

A. Out of Gal. chapter 3. v. 27. As many of you as are baptized in Christ have put
on Christ.

Q. What other proof have you?

A. Out of 1. Cor. chapter 6. v. 10. where (speaking of Fornicators, Idolaters,
Thieves, Adulterers, and Liers) These things (says S. Paul) ye were, but ye
are washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are justyfied, in the Name of our
Lord Jesus Christ, and in the Spirit of our God.

Q. What other yet?

A. Out of Titus chapter 3. v. 6. and 7. He has saved us by the Laver of
Regeneration and Renovation of the Holy Ghost, whom he has abundantly powered
out upon us, by Jesus Christ our Savior, that being justified by his Grace, we
may be Heirs according to the hope of life everlasting.

Q. What other effect has Baptism?

A. It makes a spiritual mark, or character in the soul, which shall remain
for ever, either to our great joy in Heaven, or our confusion in hell.

Q. What sin is it to baptize a man twice?

A. A mortal sin of sacrilege.

Q. How prove you that?

A. Out of Heb. chapter 6. v. 4. 5. and 6. It is impossible for those who have
been illuminated and made partakers of the Holy Ghost, (to wit, by Baptism)
and are fallen, etc. To be renewed again unto Penance, etc. (viz. by a second
Baptism.)

Q. What if a man die for the Faith before he can be baptized?

A. He is a true Martyr, and baptized in his own blood.

Q. Why have we a Godfather, and a Godmother in Baptism?

A. That if our Parents should neglect it, or be prevented with death; they may
instruct us in the Faith of Christ; which obligation lies on them.

Q. How many Godfathers may we have?

A. But one Godfather and one Godmother, at the most, since the Council of
Trent.

Q. Why so few?

A. To prevent the too great extent of spiritual affinity, which is contracted
betwixt them, and their Godchildren, and his Father and Mother, which is an
impediment, not only making Marriage unlawful, but also invalid, betwixt the
parties.

Q. How can infants be christened, which have but actual Faith?

A. In the Faith of the Church, and of their Godfathers and Godmothers.

Q. Why do we use so many Ceremonies in Baptism?

A. To stir up reverence to the Sacrament, and signify the inward effects
thereof.

Q. What means the Priests breathing on the child's face?

A. It signifies, that by Baptism the evil spirit is cast out, and the Spirit
of God is given to him.

Q. Why is the child signed on his breast and forehead with the Sign of the
Cross?

A. To signify that he is there made the servant of Christ crucified.

Q. Why does the Priest lay spettle on his ears and nostrils?

A. Because Christ by so doing healed one that was both deaf and dumb; as also
to signify that by Baptism, his ears are opened to the Word of Faith, and
his nostrills to the good Odor of all Christian virtues.

Q. Why does the Priest ask the child if he renounce the Devil and his Pomps?

A. To signify, that he which will be the child of God, cannot be the child of
the Devil.

Q. What mean the several Annointings of the child?

A. They signify the interior Anointing, or Unction of divine Grace given to
the Soul in Baptism.

Q. What mean they in particular?

A. He is anointed on the Head, to signify that by Baptism he is made
partaker of the Kingly dignity of Christ; on the Shoulders, to signify that he
must bear his Cross courageously; on the Breast, to signihe that the heart is
there strengthened with grace to fight against the Devil.

Q. What signifies the white Chrisome given to the child?

A. The purity and innocence which he there receives. Q. What signifies the
hallowed Light given to the child?

A. The light of Faith, and fire of Charity, with which his soul is there
inflamed.

Confirmation Expounded.
Q. WHat is the second Sacrament?

A. Confirmation.

Q. When did Christ ordain this Sacrament?

A. At his last Supper.

Q. What proof have you for that?

A. An Apostolical Tradition.

Q. What is the matter of this Sacrament?

A. Oil, mingled with Balm, blessed by a Bishop.

Q. What is the form of it?

A. I sign thee with the Sign of the Cross, I confirm thee with the
Chrisome of Salvation, in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
Holy Ghost.

Q. What Scripture have you for this Sacrament?

A. 2 Cor. chapter 1. v. 22. And he that confirms us with you in Christ, and has
annoyled us, God who also has sealed us (with the spiritual Character) and
given the pledge of the Spirit in our hearts.

Q. What other place have you?

A. Acts chapter 8. v. 14, 15, 16. where we read, that when Philip the Deacon had
converted the City of Samaria to the Faith, the Apostles who were at
Jerusalem, sent two Bishops, S. Peter and S. John to confirm them, who when
they were come (says the Text) prayed for them that they might receive the
Holy Ghost; for he was not yet come upon any of them, but they were only
baptized in the Name of our Lord Jesus, then did they impose their hands upon
them, and they received the Holy Ghost.

Q. What other yet?

A. Out of Act. chapter 19. v. 5, 6. where we read, that S. Paul baptized and
confirmed twelve of S. John's Disciples: Hearing these things (says the Text)
they were baptized in the Name of our Lord Jesus: and when Paul had imposed
hands upon them, the Holy Ghost came upon them.

Q. Why is Oil used in this Sacrament?

A. To signify that the principal and proper effect of it is to make us
strong and perfect Christians, men able to profess our Faith before
persecuting Tyrants.

Q. Why is Balm used in it?

A. To signify the good odor of a Christian Name, according to that, We are a
good Odor of Christ to God.

Q. In what appears the force of Confirmation?

A. In the undaunted confidence and suffering of the Apostles, Martyrs and
Saints of God, after they had received it.

Q. When were the Apostles confirmed?

A. On Whit-sunday in an extraordinary manner, the Holy Ghost descending upon
them in Tongues of Fire.

Q. Does Confirmation give a Character?

A. It does, according to 2 Cor. chapter 1. v. 22. above cited, where we read, who
also has sealed us, (that is to say, with a Character.)

Q. Who is the Minister of this Sacrament?

A. A Bishop only, as appears by Act. chapter 8. above cited, where two Bishops
were sent unto Samaria to give it.

Q. Is there any necessity of this Sacrament?

A. There is a moral necessity of it, according to the Council of Laodieaea,
Can. the 48. in these words, Those that have been baptized, must after Baptism
receive the most holy Chrisome, and be made partakers of the heavenly Kingdom.

Q. What other proof have you?

A. The Authority of S. Thomas, who in the Sacrament of Confirmation affirms,
that it is a dangerous thing to die without it.

Add unto this, That without Confirmation (according to all the Fathers) we
are not perfect Christians.

Q. What think you then of those, who for particular and private ends, slight
this Sacrament, and reach the Laity not to receive it, when they may have it.

A. Truly, I think they slight the mission of the Holy Ghost, (for this
Sacrament is a continuance of that mission unto us) and are great enemies of
Christianity.

Q. What sin is it not to receive it, when we may have it?

A. Mortal sin, if it be done out of contempt, or any gross neglect,
especially in a place of persecution, as England is.

Q. How prove you that?

A. Because by so doing, we expose our selves to great danger of denying our
Faith, against which danger it was peculiarly ordained, by Christ our Lord.

Q. At what age is Confirmation now commonly received?

A. At seven years old.

Q. Why no sooner?

A. That so we may be able to prepare our selves for it, and remember that we
have received it; for it cannot be twice given.

Q. Why is a little blow given on the cheek to him that is confirmed?

A. To signify, that he is there made the Soldier of Christ, and must be
ready to suffer stripes, and buflets for his sake.

Q. Must we have any Godfather in Confirmation?

A. One Godfather, or one Godmother at the most.

Q. Must it be received fasting?

A. That is expedient, (for so the Apostles received it) but not necessary.

The Eucharist Expounded.
Q. WHat is the third Sacrament?

A. The blessed Eucharist, or the Sacrament of the Body and Blood of Christ.

Q. By what was this Sacrament prefigured in the old Law?

A. By the Tree of Life, the Burning Bush, Melchisedeks Bread and Wine, the
Paschall Lamb, the Heavenly Manna, and the Arc of the League.

Q. How prove you that?

A. Because all things happened unto them in a Figure, according to S. Paul.

Q. Does the Blessed Eucharist excel all these in dignity?

A. It does, as far as a substantial body excells a shadow.

Q. What signifies the name Eucharist?

A. It signifies good Grace, or Thanksgiving, because it contains the Author
and Fountain of all Grace, and the greatest Gift of God to man.

Q. When did Christ ordain the Blessed Eucharist?

A. At his last Supper.

Q. Why so?

A. To leave it to his Church, as the last and greatest pledge of his love. Q.
What is the Blessed Eucharist?

A. It is the body and blood of Jesus Christ, true God and true Man, whole
Christ, under the outward forms of Bread and Wine.

Q. In what manner is Christ present under those Forms?

A. By the true and real presence of his divine and humane nature, not
figuratively only, as some would have it.

Q. How prove you that?

A. Out of S. Matthew. chapter 26. v. 26, 27, 28. where we read, that Christ at his
last Supper took bread, blessed it, brake it and gave it to his Disciples,
saying, Take ye and eat, this is my Body, and he also blessed the cup saying,
This is my blood of the New Testament which shall be shed for many to the
remission of sins.

Q. What other proof have you?

A. Out of S. Mark chapter 14, v. 22, 23, 24. were we read the selfe-san. words.

Q. What besides?

A. Out of S. Luke, chapter 22. v. 19. and 20. where we read, This is my body which
is given for you, this is the Chalice the New Testament in my blood which shall
be shed for you.

Q. What other?

A. S. Joh. c. 6. v. 52, 53, 55. The bread which I will give is my flesh for
the life of the world, my flesh is meat indeed, and my blood is drink indeed,
unless ye eat the flesh of the Son of man, and drink his blood, you shall
have no life in you.

Q. What other yet?

A. Out of 1 Cor. chapter 11. v. 23. where S. Paul tells us, that he received from
our Lord, (viz. by special revelation) that at his last Supper he blessed
bread, saying, Take ye and eat, this is my body which shall be delivered for
you; this Chalice is the New ^estament in my blood.

Q. By what means is the whole substance of the Bread and Wine
transubstantiated or changed into the whole substance of the body and blood of
Christ?

A. By the most holy and powerful words of Consecration, instituted by Christ,
and spoken by the Priest.

Q. What is the White which we see remaining after Consecration?

A. The outward species or accidents of Bread, under which the body and blood
of Christ is.

Q. What mean you by those species or accidents?

A. The color, savor and quantity of bread.

Q. Is the Body of Christ hurt or broken, when we divide or break the Sacrament?

A. It is not, for he is now immortal and impassible, he cannot die, nor
suffer any more, Romans chapter 6. v. 9.

Q. What other reason have you?

A. Because Christ is whole in the whole Host, and whole in every particle
thereof, if you divide or break it; seeing that wheresoever there would have
been bread before consecration, there must needs be the whole Body and Blood of
Christ, after consecration.

Q. What example have you for that?

A. The soul of a man, which is whole in the whole body, and whole in every
part of the body, as learned Protestants do not, nor cannot deny.

Q. How can the same thing be in many several places at once?

A. By the omnipotent power of God, by which he himself is in all and every
one of his creatures, at one and the same instant.

Q. What example have you for that?

A. A word, which being one, yet is in many hundred of ears at once.

Q. What other proof have you?

A. Out of Acts chapter 9. v. 4. and 5. Where we read, that Christ who is always
sitting at the right hand of his Father in heaven (as we willingly admit with
Protestants) appeared notwithstanding and discoursed with S. Paul on earth,
saying, Saul, Saul, Why do thou persecute me? and when S. Paul replied, who
art thou Lord? he answered, I am Jesus whomthou do persecute. Therefore, he
was then in two places at once.

Q. What is the necessary matter of the Eucharist?

A. Wheaten and unleavened Bread, and Wine of the Grape.

Q. What is the essential form of it?

A. This is my Body, this is my Blood.

Q. Why is a little water mingled with the Wine in the Chalice?

A. To signify the blood and water flowing from the side of Christ, as also
the union of the faithful with Christ by virtue of this Sacrament.

Q. What disposition is required in him, that will receive the Blessed
Eucharist?

A. That he has first confessed his sins, and be in state of grace.

Q. How prove you that?

A. Out of 1 Cor. chapter 11 v. 28. Let a man prove himself, and so let him eat of
this bread, and drink of this cup. For he that eats and drinks unworthily,
eats and drinks damnation to himself, not discerning the body of our Lord.

Q. What are the effects of the Eucharist?

A. It replenisheth the soul with grace, and nourishes in spiritual life; He
that eats of this Bread shall live for ever, S. Ioh. 6.

Q. What other benefit have we by it?

A. It is a most moving and effectual commemoration of the Incarnation,
Nativity; Passion, Resurrection and Ascension of Christ.

Q. How do you prove it lawful for the Laity to communicate under one kind
only?

A. Because there is no command in Scripture for the Laity to do it under
both, although there be for Priests, in those words, Drink ye all of this, S.
Math. chapter 26. v. 27. which was spoken to the Apostles only, and by them
fulfilled: for it follows in S. Mark chapter 14. v. 24. And they all drank.

Q. What other proof have you?

A. Out of S. John, chapter 6. v. 58. He that eats of this bread shall live for
ever; therefore one kind suffices.

Q. What other yet?

A. Out of Acts chapter 20. v. 7. where we read, That the faithful were assembled
on the first of the Sabbath to break bread, without any mention of the cup; And
the two Disciples in Emmaus knew Christ in the breaking of bread; where the cup
is not mentioned; and S. Paul 1 Cor. chapter 11. v. 27. says, Therefore whosoever
shall eat this Bread, or drink the Chalice of our Lord unworthily, (you see by
the word or, it might be received either in one or both kinds) he shall be
guilty of the Body and Blood of our Lord.

Q. What is the Mass?

A. It is the unbloody Sacrifice of the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ, which
himself instituted at his last Supper.

Q. For what is this Sacrifice availeable?

A. It is propitiatory for the Remission of our sins, impetratory for the
obtaining of all benefits; a peaceable offering of Thanksgiving to our God, and
a sweet Holocaust of divine love.

Q. Why are Priests obliged to receive under both kinds?

A. Because they offer Sacrifice, and represent the bloody Sacrifice made upon
the Cross, where the Blood was actually divided from the Body.

Q. Is it divided so also in the Mass?

A. In the manner of doing or signifying it is, but not by any real separation
or division of the one from the other.

Q. How explain you that?

A. Because the species of Bread, as also the words by which it is consecrated,
signify and represent as if the Body of Christ only were contained under it,
whereas there is indeed whole Christ; and the species of Wine, as likewise the
words by which it is consecrated signify and represent, as if there only were
the Blood of Christ, although there be both Body and Blood, whole Christ.

Q. Did the Laity ever communicate under both kinds?

A. They did sometimes in the Primitive Church, and may again, if Holy Church
shall so appoint it; but it is now prohibited by the Church to prevent the
great danger of shedding the Cup; neither are the Laity in this defrauded of
any thing. For they receive whole Christ under one kind, which is incomparably
morethen the pretended Reformers have under both, who receive only a bit of
Bakers bread, with a poor sup of common Vintners Wine.

Penance Expounded.
Q. What is the fourth Sacrament?

A. Penance.

Q. What warrant have you for doing acts of Penance?

A. Out of Apoc. chapter 2. v. 4. Thou have left thy first Charity, therefore be
mindful from whence thou have fallen and do Penance.

Q. What other proof have you?

A. Out of S. Matthew. chapter 5. v. 13. And Jesus began to preach, and say, do ye
penance, For the Kingdom of God is at hand.

Q. When did Christ ordain this Sacrament?

A. When he breathed on his Disciples, saying: Receive ye the Holy Ghost:
whose sins ye shall forgive, they are forgiven, and whose sins ye shall
retain, they are retained. S. Ioh. c. 20. v. 23.

Q. What is the matter of this Sacrament?

A. The sins and confession of the penitent.

Q. What is the form of it?

A. I absolve thee from thy sins, in the Name of the Father, and of the
Son, and of the Holy Ghost.

Q. What are the effects of it?

A. It reconcileth us to God, and either restores or increases grace.

Q. How prove you that?

A. Out of S. John chapter 20. v. 23. above cited. And out of 1. S. John, chapter 1. v.
9. If we confess our sins he is faithful and just, to forgive us our sins,
and cleanse us from all iniquity.

Q. How many parts has the Sacrament of Penance?

A. It has three parts: namely, contrition, confession, and satisfaction.

Q. What is contrition?

A. It is a hearty sorrow for our sins, proceeding immediately from the Love
of God, and joined with a firm purpose of amendment.

Q. What is attrition?

A. It is a true sorrow for our sins, proceeding immediately from the fear
of Hell and punishment from God.

Q. Will that suffice to the remission of finnes?

A. With Sacramental Confession, and Absolution it will, otherwise not.

Q. What if a dying man be in mortal sin, and cannot have a Priest?

A. Then nothing but contrition will suffice.

Q. What is a firm purpose of amendment?

A. It is a resolution, not only to shun sin, but also the occasion of sin.

Q. How long has confession been in use and practice?

A. Ever since the very Apostles time, according to S. James chapter 5. v. 16.
Confess therefore your sins to one another, and pray for one another, that
you may be saved.

Q. What other proof have you?

A. Out of Acts chapter 19. v. 18. And many of them that believed came, confessing
and declaring their deeds.

Q. What is Confession?

A. It is a Sacramental opening of our sins unto a Priest, to obtain
absolution.

Q. Wherein consists the necessity of Confession?

A. Because as to a mind laden with secret griefs, the best of comforts is, to
disclose her case unto some faithful friend; so to a soul laden with secret
sins, the best of remedies possible, is to have chosen and selected Persons
ordained for that end by Christ himself, men of singular piety and learning,
and not questionable by any Law, of what they are to hear in Confession, to
whom she may confess her sins, with an assurance both of comfort, correction
and direction for the amendment of her faults.

Q. What are the necessary conditions of a good Confession?

A. That it be short, diligent, humble, confounding, sincere and entire.

Q. How short?

A. By avoiding superfluous words and circumstances.

Q. How diligent?

A. By using a competent time and care in the examen of our conscience.

Q. How humble?

A. By making our Confession with humble hearts.

Q. How confounding?

A. By stirring up confusion for our sins.

Q. How sincere?

A. By confessing our sins plainly, without seeking to lessen or excuse them.

Q. How entire?

A. By confessing not only in what things we have sinned mortally, but also
how often, as near as we are able to remember.

Q. What if a man knowingly do leave out any one mortal sin in his
Confession for fear or shame?

A. He makes his whole Confession to be void, and commits a great
Sacrilege by lying to the Holy Ghost, and abusing the Sacrament.

Q. How prove you that?

A. By the example of Ananias and his wife Saphira, who were struck dead at the
feet of S. Peter, for daring to lie unto the Holy Ghost, Act. chapter 5. v. 5, and
10.

Q. Is he that has so done bound to confess all again?

A. Yes, all that was mortal, together with that which he left out.

Q. What is satisfaction?

A. It is the Penance which is enjoined us by the Priest, or which we
voluntarily impose upon our selves, by fasting, prayer, and the like.

Q. For what do we satisfy by that Penance?

A. For such temporal punishments as remain due sometimes unto our sins,
after the sins are forgiven us.

Q. How do you prove that Priests have power to impose Penances?

A. Out of 1 Cor. chapter 5. v. 3. where S. Paul excommunicated the incestuous
Corinthian, I (says he) absent in body, but present in spirit have already
judged him that has so done, etc. to deliver such an one to Satan for the
destruction of the flesh, that the soul may be saved.

Q. How prove you that temporal punishments may remain due to our sins,
after the sins themselves be forgiven us?

A. Because Adam after his sin was forgiven him, was notwithstanding cast out
of Paradise for ever, and his whole posterity made subject unto death and many
miseries, in punishment of that sin, Genes. chapter 3. v. 24.

Q. What other proof have you?

A. Because David after his sin of Adultery was forgiven him, was temporally
punished for it with the death of his child; Our Lord (says Nathan) has taken
away his sin, nevertheless thy son shall die.

Q. What other yet?

A. Because whom our Lord loves he chastises, Heb. chapter 12. v. 6.

Q. By what other means are those temporal punishments released?

A. By all works of piety, and above all by Indulgences.

A. Not a pardon for sins to come or leave to commit sin, (as some do
falsely and slanderously teach) but it is only a releasing of such temporal
punishments, as remain due unto those sins, which have already been forgiven
us by Penance and Confession.

Q. How does an Indulgence release those punishments?

A. By the superabundant merits of Christ and his Saints which it applies to
our souls by the special grant of the Church.

Q. When did Christ give his ^^urch power to grant Indulgences?

A. When he said to S. Peter, To thee will I give the Keys of the Kingdom of
Heaven, whatsoever thou shall bind on earth, it shall be bound in heaven, and
whatsoever thou shall loose on earth, it shall be loosed in heaven, S. Matthew.
chapter 16. v. 19.

Q. How prove you that the Apostles ever used this power?

A. Out of 2 Cor. chapter 2. v. 10. where S. Paul remitted part of the Corinthians
penance; To him that is such an one (says he) this rebuke suffices, etc. whom
you have pardoned any thing, I also.

Q. What is required for the gaining of an Indulgence.

A. That we perform the works enjoined us, and that the last part of them be
done in state of grace.

Q. What are those Works?

A. Fasting, Prayer, and Almesdeeds.

Extreme Unction expounded.
Q. WHat is the fifth Sacrament?

A. Extreme Unction.

Q. Where did Christ institute that?

A. At his last Supper.

Q. What warrant have you for that?

A. An Apostolical Tradition.

Q. By whom was this Sacrament promulgated?

A. By S. James in his Epist. chapter 5. v. 13, 14, 15. Is any man sick amongst
you, let him bring in the Priests of the Church, and let them pray over him,
annoyling him with Oil in the Name of our Lord, and the prayer of Faith shall
save the sick man, and our Lord will lift him up, and if he be in sins, his
sins shall be forgiven him.

Q. Who is capable of this Sacrament?

A. Every true and faithful Christian which is in moral danger of death by
sickness, excepting Infants, Fools, and such as are always mad.

Q. What is the matter of this Sacrament?

A. Oil blessed by a Bishop.

Q. What is the form of it?

A. By that annoyling and his own most pious mercy, let our Lord pardon thee
whatsoever thou have sinned by thy seeing, etc. and so of all the other senses,
repeating the same words.

Q. What are the effects of Extreme Unction?

A. It comfort the soul in her last Agony against despair, it remitteth
Venial sins, and the Relics of sin, and it restores corporal health,
if it be expedient.

Q. How prove you that?

A. Out of S. Mark. chapter 6. v. 13. where we read, That the Apostles anointed
with Oil many sick and healed them.

Q. Why then do so many die after receiving it?

A. One reason may be, because out of cowardice they deferred it too long, as
very many do.

Holy Order Expounded.
Q. WHat is the sixth Sacrament?

A. Holy Order.

Q. To whom does this appertain?

A. To the Rulers and Ministers of the Church. as Bishops, Priests, Deacons and
Subdeacons.

Q. What proof have you for Bishops, Priests and Deacons?

A. For Bishops and Deacons out of Philip. chapter 1. v. 1. To all the Saints at
Philippi (says S. Paul) with the Bishops and Deacons: And for Priests out of
S. James above cited, Is any man sick amongst you, let him bring in the
Priests of the Church, etc.

Q. Where did Christ ordain this Sacrament?

A. At his last Supper, when he made his Apostles, Priests, saying, This is my
Body which is given for you, do ye this for a commemoration of me, S. Luke chapter
22. v. 19.

Q. What did Christ give them power then to do?

A. To offer the unbloudy Sacrifice of his own Body and Blood, which he
himself had there ordained and offered under the outward forms of Bread and
Wine.

Q. Why did he say, Do ye this for a commemoration of me?

A. Because the unbloudy Sacrifice of the Mass is a commemoration, or
memorial of the Bloody Sacrifice, made on the Cross; nay more, it is a
renovation of it in an unbloudy way.

Q. What are the effects of Holy Order?

A. It gives a spiritual power to ordain Priests, to consecrate the body and
blood of Christ, to administer the Sacraments, to serve the Altar, and to
Preach.

Q. What else?

A. It gives also special grace for the well doing of the foresaid Offices.

Q. How prove you that?

A. Out of 1 Timothy chapter 4. v. 14. Neglect not the grace which is in thee by
Prophecy, with the Imposition of the hands of Priesthood.

Q. What is the proper Office of a Bishop?

A. To give Holy Orders and Confirmation, to preach and govern the Church.

Q. How prove you that?

A. To confirm, out of the Acts chapter 8. above cited, where we read, That two
Bishops were sent to confirm the Samaritans.

Q. How prove you that Bishops are of Divine Right, and have Authority from God
to rule the Church?

A. Out of Acts chapter 20. v. 28. Take heed unto your selves and to the flock
wherein the Holy Ghost has placed you Bishops, to rule the Church of God.

Q. How prove you that Bishops only can ordain Priests?

A. Out of Tit. chapter 1. v. 5. For this cause left I thee in Creet, that thou
should reform the things that are wanting, and ordain Priests by Cities,
(he was a Bishop.)

Q. What sin is it therefore to oppose Hierarchy and Episcopacy, either in
the whole Church, or in particular Cburches for private ends?

A. It is sin of Rebellion and high Treason against the peace and safety of
Christ's spiritual Commonwealth, the Church.

Q. How declare you that?

A. Because no Law can subsist without guards and lookers to it: since
therefore Christ has ordained Bishops to be the Guards and Teachers of his
Law, they who strike at Bishops, strike also at the whole Law of Christ, and
safety of the people.

Q. Why is it requisite that Bishops and Pastors should have such great
Revenewes?

A. Because they bear a considerable charge and office in the Commonwealth,
therefore ought to have a competence for the performance of it; Secondly that
they may give the Laity an example of the true use of riches; And finally that
it may breed a due respect both of their persons and callings in such as they
are set to govern, who cannot always judge of their internal qualities.

Q. What is the office of a Priest?

A. To offer Sacrifice, and administer the rest of the Sacraments, excepting
Holy Order and Confirmation.

Q. How prove you a Sacrifice in the new Law?

A. Because there is a Priesthood, as you have heard, and an Altar, according
to that; We have an Altar (says S. Paul) whereof they have no power to eat,
who serve the Tabernacle. Heb. chapter last v. 7.

Q. What other proof have you for it?

A. Out of Mal. chapter 1. v. 11. where he foretold the Sacrifice of the new Law
saying; From the rising of the Sun even to the going down, great is my Name
amongst the Gentiles, and in every place there is sacrificing and there is
offered to my Name a clean oblation, says the Lord of Hosts.

Q. What other yet?

A. Out of S. Luke chapter 22. v. 19. and 20. where Christ (who is high Priest for
ever according to the order of Melchisedech) offered the Sacrifice of his own
Body and Blood under the forms of Bread and Wine, saying, this is my Body
which is given for you (it was given for us you hear at his last Supper) this
is the Chalice, the new Testament in my Blood, which Chalice (according to the
Greek text) is shed for you.

Q. Is it lawful for Priests to marry?

A. It is not, there is a Precept of the Church against it, descending to us by
Apostolical tradition, neither did any of the Apostles ever company with their
wives, after their calling to the Apostleship.

Q. What other reason have you?

A. Because every one that is made a Priest takes at his Ordination, a
voluntary oath of perpetual Chastity.

Q. Why is it requisite that Priests should live chaste and unmarried?

A. Because of all pleasures the carnal most affects sensible nature,
causing the greatest extremities in man, and is the greatest binder of man to
earthly things; Wherefore it is an employment little beseeming those who are
obliged by their very callings to draw the people from this clod of earth, and
elevate their hearts to heavenly things.

Q. What are the lesser Orders of the Church?

A. Acolyte, Lector, Exorcist and Porter, according to the 4. Council of
Carthage, Can. the 6.

Q. Is it lawful for women to Preach or to be Priests?

A. It is not, according to 1 Cor. chapter 14. v. 34. Let women hold their peace in
Churches, for it is not permited them to speak, but to be subject, as the Law
says.

Q. Is it lawful for any man to usurp and take upon him Priestly power,
without the Ordination of the Church?

A. It is not, according to Heb. chapter 5. v. 1. and 4. For every high Priest
taken from amongst men, is appointed for men etc. That he may offer gifts and
Sacrifices for sins. Neither does any man take the honor to himself, but he
that is called of God, as Aaron.

Q. What other proof have you?

A. Out of S. John chapter 10. v. 1. Amen, I say unto you, he that enters not by
the door (Holy Order) into the fold of the sheep, but climbs up another way,
he is a Thief and a Robber.

Q. What if any man pretend an extraordinary calling?

A. He must prove it by miracles, or else be esteemed an Impostor.

Q. What examples have you against the usurpation of Priestly, Power?

A. That of King Oza, who was struck dead in the place, for laying but his
hand upon the Ark to save it from falling, the 2. of Kings chapter 6. v. 6. and 7.

Q. What besides?

A. The example of Core, Dathan and Abiram, who for usurping the Office of the
High Priest, though they were Priests themselves, and true believers in all
other points, were swallowed up alive by the earth, Numb. chapter 16. v. 32. and
two hundred and fifty others who were offering Incense with them, were consumed
with fire from heaven, v. 35. with fourteen thousand and seven hundred more
which were also burnt with fire from heaven for only siding with them, v. 49.

Matrimony Expounded.
Q. WHat is the seventh Sacrament?

A. Matrimony.

Q. Where was that first ordained?

A. In Paradise by Almighty God when he gave Eve to Adam for a wife, saying,
Wherefore a man shall leave his Father and his Mother, and shall cleave unto
his wife, and they shall be two in one flesh, Genesis chapter 2. v. 22.

Q. Where was it made a Sacrament of the new Law?

A. Either at the Wedding of Cana in Galilee, where Christ was present, and
wrought his first Miracle, by turning Water into Wine, S. John chapter 2. or else
in S. Matthew. chapter 19. v. 6. where he says, Therefore now they are not two but
one flesh, what God has joined let not man separate.

Q. Why was it requisite that Marriage should be made a Sacrament?

A. Because it is the maine hinge whereupon hangs the chief happiness of a
married life; and therefore ought to be ranked in the highest Order of those
Actions which Christ has sanctified for the use of man.

Q. What other reason have you?

A. Because on it depends both the restraint of sinful concupisence, the
good of posterity, the wellordering of our Domestical affairs, and the
education of our Children in the fear and service of God.

Q. How prove you Marriage to be a Sacrament?

A. Because, as you have heard, it is a conjunction made and sanctified by God
himself, and not to be dissolved by any power of man.

Q. What other proof have you?

A. Out of Ephesians. chapter 5. v. 31, 32. They shall be two in one flesh, this is a
great Sacrament, but I speak in Christ, and in the Church.

Q. What is the matter of this Sacrament?

A. The mutual consent of the parties, and deliverie of their bodies to one
another.

Q. What is the form of it?

A. The words or signs which signify the said present consent and delivery of
their bodies.

Q. What are the effects of Matrimony?

A. It gives special grace unto the married couple, to love and bear with
one another, as also to bring up their Children in the fear of God.

Q. What is the principal End of Marriage?

A. To beget Children, and bring them up in the service of God, and the next to
this is, that man may have a remedy against concupisence, and a helper in the
way of Salvation.

Q. How great is the tie of Marriage?

A. So great that it can never be dissolved, but by death, as you have heard
out of S. Mat. chapter 19.

Q. What are the Obligations of Man and Wife?

A. To love, honor and comfort one another.

Q. What else?

A. To render mutually the Marriage debt, according to that, Let the Husband
render his debt unto the Wife, and Wife also in like manner to her Husband: The
woman now has not power of her own Body, but the husband; and in like manner
the man has not power of his own Body, but the woman, 1 Cor. chapter 7. v. 3. and
4.

Q. Is it lawful for Children to marry without the consent of their Parents?

A. It is not, neither is it lawful for Parents to force them to marry against
their wills.

Q. Why are many so unhappy in their Marriages?

A. Because they never consulted with God about them, nor sought to have his
blessing in them.

Q. For what other reason?

A. Because they were lewd before Marriage, or married for lust or wealth, and
not for the right end of Marriage.

Q. What means the blessing of the Priest given in Marriage?

A. It is to beg all blessings of God for the new married couple.

Q. Why is the Ring put on the fourth finger?

B. Because that is called the heart finger, and has (they say) a vein in it
which reaches to the heart, so to signify the hearty, and constant love which
ought to be betwixt man and wife.

Q. What signifies the Ring it self?

A. It is a Symboll of perfection, and eternity, being equal in all parts and
Sphericall in figure, without beginning or end, to intimate the perfect and
perpetual love of man and wife.

Q. What are the best means to obtain good children?

A. Fasting, Prayer and Almesdeeds; For so S. Ioachim and Anne obtained the B.
Virgin Mary, and so the B. Virgin became the mother of God.

Q. What obligation have Parents to their children?

A. To instruct them in the Faith of Christ, to give them good example, to feed
and nourish, to provide for them in Marriage, and to correct their faults.

Q. What are the chief and most common Impediments of Marriage?

A. Collateral Consanguinity and Affinity to the fourth degree, inclusively.
And in the right line all degrees are prohibited by the Law of Nature, and
indispensable.

Q. Can the Church dispense in those said collateral degrees?

A. She can, excepting only the first collateral degree of Consanguinity, to
wit betwixt Brother and Sister.

Q. How prove you that?

A. Out of Genes. chapter 29. v. 29. Where we read, that Jacob, having first
married Lea, took also Rachael her sister to wife, without scruple or
reproof; which was the first Collateral degree of Affinity.

Q. What other proof have you?

A. Out of Genes. chapter 11. where we read, that Abraham took to wife Sara, his
Brother Lots Daughter, which is the second collateral degree of consanguinity.

CHAP. XII.
The Cardinal Virtues Expounded.

Q. HOw many Cardinal Virtues be there?

A. There be four; Prudence, Justice, Fortitude, and Temperance.

Q. Why are these called Cardinal Virtues?

A. Because they are the fountains, and as it were, the hinges of all Moral
Virtues.

Q. What is Prudence?

A. It is a virtue which makes us wary in all our actions, that we may neither
deceive others, nor be deceived our selves, or which (according to the Rule of
Honesty) prescribes what is to be desired, and what to be eschewed by a man.

Q. How prove you that?

A. Out of Eccles. chapter 3. v. 18. A wise heart that has understanding will keep
it self from sin, and in the works of justice it shall have success.

Q. What is Justice?

A. It is a Virtue which gives everyman his own, according to that, Render to
all men their due, to whom Tribute, Tribute, to whom Custom, Custom, to whom
Fear, Fear, to whom Honor, Honor, Romans chapter 13. v. 7.

Q. What is Temperance?

A. It is a Virtue which moderates the inordinate Appetites and pleasures of
the flesh: He that is abstinent (says the Wiseman) shall increase life,
Eccles. chapter 37.

Q. What is Fortitude?

A. It is a Virtue by which the labors and dangers of death are constantly
undertaken, and patiently sustained: The wicked man flies (says Solomon) when
no man pursues him, but the just man, as a confident Lion, shall be without
fear, Prove. chapter 28. And in 1 S. Peter, chapter 3. v. 14. we read, The fear of
them fear ye not, and be not troubled, but sanctify our Lord Christ in your
hearts.

Q. Is it necessary for a Christian to be exercised in these Virtues?

A. It is; for we must not only decline from evil, but do good, Psalm. 36. v.
27.

CHAP. XIII.
The Gifts of the Holy Ghost Expounded.

Q. HOw many be the Gifts of the Holy Ghost?

A. Seven; Wisdom, Understanding, Council, Fortitude, Knowledge, Piety, and
the fear of our Lord.

Q. What is Wisdom?

A. It is a gift of God, which teaches us to direct our whole lives and
actions to his honor, and the salvation of our souls.

Q. What is Understanding?

A. It is a gift of God, by which we are enabled to penetrate the high
mysteries of our Faith.

Q. What is Council?

A. It is a gift of God by which we discover the frauds and the deceits of the
Devil, and are not cheated with them.

Q What is Fortitude?

A. It is a gift of God, whereby we are enabled to undergo and to despise all
dangers for his sake.

Q. What is Knowledge?

A. It is a gift of God, by which we know and understand the Will of God.

Q. What is Piety?

A. It is a gift of God which makes us devout and zealous in his service.

Q. What is the fear of our Lord?

A. It is a gift of God, which curbeth our rashness, withholds us from
sin, and makes us obedient to Gods Law.

CHAP. XIIII.
The twelve Fruits of the Holy Ghost Expounded.

Q. HOw many be the Fruits of the Holy Ghost?

A. There be in number twelve, as you may see in Gal. chapter 5.

Q. What is the first?

A. Charity, whose nature and effects, you know already.

Q. What is the second?

A. Joy, by which we are enabled to serve God with cheerful hearts.

Q. What is the third?

A. Peace, which keeps us unmoved in our minds amidst the storms and
tempests of this world.

Q. What is the fourth?

A. Patience, which enableth us to suffer all adversities for the love of God.

Q. What is the fifth?

A. Long animity, which is an untired confidence of mind in expecting the good
things of the life to come.

Q. What is the sixth?

A. Goodness, which makes us hurt no man, and do good unto all.

Q. What is the seventh?

A. Benignity, which causes an affable sweetness in our manners and
conversation.

Q. What is the Eighth?

A. Mildness, which allayeth in us all the motions of passion and anger.

Q. What is the ninth?

A. Fidelity, which makes us punctual observers of our Covenants and Promises.

Q. What is the tenth?

A. Modesty, which suppresseth in us all pride, and haughtiness.

Q. What is the eleventh?

A. Continency, which makes us not only abstemious in meat and drink, but in
all other sensible delights.

Q. What is the twelfth?

A. Chastity, which keeps a pure soul in a pure body.

Q. Who are they that have these fruits?

A. The Children of God only; for whosoever are led by the Spirit of God, they
are the sons of God, Romans chapter 8. v. 14.

CHAP. XV.
The Works of Merey Expounded.

Q. HOw many are the Works of Mercy Corporal?

A. Seven: 1. To feed the hungry. 2. To give drink to the thirsty. 3. To
cloth the naked. 4. To harbor the harbourlesse. 5. To visit the sick. 6. To
visit the imprisoned: And 7. To bury the dead.

Q. How prove you that these works are meritorious of a reward?

A. Because Christ has promised the Kingdom of heaven, as the reward of them,
Come O ye blessed of my Father (says he) and possess ye the Kingdom, etc.
for I was hungry and ye gave me to eat, etc. S. Mat. chapter 25. v. 35, 36.

Q. When are we said to feed and cloth Christ?

A. As often as we feed and cloth the poor in his Name; what ye have done
(says he) to one of my little ones that ye have done unto me, the same chapter v.
40.

Q. Is the reward of these works a reward of Justice?

A. It is, according to 2 Timothy chapter 4. v. 8. I have fought a good fight (says
S. Paul) there is a crown of Justice laid up for me, which our Lord will
render to me at that day, a just Judge.

Q. What other proof have you?

A. Out of Heb. chapter 6. v. 10. For God is not unjust that he should forget the
work and love which you have showed in his Name, who have ministered unto the
Saints and do minister.

Q. How many be the Works of Mercy Spiritual?

A. Seven also: 1. To give counsel to the doubtful. 2. To instruct the
ignorant. 3. To admonish sinners. 4. To comfort the afflicted. 5. To for give
offenses. 6. To bear patiently the troublesome. 7. To pray for the quick and
the dead.

Q. How prove you prayer for the dead?

A. First, out of of the places above cited for Purgatory. Secondly out of 1 S.
John chapter 5. v. 16. He that knows his brother to sin a sin not unto death,
let him ask and life shall be given him, not sinning to death; (i. by final
impenitence) therefore it is lawful to pray for all such as die penitent and
confessing their sins. And in 2 Match. chapter 12. we read, It is therefore a
wholesome and holy cogitation to pray for the dead, that they may be loosed
from their sins.

Q. How show you these works to be meritorious?

A. Out of Dan. chapter 12. v. 2. They which instruct others unto Justice shall
shine as stars for all eternity.

CHAP. XVI.
The eight Beatitudes.

Q. WHat are the eight Beatitudes?

A. The sum of them is: 1. Poverty of spirit. 2. Meekness. 3. Mourning. 4.
To hunger and thirst after Justice. 5. Mercifulness. 6. Cleanness of heart.
7. To be Peacemakers.) 8. To suffer persecution for Justice sake. See S. Mat.
chapter 5.

Q. Whence arises the necessity of suffering Persecution?

A. Because all that will live piously in Jesus Christ, shall suffer
Persecution.

CHAP. XVII.
The kinds of sin explicated.

Q. WHy is it necessary for a Christian to know the natures and the kinds of
sin?

A. That so he may detest them, and avoid them.

Q. How many kinds of sin be there?

A. Two kinds, namely, Original and Actual sin.

Q. What is Original sin?

A. It is a privation of Original Justice, which we inherit from our first
Parent Adam, and are all born in that privation or Original sin.

Q. How prove you that?

A. Out of Romans chapter 5. v. 12. Therefore as by one man sin entered into the
world, and by sin death, and so unto all men death did pass, in whom all have
sinned.

Q. What are the effects of Original sin?

A. Concupisence, ignorance, evil inclinations, pronenesse to sin, sickness
and death.

Q. How is Original sin taken away?

A. By holy Baeptisme.

Q. Whither go Infants which die without Baptism?

A. To the upper part of hell, where they endure the pain of loss, (though not
of sense) and shall never see the face of God.

Q. How prove you that?

A. Out of S. John chapter 3. v. 5. Unless any one be borne again of water and
the Spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God.

Q. What is Actual sin?

A. It is a thought, word, or deed, contrary to the Law of God.

Q. What is a sin of Omission?

A. To omit any thing willingly which is commanded by God, or by his Church.

Q. Why is Actual sin so called?

A. Because the material part of it is commonly some voluntary act of ours.

Q. Is all sin voluntary and deliberate?

A. It is; (speaking of Actual sin) for no man sins in doing that which
is not in his power to avoid.

Q. What other proof have you?

A. Because the whole Gospel of Christ is nothing else, but an Exhortation to
do good, and avoid, evil; then which nothing were more vain, if it be not in
the free election and power of man, as assisted by Gods grace to do, or not to
do such things.

Q. What Scripture have you for that?

A. Out of Genesis chapter 4. v. 7. If thou do well, shall not thou receive again?
But if thou do ill, shall not thy sin be forthwith present at the door?
but the desire thereof (of sin) shall be under thee, and thou shall have
dominion over it.

Q. What besides?

A. Out of Deuteronomy. chapter 30. v. 19. and 20. I call to witness this day heaven and
earth, (says our Lord) that I have proposed to thee life and death, blessing
and cursing, choose therefore life that thou may live.

Q. What other yet?

A. Out of 1 Cor. chapter 7. v. 37. He that has determined in his heart being
settled, not having necessity, but having power of his own will, and has
judged in his heart to keep his Virgin, does well; (you see man has power of
his own will) and in Phil. chapter 4. I can do all things (says S. Paul) in him
that strengthens me.

Q. Does not the efficacy of Gods grace hinder and hurt the freedom of our
will?

A. No, it perfecteth it, according to 1 Cor. chapter 15. v. 10, and 11. I have
labored more abundantly (says S. Paul) then all they, yet not I, but the
grace of God with me; you hear the grace of God did not hinder, but perfect
his working.

Q. How is Actual Sin divided?

A. Into mortal and venial.

Q. What is mortal sin?

A. Any great offense against the charity of God, or our neighbor: and it is
so called, because it kills the soul, and robs it of the spiritual life
of grace.

Q. What is venial sin?

A. A small and very pardonable offense against God, or our neighbor.

Q. How prove you that some sins are mortal?

A. Out of Romans chapter 6. v. 23. For the stipend of sin is death. And v. 21. What
fruit therefore had you then in those things for which now your are ashamed?
For the end of them is death.

Q. What other proof have you?

A. Out of Wisdom chapter 16. v. 14. For a man by malice kills his own soul.
And out of Ezekiel. chapter 18. v. 4. The soul which sins she shall die.

Q. How prove you that some sins are only venial?

A. Out of 1 S. John chapter 1. v. 8. where speaking of such as walk in the light,
and are cleansed from all mortal sin by the blood of Christ, he adds, If we
shall say we have no sin, we seduce our selves, and the truth is not in us.

Q. What other proof have you?

A. In many things we all offend, S. James chapter 3. v. 2. and in Prove. 24. v. 16.
The just man falls seven times, (not mortally, for then he were no longer
just, therefore venially.)

Q. What other yet?

A. Out of S. Mat. chapter 12. v. 37. But I say unto you, every idle word which men
shall speak, they shall render an account for at the day of Judgment, (now
God forbid that every idle word should be a mortal Sin.)

Q. What are the effects of venial Sin?

A. It does not rob the soul of life, as Mortal does, but only weakneth the
fervor of Charity, and by degrees disposes unto Mortal.

Q. Why are we bound to shun not only mortal, but also venial Sins.

A. Because he that despises small things shall by little and little fall
away, Eccles. chapter 19. v. 3.

Q. What other proof have you?

A. Because no polluted thing shall enter into the heavenly Jerusalem, Apoc.
chapter 21. v. 27. (be it with mortal or venial sin.)

Q. How shall we be able to know when any sin is mortal, and when but venial?

A. By this: Because to any mortal sin it is required, both that it be
deliberate, and perfectly voluntary; and also that it be in a matter of weight
against the Law of God; one or both of which conditions is always wanting in a
venial sin.

Q. How is Mortal Sin remitted?

A. By hearty penance and contrition.

Q. How is Venial Sin remitted?

A. By all the Sacraments, by holy Water, devout Prayer, and the like.

Q. Whether go such as die in Mortal Sin?

A. To hell for all eternity, as you have heard in the Creed.

Q. Whether go such as die in Venial Sin, or not having fully satisfied for
the temporal punishments due to their mortal sins, which are forgiven them?

A. To Purgatory, till they have made full satisfaction for them, and then to
heaven.

Q. How prove you that there is Purgatory, or a penal place where souls are
purged after death.

A. Out of 1 S. Pet. chapter 3. v. 18. 19. 20. where we read, That Christ being
dead for our sins, came in spirit, and preached to them also that were in
prison, which had been incredulous in the days of Noah when the Arc was a
building.

Q. What other proof have you?

A. Out of 1 Cor. chapter 3. v. 13, 14, 15. The work of every man shall be
manifest, for the day of our Lord will declare it, because it shall be revealed
in fire, and the work of every one of what kind it is the fire shall try, if
any man's work abide (as theirs does who have deserved no Purgatory) he shall
receive a reward; if any man's work burn (as theirs does who go to Purgatory)
he shall suffer detriment, but himself shall be saved, yet so as by fire.

Q. What besides?

A. Out of S. Matthew. chapter 4. v. 27. Be thou at agreement with thy adversary
betimes whilst thou art in the way with him, (that is in this life) least
perhaps the Adversary deliver thee to the Judge, and the Judge deliver thee to
the Officer, and thou be cast into prison, (Purgatory) Amen I say unto thee,
thou shall not go out from thence till thou repay the last farthing.

Q. What other yet?

A. Out of S. Mat. chapter 12. v. 32. where we read, That some Sins shall neither
be forgiven in this world, nor in the world to come; therefore there is a place
of purging and pardoning sins after this life.

Q. How is a man made guilty, or said to cooperate to the sins of other men?

A. As often as he is an effectual cause of sin in others by any of these nine
means following: 1. By counsel. 2. By command. 3. By consent. 4. By
provocation. 5. By praise or flattery. 6. By silence. 7. By connivence. 8. By
participation; or 9. By defense of the ill done.

CHAP. XVIII.
The seven deadly Sins Expounded.

Q. HOw call you the seven deadly Sins?

A. Pride, Covetousness, Lechery, Anger, Gluttony, Envy, and Sloth.

Q. What is Pride?

A. It is an inordinate desire of our own excellency or esteem.

Q. Why is Pride called a Capital sin?

A. Because it is the head, or fountain of many other sins.

Q. What for example?

A. Vainglory, Boasting, Hypocrisy, Ambition, Arrogance, Presumption, and
contempt of others.

Q. What is Vainglory?

A. An inordinate desire of humane praise.

Q. What is Boasting?

A. A foolish cracking of our selves.

Q. What is Hypoerisie?

A. A counterfeiting of more piety and virtue, then we have.

Q. What is Ambition?

A. An inordinate desire of honor.

Q. What is Arrogance?

A. A high contempt of others joined with insolency, and rashness.

Q. What is Presumption?

A. An attempting of things above our strength.

Q. What is contempt of others?

A. A disdainful preferring of our selves before others.

Q. What other daughters has Pride?

A. Pertinacy, discord, disobedience, and in gratitude.

Q. What is pertinacy?

A. A wilful sticking to our own opinions, contrary to the judgment of our
betters.

Q. What is discord?

A. A wrangling in words with such as we ought to assent, and yield unto.

Q. What is disobedience?

A. A refractorinesse to Parents and Superiors.

Q. What is Ingratitude?

A. A forgetting or neglecting of benefits.

Q. How prove you Pride to be a mortal Sin?

A. Because we read, That God resists the proud, and gives his grace unto
the humble, 1. of S. Pet. chapter 5. v. 5. And in Eccles. chapter 10. we read, that
Pride is odious before God and men.

Q. What are the remedies of Pride?

A. To remember that Holy Lesson, learn ye of me that am mild and humble of
heart. And to consider that we are sinful dust and shall return again to
dust. And that whatsoever good we have or do is the mere gift of God.

Q. What is the virtue opposite to Pride?

A. Humility, which teaches us a lowly conceit of our selves. He that
humbles himself shallbe exalted, S. Mat. chapter 23.

Q. What is covetousness?

A. An inordinate desire of riches.

Q. When is covetousness a mortal Sin?

A. When, either we desire unjustly that which is another man's, of some
considerable value, or else refuse to give of that which is our own, to such
as are in any extreme, or moral necessity.

Q. How prove you the first part?

A. Out of 1 Timothy chapter 6. v. 9. where we read, that covetous desires drown men
into destruction and perdition: for the root of all evils is covetousness.

Q. How prove you the latter part?

A. Out of 1 S. Iohu chapter 3. v. 17. He that has the substance of this world,
and shall see his brother have necessity, and shall shut his bowels from him,
How does the charity of God abide in him?

Q. What other proof have you for alms?

A. Out of S. Luke chapter 11. v. 41. But yet that which remains, give alms, and
behold all things are clean unto you. And out of Dan. chapter 4. v. 24. Redeem
(says he) thy sins with alms, and thy iniquity with the mercies of the
poor.

Q. What are the daughters of covetousness?

A. Hardness of heart; Vnmercifullnesse to the poor; unquiet Solicitude;
Neglect of heavenly things, and confidence in things of this world.

Q. What else?

A. Usury, Fraud, Rapine, Theft, etc.

Q. What are the remedies of covetousness?

A. To consider that it is a kind of Idolatry, according to Colos. chapter 3. v. 5.
And that it is harder for a rich man to enter heaven, then for a camel to
pass through the eye of a needle, S. Matthew. chapter 19. v. 24.

Q. What are the virtues opposite to covetousness?

A. Liberality, which makes a man give freely to the poor. And justice, which
renders unto all men, that which is theirs. It is a more blessed thing to give
(says our Lord) rather then to take, Acts chapter 20. v. 35. and in 2 Cor. chapter 9.
v. 6. S. Paul says, He that sows sparingly, sparingly also shall he reap,
but he that sows in blessings, of blessings also shall he reap, for God
loves a cheerful giver.

Lechery expounded.
Q. What is Lechery?

A. An inordinate desire of carnal sin, or delights of the flesh.

Q. How prove you the gravity of this sin?

A. Because the whole world was once drowned, and the Cities of Sodom and
Gomorrah were burnt with fire from heaven for it, Genesis chapter 7. v. 21. and chapter
19. v. 25.

Q. What other proof have you?

A. Out of Romans chapter 8. v. 13. For if you live according to the flesh, you shall
die, but if by the spirit you mortify the deeds of the flesh, you shall live.

Q. What are the degrees of Lust?

A. Thought, Delight, Consent, and Act.

Q. What are the daughters of Lust?

A. Fornication, Whoredom, Adultery, voluntary Pollution, Unchaste Sights and
Touches, Wanton Kisses and Speeches.

Q. How prove you voluntary pollution to be a mortal sin?

A. Out of Genes. chapter 38. v. 7. and 9. where we read that Onan and Her were
struck dead by God in the place, for shedding the seed of nature out of the due
vessel to hinder generation.

Q. Why are lust full kisses and touches mortal sins?

A. Because they vehemently dispose to fornication and pollution.

Q. Is kissing by way of civility, when we meet a stranger, any sin?

A. No it is not?

Q. What are the remedies of Lust?

A. To consider the beastliness of it, and that by it we make the member of
Christ the member of a harlot, 1 Cor. chapter 6. v. 15. 16.

Q. What else?

A. To consider that God and his Angels are eyewitnesses of it, how ever
private it may seem.

Q. What is the virtue opposite to Lechery?

A. Chastity, which makes us abstain from carnal pleasures. Let us behave
our selves (says S. Paul) as the ministers of God, in much patience, in
watching, in fasting, in chastity, 2 Cor. chapter 6. v. 6.

Q. How prove you the greatness of this virtue?

Out of Apoc. chapter 14. v. 4. These are they which were not defiled with women
for they are virgins. These follow the Lamb whither soever he shall go.

Envy expounded.
Q. What is Envy?

A. It is a sadness or repining at another good, in as much as it seems to
lessen our own excellency.

Q. How prove you Envy to be mortal?

A. Because by the Devils envy death entered into the world, and envy was the
cause of all sin, Wisdom chapter 3. v. 24.

Q. What are the daughters of Envy?

A. Hatred, Detraction, Rash Judgment, Strife, Reproach, Contempt, and
Rejoicing at another evil.

Q. What are the remedies of Envy?

A. To cousider that it robs us of Charity, and deformeth us to the
likeness of the Devil.

Q. What is the virtue opposite to Envy?

A. Brotherly love, which is the chiefest badge of Christianity; In this (says
our Savior) men shall know that you are my Disciples, if you love one another,
S. John chapter 13. v. 34.

Gluttony expounded.
Q. WHat is Gluttony?

A. An inordinate excess, or desire of excess in meat or drink.

Q. How prove you Gluttony to be a mortal sin?

A. Out of 1 Cor. chapter 6. v. 10. where we read, that drunkards shall not
possess the kingdom of God. And out of S. Luke chapter 21. v. 34. Take heed unto
your selves, lest your hearts be overcharged with surfeiting and drunkenness.

Q. What are the daughters of Gluttony?

A. Babbling, Scurrility, Spuing, stinking of drink, and dullness of soul and
body.

Q. What are the remedies of Gluttony?

A. To consider the abstinence of Christ and his Saints, and that gluttons are
enemies to the cross of Christ. whose end is destruction, Phil. chapter 3. v. 19.

Anger Expounded
Q. What is Anger?

A. An inordinate desire of revenge.

Q. How prove you Anger to be mortal?

A. Out of S. Matthew. chapter 5. v. 22 Whosoever shall be angry, with his brother
shall be guilty of judgment, etc. And whosoever shall say, thou fool, shall
be guilty of hell fire.

Q. What are the Daughters of Anger?

A. Hatred, Swelling, Fury, Clamor, Threats, Contumely, Cursing, Blasphemy and
Murder.

Q. What are the remedies of Anger?

A. To remember that Holy Lesson of Christ, In your patience you shall possess
your souls. And that of S. Paul, Be gentle one to another, pardoning one
another, as also God in Christ has pardoned you, Ephesians. chapter 4. v. 32.

Q. What virtue is opposite to Anger?

A Patience, which suppresseth in us all passion and desire of revenge.

Q. How prove you the necessity and force of patience?

A. Out of Heb. chapter 10. v. 36. Patience is necessary for you, that doing the
will of God, you may partake the promise.

Sloth expounded
Q. WHat is Sloth?

A. A laziness of mind, neglecting to begin or prosecute good things.

Q. How prove you Sloth to be a deadly sin?

A. Out of Apoc. chapter 3. v. 15. Because thou art neither cold nor hot, but
lukewarm, I will begin to cast thee out of my mouth.

Q. What other proof have you?

A. Out of S. Matthew. chapter 25. v. 30. And the unprofitable servant cast ye forth
into exterior darkness.

Q. When is Sloth mortal?

A. As often as by it we break any Commandment of God or his Church.

Q. What are the daughters of Sloth?

A. Tepidity, Pusillanimity, Indevotion, Weariness of life, Aversion from
spiritual things, and distrust of Gods mercy.

Q. What are the remedies of Sloth?

A. To remember that of Jeremy the 48. Cursed be he that does the work of God
negligently. And to consider with what diligence men do worldly businesses.

Q. What is the virtue opposite to Sloth?

A. Diligence, which makes us careful and zealous in performing our duties,
both to God and man, Take heed (says our Lord) watch and pray, for you know
not when the time is; strive to enter by the narrow gate, for many I say to
you, shall seek to enter and shall not enter. S. Mark chapter 19. v. 33. 35.

CHAP. XIX.
The sins against the Holy Ghost expounded.

Q. HOw many are the sins against the Holy Ghost?

A. Six; Despair of Salvation; Presumption of Gods mercy; To impugn the
known truth; envy at another spiritual good; obstinacy in sin; and final
impenitence.

Q. What is despair of salvation?

A. It is a diffidence in the mercies and power of God, as also in the merits
of Jesus Christ, as if they were not of force enough to save us. This was the
sin of Cain, when he said, my sin is greater then that I can deserve
pardon; Genesis chapter 4. v. 13. And of Judas, when casting down the silver pieces
in the temple, he went and hanged himself, S. Matthew. chapter 26. v. 4. 5.

Q. What is presumption of Gods mercy?

A. A foolish confidence of salvation, without good life, or any care to keep
the Commandments; such as they have, who will be saved by faith only, without
good works.

Q. What is it to impugn the known truth?

A. To argue obstinately against known points of Faith, or to pervert the way
of our Lord by forgeing lies and slanders, as Heretics do, when they teach
the ignorant people, that Catholics worship Images as Gods, and give Angels
and Saints the honor which is due to God; or that the Pope for a little money
gives us pardons to commit what sins we please: Then all which greater
falsehoods cannot he invented.

Q. What is Envy at another spiritual good?

A. A sadness or repineing at another growth in virtue and perfection, such
as Sectaries seem to have, when they scoff and are troubled at the frequent
Fasts, Prayers, Feasts, Pilgrimages, Almsdeeds, Vows, and Religious Orders
of the Catholic Church, calling them Superstitions and Fooleries, because they
have not in their Churches any such practices of piety.

Q. What is obstinacy in sin?

A. A wilful persisting in wickedness, and running on from sin to sin, after
sufficient instruction and admonition.

Q. How show you the gravity of this sin?

A. Out of Heb. chapter 10. v. 26. If we sin willingly after the knowledge of the
truth received, now there is not left an Host for sins, but a certain terrible
expectation of judgment.

Q. What other proof have you?

A. Out of 2 S. Pet. chapter 2. v. 21. It was better for them (says he) not to
know the way of Justice, then after the knowledge to turn back from that holy
Commandment which was given them.

Q. What is final impenitence?

A. To die without either confession or contrition for our sins, as those do
of whom it is said, With a hard neck and with uncircumcised ears, you have
always resisted the Holy Ghost, Acts chapter 7. v. 51. And in the person of whom
Job speaks, saying, Depart thou from us and we will not have the knowledge of
thy ways, Job chapter 21. v. 14.

Q. Why is it said, that these sins shall never be forgiven, neither in this
world, nor in the world to come?

A. Not because there is not a power in God, or in the Sacraments to remit
them, if we confess them, and be sorry for them, (excepting only final
impenitence, of which we read, There is a sin unto death, for that I say, not
that any man ask, 1 S. Ioh, chapter 5. v. 16.) but because men very seldom do
hearty penance for them.

Q. How prove you that?

A. Out of 1 S. Ioh. chapter 1. v. 2. If we confess our sins, he is faithful
and just for to forgive us our sins, and cleanse us from all iniquity.

CHAP. XX.
The sins that cry to heaven for vengeance expounded.

Q. HOw many such sins are there?

A. Four.

Q. What is the first of them?

A. Wilful Murder, which is a voluntary and unjust taking away of another
life.

Q. How show you the gravity of this sin?

A. Out of Genesis chapter 4. v. 10. where it is said to Caine, What have thou done?
The voice of the blood of thy brother cries to me from the earth; now
therefore shall thou be cursed upon the earth. And out of S. Mat. chapter 26. v.
52. All that take the sword shall perish with the sword.

Q. What is the second?

A. Sin of Sodom, or Carnal sin against nature, which is a voluntary shedding
of the seed of nature out of the due use of Marriage, or lust with an undue Sex
or kind.

Q. What have you against this?

A. Out of Genesis chapter 19. v. 13. where we read of the Sodomites and their sin, We
will destroy this place, because the cry of them has increased before our
Lord, who has sent us to destroy them, (and they were burnt with fire from
heaven.)

Q. What is the third?

A. Oppression of the poor, which is a cruel, tyrannical and unjust dealing
with inferiors.

Q. What have you against that?

A. Out of Exodus chapter 22. v. 21. Ye shall not hurt the widow and the
fatherless: if you do hurt them, they will cry unto me, and I will hear their
cry, and my fury shall take indignation, and I will strike you with the sword.
And out of Esa. chapter 10. v. 1. Woe to them that make unjust Laws, that they
might oppress the poor in judgment, and do violence to the cause of the
humble of my people.

Q. What is the fourth?

A. To defraud Workmen of their wages; which is, to lessen, or detain it from
them.

Q. What have you against that?

A. Out of Eccles. chapter 34. v. 27. He that sheddeth blood, and he that
defraudeth the hired man, are brethren. And out of S. James chapter 5. v. 4. Behold
the hire of the workmen that have reaped your fields, which is defrauded by
you, cries, and the cry has entered into the ears of the Lord of Sabbath.

CHAP. XXI.
The four last Things expounded.

Q. WHat are the Four Last Things?

A. Death, Judgment, Hell and Heaven, Eccles. chapter 7. v. 28.

Q. What understand you by Death?

A. That we are all mortal, and shall once die; how soon we are uncertain,
and therefore must be always prepared for it.

Q. How prove you that?

A. Out of Heb. chapter 9. v. 27. It is decreed for all men once to die. And out of
S. Matthew. chapter 25. v. 13. Watch ye therefore, because ye know not the day nor
the hour.

Q. What is the best preparative for death?

A. A godly life, and to be often doing Penance for our sins, and saying with
S. Paul; I do desire to be dissolved and to be with Christ, Phil. chapter 1. v. 23.

Q. What else?

A. To remember often that of S. Matthew. chapter 16. v. 26. He that will save his
life shall lose it, and he that shall lose his life for me, shall find it.

Q. What understand you by judgment?

A. I understand that (besides the general judgment at the last day) our
souls as soon as we are dead shall receive their particular judgment at the
tribunal of Christ, according to that, Blessed are the dead that die in our
Lord, from henceforth now says the spirit, that they rest from their labors,
for their works follow them, Apoc. 14. chapter v. 13.

Q. What is the best preparitive for this judgment?

A. To remember often that of Heb. chapter 10. v. 21. It is a terrible thing to
fall into the hands of the living God. And that of 1 Cor. chapter 11. v. 31. For if
we did judge our selves, we should not be judged.

Q. What understand you by hell?

A. That such as die in mortal sin, and the disfavour of God, shall be
tormented there both day and night for ever and ever. Apoc. chapter 20. v. 10.
There shall be weeping, howling and gnashing of teeth, the worm of conscience
shall always gnaw them, and the fire that tormenteth them shall never be
extinguished, S. Matthew. chapter 8. and S. Mark chapter 9.

Q. What understand you by heaven?

A. That the elect and faithful servants of God shall reign with him for ever
in his Kingdom, where he has prepared such delights and comforts for them, as
neither eye has seen, or ear has heard, neither has it ascended into the
heart of man, 1 Cor. chapter 2. v. 9.

Q. How prove you that?

A. Out of S. Matthew. chapter 7. v. 21. He that does the will of my Father which is
in heaven, he shall enter into the Kingdom of heaven.

Q. What utility is there in the frequent memory of these last things?

A. Very great; according to that; In all thy works remember thy last things,
and thou shall never sin. Eccles. chap. 7. Which God of his great mercy give
us grace to do. Amen.

CHAP. XXII.
The Ceremonies of the Mass Expounded.

Q. WHo ordained the Ceremonies of the mass?

A. The Church, directed by the Holy Ghost.

Q. For what end did she ordain them?

A. To stir up devotion in the people, and reverence to the sacred mysteries.

Q. For what other end?

A. To instruct the ignorant in spiritual and high things, by sensible and
material signs, and by the glory of the Militant, to make them apprehend
something of the glory of the Triumphant Church.

Q. What warrant has the Church to ordain Ceremonies?

A. The authority of God himself in the old Law, commanding many and most
stately Ceremonies in things belonging to his service. See the whole book of
Leviticus.

Q. What besides?

A. The example of Christ in the new Law, using dirt and spittle to cure the
blind, the deaf and dumb: he prostrated at his prayer in the Garden three
times, he lifted up his eyes to heaven and groaned, when he was raising Lazarus
from the dead, which were all Ceremonies.

Q. Did he use any Ceremonies at at his last Supper, where he ordained the
Sacrifice of the Mass?

A. He did; for he washed the feet of his Disciples, he commanded a room to be
prepared, covered with hangings, or adorned, S. Mark. chapter 14. v. 15. He blessed
the Bread and the Cup, and exhorted the Communicants.

Q. What means the Priests coming back three steps from the Altar, and
humbling himself before he begins?

A. It signifies the prostrating of Christ in the Garden, when he began his
Passion.

Q. Why does the Priest bow himself again at the CONFITEOR?

A. To move the people to humiliation, and to signify that by the merits and
Passion of Christ (which they are there met to commemorate) salvation may be
had, if it be sought with a contrite and humble heart.

Q. Why does he beat his breast at MEA CULPA?

A. To teach the people to return unto the heart, and signify that all sin
is from the heart, and ought to be ascribed to the heart with hearty sorry.

Q. Why does the Priest ascending to the Altar, kiss the Altar in the middle?

A. Because the Altar signifies the Church composed of diverse people, as of
diverse living stones, which Christ kissed in the middle, by giving a holy kiss
of peace both to the Jews and Gentiles.

Q. What signifies the INTROITE?

A. The desires and groanings of the ancient Fathers after the coming of Christ.

Q. Why is the INTROITE repeated twice?

A. To signify the frequent repetition of their desires and supplications.

Q. Why do we add unto the INTROITE, GLORIA PATRI, etc. Glory be to the
Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost, Amen?

A. To render thanks to the most Blessed Trinity for our redemption,
accomplished by the Cross.

Q. What means the KYRIE ELEISON?

A. It signifies, Lord have mercy on us, and is repeated thrice in honor of
the Father, thrice in honor of the Son, and thrice in honor of the Holy Ghost.

Q. Why so often?

A. To signify our great necessity and earnest desire to find mercy.

Q. What means the GLORIA IN EXCELSIS DEO?

A. It is the song, which the Angels sung at the birth of Christ, and used in
this place to signify, that the mercy which we beg, was brought us by his
birth and death.

Q. What means the Collect?

A. It is the Priests Prayer, and is called a Collect, because it collecteth
and gathers together the supplications of the multitude, speaking them all
with one voice; and because it is a collection or sum of the Epistle and
Gospel of the Mass for the most part of the year, especially of all the
Sundays.

Q. Why does the Clarke say, AMEN?

A. He does it in the name of the People, to signify, that they all concur
with the Priest in his petition, or Prayer.

Q. What means the DOMINUS VOBISCUM?

A. It signifies, Our Lord be with you, and is used to excite the people to
join with the Priest in what he then does.

Q. Why is it answered by the Clarke, ET CUM SPIRITU TUO? And with thy Spirit?

A. To signify, that the people do all concur with the Priest, and beg
divine assistance for him.

Q. Why are all the Prayers ended with PER DOMINUM NOSTRUM JESUM CHRISTUM, etc.
Through our Lord Jesus Christ?

A. To signify, that whatsoever we beg of God the Father, we must beg it in
the Name of Jesus Christ, by whom he has given us all things.

Q. What means the Epistle?

A. It signifies the Old Law, and is read before the Gospel to intimate that
the Old Law being able to bring nothing to perfection, it was necessary that
the New should follow it.

Q. What means the Graduall?

A. It signifies the Penance preached by S. John Baptist, and that we cannot
partake or come unto the Salvation of Christ, but by the holy degrees of
Penance.

Q. What means the ALLELUIA?

A. It is the voice of men rejoicing and aspiring to the joys of heaven.

Q. Why is ALLELUIA repeated so often at the Feast of Easter?

B. Because that is the joyful solemnity of our Saviors Resurrection.

Q. Why betwixt Septuagesima and Easter is the Tract read in place of the
Graduall?

A. Because that is a time of penance and mourning, and therefore the Tract is
read with a sad and a slow voice, to signify the miseries and banishment of
this life.

Q. Why do we rise up at the reading of the Gospel?

A. To signify, that we are ready to go and do whither and whatsoeever it
commands us.

Q. What is the Gospel?

A. The happy Embassy or Message of Christ unto the world.

Q. Why is the Gospel read at the North end of the Altar?

A. To signify that by the preaching of the Gospel of Christ, the Kingdom of
the Devil was overthrown.

Q. How declare you that?

A. Because the Devil has chosen the North for the seat of his malice, and
all evil (says the Prophet) shall be opened from the North.

Q. Why does the Priest before he begin the Gospel salute the people with
DOMINUS VOBISCUM, Our Lord be with you?

A. To prepare them for a devout hearing of it, and beg of our Lord to make
them worthy hearers of his Word, which can save their souls.

Q. Why then does he say, SEQUENTIA SANCTI EVANGELII, etc. The Sequel of the
Holy Gospel, etc.?

A. To move attention, and signify what part of the Gospel he then reads.

Q. Why does the Clark answer, GLORIATIBI DOMINE, Glory be to thee O Lord?

A. To give the glory of the Gospel to God, who has of his mere mercy made
us partakers of it.

Q. Why then does the Priest sign the book with the sign of the Cross?

A. To signify, that the Doctrine there delivered appertains to the Cross
and Passion of Christ.

Q. Why after this do both the Priest and people sign themselves with the
Cross in three places?

A. They sign themselves on their foreheads, to signify, that they are not
ashamed to profess Christ crucified; on their mouths, to signify, that they
will be ready with their mouths to confess unto salvation; and on their
breasts, to signify, that with their hearts they do believe unto Justice.

Q. Why at the end of the Gospel do they sign their breasts again with the
Cross?

A. That the Devil coming may not steal the seed of Gods Word out of their
hearts.

Q. What means the Creed?

A. It is a public profession of our Faith, and the wholesome fruit of the
preaching of the Gospel.

Q. What means the first Offertory, where we offer Bread and Wine mingled
with Water.

A. It signifies the freedom wherewith Christ offered himself unto his
Passion, and the desire he had to suffer for our sins.

Q. What signifies the mingling of water with the wine?

A. It signifies the blood and water flowing from the side of Christ, as also
the union of the faithful with Christ.

Q. Why does the Priest wash the ends of his fingers?

A. To admonish both himself and the people, to wash away the unclean thoughts
of their hearts, that so they may partake of that holy Sacrifice; as also to
signify, that the Priest is or ought to be clean from all mortal sin.

Q. Why then after some silence does he begin the Preface with a loud voice,
saying, PEROMNIA SECULA SECULORUM.

A. To signify the triumphant entry of Christ into Jerusalem, after he had
laien hid a little space, and therefore it is ended with OSANNA BENEDICTUS
QUIVENIT, etc. which was the Hebrew Childrens Song.

Q. Why at those words does the Priest sign himself with the sign of the
Cross?

A. To signify, that the entry of Christ into Jerusalem was not to a Kingdom
of this world, but to a death upon the Cross.

Q. Why is the Canon read with a low voice?

A. To signify the sadness of our Saviors Passion.

Q. Why does the Priest begin the Canon bowing his head?

A. To signify the obedience of Christ unto his Father, in making himself a
sacrifice for sin.

Q. Why then does he kiss the Altar in the middle?

A. To signify that kiss of peace which Christ gave us by reconciling us to
God in his own blood.

Q. Why here does he sign the Host and Chalice thrice with the sign of the
Cross?

A. To signify, that our Redemption made upon the Cross was done by the
consent of the whole Trinity.

Q. Why then does he sign them again five times?

A. To signify the mystery of those five days which were betwixt our
Saviors entering into Jerusalem and his Passion.

Q. Why after he has spoken the words of Consecration does the Priest elevate
or lift up the Host and Chalice?

A. That all the people may adore the body and blood of Christ, as also to
signify that for our sins his body was lifted up on the Cross, and his blood
shed.

Q. Why then after some prayers does he again sign the offerings five times
with the Cross?

A. To signify the five wounds of Christ which he there tacitly represents
to his Father.

Q. Why after this (some prayers interposed) does he sign them again three
other times with the sign of the Cross?

A. To signify, that this Sacrifice is availeable for three sorts of men: for
those in heaven, to an increase of glory; for those in Purgatory, to free them
from their pains; and for those on Earth, to an increase of grace, and the
remission of sins

Q. Why after the MEMENTO or Commemoration for the dead, does the Priest
elevate his voice saying and to us sinners also, NOBIS QUOQUE PECCATORIBUS?

A. In memory of the supplication of the good Thief, made to Christ upon his
Cross; that so with him by virtue of this sacrifice, we may partake his
heavenly Kingdom.

Q. Why after this again does he sign the Offerings thrice with the sign of
the Cross?

A. To signify the three hours which Christ hung living on the Cross, and
all the griefs sustained in them.

Q. Why then opening the Chalice does he cross it five times with the Host?

A. His uncovering the Chalice, is to signify that at the death of Christ, the
veil of the Temple was rent asunder, the three Crosses made over the Chalice,
signify the three hours which Christ hung dead upon the Cross. The two
Crosses made at the lip of the Chalice, signify the Blood and Water flowing
from his side.

Q. Why is the PATER NOSTER said with a loud voice?

A. To signify the mystical words, which Christ spoke upon the Cross with a
loud voice?

Q. What means the Priest laying down of the Host upon the Corporal, and
covering the Chalice again?

A. It signifies the taking our Savior down from the Cross, and his Burial.

Q. Why then is the Priest silent for a time?

A. To signify our Saviors rest in the Sepulcher on the Sabbath.

Q. Why after that does he raise his voice again saying; PAX DOMINI SIT
SEMPER VOBISCUM, The peace of our Lord, be always with you?

A. To signify the joy of the resurrection, and that frequent voice of Christ
to his Disciples, PAX VOBIS, peace be unto you.

Q. Why is the Host divided into three parts?

A. To signify the division of our Saviors soul and body made on the Cross,
and that his Body was broken, or divided in three principal parts, namely, his
hands, his side, and feet.

Q. Why after this, does he yet make the sign of the Cross saying, PAXDOMINI,
etc. The peace of our Lord be always with you?

A. To signify that triple peace which he has purchased for us by his Cross,
namely, External, Internal, and Eternal peace.

Q. Why then is a particle of the Host put into the Chalice?

A. signify the reuniting of our Saviors Body, Blood, and Soul, made at his
Resurrection, as also to signify that we cannot partake of the blood and
merits of Christ, unless we also partake of his cup of sufferings.

Q. Why is the AGNUS DEI or Lamb of God, which take away the sins of the
world, said with a loud voice?

A. To commemorate the glory of our Saviors Ascension, and signify that he
was slain like an innocent Lamb to take away our sins and give us peace.

Q. Why is the PAX or kiss of peace given before Communion?

A. To signify that peace and charity which ought to be amongst the Faithful,
who do all eat of one bread of the Eucharist, and are all members of one
mystical body.

Q. What means the DOMINE NON SUM DIGNUS, etc.

A. It signifies, O Lord I am not worthy that thou should enter under my
roof, etc. and is the poor Publicans prayer by which he descended justified
into his house; and we are taught, not to approach unto this Sacrifice, but
with an humble, and a contrite heart.

Q. What mean the prayers after the Communion?

A. They are a thanksgiving to God for having made us worthy to partake of this
unbloody sacrifice of the Altar, and by it also of the bloody sacrifice of the
Cross.

Q. What mean the words, ITE MISSA EST?

A. They signify that the Host or Offering is now sent to heaven for us, and
represent the voice of the Angel dismissing the Apostles and Disciples; when
they stood looking up after Christ ascended into heaven, with O ye men of
Galite, what stand you here looking up into heaven!

Q. What means the Priests lifting up his hands, and blessing the people?

A. It signifies the blessing which Christ gave to his Apostles and Disciples,
at his Ascension, with his hands lifted up.

Q. What signifies the Gospel of S. John?

A. It signifies the preaching of the Gospel to all Nations, made by the
Apostles.

CHAP. XXIII.
The Office of our blessed Lady expounded

Q. WHo composed the Office?

A. The Church, directed by the Holy Ghost.

Q. Why is the Primer so called?

A. From the Latin word PRIMO, which signifies first of all; so to teach us
that Prayer should be the first work of the day, according to that, seek ye
first the Kingdom of God, and all these things shall be given to you.

Q. Why is the Office divided into Hymns, Psalms, Canticles, Antiphones,
Versicles, Responsories and Prayers?

A. For order, beauty and variety sake.

Q. What warrant have you for that?

A. Out of Col. chapter 3. Sing ye in your hearts unto our Lord in spiritual
Psalms, Hymns, and Canticles.

Q. Why should the Laity pray out of the Psalms, which they little understand?

A. 1. Because by so doing they pray out of the mouth of the Holy Ghost. 2.
Because if they do it with devout and humble hearts, it is as meritorious in
them, as in the greatest Clerks; For a Petition has the same force, whether
it be delivered by a learned or an unlearned man: so has also Prayer. 3.
Because a Psalm is of the same value in the sight of God from the mouth of a
child or a woman, as from the mouth of the most learned Doctor.

Q. Why is the Office divided into seven several hours?

A. That so it might be a daily memorial of the seven principal parts, and
also of the seven hours of our Saviors Passion.

Q. What ground have you for that?

A. Out of Zach. chapter 12. At that day I will power out upon the house of David
and the Inhabitants of Jerusalem the spirit of grace and prayer, and they
shall look up at him whom they have pierced.

Q. What means at that day?

A. The Law of grace, the New Law.

Q. What means he by the House of David, and the Inhabitants of Jerusalem?

A. The Church of Christ.

Q. What means he by the spirit of grace and prayer?

A. The Holy Ghost, which dictated the Office, and powers forth the grace of
God into our souls by virtue of it.

Q. What mean those words, And they shall look up at him whom they have
pierced?

A. They signify, that the whole order, scope and object of the Office should
be Christ crucified.

Q. How show you that the seven hours are a memorial of the Passion of Christ?

A. Because seven hours were consumed in his Passion; for three hours he hung
living on the Cross, other three hours he hung dead upon the Cross, and the
seventh hour was spent in nailing him to and taking him from the Cross.

Q. What do we commemorate by the Mattins and Lauds?

A. His bloody sweat and binding in the Garden, as also his dragging from
thence unto Jerusalem.

Q. What by the Prime or first hour?

A. The scoffs and indignities which he sustained whilst they led him through
the streets early in the morning unto the Princes of the Jews, as also the
false accusations which were then brought against him.

Q. What by the third hour?

A. His whipping at the Pillar, his crowning with Thorns, his clothing with a
purple garment, his Scepter of a reed, and showing to the people with lo the
man.

Q. What by the sixth hour?

A. His unjust condemnation to death, his carrying of the Cross, his stripping
and nailing to the Cross,

Q. What by the ninth hour?

A. His drinking gall and vinegar, his dying on the Cross, and the opening of
his side with a spear.

Q. What by the Evensong?

A. His taking down from the Cross, and the darkness which was made upon the
face of the earth.

Q. What by the Compline?

A. His Funeral or Burial. Briefly thus:

The Mattins and Lauds, his Agony and binding in the Garden; the Prime, his
scoffs and false accusations; the third hour, his clothing with purple, and
crowning with thorns; the sixth hour his condemning and nailing to the
Cross; the ninth hour his yielding up the Ghost, and the opening of his side;
the Evensong his taking from the Cross; and the Compline his Burial.

The particulars of the Office Expounded.
Q. WHy does our Ladies Office always begin with an AVE MARIA?

A. To dedicate the Office to our Lady, and beg her aid for the devout
performance of it to Gods honor.

Q. Why do we begin every Hour with, Incline unto mine aid O God, O Lord
make have to help me?

A. To acknowledge our infirmity and misery, and the great need we have of
divine assistance, not only in all other things, but also in our very prayers,
according to that of the Apostle, No man can say LORD JESUS, but in the Holy
Ghost.

Q. Why do we add to this, Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to
the Holy Ghost?

A. To signify, that the intention of the Office is in the first place to give
one and equal glory to the most Blessed Trinity, and to invite all creatures
to do the like: this is the principal aim of the whole Office, therefore we
not only begin every Hour, but also end every Psalm with the same Verse.

Q. Who ordained the GLORIA PATRI?

A. The Apostles, according to Baronius in his 3. Tome, the year of Christ 325.

Q. Why do we join unto the GLORIA PATRI, SICUT ERAT, As it was in the
beginning, both now and always world without end?

A. Because that was made by the Council of Nice against the Arrians, who
denied Christ to be coequall and consubstantiall to his Father, or to have been
before the Virgin Mary.

Q. Why after this, for a great part of the year, and especially betwixt
Easter and Whitsontide, do we say, ALLELUIA ALLELUIA?

A. Because that is a time of joy, and ALLELUIA is an Hebrew word, signifying,
Praise ye the Lord with all joy and exultation of heart.

Q. Why were it not better changed into English?

A. Because it is the language of the very Blessed in heaven, according to
Apoc. chapter 8. v. 6. Therefore the Church has forbidden it to be translated into
any other language.

Q. Why in Lent and some other times, do we say instead of ALLELUIA, Praise be
to thee O Lord King of eternal glory?

A. Because those are times of penance, and therefore God must be praised
rather with tears, then exultation.

Q. Why do we always say for the Invitatory; Hail ^ary full of grace, our
Lord is with thee?

A. To congratulate and renew the memory of our Blessed Ladies joy, conceived
at the conception of her Son Jesus, and to invite both men and Angels to do
the like.

Q. What signify the five Verses following the Invitatory, which begin, Come
let us exult unto our Lord?

A. The five wounds of Christ, from which all our Prayer has its force and
merit, and in honor of which those Versicles are said.

Q. What mean the Hymns?

A. They are a Poetical expression of the Prerogatives and Praises of our Lady.

Q. Why are so many Psalms used in the Office?

A. Because they were dictated by the Holy Ghost, and do contain in a most
moving manner all the affections of piety and devotion.

Q. Why are there but three Psalms in most of the hours?

A. In honor of the most Blessed Trinity, to whom chiefly the whole Office is
directed.

Q. Why was the Office divided into so many Hours?

A. I have told you the chief reason already, and one other reason was, that so
there might be no hour either of day or night, to which some Hour of the
Office might not correspond.

Q. What do the Mattins correspond to?

A. To the first, second, and third Watch of the night, consisting of three
hours apiece, and therefore the Mattins consist of three Psalms, and three
Lessons.

Q. What do the Lauds correspond to?

A. To the fourth Watch of the night.

Q. What do the Prime, the third, the sixth, and ninth hours correspond to?

A. To the first, the third, the sixth and ninth hours of the day.

Q. What do the Evensong and Compline correspond to?

A. To the Evening.

Q. What mean the Benedictions, or Blessings, given before the Eessons?

A. They are short Aspirations to beg divine assistance, and the first is in
honor of the Father, the second in honor of the Son, the third in honor of
the Holy Ghost.

Q. What do the Lessons contain?

A. The mystical praises of our Blessed Lady, taken out of the Prophets.

Q. Why do we end every Lesson saying, But thou O Lord have mercy on us?

A. To beg, that the praises and virtues of our Lady which we have there read,
may be deeply settled in our hearts, and that God would pardon our former
negligence in both his and her service.

Q. Why is it answered, Thanks be to God?

A. To render thanks to God for his mercy in bestowing such a Patroness on
us, as the Blessed Virgin Mary.

Q. What mean the Responsories?

A. They are so called, because they answer unto one another.

Q. What are the Antiphones?

A. The Verticles which are begun before the Psalms.

Q. Why do we rise up and stand at the MAGNIFICAT BENEDICTUS, and NUNC
DIMITTIS?

A. To signify our reverence to the Gospel, out of which those are taken?

Q. What is the Collect?

A. It is the Prayer, and is so called, because it collecteth and gathers
together all the Petitions and supplications of the whole Office.

Q. Why is the Collect always ended with those words, Through our Lord Jesus
Christ, etc.?

A. To signify, that he is our only Mediator of Redemption, and principal
Mediator of Intercession, and that we cannot merit any thing by our prayers,
unless we make them in his Name.

Q. Why make we a Commemoration of the Saints?

A. To praise God in his Saints, according to the advice of the Psalmist, (Psa.
150.) and to commend our felves to their merits and prayers.

Q. Why end we every hour with those words, And let the souls of the
faithful through the mercy of God rest in peace?

A. That the poor souls in Purgatory may be partakers of all our Prayers and
supplications.

Q. Why is the whole Office ended with some Hymn or Antiphone to our Lady?

A. That by her it may be presented to her Son, and by him to his eternal
Father.

FINIS.
A Table of the Chapters, and principal Contents of this Book.
Chap. 1. WHat a Christian is. And of the Blessed Trinity. page 1 Chap. 2.
Faith explicated. 6 Chap. 3. The Creed expounded. 9 1. Article. 10 2. Article.
17 3. Article. 22 4. Article. 24 5. Article. 27 6. Article. 30 7. Article. 32
8. Article. 37 9. Article. 39 10. Article. 62 11. Article. 64 12. Article. 68
Chap. 4. Hope and Prayer explicated. Chap. 5. The Pater Noster expounded. 84
Chap. 6. The Hail Mary, or Angelical Salutation expounded. 96 Chap. 7.
Charity expounded. 102 Chap. 8. The X. Commandments expounded. 108 1.
Commandment. 114 2. Commandment. 130 3. Commandment. 133 4. Commandment.
140 5. Commandment. 147 6. Commandment. 149 7. Commandment. 152 8.
Commandment. 155 9. and 10. Commandments. 159
Chap. 9. The Commandments of the Church expounded. 162 Chap. 10. The
Counsels of Christ and his Church expounded. 172 Chap. 11. An Exposition of
the 7. Sacraments. 176 1. Baptism. 184 2. Confirmation. 192 3. The Eucharist.
193 4. Penance. 210 5. Extreme Unction. 219 6. Holy Order. 222 7. Matrimony. 231
Chap. 12. The cardinal Virtues expounded. 239 Chap. 13. The Gifts of the Holy
Ghost explicated. 241 Chap. 14. The 12 Fruits of the Holy Ghost expounded. 243
Chap. 15. The Works of Mercy. 246 Chap. 16. The 8. Beatitudes. 249 Chap. 17.
Kinds of sin explicated. 250 Chap. 18. The 7. Deadly Sins expounded. 261 Chap.
19. The sins against the Holy Ghost. 276 Chap. 20. The sins that cry to heaven
for vengeance. 280 Chap. 21. The four last Things. 283 Chap. 22. The
Ceremonies of the Mass expounded. 287 Chap. 23. The Office of our B. Lady
expounded. 307
What faults the Printer (through his ignorance in this Language) has
committed, the courtesy of the Reader may correct; and chiefly these.

Errata. Page 19. lin. 6. read any thing. p. 39 l. 2. dele in. p. 41. l. 1. r.
feed my lamb^ p. 47. l. 3. r. consolation. p. 58. l. 19. ^ 20. r. every false
tongue shall. p. 60. l. 8 r. over us. p. 103. l. 3. r. is it a. p. 119. ^. r.
two Cherubins. p. 141. l. 1. r. bound p. 145. l. 15. r. your Prelates. and l.
17 your souls. p. 150. l. 1. r. mortal. p 159. l. 10. r. wife. Thou. p. 162.
l. 6. ^ help it. p. 173. l. 5. r. reward. p. 183. l. (...) r. administration.
p. 189. l. 12. r. God^ child. p. 217. l. 18. r. thy sin. p. 23 l. 10. r. Lia.
p. 248. l. 10. dele of. p. 290 (...) 2. r. sorrow.


