A TRVE REPORT OF THE OCCVRRENCES AT PORTS MOUTH from a special hand presented
to an Honorable person in London.

August 15.

LONDON: Printed by T. P. and M. S. for H. Blunden. 1642.

Sir,
I Know you love Truth where ever you find it, and on what side soever it falls.
Because the Reports concerning the affai^s in and about Portsmouth so much
vary* I will give you the certainty upon my knowledge: It is happily no news
to tell you, that Sir William Waller, and Colonel Hurry took away the Bridge,
and such fortifications as Colonel Goring had made about it, on Friday night
last about six of the clock 20 Troops adventured upon it, being ignorant of the
strength that was or might have been on Colonel Gorings side; but they found
but eight Troopers, one or two were taken, the rest fled to better refuge; the
Colonels gunner, one M^ader, being fled from his service sometime before: I
must tell you the taking of this Bridge, is of greater moment then most think
for, for it possesses them of the Island Portsley, which has 2000 Acres of
Corn now standing upon it; And as it prevents their enemies of succors, so it
is a supply to themselves, and a re-possessing the poor Inhabitants which were
bereft of all; and further it renders the taking of Portsmouth feasible,
whereof in my opinion there was no possibility (but by starving it) while the
Bridge and those Forts were secured against them* they being three mile on this
side the Town; and besides, this has put much metal into the Soldiers, and
it would make a faint-hearted man a Soldier, to see their spirits and
resolution, two, Colonel Hurry, and one Sir William Waller behave themselves
bravely. The County of Hampshire is as they were not a little incensed against
Colonel Goring and the Cavaliers with him (which they call at every word
Rebellion) so they are not a little encouraged, by this defeat against him; as
also for the surprisall of sixscore and fifteen quarters of Wheat that was
gone from Fareham to relieve Portsmouth, and was seized upon by one Master
Allyn of Gosper, and a few Watchmen; The Colonel was so vexed at it, that he
would in all haste have shot down Gosper with his Ordnance (for it is within
reach) but with the Majors and others humble beseeching him upon their knees to
spare it for the women and childrens sake, he did desist that enterprise.

It is very certain that the Colonels, Cavaliers and Troopers pillaged from
Portsley a thousand beasts and above a thousand sheep, and so refelled the poor
Inhabitants, that they left them not a bit of bread; It would grieve any one
that has the heart of a man to hear their complaints, you must know they were
most mean, and living upon their Stocks. But that which is worse, (and not to
be spoken without blushing) seven Cavaliers lay with one woman maid at once in
open view, and one Trooper lay with a man's wife before his face, and while his
fellow Trooper had his pistol at the husbands breast, in case of resistance;
Sure what ever they pretend, they are far enough from advancing for the King or
his Cause, that thus practice: It was credibly informed by some that had been
in Portsmouth in the beginning of last week, that the Colonel had but 200
Soldiers, and one hundred of them cannot be rightly called his own, if they
had a fair opportunity; many of them are forced One man that came to Town to
sell his Butter, was made a Soldier, and those that be with him at that rate,
its like are not hot in the service, and most that went in last Week before the
gates were shut, were so served: my Lord Wentworth is with Colonel Goring, and
there is some suspicion (not altogether unprobable) that my Lord Goring is
there, however his soul is there we may be assured.

One Mr Norton, who has a seat night the Bridge, carries himself like a
gallant man, he has store of Musketeers to secure his house, that stand
Sentinel at the gates.

Some Trained Bands are come in, and some Horse out of Hampshire, and the
County is generally for the Parliament, more are expected they be much incensed
by Colonel Gorings Cavaliers. Master Waller and Colonel Hurry have each of
them a Troop of Horse: There are some twenty Firelocks that looks like
desperate Soldiers; The Bridge is secured by four pieces of Ordnance, which
were taken out of the Maria; They are making Fortifications.

On Wednesday he made Proclamation, that all women and children that feared
should depart the Town by Sunday at noon. There are four ships of my Lord of
Warwicks lie so as no relief can come to the Town, nor the Town hurt them.

Yours in haste.

FINIS.

