A true state of the Proofs offered at the Bar of the House of Lords, by Robert
Son and Heir of Robert, and Grandson of John late Lord Viscount Purbeck, to
prove the Legitimacy of Robert the Father.
IT was observed first, That it is about 56 years since Robert the Father was
born, and four since he died.

2. Of how dangerous a consequence it may prove hereafter, if a president of
this nature should be now introduced, (to wit) That a man's Legitimacy shall be
called in question so long after his birth and death. Or that a Son after such
an afflux of years shall be put to prove the Legitimacy of his Father, who died
during the Infancy of such Son, or else lose both his Honor and Estate.

But that all satisfaction imaginable might be given in a matter of this
nature, it has been proved by living Witnesses,

I. That in Trinity-Term 1648, a Trial was had at the Bar of the Court of
King's Bench, between Vege Plaintiff and Robert Villers, Esquire Father of the now
Petitioner Defendant. Upon that Trial the Legitimacy of Robert the Father came
in question, for clearing of which point, it was then swore by a Midwife, that
she delivered the Lady Frances, Wife of John Lord Viscount Purbeck, of the said
Robert, and that he was her Son born of her own body.

The Nurse that nursed him, swore him to be Son of the said Lady Frances, born
of her own body.

And it was further proved,

That John Lord Purbeck always owned him to be his Son and Heir. That the Lady
Frances his Mother owned him as such.

That the Lady Hatton owned him to be her Grandson, Christened him, and was his
God-mother.

That John Lord Purbeck writ him several Letters, wherein he called him Son
Robert, and by the Superscription directs them to Robert Villers, Esquire

That he sealed Bonds to him, obliged himself to pay him money as to Robert
Villers his Son.

That his Lordship received several sums of Money of him, gave acquittances for
the same as received of his Son Robert Villers, Esquire

That John Viscount Purbeck made frequent Visits to the said Robert, and
received the like from him; with kindness owned him always to be his Son,
expressed great affection to him, gave him his blessing, and often drank to him
by the name of Son Robert; many times declared great anger against any person
that should but question whether he were his Son or not.

That he delivered him the Keys of his House at Stoak, when he came there, to
keep, and would not trust his servants; and agreed to live with him, and that
he should keep House and board him.

Often received Tokens from him, and talked much amongst his friends of the
kindness of his Son Robert.

Robert in the life time of his Father joined with him in sale of Lands, and in
the Conveyances was written Robert Villers, Esquire Son and Heir apparent of John
Lord Viscount Purbeck.

John Lord Viscount Purbeck enjoyed the Estate of the Lady Frances his Wife
during his life, by the courtesy of England upon account of having Robert
Villers his Son lawfully begotten on her body, born alive.

When Robert Villers sold Stoak-Park, John Lord Viscount his Father made him
allow him 6000 l. for his Interest therein for life, upon account, as aforesaid.

In the year 1647, the said Robert as Son and Heir of Lord John, compounded for
his Lordships Estate at Goldsmiths Hall, which Estate was after his Decease to
descend to him as Heir to the Lady Frances his Mother.

John Lord Purbeck would frequently say his Lady was a very good woman, that he
was extremely sorry he had used her so ill, declaring it was occasioned only by
his Mother the Countess of Buckingham.

The Jury upon this or the like evidence, amongst other things comprehended in
their special Verdict, found as follows.

That Frances Lady Purbeck had Issue-male of her body begotten during the
Coverture between them the said Frances Lady Purbeck, and the said John Lord
Viscount Purbeck (viz.) the aforsaid Robert Villers his eldest Son.

Upon arguing this Verdict by the Judges, Judgment was given for Rob. Villers
the Defendent, and he ever after enjoyed the Estate in question as Son and Heir
of his Mother, against the Claim of Vege, who claimed under and in right of one
Mr. Cook, and Robert the Petitioner has enjoyed the Estate in question ever
since his Decease.

This Judgment is upon record, and never reversed to this day.

Now to offer any Proofs in any Court against the Legitimacy of the said
Robert, were to aver against a Record, which in no Court will be admitted.

And if all the matters aforesaid were not sufficient of themselves to prove
the Legitimacy of Robert the Father;

Yet the Common Law will on this fact and other circumstances, as length of
time, enjoyment of Estates, living in England, etc. abundantly do it.

That the House may be satisfied of the reasons why Robert Villers his name was
changed sometimes to Wright, other times to Howard;

It is humbly desired that the Petition of Frances Viscountess Purbeck
presented to the House of Lords in 1640, may be read, which will abundantly
satisfy the reason of that fact.

The Contents whereof follows,
That 23 years before in her Minority by the command of her Father, she married
John Lord Purbeck, who had with her a great Estate, besides 10000 l. paid to
the Duke of Bucks, Brother to the said Viscount, upon the Dukes agreement to
buy Land with it, and settle it on her and her Issue.

Not long after the Marriage, the Countess of Bucks, Mother to the said
Viscount, upon pretense of weakness and distempers of her Lord, caused them to
live apart, during which time they disposed his Estate, (which most came from
her Father) and left her without maintenance; and when she repaired to the said
Countess and her Agents for relief, she was most barbarously carried into the
open street by force, and there left void of relief. That her Husband and her
Estate being kept from her, King James directed her relief; whereupon the Duke
of Bucks, who had all her Estate, agreed to allow her 1000 l. per Annum, and
her Jewels, Apparel and Housholdstuff: but when she came to settle the same,
clauses were inserted in the Deed to bar her from co-habiting again with her
Lord on pain of forfeiting her Jewels, Clothes, Housholdstuff, etc. and the
Annuity to cease during such Cohabitation; all which her necessities obliged
her to consent unto.

That afterward she and her Lord met several times, but it was privately, and
concealed as much as might be, to avoid the forfeiture aforesaid.

Sets forth, that though her Lord was thought so weak as not fit to live with
her, yet they had in this condition gotten from him Conveyances of all his
Estate of Inheritance, and converted great part of his other Estate to their
own use, and possessed themselves of all the Evidences of her Father's Estate,
which ought to remain to her and her Issue.

This done, and designing to ruin her Honor, also the Countess of Bucks with
many others in her company, when the Petitioner was with Child near her time,
and in bed, in a riotous manner, in nightime, entered her Chamber, haled her
out of bed, and Sir Edward Villers Knight, one of the Company, inhumanely held
her, that Midwives and others might search her whether she was with Child or
not, to the endangering her and her Child's life: which barbarous usage forced
her to withdraw her self to a private place from her enemies, till she was
delivered, and to take upon her a feigned name for her self and Son Robert,
born of her body, and pretend to be Wife of one John Wright, merely to secure
both from their rage and fury.

No sooner was it discoursed that she was delivered, but the was immedia^^^^
committed to Prison, from whence she was no sooner released, but she was aga^^
illegally re-committed, and if enlarged the same was upon Bail, whereby to her
great dishonor she was forced to constant attendance.

And designing to ruin her in her Honor as well as Estate, she was cited into
the High Commission Court for a supposed crime of Adultery, and there by an
unwarrantable illegal sentence condemned, fined 500 l. and unlawfully committed
to Prison; for inducing which sentence, they by negative proofs contrary to
Law, endeavored to prove that the Petitioner and her Lord had not met in a
year before the birth of her Son Robert, the contrary whereof appeared by many
affirmative proofs, and was denied to be tried by the word of her own Husband.

That after she had obtained a Rule of Common Pleas for a Prohibition to High
Commission Court, yet could she never get the Prohibition under the Seal.

That being a Prisoner in the Gatehouse by the Archbishop of Canterburies
Command on the aforesaid Sentence, finding the Archbishop her violent
Prosecutor, and the chief Judge in Pronouncing sentence against her, she made an
escape to prevent the great danger which thorough his power she thought her
self in. For which she begged their Lordships Honorable and favorable opinion,
and their Intercession to the King on her behalf for his Royal Pardon; prays
that in Honorable care of her and her posterity they would order the safe
custody of all the Evidences relating to her Estate, and that she might have
the said 1000 l. per Annum, which she was to have according to the agreement,
(which then had not been paid her) and so to consider of the illegal sufferings
she had lain under, and damages by her sustained, as that right might be done
according to justice.

And that William Alcock Administrator to the late Duke of Bucks, the Countess
of Denbigh, and all others that pretended title to the Lord Purbecks Lands, and
the Archbishop of Canterbury, Sir Henry Martin, Knight, and others employed in
the illegal Proceedings aforesaid, may appear and answer. To the end the
Petitioner might receive relief, and the offenders receive punishment according
to their demerit.

If the Fine levied in 1661, Peruse the Lords Journal, Febr. 10. 1640.
by Robert Lord Purbeck, be insisted upon to bar Robert his Son of his Honor;
Please to consider Ruthin's Case:

Resolved (nemine contra dicente) that no Peer of this Realm can drown or
extinguish his Honor, but that it descend to its descendants, neither by
Surrender, Grant, Fine, or any other Conveyance to the King.

Resolved that no Person that has any Honor in him, and a Peer of this Realm,
may aliene or transfer his Honor to any other Person.

That amongst all the presidents insisted upon by Mr. Atturny General, there is
not one single instance of any one Peer his levying a fine of his Honor, that
had Issue-male born to claim the same after his Decease.

As to the Objection that John Lord Viscount Purbeck never had any Patent.

It is Answered,

That no Peer of the Realm can sit as a Viscount in the Lords House, but must
have a Patent; which when he is first introduced, is brought into the House by
the Heralds at Arms, and read by the Clerk of the Parliament. That he had such
a Patent is clear, for otherwise there had been no need of his Petitioning the
King to give him leave to surrender the same, nor of the Kings accepting such
surrender, which it is plain his Majesty did do.

The Patent being surrendered, it is impossible for the Petitioner now to produce
it, nor can a Copy thereof be had from the Enrollment-Office, because the same
is cut out of the Roll, as will plainly appear upon a view.

But when, by whom, or upon what account that was done, is not known.

In the Signet and Privy Seal Book of Accounts for the 17 Jacob. it appears 6
l. 13 s. 4 d. was paid for the Fees of the said Patent due to those Offices.

The Docket of the said Patent was entered in the Crown-Office the 19 Jun. 17
Jacob. It was also enrolled in the Haniper-Office the 21 Jun. 17 Jacob.

And no entry of any Docket is made in the Haniper till after the Grant passes
the great Seal, nor in the Heralds-Office.

Nevertheless at the Heralds-Office, in their Book of Partitions B. Fol. 18,
mention is made the last November 17 Jacob. of the Partition of 18 l. received
for the Fees of Viscount Purbeck both for his Barony of Stoak, and
Viscountship, and of 18 s. received for a Receipt given for the said Money.

The King granted him 1000 l. per Ann. by Patent, Jac. 18.
by the name of Our Right and Well-beloved John Viscount Purbeck. which
certainly he would not have done, nor the other accepted of (by that name) if
he had not been a Viscount.

In the Lords Journal, Jan. 20.
where every day the Names of all the Lords were entered, amongst the rest John
Lord Viscount Purbeck is named, and so every day forward to the 23 of Feb. when
he is entered present, and continued entered to the 3d. of March following,
when he is again entered present, and is every day after entered, till the 19 of
King James.

In the Journal of that Parliament, 21, 22, Jac.
John Lord Viscount Purbeck is every day entered to the time of Prorogation,
which was the 16 Feb. 1624.

The first Parliament of that year, 1 Car.
his Lordship is entered in the Journal every day of the Session, which
continued from the 17 March 1627, to the 27 Jun. 1628.


