THE TRUE WAY To Render IRELAND Happy and Secure, OR, A DISCOURSE;

Wherein it is shown, that it is the Interest both of England and Ireland, to
Encourage Foreign Protestants to Plant in Ireland.

IN A LETTER To the Right Honorable Robert Molesworth, One of His Majesty's
Honorable Privy Council in Ireland, and one of the Members of the Honorable
House of Commons, both in England and Ireland.

DVBLIN: Printed by and for Andrew Crook, Printer to the King's Most Excellent
Majesty, on Cork-Hill, near Copper-Alley, and for Eliphal Dobson, at the
Stationers Arms in Castle-Street, 1697.

SIR,
WHEN Parliaments Assemble to Treat of the Grand Affairs of the Nation, it is
usual for men Without doors, to put into their Hands such Schemes, and
Projects, as they think may be Serviceable to the Public. Nor is this
Intermeddling of private men reckoned Bold and Impertinent; but those Great and
Wise Heads vouchsafe to receive the Proposals of men, sometimes of little
Figure, as readily as they do the Petitions of Injured persons: They think it is
reasonable that they, who are Chosen to Enact Laws for the good of the
Commonwealth, should have a due regard, to what any Member of the Community
proposes for the common good. Besides, they wisely consider, that men of
ordinary capacities, may sometimes hit upon lucky Thoughts, which they by close
Application of their minds to them, may afterward improve to the advantage of
the Public. When such regard is shown by Legislators, to the Sentiments of
Private men, an honest man cannot well forbear Offering that to their
Consideration, which he believes will be a means of settleing the Peace and
Prosperity of his Count^^.

What I here propose, Sir, is what I think may have that good Effect: If the
Wisdom of the Nation Judge otherwise, I shall sit down contented with the
pleasure of being mistaken in my Zeal to serve my Country.

The Reasons which induced me to recommend this little Pamphlet to you, are
more then one, you and your Ingenious and Worthy Friend Mr. St -- y were privy
first to the Writing of it; you have Interest both in England and Ireland, as
well as parts, to compass what it designs: The Method which it proposes to
promote the good of the Public, is, in the main, agreeable to your Sentiments;
and you want neither Courage nor Resolution to contend warmly for that, which
you ^^e persuaded, is for the good of your Country. What Entertainment it may
meet with, I am not able to conjecture; your Name in the Front will give it
some Reputation, and dispose a great many to cast an Eye upon it. To give it a
little more Credit; I can say, that a Person of Place and Quality, related to
you, and Dr. Wm. Mo -- x to whose Judgment I have a very great regard; have
viewed it, and passed their Censure upon it.

The design of it is to show, what you are thoroughly convinced of, that it is
our great Interest to Encourage Foreign Protestants to live among us^ This is
a ready way to make our Country Flourish; and the most effectual course that we
have now left, in my opinion, to secure us a lasting Peace, and prevent such
Rebellions, as for above Five Hundred years together' since the Conquest of
Ireland by King Henry the Second, have perpetually disturbed this Kingdom; made
it a Dear and Troublesome purchase to England; and an uncomfortable Habitation
to the English who have been Seated here.

I know Sir, that our people (who are as apt to forget a Danger, as they are
Bold to Encounter it, when it lies in their way) do generally reckon that the
Irish are so broken by the last Rebellion, that it will not be in their Power
again to Disturb the Peace of the English here, or to put England to any
further Charge to Subdue them. I shall show you, that the English have reckoned
too much after this rate formerly: and it may happen that these too Sanguine
hopes may prove very deceitful, and be Fatal to them hereafter. I do not think
that the Irish are yet so subdued, but that, if things run on in the old
course, they may in process of time meet with circumstances that may favor
other Rebellions. The Happiness or Misery of this Island, for the time to come,
to me seems to depend on the prudent or ill management of the present. We have
now an opportunity in our hands, such as never yet offered since Stronghow's
Adventurers first brought their Arms into this Country, of laying the
Foundation of a lasting Peace. I need not tell you, Sir, who are conversant in
Histories, and know the Changes and Revolutions of the World that the
Flourishing Estate of some Countries, has been occasioned by the Ruin of their
Neighbors, and the intolerable uneasinesses, that have forced them from their
Habitations: the present Desolation of France, and the usage with Protestants
meet with there, may be a means of raising the Power a^^ ^^alth of those
Neighboring Protestant Countries which have Wisdom and Goodness enough to take
hold of the opportunity. The United Provinces, who know that they owe their
greatness to the Troubles of Germany, and the concourse of people from thence,
who were Persecuted for Religion; make the best hand they can of their
Calamities. They Entertain the Persecuted Hagonots with the greatest Humanity,
and are very liberal in their Charity to them. They know what the Reward of
Charity is, and they know of what value people are to their State, they cannot
Ingross all the Wrack of the French Church: the Providence of God seems to
Design a part for Ireland, and the Security of (...) Protestant Religion here:
and it is sure if this Deodate be improved as it ought, that Religion, and
English Prop^rty may by this means be thoroughly secured, and our Country
rendered very flourishing. The Ground of this hope arises from His Majesty's
inclination to that People, and that Noble Person to whom he has given a share
in the Government. The King has always expressed a Christian concern for them,
and he has as often recommended their Condition to the Charitable consideration
of His Parliament, as he has desired necessary Supplies, for carrying on the
War. It Is not then to be doubted but that His Majesty will Give them
Encouragement to Settle, and Plant in Ireland, when he is persuaded, that by
their means he may do more to Secure the Protestant Interest of this Kingdom,
which he preserved with the hazard of His Life, than has been ever done
heretofore. Those who have a Love for England and the Protestant Interest in
Ireland, pure and free from all Mean, and Self ends, do hope that the King had
such a Design when he thought of making the Earl of Gallway one of the
Triumvirat. It happens indeed very Providentially that he is a Person for his
Courage, Knowledge, Temper, and Integrity, great in the esteem of the English
as well as his own Countrymen. It Is to be hoped then that the great Opinion
the French have of him, may incline multitudes of them to come into Ireland;
and that by means of his Credit with the English Methods may be contrived for
their Settlement here. If any thing of this kind be done there will be many
evil men of differing persuasions, biased by their Private Interests, who will
raise loud Clamours and Objections, and make it their Business to Obstruct such
a Work. The design that I had in commiting my rude Thoughts to Writeing, was to
set people on thinking of what may be for the Public Interest of this Kingdom,
and to anticipate all Objections which may be made against Foreigners being
Planted here. A short Undertaking of this kind, may have an use in it, which
every one does not think of. When a Colony of men are Invited, or Received into
a Country, it is for the Interest of the Public, that, as soon as may be, they
grow one both in their Interest and affections with the people, with whom they
are Incorporated. This depends very much upon the Inclinations which men have
toward them in the beginning; for if at their first coming in, the Inhabitants
are Prejudiced against them, from hence Animosities will Naturally arise, and
such ill Blood may by degrees be bred in them, as may creat perpetual Feuds,
opposite to the Interest of the State. It Is convenient therefore that they make
their entrance with the good Will and Approbation of the People of the Land.
This little Discourse may be in some sort useful to that end. In it I will show
that it is the Interest both of Ireland and England to encourage Foreign
Protestants to settle here: and then I will propose some Encouragement to be
given them.

That it is the Interest of Ireland to Encourage Foreign Protestants to Live
and Settle here, It Is the Interest of Ireland to Encourage Foreign Protestants.
the Parliament of this Kingdom thought, when in the Year 1692. in my Lord
Rumney's time, they made the Act for Naturalization. They knew very well, that
without many People, a Country can be neither Rich nor Secure; and that by
making their Land a Place of Refuge and Sanctuary for Strangers, they took the
most effectul course to increase their Strength and add to their Prospority It
happens sometimes, that Laws which the Wisdom of a Nation sees are for the good
of the Commonwealth; and are Enacted after the most mature deliberation, yet
are too freely Censured, when they thwart the imaginary Interest of Private men.
This may very well be supposed to be the Fate of a Law which Enfranchises
Strangers. If a Tradesman, who is one of the first Rate Orators among the men
of his Tribe, fancies that his Condition is rendered worse than 'twas before,
and thereupon Damn Forrigeners; and those who made Laws to bring them in;
others will be ready to follow the Cry, without examining whether there was
Reason for it or no that a Naturealization in Ireland, and the Encouraging such
Protestants as the French are particulary (for our greatest hopes are from
them) cannot come under this censure I shall Endeavor to show. Every one who
knows the Condition of Ireland at this time, and has viewed the Scenes of it is
former Troubles, must own that that will be of the greatest advantage to it.

Which will better the present Condition of the Country; and which will Settle
and Secure it from such troubles, and Rebellons as it has formerly been
perpetually harassed with, these will be the effects of Encouraging Protestants
to Settle here.

This will make the Condition of the Country better than it is. The way of the
World is when they compare Countries one with another, to take their Estimate
from their Wealth, and Improvements of all sorts; and to set the greatest value
on those which are Naturally the best, and have the most Artificial Wealth and
Furniture in them: Otherwise we must say, that all Countries are alike, and
that Holland, which makes so great a Figure in Europe, is not to be valued
above New Holland in Asia, which is Discrib'd to be one of the most miserable
places in the World. We may thus compare a Country with it self, and viewing it
in differing periods of time, reckon it in a better, or worse Condition,
according as we see it Flourish or Decay in it is Improvements or Wealth.

I Have seen in Sir George Carew's Manuscripts, in the Archbishop of
Canterbury's Library at Lambeth, Ms. marked M. page 49. Ex Arch. Cast. Dub.
An Extract out of the Archives of the Castle of Dublin, which says, That
formerly, for 250 Years together, the Customs of the Realm of Ireland, did
never exceed in any One Year above the Sum of 1000 l. And I find by another
Manuscript Lib. XX. p. 62, 63.
in the same Library, That in the Year 1611, in the Reign of King James the
First, Miles Cogan who took a Survey of the Kingdom, Reported, that the whole
Exportation and Importation of the Country amounted only to 211000 l. No one, I
suppose, will say, that the Kingdom was then in as good a condition as it is at
this time, when the Customs are about 130000 l. And he that considers how many
fair Ports do now lie idle, how thin of Inhabitants and Un-improved the Land is
in most places? will hardly say, that Ireland cannot be rendered more
Flourishing than it is. It is sure it may, but this must be by a greater
multitude of People. Where there is so much Ground, and so few Inhabitants, it
cannot be imagined that the People are able, by their utmost Labor and
Industry, to raise all the rich Commodities and Fruits which it is naturally apt
to produce; much less can we imagine, how the Country should be Beautified and
Enriched with Improvements: How the Foundations of new Towns or Cities should
be laid: or any considerable Additions made to the Old ones: How the Ports
should be made use of; or Ships sent to Sea, when the Commodities of the
Country lie in the Bowels of the Earth for want of Hands to force them out:
Or how men should trouble themselves to go to Sea, and endanger their Lives in
Fishing for Food there, when the Earth supplies them with plenty of Provisions,
and they may live secure in idleness, and almost in the forgetfulness of Labor
on the dry Land. These are the Practices, this the Condition of more Populous
Countries: Where there are abundance of People, the Country, though the
Barrenness of the Soil should give the greatest opposition, must necessarily
become Wealthy. Crowds of People, upon the Breach of the Roman Empire, Raised
the great City of Venice on those little Rocks and scraps of Islands, which
yielded before but an uncomfortable habitation to poor Fishermen.

The United Provinces, which are now one of the great Bulwarks of the
Protestant Religion, and the Liberties of Europe; were formerly, we know, of no
great Consideration, till great shoal's of people flocked in thither; and were
forced in their own Defense, to take a great deal of pains, both in Laboring
the Ground, and in Handicraft Occupations, to get a Livelihood. The streights
they were put to, made them Ingenious in their Inventions; and when they found
they were pinched both in the narrowness, and produce of their Earth, they were
forced to look for room, and provisions in the Sea. By this means they fell
into Navigation and Traffic; grew vastly Rich; Built great Cities; and became
the Envy of some of their Neighbors, and the Admiration of Europe. These are
the Natural and Necessary Effects of much people: Countries must be Improved,
and Enriched by them; and those sooner than others, which have the richest
Soil, and are most favored by the Sea. England is as great an instance of
this, as any other Country, for that great Wealth which it has acquired by the
Improvement of the Woollen Manufacture (which is an unknown Treasure) is owing
to the Walloons, to whom Queen Elizabeth gave the greatest Encouragement to
come for shelter into England, from the Fury of the Duke of Alva's Pesecution.
But I shall make this plainer to the People of Ireland, by giving them a short
view of somethings here in our own Country. There is in the North of Ireland,
an Estate which was the Lord Conway's, which the Lord Marquess of Normanby the
other day enjoyed in Right of his Lady, but now belongs to Mr. Popham Seym^r:
This Estate was formerly purchased by Sir Foulk Conway, Uncle to the late Lord,
for about Five hundred pounds. The Rent-role of this Estate is now about Five
thousand pound per Annum: Tho there are many great, and profitable Leases in
it, some worth about Four hundred pounds per Annum clear. The Land does not lie
upon the Sea; the Ground but very indifferent; 'twas altogether a Wood, as the
name Kilulta (the Wood of Vlster) denotes, and yet in the Memory of men now
living, has been thus improved by a Colony of Yorkshire people, and orhers
brought over, and Settled here by the Lord Conway, and managed by Sir George
Rawdon. The same Remarke may be made on the Neighboring Country of Clan Hugh
Boy, or O Neal's Country about Belfast and Carrickfergus, the former of which
Towns is the third in Ireland for Number of People, and Trade; and yet grew up
to what it is from nothing, in the Memory of People who lived but the other day
since Sir Arthur Chichester got that Estate. But why should I mention
particular Improvements? We know that till about the same time, the profits of
Ireland in General, were very inconsiderable: The Rent which the Landlords
received, was no more than what he and his Followers eat in their Coshers: and
the Public Revenue was not equal to the Charge of the State, till of late
years. All the Advances which the Country made toward a better Fortune, were
in proportion to the number of People who came over into this Island. In Queen
Elizabeth's time after the Rebellions of Munster were quelled, some English
came over, an^ Settled in the Plantations there. And after that, toward the
latter en^ of Her Reign, that Province was rendered more Secure, by the Defeat
o^ the Spanish Forces; others came over in King James his Reign. These by the
Management of the Government, and the Care of the Presidents o^ Munster, put
the Country into a little better Condition than 'twas in before. The same
Effect, about the same time, had the Plantations in the County of Wicklow, and
part of W^xford (where the English had a very ancient Settlement) after that
the Tools, Birn's, and Cavenash's had been rooted out: And in the King's and
Queen's County, after the quieting of the Insurrections of the O Connor's, and
the O More's. Vlster, which before could only afford ordinary Food to the Kerns
of the Country, and some Military men, from the latter end of Queen Elizabeth,
and the Reign of King James the First began to thrive, and alter it is Condition
for the better. This was occasioned by the Care which was then taken, in
Planting the Escheated Countres with new Protestant Inhabitants, the Londoners
Building Derry, and Colrane, and sending people to Inhabit them; English
Colonies Improving the Lands of Chichester and Conway, and the Neighboring
places; and the concourse of the Scotch out of Scotland. These were only the
first dawnings of Happiness. After the War which began with the Rebellion in
Forty One was ended, and the Kingdom was settled in Peace; it began to Flourish
indeed, and Improved every day. Then Houses were Built; Manufactures set up;
Lands Improved; and as they now yielded a considerable Rent to the Landlord, so
were they reckoned able to pay a Quit Rent to the King. This was the Condition
of Ireland in the Reign of King Charles the Second, it grew every day in
Prosperity: And the cause of this is very Obvious; the number of the British
here, was grown greater then ever before

The Army with which Cromwell Subdued the Irish was considerable: after the War
was over, these continued in the Land; the Soldiers most of them, set down
upon their Debentures; a great many Adventurers came over, brought English with
them, and Planted the Estates which were given them for the Money they laid out
to carry on the War. These were men of another Spirit generally, and more
opposite to the Irish, and their Barbarous Customs, then the English who came
over before: which must be imputed to the great aversion and prejudice, which
the Bloody Massacre in Forty One had Created in them. This new Colony put the
English who came over before (who according to the old Custom, were
Degenerating and growing Irish) in mind of their Origin; and helped to keep
them tite to the English Interest, and Protestant Religion. By their means,
Trade, Manufactures, and the Rents of Lands Increased daily; and the State of
the Kingdom was so Improved, that in the latter end of King Charles the
Second's Reign, Ireland, which before used to put England to a considerable
charge, raised a Revenue of about 330000 l. per Annum.

Since the late Troubles, the condition of the Country is much worse; (and
'twill be in a worse condition than it is now) many fair Houses, and some Towns
were Bu^^ed; and great Numbers of the People Destroyed, so that of course
Man^^actures must be Imp^ired, and Lands Untenanted. But people would soon
recover it, and m^ke it is condition better than ever it was: all Foreigners
are valuable, but some more than others. The Du^ch are worth the B^^bing, it
they could be drawn in that way. When we consider how little Land is to be
Purchased in Holland; what horrible Devastations have been in the (...); and
the continual danger of the Protestants upon the Rhin^, and elsewere; we may
reckon that abundance of those people would willingly upon any Encouragement,
flock hither. But the French Protestants are the people that we have the
greatest expectation from at present; and to me they seem to be such as this
Country should desire upon every account; and I think, if we considered our
true Interest, we should make it our Business to give them all Encouraging
Invitations to come in, and Treat them with the greatest Kindness and Civility
when they are here. It must be owned, that, very often, men who remove from one
Land to another, are persons, who, by reason either of their Imprudence, or
Extravagance, or Injustice, or Laziness, made their Lives uneasy at home, and
therefore were necessitated to change their Soil. No Country can be great
Gainers by such men as these. This is not the Case of the French Protestants:
The Reason which made them quit their Country, is a very powerful one to
Recommend them to the people of Ireland. They quitted their Country upon the
account of Religion: This should be a Motive to make us Value, and Entertain
them. I do not here speak of that Charity, and Compassion, which their
Sufferings justly Challenge from all, who pretend a Zeal for the Reformed
Religion; (though upon that Account, it may be the Interest, as well as the Duty
of People, to Treat them Hospitably; because they may Entertain Angels
unawares, and bring a Blessing upon the Land.) My Reason is an Argument to
worldly Men, and is strong in the plain point of Secular Prudence, and
Interest, Abstracted from all Religious Considerations. Men who forsake their
Country upon the Account of Religion, are men of Principles and Conscience: The
very same Principle therefore, or Temper of Mind, which makes them scrupulous
in the Case of Religion, we may rationally conceive, will incline them to be
Sober, and Just, and Industrious in the works of their Calling. Such men as
these are likely to make a Nation happy.

The French Protestants have many men of Letters among them, and they are
generally remarkable for their good Breeding and Civility: It Is not to be
doubted then, but that they Living in Towns, and Villages, among the ruder
Irish, will in time help greatly to improve them, both in Manners and Religion;
Teach them a more Human way of Living; and thus drive them from that Native
Barbarity, which has been a great Cause of their former Rebellions. The English
have done much this way, but more had been done before now, had it been their
good Fortune formerly, to have more people of good Manners, and Civility to
assist them. 'Twas the Misfortune of the English, that they were but few in
number in respect of the Irish: they came into the Land by single Families, or
but few at a time; therefore, instead of Reforming them, they fell into the
Manners, and Religion of the people of the Land; and after a while, did not
fall short of their new Countrymen, even in their Hatred of the English. A
better Harvest may be expected when many Families come into a Land together:
Therefore the pleasure that good men ought to take, in having the poor Irish,
as well as the Soil, Cultivated, should make them Contribute all their
Assistance, as well as their good Wishes, to bring in a People who may help to
Civilize such parts of the Country, as the English, for want of sufficient
numbers, have not yet been able to do.

The French are excellent Handicraftment in all Trades; such men are extremely
wanted in Ireland, and will Contribute to the Enriching, as well as
Strengthening of this Kingdom. I know the Opinion of the Multitude is
otherwise: The coming in of Outlandish Trades men is reckoned a Grievance; and
the Outcry against you is, that you bring in Foreigners to take the Bread out
of English men's Mouths. Ill natured Beasts will sometimes fall upon Creatures
of their own kind, if they eat near them, though there be much more Food than
they can devour. I Am sorry that Man, who is called a Sociable Creature, should
be troubled with a Temper which is so Destructive of Society: Do Foreigners
eat the Bread out of their Mouths, when they have more Bread, than they have
Mouths to devour it? But whom do these people call Foreigners? He is not to be
reckoned a Forreigner to day, who yesterday came into our Country upon
Invitation; took Oaths required by our Laws; and made himself such a Denizon,
as will strengthen our State, and Contribute to the lasting Peace of our
Kingdom. If particular Persons did Suffer by the coming in of Strangers, yet
the great Good which the Commonwealth Reaps by it ought to Silence their
Complaints. But let us see whether these men's Complaints are just or no. An
Act for Naturalization Encourages Foreigners to come in: I suppose then that
Fifty Families take Shipping at Rochel in France, Land in Waterford, and Settle
there: if the men of those Families are of differing Callings, then possibly
they may not hurt any one Artizan of that ancient City; because they will
consume the Labor of one another hands. For Example; Suppose one or two be
Shoe-makers, and the rest wear as many Shoes as they can make; then it is plain,
that the Shoe-makers there are not Injured, and so it may be shown in other
particular Callings. The coming in of many people of differing Callings, and
fixing in your Towns, will Improve those Callings by the Addition of new, and
perhaps some better Trades men: But that they cannot be supposed to prejudice
the old Tradesmen, I think is plain from this Consideration, that if those
Foreigners should keep themselves entire in a Body, and Seat themselves where
there were not any other Tradesmen before, no one will deny that these are
able to live one upon another. Would not the Case then be the same, if they
fell into Towns before Inhabited, and furnished with Tradesmen? They must
allow it, otherwise they must say, that the many Trades men of greater Cities,
do not subsist one by another, as well as those of smaller Hamlets.

The men of the several Callings in Dublin, I suppose, Live at least as well by
their Callings, as they did 50 Years ago, though the City was not above half as
big as it is now,; and yet this Enlargement of the City was made by the Addition
of more people of those Callings. But suppose (as it may by chance happen) that
more men of one Calling should come into a City, or Town, than are sufficient
to Supply that City with the Labor of their Craft; is not this an
Inconvenience and Prejudice to that City? No sure: it is no Predjudice to the
City of Waterford in General, for Example, to have more Haberdashers of Hats,
or Hatters, as we call them here, fall in there, than are Necessary to Supply
the Town, for if by that means better Hats are made, and they be sold cheaper,
then it is plain that the rest of the Town are Gainers by it. But you will say,
what if this should happen to be the Case of all the other Callings? This
cannot be because that when the men of all Callings do Increase, they Live one
upon another, just as they did before, when they were fewer in number. But let
us see what Inconveniences will follow from Waterford's being clogged with too
many Men of the Haters Trade, as some phrase it; in such a Case, either some of
those superfluous Tradesmen will enquire what other places of the Kingd^m want
men of their Calling, and they will go and live there, which is a great
Advantage to that place: or if they continue in Waterford they will send their
Ware to other Markets of the Kingdom, as the Northern people do their Linen
Cloth to Dublin, and other Places; the Shoemakes of Bandon do their Shoes to
Co^k; and those of Athlone do their Hats to Dublin. This way of Trading must be
Advantageous to Waterford, for either they must bring home Money for their
Hats, or some other Goods which that City stands in need of. And if by the
casual falling in of Tradesmen, or other Accidents or Conveniences, it should
happen that many Towns of the Kingdom should run into one sort of Trade, (as
Rippon into the Trade, of Spurrs, Bermingham and Sheffield of Iron Ware) This
would be a mighty Advantage to the Kingdom, and the men of that Craft in those
places, for by this means, our Country would almost every where be Improved,
our Roads frequented and rendr'd secure from Robberies and there would be a
vast Commerce in the Kingdom. I would ask those people, who are against the
coming in of Foreign Tradesmen, one Question; whether it be not better that
Foreign Tradesmen should be Encouraged to live among us, than that we should
be at the Charge of bringing their Goods out of France? this was our Case
before the War, and will be again when we have a free Trade thither. Our people
should consider that our Trades are not in the highest perfection in Ireland,
but that people furnish themselves with the portable work of almost all
Callings from other places. The French are Famous for their great Skill in
Manufactures. England must own that they have profited mightily by them since
this War began, or rather I would say since the Edict of Nantz was destroyed,
by the Improvement of the Silk Manufacture. The Linen Manufacture is that
which we may Improve: in this we shall not Rival England, for they give up this
Improvement to us, without grudging, and reckon it to be the more peculiar
Talent of Ireland. This is a Manufacture in which the French do excel; and
therefore Ireland may very reasonably promise themselves great Advantages, by
the coming in of the French, and their Improveing of it.

The French are Remarkable for their Skill in Gardening and managing of Trees
of all sorts: it is not to be doubted then but if considerable numbers of them
come into this Land, they will render it both Beautiful and profitable by
Improvements of that kind.

Ireland wants Skilful and Industrious Husbandmen as much as any place. In the
condition it is now you cannot expect to see men Industrious. The Irish are
reckoned a lazy people; but this I don't attribute to the natural temper of the
Men, and the abundance of Phlegm in their Bodies as is generally supposed, but
rather to the want of Employment, and Encouragement to work. Sir William Petty
computes that the work of one man in a Potato Garden will feed Forty people;
and the Milk of one Cow will afford Meat and Drink enough in the Summer time
for three men. Besides there is abundance of Food round the Sea-shores which is
procured with little or no pains. The Addition of people must Increase their
Industry in Laboring the Ground. The French are allowed to understand
Husbandry, as well as any people, next the Flemings; and this enhances their
value in Ireland above any thing else. It Is true indeed very many of that way
of life are not yet come over, Husbandmen are the last that quit a Country, by
reason of the difficulty of disposing of their Leases, and removing their
Stock: But there is no doubt but very many of them will dispose of their
Effects in France, and seek a Retreat for their Religion in Ireland, when they
hear that they have some Encouragement to do it, and that their Brethren are
Settled and well Entertained here.

But I have heard some people say, that the French are very poor, and what
Advantage, say they, is it to have such come into a Land? It Is the Observation
of a very Wise and Curious Observer, that they who grow Richest in a Country
are they who come in poor: how can they arrive to this Wealth, but by great
Industry and Improveing the Country? but those men are mistaken, the French,
even who are in England, yet unsettled, and are disposed to come into Ireland
when Encouragement is given them, are not all poor: they have a great deal of
Money among them, and will, if they come over, make a considerable Addition to
the current Coin of Ireland. But if they had no Money they would be
nevertheless People: People are Wealth, and they have rates set upon them; The
value of people in England, one with another, some have computed to be Seven
pounds a Head: In Ireland I account the value of such Protestant People as the
French are (for I do make a Difference) to be much greater; because in Ireland
you are not only to value them as people who Improve the Country, but as
Soldiers likewise who are to secure you and your Interest. You may therefore
(and 'twill be but an ordinary Civility so to do) set as great a rate on them,
as we usually do on Slaves and Negro's viz. 15 l. one with another: Men being
sold for 25 l and Children at 5 l. each the mean rate is 15 l. I should be very
sorry to meet with Protestants, who would not allow this Computation in
Ireland, where the Country wants good Inhabitants to Improve it, and Men to
plant Civility and Religion. Allowing this Computation then, or allowing any
thing, you see that a considerable number of Foreigners, if they should come
bare into your Country, bring considerable Wealth with them; Wealth which I
think can never be sufficiently Prized when you consider that they will not
only make the Condition of this present Age better, but likewise be a Defense
and Security to us for the future

If this be true, Encourageing Foreign Protestants will secure us for the
future.
I Am sure it ought to be a great Motive to the people of Ireland to give their
helping Hand to Contribute to it. I will not except the poor Irish themselves,
for you do them as much kindness in putting it out of their Power to Rebel, as
you would do Frantic people in tying their Hands, when you are persuaded
they will cut their own Throats They in their Insurrections have shed a world of
English Blood, and all the good they have done themselves by it, is that they
lost their own Blood and Estates: every Rebellion making their Conditions, as
well as the Country, worse then they were before. But it is generally thought
now, that the Irish are so subdued that there is no danger of their disturbing
us for the time to come. By such a forward reckoning as this, have the English
continually been deceived, and very fatally Imposed on themselves ever since
the first Conquest of Ireland. I think it, Sir, not inconvenient to instance
some Cases very briefly.

Henry the Second, the First Conqueror after he came into Ireland contented
himself with the Oaths and Submissions of the Irish; he thought they were
sufficient; and did not trouble himself with Building of Garrisons, or Leaving
an Army here: those who came after him saw that they have but a very bad
Interest, who rely upon Irish Submissions. I find in Sir George Carew's
Manuscripts in the Archbishop of Canterbury's Manuscript Library at Lambeth
Lib. M. page 38.
that Richard the Second in the Ninth year of his Reign made Robert de Vere,
Duke of Ireland, Lord Lieutenant here, gave him 1500 men super conquestum
illius and terrae perdues annos, they were positive then that those men would
serve to Conquer Ireland fully in Two years: but they were out in their
Reckoning; for in the same Book, ib. page 39.
I find (which is related likewise by our Historians) that King Richard the
Second, in the year 1394, which was but Nine years after, came over himself in
Person, with an Army of 30000 Archers, and 4000 men of Arms. This was a pretty
sort of Army for a King to bring into a Country, which his Lieutenant had so
lately engaged to Conquer in Two years with less than the 20th. part of the
men, But notwithstanding this Army and the general Submissions of the Irish to
him, he came over again to head another Army within Five years. I find by the
Instructions which Queen Eliz. gave that Great and Worthy Person, Sir Henry
Sidney in the year 1575, when he came over Lord Deputy, which are in the
Manuscript Library at Lambeth Lib. H. fol. 326.
that he had Engaged to Her that he would defray all Her Charge here for 20000
l. Per Annum, besides the Revenue of the Kingdom, which was then little or
nothing. This was more than King Edward the Third, gave Sir William Windsor,
who Covenanted with the King by Indenture to defray all the Charge for 11213 l.
06^. 08 d. Per Annum: Lib. M. fol. 44.
and yet if he had lived till the latter end of the Queen's Reign, and made his
Bargain good, he had saved Her a Considerable Treasure. Four years after. Anno
1579, we find among the same Manuscripts Lib. L. fol. 265.
that, an Opinion touching the Government of Ireland proposes with 2000
Soldiers well placed to keep the whole Country in Subjection. How these
Projectors were mistaken a little time discovered; for Mr. Spencer in his
Eudoxus and Irenaeus Complains of the vast deal of Money, which the Queen had
spent in a little time: and Camden Camd append. to Eliz.
tells us that O Neal's War which the Queen ended, cost England 1198717 l. Mr.
Spencer, who was Offended at the Oversight of others, is sure he has a
contrivance which will put an end to all these Troubles. he is then for having
all put to their helping Hands and H^arts; and doing all at once. If 10000 Foot
and 1000 Horse be sent into Ireland, he says that in a year and a half's time
they will do the work effectually; and Settle the Perpetual Peace of the Kingdom
Spencer page 233.
when the Ingenious Mr Edm. Spencer formed this Scheme Sir William Russ^^ (who
was Sworn August 11th 1594.) was Lord Deputy: within Four or Five years after
his Writing it, he saw that he mistook as well as others had done; for in the
Instructions Queen Elizabeth gave Robert Earl of Ess^x (which is in one of the
above named Manuscripts. Lib. C.C. fol. 169. 170.
in the year 1599. on the 25th. of March when he was made Lord Lieutenant of
Ireland, we find She allows him 16000 Foot and 1^00. Horse to finish the War
betime, and Orders him to receive the Capital Tray^or O Neal to no Conditions
but bare Submissions

This Army, by the Rule of proportion ought to have done hat in somewhat more
than a year, which Mr. Spencer's was to do in a year and half; and yet we find
in another Book among Sir George Carew's Manuscripts in Lambeth Library, that
above Three years afterward in April 1602, the List of the Army was 1350 Horse
and 16000 Foot, and in September following the List was 1425 Horse and ^6250
Foot. Manucripts in Page 14.
Any man will at first sight perceive why I am thus particular in mentioning
these things, it is to show how the English have been mistaken in their
Reckoning, that this may make them cautious at the present. The Troubles which
followed afterward are a plainer Demonstration of their Error.
Notwithstanding the Subjection which the Army of Queen Elizabeth brought the
Irish to; and the trouble which King James Her Successor had, and the Care he
took by making New Plantations, and Raising strong Fortresses, to secure the
Peace of this Kingdom; yet in 1641 a Rebellion began with a most Bloody
Massacre, and a War ensued, which put England to much more Charge than they
were at since the Conquest. After this War the English reckoned themselves in
Possession of a Peace, which could never again be Disturbed. And in the year
1672, we find that one of the greatest Heads in Europe Sir William Petty Polit.
Anatom. of Ireland.
positively Asserted, that it could not be in the power of the Irish to disturb
the British of this Kingdom again. Had he Printed his Book at that time, I
should almost have suspected that he wrote it to please the Government, that
Protestants here might Entertain no Suspicion of the great Favor, which by
Proclamation was shown the Irish Papists the Year following It Is plain from
what followed afterward, that he was mistaken as others were before him: We,
to our Sorrow, are Witnesses, that they grew to that head, as to put England to
the Charge of sending over such an Army, as never was seen in this Island
before; and did themselves the Honor of looking the Most Warlike Prince, and,
after him, the greatest General in Europe in the Face.

I know people will say, that this happened by the King's Indulgence to them;
and that 'twas impossible they should give England that trouble, if the Sword
had not been put into their Hands I think 'twas possible that they might have
had a better opportunity than that: For suppose that before King James came to
the Crown, a Civil War had broken out in England, which had employed the whole
Strength of the Kingdom; if the French King in such a Case had Landed a
considerable Army in Ireland, and the Irish had Universally joined with him;
would not they have put the English harder to it? This might have been, for we
know a very good Author who tells us, that the French King had it in his
Thoughts, to Land an Army in Ireland: And that he made the Peace of Nimiguen
more readily upon that very Account. What Accidents may happen, after this
Genera^ion is passed away, God only knows: This I know, that I can think of
things that may possibly happen, which may give the Irish an opportunity, at
least with Foreign Assistance (which they will always Industriously solicit)
of troubling us again

Wise and Good people, who have a concern for their Posterity, would provide
against all Accidents: and whatsoever their present condition be, would not
reckon themselves Secure, when the Irish are three to one: especially when they
consider, that as the English Power grew greater in Ireland, the Efforts of the
Irish in their Insurrections, were always more considerable, and dangerous to
the English. There is a good Reason for it, such as every body has not thought
of, but is very material, and worthy our Consideration; that is this, That the
Irish have Increased in Power and Number, by means of the English, and will do
so far the time to come. When Henry the Second Invaded the Kingdom, the
Computation was, that there were then but 300000 Souls in Ireland. It Is very
probable, that, if they had been left to themselves, and their old Custom of
Cutting Throats, and Mu^thering one another, their number would not have been
much greater at this day. All the English who came in since that time (except
those of latter years) have been getting Children for them, and Increasing
their st^ck; so great a part have they had in making them numerous as they are,
that it could be shown, that above half the Names of Ireland, which are now of
the Language, Customs, Religion, and Interest of the Irish, were old English,
who came over to subdue them. Such are all the old names of the pale: Such are
in the County of Waterford, the Powers, Welches, Pendergrasses, Sherlocks,
Geraldines, Nugents, Condons, Browns, Dobbins, Heys: Such in the County of
Cork, besides some of these, are the Barrys, Roches, Coureyes, M^agh.,
Fitz-Edmonds, Carons, Whites, Russels, etc. And thus I could run through all the
other Counties in Ireland, were it not tedious. Many old English names there
are, which have been changed into the mere Irish Mac's and O's. The Mac Quilins
in the County of Autrim, who, in the Reign of King James the first, were
destroyed by the Mac Donnels, were anciently Welshmen, and the name was
William^. The O Rely's in the County of Cavan, some say, were Ridley's: The Mac
Swynes in Ulster, were formerly Vero's: And the Mac Mahons, Fitz U^sula's. In
Conaught, Mac Morris was formerly Pendergrass: Mac Avile, Stanton: Mac Jordan.
D'Exter: Mac Quistolo, Nangle: Mac Phadin, Mac Pieke, Mac Tomin, all Barrets: O
Doud, Dowdal: Mac Delphin, Dolphin: Mac Granel, Nangle: Mao Thomas, Joys: Mac
Orish, B^imingham: O Naughton, Snow: Mac Kogh, Gough: Mac Nemara, Mor^imer: Mac
William, Eughter, Mac Phillippine, Burgh's: And a vast number of other Names
which I could reckon. There is in one of the Manuscripts at Lam^e^h Lib. CC.
Fol. 57, 58.
a Letter which Sir Henry Sidney wrote to the Lords of the Council in England,
the 27th. of April, 1576. Wherein he tells them, that when he was in Conaught,
there came to him Mac Phaton, Mac ^^ylye, Mac Jordan, Mac Gostelo, and Mac
Maurice, and brought him Matters of Record and Credit, to show that they had
been not only English (which every one, says he, Confesses) but also Lords and
Barons in Parliament: and that they had then Lands sufficient for Barons, if
they might weld their own quietly: That they were so Barbarous, that they had
not three Hacney's between them, to carry them and their Train home. These, and
some other old English Gentlemen, he says, came and Lamented their Devastation:
and with one consent cried for Justice, and English Government, in so
miserable, and yet magnanimous a manner, as it would make any English heart to
feel Compassion with them. This short Account gives a good Idea of all those
old English, who lived among the Irish. They did not (as it is said Messala
Corvinus, a Learned man, did in a fit of Sickness) forget their Names: but they
put them off, together with their Language, and former manner of Living. So
Universal was this Degeneracy, that even the old English of the pale, though by
reason of the nearness of the State, they retained more of Civility, yet became
Irish in their Affection, and Interest: And in the late War it is certain, that,
as they were the greatest men both in the Army, and the management of the
State, so were they as forward and deep, as any of the old Irish, in the Design
that was formed to shake of the English Yoke.

And when I speak of the late War, I cannot but observe that Sir Valentine
Brown, who lost his Estate for being Engaged with the Irish, in this War,
against the Interest of England; Descended from that Sir Valentine Brown, who
in a Discourse about Peopleing Munster (to be seen in one of the Manuscripts at
Lambeth Lib. L. Fol. 4^.
in the year 1584. when Sir John Perrot was Lord Deputy, Proposed to Queen
Elizabeth, that the Geraldins, and the Principals of the Free holders should be
Prosecuted by War, to the utter Extirpation of them and theirs.

We cannot so much wonder at this, when we consider, how many there are of the
Children of Oliver's Soldiers in this Kingdom, who cannot speak one word of
English. And, which is stranger, the same may be said of some of the Children
of King William's Soldiers, who came but the other day into the Country. This
misfortune is oweing to the Marrying Irish women, for want of English, who came
not over in so great numbers as were requisite. It Is sure, that no Englishman
in Ireland knows what his Children may be, as things are now: They cannot well
live in the Country, without growing Irish; for none take such care as Sir
Jerome Alexander did, who left his Estate to his Daughter, provided she Married
no Irishman, or any Related to that Interest.

Since things are thus, the Irish, unless a great deal of care be taken, will
out number us in a greater proportion than now they do: They are not Employed
in our Wars, as the British are; they Marry much younger than the British do;
and get a great many Children before they Marry; and are not as severely
punished for it as they might be. And besides, as I said, the Children of the
English by Conversing in the Country with them, learn their Language; admire
their Customs; Marry with them very frequently; and of course Embrace their
Religion. What then can better secure us, and our Posterity, than to Encourage
great numbers of Foreign Protestants, who will Contribute to Reform the
Manners and Religion of the Irish, and thus do God and the Country the greatest
Service, to come over, and take up their Habitations among us.

I know 'twill be Objected by some, that the Remedy may be as bad as the
Disease: that we cannot be secure, that the French will not help to Inslave us
to a Foreign Nation. The Wise Heads of the Nation, sufficiently considered
this danger before they made the Act for Naturalization. The only Danger that
is, or can be feared, is from the French King. It Is often said, that the French
Protestants are proud of their Monarch's greatness, and seem to be pleased with
his Success. I should not at all wonder, if something of this were true: It Is
natural for men who are forced from their Country, and endure hardships in a
strange Land, to desire to be thought considerable; and they may think, that it
may give them some Reputation and Credit among strangers, when they see and
consider, that they forsook a Prince, whose Power is great, and his Arms
sometimes Crowned with Success. I have heard it said, that when we Burned the
French Ships at Le Hoge, etc. The Irish Army, who were joined with the French
there rejoiced at it: And it is very well known, that many of those English
Gentlemen, who followed King James and his Fortune through France, into this
Kingdom (whom we knew to be Bitter and Inviterate in their Expressions against
their Native Country) because they came in Competition with the Irish for their
Places and Preferments, were Represented by them to be persons so partially
addicted to the people of England, that they could not well be trusted. But let
us see what Danger may be feared from the French King.

I will suppose great numbers of French Protestants planted in Ireland; and I
will suppose that the French King Lands a Body of men here. If he desires his
old Subjects (whom he has used so barbarously) should repair to his Standard,
and assist him in his Enterprise, he must put out a Declaration, wherein he
must vow, much oftener than he did about the Edict of Nantz, (or else he will do
no good) that though he was not so kind, to them, who helped him to the Throne,
as he might have been; though he had broken that Edict which he confirmed by many
Vows and Proclamations; though in that Edict, whereby, in the year 1685, he
rescinded the Edict of Nantz, he Declared to the World, that 'twas his
Resolution, from the very beginning of his Reign, to destroy the Religion of
Protestants, whom he always reckoned to be people fit to be treated with all
manner of Injuries, and not capable of Leagues, and acts of kindness; and that
all the Edicts he hitherto Published in their Favor, and all the Honors he
Conferred upon them, were only to gull, and delude them; though he had Dragoon'd
them too severely; though he had forced them to the Galleys; and deprived too
many of their Lives; yet now he promises and vows, more Solemnly then ever,
that he will let them enjoy their Religion without Disturbance. Who can imagine
that a people, who were so Inhumanly treated, after that their Religion is
again Established; after that they are freed from severe Exactions; and have
tasted, and known the pleasure of a mild and gentle Government; and have been
very kindly Entertained in a strange Land; will prove false to their
Benefactors, and their own Interest: and run headlong into Popery and Slavery
again? I Am sure there must be at least as much reason for trusting them to live
in Ireland now, as there was for useing their assistance against Monsieur St.
Ruth at the Battle of Aghrim; and none, I think, will deny that they behaved
themselves very well there, as they have done in Piedmont, and Flanders.

Others will Object that it may be of ill consequence to Encourage French
Protestants to Settle here, because their Discipline, and way of Worship differ
from that of our Established Church. It Is a great misfortune: that scarce any
thing can be proposed for the Public good, which crafty men cannot Defeat, by
Representing it Dangerous, or Inconvenient to one party or other.

There is nothing that I desire more, than to see the day, when the Distinction
of Parties, so opposite to the Public Good and Safety, shall be clearly, or in
a great measure, taken away. Our most considering men, who are Zealous for our
Ecclesiastical constitution, and careful enough to Discountenance any thing
that may possibly occasion Troubles in the Nation, know that there is no place
for this Objection. They may, and do observe, that of all Foreign Protestants,
none more readily Consorm to the Discipline of the Church of England, than the
French do; that many of the Famous Writers of that Church have, in their
Writings in France, Expressed their Approbation of an Episcopali Government;
that they have a Legal Established Church here; and that their Wise and Leading
men, are inclined by their Judgment, as well as Interest, with the other
Immunities of the Country, to embrace the public Religion of it. I think
indeed no Argument can be brought strong enough to prove that it is not ^he
Interest of Ireland to have French Protestants Planted here nor is this ^ess
the Interest of England, than it is of Ireland.

I cannot call any thing the Interest of Ireland, It Is the Interest of England
to Encourage Foreign Protestants in Ireland.
which ^ndangers the Safety or plainly Prejudices the Gene^al good of England.
I hope all the English of this Kingdom are of the same Temper, I Am sure they
^ught to be. Natural Affection should remind us of ^ur Origin, and Gratitude of
the Obligations which ^e owe to England for the vast Revenue they have spent
from time to time (...) Quelling the Insurrections of our insolent Enemies. I
must indeed Con^ess that I never could understand the Reason of some Men's
Assertions, or ^^e force of their Reasoning, who maintain that it is the
Interest of England (...) keep Ireland low. That in an Age more Remarkable for
refined Policy, ^an Virtue, some should (as they have done) wish it drowned in
the ^ottom of the Sea, to me does not seem strange; there is a Plain and
Obvious ^eason for it, and that is, because it has put England to a vast
Charge. This ^on a due Examination will prove to be a Reason why England should
lend (...) helping hand to Settle it upon a better Foundation. Those good men
^d true Lovers of their Country find, they cannot drown it with their Wishes, ^r
can they make such Engines to over-whelm it, as Archimedes Invented to (...)
raise up the Roman Ships in the Harbor of Syracuse; who by turning ^em upside
down threw the men into the Sea. Whilst this Island (...) above Water it will
have People. Great Nations have had their ^e upon it. In the time of the
Romans, we are told that one of the ^avest men of that Commonwealth reckoned
it, upon the Account (...) its Harbors and Soil, convenient for those to
possess who aimed at ^e Dominion of the World. Spain when it had Ambition, and
Power to ^pport it, made an Attack upon Ireland as a step to the Universal
Mon^chy. and since that Ambition, together with the Balance of Power, have ^len
to France, that King has cast a greedy Eye upon this Island. There^e it must be
the great concern of England to Secure it. Sir Humphrey ^lbert in the year
1572, in a Discource concerning ^^land (to be found in one of the Manuscripts
at Lam^h Lib. L. fol. 239, 240.
said 'twas the Interest of England to take more ^^re then they did of the
Settlement of the English here, and ^ir being put in a thriveing way and made
able to defend themselves, for that to ^gland it must be either a necessary
Friend or hurtful Enemy. That if it should ^ne into the hands of the Spaniards,
or French, England would be surrounded ^^th dangerous Enemies.

The Danger england has been in, and the Money they have Expended on is Island
in this last age; should methinks, without running up into the story, of more
Ancient Times, convince them of the Reason they have to ^^ke care of the
Settlement of this Kingdom. The War, that began with the ^assacre in 1641,
besides all the Blood that was spilt, cost England more ^an double the Money
that all Ireland is worth; if you will allow the Com^tation of some men. That the
late Troubles of this Kingdom, and the Pow^he Irish grew to, considering the
State of Affairs abroad, brought England into some danger, all thinking men, I
believe will allow: This they must own, that, if the Treasure which was spent
in Ireland, and the Armies which were employed here, had been sent into
Flanders, France had been humbled long ago, and we had been in possession of an
Honorable Peace. When this is considered, it must be allowed me, that if in
former times Methods could have been contrived to secure Ireland from these
Troubles, though it were by suffering it to grow Rich, it had been the undoubted
Interest of England to do it. From hence I would infer, that it is the Interest
of England at this present time, to do all that lies in its Power, to prevent
such Chargeable, Bloody, and Dangerous Rebellions for the time to come. There
is no way of doing it effectually but by Incourageing people to come and Plant
here, People who will help to bring the Natives into Order, and keep them in
Subjection. Thomas Howard Earl of Surry Eldest Son of Thomas Duke of Norfolk,
who was made Lord Leivtenant of Ireland in the year 1520, in a Letter to Henry
the Eighth to be seen in one of the Manuscripts at Lambeth Lib. H. fol. 339,
340.
tells him that unless his Grace send Inhabitants of his own natural Subjects
to Inhabit such Countries as should be won, all his charges would be but
wastfully spent, for if the Irishrie, says he, Inhabit, they will undoubtedly
return to their old ill rooted Customs, when they have opportunity, as they
have ever yet done. This Noble Lord in this Letter shows the King the absolute
necessity there was for his sending over Inhabitants of his own Subjects to
Plant in this Country. On which Saying we may make two Remarks, which I think
will be very useful.

First, we see what a mighty Advantage it is to England that People come fairly
in their way, of whom, by giving them some Encouragement, they may as well
serve themselves here, and keep their own people at home. It was then proposed
that the King would Encourage Spaniards, Flemings, Almains, and others to come
over; but from this the Earl dissuaded the King left they should happen to fall
into the Obedience of the Prince of their Native Country. This was a just
caution at that time when the Power of Spain was so great, and all were of one
Religion: it does not hold in the case of the French, who are of the same
Religion with us, and differ from the Religion of their King and Country.

Secondly, we see what the Great and Wise men reckoned the Interest of England,
that 'twas to subdue Ireland thoroughly, and put it into such a condition that
it should not give any Disturbance to England, or the English Colony here. They
were not afraid of Depopulating England, or of wanting men to send to raise
Smoke in America. No, Ireland was their great concern: They willingly sent
their People hither, and were very careful to make Ordinances, and Laws to keep
them here. Hence it was that (as we find in a Manuscript at Lambeth, Lib. G.
fol. 13.
in the 49th. year of Edward the Third there was a Decree of Council, that
those who had Lands given them in Ireland should abide there in Auxilium
Salvationis terrae nostrae Hiberniae, to help to preserve our Land of Ireland.
And in the Reign of Richard the Second his Successor (as we find by another of
those Manuscripts, Lib. M. fol. 35. ano Ric. 2d. Roll par. Jur. Land.
a Statute was made against Absentces, commanding all such as had Lands in
Ireland to reside there upon pain of forfeiting two third parts of the profits
thereof.

And in the Reign of Henry the Eighth this Law was made fuller, and extended to
all their Lands. By this Act the Earl of Shrewsbury the Duke of Norfolk, the
Lord Berkley and others forfeited their Estates here; and the former, (the
Ancestor of that Great and Worthy Person the present Duke of Shrewsbury) lost
that which is now the whole Country of Longford, and almost all the Lands of
the Counties of Westmeath and Wexford. vid. Lib. G. fol. 69. in Manuscript.
Lambethian.
These Laws, I Am told, are still in Force, and some have thought that if they
had been duly executed, the Irish would not have been able to grow to that Head
in Ireland which they lately did. Whether this Conjecture be right or no I
cannot tell: this I may say without offense, that the great Adventurers and
Estated Men's living in England was always reckoned in former times one of the
great Causes why Ireland was not brought into Subjection, I could wish that
those who have great Estates here would take this into their Consideration now.
I find that among the other Instructions which the Earl of Essex Lord
Lieutenant of Ireland in the year 1573 gave Edward Waterhouse to communicate to
the Queen, this (which we find in one of Sir George Carew's Manuscripts, Lib. L
L. fol. 8.
was one, that he should inform her, that one great reason of the Armies being
diminished in the North, and that the Country was in the hands of the Rebels,
was the Adventurers retireing themselves to England.

The reason why I mention these things, is to show, that in former times
England did not regard any Advantage of its own which might interfere with the
security of this Kingdom: how plain would this be, if I should give an account
of the Ancient Immunities granted by our Kings to the Corporations here, and
show on the other side how the Trade now is Prohibited and fettered by English
Statutes. This our Friends in England say, is Policy; and it is a maxim among
them, that it is their Interest to keep Ireland low. If by their Interest they
mean the Interest of some private men, who have Ends of their own to serve
distinct from the Public Good; and if by Ireland they mean the Popish Irish
Interest of Ireland, then I allow that what they say may be true. I think it is
the undoubted Interest of the King and Kingdom of England, that those who are
of the Protestant Religion, and English Interest in Ireland be very numerous,
and that under them this Kingdom Flourish and grow Rich. The King will allow,
and so must every one that it is His Interest to have His Power and Strength
increased by the increase of Loyal Subjects: and his Revenue made greater by
the growth of their Wealth. And when the thing is duly considered it must be
allowed that it is no less the Interest of the Kingdom of England then of the
King. What can be more convenient for England than to have a Kingdom so near
it, which will be able to raise and maintain a considerable Body of Protestant
Soldiers whenever there is occasion? In the time of Edward the First we find
it recorded that three several Armies were raised of the Kings Subjects in
Ireland, and Transported one into Scotland; another into Wales; and the third
into Gascoign. Edward the Third Employed an Irish Army under the Command of the
Earl of Kildare and Faleo de (...) F^^yn at the Siege of Callis. And Henry the
Fifth called over the Prior of Kilm^inam with 15^0 Irish to the Seige of (...).
If it had been the good Fortune of Ireland in former times to be put unto such
a Condition, by Protestant Plantations, that it had been able to maintain an
Army this War in Handers, it had thereby lessened the Change of English which I
believe all the People of England will allow had been for their Interest.

But let us examine a little more nicely, whether or no it be more the Interest
of England to keep I^eland low, than to have it to grow Rich and Flourish, by
the increase of Protestant People, and growth of Trade. I do believe that every
wise and and considering English man will allow me, that scarce any one thing
can happen, without the Coasts of England, that would be more fatal to it, than
that Ireland should come into the hands of the greatest Power in Europe. The
Inconveniences that would happen upon it, I need not mention. Let us see then
whether of the two will be likelier to prevent this, to keep things in the
State they are, that is to say, to suffer the I^ish Papists (who are at least
Three times as Numerous as we are, and are, to a man, in the Interest of the
French King) to exceed us so much in number; or to promote our growing more
Considerable than we are, by the Addition of Protestant People, and the
increase of Wealth. The greater we are in Riches, and People, the abler we
shall be, not only to Defeat any Rebellions at home, or Descents from abroad,
which may be ultimatly levelled against England; but also to lend a
Considerable Assistanance to our Mother Country in any necessary War she is
Engaged in I think it is the Opinion of every English man, that it is the
undoubted Interest of England to keep Possession of Ireland: If so, then I
would fain see some Reason given why it is not the Interest of the People of
England to render Ireland secure, and make it Wealthy as well as England. To
say that Ireland is a Conquered Country is no Reason: for wise Nations when
they Conquer Countries with a Design to keep them, do propose to themselves to
add to the Grandeur, Strength, and Wealth of their own Country by it: but how
is this to be done, but by Improveing their Conquest, and by Immunities, and
Encouragements rendering them as like their own as they can? and I think it may
seem a little strange that a Nation famed for wisdom and Equity as the English
are, should not after above 520 years possession, in a Country so conveniently
Situated, so good, so improveable as Ireland is, order things so, as that, the
very name of Conquered, (which has a very mischievous Idea joined to it) and
all manner of Jealousies being taken away, both Islands might be rendered one in
all their Interests. If they were made one Kingdom (which I wish that this
Reign, and our present great Ministers of State in England may have the Glory
of accomplishing.) I believe England would then reckon it their Interest to
help to make this Country as Considerable and Strong as they could by promoting
the increase of our Wealth, and the growth of Protestant People; and they would
no more grumble at our Prosperity, than the North of England dos at the
happiness of the South. If such a Country as Ireland is, well peopled and
Wealthy, were joined to England just as Wales is, I would ask whether England
would not be put into a better condition than before. The Hollanders, who take
a great deal of pains to gain ground from the Sea, will allow it: and he that
denies it, must be forced to own, that England is not the better for the
Addition of Wales; and that 'twould be no worse, if Wales, and many of its own
Shires were lopped off from it. But 'twill be said, that Ireland is not
contiguous, and joined to England as I suppose: Though it be not, it may be made
one Kingdom with it, and then 'twould be much the better for being divided from
it by the Sea as it is: For now the two Islands have more good Ports between
them, than they would have if they joined together; the Wealth and Naval force
of England would be greater, by means of the Shiping that must be employed
between the two Countries. And it is sure that we cannot easily imagine, how great
the Power and Wealth of England would be, as the Kingdoms are now placed, if
they were made one Kingdom; if England would take off the Shackles of Ireland,
make us a Free people, and we gave Foreign Protestants Encouragement to live
here. I Am sure, if Ireland had been in such a condition long ago, England would
have some Millions of Money, and a vast Treasure of Men which it now wants. But
some do imagine that Ireland cannot grow in Wealth but by Impoverishing England,
or hindering the growth of its Wealth. They may as well say that they cannot
have a considerable Addition to their Protestant people without making England
weaker. The Increase of Wealth in Ireland, must Increase that of England; for
whatsoever Fountain our Wealth here springs from, what ever Conduits it runs
through, it in the end empties it self in England. Ireland may be rendered very
Wealthy by a Trade which will not in the least interfere with that of England.
Ireland is by a great many reckoned equal to most Countries in the World, for
the production of Flax and Hemp; the Natives of the Country seem to be
naturally inclined to this Manufacture. It Is plain by the Act of Parliament
made not long since in England, to take off all Duties and Impositions on the
Product of Flax and Hemp from Ireland, that England is well inclined to humor
the genius of Ireland. When we consider what a hand Holland, France, and the
Northern Crowns, have made of this Manufacture, we may well allow that Ireland,
which has naturally greater advantages to improve it, may be greatly enriched
by it. If we did but furnish England with that Linen which they have from our
neighboring Countries, this would raise us a vast Treasure, but I cannot see
what prejudice it would do England. It seems to me to be at least as much their
Interest to lay out their money with us, who shall employ it in their defense,
and are their selves, as with them who will make it an Instrument of their
ruin. It Is the Computation of a very great man, that the people of England
spend 5 l. a year in Linen one with another; this Computation I suppose is
much too large, if the 30th. part of this were laid out in Ireland, 'twould be
three times as much as the current cash of this Kingdom has ever yet been. It
cannot easily be conceived how much it is England's Interest to have this
Manufacture improved to the height. It Is probable that this will be the effect
of Encourageing Foreign Protestants to flock hither; this may draw in not only
the French, but many others likewise.

Since it is so much our Interest to have Foreign Protetestants settle here,
How Foreigners may be encouraged
it concerns us to consider how we may encourage them to come in.

The Parliament which was held in my Lord Rumney's Government, in the year
1692, made an Act which Naturalized all Foreign Protestants; but that was to
be in Force only for Seven years. Since that Law will be out of Date within two
years, I think, Sir, 'twill become the Wisdom of the Nation, to make a new Act
which shall be in force Twenty years after the expiration of the old one; and
'twill be for the Public good, I think, that by this Law, Foreigners be not
only Naturalized, but made Free of our Corporations likewise: This will be for
the advantage of the Commonwealth, and will not injure particular Trades men,
as men upon first sight are apt to imagine.

To vouchsafe Strangers the Freedom of your Country, is the first
Encouragement, the first Act of Kindness and Hospitality that you can show
them: But this, in good truth, is no more than to give Rich men leave to bring
in their Wealth, and the Poor leave to beg in your Country. I could wish that
all whom it concerns, would seriously consider, whether it be not worth the
while to lay another bait to draw them in? Whether, that after you have
considered the real value of People, you will not reckon it money well laid
out, if you should raise a fund not exceeding -- to be given to poor
Protestants, who bring in their Families to settle here? I would have this
money distributed among the poor French especially, because they have been
great Sufferers on the account of Religion. The greatest Encouragement should
be for men of Callings; and those should have most, who have Wives and most
Children. This cannot be called a Burden to the Nation, because 'twill be
spent in the Kingdom, and will increase its Wealth for the time to come. This
will not draw in the poor alone, but the Rich likewise, for they will be fond
of living among a people who make such Provision for their poor.

And because I have shown that it is the Interest of England to Encourage
Foreign Protestants to settle here, it is to be hoped that, if it can be done,
some measures will be thought of, to prevail upon the King and People of
England, to raise some Fund there, to help poor Foreigners to come over hither.

When this is done, I think, Sir, that our great Council would do that which
would make their Memory dear to postority, if they would Address the
Government, and pray that they would signify to His Majesty, that it is the
request of His great Council here, that, for promoting the Prosperity, and
Secureing the Peace of this Nation for the time to come, he would in the Grants
he makes of Forfeited Lands take some care to have Protestants planted in them.
If in every Estate Granted by the King, the person to whom the Grant is made,
were obliged to plant a considerable number of Protestants in proportion to the
Land which is given him: and if they were obliged to set out a good part of
those Estates to Protestant Tenants in Leases for Lives, at a small Rent first,
and to be raised afterward, this, I think, would have a very good Effect, and
would go a great way toward making the Country Rich and Secure.

There is another thing which I could wish the Wisdom of our Nation would
seriously consider, Whether it would not be very much for the Interest of
Ireland, that the King would grant at least a part of the Forfeited Lands not
yet disposed of, to Foreign Protestants; particularly (and that for very good
reasons) to the French?

I believe when they consider the thing impartially, they will own it. I find
that in the year 1583, Queen Elizabeth in the Instructions which She gave Sir
John Perrot sent Lord Deputy into Ireland, when She talks of Disposing of
Forfeited Lands here, tells him that She Is for giving no more to one than he is
able to furnish people for. Manuscript. Lambeth. L. C. page 35.
If the King gives Grants to English Gentlemen of England or Ireland (without
this care taken) they must take up with the Irish Tenants that are upon the
Land, and things must run on in their old course: If they furnish people out of
England, this will unpeople England, and impoverish it, which it is our Interest
to have full of People and Wealth, that we may live the more secure under its
protection. The great Body of the French Protestants are at this day in a very
uneasy and unsettled condition, and no one knows how many of them would make
this Country a place of Retreat from their severe Persecutions, if they heard
that the King of Great Britain had granted them Lands to settle upon. And when
I speak this, I cannot but take notice that I think it a great happiness, that
the Forfeitures not yet disposed of are in Conaught: If great numbers of the
French were planted there, that Country which is thinest of Protestants, would
be rendered as Secure as any part of the Kingdom.

Before the Reign of King James the first, till the Escheated Counties were
planted with Protestant Inhabitants, and the Londoners Built Derry and Colrane,
the North of Ireland gave the greatest disturbance to the English: Since those
Plantations have been made there, it has been the securest retreat from the
Insurrections of the Irish. If a considerable Colony of Protestants were
planted in Conaught, 'twould be impossible for the Irish to disturb the peace
of the English in this Country for the time to come. I have heard a Person of
Quality, who is your Relation, speak of a projest which I think would, if it
were put in Execution, render that part of the Country secure. If the King,
after that he has obliged those whom their Merits Recommend to His Favor,
would be pleased to Grant Lands in this Province to the French, and would take
care to appoint Commissioners to see it planted by them, and English mixed
together, He would take an effectual course to Secure and Enrich this Kingdom,
which he retrieved from Misery and Slavery, by the hazard of His Life. When the
Parliament considers this, they perhaps may think it proper to pray the
Government, that they would Represent this to the King besides these public
Grants and Emulaments, it is to be hoped that the Protestant Nobility and Gentry
of this Kingdom, will (when they consider the great want and value of good
people in this Country) give private Encouragements to Foreign Protestants to
come into the Kingdom, and settle upon their Estates. In Order to Promote this,
I could wish that in the Act of Naturalization it were Enacted, that at the
Public charge, four Folio Manuscripts well Bound were purchased; the First of
these called the Book of Linster, to be placed in Dublin; the Second called the
Book of Mu^ster, to be placed in Cork; the Third called the Book of Conaught,
to be placed in Gallway; the Fourth called the Book of Vlster (which need not
be large, because Foreigners will have little or no Encouragement in this
Province which is indifferent full of People already) to be placed at Belfast,
or some other place; those Books I would have put into the hands of the Town
Clarks of the respective places, or such other Persons as shall be thought fit.
In these Books I would have the Nobility and Gentry of the Respective Provinces
enter the Encouragements they will give to Foreign Protestants to Settle in
their Estate, viz. How many Tenements they will set out, with what Lands
Annexed to them; whether the Lease shall be for Lives, or a considerable term
of years; (and I could wish that they would consider that the true way to make
Ireland Flourish, is to let Leases for Lives as in England, and to Encourage
Tillage) how long they shall be Rent free; and what the Rent shall be after
such time; what Bona side, the Land is worth an Acre as the Land thereabouts is
now Set? How many Tenements they have particularly for Linen Weavers; for this
will be a good way to Encourage the Linen Manufacture; and if the Parliament
would in all, or (for a Specimen) in some Counties, where the Linen
Manufacture is most Improved, order large Bleaching Yards to be made in such
places of those Counties, or the Neighboring County as -- Justices of the
Peace of the County with the Advice of -- Persons whose employment it has been
to make Linen; these Bleaching Yards to be put into the hands of the best
Tradesmen to be procured at home or a broad, and they to Whiten Cloth at a
rate set by the Parliament; this I conceive might go a great way in Improveing
our Linen Manufacture. What Encouragement is thus given I would have entered
in the Reigistry by the Gentleman's own hand; or if he send his Encouragement in
a Letter to the Register, I would have two Witnesses hands to the Letter, and
it should be kept on Record. The Reason is because I would have whatever
Encouragement is thus given as Binding in Law as if it were a Deed, and the
poor Forrigner who accepts the Proposal should have Liberty to sue in Forma
Pauperis, and all the Kings Council should be obliged to see him righted, as if
it were the Kings Suit. Such provisions and security, as this from the Public
Faith will Encourage Foreigners to venture into the Kingdom. When such public
Registries are Settled, Foreigners will have their Agent in the Kingdom to
take an Account of the Encouragement that is given and if the Nobillty and
Gentry would be generous in their Proposals, and would regard rather the good
of their posterity, and the Security, and Flourishing Estate of the Kingdom for
the time to come, than their own present gain, no one can tell what a multitude
of useful people they may bring into the Kingdom by this means. That these
Encouragements maybe made as public as may be, I would have Transcripts of the
Encouragements entered in the Book of Conaught sent Monthly to the Register of
Cork and Dublin, and those entered in Cork, Conaught and Vlster sent likewise to
Dublin. And that Foreigners may have the more Encouragement to Settle here, I
would have them exempted, at least for Seven years, from the Offices of
Churchwardens, Constables, Jurors, and from public Taxes; besides what Goods
they bring in at their first coming should be Duty Free, but then they must
give Security to pay for them, if they don't settle in the Kingdom.

I am persuaded, Sir, that these Proposals on the first Reflection, will seem
very Wild and Extravagant: and 'twill be thought ill Husbandry thus to Bribe,
and hire men to do themselves a kindness. Before men censure too rashly, I
desire they would consider the great, (I had almost said the unknown) value of
people; and the ill Report that frequent Rebellions have brought upon the
Country, which is a Lion in the way, that frightens Foreigners from coming
hither. What is thus given can do us no harm, for the Money will in effect, be
raised only to Improve the Kingdom, and that Land which is given to draw
Foreigners in to Plant and Improve it, will not, I Am sure, be carried out of
the Country.

Some may very justly ask why I don't propose that English people rather be thus
Encouraged to come and settle here, so I would (for they are the people that
would be useful to us) if I were not very sure, that this would be taken ill in
England. I Am for gaining as many useful Foreigners as possible and if we could
draw in great numbers of the French Protestants, this would be an Act of great
Charity to them, a great blow to the French King, and the greatest kindness
that we can do our selves.

FINIS.

