THANATOKTASIA. OR, DEATH DIS ARMED: And the Grave swallowed up in Victory.

A Sermon preached at S. Mary's in Cambridge, December. 22. 1653. At the public
Funerals of Dr. Hill, Late Master of Trinity College in that University. With
a short account of his Life and Death. To which are added two Sermons more upon
the same Text, preached afterward in the same place.

By ANTHONY TUCKNEY, D. D. Master of S. John's College in Cambridge.

I will ransom them from the power of the grave, I will redeem them from
death: O death, I will be thy plague; O grave, I will be thy destruction. Hosea
13. 14. LONDON, Printed for J. Rothwel, at the Fountain and Bear in
Goldsmiths-row in Cheapside; And S. Gellibrand at the Ball in Paul's
Churchyard, 1654.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL my ever honored Friend, Mr. FRANCIS ASH. Merchant,
and Governor of the Muscovia Company of the City of LONDON.
SIR,
THat I print this Sermon, is not out of any compliance with the scribbling
humor of these times, or from the least thought, that by it I shall add any
thing to the Argument it treats of, which from other abler men's labors may not
be had with better advantage: But only from the importunity of some friends,
whom I could not well deny, and whose aim in it was the glory of God, and the
keeping alive the memory of That his faithful servant at whose Funerals it was
preached.

But seeing that, such as it is, it must be Printed, That I dedicate it to your
self, I have many great causes, which although you be not, yet I am desirous
that others may take notice of: Amongst them, I may not, without ingratitude,
omit your undeserved respects to my self.

But I must especially reckon your plain and single-hearted Candor and
Integrity, which the painted Pageants of many others now a days set off with a
greater luster.

Your cordial love of Gods truth, and of that good old Doctrine according unto
godliness, which those Worthies of God, under whom you and I have been trained
up, preached, and lived, and died in the belief, practice, and comfort of, to
which you do well firmly to adhere, whilst too many in this giddy Age are
turned aside to vain janglings, and 1 Timothy 1. 6 2 Pet. 2. ^.
pernicious errors;

Your fervent zeal for Christ's Ministry and Ministers, so that whom others
despise, you honor; and whom the foot of pride, even of the basest, is ready
to tread down and trample upon, your humility and love endeavor to uphold:
Witness that your great, and for many years rarely paralleled bounty, in
giving (and that in your life time) the large sum of very nigh three hundred
pounds per annum, to most pious uses, viz. toward the maintenance

Of poor Ministers Widows.

Of a Lecture in London, the place of your longest abode.

Of two Schools, the one in the place of your Birth, and the other of your
Darby, as^by de l^ Zouch.
Education.

And especially of that happy Society of Emmanuel College in this University,
on which you have been pleased to confer the greatest share of it.

That this plentiful shower of your bounty should be directed to fall on that
fruitful Field, which God all along has so abundantly blessed, was his good
hand guiding yours to lay it on the head of that fruitful Ephraim.

That your favor to my self should in any measure incline your heart to that
College of which I was then an unworthy Member, was your goodness so much to
honor me. But that which rend^eth both your self, and your gift more highly
valued and honored by All, is

1. The greatness of it making you a second Founder, at least (after their most
pious Founder) the greatest Benefactor that ever that College had. Like
Solomon's Clouds, which when full Eccl. 1^. ^
of rain, empty themselves abundantly upon the earth; herein you have obeyed
Gods command, in opening your hand Deuteronomy. 1^ 11. 1 Timothy 6 17. 1^.
wide. Followed his example, who gives to all richly. Answered has
expectation, who requires much where he has given much. Ten talents, Luke 12.
48. Matthew. 25. 20. Deuteronomy. 26. 10. and Prove. 3. 9, 10. Math. 25. 24, 25, 26, 27.
etc.
where he has given five.

As Sovereign Lord he will be acknowledged by all. Something he expects from
them on whom he has bestowed least; but much, on whom more. So that he who in
this or the like kind does nothing, is an evil servant, a practical Atheist,
thereby in true interpretation saying, that he has received nothing: and he
who having received much, gives but little, does but tell over again Saphira's
lie in saying, yea, so much, when it was much more, that Acts 5. 8, 9, 10.
made her doom very heavy; whilst you, whose pound has gained ten pounds may
comfortably expect to hear that blessed Euge, Well done good and L^k. 19. 16,
17.
faithful servant. And whatever others may think and say, yet if Scripture may
be Judge, you have herein done the part of a good husband: hereby making God
your debtor, who being eternal, Prove. 19. 17.
will have time enough to show himself a true paymaster, and a most plentiful
rewarder of your bounty with his. The prudent husbandman, whatever else he is
sparing of, will not scant his seed-corn; it seems you intend 2 Cor. 9. 6.
Prove. 11. ^7.
by sowing liberally to reap liberally; thus you have done good to your self,
whilst you have withal honored Prove. 3. 9.
God, our Nation, and the whole Reformed Religion. Papists boast much of their
great good works; but some of our Divines have truly Dr. Willet,
made it out by Induction of particulars, that (for their time and ability)
Protestants have equaled and exceeded them; and let your happy name be added,
and in fair letters written in that lovely Catalogue.

2. The pious and religious Grounds and ends of giving it; it was not in way of
any Popish penance to expiate the guilt of some fouler crime, which in those
blind times built many of their Churches and Monasteries, nor a Legacy
bequeathed by the will of some cruel oppressor, who after that in his life time
by his exactions he had made many poor, on his deathbed from sting of
conscience is enforced to take care for the maintaining of some of them, this
was no such trucking either with God or man, with the Papist to merit at Gods
hands, or with the vainglorious Pharisee to blow a Trumpet to gain Math. 6. 2.
Hos. 12. 7. Joh. 2. 14.
applause with men, which is but to play the Merchant and money-changer in the
Temple, and in making up their last accounts to close up all former oppressions
with a new kind of usury; your eye was more single, did not look so asquint,
when it looked so favorably upon that College, but as you were pleased to
build upon their honorable Founders religious foundation, so you both had the
very same pious intention. He expresses his in the Preface to his statutes in
those words, Pro mea facultate Religionis, and vitae puritatem ad posteros
nostros propagare, that according to his ability he might propagate purity of
life and doctrine to posterity; from whence some great men, and their small
friends then at the very first thought they smelt a Puritan: you as clearly
manifest yours in the words of your Donation to be, For and toward the
furtherance of godliness and learning, that so the Church of God may be thereby
the better provided of godly, learned, and Orthodox Ministers. Blessed be God,
that both of you so happily meet in the same work, with the same heart, and as
He in the view of all, has manifestly obtained his end, whilst that little
younger sister has been as fruitful as any; so may you also yours, in her
continuance and increase of yet more fruitfulness answerable to Gods wider
opening his hand to her, in his and your bounty.

3. The time and season in which it was given. This, as it renders every thing
beautiful, so it presents Eccl. 3. 11 Prove. 2. 5. 11.
your rich gift, as apples of Gold in pictures of Silver: as a smile from
heaven, when earth frowned; a Cordial in a fainting fit. When our Almanac
Diviners could read in the Heavens our Ministry and Universities to be falling
Stars; and our ABC Divines, pretending to more divine inspirations both in
Pulpit and Pamphlet, could foretell the sudden ruin of both, and then like a
Jonah return to their boo^^ to see what would become of Jonah 4. 5.
them; When Ignorance driveled, and madness foamed and raved with distracted
nonsense, and malice plotted our overthrow, and all (Edom-like) cried Raze it,
raze it to the foundation, then (...), or rather in Psalm. 137. 7. Psalm. 46. 1.
Scripture-expression (...) Then our God from on high looked through the pillar
of fire upon the host of those Egyptians, Exodus 14. 24, 25.
and took off their Chariot-wheels when they drove so furiously. And then also
it was that you in your place and rank reached out your able and friendly band
to hold and lift us up, when others would have cast us down; and if he who
helps to uphold the weak man at any time does a friendly office, he who
bears him up when he is now stumbling and ready to Job 12. 5.
slip, and so is as a despised lamp, subject to be trod out as a snuff, does
him a double courtesy: by this God himself commends his love to his people,
in that he is a Strength, but that to the poor and needy, and that in his
distress, Isa. 25. 4.
a refuge from the Tempest, when the blast of the terrible ones is as a storm
against the wall: such blasts we have felt; but blessed be God, and those his
servants, who have been as Isa. 32. 2.
an hiding place from the wind, and a covert from such Tempests; and blessed
be you also who durst set your shoulder to uphold a falling wall, and then to
appear for us, when so many so violently opposed us; and others who wished us
well, could better pity then help us: a piece not so much of Roman gallantry,
which adventured upon the Florus l. 2
purchase of that field in which Annibal had pitched his camp, as of true
Christian magnanimity, like Joseph of Arimathea, who in that hour and power of
darkness in extrema desperatione intrepide in lucem prodiit, and Calvin in Joh.
19. 38. Mark. 15. 43.
boldly appeared for a crucified Savior. Let others admire the gay Tulip,
which will close up when night or a cold blast comes; in my eye that is a
pleasant plant that will bloom and blossom in an hard Frost; and that a
stately bird which will swim up against the stream, while light straws and such
trash are carried down with it.

In this you have proved your self a true friend, to love thus at all times,
Prove. 17. ^ 17.
and more then a brother that is born for adversity. Constancy in such times
when the generality of the world ran a contrary course, made Athanasius in
Ornt. 21. in Laudem Athanasii.
Nazianzens esteem both Adamas and Magnes; and you in this have proved both;
the Adamant in your invincible resolution, notwithstanding all discouragements;
and thereby must needs prove the Loadstone to draw both ours and all good men's
hearts to you. Although therefore they were too bold to tell our Savior that
the Centurion was worthy to be gratified by him, because he loved their Nation,
and built them a Luke 7. 4.
Synagogue; Yet you who plead no merit with God, are deservedly worthy to be
honored by men, and shall ever be by me, for the like love and bounty. This
has begot you the trouble of this Dedication; and may your perusal of the book
conduce any thing to the guidance of your life, or the comfort of your death, I
shall account my self to have received a rich reward of this poor labor.

You read of Isaac's going out into the field to meditate in the evening; Genesis
24. 63.
Sir, it is about that time of the day with you; shall you therefore please in
this your evening-walk and meditation, that it may sometimes bear you company,
I hope you and I shall have the more cause to rejoice at our last most
comfortable meeting. Now that God and Father who has bin the guide of your
youth, be the staff of your age, that you may be so planted in his house, and
flourish Psalm. 92. 13, 14.
in his Courts, that you may still bring forth more fruit in your old age, and
your fruit may remain and perpetuate Joh. 15. 16. Isa. 56. 5.
you a name better then of sons and daughters, which (God enabling me) shall be
the constant and instant prayer of

SIR, Your affectionate friend, very much obliged to love and honor you,
ANTHONY TVCKNEY.
Cambridge, March 27 1654
DEATH DISARMED. AND THE GRAVE Swallowed up in Victory.
SERMON I.
1 COR. 15. 55. O death, where is thy sting? O grave, where is thy victory?
THE Apostle calls it, the good fight of faith, 1 Timothy 6. 12. every way good,
and best, because at last it always ends well, in victory, (...), 1 John 5. 4
it overcomes; nay, (...), proves more then conqueror as many other Romans 8. 37.
ways, so this for one, that as this fight ends in victory, so this victory in
triumph. For here (otherwise then with the Romans of old) the Conqueror
always triumphs; and so we have this our Conqueror ever and anon brought in
triumphing, over sin and misery, and death it self.

Over sin; Miserable man that I am! who shall deliver me from this body of
death? I thank God, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Romans 7. 24, 25.

Over all accusers, and all outward evils* and enemies; Who shall impeach? who
shall condemn? who shall separate? Shall tribulation, or distress, or
persecution, etc? nay, I am persuaded, that none of all these, that nothing at
all shall be able to separate us from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus
our Lord, Romans 8. 33, 34. etc.

And lastly, over the last enemy of all, which is death and the grave; as here
in the Text, and following Verses: O death, where is thy sting? O grave, where
is thy victory? the sting of death is sin, and the strength of sin is the Law;
but thanks be to God, who gives us the victory, through our Lord Jesus Christ.

In all, observe, that it is still through Jesus Christ our Lord, and through
our Lord Jesus Christ: Happy man that could say it! and more blessed grace of
faith that could prompt and enable him to it! but above all, most blessed be
the Captain of our Salvation, who gave that faith such strength, and thereby
this man of God such a conquest, that when world and sin, death and hell had
done their worst, they had done him none, but themselves all the mischief, by
bruising his heel had broken their own head: so that now as vanquished, and
lying prostrate at his feet; as Joshuab over the Ganaanitish Josh. 10* 24.
Kings, or as a little David over a great Goliath, he treads on 1 Samuel 17. 51.
their necks, trampleth on the Lion and Dragon, without fear of hurt, their
teeth being broken, and their sting taken out, and in this joyful (...), at once

Both insulteth over them; O death, where is thy sting? O grave, where is thy
victory?

And withal exulteth and triumphs in God through Christ. Now thanks be to
God, who gives us the victory, through our Lord Jesus Christ.

The enemies here triumphed over, are death and the grave, (...) and (...), the
latter whereof answers to the Hebrew (...); which if Del-Rio will needs have
to be always in Adagial: Sacr: in 2 Samuel 22. Digress: 2.
Scripture meant of Hell, I must needs say, that I think Job was not of his
mind, for then he would not have so desired to be hid in it, as he does, Job
14. 13. And therefore the Jesuit (...)
when he undertakes to prove that it is so understood in all the places of
Scripture where it is used, though he endeavor to clear no fewer then 87
places, did very wisely overlook and leave out this, which (it may be) he could
not so well satisfy: I grant that you may here find Hell set down in the
Margin of your Bibles, but its not to be found in the Text, for that Hell never
loses its victory, nor will the prayer, no not of a Gregory, though never so
great, (whatever they fable) rescue any that is once become its prisoner. Ours
often translate it the grave, and so both here and in many other places it must
be meant: Generally it signifies the state of the dead after their
dissolution: and so the latter word may only hold out a continuation of what
was in the former: both very near of kin, and as such you Cant. 8. 6. Rev. 1.
18. Rev. 6. 8. Rev. 20. 13, 14.
have them often in Scripture linked together. In effect, they are the same,
and so the Vulgar Interpreter here in stead of these two words Death and Grave,
has the same word Death in both clauses of the Verse: and besides,
transporteth the other words, as Beza, and others also do, Junius in Parallelis.
who read them thus, O death, where is thy victory? O grave, where is thy
sting? Contrary to the Greek, Syriack, and Arabic Copies, yet in Beza's
judgment better suiting with the following Verse, in which I crave leave to
dissent; for I find the word sting joined to the word death there also: He
might rather have said, that so it would be more agreeable to the Hebrew in
Hos. 13. 14. from which place this Text is taken, with some variation of words,
(which I now pass by) but fully agreeing in the same sense. Which is, to
represent death and the grave to us in a double, but much different view and
posture.

1. As an enemy in himself armed, and so formidable to all, and so death has
its sting, and the grave has, or will have the victory.

2. As the same enemy by Christ the Captain of our Salvation disarmed, and so
to the believer made contemptible, and so (as to such) by Jesus Christ, death
has lost his sting, and the grave shall at last be swallowed up in victory.

For that is the true meaning of this question, O death, where is thy sting?
etc. In which the Apostle does not ask, where that was, which they never had,
but what they once were possessed, but now by Christ, as to his servants, are
despoiled of. I begin with the first.

Death (in it self, and as to those 1 Samuel 26. 16.
(...), those sons of death who are not rescued from the power of it) has its
sting, and the grave has, or will have the victory: to which agrees that
proverbial expression, Cant. 8. 6. Strong as death, which overcomes all, and
cruel as the grave, which spares none. But more particularly,

1. Death has its sting: A Metaphor taken from some poisonous Serpent, or
Scorpion, which with its sting poison's, wound's, kill's, and this sometimes
suddenly, unavoidably, irrecoverably.

And this death does

1. To the bodily life, as it is the destruction of it; and so life and death
are opposed, Deuteronomy. 30. 15. and if Hezekiah must die, he cannot live, Isa. 38. 1.

And were this all; yet thus, as it is the dissolution and destruction of
nature, and the violent parting of soul and body, those two long acquainted
(...), Plat. Gorgias. Ethic. l. 3.
and near united friends,

Even pure nature (and that in our Savior himself, Matthew. 26. 36, 37, 38, 39.)
innocently recoileth from it.

But to mere natural men, even in the Philosophers account, is (...), and
although some of them, whilst death was at a distance in a Philosophic
bravery, could call them fools that were afraid (...). Sophocl. Aeschylus
Epictetus.
of it, and call it (...), Hermach: with their (...), as though not death it
self, but only our opinion of it were terrible: yet usually (as diverse of them
confess) when after all those vaunts and braves, death indeed came near them,
it had a more grim visage that affrighted them: and although some of them even
then either out of brutish senslesnesse, or some passion of pride, could in a
desperate frolic rush upon it as the horse does into the Jer. 8. 6.
battle; yet in cooler blood, it was wont to put them into a shaking fit, with
the great Emperors pallidula, rigida, nudula; and if Epictetus will except
Socrates, yet the common rule which obtained with the most sober of them, was,
(...); Euripid:
the Scripture of truth (I am sure) says of all such, that through fear of
death, they are all their life time subject to bondage, Heb. 2. 15. And if life
(as you use to say) be sweet, it can be no less then the bitterness of death,
1 Samuel 15. 32. How bitter is the bare Ecclus. 41. 1.
remembrance of it to him that is at ease? but the approach of it was (...),
bitter bitterness, (as the case was then with him) even to an Hezekiah, Isa.
38. 17. and if the message of it made him weep, v. 3. then 1 Samuel 28. 20.
wonder not if Saul at it swooned quite away.

It is a bitter sting, that with the So Socrates (...). Apud Justin. Mart. ad
Graeces adhortat. 1.
prick of it lets out the lifeblood of the dying man, if when it takes
away from him this life, he has no assurance of a better, but dies with
Aristotle's word in his mouth, dubious morior, quo vadam nescio, be he never so
wise a Philosopher, or Adrians, quos nunc abibis in locos? should he be (with
him) never so great an Emperor.

It is not death, as death, that even the godly desire or rejoice in; for in
that sense Paul would not be 2 Cor. 5. 4. Joh. 21. 18.
unclothed; and Peter is said in that respect to be carried whither he would
not. It is some greater good which God vouchsafes to such at death, and after
it, which whilst others then want, and have no assurance of, it must needs be
a dolorous and deadly sting, that thus, first lets out their dearest life.

2. And therewith, (which is a second stinging wound) all the comforts of life.

Which should they abide, yet the man is gone, whose very soul was wrapped up in
them, but now has no benefit by them; and then the stateliest room, though
never so richly hung and furnished, is but a sad sight, where is nothing else to
be seen but the dead master in his coffin in the midst of it.

All dearest Relations are at once then snapt asunder.

The pleasantest child (now half fatherless) turn's away his face, as not
being able to endure to see a dear Father die.

The dearest wife, which was before the desire of thine eyes, thou now Ezekiel.
24. 16. 21. Genesis 23. 4.
desire (with Abraham) to have buried out of thy sight.

Thy most loving friends may then stand by and weep over thee, but cannot help
thee; and at last with a longum vale, bid thee good night, and so part: and
does not this ^uth 1. 17
sting?

As for Honors and outward greatness, 1 Samuel 4. 10.
Phinehas his wife now dying, calls them Ichabod: this sting prick's that
swollen bladder, and so his breath goe's forth, and then (...), all his thoughts,
all his goodly glistering thoughts, (as that Psalm. 146. 4
word seems to signify) perish. Which words hold not forth a (...), as Pope
John the 22. would gather out of them, as though after death his soul should
sleep, and think of nothing; but to express that all his former great high
thoughts in his life time, then at death come to nothing.

For pleasures, and former facetious and jovial merriments; old Barzillaies 2 Samuel 19. 35.
eyes grow dim in that evening, when he was but now entered within the shadow of
death, but are quite closed up in this midnight; in old Eccles. 12. 5.
age desire fails, but in death it is wholly extinct. Death (if nothing do it
before) will break many a knot of good fellows: and then adieu sworn
fellow-drunkard, and well if you and I can now come to a good reckoning; and
adieu also you sweet Mistress, and all that dalliance you wot of, till you and
I stand before our Judge, and all that be brought to light which was done by us
in secret. And adieu to you too my more innocent merry companion, nec ut soles
dabis jocos; the whole club of wits are now all amort, and not one Jest more;
for now that God and Death are in good earnest, it is past Jesting, past
Drinking, Whoring, yea, rejoicing in wife, or children, or friends:

Or Riches, which should they (as with some Nations they are) be buried with
thee, yet in that day of Prove. 11. 4
wrath they will not be able to profit thee; for if in thy life time they do
not (as often they do) make themselves Prove. 23. 5
wings and flee away from thee, yet in death thou will be taken from them; thy
close fist will be then open, and all that dust which before thou gripedst in
thy hand, will then See Shickard in his Jus Regiu^ cap. 6. Luke 12. 20.
run through thy fingers; and then thou fool, whose shall all these things be?
Blessed Hezekiah! who in this case could say of Gods Word and Promises, and
Providence, In these things is the life of my spirit; but Isa. 38. 16.
the very spirit of the worldlings life, is wrapped up in this bundle of outward
contentments: so that if that thread be once cut, and so all these be scattered
and lost, then as Micah said, What have I more? the man is Judge. 18. ^4.
utterly undone, and to whom in time of his life, it was death to part with a
penny, it will be an hell at death to part with all; as it was once said by one
to a great Lord, upon his showing him his stately house and pleasant Gardens,
Sir, You had need make sure of Heaven, or else when you die, you will be a very
great loser.

Nor is this all; for were it only the loss of life, and outward comforts of
it, that sting death fastneth even in the heirs of life.

3. Thirdly, therefore there is a deeper sting in it, which the godly are freed
from: of which we read in the following Verse, in these words, The sting of
death is sin, and the strength of sin is the law, ie. sin Romans 5. 12. Punctura
peccati morimur. P. Martyr.
armeth death with its sting, which otherwise could never have had power to
hurt or touch us, whatever the Socinian says to the contrary; and the law now
broken does ex accidente irritate, and per se declare, and manifest, and
aggravate sin, and so gives it its strength, and death its warrant thus to
arrest and execute us: and hinc illae lachrymae, hence is the deepest sting of
death, and deadliest groan of the dying sinner; for that with death, the weight
both of sin and the law fall on him together, which presses him yet lower, and
wounds him deeper even to the soul and conscience, whilst he is hereby made
sensible, that his death is the wages of his sin, so that he dies not as a
Romans 6. 23
Martyr, or barely as a Man, but as a Malefactor, under the guilt of sin, and
sense of Gods wrath; and if there was a painful sting of death in the two
former particulars, then in this third is the very poison of it. That, as the
sting of a Be may be very painful, but This is the Hornet and Scorpion: This
Scorpions sting in the tail (as those Rev. 9. 10.) in the end of our life is
most deadly; as they use to say, Maxim mortiferi morsus bestiarum morientium,
the biting of a dying beast is most deadly, the sting of death, if dipped in the
venom of Gods wrath, is both intolerable and incurable. That facies
Hypocratica, (which Physicians speak of) of a spent dying man looks very
ghastly; but no sight in all the world more dreadful, than to see an awakened
dying sinner (as a Saul, Judas, Francis Spira, etc.) conflicting with death,
and sin, and the law, and Gods curse, and wrath altogether. If in a dying
hour, in stead of Gods reviving smile, the sinner meets with his deadly
frown, so that when death has made his grave, his sin like a massy gravestone
Isa. 24. 20.
lie heavy upon him, how miserably is that poor wretch pressed to death? and
how deadly is that groan when you may hear him sighing out his soul with this
saddest moan; Oh! I am so sick, that I cannot live, and yet (woeful wretch that
I am!) Dr. Harris.
so sinful that I dare not die? Oh that I might live! Oh that I might die! O
that I might do neither! At non sic abibunt odia, Friend, you shall do both:
because you are a sinner, you must die; but because you die in your sin, you
shall live in torment to eternity.

4. For that is the last and worst sting of death, which thrusts the sword in
to the hilts; that it is such a sting, quo mortales ex hac vita Del-Rio Adag:
page 250.
expellens ad mortem secundam exstimulat, that this first death when come, (if
better care be not before taken) will prick us on, and thrust us into a second;
for so was the tenor of the first sentence, In dying, thou shall die. So that
one death Genesis 2. 17.
leads on to another; the first to the second, that whatever it be which the
unpardoned sinner suffers in the first death, it is but the beginning Matthew.
24. 8. Deuteronomy. 32. 22.
of sorrows; the fire now kindled will burn to the lowest hell: for so we read
of death mounted on his pale horse, and hell following him, Rev. 6: 8. (and
that was in the time of the Sea C. a Lapide in Hos. 13. 14
Gospel, and not only of the Law) that after death comes judgment, Heb. 7.
29. and that when the body returns to the dust, the spirit shall return unto
God who gave it, Eccles. 12. 7. if not to him as a Father, to be received into
his bosom, then as to a Judge, to receive its everlasting doom: and if (as the
Apostle says) the Devil has the power of death, Heb. 2. 14. (...) Targum,
habet imperium mortis. Grotius.
you may easily gather that with some, death and hell are not far asunder;
and although he helped the Heathen, to put out of their minds the
dreadfulnesse of it, by the dream of their Elysian fields, as he does the Turks
now by that of their Paradise: yet to an awakened sinner, now at the point of
death, to be but in danger of it, as not knowing whither he shall go, leaves
him at a woeful loss; but if (as they say of the Molle) he has then first his
eyes open, and so comes to see himself now on the brow of the the hill, and
from that precipice now certainly falling into the lake of fire and brimstone,
he gives himself utterly lost for ever. And thus in all these four respects,
we see that death has his sting.

2. And Hades, or the grave, has, 2. Prove. 30. 15. 16. (...) Genesis 5. 24. 2
Kings 2. 11. 1 Cor. 15. 51. Immutatio illa species mortis erit. Beza in Heb. 9.
27.
or will have the victory; it being that open Sepulcher, which still cries,
Give, Give, till it have swallowed up all; for it is appointed ((...)) for all
men once to die, Heb. 9. 27. even Enochs and Elijahs assumption, and the change
of those, who shall be found alive at the last day, being a kind of death, and
an analogicall dissolution: so that death having one age after another (as it
were) mowed down the whole field of the world, and as a last enemy, having
conquered all the great Conquerors of the earth, and with them vanquished all
else; and still keeping the field, will have thereby obtained a complete
victory.

1. In thus bringing down all.

2. So as never to have risen more, as some conceive, had it not been for
Christ, who as he is the Resurrection and the Life, John 11. 25. so by him
only (either as Head or Judge) is the resurrection from the dead, 1 Cor. 15.
21.

3. And yet further, so as that the most of them that rise again, shall
presently sink down again into eternal death: and so this sting prove's that
worm which never dies, where the fire never goes out, Mark 9. 48. Igne quasi
salietur; vide Brugensem in locum. Myrothec in John 3. 36.
but where, the sacrifice is salted with fire, ver. 49. burn's but consume's
not; fire being of a burning, but salt of a preserving nature. Perdit sed non
disperdit, and cruciat ita ut nunquam perimat, as Camero somewhere expresses
it: So that to them the Greek (...), will answer the Hebrew (...), it will be
both in victoriam, and in perpetuum, and so a signal and a final victory.

Now confider this, ye that forget Psa. 50. 22. 1 King. 14. 6.
God; for as the Prophet said to Jeroboams wife, I am sent to you with heavy
tidings this day; if there be such a four-forked sting in death, as we have
seen in the former particulars; then to you, who are not as yet made partakers
of the grace of 1 Pet. 3. 7.
life, here is matter of 1. Fear. 2 Care.

First, of Fear: and O that the Seneca according to his surly Stoical
Principle, would persuade himself and others, that it is ill to desire death,
but worse to fear it. But the Word of God teaches us, that such as they, have
no cause to desire it, but great cause heartily to fear it; and that by reason
of their fear of it, they are all their life time subject to bondage. Heb. 1.
15.
Whence it is, that

1. In their health and life they cannot endure (their thoughts being fears)
seriously to think of it. Like them, who put far away the evil Amos 6. 3, 4, 5.
6.
day; and for that purpose, chaunted to the sound of the viol, and drunk wine
in bowls, to sing and drink away such heart-qualms, as Lewis the 11. who
charged all about him not to name the terrible name of death to him; and must
not that then be a terrible sight, which a stout man dare not look on?

2. In their sickness, when death now approaches; if their eyes be but open,
they are horribly affrighted at it. Pashur is then a Magormissabib. Saul though
a King, and Jer. 10. 3.
valiant, at the news of it, falls all along (...), quantus quantus erat, as
P. Martyr renders 1 Samuel 28. 20.
it; and the taller he was, the heavier was his fall. Belshazzar a mighty Dan.
5. 1, 2 3, 4, 5, 6.
Emperor, and now in the height of his jollity, upon the like occasion is
struck all amort, his countenance is changed, his thoughts trouble him, the
joints of his loins are loosed, and his things smite one against the other: But
what is the matter, that casts him into this shaking fit, and trembling
astonishment? It was only the fingers of a man's hand, writing something ver. 5.
on the wall; and that, something which he could not read, and so understood
not; and why then should he be so amazed at it? Alas! he feared that it was (as
indeed it proved) a Letter written to him from him, whom Bildad calls the
King of Job 18. 14.
terrors, and that was it which so terrified him: for so we read the in Scripture,

Of the shadow of death, as a very gloomy thing, Job 10. 21, 22. ca. 16. 16.
and 24. 17.

Of the messengers of death, Prove. 16. 14.

Of the snares, sorrows, and terrors of death, Psalm. 18. 4, 5. Psalm. 55. 4. as
most terrible; and indeed having in them all that which Aristotle Rhet. l. 1.
c. 6.
mentions in the proper object of fear.

1. It is evil; and the evil of it in the former particulars, we have seen was
very great.

2. And this near at hand; for although (...).
He instanceth in this very particular of Death, and says, that because we
think it far off, therefore we do not fear it: yet at all times (for any
thing that we know) it may be near enough; and now to the dying man its very
near, even at the doors.

3. And (which according to his rule, makes all terrible things the (...).
more terrible) it is irrecoverable; if not then well done, can never be
mended, and so the man is utterly undone for ever; and this can be no less,
then of all terribles the most terrible. For with what a trembling hand, and
aching heart, does the sick man take that potion, which he certainly knowe's
will either mend him, or end him? but with how much greater horror and
amazement, must that sinner needs taste of death's cup, who knows that it
will do neither? Neither mend him, no, nor yet end him, only end his former
enjoyments, but begin his endless torments. Could then the most careless and
obstinate sinner be persuaded to sit down, and but for one hour, and in good
earnest sadly bethink himself thus: This day and hour I may die, and then not
only all the delights of sin and the world, which I have hitherto taken up
with, at one clap are gone for ever: but I have then an incensed Judge to
appear before, an irreversible sentence and doom to be then passed upon me, and
extremest torments to be endured by me, and those never to end, when my life
and all the comforts of it are ended, but after millions of millions of years,
yet (as it were) to begin still, and all this (for any thing that I can be sure
of to the contrary) may begin with me this day, this hour, this moment. Were
this, in his more secret retirement (when the hot fit of a wantons lust is a
little cooled, and the drunkards wine evaporated, and the good fellows closet
door shut, and he withdrawn from the noise of his ranting companions, and
conscience suffered in this self-parly to speak out freely:) were this, I say,
but seriously thought on, and sadly laid to heart, were it possible that he
should desperately go on in his sin, and thus madly kick Acts 9. 5.
against these pricks, against this sting of death, so sharp, and so deadly?
Thou, who (it may be) with Hagar, Genesis 21. 16.
can not endure to see another die, how will thy heart die quite away within
thee (as Nabals did) when 1 Samuel 25. 37.
thou see thine own death approaching? If the stingings of Bees and Wasps be
so painful, how deadly will the sting of death be to thee? Miserable would that
man's death be, who should be buried alive in a Vault, full of Serpents and
Scorpions. Friend, thou art the man, and unless betimes thou look better to
it, such will thine be, thou will be stung to death. And whatever they story of
Exagon, who was cast into a Plin. lib. 28. c. 3.
great vessel of Serpents, which ( they say) circummulcentibus linguis, did
gently lick him, and not sting him: yet no Psylli, or Marsi, or Ophiogenes, are
armor of proof against the sting of death, but it will sting deadly.

How vain therefore and desperate is the course of such, who in stead of
fearing death,

1. Out of grief, fear, discontent, or despondency and despair, being Job 3. 1
Kings 19 4. Jer. 20. 14, 15, etc. Jonah 4. 8 1 Samuel 31. 4. 2 Samuel 17. 23. Matt.
27. 5
weary of life, either wish or procure their own death? We read of Job, Elijah,
Jeremiah, Jonah, faulty in the former, and Saul, Ahitophel, Judas, and many in
our times, have been sad instances of the latter. But O woeful delusion! as
though death had not a more deadly sting then any thing which in this life they
can feel or fear. This is then but e fumo in flammam, as the man's flying from a
Lion, and a more savage Bear meet's him, or going from it into the house, (that
house, Job 30. 23.) and this more venomous Serpent there bites him, Amos 5. 19.

2. Or out of a brutish senseless stupidity and blockishnesse, harden
themselves against it. I say, brutish, Exercit. 307. did. 33.
because as Scaliger well observes, Death being a privation, and so only
discernable by understanding. Brutes because they do not understand it, do not
therefore rationally fear it; and so proportionably the more brutish men are,
the less thoughts and fears they have of death usually. But notwithstanding
the Leviathans scales are otherwise impenetrable, yet he that made him, can
make his sword approach unto him. Job 40. 18, 19
Deaths sting can pierce such armor, even to the quick through such a callous
brawnynesse. The great block, though it do not so soon take fire, yet when
thoroughly kindled, burn's more fiercely.

3. Or for some outward profit and advantage, or popular applause daringly
adventure upon it;

As Thieves and Robbers do, to Prove. 1. 13. 19.
maintain a sharking life; yea, and those braver sparks in former and latter
wars, if it be (not for God and their Country, in a good cause, way,
intention, but) that they may go out in the blaze of a proud affectation of
bravery and renown. But Solomon though (it may be) not so stout and hardy a
Soldier, yet a far wiser man, may See Mercer and Baynus in locum. Prove. 21. 6
assure them, and that from the Spirit of God, that such rufflings and bravery
are but a vanity tossed to and fro of them that seek death. It is an undoing
gain to break their arm by catching at a feather, to lose their precious lives
and souls for such unjust spoils, a vanity tossed to and fro, like straws and
feathers, which neither in their bodies, souls, estate, name, posterity, they
are the better for, but in all every way the worse, which will therefore appear
to have been a very bad bargain at their last reckoning: as it will also be
found by those other, who account it their gallantry readily and cheerfully to
breathe their last, if thereby they may gain the vain breath of popular
applause: too great a price for so mean a purchase; and too daring a brave, if
they would consider that deaths sting is sharper then their enemies sword
point. Such should first Suetonius in Nerone.
with Nero feel the point of the poniard, before they stab themselves with it,
and get themselves more fit for death, and this sting of it taken out before
they thus fool-hardily venture upon it, otherwise what was said then to Nero,
usque adeone mori misorum est? was but cool comfort to his fainting heart in
that agony. So Tacitus of Vitellius, praeterita, instantia, futura part
oblivione dimiserat, mirum apud ipsum de bello filentium and prohibit^ per
levitatem sermones. Psalm. 90. 12


4. There is a fourth sort of men not so daring as the former, but every way as
secure, who yet are most heartily afraid of it, but therefore labor to put
away all thoughts of it, their habitually being afraid, puts them upon all
means by which they may prevent and banish all actual fears; and so they feast
without fear, Jud. 12. Tell over their cash, that they may not be troubled with
numbering their days. Lie down and sleep on their heaps, and then dream of
goods laid up for man^ ^ears, Lu. 12. 19. and of Lands and Houses to endure to
all generations, Psalm. 49. 11. But is it the way to overcome an enemy, to get
as far as we can from him, or never to think of him? or by shutting my eyes,
to keep the Bees from stinging me? Although these men sleep, yet their
judgment slumbreth not. Death mean while 2 Pet. 2. 3.
makes his approaches, and so is upon them before they are aware, and then
their covenant with death is disanull'd, Isa. 28. 18.
and their agreement with hell will not stand; then thou fool, this night, is a
dreadful sound in their ears, when in his prosperity, the destroyer Job 15. 21.
comes upon him; when it comes in the dead of the night, when they slept so
securely, and never Exodus 12. 29, 30.
dreamed of it: as Egypts cry for their dead at midnight was very dreadful; and
Laish is so much the Jude 18.
more affrighted at such an enemies approach, by how much further off she was
from thoughts of him; but how much more comfortable and happy would it be to
prevent those after sinking terrors of death, by present more safe and saving
fears of it?

An answerable care to prepare Heb. 11. 7.
for it, as Noah moved with fear prepared an Ark; (...), says the Philosopher,
fear should stand Sentinel, is the consultive and watchful affection, as the
fearful Hare sleeps (they say) with her eyes open. O that ours could so look
about us, that (seeing those of us that are young may die soon; and they that
are old cannot live long; the ripe apple will drop down of it self, and the
green may be soon plucked or shaken down) that when (it may be) on the sudden we
are gotten into the gloomy shadow of death, our feet may not stumble on Jer.
13. 16.
those dark mountains; but that when our death comes, we may be found in such
an estate, frame of spirit, and way of life, that our hearts may not then die,
when our bodies do, but that upon better ground we may use Cheraeae's words.
Nunc tempus prosecto est, cum perpeti me possim interfici. I thank God I dare
die; so that although I see I must now die either a natural or a violent death,
yet (I bless him) I can say with Steph: Mylii Apoph. page 61.
Brunus the Martyr, Mors sane mihi terribilis non est, death though it look
grim on me, is not terrible to me, and with Ambrose; I have not so lived, as
that either I am ashamed to live, or afraid to die.

It was a great word of Lucan's, which he said of the Gauls and Britans:
animaeque capaces mortis, and this because they believed the immortality of the
soul, happy should we be, if upon a better account, it might be said of us
Britains, that because Christ has brought life and 2 Timothy 1. 10.
immortality to light by the Gospel, and has by his death taken out the sting
of ours, that therefore we are indeed capaces mortis, we dare die, and in Romans
5. 7. (...) Psa. 22. 26.
death it self, our hearts can live. Sweet bird that can sing so sweetly and
pleasantly, and that in winter!

Nightingale thus sing; with this thorn (this sting of death) at her breast?
what are we to do in the time of our life, that when death comes, this sting
of it may not hurt us?

Pliny in his Books up and down tells us of many things, which either prevent
or cure the stingings of Bees and Serpents, and you meet with them almost in
every page of your ordinary Herbalists: but when you have read and known all
them, you must seek and search for remedies against the sting of death in more
sacred Volumes. The Heathens (I confess) in their writings, have in their kind
many excellent meditations of death, and consolations against it. Speak much
and high of an (...), and an (...) too: but after all that, death is like that
deaf adder, that hear's not Psalm. 58. 4, 5.
the voice of such charmers, though they charm (at least as they themselves,
and too many now amongst us think) very wisely: this lesson is learnt to
purpose only in the school of Christ; whose blood alone take's out this sting,
and cure's the wounds made by it, whilst miserable Physicians and of no value
are they all, since Job 13. 4.
all their (...), are but as so many (...), which help to stupifie the part
affected, and to make it senseless (which Mountebanks easily can do) rather
then to work any perfect cure: And therefore Ficin^s prescribes a better method
of Physic, who after his Tracts, de Sanitate tuenda, and then de Sanitate
restituenda, and de vita producenda, because after all those courses gone
through, death will not at last be put off, and if better course be not taken,
when it comes, will bring its sting with it; he wisely adds another Tract de
vita coelesti comparanda, to show how when at death we can live no longer here,
we may then live with God in Heaven for ever: which is only by Christ, who
alone can then make us happy, and our deaths comfortable: what therefore the
Poets fable of Persius his borrowing of armor from several of their Deities,
to harness him against his conflict with Medusa: may direct and See Bacons
Augm. lib. 2. cap. 13. p. 137.
quicken our diligence and carefullest endeavor to get that from the true God
in Christ, which may completely arm and secure us against this our last enemies
deadly sting.

Many are the precepts of the De Art moriendi. Perkins, Bellarmin, I. Beust.
M. Cyrus, Mi. Franciscus.
Art of dying well, as Mr. Perkins calls it, which he and other Christian
writers afford us, to whom I must for the present refer you, and all that I
shall now say, is,

That in the general, something, nay, much, nay, all is to be done in this time
of our life, that we may not meet with this sting in death: nor will it be done
with a Baalams wish that he might die the death of the Numb. 23. 10.
righteous: as Euchrites (who in this did not make good his name) would be
Craesus vivens, and Socrates mortuus; but he who would die Romans 14. 8.
comfortably, must live holily: we must live to the Lord, if ever we would 2
Cor. 5. 15.
die in him.

But in particular, would we not have our death too stingy, and its sting
deadly: many are the directions which are held forth to us by the Scriptures,
and from them by several Christian writers, some of which I shall touch upon in
the application of the second Doctrine, which is, that

The sting of death, and the victory grave by Jesus Christ is taken away as to
true believers, who may with Paul triumph over both, as the Apostle both in his
own and their name does here in the Text, O death where is thy sting? O grave
where is thy victory? A most blessed and comfortable Gospel Truth, mainly
intended in the Text, and was by me to have been now treated upon in my first
choice of it, as best suiting with the present occasion; but an ill-made pen
makes double letters; mine was such, and so instead of one, wrote two Sermons:
the latter though more comfortable, and better agreeing with our present
business, yet may be now the better spared, because all that I should have
said in the prosecution of it, is so fully exemplified in the life and death of
our lately deceased reverend and dear brother Dr. Thomas Hill, late Master of
Trinity College, and a most useful and happy prime member of this our
University, whose Mr. Withrington the University Orator at St. Mary's, and Mr.
Templar, one of the senior Fellows of Trinity College in their Hall. Camero.
Myrothreiu Luke 11. 47, 48. (...) Talm. Hierosol.
sad Funerals we now celebrate.

Concerning whom, if any Panegyric be expected of his deserved praises, that
will by and by be better performed by them whose work it is. But as for him, I
believe that he was not ambitious with Augustus, to go off the stage with a
Plaudite; so for my part, I came not up hither to paint Sepulchers, when the
building and adorning, even of those of the Prophets, with our Savior had no
favorable construction.

The Jews have a saying, that non facienda sunt monumenta justis, whose words
and works are their best monuments, and which praise the righteous man, as well
as the virtuous woman in the Gates, Prove. 31. 31. And truly, if when we have
done well, to hear ill, be a royalty; then Be^e agere, and male audire regium
est.
much more after a life well led (whether we be rich or poor) to have no more
said of us then was of Lazarus, that the poor man died, and was carried by the
Angels into Abraham's Lu. 16. 22.
bosom. I shall ever judge to be a very large Funeral Encomium.

But yet when I read of all Judah and Jerusalem, doing Hez^kiah 2 Chronicles. 32,
33. Act. 9. 39.
honor at his death, and of the widows weeping, and showing the coats which
Dorcas made while she was with them, I am not so strait-laced or superstitious,
as when any man's life has been eminently remarkable and exemplary, lest I
should be guilty of idolatry in adoring him, to commit sacrilege, in robbing
both the dead of his just praise, and the living of an useful pattern for their
imitation.

That this our Brother was such an one, is so generally known to you all, and
more fully to my self by 34 years experience and acquaintance, that I am the
more secure, that what I shall say of him, will be less suspected of flattery
or falsehood.

He was born at Knighton in Worcestershire, of godly Parents, (and David
accounts it his great honor Psalm. 86. 16
and blessing to be the Son of Gods Handmaid:) both yet alive, and they happy
in so blessed a Son, and although justly sad that he died so soon, yet so as
that they may cheerfully bless God, that he lived so long, to do so much good
in his generation.

As they dedicated him to God, so in order thereto, they trained him up to
School-learning in the Country, and when he was fit, they sent him for further
ripening to Emanuel College in this University: where the Rose was not
cankered in the bud, his youth not corrupted and debauched, as with grief we
have seen many so tainted and poisoned, that they have been irrecoverably
undone themselves, and have also infected others. But this morning (like that 2 Samuel 23. 4.) was without clouds, not sullied with any noted miscarriage, that I
can remember; but on the contrary, as it is said of Sampson, when young, that
Judge. 13. ^5.
the Spirit of the Lord began then to move him: so in his then sober and
studious behavior, the Sun looked out betime in that Summer morning, and
through grace (otherwise then it often falls out in nature) gave promising hopes
of an after clearer day.

This was taken notice of by the Governors of the College, who thereupon
chose him Scholar of the House, he (as his Savior) still Luke 2. 52 (...)
Plato in Theag.
growing in wisdom and stature, and in favor both with God and man. O that
young scholars in that vigorous, but yet dangerous age of theirs, would look on
such patterns, and go, and do likewise.

Some good time for his further perfecting, and the more happy seasoning of his
spirit, he spent with that man of God, now also with God, Mr. Cotton at Boston
in Lincolnshire; where, upon Gods rich blessing of his most godly directions
and example, and the society he had with him, and other eminent Christians
there, he was much improved and furthered, as otherwise, so especially
heaven-way, which most happily went along with him to his Journies end.

Upon his return from thence to the College, it was not long before he was
chosen Fellow, with general approbation, though upon a most strict and double
examen, more (I think) then ever was in that College before, or has been
since, though it still is, and ever has been according to the Statutes very
strict and serious, and which has been blessed to be a special means of holding
up true worth and learning in that happy Society.

And now, through Gods good hand, leading and strengthening him, he proves a
diligent and successeful Tutor of very many Pupils, and diverse of them of
quality, who have proved great blessings, both in Church and Commonwealth. And
thus, as he was before a pattern for young Scholars: so in this, of Tutors,
great is the trust, which Parents, the University, the whole Nation, and God
above all puts in them; and great may be the blessing, which upon their
faithfulness, may come by them; whilst so many Towns, Congregations,
Countries, are blessed with so many good Magistrates, Ministers, and
Schoolmasters, as they have had Pupils, whom they have been means of doing
good to. No one part of their lives (I believe) is of more consequence, or may
be of more service, or will come to a more strict account at their last great
reckoning. And therefore I both desire, and hope their care will be answerable,
especially now, when, as they have more liberty to be, and to do as much good
as they will; so there will not be wanting such as will be very ready to take
the advantage from the miscarriage either of our selves, or of them that are
under our charge, to ruin all.

But this our wise Master Builder satisfied not himself, as a Tutor in
polishing of Builders, but as a faithful and painful Minister, he laboriously
endeavored to square other lively stones for Gods Temple; and 1 Pet. 2. 5.
so as he read to Scholars in the College, so he diligently and conscionably
Preached to a neighbor- Congregation S. Andrews
in the Town. Which, I believe, many poor souls do to this day bless God and
him for.

Nor was he an hireling, to fly when the Wolf came; but when the John 10. 12.
plague in this time of his Ministry raged in the Town, he then continued with
them in the work. The better Shepherd he, that not only Ezekiel. 34. 4. 16.
fed the sound, but also healed and bound up the torn and weak of the flock.
This I am sure in all unkindnesses afterward taken by some, should not have
been forgotten.

But this Alabaster box of precious ointment thus poured out, filled the whole
house with its odor, and the John 12. 3
sweet fragrancy of it spreads abroad, so that now he come's to be more taken
notice of by many both great and good men, and so by some of eminent worth and
honor, he was called to the Pastoral charge of Tichmersh in Northamptonshire,
where he labored faithfully in Gods Harvest about eight or nine years, and
partly by Preaching and conversing up and down with others; but especially
(otherwise then our Erratick Itineraries use is) with his own Parochial charge,
he proved a great blessing not only to that Town, but also to the whole
Country: like another Bernard Gilpin, in every See his life written by Bishop
Carlton.
place where he came, spreading a good savor, and leaving it behind him.

Whilst he was thus at his work there, for more public service he was chosen
by the Parliament for one of that County, to attend and assist in the Assembly
of Divines, called together by their Authority: where being of very good use,
he was often Ordered by the Parliament to Preach before them at their public
Fasts, and upon other their more solemn occasions; was also chosen by them to
be one of their morning week-dayes Preachers in the Abbey at Westminster.
Besides, S. Martins in the fields.
his constant Sabbath-dayes pains in another great Congregation, where he was a
blessing to thousands.

Thence he was Ordered to be Master of Emanuel College in this University,
which not being a sphere large enough for his activity, he was from thence
removed to the Mastership of Trinity College. Where what great good he did,
they there can best tell; and that happy change proclaime's, from that
confusion (by reason of those distracted times) in which he found it, to that
orderly composure and frame, in which, through Gods blessing, he left it. How
solicitous he was for their best welfare, his very frequent Preaching in their
Chapel to them all, and his writing to their Seniors, speak out fully. And we
with them can truly bear witness, how humble and loving to them he was in his
carriage, how studious to keep up Colledg-Exercises, how zealous to advance
Piety and Learning; and for that purpose to countenance and prefer such as he
observed to be eminent in either. Long so may that famous Society flourish, and
long may such be continued with them, who shall industriously endeavor to carry
on his happy beginnings to perfection.

As he was an University man, he was zealously careful of

It Is honor, (which the Parliament House can witness) in an unkindely contest
about it: and also his care in collecting the decayed Antiquities of it, whose
pains in that Argument, I desire may not die with him.

Of its privileges, as always, so especially the two years together, in which
he was Vice Chancellor, for which he suffered in some men's reputes unjustly.

Of its profit and emolument, being By Archbishop Bancrofts will. Sir John
Wollaston Alderman of the City of London.
a special means of procuring to it from the Parliament, the Lambeth Library,
which of right fell to us: and from a noble Knight, both a yearly stipend for a
Mathematick Lecturer, and also large sums of money for the fitting of the
public Library, that it might be of public use, which others do not more
desire, then he endeavored; for the accomplishment whereof the University is
more ways then one his debtor.

Finally, of the general good, and well-ordering of it: surely it was his
careful thought in private with himself; for I am sure it was the matter of his
private discourse with others. Scarce was there a time that he met with us, but
he was asking or proposing something or other that way. It seems his care was
to keep up those Universities, which others would ruin: which made Grotius
pronounce many Christians De jure belli ac pacis lib. 3. ca. 11. sect. 10.
to be worse then the Philistines; for they 1 Samuel 10. 5. would let the company
of Prophets alone, even where they kept Garrison: it has been not from the
good will of these men, but from the favor of God, and our Governors, that in
the midst of wars we have enjoyed the like safety and protection. However,
seeing as the Philosophers of old Hieronym. Mercurialis de art gymnastica.
Aristotle's de anima lib. cap. Jer. 29. 7.
were wont to dispute in the Temple of Peace, till it was demolished, and
Intellectus being in quiet, such a Temple is a Students best sanctuary. Pray
we for the Peace of the State, for in it we shall have peace, and not be given
up to the fury of those whose little Learning serves them only to declame
against what they want: near of kin to the Fox in the Fable, or to them whom
the Prophet calls (...), Ardaliones, Burning or brutish Ezekiel. 21. 31.
men, and skilful only to destroy. But to return to our Brother. This he was
as an University man.

As a Divine, he was sound in the Tit. 1. 13.
Faith, Orthodox in his Judgment, firmly adhering to the good old doctrine of
the Church of England; that which in this our University our famous Whitaker,
Perkins, Davenant, Ward, and others maintained in their times: and in the other
University among other great Names there, he was a very great Admirer of the
right Reverend and Judicious Dr. Robert Abbot, Bishop of Salisbury, and I wish
he had there many more such Admirers. The Doctrines of Gods Sovereignty in his
decrees, of his inconditionate most free electing love, of his free grace
against free will, and the power of nature in spirituals; of justification by
the imputed righteousness of Christ, against the perfection o^ inherent
righteousness now attainable by us in this life; of perseverance in grace
against the Apostasy of the Saints, and the like. Were not with this our
Brother, (as they are now called by some) Sects and Notions, matters only of
Steven Gardners dialect, who calls justification an Article of Learning-Fox
Acts and Monum. Tom. 2. pa. 726.
Learning, and curiosity, and of the Presbyterian faction. But of the
lifeblood of Faith, which at his death, (as he expressed to his friend) he had
singular comfort from; and in his life firmly believed, constantly Preached,
and by his Pen endeavored to maintain and defend, and that against the great
daring Champion of the contrary errors, whom the abusive wits in this
University with an impudent boldness could say, none here durst adventure
upon, whose immodest scurrility his Learned answer to that daring adversary
(which he had made so fair a progress in) had shordy confuted, had not he by
his more sudden death been therein prevented. This of him as a Divine.

As a Minister of the Gospel; In his Preaching he was plain, powerful,
spiritual, frequent, and laborious; for besides, what in that kind he did, as
to the University in this place, and in the College Chapel, which was very
happy in his often pains there.

In the Town he set up one Lecture St. Michaels.
every Sabbath morning in one Church, performed only by himself, and cheerfully
frequented by a great confluence of both Scholars and Townsmen. And another in
another All-Hallowes.
Church every Lords day in the afternoon, in which he bare at least, the fourth
part of the burden, and both gratis, as there are many more such Lectures here
performed, much about the same rate, weekly by other pious learned men, and
more (I believe) then are in any Town or City upon those terms in all England.
In Cambridge now, more then any where I know, or in these latter times have
heard of, you may have (...), the more to 1 Cor. 9. 18.
the honor (I say not of such thrifty hearers, but) of God in the first place,
and then of that Reformation which so many do so traduce and spit at: as also
of those more noble spirited Preachers, who so freely offer to God that which
costeth them so much, for which of men they receive nothing.

But this place did not bound the course of this our laborious Preachers
Ministry; but as it is said of Matthew. 9. 35.
our Savior (...), that he went about all Cities and Villages teaching and
preaching, and of Paul, Romans 15. 19. Vulg.
that from Jerusalem, (...), per circuitum, round about, and that to
Illyricum, which was in a right line 3^0. German miles, (as Pareus upon the
place computes it) he did fully preach the Gospel, imitating herein, (as
Hierome observes,) his Lord and in Amos ^.
Master, that Sun of righteousness, whose going forth is from the ends of
Psalm. 19. 6.
the Heaven, and his circuit unto the ends of it: ut ante eum terra deficeret,
quam praedicandi studium. In these their blessed steps, this our Brother trod
and followed them in his painful Ministry, diligently Preaching (when he had
occasion to be abroad) in remoter parts; but especially in many Towns and
Villages nearer hand, round about the University, being a means to set up
Lectures in many of them, and very often assisting in them: and as our Savior
is observed, by some Divines to have Preached more frequently, the nearer he
was to his departure: so this his faithful Servant, as it were presaging that
his day would be but short, toward his evening made the more haste and speed
in his journey, toward his end, yet more abounded 1 Cor. 15. 58.
in this work of the Lord, and now finds that his labor is not in vain in the
Lord. This of him as a Minister.

And lastly, as he was a Christian-

He was active for God, as his Savior, going up and down, and doing Act. 10. 38
good. And although otherwise modest, yet when the case required it, bold in a
good cause.

Spiritual in communion, so that now he is dead, I fear we shall want such a
quickner.

Fruitful in discourse, by which we might discover the frame of his Loquere, ut
te videam.
spirit; frequent in asking questions, which was both his humility, and
Christian good Hushandry, thereby to improve himself, and time, and company.

Affable to others, of much humility in low thoughts of himself, and of great
integrity and singleness of heart, toward God, his truth, ordinances, ways,
and servants.

Of a very public spirit, and much affected with the various conditions of the
State, especially of the Church and people of God.

A most loving Husband to his Wife, and dutiful Son to his Parents.

And in his life time much helpful to his other relations, many poor, both of
the University, and Town, will now feel the want of his bounty, which they
tasted of in his life, and both they and others had done more at his death, (as
appears by his intentions of it in the draught of his Will) had not the
suddenness of it prevented it.

In a long continued Quartan, God had knocked at his door, which in the interim
of his recovery awakened him to get all within ready against his now coming in,
which though to us unexpected, yet found not him unprepared.

In his short sickness, to one of his friends he expressed (as I before
hinted) his great comfort and joy in Gods free discriminating electing love,
which therefore I would have none among us dispute a way against the time that
their turn comes; to my self, about half an hour before his departure (which
I hoped had been much farther off) when I enquired of him about the settling of
his outward estate, and inward peace, he readily and without the least
hesitancy answered me, through the mercy of God in Christ it was made, and that
he quietly rested in it. It seems that (as it was said of one) he had his
faith at his fingers ends, and having before given all diligence to make his
calling and election sure, though somewhat suddenly called out of this life, he
had an abundant entrance now set open to him into the everlasting Kingdom 2
Pet. 1. 10, 11.
of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

And thus from this University (as the Jews use to say of a Learned man when
he dies) requisitus est in Academiam coelestem.

As to himself, having lived a fruitful and gracious life, as Clemens Epistol^
prima ad Corinth. page 58.
Romanus speaks of some of the first and best Bishops, (...), he closed up all
with an happy and blessed death.

As to others, he lived approved, and died desired; and by my self (I am sure)
and by very many, by most that ever rightly knew him (I believe) very much
lamented. So that although we leave Ennius to his Nemo me Lachrymis, etc. yet
this our Brother with Solon (if his humility would have suffered him) might
have said, (...). I have heard, that at Dr. Whitakers Funerals, in this place
there were very many wet eyes, and I believe now at Dr. Hills are very many sad
hearts; but why should we grudge him his happiness? who may say to us, as our
Savior did to the Jews, Weep not for me, but weep Luke 23. 28
for your selves, and for the many sad evils, which he is taken from, you may
be left to see and feel, Isa. 57. 1. answerable to which the Jews have (...)
a saying of such good men's deaths, Quando luminaria patiuntur Eclypsin signum
malum est mundo, It is an ill sign to the world, when the Luminaries of Heaven
are Eclypsed. Deus avertat omen: But certain it is, that we have lost in him a
great good help to keep off such judgments, and that at such a time, in which
he could be ill spared. But we most humbly submit to the Sovereign will of
that Supreme All-sufficient God, who can of stones raise up children Matt. 3. 9.
unto Abraham, and who, (whatever we do) stands not in need of his best
fitted servants for the accomplishment of his work. Only the fewer and weaker
our hands are which are left, the more we have need to bestirre them for his
truth, and in his service: or rather, the more earnestly spread and lift them
up to him, that he would carry on his own work by his own strength; and if it
be his will, (as the Jews from that in Eccles. 1. 5. of the Suns Antequam
occidere sinat Deus solemn justi alicujus, oriri facit solemn justi alterius. 2
Kings 2. 13. Sermon. 87.
rising, and the Suns going down, are wont to say, that the same day wherein
one great man dies, another is raised up, a Joshua to succeed Moses, and
Samuel Eli) that the mantle of this our Elijah may fall upon some Elisha, that
some may arise in his spirit and power, and that doubled, as Ambrose says of
Elijah, plus gratiae dimisit in terris quam secum portavit in coelos; so that
the place of this our David may not be left empty, 1 Samuel 20. 25. In Dr. Arrow
smiths succeeding him in Trinity College.
but what is already happily supplied to the College, may also be made up to
the whole University, and the Church of God.

Mean while, let not us or his sometimes nearest Relations sorrow as men
without hope:

Either of our selves, as though because he has left us, God should have left
us also; but by his death let us take occasion to love the world Robinsons.
Essaies, cap. 62.
less, out of which he is taken, and heaven more, whither he is gone before
us, and where once we shall for ever enjoy him, and be there Phil. 1. 23.
with Christ, which is best of all.

Especially, because there is no cause at all to weep as without hope of him,
who undoubtedly rests in Christ; and though dead, lives and triumphs in
Heaven, where in that blessed Consort he now sing's this joyful (...) in the
Text, O death, where is thy sting? O grave, where is thy victory? Now thanks be
to God, who has given us the victory, through our Lord Jesus Christ.

SERMON II.
1 COR. 15. 55. O death, where is thy sting? O grave, where is thy victory?
THE Text presented death and the grave to us as an enemy, in a double, but
very different posture.

1. As armed, and so formidable: Death with its sting, and the Grave with the
victory.

2. But secondly, (and which is principally intended) disarmed, and so made
contemptible: and here Death has lost its sting, and the grave the victory.

The former we have lately considered upon a more sad occasion, when we took
view of the dark side of the cloudy pillar, and whiles the Exodus 14. 30. Luke
9. 14.
true Israelite looks on it only, he may, with the Disciples begin to fear,
as he enters into that cloud. But now the bright side is turned to us, and the
true Disciple of Christ may hear out of this cloud that sweet voice, This is my
beloved Son. After Luke 9. 35.
a dark night, the day now breake's, and the shadows, (even the shadow Cant.
2. 17.
of death) fly away. The last enemy is destroyed, and the true Believer who had
fought under Christ's banner, after the conflict ended, and the victory
obtained, is now gotten into the valley of Berachah, there in 2 Chronicles. 20. 26.
God, to triumph over these his enemies. With this (...), O death, where is thy
sting! O grave, where is thy victory? And so the point which remains to be
treated on is, That

As to a true Believer, in and by Jesus Christ, death has lost its sting, and
the grave which swalloweth up all, shall at last it self be swallowed up in
victory: For so our Apostle here (...), as Chrysostom and Theophylact In
locum.
flourish the words; as a victorious triumphant Conqueror treading on the
necks of these vanquished enemies, cries victoria, and shout's out with
triumphant song, O death, where is thy sting? O grave, where is thy victory?

In which words, as to the strength and elegancy of the expression, take notice
of

1. His Rhetorical Prosopopaeia and Apostrophe, in this Catacleuasticall
compellation, O death -- O grave. It seems this man of God durst look these
(...), bugbears in the face, and speak out to their heads without fear and
astonishment.

2. His as elegant, but stinging Interrogation. Where is thy sting? Where is
thy victory? Which adds weight to the expression, but yet more elevateth and
sleighteth the adversary, as wholly vanquished, and his power and terror quite
vanished, (...), when Chrysostom. in^ locum.
sought for it cannot be found. This question of the Apostle, being like that
of Zebul to Gaal, Jndg. 9. 38. Where is now thy mouth? when he stood before
him speechless. Or rather like that chap. 1. of this Epistle, Where is the
wise man? where is the Scribe? etc. v. 20. which he had answered before, ver.
19. in his (...), they were destroyed and brought to naught. And so here, when
he asks the question, O death, where is thy sting? O grave, where is thy
victory? he also had before answered it, in his (...), ver. 26. and (...), ver.
54. both words being strongly significant to our present purpose.

(...), it is destroyed, abolished, made idle and vain, that it can do nothing,
at least to our hurt, whilst its sting is broken, and quite taken out, the Be
is become a Drone. It is as a vipera medicata, that whatever good it may do,
to be sure it can do us no harm, but rather as Moses his Serpent, becomes a
staff in his hand to support him; which before he was afraid of, and ran away
from, and might he not then well ask the question, O death, where is thy sting?

And then add, O grave, where is thy victory? when he had immediately before in
the foregoing verse said, (...), it self was swallowed up in victory.

Thus the strong man is overcome by Luke 11. 21, 22.
the stronger, who by taking out this sting, has taken from him his armor: and
so even the lawful captive of the Isa. 49. 24. 25.
mighty is taken away, and the prey of the terrible delivered, whilst this
terrible enemy is thus despoiled, and this painted Lion is not armed, which is
now a foul fault in Deaths Heraldry: Now as an Ex-Consul, a quondam Tyrant,
like the beast that was, and is Rev. 17. ^.
not, and miserum est fuisse, our enemies misery, but our happiness; when,
being once landed on the shore of Eternity, we shall with everlasting joy, look
on death, and the grave, with all their power and terror, as at waters that
are past; and amongst Job. 11. 16.
the many other dead corpses of our Egyptian enemies, see Death it self Exodus
14. 30. with 15. 1. Revel. 15. 2, 3.
also dead on the seashore; and then having the harps of God, sing the song of
Moses and the Lamb: Or if you will this of the Apostle in the Text, O death,
where is thy sting? O grave, where is thy victory? In which Myrothec. page 37,
31.
words Came^o think's the Apostle has special respect to that great promise of
our Savior, Matthew. 16. 18. that the gates of Hell shall not prevail against
his Church; which gates of Hell, he expound's of the power of death and the
grave, which being weakened and annulled by the death of Christ, he says, (...)
they shall not be able altogether to prevail, as that compound Verb signifies.
Something indeed death and the grave are able to do, and that to the elect of
God; those (...), those cords and chains of Psalm. 18. 4.
death, will be able to draw them to the grave, and there for a time keep them
bound under their dominion, (...), valebit, sed non praevalebit, as he speaks
of death; but at worst this will not be always, time will be when this (...)
in the Text, which have so long kept us prisoners in the grave, shall at last
themselves, as condemned prisoners, be cast into the lake of fire, Rev. 20. 14.
when the the Elect, after all their fore-tastes of this mercy here, as it were
by faith, antedating this Triumph, and beforehand tuning the Instrument
against that blessed Consort, being then fully and for ever freed from this
last enemy, as well as all others, shall sing out aloud this blessed triumphant
song, which shall then fill Heaven and Earth with the sound of it; O death,
where is thy sting? O grave, where is thy victory?

But more particularly, That death even in this life, has lost its sting to
such, appears from this, that 1. for any hurt it can do them, they have been
enabled to slight and despise it. 2. In regard of that great good it bring's
with it, they have earnestly desired that it would come, and as cheerfully
welcomed it, when it did.

1. For any hurt it can do them, they have been able to slight and despise
it, and (as it is here in the Text) to triumph over it, O death, where is your
sting? As though he had said to this Serpent, you make an hissing, but you hurt
not. Your Canon makes a roaring, but its no bullet that you shoot but powder,
which cannot blow me from Christ, and my steadfastness, such Shaw-fowls do not
scare me, which instead of being affrighted, I can smile at. Mors Christianis
ludus est. So Vincentius, nay, (as Chrysostom expresses it) In 1 Cor. 10.
(...), it is such as tenderest Virgins, and weakest children could laugh at;
and although they were more serious then with Sir Thomas More, to die Bacon
Aug. meant. l. 4. ca. 1. p. 205 So also Vespatian died with a jest, and Augustus
in a complement. Ecce miser tuam partem assasti, verte alteram.
with a light jest in their mouths, yet they could with an holy derision of
their cruellest Tormentors, as Laurentius, when now broiling on the grid-iron
to Decius, in that facetious Sarcasme. Behold, wretched Tyrant, thou have
roasted thine own part, turn the other. It would be too long to relate in
particular how ambitious, and sometimes too forward Primitive Christians have
been by crowds to press to death and martyrdom, blunting the edge of the
keenest persecutors swords, and choking those ravenous beasts of prey, whose
throats were as open sepulchers; or, Romans 3. 13.
like the Behemoth, Job 40. 23. thinking to swallow down all, the tenderest age
being enabled cheerfully to endure the greatest hardship, and the weakest sex
to over-master strongest pains and torments, as so many fleabites, or
medicinable blood-lettings. So Anne Ayscough in that case could subscribe her
self, Such an one as Acts and Monum. Tom. 2. pa. 776.
neither wished death, nor feared his might, and as merry as one that was bound
for Heaven. (...), as Chrysostom upon these words said of Paul in the Text,
and the same may we of Hers and many others. Noble souls! that could despise
that, which others trembled at, like Christ himself, and by his mighty conduct,
leading captivity captive, triumphing Ephesians. 4. 8
over death, the fear whereof keep's others in bondage. Such a miracle Heb. 2.
15. Sermon. 26. in Cantic.
Bernard says, he saw in dying Gerardus, hominem in morte exultantem, and
insultantem morti, exulting in death, and insulting over it; a miracle indeed
in regard of the greatness of the thing, but none in respect of the
ordinarinesse of it, in many new, in more in former times of persecution; but
eminently in our Apostle, who might well ask death, where its sting was? when
in the first place for any hurt it could do him, could thus despise it, and
triumph over it.

2. But secondly, in regard of the (...). Phil. 1. 21.
great gain he should have by it, could earnestly desire that it would hasten
to come, and as cheerfully and joyfully welcome it, when it did. Mors omnibus
est finis, multis remedium, probis etia^ votum.


1. A believer can heartily and earnestly desire it, cui vita in taedio, or
rather in patientia, mors in desiderio, is weary of life, or patiently content
to live, but willing and desirous to die.

And this not out of extremity of present anguish and pain, or heat of passion,
as Elijah, Job, Jonah, and 1 Kin. 19. 4 Job 7. 15, 16. Jonah 4. 3
others, who upon that account long for death, and dig for it more then for hid
treasures, Job 3. 21.

But in cool blood, upon most serious debate, Paul is in a strait between two,
and when he has disputed the case Pro and Con, he concludes for a conclusion
of this life, (...), Phil. 1. 23. desiring to be dissolved or to be loosed, as
some read that word, or rather reverti, Genev.
as Ruffinus, or, as our last Translators render it to depart, as a travellour
to return home, and there to be loosed from this worlds intanglements, as
Charet or Coach-horses use to be from their harness, when they come to the end
of their journey; for so the words both (...) Beza. (...) dimissio mors.
Shindler (...)
and (...) signify; and so old Simeon in the same case makes use of a like
word, Luke 2. 29. (...) praying for a dismission, as a prisoner from his
chains, and a stranger to his home, where as a weary travellor, he may lie down
and take his rest: for so death, to such, is frequently in Scripture, and other
Authors expressed by sleep, and the burying place is called (...) a sleeping
place, and both the grave is (...) and the Biere Isa. 57. 2. 2 Samuel 3. 31.
that carries to it (...) both words signifying a bed to rest and sleep on;
which they could not well have done, if death had retained its sting, and so
their graves had been as so many Vaults full of Scorpions, and themselves like
the Leviathan that has sharp-pointed stones spread under him, Job 41. 30. If
so, it had been no molliter ossa cubant, would have proved but a very uneasy
bed, not so to be desired quietly to take our rest in; this sting therefore
must of necessity be gone, seeing so many in their right wits have so heartily
and earnestly desired that it might come.

And what then? when it did (...). Eurip. Alcest.
come, were they then as much troubled and affrighted at it, as the old man in
the Fable, who weary of his burden, wished for death; but when it came at his
call, all in a fright, got up with his load, and trudge away as fast as his
feet, or rather his fear could carry him? No, but

2. Did not more earnestly before defire it, then at its approach most gladly
welcome it.

Nor this neither with them, Job 3. 22. and some others, who by reason of
extremity of outward or inward anguish, and weariness of life, (as Saul said,
anguish is come upon me, 2 Samuel 1. 9.
because my life is yet whole in me: do therefore exceedingly rejoice, when
they can find the grave; which many of them then too late find they have
little cause for, when, to their smart they will meet with infinite more misery
after death, then they did before. But they that have a lively faith in Christ,
and in a dying hour can then act it, even when in a manner they lie
speechless, (from consideration of that greater good they then partly meet
with, and are more fully then entering upon) can say, that the day of their
death, is Eccles. 7. 1.
better then the day of their birth; so that whereas they cried in that, they
rejoice in this. And (as the Martyrs did the day of their Martyrdom) account it
their Natalitia, and accordingly Mar. 6. 21. Genesis 40. 20.
(as the manner was) most joyfully welcome and celebrate it. If it came in a
natural course peaceably, nay, were it never so violent, yet receive the
cruellest sentence of it, as Cyprian did, with a Deo gratias. So they story of
S. Andrew, saluting the Cross on which he was to be crucified, and saying,
Take me from Accipe me ab hominibus, and read me magistro meo.
men, and restore me to my Master; as of Laurence Saunders, who when come to
the stake at which he was to be burnt, kissed it, saying, Welcome the Cross of
Christ, welcome everlasting life: That whereas the messenger Prove. 16. 14.
of death, to most men, is in it self, and is so described in Scripture, very
terrible, yet to a dying Believer, then acting a lively faith, is nothing so,
but is entertained by him as a welcome messenger sent from the Father, as to a
child at nurse, to Robinson.
bring it home, where it shall be better provided for, whilst it transmitteth
him from all his sins and sorrows into that place and estate of Browns inquiry
into vulgar errors, li. 3. cap.
bliss, where he shall never sin nor grieve more. Solinus his relation of
the Swan's singing a little before her death, is now accounted but a Fable; yet
Aristotle in one De histor. Animal. li. 9. cap. 12.
place confirms it, and in another rendereth this reason of it, that then
generous blood goes to the heart, making it cheerful, and that thence comes
the melody. I shall not undertake to assert either the relation, or the reason
of it; but thus far may apply it, and say, that God promises to his meek
servants, that their hearts shall Psa. 22. 26.
live for ever; and if for ever, then in death it self; and thence it is that
such generous blood indeed comes then to such hearts, which enableth many to
end their lives, not in mournful Elegies, but in most joyful songs of praise
and thanksgiving, or without any dolorous sense, or mournful complaint of the
sting of death: and where is it then, when it is thus earnestly desired, and so
welcomly entertained?

I grant that this is not so with all believers; Hezekiah in this case, did not
sing like the Swan but chattered Isa. 38. 14.
as the Crane, and mourned as the Dove. And many may be the reasons, why God
in wisdom and faithfulness may let some Believers setting Sun, (at least for
a time) be muffled up in a cloud; and the fault is in themselves, that whereas
Satan uses then most fiercely to cast his fiery darts, they then are not
careful Ephesians. 6. 10.
to hold up the shield of faith, which might quench them; but by their willing
or wilful unbelief, take a course to thrust them in deeper. The Be Animasque
in Vulnere ponunt. Virg. Geor. 4.
dies when she has left her sting in the wound; but if the man who is stung,
carelessly let it alone, he may come to more smart by it, which, by his care
timely to get it out, might be prevented; like carelessness of a worse sting,
breeds greater smart in the case we now speak of. What therefore has bin
said of a Believers security and comfort in this kind, is to be understood of
him as such, viz. as he approves himself to be a true believer, stirring up,
and acting his faith in Christ. Otherwise although the second death shall have
no power over him, yet as he may be found careless and negligent, the first
death, if it surprise him in that posture, may very sorely sting and wound him:
for as it is said of man's laws, so it is as true of Gods promises they favor
not them that are asleep, but such as are awake and watchful; and so to such a
wakefull Christian, death is but a sleep, indeed not it self, not death but an
entrance Miseri infideles mortem appellant, Fideles vero quid nisi pascham?
Bernard. de natura and dignit. divini amoris.
into life; as Bernard says, miserable unbelievers call it death, but to
faithful believers, what is it but a passover, but a Jubilee? Though in it self
it be an enemy, yet by the death and life Christ, it is so disarmed, that his
servants can earnestly desire it, and gladly welcome it, by reason of the great
good it brings with it; and as for all the evil it may seem to threaten or
inflict, can securely despise it, and victoriously triumph over it, and with
Paul here, say, O death, where is thy sting? etc.

For the further clearing whereof, that we more distinctly see in what sense
the sting of death is taken out, and the power of the grave abolished, as to
believers, we are to take notice.

1. Negatively, that is not so to be understood, as though they should never
either die, or meet with any anguish in death.

1. That death should not so far sting them, as not to take away their bodily
life from them, that was once given out of John should be true of them, that
they should never die; for John 21. 23.
so the longest lived of them have done, Genesis 5. and the wisest shall, Psalm.
(...).
49. 10. and the best oftentimes soonest, as sadly appeared in the untimely
deaths of Judah's, and our English Josiah: for as for this death, Gods
sentence, in dying, thou shall die, or Genesis 2. 17.
thou shall surely die, upon Adams sin both to himself, and his whole posterity
in ordinary course was, and continues irreversible; so that it is appointed
for men (that is, generally Heb. 9. 27.
for all men) once to die, and because the best are sinful whilst they live,
therefore they must die once, that once at last they may sin no more.

first Adam is taken off from the faithful, by Christ the second Adam;



1. That although as to all curse and wrath, and vindicative Justice, that was
at first in it, all that is taken away by the imputation of Christ's
satisfaction in our justification, yet the full freedom from it, yea, and from
worse evils then death is, (that we might be kept more humble, and dependant on
God, and Heaven at last more welcome) is carried on and perfected by degrees.
As on the one side, when the sentence of death was passed upon Adam, and so he
was a dead man, yet he did not at that instant presently die; as deadly poison
taken does not always kill presently, but some after a shorter, and some after
a longer time; so here on the other side, the most Sovereign medicine may not
perfectly cure at the first, but when it has had its perfect work; and
although our Redemption by Christ be full, and our recovery by him will be made
complete, before he have done with us, yea even at the first we are (as I
said) in our justification, freed from the state of death, yet the guilty
malefactor is not always presently taken out of prison upon his first
receiving of his pardon, nor we at the first wholly quit from the miseries of
this life, nor from bodily death, no, nor from sin, which to a godly heart is
more bitter then death. Did not our Heavenly Father know, how both for the
present and the future to improve them all to his own glory and our good, he
could and would cut short his work in righteousness, and at the first, Romans 9.
28*
at once pardon guilt, extinguish sin, remove sorrow, and abolish death, simul
and semel omnia; but a man, (and so sin and death in the godly) may have his
deaths wound before he be quite dead, and a conquered captived enemy may for
some time be kept alive, and have much good use made of him before he be
finally executed; and so it is in this divine Economy of Gods grace to his
servants, and in his process against these our enemies: he rescueth us
orderly, and by degrees, from one enemy after another, from one insult of the
same enemy after another.

2. And (which is the second particular in this divine method of God
observable) he does deliver us from the worst first: first, from that which is
wholly inconsistent with his favor to us, and our interest in him: as,

First, from his revenging wrath, and the condemning guilt of sin, and so
from the state of death, in our justification, Romans 5. 1, 2. and 8. 1, 2, etc.

And therewith from the dominion of sin, in our sanctification, Romans 6. 14.

From the being and inexistence of sin, at death, Heb. 12. 23.

And from death it self, (which is left last, as least hurtful) at the
resurrection, 1 Cor. 15. 26. 54. and it is abundantly enough for our comfort,
that if not in this life, yet at death; or to be sure at that last day, we
shall have the full (...), and perfect accomplishment of this great work, when
Christ's rescue of us shall be complete, and death our last enemy shall be
wholly and for ever swallowed up in victory. And this is the first Negative,
Death has not lost its sting, so as that believers should never die.

2. Nor so neither, that at their death they should never feel any kind of
smart and pain by the sting of it. Isa. 38. 3.
You heard that Hezekiah then wept sore, and you read partly how poor, and
partly what desperate shifts, even Abraham, Genesis 12. 12, 13. and 20. 2. 11. and
David, 1 Samuel 21. 12, 13. and Peter, Matthew. 26. 70. 72. 74. (three of the
Scriptures greatest worthies; the first famous for faith, the second for
valor, the third for boldness in the cause of Christ) were driven to through
fear of it; and sad instances of latter times have shown that when many: secure
obdurate sinners have died (as you use to say) like lambs, some of the true
sheep of Christ's pasture have been then half worried by this evening wolf; in
such evenings these frogs of the insernal pit often croak aloud, and Belzebubs
flies then swarm apace. Satan when now to be cast out teareth most; in Isreal's
Mar. 2. 26. Exodus 14. 5, 6, 7, etc.
Exodus, or out-gate from Egypt, Pharaoh pursues with all his Charets, because
if then once gone, they will be out of his reach for ever; the Devil comes
down with greatest wrath, Rev. 12. 12. Deuteronomy. 25. 17. 18.
because then he has least time; and when Israel is weak, Amalek must fall on
the Rear, and do something now or never. And hence it has been, that possibly
you may have overheard some dying Saints groans to have been very deep, and
seen their deathbeds, (as David's Couch) watered and swimming with tears.
Especially Psalm. 6. 6.
if

Either guilt of sin be then charged on the conscience, as not pardoned.

Or some defilement of sin then discovered and aggravated; if our faith then
stumble, our hearts will sink and fall, and be much bruised against the gates
of death: a body of Romans 7. 24
death will then lie very heavy on the weak sick man, now hasting to his bodily
death; and that sin which so defile's him, that he cannot with freedom and
serenity of spirit at other times appear before God in duty, will more abash
him, when now he is to appear before him in death to receive his doom.

And thus far (for the Negative) death has not lost its sting, but partly
does, and partly may retain it, as to true believers.

2. But (for the Affirmative) so, as that in this life, at death, and at the
resurrection, they may with Paul in the Text, ask where is it? For

In the General, it is but this outward life that death can seize on; as our
Savior said of other enemies, so may we of this our last enemy, it can kill
only the body, and after that has Lu. 12. 4.
nothing more that it can do.



second death has no power: Rev. 20. 6.
and then, if they escape that second death, this first to them is but Larva
mortis, (as he calls it) but a grim vizard of death, in the Scripture account
is reckoned for no death indeed, for whosoever believes in me (says our
Savior, John 11. 26.) (...), shall not die for ever: so in the Original which
our last Translators, not unfitly (but as the Greek phrase will bear) read it,
shall never die, if not for ever, faith construeth it never; though I die
temporally, yet Scripture calls it a sleep, rather then death, if I do not
die eternally. This in the general.

But more particularly this sting of death is taken away from believers

1. In this life, partly, in justification, and partly in sanctification; for
the Apostle in the words following the Text, tells us, that the sting of
death is sin; and sin sting's us, both in its terrifying condemning guilt,
binding over to punishment, and in its enslaving power and pollution.

1. Now the first we are freed from in our justification, there is then peace,
Romans 5. 1. and no condemnation, Romans 8. 1. we are passed from death unto life,
1 John 3. 14. the destroying Angel passes over and strike's not, when the
door-posts and lintel are first struck with the blood Exodus 12. 12, 13. Luke 2,
29, 30.
of the Paschal Lamb. And how cheerfully then does old Simeon sing his Nunc
dimittis, when he has got his Savior in his arms, and his eyes have seen Gods
salvation? There is no sting of death that he complains of, the kisses of
Christ's mouth have sucked that out from a justified Believer; and then although
the shadow of death should sit on my eyelids, as they did on Jobs, yet if Job
16. 16.
I can but then discover the eyelids of the morning, but the first and least
Job 41. 18.
out-lookings of Heaven upon my soul, in pardon and peace, especially if broad
day light, and the more glorious shine of the Sun Mal. 4. 2.
of righteousness; how painful soever deaths sting might otherwise have been,
my Phoebus is my Physician, so that there will be full healing under his wings;
and O death, where is then thy sting?

2. And as for the defiling pollution, and enthralling power of sin, though
it be as painful as the very guilt of it, is as a prick in the flesh, sting's
deep, and prick's (...). 2 Cor. 12. 7.
the very heart, Acts 2. 37. yet a Believer in this life has an healing
plaster for this wound also, from the spirit of grace in his sanctification:
and how quickly does a clean wound heal? with how little pain does a formerly
well-ordered body die? and with how much less, does a soul, not
Philosophically purged, but spiritually sanctified, depart from this earthly
tabernacle, which is so subject to be foul, and the very sweeping raises a
dust, our repentings not being without new defilings? Death is not dolorous
when my death and my sin do not meet, but so part, that when the one comes,
the other is gone for ever; and how does the undefiled Dove (which had before
lien among the pots) then shine and glister, when now in her flight to Heaven,
the Sun of righteousness shines on her wings, which are covered with silver,
and her feathers with yellow gold? That I may allude to that of the Psalmist,
Psalm. 68. 13, 14. with what joy and delight does the now chaste soul, when it
has given a bill of divorce to all her former Paramours, ruere in amplexus,
now cast her self into the bosom and embraces of her best beloved? Truly it is
no terrible sight to see death, when the pure in heart (though now Matthew. 5. 1.
closing their eyes in the gloomy shadow of death) can even then see God, in
the clear glass of a pure conscience: there is no such sting in it to such,
to disquiet them, but that without the help of other friends, they may close
their own eyes, and take their rest in their Saviors arms, and their Heavenly
Fathers bosom.

Which leads me from the first part of the Believers freedom from the sting
of death, In this life, to the

2. Second and greater, and that even in death it self. So that when it (...),
Justin Martyr Apol. 1.
kills, it hurts, it stings not; but when they lose their lives, death then
loses its sting, and this many ways: for whereas in the former poi^^ we
showed that to a worldly carnal man, one sore prick of this sting of death
was, that it let out all that comfort which the life of his soul was wrapped up
in. On the contrary here it will appear, that a Believer in the outlet of his
life, has his (...), (as it is called, Luke 9. 31.) his out-gate from all that
which in this life most troubled and wounded him, when the world shall never
trouble, or the Devil tempt, nor God frown, nor we sin any more for ever, then
(I say) we are freed*

1. From all the troubles of this world, which, as to others, so especially to
the godly uses to be very vexatious and troublesome.

A tempestuous sea; and am I hurt if a tempest drive me out of it into harbor?

(...), Psalm. 84. 6. a valley of tears (so some read it) or of Mulberry trees
(so others) the one are moist, and others use to grow in more dry places,
between them they may serve to make up a more complete Emblem of this
miserable world, made up of woes and wants; and how often may you over-hear the
sad mourner complaining, Now woe is me that I sojourn in Psa. 120. 5. (...) lxx.
Meshech? and that word signifies how long he thinke's the time is protracted;
and may you not see those mourning Doves of the valleys mantling the wing, and
saying, O that I indeed had wings like a Dove, that I Psalm. 55. 6.
might flee away, and be at rest. And that rest death and the grave bring's us,
for there the wicked cease from troubling, and there the weary be at rest, Job
3. 17. at rest, from all sicknesses, pains, sorrows, persecutions, etc. which
here they either feel or fear, the one death end's and cure's, the other it
prevent's.

It put's an end to them, so that either they are not, their malice then
cease, post fata quiescit, or in case it prove immortal, so that their
cruelty rages against the dead bodies, estates, good name, and posterity of
Saints departed; yet the best is, they then feel it not. Bucer and Fagius did
not cry out from Heaven as hurt, when their bones (suppose the wise Inquisitors
mistook not some others for theirs) were ridiculously burnt here in Cambridge
diverse years after their deaths, the dead man neither pine's nor starve's, and
though you stab him, he neither sighe's nor groans: the weary before, (however
others trouble themselves with them then) are at rest, and although men will
not let them live in peace, yet in spite of their malice, with old Simeon, they
depart in peace, what evil they before felt, is then ended.

And what they feared, is then prevented, they being taken away from the evil
to come, Isa. 57. 1. as usually evil is then coming, when good men are going;
and if so, it is then the Fathers love and care even hastily to snatch away the
child, when the wild bull is broken loose from the stake, and is now running
upon him; as also the wise Husbandman hasteneth to get in his Corn, before the
swine be put out into the field to root up all: the ordinary instances in this
kind, are, Josiah, suddenly taken away, that his eyes might not see the evil
that was to be brought upon his people, and so, though he died in war, yet he
is said to be gathered to his grave in 2 Chronicles. 34. 28.
peace; and so Daniel is bid to go away and rest, chap. 12. 13. before those
great clashings and confusions should come, which had been foreshewn to him in
the foregoing visions of that Book. Saint Augustine dies a little before
Gensericus took Hippo, and Paraeus before. Heidelberg was lost, to whom (if you
please) Wilson of the life of ^. James.
you may add Mr. Brightman, for whom the Pursivant was sent a day or two after
he was buried. And is then the man hurt, who by this means is set out of harms
way? Or, is our traveller to Heaven the worse traveller, or in a worse case,
for taking up his Inn betimes, before the storm come, or he be benighted in a
wilderness? At death the world will never fight or fright us more, and where
then is its sting?

2. Nor will then the Devil be ever able to tempt us any more; his Ephesians. 6.
^6.
are fiery darts, but then (thanks be to God) we are (...), out of gunshot; 2
Cor. 12. 7.
his temptations are pricks in the flesh, and there let them stick; but the
happiness is, that in death we have left our flesh behind us. This Pharaoh
may then (as was before showed) pursue us most fiercely with all his forces;
but then it may confidently be spoken to the Israel of God, Fear not, stand
still, and see the Exodus 14. 13.
salvation of the Lord, which he will show to you this day, for these Egyptians
whom you have seen to day, ye shall see them again no more for ever.

The Devil who had the power of Diabolus per quod potestatem habuit, victus
est. Ambros.
death, Heb. 2. 14. has by death his commission and power abrogated and
abolished. For,

The souls of departed Saints, are then out of his reach.

And as for their dead bodies, although they may be, and have been abused by
wicked men, the Devils instruments, yet it has been justly questioned, whether
the Devil himself immediately have any such power over them. We read once of
his Jude v. 9*
contending with Michael the Archangel, about the body of Moses, and if the
thing he contended for, were (as it is usually conceived) to have the place
where it was buried discovered. It is plain from Deuteronomy. 34. 6. that in that
conflict he was worsted, and is there then any sting in death, when after it
the world shall never any more trouble, nor the Devil tempt?

3. Nor (which is a far greater word) God frown, which yet in the time of our
life he sees just cause sometimes to do, and to vail his face from us; but
then we come to live, not by faith, which admits of doubting, but by 1 Cor. 13.
12. Rev. 22. 4.
vision, and that face to face: that morning will be (as 2 Samuel 23. 4.) without
clouds, because we shall be above them, and in nearest conjunction with the
Jam. 1. 17.
Father of Lights, with whom there is no over shadowing; whatever the loansom
estrangments be that we meet with here, yet when Lazarus is once dead, he who
was kept out of the rich man's Luke 16. 32.
gates, is then found in Abraham's bosom, the place of warmest love.

And that most lively warmth, most lively felt, in this chill and dark evening
of death, in it there is light, Zech. 14. 7. in grace as well as in nature, the
afternoon Sun is oftentimes very warm, and the setting Sun shines out sometimes
most gloriously. So Oecolampadius making good the splendour of his own name) now
dying, and that of an uncomfortable death, viz. the plague, could lay his hand
upon his breast, and say, hic abunde lucis est: here, here in this dark evening
is abundant light, then then in that gloomy shadow of death have humble
Believers (and oftentimes none more then they who before had been most sad and
brokenhearted) met with divinest raptures and ravishments of Gods love, with
gloriousest shines, and most pleasing smiles of his countenance, and sweetest
kisses of his mouth, as the loving mother kisseth the sweet babe, and so lays
it down to sleep. So the Maimonid. More. Nevoch. part tertia cap. 51. ad
finem. Buxtorf. Lexic. R^bin. ad vocem (...) Idem in Florileg. Hebr. page 205.
Jewish Masters expound that Deuteronomy. 34. 5. of Moses his dying (...) ad ^s
Jehovae, as though God did take away his soul with a kiss; and so of their 903
kinds of death which they use to reckon up, this their (...), the death which
comes by such a kiss, they say is omnium placidissima, of all most pleasant
and comfortable: which, they say also, Moses and Aaron, and Miriam only dyed
of; but many besides them, through Gods mercy have at that time known what the
kisses of Christ's mouth mean. And yet this both in Moses and Aarons deaths is
to this purpose singularly remarkable, that whereas you read of Gods bidding
Moses to go up to Deuteronomy. 32. 49. 50. Numb. 20. 25, 26. Heinsii exercit. sacrae
in Matthew. cap. 16.
mount Nebo, and there die, and of Aaron, to go up to mount Hor, and strip him
of his garments and die there, you shall not find in either places, that ut
capistrati ad mortem mali trahebantur; that as Malefactors they were dragged
to it as to an execution; but on the contrary, without the least reluctance,
they did as they were bid, like (me thinks) well natured children, although
others of the Family sit up latter, and it may be have greater provisions
preparing for them, yet without crying, or the least whimpering, make
themselves ready, and go up to bed when their Father bids them, and well they
might, although others staid behind, and were to be entertained with Canaans
milk and honey, which they were cut short of, seeing they were thus sent to bed
with a kiss, never to have the least appearance of a frown more.

4. But might we here add and never Ezekiel. 28. 12.
sin more, you may say, this would seal up the sum, complete all, and leave
of this sting neither mark nor remembrance. Nor will this be wanting, and
therefore in the last place I shall be bold to add this too. For as sin in this
life, had (as to the Believer) lost its condemning guilt, and dominion, so in
death, it will be deprived of its being, or inexistence; indeed as long we
shall here continue to dwell in these houses of clay, it will be (...), that
which will keep possession, and have its dwelling in us, Romans 7. 17. but when
our souls shall then be dislodged of our bodies, this incroaching and
troublesome Inmate shall once for ever be thrust out of doors from both bodies
and souls together; the death of our body delivering us perfectly from this
body of death, by which (...), its controverted whether be meant this our
mortal body, or the body of sin, which Romans 7. 24. Docet non finiri hos
conflictus quandiu mortale corpus circumgestamus, quando corpus peccati
aliquando exuemus, Paraeus in locum.
is more deadly. I grant the latter, but would not exclude the former, because
both of them are put together, as when Samson died, the Philistines died also
together with Judge. 16. 30. Vide Annotat. in V. T. incerti Autoris. Canta brig.
1653. In Lev. 11. 25. See Mr. Cotton on Eccles. 7. 1.
him. This (some think) was typed out by that in the Law, where it is so often
spoken of men's being unclean until the evening; but more fully and plainly
asserted in the New Testament, where the souls of just men once got to Heaven,
are said to be made perfect, Heb. 12. 23. Other places are brought by some to
the same purpose, as that Romans 6. 7. He he that is dead is freed from sin,
which though meant of a death to sin in mortification, yet alludes to what is
in natural death, as Interpreters agree upon the place, and those expressions
of Christ's presenting us to himself, (...), faultlesse, Jude 24. not having
spot, or wrinkle, or any such thing, Ephesians. 5. 27. which to our particular
persons is done in death, Ecles. 12. 7. and that also, 1 Cor. 15. 26. where
death is said to be the last enemy which is to be destroyed, which they
conceive it could not be, if sin should remain in us undestroyed after death:
but because these places may seem to be capable of a satisfying answer, I wave
them, and content my self with that one before mentioned. I Confess some See
Mr. B. his vindiciae legis page 118.
Divines of very great worth, conceive it is not death, but Cinerefaction that
wholly rids us of sin, i. e. that we are not wholly freed from it, as soon as the
soul is departed, and the body is now dead, but when it is turned into dust and
ashes: and this they would infer from the instance of Lazarus, who after he
had been John 11.
dead four days, was raised up to life, yet so as he died again, which yet he
should not have done, if the Image of God had in his first death been perfected
in him, and so he wholly freed from sin. To which I briefly answer

1. That it is no good way to prove that to be the ordinary and general course
which God takes with all others, because possibly it might be so in Lazarus his
particular and extraordinary instance, concerning whom busily to enquire what
kind of death his was, or in what state his soul was, in that quatridium
mortis, I think would be too presumptuous curiosity.

2. Although the Image of God in him might not be made perfect upon his first
dying, and therefore he might die again the second time, whilst some
consequents of sin, (as mortality) yet clave to him, yet it will not thence
follow, that sin abode in him, no more then that a Saint departed lies under
the power of sin, though he do continue under the power of death, which is a
consequent of sin, till the resurrection. Not that I determine that Lazarus,
after his first dying and rising again, lived all his time after without sin,
in which to define any thing either way, were rashness; but only to deny the
inference, that because the Image of God was not every way completed upon his
first death, so that he died again, therefore it was not restored in this, as
to his being freed from sin, which I conceived saints departed are, though till
the last day they lie under the power of death, which yet was brought into the
world by sin, Romans 5. 12.

3. For the ordinary course, as I believe the dead body is no proper subject
for sin, so I conceive all Protestants, who deny a Popish Purgatory, Rev. 14.
13. Rev. 21. 27.
or middle state after death, must needs confess, that the soul before the
body be turned to dust and ashes, is Sicque malorum omnium tela abrumpitur
Paraeus.
got to Heaven, into which no unclean thing enters; and therefore as soon as
it is loosed from the body, it is so loosed from sin, that it may have a ready
flight, and free entrance unto that undefiled Mansion.

And therefore I cannot but subscribe to him who calls Death (...), and say
with Ambrose, quid est mors nisi peccatorum sepultura? that however it be the
curse of the wicked, to die in their sins, John 8. 21. 4. yet for the godly,
death in them kills sin, and is buried in their grave, and so sin and death,
which were before friends, in our death prove deadly enemies; peccatum peperit
mortem and filia devoravit matrem, sin at first begot and brought forth death,
and death Jam. 5. 17.
at last destroyed sin as the worm kills the tree that bred it. Death came by
sin, Romans 5. 12. Mr. Brightman in his Sermon on Luke 4. 18. page 66.
and sin goes out by death, and so sin dis-armeth it self, takes out its own
sting; and may we not then well say, O death, where is thy sting? O grave,
where is thy victory? viz. when death it self, is thus killed, as you use to
say, quicksilver is killed, when so qualified, as it is made medicinable.

And the grave, which swallowed up all, is it self swallowed up in victory,
Captivity led captive and this our enemy not only subdued that it cannot hurt
us, but also made to serve under our victorious Conqueror, so as to destroy our
worst enemy, sin I mean, which we had most cause to be afraid of, and which
above all made death terrible.

And thus we have seen how the sting of death is taken out both in life and
death from a Believer; but for all this all is not yet done, for all the time
that we continue dead, death in some respect continues his dominion, and
whilst the grave keeps our bodies prisoners, how has it lost the victory?
There is therefore something yet behind, and will that good God who has thus
far led us, here leave us? that as Rachel died, when now it Genesis 35. 16.
was but a little way to come to Ephrath, so when one stroke more would bring
us to shore, we should sink in the harbor? O no.

As on the one side David from good experience could style God (...) Psalm. 57.
2.
a God, who performs, or finisheth, or perfecteth all for me, and whom he
loves, he loves to the end, John 13. 1.

So on the other side, as for his and their enemies, when he begins, he will
make an end, 1 Samuel 3. 12. nor will he with Joash, when he has 2 Kings 13 18,
19.
smitten twice or thrice, for want of giving the last stroke fall short of
completing the victory.

3. And that will be at the last day of the general Resurrection, till which
time, death as it were lived, Romans 5. 14
reigned, and kept the field, and the grave continued his victory; but as in
death (we heard) sin lost its being, so at the resurrection death and the grave
shall forever lose theirs, (...), it shall be destroyed, ver. 26. and (...)
shall be swallowed up, In the 54. ver. immediately preceding the Text, to which
the Apostle relates in these words, O death where is thy sting? etc. which he
speaks by way of anticipation of faith, and (according as before I expressed
it) as it were before hand tuning his voice, that he might sing them out aloud
in that last great Jubilee, and then death and the grave Rev. 20. 13
shall give up their dead, and disgorge themselves of all that they had before
swallowed, and then not only the sting of death, but also death it self shall
die and cease for ever, for there shall then be no more death, then our Rev.
21. 4.
dead bodies shall again live, Isa. 26. 19. so as thenceforth they can die no
more, Luke 20. 36. but what is said of our Savior, shall then be made good of
his servants, they shall then live who were dead, and shall live for ever, Rev.
1. 18. and then Death and Hell as vanquished enemies shall be dragged after
our glorious Conquerurs Charet, whilst his Redeemed ones shall follow him with
their joyful and thankful acclamations, and make Heaven and Earth echo this
triumphant song O death, where is thy sting? O grave, where is thy victory? Nor
will they forget to add that which the Apostle does, v. 57. Now thanks be to
God, who has given us the victory through our Lord Jesus Christ. Which fitly
leads me to the Application.

ANd let the first be everlasting SERMON. III
Prince of our peace, and captain of our salvation. Now and ever blessed be our
God, who has given us the victory Ver. 57.
through our Lord Jesus Christ: and truly it must be (...), if (...), a most
free gift if we have it, for did we fight and win it, that we should wear it?
No, he tred the wine press Isa. 63. 1, 2* 3.
alone, and of the people there was none with him when he came from Edom with
his garments died in the blood of these our enemies, traveling in the
greatness of his strength, mighty to save, (...), as Theophylact upon the
Text. He endured the conflict, and in and by him gained the victory; or as
Chrysostom expresses it, (...), Ille pugna^^ sustinuit, nos coronis and
triumphis suis ornavit. P. Martyr. Rev. 4. 10, 11. Ezekiel. 21. 26, 27.
He got the victory, and let us wear the Crown. But shall not then humble and
thankful ingenuity cast down our Crowns at his feet, or rather set them on his
head, whose right it is? and say, thou art worthy, O Lord, to receive glory,
and honor, and power, for thou have created all things, and for thy pleasure
they are, and were created; all is by him, and from him, and therefore let the
praise of all be to him for ever. It was,

1. His death, which gave death its deadly wound, and by death be destroyed him
who had the power of death Heb. ^. 14.
which is the Devil. And this

As most gloriously, whilst thus in his greatest weakness, he foileth Satan
in his greatest strength, vincit dum 2 Cor. 13. 4
vincitur, when as a weak man he is overcome of death, as the mighty, Almighty
God he overcomes both death, and him that had the power of it, and on the
very Cross made a show Coloss. 2. 15. Musculus. Romans 6. 23.
of him openly, when he himself was there made a spectacle.

So most justly; for seeing death is the wages only of sin, he most
righteously forfeited that his power and authority, by inflicting death on him
who 2 Cor, 5. 21
knew no sin; and thus Jeroboams arm 1 Kin. 13. 4 In Epitaph: Nepot. Vt Hydrus
Crocodilum interficit. P. Dammian: li. 2. ep. 18. Dentes infringes in nimis
solido: concoquere non poteris, sed sicut Danielis bolo Babylonius draco,
eruciaberis and crepabis. Del Rio Adagial. page 250.
dries up, when stretched out to lay hold on Gods Prophet; and the waspish
angry Be fastening her sting where she should not, has lost both it and her
life together. This made Hierom insult over death, illius morte tu mortua es,
devorasti and de^orata es; but withal he blesses Christ for it, Gratias tibi
Christ Salvator, quod tam potentem adversarium nostrum, dum occideris,
occidisti, its most just that death should die, for seizing on the Lord of
Life, who never deserved it; and although we did, yet just too, that we should
be delivered, seeing our Surety has satisfied. And thus our blessed Redeemer,
by being lifted up on the Cross, fought with these our enemies from the higher
ground, and so mortally wounded their head; and that spear which pierced his
heart brake this string, which else would have wounded ours; in hoc sign^
vinces; so that however other Soldiers are wont to be dismayed at the death of
their Captains, yet we are delivered, and so animated by the death of ours; his
death is our life, and therefore let him have that praise, which he purchased
at so dear a price.

2. His Resurrection is both the cause and pledge of ours, 1 Cor. 15. 20, 21.
has a special influence into our justification, Romans 4. 25. and 8. 34.
affording faith (by which we are justified) Romans 5. 1.
a sure handhold; in that it clearly manifests, that he had paid the debt,
when the prisoner was set free, satisfied Gods Justice, when the arrest of
death was taken off, and then, O death where i^ thy sting? and by opening his
own grave, had done as much for ours, and then, O grave, Ezekiel. 37. 12.
where is thy victory?

3. The imputation of his sufferings, death, and unrighteousness, is that
which in our justification takes off Gods revenging wrath, and the condemning
guilt of sin, which our Apostle says, is the sting of death, and so he saves us
from going down into the pit, or at least brings us up out of it, because he
has found a ransom, Job. 33. 24.

4. It is the grace of his Spirit, by which we are enabled to mortify the the
deeds and lusts of the flesh, Romans 8. 13. which was another sting of sin, and
so of death, which the finger of the Spirit of Christ only take's out.

It is not our strongest purposes or resolutions that will be able to
overmaster these enemies; a foul sore, til it be indeed healed, will run,
though we say it shall not.

Nor will the Heathens, and Philosophers Purgative virtues, cleanse this sink,
in which the best of them so foully wallowed.

Nor the Papists Purgatories, penances, watchings, whippings, lousie shirts, or
S. Francis his kissing Bonavent. in ejus vita cap. 2.
or licking of Lepers sores, which will cleanse this fretting leprosy. The
poor woman in the gospel after she had spent all she had on other miserable
Physicians, could not get her Mark 5. 25. 26, 27.
issue of blood stopped, till she got a touch of Christ's garment. Porphyric
himself confesses that nothing else can effect this cleansing, sola principia
Morn: de veritat. Rel. cap. 27
hanc purgation^ perficere possu^t. By which Principia some conceive, were meant
the 3 Persons in the blessed Trinity; but whatsoever he meant by them, I am
sure it was the blood of the sacrifice, Lev. 14. 14. 15, 16.
and the oil that cleanses the Leper in the Law, and that by them was meant
the blood of Christ, and the grace of his Spirit which alone has power to
cleanse and heal both them then, and us now under the Gospel.

5. They are also the consolations and comforts of the same Spirit of Christ,
which are the (...), and Lenitives, which actually and formally take away all
that pain and anguish, which the sting of sin and death make Gal. 5. 22. Romans
14. 17.
in our consciences, such joy and peace are fruits of this spirit, and spring
from no other root. It is the Lord Joh. 10. 11. See Ainsworth on Genesis 25. 2.
Jesus who is our good Shepherd, and as it is the good Shepherds work and
office, first to feed his sheep, and then secondly, to make them lie down and
rest, so he only does both these to our souls, feeds us in green pastures,
Psalm. 23. 2. and makes us lie down at noon, yea, and at night too, Cant. 1. 7.
the first in our life time, and the other event in death, and thence no sting
in death to a good Christian.

6. Finally, it will be his last glorious appearing, at the bright luster
whereof the shadow of death will then quite vanish, and death it self (which
till then had continued and prevailed, and just then having cut down all before
it, had (as it were) completed its conquest) shall then for ever be swallowed
up in victory.

And thus we see our Christ, who is our all, from first to last in this Col. 3.
11.
great achievement of our victory over death, put down all, and therefore to
him most deservedly let be all the praise; and if the Philistims when Judge. 16.
23, 24.
they had gotten Samson into their power, praised their Gods, and offered a
great sacrifice to Dagon, and rejoiced that he had delivered their enemy into
their hands, who had destroyed their Country, and slain many of them; then what
Lebanon is sufficient to burn, Isa. 40. 16. Psa. 50. 10.
or what cattle on a thousand kills sufficient for a burnt sacrifice? what
Hecatombs of praise and service, of whatever we are, have, can do or suffer,
are due to our great God and Savior? who has delivered the destroyer of our
both bodies and souls into our hands, and us out of his; who has slain not
only many of us, but either has or will make havoc of us all, heaps upon
heaps, far more and greater then ever Samson did of Judge. 15. 16. Asa. 115. 1.
them. Now not unto us, not unto us, O Lord, but to our most mighty and most
merciful God and Savior, be all the praise, who has thus delivered us from
the power of darkness, and has Colos. 1. 13 Davenant in locum.
translated ((...)) i. e. has as a Colony, transplanted us into a new and
better Country) from under the power of sin and death into the kingdom of his
dear Son; the Lord of life and glory, has opened for us that iron Jude 6. Heb.
7. 16.
gate, and broken those everlasting chains of darkness asunder and, having
perfectly vanquished hell and death, has instated us in that power of an
endless life. Now glory to God on high, and on earth peace.

strong and everlasting consolation and good hope to 2 Thessalonians. 2. 16. Heb. 6. 18.
all those that are made partakers of the grace of life. For so Calvin rightly
observes, that the Apostle here in the Text, tam animos a exclamatione erigere
voluit Corinthiorum animos; by such an hearty and triumphant exclamation as
this, O death, where is thy sting? O grave, where is thy victory? He intended
to rouse and raise up the drooping, trembling, sinking hearts of Believers, and
by this Prosopopoeia, (as P. Martyr Proponit ob oculos mortem prostratam and
confossam.
adde's) he presents death as having got a deadly wound, and now lying
prostrate at their feet, for them securely to trample upon, and to triumph
over, the sting being gone, and the honey only remaining, whilst it has
delivered them from their worst enemy, sin; and more nearly united them to
their best friend Jesus Christ their Lord and Head. It does indeed part them
from the bodily presence of other dearest relations here on earth, and from
their bodies too, which they must leave also for a time, till they at last come
to a more joyful meeting. But not from God, who as Saul and Jonathan, in death
are 2 Samuel 1. 23. Bernard in Cant. Sermon 26.
not parted. So that what was before porta inferni, is now introitus regni, the
gate of Hell is now become the entrance into Heaven; or as Mr. Brightman
expresses it, what was before the Devils Sergeant to drag us to Hell, is now
the Lords Gentleman-usher to conduct us to Heaven.

Prove. 31. 8. dying men are called (...), a phrase which has troubled Vide
Mercer. in locum.
Interpreters, to give the true sense of it; the word usually signifies a
change of raiment, and so indeed death strip's us all, but happy they whom
Christ has spread his skirt over, they then will not be found naked, but
clothed upon with their 2 Cor. 5. 2^ 3, 4,
house from Heaven. This a Believer has in death, yea by death, and what
conclusion then should he infer from it, but the Psalmists Ergo? Psalm. 16. 8,
10, 11.
Therefore my heart is glad, and my glory rejoiceth, my flesh also shall rest
in hope, because thou will not leave my soul in Hell, but wilt show me the path
of life, etc. and therefore I will not only rest in peace, but leap for joy,
whilst I can thus insult over so deadly an enemy; the righteous may well have
hope in their death, when Prove. 14. 32.
from this Text, they may be sure of the victory.

Cant. 3. 7, 8. that the valiant of Israel have their swords on their thighs,
because of fear in the night; which implies, that as So the Greeks, amongst
their many words for a night have (...) for one which imports fear.
other nights usually strike men (at least children) into fears, so this long
and more darksome night of death, is subject to raise fears even in those that
are men of God. Especially whilst they are weak children, they are often weary
of life, and yet afraid of death, that God (in a manner) knows not what to do
with them; as the Angel ( in Cyprian) chideth such, pati timetis, exire non
vultis, quid faciam vobis? and truly such children should be chid out of such
childish fears, but from the valiant of Israel God expects more spirit, if
not wholly to prevent such insults, yet with courages to repel them; for else
to what purpose serve their swords on their thighs? and a lively faith in their
hearts, if the fears of death can dead it? It is a sad word of Calvin upon Heb.
2. 14, 15. He Si quis anima^ pacare non potest mo^tis contemptu, is sciat p^^um
se adhuc profecisse in Christi fide; ^a^ ut nimia trepidatio ex ignorantia
Christi gratiae nascitur, ita certum est infidelitatis signam.
that cannot quiet his heart in all holy contempt of death, let him know that
he has as yet profited but a very little in the faith of Christ, because this
trembling arises from too much ignorance of his grace, and is a certain sign
of too much infidelity: For so Paul, Romans 10. 7. affirms, that doubtingly to
ask, who shall descend into the deep? is to bring Christ again from the dead,
as though he had not died, and by his death overcome death and Hell: but on the
contrary,

1. The example of Christ our Savior dying, should animate every Christian
Soldier against fears of death; his tasting of it for us, Heb. 2. 9.
should keep it from being to us a c^p of trembling: for if the weak silly
sheep freely follows, where the dux gregis, before has led the way, why
should the sheep of Christ's Pasture be at a stand, though it be in the valley
of the shadow of death, from following the Lamb whither soever Rev. 14. 4.
he goes?

2. But the merit and efficacy of the death of Christ should in this kind be
most operative; as it pacifieth the wrath, satisfies the justice of God,
removes guilt, and purchases Maledictionem sube^ndo sustulit quod in morte
formidabile erat. Cypr.
life; had we the skill of faith to apply it aright to our wounded souls, it
would be able so perfectly to take out the sting of death, that we should have
no cause to be troubled with the fear of it; for so it is signanter dictum, by
death he has Heb. 2. 14, 15.
destroyed him who had the power of death, so as to deliver them that were all
their life time in bondage, by reason of their fear of it: so that if we shall
fear, it is some bodies fault, it is none of his; for on his part active, quoad
causam and fundamentum, (and in the sense that fear is sometimes taken for the
thing feared) we are delivered from the fear of death.

Though on our part, through weakness of faith, or want of due exercise of it,
passive, quoad effectum vel eventum, we may be too much disturbed with this
passion, and accordingly fear it; as a man before in danger, if now by his
friend indeed set in safety, we may truly say he is put out of fear, though for
his part (as not sensible of it) you may possibly see him yet stand quaking and
trembling, like him who after a storm which he has been in, is now safe on the
shore, and yet his head is so dizzy and turns round, that he think's he is
still rolling and tossing in the tempest.

But shall we be so silly, that when Christ has knocked off our chains, the
Devil through these fears should tie and keep us bound with straws?

Nay, shall we be so unkind (I had almost said, so profane) as with Ahaz, Isa.
7. in such a trembling fit as you read of v. 2. not only to weary men, but God
also, v. 13* not only be injurious to our own peace and life, but also to the
worth and efficacy of Christ's death, as though it were not able to fetch out
the sting, and all the poison of ours.

Especially seeing that after his death followed his Resurrection, those Act.
2. 24.
chains of death being too weak to hold him, but that (...), that (...), that
exceeding greatness of his mighty Ephesians. 1. 19. Judge. 16. 9 12.
power Samson-like easily snapt them, as so many burnt threeds asunder, and so
disruptis mortis, sepulchri inferni repagulis, he rises in the glory of that
his might as a Conqueror over death, and so dies no more, Romans 6. 9.
that we might fear no more. Death has no more dominion over him, that the
terror of it may have none over us. Thus our Elisha has cast that 2 King. 2.
21.
salt into these bitter waters, and so healed them, that from thenceforth there
might be no death in them; and although there were sometimes death in the pot,
and a deadly poisonous sting in that death, yet by casting in of this meal,
there is now no harm, 2 Kings 4. 40, 41.
but meat and medicine, life and strength in it; and how long then shall we be
so weak as like children to be afraid of our Physician and Physic? Or like
such timorous men, who, when in the dark, are afraid of any thing they see,
thinking it to be a Devil, or an enemy, which when it come's near, proves their
very friend? But when shall we once attain to that boldness of faith as not to
1 Timothy 3. 13.
fear death, which by the death and resurrection of Christ is become a Serpent
without a sting, and although an enemy, yet such an one as has lost the
victory?

The way to our help herein, will Helps against fear of death.
be

1. To enquire into the occasions and causes of this our malady; and then

2. To apply to each their several proper remedies, that so although we must
all die, yet we may die in peace; and whereas some say, that all die of a
Fever, yet we may not in a cold shaking fit, but with such peace, comfort,
joy, and triumph, that we may then say Paul's words, with Paul's spirit and
faith, O death, where is thy sting? O grave, where is thy victory?

1. Now amongst those causes of Causes of this fear.
our fear of death, some may be more blameless and excusable, if not
justifiable, for a true believer (and that as acting faith) may lawfully in
some cases desire the continuance of life, and so far in a regular way and
measure fear death.

1. From a natural aversation from death, if not as a fruit of sin, yet as an
enemy and destroyer of nature, which before I hinted was in Peter and Paul,
yea, in Christ himself; as appeared in his agony and bloody Lu. 22. 44.
sweat, in that (...), being amazed, and very heavy, and his soul being
exceeding sorrowful unto death, Mark 14. 33, 34. so that again and again he
prays the same words, v. 39. that if it were possible that Cup might pass
from him, Matthew. 26. 39. I confess there was more bitterness in that Cup,
then of a bare natural, or a more ordinary violent death, but yet death as it
is in it self a privation of life, and so a natural evil; so it was no sin in
our Savior in way of natural affection to turn from it, but the perfection of
his obedience to subject himself, and his natural desires and Matthew. 26. 42.
Mark 14. 36.
fears to his Fathers will in it.

2. From some more special grounds of desire of continuance of life:

As, till he attain some mercy desired: so Moses desires to live to go over
Jordan, and see that goodly Mountain and Lebanon, Deuteronomy. 3. 25. and Hezekiah
weeps When he hears he must die before he had an heir. Isa. 28. 3.
.

Or some mercy promised, as no doubt Simeon could not have been willing to see
death, till (as was revealed to him) he had seen the Lords Christ, though then
he desired to depart, Luke 2. 26, 28, 29, 30.

Or till he effect and accomplish some work and service which God has called
and fitted him unto; so the Psalmist desires to live to propagate Gods praise,
Psalm 119. 17. 5. Psalm 71. 18. as a true labourer will desire his day may
last, till his work be done; but in these and the like particulars, there is
rather a desire of life then fear of death, though where there is a true desire
of any thing, the fear of the contrary to it must needs be proportionable.

3. In some other respects there may be more formal fears of death, and yet
less sinful, and more excusable.

As in general, by reason of the greatness of that change and task, which in
death every man, the best Saint, is brought to and put upon.

For so, All changes usually affect us; let it be but the turning of the blood,
(as they use to call it) after the opening of a vein, the man is often at a
swooning fit.

But as all Greatness is awful, so Ezekiel. 1. 18.
great tasks are wont to make us very thoughtful and sollicitous; and great
changes use greatly to affect us, and therefore the great change at the last
day will make even the powers of Heaven to shake, Matthew. 24. 29. by which some
understand the Angels of Heaven, though they be safe enough: so proportionably
the day of our death being the day of our particular doom, in which we have one
of our last and greatest changes to be undergone, and one of our most important
tasks to be set upon and gone through with. Wonder not if you should then see
the wary, busy, thoughtful, careful soul trembling: as for instance,

The parting of the soul and body, so nearly united, and so long acquainted,
and never yet severed, is a very hard twitch.

The leaving of this world of men, to go now into the world of souls, into
that far strange Country, is a great change.

The pains and pangs of death with some are very strong, so that possibly you
have sometimes seen some of strong bodies, yea, and faith too, though they had
nothing else then to do, yet then finding it a work great enough to be able to
die.

Our last accounts are, then to be given up, Eccles. 12. 7. Luke 16. 2. and
that is a very awful business.

And this to a most glorious Lord and Judge, whom we are then to appear before,
and if here we find a dread Majesty in his very smiles, when he is on a
mercy-seat, now that he is on the Judgment seat, his presence cannot but be
very dreadful.

Remembrance of former sins, though pardoned, may make the dying man's pale
cheeks blush.

And sense of present defilement and weakness, though now dying with him, may
make the pure in heart shrink back from appearing before so pure an eye.

And those last conflicts with the world, sin, and Satan, are often then most
fierce and violent, and unless the Sun of righteousness do then more
gloriously shine out upon us with his more enlightening and enlivening beams in
this chill and gloomy shadow of death, even the man of God may tremble, and yet
all this, in these and the like cases, but as an Isaacs trembling, Genesis 27. 33.
or a Moses his quaking, Heb. 12. 21. Reverential, holy, comfortable, and more
awful then fearful.

2. But farther then God helps and strengthens, the best of us may then be
subject to worse and more sinful fears; some of the causes whereof may be
these, to which I shall particularly subjoin their cures and remedies.

1. First, a more general cause of this fear of death, is a secure careless
neglect seriously beforehand to meditate of it, and accordingly to prepare for
it in time of life, for so by coming suddenly and unexpectedly, it puts all on
heaps and confusion. So suddenness and fear for 5. ult.
in other cases are joined together, Prove. 3. 25. and suddenness of
destruction coming upon any, is a description of a most careful and doleful
condition, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 3. it is so here, when in our life time we have not
taken a due and timely estimate of the antecedents, concomitants, and
consequents of death, of all the evil that is in it, and so have laid in no
provisions of those cordialls and comforts that should antidote and sweeten it,
before we are aware of it, or prepared for it, to taste of it, renders it that
(...) a cup of trembling, the Heb. 2. 9. Zech. 12. 2
man unawares has set his feet on a Bog, and he and it tremble, and quake, and
sink together, like Nabal, whose heart died before he did, 1 Samuel 25. 37.

And therefore the Prophylactick here is a frequent and thoughtful meditation
of it, and a daily answerable preparation for it, and so, when it comes, it
prove's less terrible. Whatever the Philosophers meant by defining their
Philosophy to be a meditation of their Metaphorical death, I am sure that in
plain terms the frequent and serious meditating of this death, we now speak of,
is a great part of true saving Christian Divinity; and if with Joseph of
Arimathea, we John 19. 41.
would have our Sepulchers, in our Gardens, if thoughts of death did often recurr
in our best life, especially if in every sickness, disease, and danger, in
which God knock's at our door, Luke 12. 36.
and tell's us that he is coming, we could more livelily see deaths face, and
so grow more acquainted with it, (as Soldiers are wont) we should at last be
less afraid of it. I protest by your rejoicing in Christ Jesus, I die daily,
says our apostle, v. 31. of this Chapter; a daily dying, is joined with a last
days rejoicing, and our continual putting our lives into our hands, as Judge.
12. 3. Psalm. 119. 109.
ready to offer them up to God, will be a means willingly to part with them,
when God shall please to call for them; a dying before hand in thought will
make dying indeed less troublesome: for how forcible and effectual would
forethoughts of death be to make us to fear to sin, and thereby not to fear to
die? whilst the eye of Faith has before taken view of death, in all the evil
that any way is in it, and of all that good which to a believer comes by it.

But so, as this meditation be accompanied with an answerable preparation, for
otherwise as Solomon in another case says, he that increases knowledge
increases sorrow, Ecles. 1. 18. so here the more I know, the more I fear, and
grieve, whilst I know so much evil in it, which then abides me, and withal
that all that good which may be in it, I, for my part, shall fall short of.
With how much shaking does the unripe apple fall off, when a ripe one drops
down without that trouble? the Vine weepeth, when the branch is cut off before
the harvest, and Isa. 18. 5.
the sour grape is but yet ripening in the flower; but with what harvest joy
shall we come to the grave, when we shall be like a shock of ripe corn, which
comes in in his season? Job 5. 26. to which for a close of this, let me add
what there follows, Lo this, we have Ver. 27.
searched it, so it is, and therefore hear and know it for your good.

2. And because in this preparation for death, prayer is one special part of
it; therefore the neglect of prayer is one great cause of the anguish and and
fear of it; and so we find that want of prayer is joined with want of hope at
such a time in the hypocrit, Job 27. 8. with 9. 10. they that use not to look
up to God to seek him before, will then hardly find him; and then for the
child in that dark entry, not to have the Father by the hand will be very
terrible: the true children of God may possibly be more to seek for their
comfort at their deaths, by reason of their less seeking it in their lives, in
that it often falls out, that amongst their many and earn^^ ^uits for grace to
carry them on in ^^eir way, they have not been so mindful as they should to beg
for a smile in their Journeies end, which God make's account, is a mercy worth
asking, and therefore we receive not because we ask not Jam. 4. 2.

For remedy therefore, ask that you may have, now seek, that you may then
find, and all your life time be knocking Matthew. 7. 7
hard at the gate of mercy, that at your out-gate of this life an abundant
entrance 2 Pet. 1. 11.
may be administered unto you; into the everlasting kingdom of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ. Have you ordinarily known the man, who was much in prayer
while he lived, to be full of fears and anguish when he came die? No, those
sweet and strong breathings blow away such darksome clouds, and thereby the
setting Sun shines out brightly. For prayer,

1. Through mercy procure's it, it can get any good thing, at a good Gods hand,
and why not comfort in death? nay, then especially, for then begin's a
believers harvest, when he re^^'s the fruit of hi^ for^^^ la^^^^ Job 5. 26.
Revel. 14. 15.
and has oftentimes a ^ost ^ensibl^ return of all hi^ ^^^^er prayers, which
before (i^ ^^^y be) he thought God, as well as himself, had forgotten.

2. As prayer thus impetrate's it, so it naturally (as it were) trains us up to
it; for by constant acquaintance with prayer, we come to more familiar
acquaintance with Christ, and so come to see and feel how happy it is to be
near him, which cannot but make us the more ready and desirous of getting out
of the body, Phil. 1. 23. 2 Cor. 5. 6.
that we may be no longer absent from him; and besides, the happy soul, which,
with the sweet bird is continually soaring upward, and keeps much aloft, is
so well acquainted with those approaches to Heaven, that now when it fitteth on
the dying man's lips, it is ready on the wing to take its last flight, as in
that dark night very well knowing its accustomed way thither, and having so
often sent its prayers, those winged messengers, thither beforehand, now with
joy and singing mounteth up it self thither, and therefore be much in prayer
now, if in death you would have an answer of peace.

3. False heartedness is another cause of faint-heartednesse, in these animae
deliquia, the rotten quagmire quakes and sinks when trod on; and so fearfulness
(we read) surprizeth hypocrites, Isa. 33. 14.
when death and danger lays hold on them, God then takes away their souls and
their hopes together, Job 27. 8. as else where their hope is said to be as the
giving up of the ghost. Miserable cap. 11. 20. (...)
man! if thy soul and thy hope go out with the breath of the same dying groan.

But on the contrary, (by way of remedy) Hezekiahs walking before God
perfectly, and with an upright heart, Isa. 38. 3.
was the best stake in his hedge, when the news of death made all crack; and
so much truth and sincerity as we have, just so much peace and comfort shall we
have in dangers and death, and no more. The Heathens under their Fables of
Minos, Aeacus, and Rhadamanthus, hinted See Plato in Gorgia. Hora mortis, hora
ve^itatis.
to us, that at death there will be a strict Scrutiny, and however in our life
time we have been judged by our selves and others with our cloths on, yet then
we shall all be judged naked, then all vizards will be laid aside, all black
patches and beauty spots that covered foul sores will be plucked, off and the
pure heart only will be able to lift up their face without spot, and be
steadfast Job 11. 15
and not fear.

4. Too much love of the world is another great cause of our as much fear of
death, when we are to leave it, for fear ever presupposes love, and so much as
I love any thing, so much I am aggrieved and afraid to part with it; with what
crying is the child plucked from the breast, when it has tasted of the
sweetness of it, and as yet skill's of no other nourishment? things fast glued
together, are torn and broken when violently plucked asunder, and if thy cloth
cleave to thy skin, as it is a sign that there is some sore under it, so it
will make all smart when plucked off, and answerably if thy portion (with them
Psalm. 17. 14.) be in this life, thou art utterly undone, when it is ended: Job
Cap. 29. 13
some-where speaks of dying in his nest, but as Chrysostom observes, Nestlins
are wont to be but weaklins, and they that have feathered their nests in the
world, have mind to be on the wing to fly out of it, O death, how bitter is
thy remembrance to him that Ecclus. 41. 1.
lives at ease in his possessions? how sad a sight is the handwriting on the
wall to a Belshazzar in his cups? and when Dan. 5.
the rich man is dreaming of goods laid up for many years, how dreadful a
sound in his ears was that, Thou fool, Luke 12. 12, 20.
this night, etc? when in prosperity the destroyer comes upon him, Job 15. 21.
It was a wise and Christian speech of Charles the 5t. to the Duke of Venice,
who when he had shown him the glory of his Princely Palace and Earthly
Paradise, instead of admitting it, or him for it, only returned him this grave
and serious memento. Haec sunt quae faciunt invitos mori: these are the things
which make us unwilling to die, and so sharpen deaths sting, and make it more
painful; it is a double death to him who is alive to the world, to part with it.

Whereas on the contrary (again for the remedy) if with Paul we were before
hand crucified to the world, Gal. 6. 14.
and had it crucified to us, and (as Chrysostom descan'ts upon the place) lay
like two dead bodies one by another, as there was no mutual desire, or delight
in each other, when they lay together, so there would be as little grief when
they are parted asunder, the world not caring for us, and we as little for it,
and so by our parting no hurt done; were we indeed strangers and pilgrims here,
we would not go home weeping; were we and the world two, at our parting there
would not be a painful dissolutio continui, sitting loose now, would prevent
such convulsion fits, and rentings then.

5. On the contrary, too much carelessness of the things of this world, makes
some men's deaths more careful, and themselves more fearful.

In particular, (I mean) our neglect of a provident and timely setting our
house in order when we are now leaving the world, is apt to leave us in heaps
and confusion. It is expressed in Scripture, as the dying man's task, but Isa.
38. 1. 2 Samuel 17. 17. 23.
it would be much better if it were the living man's care, that when we have
made up our Accounts with men, we might be more ready for Gods Audit, and when
we have disposed of our goods to others, we might be at more leisure and
vacant, the more safely to bequeath our souls to God, and so enter upon our
heavenly inheritance; but it is but our sin and misery, that we lay this double
burden on the tired horseback, that the ending of our reckonings with the
world, and the beginning of our accounts with God, are both put off to be made
on a deathbed; and hence comes many men's fear of death, the man would not
die till his Will be made, and so he then sets about it, but it usually
beginning with his bequeathing of his soul to God, and then this sad thought
comes in; but upon what acquaintance or grounded assurance? which puts the
poor man to a stop; and the will is for the present laid aside, and the sealing
of his pardon he then thinks needs first to be looked after, and so (it may
be) at the last, neither of them is effected with comfort; such men being like
those who have neglected to do their work on the weelday, and so cannot rest
when the Sabbath com's. but Heaven sets us a better copy to write after; God
having finished his works in six days, Genesis 2. 2. Exodus 31. 17. (...)
rested and was refreshed on the seventh; and our Savior when he had said, it
is finished then he quietly gave up the ghost, and so rested in the grave, John
17. 4. 19, 20.
which was typified by the Jewish Sabbath. Happy we, if in this working day of
our life, we could dispatch our greatest business first, but yet all our other
worldly occasions also in time, that the day of our death may be our Sabbath,
in which we may rest from our labors, and feriari Rev. 14. 13
Deo, even keep a true holy day indeed to God, that then with our Savior we
may say, it is finished and with Paul, we have finished our course, and in
running our race, have outgone all 2 Timothy 4. 7. 8.
our griefs and fears, and then may have nothing else to do, but only quietly
to take our rest, and receive the Crown.

6. But because our apostle tells V. 56.
us, that the sting of death is sin, and this (as was before expressed) both in
the guilt and defilement of it; they both make death terrible, and us then
fearful.

1. The guilt of sin, if then unpardoned, or but so apprehended, much
terrifieth the conscience, and so renders death very formidable, whilst it is
looked at as the wages of sin, or Romans 6. 13
Gods arrest, and so the forerunner or beginning of a more terrible execution;
and as its death to a malefactor to go even out of prison, if to be brought So
(...) is rendered, let him be condemned.
before his Judge, so to such a (...), i. e. a guilty condemned sinner, his
death is phrased to be a bringing him to the King of terrors, Job 18. 5. with
14. and well it may, when even a beloved child is afraid to come into his
loving Fathers presence, when he is angry; some such trouble of spirit some
Isa. 38. 3.
Divines conceive Hezekiah lay under, when he wept so sore at the message of
death, and David also when he desired that respite, Psalm. 39. 13.

And therefore our cure here is faith's timely and effectual application of the
blood and death of Jesus Christ, the only tried cure of this tremor cordis, for
so its expressly said, that he by death has delivered us Heb. 2. 14, 15.
from the bondage of the fear of it. So that the more or less that we are able
to apply Christ and his death, the more or less we are afraid of our own; and
hence it is, that

1. Believers by the clearer discoveries of Christ and his death, under the
brighter light of the Gospel, are less in the dark, in the gloomy shadow of
death, then the faithful under the Sea Calvin in John 19. 40. Romans 8. 15*
Law. Their darker vails and shadows had less of the spirit of Adoption and
confidence, and more of the spirit of bondage and fear; as the Apostle hinteth
in the forementioned place to the Hebrews, where he shows, that Christ by
taking part with the children of flesh and blood in his Incarnation, did free
us from that bondage, and so, whereas Moses the giver of the law desired to
live, Deu. 3. 24, 25. Paul a Preacher of the Gospel, desires to be dissolved,
Phil. 1. 23. when once the Sun of righteousness was now more up, yea, Simeon
crave's leave to depart, Luke 2. 29. as its first rising.

2. Hence also it is that among several Believers now under the Gospel, such
use to be more joyful, and less fearful of death, who by faith have more fully
applied Christ, and to whom he has been most manifested; and of all such, none
more then they that have been most humbled, and their hearts most broken with
sense of sin, and afterward have had them more soundly healed, and more
feelingly comforted and enlarged with the assurance of Gods favor in Christ;
the bone broken, and well set again, proves stronger; and the Lute broken if
well put together, makes not the worse but rather the better music. Of all the
Apostles, Paul at his conversion, and in after-sufferings was most humbled, and
none of them express more (none so much) cheerful readiness and desire to die
in Christ, yea, to die for him.

And therefore as our Savior said, Mar. 11. 22
have we faith in God, oh that we had more, and then could act more faith in
God! Could the sting of a fiery serpent make us daily look more up to the
brazen Serpent, sense of sin drive us more to Christ, to get more assurance* of
part in his death, we should thereby (even when we receive the sentence of
death) be more able to trust in him who quickens the dead; 2 Cor. 1. 9.
then should we not be pinioned, as condemned Malefactors are wont to be, but
have an hand of Faith free and at liberty to lay hold on Christ, the Lord of
Life, yea, and gladly reach it it out to receive death it self, as that which
will more fully unite us to him: when the babe is in its mothers arms, or laid
down with a kiss, it then sleep's quietly.

2. But Secondly, the defilement of sin, although faith can see it pardoned,
will make a child-like shamefacednesse blush and fear so to come into a Fathers
presence. My little 1 John 2. 28.
children, (says the Apostle) abide in him, that when he shall appear, we may
have confidence, and not be ashamed before him at his coming; and although the
most loving wife heartily desires her husbands coming home, yet she could be
content that he would stay out so long, til he have righted things in the
house, if for the present they lie unhandsomely and out of order. With Vzziah
to be lepers to the day of 2 Chronicles. 26. 21.
our death, will make a very foul corpse, and a body foully distempered in life,
(especially if the soul be found so in death) will make deathbed-groanes more
deadly; strong bodies use to have strong pains in death, John 8. 5. Numb. 25.
8. 2 Samuel 17. 23. and 18. 14. 15. 1 Samuel 28. 7, 8, 9. etc. with 19. Matthew 27. 5.
and so have strong lusts; especially if we be taken (...), as Zimri and Cozbi
in the very act of uncleanness, Absalom and Ahitophel of rebellion; if Saul
consult the Devil this day, and go to him the next, and Judas by an untimely
and woeful death, be suddenly brought before his Judge, whilst he is yet
reeking with the blood of his betrayed Lord and Savior; with what horror and
amazement must such needs appear before the Judgment seat? Joseph, though
Genesis 41. 14
under no such guilt, yet being in the squalid condition of a prisoner shaveth
himself and changes his raiment, when hastily brought out of the dungeon
before Pharaoh, an infinitely inferior presence to that which we at death are
to appear before.

And therefore here again, the death of Christ applied by faith, proves a
Sovereign remedy; for it is then safe drawing near to God, when our hearts are
sprinkled from an evil conscience, Heb. 10. 22. and that is by the blood of
Christ, Heb. 9. 14. labor therefore in the way of mortification to be
implanted into Christ's death, and Romans 6. 5.
this sweet fruit amongst others, will spring out of his grave, that what
mortifieth sin, will kill the fear of death, which is caused by it.

1. Partly as this daily practicing of dying to sin, will inure us with more
ease to die to the world, not only whilst we live to be weaned from it, but
when God shall call, in death willingly to leave it. Lusts are members Col. 3.
5. and the content which a sinner takes in them, in his very life Isa. 57. 10.
dearer then his natural life, and therefore it is that he is so often ready
rather desperately to hazard it, then not to gratify and satisfy them, he
therefore who in a course of mortification has done the greater, will not
stick at the less; will not stick to part with his dear life, who by the grace
of Christ has already parted with his dearer lust, and so by continual loosing
the tie of his soul and sin, he may expect the last loose of his body and soul
with more comfort.

2. But mortification effects this more directly, in that it properly and
formally takes away sin which is fomes morbi, the very matter of the disease,
and of all these shaking fits in death, and then as a sound and well ordered
body, dies with little pain, so a sanctified purged soul departs with less
anguish; a great deal of grace in our life, brings a great deal of comfort in
death; and why should I fear that which at once freeth me from sin, which in
this course of mortification, is the cause of my greatest grief, and perfect's
grace, which is the object of my chiefest desire? what therefore now remains,
but that we labor to live holily, that we may at last die comfortably; and as
they were Acts 9. 37. Luke 23.. 56. Matthew. 26. 12.
wont to wash dead bodies, and to anoint them for their burial, so that we
would do as much for our souls, get them washed in the blood of Christ, and
daily more and more anointed and embalmed, and perfumed with the graces of his
Spirit; So our deaths would not be more precious to Psalm. 116. 15.
God, then comfortable to our selves: So with Asa we should be laid in our
graves as in a bed filled with sweet odours 2 Chronicles. 16. 14.
and spices; and what the Romans were wont to do in their Pageants, at
Herodian: l. 4.
the consecration of their dead Emperors, would have more realty at our death
and Funerals: no Eagle (as with them) to carry the soul up to Heaven, but our
souls as the renewed Eagle would mount up out of such a bed of spices, to those
mountains of spices, where Cant. 8. 14. Brightman Psalm. 16. 11 Matthew. 25. 4, 6,
7.
are pleasures for evermore. O that we were once so wise, as with those wise
Virgins to get oil enough into our Vessels, and then our Lamps will burn bright
at midnight, in this midnight of death and judgment; when, with them, we shall
either go to Christ, or Christ will come to be married to us, and then this
shall be one strain of our marriage, of our Triumphant Song, O death, where is
thy sting? O grave, where is thy victory?

Tibi Domini Jesu, qui spes es viventium and resurrectio mortuorum.
FINIS.

