A true Report of the great Costs and Charges of the four Hospitals, in the
City of London, in the maintenance of their great number of poor, this present
year, 1644. as follows.
CHildren kept and maintained at this present, at the Charge of Christ's
Hospital in the said House, in diverse places of this City and Suburbs, and
with sundry Nurses in the Country -- 758

The Names of all which are registered in the Books kept in Christ's Hospital,
there to be seen from what Parishes, and by what means they have been from
time to time admitted.

Children put forth Apprentices, discharged, and dead this year last past --
100

In respect of the troubles of the times, the means of the said Hospital has
very much failed for want of charitable Benevolences, which formerly have been
given, and are now ceased, and very few Legacies are now given to Hospitals,
the Rents and Revenues thereunto belonging being also very ill paid; besides
the want of bringing Cloth and other Manufactures to London, which have
formerly bin brought to Blackwell-Hall, the Hallage whereof was a great part of
the poor Childrens Maintenance, which being decayed, by these and other
means, the said Hospital has not been able to take in any Children for two
years past.

THere has bin Cured this year last (...), at the Charge of St. Barthol^mewes
Hospital of maimed Soldiers, and other diseased Persons, to the number of --
1122

All which have been relieved with Money and other necessaries at their
departure.

Buried this year after much Charge in their Sickness -- 152

Remaining under Cure at this present, at the Charge of the said Hospital. --
249

THere has bin Cured at the Charge of St. Thomas Hospital, this year last
past, of diseased Persons, whereof a great number have bin Soldiers, who have
bin relieved with money and other necessaries at their departure -- 1063

Buried this year after much charge in the time of their Sickness -- 248

Remaining under Cure, upon the charge of the said Hospital at this present --
265

THere has been brought to the Hospital of Bridewell, within the space of
one whole year last past, of Cavaleers, and wandering Soldiers, and other
vagrant people, to the number of -- 1128

Many whereof have been very chargeable to the said Hospital, for Apparel,
sick diet, and Surgery, besides their ordinary diet, and other provisions and
charges expended about them, which could not be avo^ded, by reason of their
necessities. And there are now kept and maintained in Arts and Occupations, and
other several works and labors, at the charge of the said Hospital, to the
number of 134 Apprentices, and other Persons.

The Hospital of Bethlem is of great antiquity use and necessity, for keeping
and curing distracted persons, who are of all other the most miserable, by
reason of their wants, both for soul and body, and have no sense thereof.

That the charge thereof is very great, there being kept and maintained with
Physic, diet, and other relief, 44 distracted persons, constantly at least,
and the rents and revenues thereof very small, not amounting to two third parts
of the yearly charge, and therefore is a fit object of Charity.


