C R The true way to a safe and sudden Peace, propounded by the well- affected
to the CITY and KINGDOM.
ENGLAND, an Island, may well admit to be compared unto a Ship, and would ever
floate* were it not for its two maine Anchors, RELIGION, and the LAWS: the
bulck and rigging, are the People; the Gang, the Governors; and the King PILOT.

Near seven Years since, was pressed a new crew of Mariners: these were not
long me^, but (to do something to be talked of) they would needs clap the Pilot
under Hatches, slip the maine Cables, and to Sea.

Now (if all be well thought on) it is no wonder that this Island should have
undergone such shocks, such dangers; when only a long Voyage was decreed, no
Port propounded. We were once whirled into the midst of the Red Sea, deep
in blood: upon promise of better things, Providence then brought us off.

But behold us (a backsliding Generation, and gaine-saying People) now once
more at the brinke of those bitter Waters, and even all ready to perish, such
are our Miseryes, such is our Distress; but is their no hopes left? no remedy?
Yes* let us unanimously, unfainedly, and severely repent us of all our sins,
(peculiarly those of Rebelion) to GOD and our KING: (which we must confess
too) and be of good courage; the Boyghs are still above Water, records of our
RELIGION and LAWS to be yet found.

Oh then, you of the Gang, Parliament Men, Fairfax, Mayor, and Aldermen of this
City, Massy* Poyntz, and the rest that should govern: be not ashamed to
endeavor the Salvation of your own Souls (by a public acknowledgement of
your mistakes and errou^^) and the preservation of the blood of many thousands,
persons innocent (in order to this War) who will (if it proceed) certainly
fall by it.

Break up the H^tches, call on the KING in mercy, and be confident, he will be
as truly joyous to guide, and conduct you to your lost Anchors, as the man now
drowning to recover the wished Shore.

The People (with Hi^ most Gracious MAJESTY) will not only pass an Act of
Oblivion, and attribute all our past-Sufferings to mis^understandings,
believing you meant better. But rather remember that you have now saved us from
Fire, Famine, and the Sword.

And as for you gallant Apprentices, go on in your honest Petition, go on in
the Name of the God of PEACE, and prosper: never leaving till you have procured
the men now in Authority, to humble themselves, as Subjects should unto their
KING, desiring him (by that abundance of love which he has ever professed unto
his People) in Wisdom, to enrerpose and (by the right of his Scepter) take up,
the differences now on foot. This done, know Fairfax dares not but be honest;
and you will so make this, and after Generations for ever bless you* which
that God in his mercy may effect, is the hearty Prayers of him who conjures you
to assure your selves that, no King, no Peace, no Happiness.

Fiat iustitia quanquam ipse periam.
Printed at London 1647.


