THE Temples Foundation LAID: OR, A Way for SETLEMENT OF RELIGION. Humbly
Presented unto the PARLIAMENT.

By M. T.

LONDON, Printed by G. D. for Giles Calvert at the Black Spread-Eagle near the
West End of Paul's 1653.

THE TEMPLES FOUNDATION LA OR, A Way for SETTLEMENT OF RELIGION.
Let your Moderation be known unto all men, for the Lord is at hand.

Phil. 4. v. 5.
IN Church discipline or the affairs of the Church, it was the great
expectation of the people of God, and the grant of Authority they rejoiced in,
that there should be a due regard had to tender Consciences: Yet Episcopacy,
Presbytery, etc. having, as they conceived, the sword of authority in their
hand, made some Saints groan, and their cry has come up into the ears of the
Almighty, who has said, Touch not mine anointed, and do my Prophets no harm:
For, if ye touch them, ye touch the apple of mine eye. And having taken to
himself his great power, and pouring forth his Viols of wrath, most have
blasphemed and not repented, and in the confidence of their ways, have not
eyed, whether Moderation has been found in them, and that Righteous Law, Quod
tibi ne feceris, alteri ne facias, (the Perspective Glass into all Laws) has
been by them neglected. And hence come Wars, Fightings, Back-bitings, etc.
and who knows how soon the cryers of Hosannah may cry, Crucify, Crucify?

And the ground of this has been Zeal, (but not according to knowledge.
Therefore it is necessary to consider Zeal, First, As it has been contrary to
God and his People. Secondly, As it may, and ought to be, every Christians
practice.

Zeal then considered, as contrary to God and his People, will not need much
labor to prove, as having been by most of the people of God granted, and by
their practice, in opposition to the Laws in force under Episcopacy, and
Presbytery, made manifest. For the slying of some to New England, to Holland,
and to secret Coverts, to avoid the High Commission, testifies clearly, the
truth of their sufferings, rather than to conform to the Act of Uniformity. And
the keeping up of the same Laws in the time of Presbytery, shows the same
spirit active then.

But it may be Octjected, That those very Ministers, that cost many vast
estates, to carry and maintain them beyond the Seas, do come and enjoy the
fattest livings in the land now, and perform every thing those Ministers did
against whom they cried, Separate, and be ye separated, and therefore it will
be necessary to enquire, whether there were a true ground to separate, and
whether those things, so zealously imposed, were against God and his People.

The Tracts are many and large against mixed Communions, which to every
understanding man (to whom these are intended) are so clear, that I shall
forbear to to urge any more texts than, come out of her my people, and, what
fellowship has light with darkness. And my opinion is, that whosoever shall
command any thing in the worship and service of God, sits in the Temple of God
as God, and if he does command Tables to Altars, making of Churches and
Ministers thereto, jure divino, He is Antichrist in the height, and sits in the
Temple of God, against God, an Enemy ready for destruction: And whosoever
obeys such commands is to be separated from, in it.

But it will be Objected, That there was never any thing imposed yet, but under
color of Scripture Authority.

To which I Answer, Their works accordingly were burnt up and they suffered
loss.

It will be Objected again, That fear of flying to high may cause a flying to
low, therefore if no course be taken by Authority in Settlement of Religion,
the consequences appears already to be very dangerous.

To the which I Answer, That the most disputable points (most commonly insisted
on for settling Church Government) about the visible Churches, the Ministry,
and Sacraments, will not be found any ways conducing to the ends proposed. For
the great advantage to the civilizing of People to extirpate all viciousness,
and to increase knowledge in the Scriptures, has been the Preaching of the
World, or the Saints of God giving forth their apprehensions of the Scriptures,
which are the Preachings of the Prophets and Apostles, and as they were sent,
so by their writings do preach to the end of the world. And this present age
has been much puzzled, laboring to find out, and set up men as their
successors, which prosecuted, vi and armis, with their interests, has caused
the Judgments of God, who will vindicate his own way.

And therefore before I go to lay down that Order of Preaching or searching the
Scriptures necessary for the Nation, I shall briefly set forth the true and
false Ministry.

The true Ministry seems to be held forth to me, in Ephesians. 4. v. 11, 12. And
he gave some Apostles, some Prophets, some Evangelists, some Pastors, some
Teachers, for the joynting or grafting in of the Saints into the work, of the
Ministry. And the Lord accordingly has owned the Ministry in this Land, qua
Saints, and disowned and punished that which was set up Authoritatively, as an
Idol, or as one having a gold ring, and as it stopped the mouths of other
Saints, met in the fear of the Lord. And as the Observator upon Clement, Paul's
fellow laborer, the best piece of Antiquity in the world shows, that in his
time, when there was a visible Church, a visible Ministry, etc. That even
then, as he writes, omnes Sancli sunt Cleri; And the word Laicus had not to
this day obtained a place in our Lexicons. It would certainly be dangerous to
set up a Ministry of man's making. But as this is dangerous to assert, in these
times wherein we hope better things, I am bold to adventure the danger, not
knowing that I err from the most Orthodox Writers, Scriptures, or Councels.

As for Writers to the point of the visible Church, never any of note, or worth
noting, answer Bellarmin, and the Papists, otherwise, than that it is not
necessary the Church should be Visible: Willet in his Synopsis Papismi uses it,
and so does Calvin, and all the chief Writers. Which seems to me a weak answer,
and this day it is the first point, and only one, a Jesuit insisteth on
against us, and our unhandsome dealing therein wiling to keep our Hierarchy,
has sent thousands back to Rome.

For in truth if a visible Church (most commonly by lovers of Truth) adjudged
theirs for the Channel, labored to be cut by diverse, seems to have the
impregnable Alps in the way. But if no visible Church, no visible Ministry,
being as inseparable as the soul from a living man. And many of our late
Orthodox Writers say expressly, that the Church was invisible, as Brightman, and
diverse others. And the Scriptures are evident for it; for upon the opening of
the seventh Seal, the Sun was darkened, the Moon lost her light, and the
Stars fell from heaven, which was doubtless the ceasing of the visible
Church, foretold by our Savior in the Evangelists, to follow immediately after
that Generation was past away.

And Scripture seems to hold forth clearly the Church to be invisible, if the
Covenant of God be that formale esse of a Church, which gives the being, then
as the Covenant is spiritual so is the House; for the Covenant of Circumcision
was visible, if that such did show forth the death and resurrection of Christ,
they were legal, and being shadows must pass away, the Substance being come.
For says the Apostle, The Law has the shadow of good things to come: by which
we know, what was legal and ceremonious, which Laws and Ceremonies, the
Apostle writing of them, as they were under divine institution, terms them,
beggarly and weak: and if we did truly know and weigh the new Covenant, and the
enjoyment thereof, we should be so far from contesting about meats, and
drinks, and days, and washings, that if there were divine institution upon
them, yet to be valued no further than as to fulfill all righteousness, and
not to be looked upon as serving to purify the Conscience, whereas the New
Creature is All.

And if it appear then, that the Covenant is altogether spiritual, doubtless
the House is spiritual; one Holy Catholic Church, as the first, and all
Councels, worthy the name, conclude. And doubtless the Councels of England,
making those new Distinctions of the Church of England, and Parish Churches,
used the word as Heathens did, or as some of our late Councels, to be so jure
humano, by which they were in a fair way to settle the Nation, but the violence
of some spirits, if not self interests, that they might give law to them that
made them, by a Law would be jure divino, till divine Justice vindicated his
own honor.

And if the Lords going through the red Sea, in destroying those enemies, be
worthy our observation, and if so much can be said, as before, to show the
invisibility of Church and Ministry, for quatenus a Saint, he is invisible from
a hypocrite.

I say then, if that Ministry of Saints under bondage, has been so beneficial
to the Nation, and the only means of good, to the ends before proposed, let
true Zeal propagate it to freedom.

Zeal then truly considered, to propagate the Gospel to freedom, admits of a
Quaere, Whether it should be Coercive or not Coercive.

To which if I should positively answer, I know my doom, the judgments of men
standing on each side like Scilla and Charibdis. And because I intend to show
the unnecessariness of a Coercive power, I might well pass it by.

But if I put in a word, it may not be altogether unnecessary. I shall say
then, that if the Magistrate may Coerce any civil assembling, why not this?
why not a metting to read a Chapter? etc. under the same stamp of jure humano;
and if upon any other account, as jure divino, to order any thing in Gods
worship, my opinion is, he sits in the Temple of God as God, and if he Coerce,
God will grind him to powder.

But I shall proceed to show the unnecessariness of a Coercive power, the
Independent, and Anabaptist, and all Church-fellowships of the same nature need
it not. The lost sheep only stand in need; and what is their cry? When will the
State settle Religion? we live like Heathen; and indeed their case is sad. And
if the State would but appoint them a way for acquainting them with the
Scriptures, and order a Discipline for ruling their lives and conversations, I
am confident the fore named fellowships would not outshine them, and thereby
the Divisions in the Land, upon the account of one more holy than his fellow
taken away: and only a holy emulation remain, as who should be most holy in
truth. It will be necessary then, to proceed particularly in the appointment of
a way for the acquainting of the lost sheep of the Nation with the Scriptures.

The persons necessary to be employed in such a work, are worthy our
consideration.

First, If they be members of Congregations, it will break the Congregations.

Secondly, Such as are likely to extend the appointments of Authority to a
yoke, and heavily impose it, will overthrow the intended work.

Thirdly, If the lost sheep be prejudiced against such persons, the ends
proposed will not be effected.

Fourthly, Convenience of time and place suites not with Church Members.

Fifthly, The emulation to holiness is taken away betwixt them.

Sixthly, The enlargednesse of spirit to each others good, appears not in them.

Seventhly, It may be much feared, that the precious opportunities in such
meetings, will be devoured in vain janglings, and questions, about Church-form,
neglecting the substance.

Eighthly, If the lost sheep shall not partake of the Sacraments, etc. with
those sent unto them, it will cause breach of love, etc.

Ninthly, In settlement of Religion, Peace and agreement is chiefly to be
sought, which cannot be betwixt persons so different.

Tenthly, If persons of enlarged spirits, as Mr. Sterry, Mr. William Sedgwick,
Mr. Dell, Mr. Bacon, Mr. Sprigg, etc. be appointed a Committee into several
Counties, for putting in force the Order intended, as to time, place, persons,
and the work to be done, quam facile est.

The time most suitable will be the first day of the week.

The place would be most convenient suitable to the persons.

The persons intended, are one, two, or more Parishes, as those Commissioners
shall see fit, wherein will be be found some 4, 6, or 8. fit for Moderators, to
preserve the meeting from confusion, being wise, holy in life, knowing in the
Scriptures, that whatsoever is done may be for edification.

The Work intended, wherein the Nation would rejoice, is the reading of the
accustomed Psalms and Chapters in the Old and New Testament; and I should
argue, if my child loved History, as the Chronicles, so he read in the Bible, I
should like it, and not doubt to be able to show him something very profitable;
and if he should inquire and search after the meaning, I should rejoice in it,
and think my self happy, and why not the meanest in the Nation have the same
privilege, though it were good civil policy to disown such children as live
disorderly. And commending the word of exhortation and instruction to the
Moderators, I shall (intending brevity all along) forbear a more exact form in
the Method, conceiving such persons named more fit.

There remains, in Order to a more excellent shining of the Nation, a
Discipline, which was never practiced but in the non-conformable Churches,
which causes their shining, but drawn forth into Questions of Church Ministry
and Sacraments, by the Church of England. And the severity of that Discipline,
for such questionable things, from their own mouths, runs so in their
Disciples mouths, that it would make a man tremble, especially if they are in
authority, that it strikes like lightning. And under this Discipline, most
commonly a Heritique judges a Saint a Heretic: And therefore all judging for
matter of Opinion I forbear, conceiving as the Apostle, That if such a one
comes in he will be judged of all, and, that Truth seeks no sword for its
Protector.

The Copy of the Order to the Commissioners, and the Act of Parliament intended
hereunto necessary also set down.

The Magistrate, as Parents to Children, and Masters to Servants, ought to
exhort and correct evil doers and therefore sends Letters, and gives his
authority to some Deputies, Moses himself not being able to bear the burden
himself.
TO A. B. and C. D. We desire and require you to go through such a County,
appointing Parishes, as you think fit, to meet the first day of the week at the
most convenient place, or places, at accustomed hours, and to appoint such
whose lives, in your Judgment, do render them to be Saints, to read the
Psalms and Chapters, in the Old and New Testament, as was accustomed to be
read, and that according to their best abilities they do first of all inquire
into a right understanding and meaning of the words read: And to avoid
confusion, there shall be with your consent, four Moderators, or more, who may
afterward give forth such instructions and exhortations as are pertinent to the
said Scriptures. And we require you further to inquire into the lives and
conversations of People, sharply reproving such as live disorderly, in a
continued scandalous way of sinning against God: And that you leave order in
writing for the Moderators of one hundred, to choose four from amongst them to
go into the next hundred, every six months, Viz. June 24. and December 25. and
inquiring for, and sharply reproving such as live in a continued scandalous way
of sinning against God. And if after such reproof they amend not, to give
notice of their names and crimes to the next Justice.

Authoritate Parliamenti.
And whereas it is a shame that Christians should come to be judged by Heathens,

Be it Enacted by Authority of this present Parliament, that no man within this
Commonwealth, that is not adjudged a Saint, shall be of any Jury. And that the
Justices of the Peace do appoint a Jury of the Neighborhood to fine any
person being found guilty by them, upon the Oath of two sufficient Witnesses,
of his liveing in a continued scandalous way of sinning against God. And it
shall be lawful for the said Justices to mitigate the said five: Which shall
be to the only use of the poor of the Parish where the Offender lives. The
fine not exceeding the fiftieth part of any man's visible Estate, or the half of
his yearly Revenue. And only in default thereof a Corporal punishment.

FINIS.

