July the 12th. 1642.
Truths from York, Hull, and other places.
ON Sunday night last His Majesty had a Post come unto him, that the Ship
Providence was driven a ground near Hull, by a Ship employed by the
Parliament; and that the Lo: Digbie with other Cavaliers were in the Ship. It
so pleased the Court, that an Alarm was struck, every man crying, Horse,
Horse, Arm, Arm. Sir Thomas Metham received command to raise his Regiment;
Sir Robert Strictlands Regiment was commanded to march; the Lord Mayor in
person ran like a mad man to drive horses in the field, to hasten away the
baggage; the King went away in all haste toward Beverley on Monday morning.
Sir Fra: Wortley and Metham were designed to cut the fresh water River; but the
great prejudice the Inhabitants, near their quarters, were like to have by
that design, diverted them from going on. The Archbishop of York gloried
much in the arrival of this Ship and Ordnance. Sir Ralph Hopton, and Sir
Christopher Hatton, with some other Members of the House of Commons, went in
person this week to the Leagre, which at this time is within a mile and a
quarter of Hull, where they entrench themselves: and as I understand from a
good hand, some twenty of the common soldiers were enforced by some of the
Cavaliers to make an attempt upon the stone Sluice, within three quarters of a
mile of the town; but Sir John Hotham discharged his Canon on each side them,
and they were glad to depart, some of them being struck dead for a time with
the wafte of the bullets. It is an admiration unto us, how the Commanders in
Ireland, (who are employed by the Parliament, to reduce those bloudthirsty
Rebels) could have such private intelligence, to come over at this instant of
time. We are sorry they have so little conscience, to leave their killing
Rebels and Traitors to the King and all his Kingdoms, and come hither to
engage themselves against the Kings own subjects in this Kingdom, as at this
time diverse of them are. I hear a good report of Captain Lloyd, (the Enginier
and Quartermaster for the whole Army in Ireland, and employed by the
Parliament) he had good fortune to come in this nicke of time; His Majesty
received him with such great joy, that he would not suffer him to salute his
wife, but took him to the siege against Hull, with diverse chief Commanders
more that are come out of Ireland, (we all think) to advise the gaining of
Hull, especially because the proclaimed Traitor, Lord Digbie, is their Comraig;
though by advice to his Majesty (lest the countenancing of his Lordship should
lose his Majesty in the affections of his people) he is kept very privately at
Court. It is strange, that this Design should be so well known to those of our
Nation in Spain, France, Holland, and Ireland, of the surprisall of Hull, and
yet that Sir John Hotham must be in a lost condition, before there be a sense
of his danger amongst our selves.

On Wednesday his Majesty returned from Beverley to view the great appearance
of horse on the North moore; many hundreds were expected, I cannot say one
hundred appeared, only nine listed themselves. The Gentry desire not to divide
the King and Parliament, and the Yeomanry swear they will not, and believe
when any attempt is made upon Hull, the trained bands will be cold in that
service: it must be a select number of the damme blades of Cavaliers and common
soldiers that must do it; and men of undaunted courage in that town will
find them work: the only difficulty we conceive will be the untowardnesse of
some of the Townsmen, that will endeavor to make a fraction by reason of want
of trade and victuals, which the Parliament must with speed supply, and
declare, they shall receive satisfaction for their sufferings, and send them in
men and provisions; which may come in safe enough by Sea, notwithstanding the
Ordnance planted on the mouth of Humber. Our ancient Esquires do take it in
great indignation, that persons of so base a condition as Duncombe and some
others are of, should be honored with Knighthood, yea and a Barronetship too,
in so much as at this time it is accounted a dishonor to be made a Knight. In
a word, the late Arrival of these Arms and Ammunition out of Holland, have
much unsettled the affections of this County, calling to mind His Majesty's
Protestations and Invocations, and the Declarations of the Lords against any
preparation for war; the full visage whereof appears now to the contrary
amongst us.

Very many Papists resort hither daily, which increases our fears: It is given
out that his Majesty intends next for Lincolneshire, and so for Leicestershire
to enforce the Commission of Array.

Here are several Popish Commanders come out of Flanders, who (that they might
gain the freer passage hither) confess they had a Dispensation from the Pope,
to take any Oath that should be tendered to them.

In Warwickshire the Ordinance for the Militia is most cheerfully obeyed. In
which County, besides the Trained Band, there appeared at the General Muster,
2850. Volunteers. And in regard of some combustions that have lately been in
Leicestershire, stirred up by M. Hastings, they have sent a proffer to
Leicestershire to assist them with horse and men, and Northamptonshire has
done the like.

Also in one of the Hundreds of Lancashire, there appeared at Manchester, in
obedience to the said Ordinance, about 10000. men in Arms, crying for about
half an hour together, For the King and Parliament, For the King and
Parliament.

The Lord of Warwick has taken the Kings Ship called the Lion, in its coming
from Holland.

The Lord Mayor of London for many misdemeanors was committed to the Tower,
July 11. by the House of Peers.

Printed in the year, M DC XLII.


