TWO PETITIONS From the City of LONDON ONE To the ARMY, the other to the House
of LORDS.

Concerning the late Lord Mayor, Sir John Geyre, Alderman Bunce, and others,
who were engaged in the bloody murder at Guild Hall.

WITH The Representation of the Officers of the Army, (of their Resolutions) to
the PARLIAMENT, therein.

October 12. 1647.
THese Petitions of the City of London, with the Resolutions of the Army, are
appointed to be Printed and published by the Authority of the Licenser,
appointed by the House of Peers, according to an Ordinance of both Houses of
Parliament.

Imprimatur,

G. M.

Printed at London by Robert Ibbitson, in Smithfield, near the Queenes-head
Tavern, 1647.

TO HIS EXCELLENCY Sir THOMAS FAIRFAX Captain General Of the PARLIAMENTS
Forces.
The humble Petition of diverse Inhabitants of the City of London, who were cut,
and wounded, at the Guild Hall of the said City, on Monday the second day of
August, 1647.
Shows,
THAT your Petitioners with many other Citizens, perceiving a preparation in
some to raise a new war against the Army, addressing themselves by Petition
unto the Common Council of London for peace; And attending the sitting of the
said Court at the Guild Hall; your petitioners were violently set upon, by
Major General Poyntz and his Reformadoes, and cut and wounded by them, and two
of our number slain outright; and no course of Justice being had in the City
against the murderers or tumulters, but they rather abetted and encouraged, by
the then Lord Mayor, and Alderman Bunce who began the violence: your
petitioners represented their sufferings unto the high Court of Parliament, by
their petition, a copy whereof is hereunto annexed: But have hitherto reaped no
fruit thereby, other business stepping between.

Now for as much as your Petitioners were so wounded and abused for their good
affections to your Excellency and the Army, and for moving in opposition to the
new war intended against you; And for as much as your Petitioners are poor,
and cannot spend much time in attendance, without adding to their afflictions,
and ruining their families.

Your Petitioners therefore most humbly pray, that your Excellency will be
pleased to recommend their sufferings, and distressed condition, unto the
speedy consideration and redress of the Honorable Houses of Parliament.

And your petitioners shall ever pray, etc. Edward Mor^craft, William Collet,
Thomas Abraham, John Vallance, Robert Howell, Henry Daller, Robert Webster,
Thomas Child, John Bland, Thomas Harbert, Edmund Bird, John Walterson, Richard
Eddes, Thomas Lea, Valentine Freaston.


To the Right Honorable the House of Peers in Parliament Assembled:
The humble Petition of diverse Inhabitants of the City of London, who were cut
and wounded at the Guild Hall of the said City, on Monday the 2 of August, 1647.
Shows,
THat your Petitioners, and many other Citizens of London, being deeply
sensible of the destructive design of some, who labored to foment a new
war, in this City joined to the number of three thousand, or thereabouts, in
a Petition for peace, directed to the Lord Major, Aldermen, and Commons of the
said City, in Common Council Assembled, and went unarmed, in a peaceable
manner unto the Guild Hall to present the same, on the day abovesaid, and in
regard the Court was not sat, but shortly expected (according to appointment)
to sit.

The Petitioners attended at the Common Councell-doore, and in the Hall, and
yard, there to deliver their said Petition into the Court, and had appointed
one (or more if occasion were) to speak thereto: At which time an Alderman
coming to the Common Council door, laid hands on one of the petitioners, who
was so appointed to speak, and endeavored by force to pull him to the Committee
of the Militia there sitting; thereby to terrify the petitioners, which not
taking effect, the Lord Mayor came to the said door, and (in a violent manner)
did strike and thrust some of the petitioners, urging to have the petition from
them, and bidding them to be gone: And when his Lordship returned back toward
the Militia door, presently after came down their Major General Poyntz, and
diverse Reformadoes with him (Major General Massey being gone out before). And
the said Poyntz with his Reformadoes, when they came to the lower end of the
yard, and had got more of their party together, returned back with drawn swords
in their hands, and fell upon the Petitioners in the yard, calling them
Independent Dogs, and Rogues, saying, they would give them Peace: and wounded
above thirty of them, killed one out right, and another (if not more) is since
dead, some of them are maimed, diverse of them had four, or six wounds a piece,
and have thereby lost their Trades, and are put to great pain, charges, and
expenses.

And while this cruelty was in acting, Major General Massey with a great party
more of Reformadoes, came into Bassinshaw-street, with their swords drawn,
where some of the Petitioners (who had escaped that way from the former
violence) w re afresh assaulted by the said Massey, and a dangerous blow made
by himself at one of the Petitioners.

Notwithstanding all which, the said Poyntz and Massey were suffered to ride up
and down the streets, both that night and the next day, without any control,
or endeavor used to apprehend them, for the murder and Riot aforesaid: Neither
has so much as search, or hue and cry been made after the said Poyntz, or the
other murderers, nor mention made of the slain, in the weekly Bills of
Mortallity.

Your Petitioners therefore most humbly pray, that some effectual course may
be taken for the apprehending and punishing of the said Rioters, and
murderers, and of all those who have aided or abetted, or countenanced them in
their outrages aforesaid: And that your Petitioners may have reparations for
their wounds, losses, and sufferings out of their estates: In such manner as
your Honors in your great wisdom shall think meet.

And your Petitioners shall ever pray etc.
Putney October 8. 1647. At the Committee of General Officers.
Upon the Petition of the persons wounded by Major General Poyntz and the
Reformadoes, at their petitioning for peace:

Resolved upon the Question,

That in regard (as we conceive) their condition so immediately concerns his
Excellencies Cognizance in respect of their appearance at that time for the
Army: His Excellency be desired to write an effectual Letter to the Parliament
in their behalf.

By the appointment of the Committee of Officers; Signed, JOHN GILLOT, Cleric.

FINIS.

