TWO DECLARATIONS,

The first from Newmarket, concerning the Kings most Excellent Majesty.

The second from St. Albanes, agreed upon by the Officers and Soldiers under
Command of his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairefax.

Wherein is set forth the Resolution of the Army, concerning the disposal of
his Majesty's Royal Person? together with their desires concerning his
Highness the prince of Wales.

London, Printed for R.W. 1647.

A Declaration of the Proceedings of the COMMISSIONERS.
SIR,
THE various reports that have been spread abroad of late, concerning the
present business between the Parliament, the City, and the Army, and the
dubious Relations that have been made of it, have not only ravsed the
expectations of people to know the certainty of it, but also possessed their
minds with many jealousies and fears; as if, the wars being ended with the
Malignants, we should have divisions opend among our selves, that may break
out into a new war, which is nothing else but the secret working of Malignant
spirits, or persons of such fortunes that have found better advantage of war
then they could of peaceable times. But there were never more pretenders to
truth then in this age, nor ever fewer that obtained, or made care and
Conscience to use it in their words or deeds. And though it be no easy matter
in such variety of Relations to deliver exactly to the world the present
proceedings, without an extraordinary intelligence; Yet I shall impart so much
of the truth and reallity of late passages, as shall give satisfaction to
indifferent Readers, and a counter-cuffe to all Malignants that vapor and
ruffl^ in the expectation of new broiles.

We hope shortly that the noise of war, and all the miseries that follow it,
will be removed farther from us, and that Peace, and her blessings shall come
in the room; for without question there is like to be a sweet and happy
accommodation of things between the Parliament, the City, and the Army, whereby
the expectation of all the Enemies of our Peace and Safety, of the honor and
glory of this Kingdom will be frustrated.

For certain kn^w this, that the head Quarters of the Army is still at St.
Albans, and the General there too: No talk of drawing to a Rendezvous nearer
London, as some would have it; all is very peaceable in the Army, and the
unanimity betwixt the Officers and the soldiers to be admired; not any stop
of trade or traffic to or from the City of London, in any part of the Army in
any kind, as some have falsely suggested; Their inclinations too, and desire of
a well grounded Peace, is apparent by their desire, that during the debate and
transaction of this business between the Parliament and the Army, the
Parliament would not suffer any new forces to be raised within this kingdom,
or any forces to be invited or admitted out of any other kingdom to this, or
any thing else to be done that may carry the face of a new war, or of
preparations thereunto, which may endanger or interrupt the present proceedings
to the settlement of the Liberties and Peace of this kingdom.

Several Petitions from the Counties or Hertford, Essex, Norfolk, Suffolk
and Buckingham, much to this purpose; That apprehending a necessity for the
sudden furtherance of all lawful means which may conduce to the removing
their Countries and the kingdoms grievances, this their present address unto
his Excellency was not so general as otherwise it might have been; yet they
were confident they might fully discharge their Countries real and high
esteem of his Excellencies unwearied and faithful endeavors for the kingdoms
Peace. And if his Excellency should farther please to improve his utmost
interest in the honorable Court of Parliament, for the crowning of his former
achievements, with the future freedom of this Nation, that they and their
posterity should acknowledge him; and if any, disaffected to the common good,
should endeavor by means hereof to render his Person or Army odious to the
Parliament or kingdom, that they could not but look upon that as an injury of
a common concernment, and them as enemies to the public Peace, and that none
should be more ready to bring such to their legal and just deserved censures
then themselves, who had in this Petition (they humbly presented unto him)
subscribed themselves both his Excellencies and the Kingdoms faithful
Servants.

The General has received order for the removal of his Majesty to Richmond,
and Collonell Rossiter, with his Regiment, is to attend and guard his Majesty's
person, that so the Propositions agreed upon by both kingdoms may be speedily
presented to his Majesty, for the settling of a safe and well grounded Peace.

Some say his Majesty is entertained by the Army honorably and with all
freedom, some say the contrary, but I rather incline to the first: They say
likewise that he is advanced toward London; others, that he is still at
Newmarket, very pleasant and merry, but yet very careful and solicitous for
settling the kingdom in peace and quiet, being very sensible of the forepast
miseries, and preserving the Peace of the kingdom above his own Rights,
therein showing himself a right gracious Prince, and a true Father of his
Country. Her Majesty and the Prince are weary of France, hoping shortly that
all breaches will be made up, and desiring to be for England, God send them
and us all a happy meeting and union again, that as men of one Country and one
Religion, we may be like wise all of one Heart and one Mind.

There was a Letter June the nineteenth came from the Commissioners with the
Army attending his Majesty, That they had sent to Sir Thomas Fairefa^, to know
his answer to the votes of both Houses, concerning the disposal of the person
of his Majesty to Richmond, and was communicated by a Messenger from the Lords
to the House of Commons. His Majesty's own Coach is sent unto him, to
accomodate him for his removal.

The Papists conceive great hopes now of advancing their Cause again, on what
grounds I cannot see, unless those little Foxes, the subtle Jesuits, the
common Incendiaries of Christendom, that creep up and down in corners of
this Land, have by their sly practices so much influence upon the several
parties as to set them in a combustion. They cry aloud, Down with us, Down
with us, even to the ground; and their bloody zeal is such, that they could
be content to lose their own Lives in the common ruin, Look to them. But
God forbid that such eminent Parties as the Parliament, City, and Kingdom
should be incensed, or engaged one against another to their Countries ruin,
who all of them have already so highly merited of their Country in preserving
and vindicating her ancient Liberties.

It is certain that the Soldiery of the Army are generally for a composure of
all things in love and so doubtless it will be.

God preserve his Royal Majesty, and unite us all in Peace with Love; and
scatter all those like dust in the wind, that seek to divide us.
Another Copy of a Letter.
SIR,
HAVING such a fi^oportunity by this Bearer, I thought it meet to represent
unto you these ensuing Lines; but by reason they are not yet come to the full
growth and maturity, I shall therefore give you the heads of a Declaration, now
in Dispense and drawing up by the Officers and Soldiers, under command of his
Excellency Sir Thomas Fairefax at St. Albanes.

1. They Declare their desires to have the Kings Majesty stated in his Royal
Throne at Westminster, as formerly, and his Royal Posterity provided for with
Honor and Safety.

2. That a Message may be speedily sent to his Highness the Prince of Wales,
with an invitation from both houses of Parliament for his return to England,

3 That Justice may be speedily executed and the privilege of Parl. and the
Liberty of the subject maintaind.

His Excellency has lately received a Message from Newmarket wherein his
Majesty does declare his concurrence to the Parliaments votes, and his great
willingness to go to Richmond with the Commissioners, his Majesty conceives
that to be a ready way to put a period to all the distractions within this
kingdom. Concerning which the Army has had a long de^ate, both by the Officers
and Agitators of the Army, but has not fully concluded of it as yet. By the
next you shall hear farther from

St. Albans June 22. late at night. Your Friend and Kinsman, THO. ALLEN.


