TWO PETITIONS OF The Lord Major, Aldermen, and Common Council of the City of
LONDON: Concerning Major General SKIPPON WITH The Parliaments Answer thereunto.

Also, the Declaration of the Committee of Estates of the Parliament of
Scotland, or the five Reasons of their Armies coming into England.

And the last News from the Prince of Wales, and the Duke of York.

July 24 London Printed for G. Beal, and are to be sold in the Old-Bayley, and
near Temple Bar, 1648.

A Full Relation of Prince and Duke of York, and of the Prince his going into
the North.
SIR,
THe Duke of York was invited aboard the revolted ships, at Helver sluice,
where they gave him the best entertainment they could for him, after the
banquet ended, the Duke would depart, but the Seamen persuaded him to the
contrary crying him up Lo. high Admiral, his highness told them, he was
unskilled in Marritainie affairs, and therefore would be evcused in person for
staying aboard, then the seamen used more then ordinary importunity, to stay
him to which the Duke could not but give way for a time, saying he would give
his possitive answer the next day, at which time a petition was presented to
his highness showing that they had adventured, their lives and fortunes for
the Kings Majesty and h^s highness, and intended to continue their constant
service, in that business, and did therefore most humbly beseech his highness
to continue aboard that fleet which would not only be a great encouragement
unto them but would also be an occasion to some of their fellows, now absent
to come and join with them which might be a means, to bring the opposers to
comply upon such conditions as were reasonable, the Duke after some pause and
advice taken with P. Maurice, Sir John Barkley and others necessaries they
wanted and set out with the next wind and the Saylors which run in the full
strain of the Officer^ say that they will lie about the Downs and take
Merchants ships as they come in or out.

The P. of Wales crme from Callis into the low Countries in a Holland man of
War, and was attended by the L. Gerrard, L. Culpepper, L. Ratham and L. Iermin
and about a hundred more Lords and Gentlemen, and their attendrnts most of them
will go along with his highness another voyage which is reported to be upon
the North of England the estates of Holland furnished his highness with a
gallant man of War for his passage some say they have freely given it him
others that he hyers it, and another to attend her.

On Satturday the 22 of this instant July a Petition was presented to the Lords
and another to the Commons from the L. Major Aldermen and Common Council of
the City of London; that the Lords was directed thus.

To the Right Honorable the Lords assembled in Parliament.
The humble Petition of the Lord Major, Aldermen and Common Council of the
City of London.
Showing that they acknowledge man's favors, already received from that
honorable house and their care to preserve the City in unity and peace for
which they return humble thanks to their Lordships, and further setting forth
that the Lord Major and Aldermen and Commons in Common Council assembled on
Friday last had a long debate concerning the peace and safety of the City, and
did apprehend some eminent dangers by reason of Listing and raising of Forces
according to certain votes formerly past that honorable house for giving power
to Major General Skippon, and therefore they humbly pray the recalling of the
said votes, and that there be no Listing of men o^ Officers entertained without
the advice of the City and consent of the Militia of the City of London. After
the Petition was read and debated the petitioners were called into the house,
and the Earl of Manchester Speaker of the House of Peers, pro tempore gave an
answer thus.

MY Lords have commanded me to give you thanks for the acknowledgment in the
Petition of the care this House has of the peace and prosperity of the City of
London, They have also considered of the incoveniencies mentioned in the
petition, in order to the peace and quiet thereof, which inconveniences were
not apprehended by that house at the passing of the Votes concerning Major
General Skippo^ for listing of Forces, but finding that the Lord Major,
Aldermen, and Common Council of the City, do in their petition apprehend such
inconveniency thereof, their Lordships will use their best endeavors to recall
the said Votes, and do as much as in them lies to prevent any thing that may
disturb the peace of the City of London, who have given so much testimony of
their fidelity to the Parliament.

The Declaration of the Commitee of Estates of the Parliament of Scotland was
this day extant, in which they declare as follows:

1. We declare before God and the World, that we are resolved sincerely,
really, and constantly to maintain and preserve inviolably with the hazard of
our lives and fortunes, and all that is dearest unto us, the Reformation of
Religion, in Doctrine, Worship, and Discipline, as it is by the mercy of God
and his Majesty's goodness established by law amongst us, and never to suffer
it by fraud or force to be taken from us, nor yet to endure the bringing in of
Episcopacy, the Book of Common prayer, or any other of these innovasions and
superstitions thrown out of this Church, as some have bin so impudent to aver.

We do also declare, That we will endeavor the rescue of his Maj. person from
his base imprisonment, that he may come with honor; freedom and safety to some
of his own houses in or near London, that the Parl. of both Kingdoms may make
their appl cations to him, for obtaining his royal assent to such desires as
shall be by them presented unto him, for establishing Religion, and settling a
well grounded peace that, so all differences and troubles may end, and the King
enjoy his royal Consort and Children, with other contentments, and we after so
great distractions and long continued sufferings may reap the blessed fruits
of true h and peace under his Go^ernment.

3. That the two houses of Parliament may be restored to their freedom, that
all Members who have been faithful to this cause may freely and safely attend
their charges, thot the Parliament being Masters of their own councels and
resuits, they may together with the consent and advice of the Kingdom of
Scotland conclude in a treaty with his Majesty, all other things expedient to a
thorough settlement,

4. That the City of London which has expended so much in blood and treasure,
may have their former propositions, presented to the King at Oxford and
Newcastle, and pressed as was formerly intended.

5. That the Army of Sectaries, under the command of Thomas L. Fairfax of
Camron, be disbanded and none employed either in relation of the prosecution of
the war in Ireland, or the necessary Garrisons and Forces, but such as have or
shall take the Covenant and are well affected to Religion, and Government, that
so the people of England may be cased of Taxes, free quarter, and other great
impositions, under which they have so long groaned. And although the interest
of Religion, the King and Kingdom, and a settling of a solid peace be the cause
of this undertaking, yet we do not doubt, but due regards will be had to the
concernments of Scotland, contained in our several former Demands, b^th in
relation to what is due to this Kingdom, and their Armies here and in I^eland,
and also what is necessary for the better safety, union, and Government of the
Kingdoms.

FINIS.

