TYRANTS Tryumphant: OR, The High Court of State.
Lo here in Rank and File the Rebels stand,
Who have unchristened half a Christian Land,
Lo here the Libertines, those Lawless things,
Who hate the Scepter, yet would all be Kings,
Lo here the Regindos, who at one stroke,
Have coller'd us in an Egyptian yoke,
Behold them well, take notice which is best,
Find out one good, I Will swear for all the rest.
Earls.
Sarum Denbigh Mulgrave Pembroke.
Lords.
Fairfax Gray of Wark Gray of Groby Lisle. Cromwell Skippon Rolls St. John
Wild Bradshaw.
Knights.
Arthur Haslerigg William Massam Gilbert Pickering James Harrington Vane
junior John Danvers William Armyn Henry Mildmay William Constable.
Citizens.
Isaac Pennington Rowland Wilson.
Esquires.
VVhitlock Stapeley Heningham Ludlow Wallop Hutchinson Bond Popham VVatten
Scot Purfoy Jones.
Four Traiterous Earls, as many stinking Lords,
The veriest fools and knaves the Land affords,
Two Saints, one a Prodigious flame of light,
The other a most smooth Hermophradite;
Two Justices in chief, (for grand deserts)
The Laundring Baron, that does wash his Shirts,
Besides Lord President unto the State,
Who had the Law once pusht into his pate.
Nine skittish Knights, the first a jewel Thief,
The next a Broker of the Saints belief,
The third, a Pandor to his zealous Sister,
Whilst Major (he knows who) devoutly kissed her,
The fourth, a Coward, posted up of yore,
Because he would not stand unto his Whore;
The fifth so valiant* that he run away
At Newburn Heath, yet swore he won the day;
The sixth, a cursed Cheat; the seventh a Sot
Not civilized, till by a barbarous Scot;
The eighth, a man of chaste and holy life,
Ask but his Handmaid, or his zealous Wife,
Perhaps the Gravell-pit may it remember,
For here indeed he showed himself a Member;
The Ninth, New England vamped in the Foot,
Or else he had withered both branch and root.
Two reverend Cits, a creeping knave the first,
Skinned ore with Sacrilege, yet belly-burst;
The latter worldly wise, but weak within,
His guts is furred with dregs, his heart with sin.
Twelve more there are, and they be called Squires,
Bred up by Beggars, at good peoples fires,
Most of whose names were never known before,
Except in some Churchwardens list of the Poor,
Or at the Sessions House, (for there indeed)
Inditements have been fatal to their breed,
Yet these be they who must have all the sway,
These are the Kings the English must obey,
Here are the Pillars of the Commonweal,
The Power Supreme, from whence is no appeal.
England, shake of these fetters, fight and dye,
Rather then live slave to their Tyranny,
Admit thy lawful King, revenge the blood
Of Him these murdered, for being too good;
Purge out thy peccant humors that abound,
Let blood, 'twill cleanse, and make thy body sound;
This Physic is safe, if used but in season,
No Dote so proper for dispelling Treason,
Take it sick England, if thou will be well,
For there is no health till these men fry in Hell.

