TWO PETITIONS Of Diverse Freemen of England, Inhabitants in the City of
BRISTOLL, And in the adjacent Parts.

The one presented To the Honorable House of Commons, Upon the 2. of
September, 1647.

Together with their Answer thereunto.

THE OTHER To his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, At his Headquarters at
KINGSTON.

Both signed with many thousand Hands.

LONDON, Printed for Giles Calvert, at the black Spread-Eagle, at the West End
of PAUL'S. 1647.

TO His Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax Knight, Commander in chief of all the
Forces raised, and to be raised in the Kingdom of England, Dominion of Wales,
the Isles of Gernsey and Jersey, and for the relief of Ireland.
The humble Petition of diverse Freemen of England, Inhabitants in the City of
Bristoll, and the adjacent parts.
May it please your Excellency;
WE have had such living expressions of your Excellencies faithfulness,
valor, and love unto your Country, that where ever we cast our eyes, we view
the engraven monuments thereof to all posterity. Should all other places be
silent, yet the City of Bristoll, and these Western parts, must needs speak
loud, and tell the world, that your prowess, and unwearied diligence has
again restored the spoiled, and banished, unto their houses, and habitations.
Your Excellency did not, could not (such was the nobleness of your spirit)
put too high a value upon your precious blood: you have hazarded life, estate,
all that was dear unto you, and have stepped in to relieve this Kingdom under
its greatest languishments; and in the glorious hand of our God, wherein your
Army has been a pollished shaft, we have seen ye triumphantly marching at
once, to the terror of your enemies, and the wonder of your friends. That
sweetness, and gallantry of spirit, which you then managed against the
enemies of this nation, that rose up to trouble us; you are still putting forth
against those, that appear with a new face, and under more specious pretexts to
rob us of our freedom. It was our liberty, which you then with all resolution
vindicated; you seem to us to move still in the same sphere, and to be with
all justice and moderation pleading our rights against such as have attempted
to usurp them.

We are very much satisfied in our spirits, (and therefore Declare thus much,
to you, and the Kingdom) that all your Excellencies undertakings glide along
in the channel of the public safety, and advantage. We are very certain,
that the honor and Privileges of Parliament lie dear unto your heart, and
that you only seek the conservation of the English Liberties in the bulk of
the Parliaments just Privileges. We dare not condemn our selves of so much
wilful blindness, as to say, we see no injustice, oppression, violence in our
borders; the Land is too full of those that would eat out the very bowels of
it: And noble Sir, you are now in your actings and counsels engaging against
these, we join with you in our hearts, and rejoice in your endeavors.

We must needs speak the truth, and dare not belie our consciences, but with
all modesty reveal our thoughts, that had your Excellencies Army been
disbanded, we might justly have looked for the invasion of violence, slavery,
ruin. The insolences of our enemies had in all probability swollen to that
height, that they would soon have trodden us under their feet: What was the
expectation? what would have been the rejoicing of Englands enemies, but the
disbanding of that Army which has been such a dread unto them? We are
hereupon necessitated, and cannot but with some grief of heart, mention and
take notice of those Officers and Soldiers, that have deserted you in this
your noble and memorable undertaking. We sadly wonder, that any that have
known your courage, undauntednesse, and resolute fidelity to the Kingdoms
interest, should now draw back and forsake you, when you are summing up all
things (as we trust) into harmony and composure.

We are now opening our thoughts, and we do in the last place, according to our
understanding, freely profess, that we look upon it as a special
concernment to the Kingdom, that men of approved faithfulness and trust, be
employed to attend and guard his Majesty's Person. We may justly fear that
discontented spirits have secret commotions, and are in travel to bring forth
new mischiefs to this Land: and doubtless, they would have deeply wrought,
and not have been wanting in counsels, activenesse, and accomplices, (had they a
fair opportunity thereunto) to engage his Majesty on their party for the
effecting of their designs. We must therefore reckon it a glorious providence
and mercy, and that which is very much conducing to peace and safety; that your
Excellency and Army are so near unto his Majesty, and have thereby an
advantage by your care and vigilance to obstruct and prevent all contrivances
of that nature, and to give his Majesty and the Kingdom a right and clear
understanding of the candidnesse and uprightness of your present actings and
intentions.

And now having our hearts full of the honor of your worth, of joy in your
procedings, and achievements, and of love to your Excellencies Person, and
Army, we have made this our most humble address unto you, and in this plain,
and modest phrase bespeake your Excellency,

1. That you would prosecute, and still proceed to have such brought to
condign punishment, that are the Kingdoms and Armies enemies; and earnestly
contend against those, that would bereave us of our Rights and Liberties.

2. That you would, as you have done, and do with all respect, tender the
honor, and just Privileges of the Parliament, which renders your name and
actions so precious in the eyes of the Kingdom.

3. That you would negotiate with the Parliament, that your Army be not
disbanded, till a firm peace be settled, and our Liberties fully secured.

4. That all those, who have deserted your Army, may be declared to be such as
have flincht from the employments of the Kingdom in its great exigencies; and
that those, who have stood and acted with you, may be encouraged, rewarded, and
embraced as faithful and loyal to their Countries Interest.

5. That you might continue to be a guard to his Majesty; and might be
entrusted to employ such, as you know are faithful, to attend him, that
disaffected persons might not gain an opportunity or have a design on his
Majesty's Person, to the involving this Kingdom in new destractions.

We have thus far troubled your Excellency, and crowded in amongst the rest,
to show our selves in the behalf of our Countries Freedom: we assure you,
that what we have spoken in this Paper, we have referred to your self, as the
head; to your Army and faithful Commanders as one with you in Counsel, and
enterprise. And we do declare, that in all those enterprises of service, and
gallantry, which we have acknowledged unto ye, we look upon ye under no other
notion then as instruments, in the power of God, who has exalted himself, and
through ye made himself glorious in this our Land. Herein we have laid open
the very sense of our hearts and resolutions; and do purpose to engage with ye
to the utmost in the vindication of the Privileges of Parliament, and of our
undoubted English Liberties, whereunto we are borne. Go on most Excellent Sir,
in these your designs, and prosper; so shall England honor your name, and

Your Petitioners shall pray for your Excellencies happiness, and the success
of your Army in all your engagements.

To the Honorable the House of Commons assembled in Parliament.
The humble Petition of diverse Freemen of England, Inhabitants in the City of
Bristoll, and in the adjacent parts.
Honorable;
THe bringing forth and presenting this Paper unto you, in such a time as this,
may now seem altogether posthumous, and unsuitable to the present Occurrences,
God having so wheeled about things in his most wise providence. We indeed could
not but esteem it our duty to appear and express our sad thoughts concerning
the state of things, at they then were; but meeting with private oppositions at
home, and by the intervening of the la^e public tumults abroad, we were
exceedingly retarded in our proceedings. And now though the appearance of the
Sun breaking through the clouds has very much re^^v^^^ as from under our
drooping fears, and languis^^ (...) make bold to offer this, such as it is,
unto you, and do beseech you according to your wisdom, to refer every
thing herein to its proper head, and to take the remain of our desires and
your most seri^s consideration (...) further preface, but relying upon, (...)
fa^^urable acceptance, humbly beseech you after this manner.

AMongst those many Suppliants that now address themselves unto you in this
time of Englands breach, we also appear to act our part, and discharge our
duty to our native Country: and we the more willingly repair unto you,
because we avouch the Parliament, the high and supremest Court of Justice in
this Kingdom, to be the assertor of our Liberties, and upholder of all our
Rights. We have always with much delight and satisfaction looked upon our
Nation as happy under this Constitution, and the rather, in that we behold
such an oneness betwixt the Parliament and Kingdom, betwixt the Privileges
of the one, and the Liberties of the other. We well know, that the regular
transactions of the Parliament can be no other then an unanimous concurrence to
the weal and benefit of the Kingdom: And we also, as freeborn Natives, can
do nothing against the Parliament, but all for the honor, safety, and
maintenance thereof: We cannot but have an honorable respect unto you, as
those who being chosen by us, do in our names vindicate our Liberties from
oppression and violence; and we trust, that you have a reciprocal tenderness
over us, whom you do represent under all our burdens, pressures, grievances.

We do in the first place with all cheerfulness acknowledge the vast expense
of your unwearied labor and pains, in repelling the imminent dangers, and
providing for the tranquillity of this rent, torn Kingdom: your activenesse
and industry to rescue our known Rights from under the usurpation of Tyranny,
cannot die in our thoughts, nor be concealed from the memory, and admiration of
succeeding generations.

Yet Honorable, we have a few things to whisper unto you in a mournful
accent, and to acquaint you with our fears, troubles, anguish, heaviness.

We had hoped, that the day of Englands peace had began to dawne, but truly we
are very jealous that we yet hear a sound of war in our streets. We seem to
be reduced to this straight, that either we must hearken to an unsound peace,
which threatens us with the irruption of more pressing miseries, or else
through the instigation of malicious instruments, be engaged in the mischiefs
of a second war. According to our best understanding and reason, we could not
but judge so sudden a disbanding of this Army, and in such a way, to be the
design of those that mean the advancement of themselves, and the sinking of
the Kingdoms Liberties: and here peace should have served but to betray us into
greater bondage: But this prospering not, we trace the same men carrying on the
same plot of our slavery by endeavoring to raise up another Army against this,
and here is the sad visage of a new war, which we so much fear, and are not
able to stand under. Further, what mean those misreports, railings, aspersions,
cast upon that most faithful (and ever to be respected) Army? Are not these
also the issues of some heady and male-contented spirits, laboring to imbroyle
the Kingdom in new commotions and discords? This speaks sadly in our ears,
and it wounds our hearts, that an Army of such high deserts, that has been the
very walls and Bulwarks of this Land, should be so injured, so affronted.

We have undertaken to lay before you our grievances, and we reckon this not
amongst the least, that the due course of the Subjects petitioning unto you,
should any way be hedged up, that any power should endeavor to suppress and
stifle them in their birth; and that when they are presented, they should be
condemned to the fire. W^ cannot construe such actings any otherwise then the
arbitrarie proceedings of a prevailing Party, and such as breath forth, the
certain and total ruin of this Kingdom, and our Liberties. And truly this
enforces us with all freeness and humility to acquaint you, that we must
needs suspect, there are many sitting in that eminent Court, and other
conspicuous places of Judicature in this Kingdom, that are friends to
oppression and violence. We cannot but cry out of wrong in whomsoever we see
it, and surely we must needs speak, when it is crept in there where there
should be the habitation of Justice. And we epsy likewise in the several
parts of the Land, this unequal mannaging of things by those in power, that
diverse of the Kingdoms most faithful friends, who are rather to be cherished
and advanced, are yet every where slighted, discountenanced, and kept out of
places of trust and emolument: wherein also we sadly observe the frame of all
things returning to their former confusions.

We entreat you not to be offended, when we freely tell you, that the Covenant
(as it is now pressed upon the Kingdom) is a burden and snare to many tender
spirits; it is not unknown to us that many faithful and valiant Heroes, who
have stood resolutely in defense of the Parliament and Kingdom, dare not yet
subscribe, and come within the compass of that engagement. And do not many of
those persons who adhered unto you when the power of your enemies was great and
insolent, and are again ready to venture all with you against the usurpers of
our Liberties, even sigh under those Edicts that enforce and urge it upon them?
We beseech you to remember those your Declarations, wherein you promised to
succor such, who through the tenderness of their consciences, could not
submit to every thing that might happily be imposed upon them: For we humbly
conceive, it will much add to the flourishing of this Kingdom, that you take
such Subjects under your protections, they conforming to the Laws, and paying
all lawful Customs of Tribute and dues whatsoever unto the Civil State. And
herein we are not selfish, and glance at a particular party, but our thoughts
and desires run public: We are very clear for, and shall much rejoice in the
establishment of a general right and just freedom to all men: and we could
cordially wish, that those who have partaked with the King in the late
differences, may know the utmost of their sufferings; and when they have fully
satisfied for their former Delinquencies, and do give manifest testimonies of
their future subjection, they may be received into the security of common
immunities, and be conquered by an unparalleled clemency: This we humby offer
unto your more mature consideration, as that which may facillitate the
settlement of a sweet and lasting peace in this (now divided) Kingdom.

And Worthies, can you check us, when we assure you that our very souls bleed
under the sense of those burdens, that lie upon the oppressed, when we hear
the groans of the Widows, and Fatherless, when we see the anguish of their
spirits, that have lost near relations, friends, and estates in the service of
the Parliament; nay, when we know, that the Powers that should help them, do
add oppression unto them, we are even then full of heaviness, and become
silent by reason of the greatness of our sorrows. We may hereupon very
opportunely number over again unto you those vast sums of moneys, that have
been disbursed out of the Kingdoms Treasury; and shall we say, to those that
have had little or no need of it, when as many thousand Families that have been
totally impoverish't, and undone, have not yet received the least succor, and
relief from you.

We do likewise tenderly simpathize with those our fellow subjects, that are,
and have been a long time imprisoned, and lie under pressures, and wants, them,
their wives and children, we will not take the boldness to mention any, but
silently refer to such, as have endured the tartness of a long imprisonment
with its excessive charges, and have not as yet been brought to a legal
trial; they professing, that they only stand up for the rights of freeborn
English Subjects And here it seems not altogether superfluous to mind you of
those great abuses, that are generally in the Prisons themselves: If we
consider the long time of Imprisonments, the ^astinesse of the places, and the
intolerable excess of fees, we may well say, that Prisons are the executions
of Prisoners before their trial.

We are now putting a period to this large rehearsal, wherein we have
unbowelled our selves unto you, and shall only crave leave to cast this one
thing into the common heap of our other grievances. We have in our experience
observed, that many have wasted great estates, and been suddenly reduced to
poverty, by their waiting upon the tedious determinations of Lawsuits, we
cannot impute this to any thing else, but either the intricacy, and
perplextnesse of the Laws, or the deceit and corruption of those that plead. It
will undoubtedly in the issue prove a great ease unto the Subject, if the
Common-Lawes be written in our own dialect, and in their number, and
plainness brought down to the obviousnesse of an ordinary understanding: This
in all likelihood will prevent malice, and contentions, and give us the
advantage of knowing our own Rights, without the trouble of a Suit.

Having had these things sadly in our thoughts, we have according to our just
freedom, vented them to this Honorable House for redress, and we do
seriously and most humbly lay these our equal and modest desires, at your
Honors feeet. And do entreat you,

1. That ye would provide for the settlement of a firm and lasting peace in
this Kingdom, according to the full opportunity now before you: and divert all
occasions of, and preparations unto a second War: And that ye would so
succor Ireland, as that Kingdom also may at length revive out of it is
bleeding, dying condition.

2. That ye would fully answer the just desires, and grievances of the Army;
vindicate them from all aspersions and calumnies; give them all due
reparations, and continue them undisbanded, till the Kingdom shall have the
happy experience of a well settled peace.

3. That the just rights, and Liberties of the English Subjects may be secured
from all violence, oppression, Injustice, Tyranny; and the free course of
justice pass upon all such infringers of our Liberties, as either have been,
or shall be impeached, and convicted.

4. That ye would free us from any unlawful power, that endeavors to
suppress the Petitions of the Subjects; and that ye would not discountenance,
nor deal disgracefully with any Petition brought from the grieved Subject.

5. That ye would remove out of the House of Parliament, out of Committees, and
places of administration of justice, all such as are justly made incapable by
your several Votes, and Ordinances.

6. That such who have given undoubted testimonies of their abilities, and
faithfulness, may be entrusted, and continued in the several places of power,
rule and concernment in the Kingdom. And to mention one thing more plainly,
that the Militia of the Kingdom may be speedily settled, and put into the hands
of such persons, and in particular the Militia of the City of London
transmitted back again unto those, who formerly managed it with much trust in
time of greatest danger.

7. That ye would be tender in imposing the Covenant, either upon any of your
Members, or upon any other subject in this Kingdom, whose consciences dare not
subscribe unto it: and that occasion or advantage might not be hence taken to
quit any of known fidelity, out of the trusts and services they have in the
Commonwealth, if they cannot submit unto it.

8. That according to your several Ordinances made, ye would provide for the
succouring of tender consciences, and not suffer them to be greiv'd, and
brought into bondage by any rigid impositions, but protect them by the Laws,
in their civil rights, so long as they live peaceably, and without offense.

9. That to prevent feuds, factions, future insurrections and tumults, and to
procure a lasting peace to this Nation, ye would propose to such, as have
partak'd with the King, their utmost penalty, and that they fully satisfying
it, may be owned again as Subjects, all former actings be obliterated; and they
for the future secured in their Common Interests, so far as may consist with
the safety of the Kingdom, and the conservation of our just Rights and
Liberties.

10. That ye would seriously consider our fellow subjects, that are cast into
Prisons, and lie languishing there; and provide for the hearing of their
causes, that either they may be acquitted by Law, and have reparations for
their losses, and sufferings, or else fall under the censure of it, if they so
demerit.

11. That long, and lingering imprisonments may be remedied by a speedy trial;
provision made for the cleansing, and better regulating of Prisons; and the
excessive Fees abated, that Prisons may be for security only, not for
punishment.

12. That ye would tenderly compassionate the Widows, and fatherless, and
those, who have lost estates and limbs, for their affections to, and in the
service of the Parliament.

13. That accounts may be given for the millions of moneys that have been
expended; and that ye would first, and chiefly dispose of the Treasures of
the Kingdom for the payment of the Public debts, and for the relief of
those, that are either totally impoverisht, or else smart under very great
losses; and (to speak with all humility) not as it has been, to diverse of your
own Houses, and others, that lie not under such pressing necessities.

14. That, in your counsels, ye would find out a way, for the deciding of
controversies, and Suits of Law, without so much expense of time, trouble, and
charges; and bring the Laws (if possibly you may) into a lesser volume, and to
speak our own Language.

We have now spoken all, and do beseech you to believe, that our only aim in
these our requests is the Honor of the Parliament; and the advantage of the
Kingdom.

If then, you the high and Honorable Court of this Kingdom, shall be pleased
to resume this Paper, and lay our desires and grievances therein expressed unto
your hearts,

Your Petitioners, that are in all things careful, to conserve the being, and
Privileges of Parliament, that are faithful to their Countries Liberties,
shall pray for your Honors peace and safety, and for the settlement of this
Kingdom in all tranquillity, etc.

Die Jovis, 2. September. 1647.
THe House being informed, that diverse Gentlemen of the City of Bristoll, and
the parts thereabouts, were at the door, desirous to present a Petition to the
House; they were called in.

The Petition was read, and styled, The humble Petition of diverse Freemen of
England, Jnhabitants in the City of Bristoll, and in the adjacent parts.

Resolved, etc.

That this shall be the Answer to the Petitioners, That though there be some
things in this Petition, that the House cannot so well approve of, to be
presented by Petition, yet there are some things in which they have expressed
their good affections to this House, and to the Kingdom; and that for their
good affections, they shall have the thanks of this House.

The Petitioners were again called in, and M. Speaker by command of this
House, did accordingly give them this Answer.

H. Elsynge Cler. Parl. Dom. Com.


