Two strange PROPHESIES, Predicting wonderful events, to betide ^ere of
Danger, in this Clymate, ^ereof some have already come to pass.

Well worthy of note: The one being found in the Reign of King Edward the
Fourth: The other in the Reign of King Henry the Eighth: named Mother Shipton.



London, Printed for G. Smith. 1642.

The first Prophecy.
IF Eighty eight be past, then thrive
Thou may, till thirty four, or five.
After the E is dead, a Scot
Shall govern there: and if a plot
prevent him not, sure then his sway
Continue shall till many a day.
The ninth shall dye young, and the first
perhaps shall reign: but (oh) accursed
Shall be the time, when thou shall see
To sixteen joined twenty three;
For then the Eagle should have help
By Craft to catch the Lions whelpe,
and hurt him sore; except the same
Be cured by the Maidens name.
In July month of the same year
Saturn conjoynes with Jupiter.
perhaps false prophets shall arise,
And Mahomet shall show his prize.
And sure much alteration
Shall happen in Religion.
Believe this truly, if then you see.
A Spanyard a Protestant to be.
The lines (I confess impartially) are very mysterious, and withal they are
involved in a stupendous obscurity. They seem as aenigmaticall, as Sphynk his
hidden Riddle, yet I doubt not but that your judicious minds will prove as
auspitious unto this, as Oedipus did to his.

You may enucleate the genuine sense, and signification of the words, if you
do but seriously revolve them.

When the formidable Armado was dissipated in 88. this Kingdom did flourish a
long time in peace and prosperous tranquillity, unto one thousand six hundred
and thirty four or five: After Queen Elizabeth died, King James came out of
Scotland, and inherited the Imperial Crown after her.

A plot all men know was most nefariously ^atched in his Reign, to wit, the
Gunpowder treason: which not preventing him, he swaied the Scepter very
peacefully in a great succession of future time.

Prince Henry the 9. of that name died young, and King Charles the first of
that name reigned next in Majesty (whom God long preserve, and protect from the
wicked Plots of his enemies.) The beginning of these perilous times, began in
1639. The next four verses I will leave to the exposition of the Reader hereof.

The Philosophers have given their unite astipulation, and withal the
Astrologians have affirmed in their solid assertions, that when Saturn has
any conjunction with Jupiter, great wars and bloody times shall ensue, and I am
sure their opinions have not prooved fallible in this respect. Many false
Prophets are now risen amongst us, and do prophecy false things to the people,
who dare presume to preach in Tubs to their schismatic Auditors: whom they
delude and suggest vain imaginations unto them, that they are sent from
heaven, and have the spirit of God, when they have nothing but the spirit of
error and falsehood. Mahomet has shown indeed his prize sufficiently amongst
us, for too many (I suppose) in our times rather Mahometans, then true
Christians. The alteration of Religion has been very great, and tossed too
and fro by the various wind of every ones opinion.

The last two verses I refer to the judgment of the Reader: for I will
nominate no man particularly.

This prophecy is stupendous, and as it includes a mystery, so it includes
verity withal: as by the former it is involved in obscurity, so by the later
it is illuminated in apparent Truth.

The demonstration of prophetic divinations predictates the future estate of a
Kingdom, and whatsoever has bin expressed in this lately mentioned, is
already fulfilled in exemplary relations.

But the distracted opinions of most men are still so promiscuous, that we
want Prophets enough to exclaim against them; for some they will not hear,
others they neglect, others they in a despicable detestation do contemn.

But God of his infinite mercy grant, that we may hereafter all make true use
of the sincere prophecy of him, and his holy Gospel, that these various mists
of errors may be expelled, these roaring waves of Schism may be calmed, and
the distemper^ of the whole Realm cured perfectly.

The second Prophecy of Mother Shipton.
WHen she heard King Henry the eighth should be King, and Cardinal Wolsey
should be at York, she said that Cardinal Wolsey should never come to York
with the King, and the Cardinal hearing being angry, sent the Duke of
Suffolk, the Lord Piercy, and the Lord Darcy to her, who came with their men
disguised to the Kings house near York, where leaving their men, they went to
Master Besley to York, and desired him to go with them to mother Shiptons
house, where when they came they knocked at the door, she said, Come in
Master Besley, and those honorable Lords with you, and Master Besley would
have put in the Lords before him, but she said, come in Master Besley, you
know the way, but they do not. This they thought strange that she should know
them, and never saw them; then they went into the house, where there was a
great fire, and she bade them welcome, calling them all by their names, and
sent for some Cakes and Ale, and they drunk and were very merry. Mother
Shipton, said the Duke, if you knew what we come about, you would not make us
so welcome, and she said the Messenger should nobe^^ hanged; Mother Shipton,
said the Duke, you said the Cardinal should never see York; Yea, said she, I
said he might see York, but never come at it; But said the Duke when he comes
to York thou shall be burned; We shall see that, said she, and plucking her
Handkerchieffe off her head she threw it into the fire, and it would not
burn; then she took her staff and turned it into the fire, and it would not
burn, then she took it and put it on again; Now (said the Duke) what mean you
by this? if this had burned (said she) I might have burned. Mother Shipton
(quoth the Duke) what think you of me? my Love said she, the time will come
you will be as low as I am, and that is a low one indeed. My Lord Percy said,
what say you of me? My Lord (said she) shoe your Horse in the quick, and you
shall do well, but your body will be buried in York pavement, and your head
shall be stolen from the Bar and carried into France. Then said the Lord
Darcy, and what think you of me? She said, you have made a great Gun, shoot
it off, for it will do you no good, you are going to war, you will pain many
a man, but you will kill none; so they went away.

Not long after the Cardinal came to Cawood, and going to the top of the
Tower, he asked where York was, and how far it was thither, and said that
one had said he should never see York; Nay, said one, she said you might see
York, but never come at it. He vowed to burn her when he came to York. Then
they showed him York, and told him it was but eight miles thence? he said that
he will be soon there: but being sent for by the King, he died in the way to
London, at Liecester, of a lask; And Shiptons Wife said to Master Besley,
yonder is a fine stall built for the Cardinal in the Minster, of Gold, Pearl,
and precious stones, go and present one of the Pillars to King Henry, and he
did so.

Master Besley seeing these things fall out as she had foretold, desired her
to tell him some more of her Prophesies; Master, said she, before that Owes
Bridge and Trinity Church meet, they shall build on the day, and it shall fall
in the night, until they get the highest stone of Trinity Church, to be the
lowest stone of Owes Bridge; then the day will come when the North shall rue it
wondrous sore, but the South shall rue it for evermore; When Hares kindle on
cold harth stones, and Lads shall marry Ladies, and bring them home, then shall
you have a year of pyning hunger, and then a dearth without Corn; A woeful
day shall be seen in England, a King and Queen, the first coming of the King
of Scots shall be at Holgate Town, but he shall not come through the Bar,
and when King of the North shall be at London Bridge, his Tail shall be at
Edenborough; After this shall wa^er come over Owes Bridge, and a Windmill shall
be set on a ^ower, and an Elme-tree shall lie at every man's door, at that ^^me
women shall wear great Hats and great Bands, and when ^ere is a Lord Major at
York, let him beware of a stab; When ^wo Knights shall fall out in the Castle
yard, they shall never be kindly all their lives after; When all Colton Hagge
has born Crops of Corn, seven years after you shall hear news, there shall
two Judges go in and out at Mungate Bar.

Then wars shall begin in the Spring,
Much woe to England it shall bring:
Then shall the Ladies cry wel-away,
That ever we lived to see this day.
Then best for them that have the least, and worst for them that have the most,
you shall not know of the War over night, yet you shall have it in the
morning, and when it comes it shall last three years, between Cadr^n and Air
shall be great warfare, when all the world is as a lost, it shall be called
Christ's crossed, when the battle begins, it shall be, where Crookback Richard
made his fray, they shall say, To warfare for your King for half a Crown a
day, but stir not (she will say) to warfare for your King, on pain of
hanging, but stir not, for he that goes to complain, shall not come back
again. The time will come when England shall tremble and quake for fear of a
dead man that shall be heard to speak, then will the Dragon give the Bull a
great snap, and when the one is down they will go to London Town; Then there
will be a great battle between England and Scotland, and they will be
pacified for a time, and when they come to Brammamore, they fight and are
again pacified for a time, then there will be a great Battle at Knavesmore, and
they will be pacified for a while; then there will be a great battle between
England and Scotland at Stoknmore; Then will Ravens sit on the Cross and
drink as much blood of Nobles, as of the Commons, then woe is me, for London
shall be destroyed for ever after; Then there will come a woman with one eye,
and she shall tread in many men's blood to the knee, and a man leaning on a
staff by her, and she shall say to him, what art thou? and he shall say, I am
King of the Scots, and she shall say, go with me to my house, for there are
three Knights, and he will go with her, and stay there three days and three
nights: then will England be lost; and they will cry twice of a day England is
lost; Then there will be three Knights in Petergate in York, and the one shall
not know of the other; there shall be a Child borne in Pomfret with three
thumbes, and those three Knights will give him three Horses to hold, while they
win England, and all Noble blood shall be gone but one, and they shall carry
him to Sheriff Nuttons Castle six miles from York, and he shall die there,
and they shall chus^ there an Earl in the field, and hanging their Horses on a
thorn, And rue the time that ever they were borne, to see so much blood shed.
Then they will come to York to besiege it, and they shall keep them out three
days, and three nights, and a penny Loaf shall be within the Bar at half a
Crown, and without the Bar at a penny; And they will swear if they will not
yield, to blow up the Town walls. Then they will let them in, and they will
hang up the Major, Shrie^fes and Aldermen, and they will go into Crouch
Church, there will three Knights go in, and but one come out again, and he
will cause Proclamation to be made, that any man may take House, Tower, or
Bower for twenty one years, and whilst the World endures, there shall never be
warfare again, nor any more Kings or Queens, but the Kingdom shall be
governed by three Lords, and then York shall be London. And after this shall
be a white Harvest of Corn gotten in by women. Then shall be in the North,
that one woman shall say unto another, Mother I have seen a man to day* and
for one man there shall be a thousand women, there shall be a man sitting upon
Saint James Church hill weeping his fill; And after that a Ship come sailing up
the Thames till it come against London, and the Master of the Ship shall weep,
and the Mariners shall ask him why he weepeth, being he has made so good a
Voyage, and he shall say; A what a goodly City this was, none in the World
comparable to it, and now there is scarce left any house that can let us have
drink for our money.

Unhappy he that lives to see these days,
But happy are the dead, Shiptons wife says.
In the Worlds old age, this woman did foretell,
Strange things should hap, which in our times have fell.
FINIS.

