TWO LETTERS CONTAINING All the Proceedings betwixt the PRINCE, and the E. of
Warwick: a fight at Sea, and a Fleet upon the Downs.

The submitting of seven ships, and above 100. piece of Ordnance taken: With a
Declaration of the revolted Ships concerning Prince Rupert, who was made
Admiral thereof.

Also the Heads of the large Declaration, and Demands of of the Army, to be
debated in Parliament; the King taken into Custody; with a Letter from the
Estates of Scotland, and the last News of the King and Treaty in the Isle of
Wight.

woodcut illustration of flags flying above ships C P

ICH DIEN



London: Printed for T. P. 1648.

Two Letters of the whole proceedings betwixt the Prince, and the Earl of
Warwick.
Right honorable,
ACcording to the last Orders of the States of Holland, Vantrump put forth to
Sea (with the Fleet which before he lay with all between the Earl of WARVVICK,
and the revolted Ships) the 9. of this instant November, this gave us some
farther assurance, besides the promises they formerly made to us, that no
interruption would be given us, but that we might without disturbance use our
utmost endeavors in accomplishing the Parliaments and Kingdoms service, which
we are about, and for effecting thereof, no sooner was Vantrump put out to Sea,
but the Lord Admiral waighed Anchor, and sailed quite up into the Creek
almost as high as Delfe Sluice, which is near unto Gorey, and most of the
revolted Ships were within view near to the other shore, some great Guns were
discharged on both sides, but little execution done, then the Lord Admiral
perceiving that night began to approach, and like to be misty and dark, he gave
Order to each Squadron to look diligently to their Guard, and the next morning,
the CONSTANT WAR VVICK desired a Parlee, which being granted, the Officers and
those Sailors which were left in her, submitted and came in, desired to be
indempnified for what was past; after her submitted the Hind, the Love, and the
Satisfaction, the rest of those Ships sought sanctuary in the Harbor of Helver
Sluice, and Prince Rupert uses his best skill to satisfy those that remain
with him, and caused several pieces of Ordinance to be drawn forth and
planted on the shore: but whether that will be allowed on by the Dutch, we
cannot yet know of any certainty; but some of them assure us the contrary: it
is rumoured, that the Prince is daily expected with them, yet, they say, he is
not so well recovered, as to come from the Hague, his Highness (we hear) is
with the Lord Admiral, and thereby seek to make an agreement with the
Parliament, and return again into England: but if any such thing be moved, let
all men be assured that nothing will be acted that way, but what shall be with
advice and approbation of Parliament. The Duke of York is with Prince Rupert;
if the Treaty does not take effect, so as a peace be contented for all parties,
it is thought the Prince will back again into France.

Delph, 12. November. 1648.
A Letter from a well-wisher to the King and Prince.
Honored Sir,
I Believe you have heard, (before this kisses your hands) that some of those
ships which did adhere to the Prince, and deserted the Parliament, are gone in
to the Earl of Warwick; but since those four which first submitted to him went
away, two or three more have followed; amongst which is the Constantine, which
bare the Prince his Colors, and the rest are blocked up in Helver-Sluce, so
that it is believed that not one of them can escape, if they should do their
uttermost to obtain it; but to tell you the truth, of what we think, it is
rather conceived, that they will follow the example of those which are already
gone to the Earl of Warwick, then dispute the business any further; for the
making Prince Rupert Commander in chief of the Prince his Fleet in his absence,
bred such a rankor in the hearts both of Seamen and others, that when he came
and read his Commission to them, they stuck not to tell him, that they had
rather sheath their swords in his bowels then be commanded by him, and indeed
when Batten and Jorden (by reason of discontent) left his Highness, the
greatest part of the Navy, there went off with them, or staggred in their
affections, so that in all probability the Prince had not sooner gained this
Fleet, and set up his Standard then it will be lost: For the Earl of Warwick
does not only keep in the remaining part, so that they must in all likelihood
within a short time submit, but with the manning of those which are already
come into him (whereof some carry 40. pieces of Ordinance a piece) has sent a
gallant Squadron of Ships to the Downs, to be a guard to Merchants and other
Ships passing upon the narrow Seas.

The Prince is not so well recovered as to come from the Hague, and the Earl
of Warwick has sent another summons to the Ships which shelter themselves in
Helver-Sluce, so that it is believed the hopes which some did entertain that
there would by way of Treaty be an agreement between his Highness and the
Earl of Warwick, will. come to nothing

From the Navy Novem. 14. 1648.
Westminster die Sabbati 18. November. 1648.
A Letter was read in the House from the Committee of Estates in Scotland,
which follows verbatim.

For the Kight Honorable, the Lords and Commons assembled in the Parliament of
England.
RIght honorable, as we are very sensible of the benefit and advantage
afforded to this Kingdom, against the enemies to the peace and happiness of
both Nations, by the coming hither of your Forces under the command of
Lieutenant General Crumwell, and Major General Lambert; so we hold it fitting
when the condition of our affairs and posture of our Forces have now permitted
their return, to render them this deserved testimony, and to acknowledge that
the deportment of the General Officers, Underofficers and soldiers in their
coming into this Kingdom, during their abode amongst us, and in their return to
England, has been so fair and civil, and with so much tenderness to avoid
all causes of offense, and to preserve a right understanding betwixt the
Kingdoms, that we trust by their carriage the Malignant and disaffected shall
be much convinced and disappointed, and the amity of both Kingdoms strengthened
and confirmed, which we shall likewise on our part inviolably study to
preserve, and to witness that we are

Your very affectionate friends and humble servants, Loudoun Canc.
Edinburgh, 7. Novem. 1648. Signed in the name, and by command of the Committee
of Estates.

From the Headquarters at S. Albans came Letters signifying, that there is a
large Remonstrance or Declaration drawing up, with the advice of the General
Council of the Army. If it come time enough it will be debated in the House on
Monday next, It will contain many particulars, but the chief heads are these.

That Justice be dxecuted on all grand Delinquents, and offenses on what party
soever brought to trial; a time limited for the sitting of this present
Parliament, and another to be called, the Arrears of all that have faithfully
served the Parliament paid, etc. From the Isle of Wight is expected his
Majesty's farther Concessions to the Parliaments last desires, and then it may
be some few days may be added to the Treaty, and if otherwise it ends on
Tuesday next, and his Majesty is again in custody of the Army.

The Letter from Scotland herein Printed was read in both Houses, and it is
Ordered by the Lords and Commons in Parliament that it should be Printed and
Published.

Joh. Brown Cler. Parl. H. Elsinge Cler. Parl. D. Com.

FINIS.

