Two most Strange WONDERS; THE ONE Is a true Relation of an Angel appearing to
Mr James Wise Minister in Yorkshire, and the many strange and wonderful
Visions which he at that time beheld; As also his Prophecies concerning some
years of plenty, and a great dearth presently afterward to ensue; with the
burning and utter destruction of many goodly Towns and Countries.

THE OTHER Being a most fearful judgment which befell Dorothy Matley of Ashover
in the County of Derby on Saturday the 23. of March last, who having couzened a
poor Lad of two single pence, wished that the ground might bury her alive if
she had it, which presently came to pass, for the ground opened and swallowed
her and the Tub she washed Lead-Ore in.

The truth of this Wonder is here incerted by Mr. Iddolls Minister; Tho. Rice,
Henry Wapping kinsman to her; Giles VVinter, Tho. Smith, Francis Brown: and
many others.

Printed for W. Gilbertson, 1662.

Most prodigious tidings from the NORTH: OR, A most true Relation of an Angel
appearing to Doctor James Wise, Parson of the Town of Greenway in the West
Ridings in the County of York, to whom an Angel appeared on the 18. of March
last; and an account of the several Visions that appeared to him.
THe Land of England has for these many years been accounted the Land of
Wonders. Errors and Divisions prevailing, the Angels of the Churches have been
dumb; but will you now hear the strange Visions, and the tidings which an
Angel, (who is a Ministering Spirit) has Rev^aled for future times, for the
better settlement of many discontented spirits in this Kingdom.

MAster James Wise Minister of Greenway in the County of York, seven miles from
the City thereof; walking some few miles to visit a friend of his not far from
Greenway where his Parsonage was, did meet in the way with another Minister to
whom having communicated his mind, and being both full of pensive thoughts; Mr.
Greenway having taken his leave of him, Beheld, where before his face there
appeared many strange Visions which might have amazed any other Spirit but his
alone, who was thoroughly exercised in all works of Devotion and Humility; yet
he could not be so much master of himself, but at the sight of the first Vision
which appeared to him with a Cross in his hand, he trembled down upon his
knees, and hearing a voice that by this you shall overcome, he sell prostrate
on his face, and ignorantly worshipped that, which before he too profanely
didneglect.

In this great distress both of Body and of Mind, he continued for some
certain hours; and another Vision, which carrying a great Splendour with it
appearing, he lay on the ground (dank as if then was) for the space of an hour,
till some honest men, who knew him, passing by, did-raise him from the ground,
and desired to know the reason of that his so melancholy distemper.

He then looking up, as from a Trance, acknowledged that he had seen many
strange Visions during the time of that Trance, and they desiring him to return
to his own House, because he looked so extremely ill; he beseeched them to let
him alone for he did believe, that by a peculiar appointment he came forth, a
selected man to observe those events which would be of great concernment to
this Kingdom.

Some there were by, who hereupon did urge him with more persuasions to go
home, and buy some warm Meats to strengthen and refresh his weak and misguided
thoughts, to whom he said, he was never better in all his life; and if they but
knew the least of that with which he was then possessed with, and could but
apprehend, and behold what he saw and beheld, they would not part with the
least portion of that Spiritual Felicity, for all the Endowments which the
World should give them.

His friends standing in admiration of him; and the Evening drawing on, they
parted from one another, and Mr. Wiseman having taken his leave of them, and
thanked them for their courtesy, returned toward his own Parsonage of
Greenway. He had not gone above the length of half an Acre, but an Angel, as
dazeling to behold, as impossible to express, did encounter him on the way, and
touching him with a white Wand, said unto him,

Be of courage and fear not, beloved, and defended by the Powers above. Thou
have seen many things unrevealed to other men; and it will be thy happiness to
see a great part of them fulfilled.

Do not thou see so many Crawling and Ob^^rious things that are returning to
curle themselves in their own beds again, They are the many Seditions,
Factions, and Heresies, which having been permitted to come out of the
Monstrous Wombs of Ignorance, Rebellion, and Confusion, are now returning to
their own Center: They left Hell empty to people this Nation, and to speak
truth, there was more Order in Hell without them, then there was lately in your
Nation with them.

Who it was that called them into this Land, and did awaken them from their old
beds to disease and disrest them, this is not a fit place nor time to reveal;
We have a Catalogue of their names above in Heaven, and they hang in Files on
the Infernal Rolls.

The World was made in Order, and it is Order only that will preserve it. There
must be a Superiority, and a power Superintendant our all the rest: Look but
on your owe hand, and you will confess, that it were a very unfit Instrument if
the fingers were all of an equal length.

Mr. Wiseman hearing as well the voice, as observing the admirable splendour of
the Angel, remained as a thing lost betwixt Amazements and Fears; when by and
by the Angel departing from him and giving him a gentle brush with his silver
Wings at his departure, Mr. Wise Man did seem to be more encouraged thereby,
and looking round about him, and resolving to go home with all the speed that a
body so old as his would permit; he sound his hope to be intreached upon by
despair, for to his appearance the Sun (it being then but four in the
afternoon) began to lose his light as if it had been but a short day ^t the
beginning of January; his absence was attended with many thick Clouds of
darkness; and to make his words and his fears the greater these Clouds seemed
to be of several complexions.

Sometimes they seemed to be of a duskish pale color, as is the color of the
Earth; sometimes again of a dark green, and blew, such as is the color of the
Sea; sometimes Azure, as is the color of the Elements; and sometimes of an
angry Red, as is the color of the Fire.

The Clouds that were of a duskish color represented several forms, and dull
conditions of many persons with their Arms folded up, as if they would be
content with any Government, provided they could but keep their gold, and the
dull treasures of the Earth with them.

There were also many men and creatures to be seen in the dark green and blue
color; and there were swarms of Bats flying like Independants in the Air, too
wise to own Earth and too weak of wing to fly aloft to Heaven.

That which did most ^ffect him, were many choice and gallant bodies of Azure
color, and some of perfect White, all differing in their stature, but
resembling one another in their degrees, as well in their Honor as in their
Innocence.

And it is to be observed, that as they were all distinct from one another, as
well by their Voices as Complexions; so there was no where any true Harmony to
be found but in these only.

The last Creatures in the Clouds were some of a Scarlet, and some of a Purple
Complexion; some of them in long Coats from their shoulders down to their Feet
were walking up and down the Streets and whispering Treason; and because they
had not their own Order, they would admit of no Order. A wretched Generation of
men, they looked most of them like Citizens, and knew neither how to govern,
nor to be governed.

But those in Scarlet were most of them on foot, and armed either with Pike or
Musket, and looked very superciliously, as if they would give Laws to those
men, who of themselves would observe no Laws but their own.

The sight of so many persons, so strange in their Tempers, as in their
Complexions, and Habits, did wondefully perplex Mr. Wiseman; but a voice was
heard, the Lord is thy Guide, which voice did give a new Encouragement unto
him, when behold a battle in the Air, Eagles sought against Griffins, and
Bears against Boars, Tigers against Lions, and Wolves against Leopards, the
number on both sides seemed to be infinite and would have amazed the sight, but
behold, in less then an hours space they vanished: And men sought against men,
both on Horseback and Foot, they all fought like Lions; but they who carried
their Lions Passant in their designs, were undoubtedly the Conquerors.

After this, there was to be seen a City all on fire, a great City, and
although of innumerable buildings, yet hardly able to contain her people. And
after that a Cloud of Dismal Smoke which for a while waving up and down,
there appeared at the last a finger of fire, which pointing to Mr. Wiseman, he
drew near unto it, and heard a voice which commanded him to go home, and
declare unto the world this ensuing Prophecy.

The Prophecy.
ONe thousand six hundred sixty and one,
a great dispute will be,
And Presbyterians must all veil
to those of the Hierarchy.
At this much murmur will arise,
and they would all destroy
Both Train men and Auxiliaries
that say Vive le Roy.
But they shall all be quel'd,
although their numbers are so many
Whom Providence has armed now,
shall nere be quel'd by any.
Three fruitful years of Corn will be,
of Cattle, fruit, and hay,
And three dear years after you will see
to eat these clean away.
Old women this year will dyc a pace
middle age with feavours strives
In deaths path young babes take their race
at Seas men lose their lives.
The greatest fight at Sea will be,
never the like known before,
All Nations thick us woods of trees,
the Seas a purple gore.
A many people will run mad
and men will kill their wives,
The Son to wrong his Father is glad
and untimely lose their lives.
For sin great plagues on Cities ensue
the bellconstantly toles,
To bury two thousand a week will be true
O Lord receive their sculs.
A mighty Earthquake by Gods power
in several places tot'h Land send.
Which will shake stately towns and towers,
and thus I make an end.
The Names of the chief Parishoners which do desire to have their hands
annexed to confirm this wonderful Prediction; are
John VVilles Esquire. Tho. Brown Head Constable. William Dean. Ralph Corbet.
Simond Mayn. Jun. Sam. Walter. Henry Mayn. Peter Cresil. Moses Treton. Michael
James. Valentine Strowd. John Andrews.
The great and grievous punishment which by the most just judgment of Almighty
God fell upon Dorothy Matley widow, of the parish of Ashover within fifteen
miles of the tamous Derby, who the ground opening was swallowed up within it
for her grievous sin of imprecation.
WE read in the holy Scripture that the ground opening swallowed up the
rebellious Corah, Dathan, and Abiram; this was a fearful judgment, at which all
the whole Tribes of Israel were amazed and silenced. The like we read in many
Histories; and the sad punishment in the like nature which befell this Woman in
Derby shire is most memorable.

Her name was Dorothy Matley, a woman noted for pilfering and defrauding her
neighbors, but above all her most grievous sin of imprecation; for when she
had wronged any of her Neighbors, which she would do often, and was reproved
by them for it she would presently fall a ranting and cursing bitterly, and
wish that the ground might open and swallow her alive, if she had done any such
thing.

It so fell out, that on Saturday on the 23. of March last she had purloyned
from a poor boy two single pence, the boy missing of his money complained to
his Mother, and told her that Dorothy Matley had got it from him; his Mother
coming to her, found her washing and purging of Lead-Ore from the Rubbish with
which it was dug up, and demanded the two single pence of her, but she most
wretchedly denied it, and wished that the ground might open, and that she might
sink alive into it, if she had it, when behold the just judgment of God, for
immediately at that very instant the ground did open and swallowed her* who
perceiving whether she was a going made a dismal cry and noise, but it was in
vain, for the ground gaping swallowed her self and the Tub in which she was
washing, did suddenly close again.

The neighbors, and some that knew did dig for her body, and found it a great
way in the Earth, but as for the Tub in which she washed, they could not find
it, although they dug deep for it.

This was a dreadful judgment, and may serve for an example to all the God
dammers of our times; and to all other that are guilty of the like
Imprecations: therefore let them consider of this and repent least they be torn
in pieces, as the Prophet Daved has it, and there be none to deliver them.

FINIS.

