Two Great Victories: ON Obtained by the Earl of DENBIGH at OSVVESTREY: And
how he took 20 Gentlemen of Wales. 1 Lieutenant Colonel. Diverse Captains and
other officers 200 Prisoners. 100 Muskets. 500 pound composition. 300 Cows and
Welsh Roonts. Many Swords and Pistols. Diverse Arms. 1 Barrel of Powder. A
quantity of Ballets. The Church. The Tower. The Castle. Besides diverse hurt.
Some slain.


Certified by Letters from the Earl of Denbigh his Quarters.

The other Victory by Colonel Mitton, with a List of the Prisoners by him
taken:

Certified by Letters from Colonel Mitton.

Published according to Order.

LONDON, Printed by I. Coe, 1644.

LETTERS SENT FROM Colonel MITTON.
SIR,
I Came hither about eleven of the clock upon Tuesday night, I had not been in
bed on quarter of an hour, but a friend came to me, and informed me that
there were Carriages summoned to be in Oswestree by nine of the clock,
yesterday to carry Ammunitiun to Prince Rupert, which we hear he stands in
need of very much, I drew out all the small forces could be spared hence, and
marched toward Chirke to surprise it. I went on with the horse to a place so
appointed one to meet me, to give me farther intelligence, who when he came
did assure me that a party was gone out of Oswestree that morning, to convey it
thither. I cannot learn that it is yet gone past, I have sent to the Earl of
Denbigh to give him notice hereof, who as I even now received intelligence,
that he has sent forces toward me, if they come before the Ammunition be
past, I intend by Gods help to fall upon the Town, which they are about to
fortify very strongly. Yesterday I took 2. of Major Sachaverels Troopers,
who-upon examination confessed, that a Lieutenant of foot with 20 Musketeers
were gone a mile past, as we being at Saint Martius, they going toward Bangor,
I followed them as fast I could with 25 horse, and as many Dragoons when we
came in sight of them, they not seeing as the Dragoones alighted to charge them
in the Rear, the place being enclosed ground, full of Woods, and very uneven,
instead of 20 we found 54: one of our Troopers discharged a Pistol, how or
wherefore I cannot learn, but it gave them such an Alarume, whereupon we
discharged them with our horse, routed them, took prisoners according to the
note enclosed, blessed be God for all his mercies, he is the only giver of all
Victories, and whom I trust will never forsake them that are faithful in his
service: I thank my God I have not one man slain in any fight, since I parted
last from you.

Dated June 20, 1644.

A List of the Prisoners taken at Duddleston, JUNE 19, 1644.
Bartholomew Fuller Marshall. Owen Jones Quartermaster. Richard Foulks
Sergeant. Robert Jones. Joseph Jones. Owen Lewis. Richard ab David. Richard ap
Thomas. Thomas Owen. Richard Treuard. Morgan ap Richard. Hugh ap Thomas. John
Henrey. Richard Jones. Robert Davies. Morgan ap Robert. Edward Jones. Thomas
Rogers. John Steel. Thomas ap Thomas. Robert Jones. Randby Stocton. Edward
Philip. John Roberts. Richard Davis. Edward Williams. John Owen.
Upon Saturday last about two of the clock in the afternoon my Lord with his
horse, and 200 foot fell upon this Town, my Lord by reason of his command into
Lancashire, could not spare any of his foot, therefore we are constrained to
take this small force out of Weme, which God so blessed, that before five of
the clock we entered the Town, we were forced first to take the Church,
wherein there was 25. The next morning. the Castle was surrendered, the
particulars I refer to my Lords Relation.

Ossastree, 24 of June, 1644.

Thus far the Letters from that Heroicke Conqueror Colonel Mitton.

Now follows other Letters from the Earl of Deneigh his quarters, of the
particulors, of the victory at Oswestrey.

SIR,
I Desire you to join: with us, and for us, in praises to God, who has done
great things for us, and by us.

Upon Thursday last we came out of Stafford, horse and foot, to intercept
some Ammunition, going to Prince Rupert, by the way of Wales, over the river of
Comerah. That night we merched not far by reason of great rain: but my Lord
of Denbigh, early the next day got to horse, and leaving all our foot at
Draiton, we marched to wem, and our horse to Elsmore, and 200, foot and a
troop of horse under the command of Collonell Mitton: We early next day
overtooke our horse and those foot and by 12 a clock on Saturday we
beleaguerd the enemies garirson town of Oswestrey, which is (a walled town)
and in it the Church well manned and the Castle.

They gave us a hot salute, and our men as gallantly entertained it and
returned an answer.

Captain Keme undertook to make good Chester passage, and Chirke Castle
road, with these Troops, viz: Captain Kems on Toope, Collonell Bartons,
Captain Noakeses, Captain: Tompsons, and Captain Broothers.

Captain Keme immediately fixed his guards, and sent out parties into the
mountains and scouts every way, who returned with news of one Collonell
Marrowes appearing with a body of horse, but they never came up, though
expected.

My Lords horse commanded by Major Frazer had the guard of Shrewsburie, road
and Morton: Our Foot made an onslaut on the Church being but 200, and in an
half hours sore fight entered the Church, the Enemy fled into the steeple,
thence they fetched them down with a powder; there we took 27. prisoners; then
we brought up a Sacre to the gate through the suburbs, and a party of Horse
were called off the guards both of my Lords, and ours, and my Lords Lifeguard;
we shot the gate through at two shot, and they fired from the gate at our men:
but one of our shot shooting a woman's bowels cut, and wounding two or three,
put them in a fear, that they betook themselves to the Castle. We forced open
the gates, and the horse entered resolutely, and so by 3. aclock were possessed
of the Town, as good a piece of service, God have all the pra^se, as this year
has produced. My Lord himself entered the Town with the horse, neglecting
thoughts of his own safety: Our men minded not the plundring the Town (which
was their right in raking it in this way) but followed on to the Castle where
they fiercely fiered on us every way being well manned. We made some shot with
the greatest Sacre, but took little effect.

Only some timorous men got over the walls, one broke his arm falling, others
Captain Kemes horse lighted on, took them prisoners, Captain Keme sent my Lord
from his guard 14. prisoners into the Town, besides one Captain which his Scout
took by Chirke Castle with his Commission under his Majesty's hand, and sent it
to my Lord also.

My Lord at night called a Council of War, and ordered a strong guard, and
designed a party of Troopers to venture to fire the Castle gates with pitch; but
our men wearied out, slipped the opportunity: My Lord by break of day waking,
came to Captain Keme in the same house with him, and designed him to go forward
the design, which immediately he did with great cheerfulness and valor: but
on his way there met him a party of women of all sorts down on their knees,
confounding him with their Welsh howlings, that he was fain to get an
Interpreter, which was to beseech me to entreat my Lord before he blew up the
Castle, they might go up and speak to their husbands, children, and the
officers; which he moved, and my Lord condescended to, so Captain Keme might go
with them and a Trumpet, which he did courageously, and carried this message.
Then my Lord to avoid the effusion of blood yet offered them mercy, if they
would accept of it; they threw down this paper, viz.

To the Right Honorable the Earl of Denbigh.
Propositions propounded by us for the delivering up of the Castle of Oswestry.
FIrst, to march away with our Arms, bag and baggage, Officers and Soldiers,
and all other persons whatsoever being in the said Castle. And,

Secondly, that we the said Officers, and all other persons whatsoever, being
within the said Castle, may be guarded through your Quarters to Mountfords
bridge, or quietly to abide in our own habitations.

Thirdly, that we may march out of the said Castle over the said Bridge with
our Muskets charged, light matches, and balls in our mouths.

These Propositions being granted, the Castle shall be delivered by the
Officers subscribed.

John Birdwell Lieutenant Colonel. John Warrin Captain. Nicho. Hooks
Lieutenant. Thomas Davenport, Lieutenant. Hugh Lloyd, Ancient. Lewis Morgan,
Ancient.


Captain Keme returned, leaving the women, my Lord refused to condescend; at
last the women prevailed, and cried to me to come up: then the two brave
Champions, Colonel Mitton, and Captain Keme went up, and they said they would
repose themselves on such quarter as my Lord would sign to, which was their
lives only.

So they marched out, and we found, 100, good muskets, besides others stole
away 8, Halberts, and Officers to them, 1 barrel of powder, and suitable match,
many swords, and some few pistolls, 20, Gentlemen of wales, and Shropshire,
diverse Officers, and 200, Prisoners, besides what were lost.

Immediately (it being the Lords day) my Lord called away all to go to Church to
praise God, which was done, and our dead buried.

In all this service we had but 2 Soldiers slain, and 1 horse and but 4,
wounded, blessed be God.

This Town is of great concernment. We had a Council of war at 1 a clock,
at which my Lord General (the Earl of Denbigh) made Colonel Mitton Governor
of Oswester: And we have resolved upon a great design, which is to join with
Cheshire forces, where Sir Thomas Middleton is now at Namptvvich, and has
been these four days, and go against Prince Rupert into Lancashire: I pray
commend us especially now in your constant prayers to the Lord, be doing as
well as we: and praise God for his miraculous love by us a poor weak Aamie.

This day my Lord received thanks from the Committee of both Kingdoms for the
last service at Tipton Green: It is a sad sight to behold the ignorance of
these Welsh in these parts, and how they are inslaved to serve: we shall leave
a Garrison here, and Colonel Mitton, and march to our foot on Wednesday next
with our body of horse. Colonel Fox is with us here: our men fetched in 300
Cows and Salt Runts of the Mountains, and sell good penny worths: This Town to
avoid plundering are to give 500 pounds to the Soldiers.


FINIS.

