THE Two Petitions Of the Knights, Gentlemen, and Freeholders of the County of
OXON:

Together with the two Petitions of the Knights, Gentlemen, Ministers,
Freeholders, and other Inhabitants of the County of Kent, as they were
presented to both Houses of Parliament on the eighth, and ninth of February.

Printed at London for F. Couls, and T. Banks: 1642.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE The House of PEERS, now assembled in PARLIAMENT
The humble Petition of the Knights Gentlemen, Freeholders, and Subsidie-men,
of the best rank and quality in the County of Oxon.
Shows.
THAT your Petitioners have for diverse years, groaned under most heavy
pressures and grievances, both in our Religion, civil rites and liberties,
which were grown to such height, that they became unsupportable, and yet no
hopes of redress appeared to the eye of man, till it pleased the Almighty God
of his infinite goodness, to stir up the Kings Majesty to call this present
Parliament, whereby our dying hopes were raised to very great and confident
expectations to of a full and perfect Reformation, but they were soon abated to
our exceeding great discouragement, by the lets and hindrances which are
largely expressed in the late Remonstrance of the state of the Kingdom, set
forth by the Honorable house of Commons, arising from the endeavors of a
malignant party within this Kingdom: and (as we humbly conceive) from the
popish Lords and Bishops, Voting in the House of Peers: Nevertheless we now
cannot but entertain new hopes of comfort, and of the happy proceedings and
success of this Parliaement, beholding with unspeakable joy, your late
concurrence with the Honorable House of Commons, especially in taking away the
Votes of prelates, and settling this Kingdom in a posture of defense: which we
do with all possible thankfulness acknowledge.

Humbly beseeching your Lordships, that you would keep up our hopes by
proceeding in your happy concurrence with the house of Commons, to a perfect
Reformation, and particularly, in vindicating the privileges of Parliament,
discovering, punishing and removing evil Counselors and Magistrates, taking
away from the popish Lords, their Votes in parliament, utterly abollishing that
Kingdom destroying sin of idolatry, together with superstition and
Arminianisme, so much professed and countenanced in our University: pasing the
Bill against plurallities, and joining in that order of the house of Commons,
for the demollishing of Altars, and scandalous pictures: And your petitioners
shall still have cause to look upon your Lordships with as high esteem as ever
our Forefathers did upon your most Noble progenitors, and also with our best
endeavors, will maintain you in your happy concurrence with the said House of
Commons, in your persons, Honors, and Dignities.

And your petitioners shall ever pray, etc.
To the Honorable the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses, of the House of
Commons assembled in Parliament.
The humble petitian of the Gentlemen, Freeholders, Subsidymen and others of
good rank and quality, Inhabitants of the County of Oxon.
Shows.
Our most humble and thankful acknowledgment of your exceeding great care and
pairs already taken, during this Parliament, to the hazarding of your healths
and lives, in the endeavoring a removal of the many grievances in Church and
Commonwealth: As also the continued care, and unwearied endeavors, for a
perfect Reformation: The Remonstrance whereof, as we cannot consider without
unspeakable joy (it putting life into our languishing souls) so we desire it
may be remembered with high esteem by us and our posterity for ever. And for
that you under Almighty God, and his most excellent Majesty, are now called to
the place of our chiefest hopes against all our else: Your Petitioners humbly
presnt our daily fears and distractions arising from the desperate plots of the
malignant Party of this Kingdom, and from the certain reports of the most
barbarous and bloody practices of the Rebels in Iceland, by whose prevailing
and the small provision that is made for their suppressing and securing of this
Kingdom against the like attempts, the said party is much imboldened, the
Petitioners fears augmented, their common Commerce and Trading abated, and the
public safety of the Kingdom end angered,

It is therefore the humble desire of your Petitioners, That some course may
be taken as to suppress those Rebels in Ireland: so to put this Kingdom in
such a posture of defense, as the present condition thereof requires: And that
it may please you in our behalfs, to be a means to the Kings most gracious
Majesty, and to the House of Peers, to perfect their endeavors by their
concurrence with you, in punishing Delinquents, and removing ull those
pressures and grievances, in Church and Commonwealth, with the causes, and
Causers of the same. And your Petitioners shall uncessantly pray unto Almighty
God for the prosperous and happy success, and withal. put forth our best
endeavors to maintain and defend the Kings most excellent Majesty and high
Court of Parliament in their good endeavors and undertakings for the
comfortable and secure settling of Religion, and Liberties against all malignant
opposers whatsoever.

To the Right Honorable the House Peers assembled in Parliament.
The humble Petition of the Knights, Gentlemen, Ministers, Freeholders and
other Inhabitants of the County of Kent.
Shows.
THat the Petitioners do with joy and humble thankfulness acknowledge the
good Correspondency and Concurrence, which (by the blessing of God) this
Honorable House has held with the Worthy House of Commons, in passing the
Bill to take away the Votes of the Prelates in this Honorable House, and
disabling them from Temporal employments; And for setting the Kingdom into a
Posture of War for its defense.

And the Petitioners do in like manner most humbly and heartily profess, That
they will ever honor this Honorable House, and to the utmost of their power
defend the same, so far as your Lordships shall continue to hold Correspondence
and Concurrence with the said House of Commons in all their just desires and
endeavors. Upon which the Petitioners do humbly conceive, greatly depends
the peace and Welfare of this Kingdom.

And the Petitioners most humbly pray, That this Honouable House (declaring
therein your Noble Resolutions for he public good) would be pleased to go on
with the said House of Commons, to a through Reformation, especially of the
Church, according to the Word of God; To press dispaech for the relief of
Ireland; To expedite proceedings against Delinquents; To Vindicate Parliament
Privileges; To discover, remove, and punish evil Counselors; To deprive the
Popish Lords of their Votes; to disarme and scarch out Papists, and put them
into fafe custody; To suppress Mass, both in public and private; To cast out
scandalous Ministers, plant painful Preachers every where; And discover who
are Church Papists, as well as known Recusautss.

And the Petitioners shall daily pray.
To the Honorable, the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses of the Commons House
now assembled in Parliament.
The humble Petition of many Knights, Gentlemen, Freeholders and other
Inhabitants in the County of Kent.
Shows.
THat we these many years past have bin pressed with many unusual and heavy
burdens on our consciences and states, to our great grief and discouragement,
yet good has been showed us from the Lord our God, who has extended mercy to
us to give us a little reviving by the provideece and uncessant care of this
Honorable House, whose matchless diligence has already removed many almost
insuperable difficulties, whose pious intentions (under our God) upholds our
hopes for removal of al our pressures which continue upon us by the Popish
Lords and Prelates with their party in the House of Peers, which have been the
great opposers of your just proceedings and zealous endeavors, whereby our
grievances increase upon us.

First, the trade of clothing being decaid to the impoverishing of the County,
and to the bringing of many thousands of the poor depending thereon to
unavoidable necessities.

2. That this his Majesty's County bordering upon the Sea Coast is exposed to
danger by foreign enemies, whose fears threaten us being greatly weakened by so
many arms forced from us for the Northern Service.

3. That our brethren the Protestants in Ireland lie bleeding under the
inhumane hand of Popish Rebels, who have conspired and lift up the head to root
out true religion there, and without timely prevention to cause confusion here.

4. That the privileges of Parliament (in the peace whereof is our peace)
broken in so a unparelled a manner, to the great amazement of us, who according
to our duty are come to make expression of our loyalty to our Sovereign and
fidelity to his Parliament, in maintaining and defending, as far as lawfully we
may, with our lives, power and estates his Majesty's Royal Person and
privileges of Parliament against all adversary attempts.

Wherefore our ardent prayer is that by the wisdom of this Honorable House
the popish Lords may be outed the House of Peers, the causes of our grievances
taken away, the County put in a posture of defense, the ports fortified and
committed to trusty hands, our arms restored; the fire in Ireland spsedily
quenched, delinquents punished, and the privileges of Parliament confirmed,
which will turn our mourning into a good day.

And we shall pray that God would crown this happy Parliament with such
success, that the Lord may be an habitation of Justice, and the Church the
mountain of holiness.

FINIS.

