TWO EPITAPHS, OCCASIONED by the Death of Sr CHARLES LUCAS, AND Sr GEORGE
LISLE, basely assassinated at Colchester.

Contraria juxta se posita magis elucescunt. Printed in the Year 1648.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE JOHN, Lord LUCAS.
My Lord;
THE Doctor of the Gentiles, of whom it is certain some of us Englishmen are
descended, (though many are degenerated into the very faith, or rather
perfidiousnes of the Jews: some turned Nulli-fidians, others plain Cannibals,
delighting with Cyrus in raw flesh, and to wallow in blood,) almost all
Barbarians, not knowing, at least not regarding Divine, National, or Martial
Laws; I say this great Doctor writing to the Thessalonians with purpose to
mitigate their sorrow, for some departed friends, insists altogether on the
resurrection, and future glory, that by the evidence of this argument they
might assure themselves they had not lost, but should certainly enjoy (and in
the plenitude of all pleasures) their dead friends. I will not say your Honor
has lost, but sent before you a most noble Brother, whose death (like that of
the Queen of Scots) our most gracious Sovereigns Grandmother (sic parvis
componere magna, etc.) as it will redound to the perpetual infamy of our
Nation, so it shall be a lasting Ornament to your noble family; and therefore
you may with symphoniack voices, and choicest melody prosecute the funerals of
your most Loyal and worthy Brother; and such as Macrobius witnesses was the
custom of the wisest Gentiles in performing the solemn obsequies of those
Heroes, who had sacrificed their lives for the safety of their Country,
assuring themselves their noble souls were translated hence to hear the
harmonious melody resulting (as Pythagoras constantly affirmed) from the
divinely ordered conversion of the heavenly spheres, and therefore those
Ancients would accordingly with music, and honor conduct such happy spirits
to the joyful mansions of eternal beatitude: These gnomicall, yet consolatory
Monodies of Statius in Epicedio Glauci are too general for your heroik
thoughts.

Omnia functa, etc.
All dye, or else shall dye, the days and nights
Are borne, and vanish: STARS put out their lights,
Who for this thing called Man, will wet his eyes,
That by so many several chances dies?
But certainly what Seneca writes to his honorable friend Polybius, Cum plus
aequo fratris morte perturbaretur, may be addressed to your noble self; Cum
voles rerum omn ium oblivisci, cogita Caesarem; fas non est tibi recordato
Caesare de fortuna queri; especialy reflecting how your noble Brother so justly
paid Caesar what was Caesar's, courageously dying for his Prince and Country,
and as that famous Epaminondas the glory of Thebes left two illustrius
Daughters behind him the Victories at Leuctra and Mantinea to perpetuate his
memory: In like manner so many battles in the defense of our King and
Kingdom, and Colchester with such galantry defended are the ever-living
Offspring of your renowned Brothers virtues; and may solidly comfort your
Honor in the absence of so brave a Parent of them, and your so near Kinsman,
which are the hearty desires of, Your

Lordships unknown servant; Demophilus Philanactos.

2. Epitaphs, etc.
Among the black deeds of blacker Tom, this One
Be grav'n upon his Monumentall Stone;
Here lies a Fellow (Reader curse his Dust)
That killed a Worthy, of whom England must
Avouch he was not to be paralleld
For Loyalty, and Valor in the Field.
Had all things done by Fairfax been done well,
This Act had damned them all, and him to Hell.
NOW we will adjoyn brave Lucas Epitaph;
Here sweetly rests his KINGS and Countries staff:
Expect no Hattons Tomb to set him forth,
His own Deeds are best Heralds of his Worth,
And long-defended Colchesters sad Story.
The never ending Volume of his glory.
The King has lost a CHAMPION, and true MIRROR
Of Loyalty, the Parliament their TERROR:
Soldiers have lost a LEADER to the Field,
And in HIM only were ten thousands killed.
(No Hamilton, that Troops raised not long since
To free his King, but sold both Troops and Prince.)
His House has lost an Honor of their stem,
Three Realms a Chieftaine might have rescued them:
What has the Parliament and Fairfax won
By cutting his lives thread, before 'twas out spun?
Taken a few days off: Alas whilst days
And Ages run, so long shall last his praise.
And this dries every tear, cures every maime,
CHARLES shall live ever registered by Fame.
Tiberius hated Histories, because
He knew his own foul deeds done against all Laws
Should be recorded, and Truth telling Fame
Would speak his actions to the Actors shame:
Passion, and proper Interest dim our sight,
And very few in their own cause judge right.
Impartial Censors are the after times,
And freely dare pronounce Crimes to be Crimes:
Who not abhors Wat Tiler and Jack Cade?
That such Com'otions here in London made:
(Base Levellers) who durst their Armies bring
By force to curb, or take, or kill the King.
But let the Parliament prepare their eyes
From Lucas Ashes Lucasses shall rise;
Heroes, who like Elisha shall inherit
In double measure, Noble Lucas spirit:
Heroes, who to their King and Country true,
Shall quell them, and their Independent Crew.
Those Musketeers did unaware conspire
To this miraculous Birth, when they gave Fire,
And Noble Lucas fell a VICTIME down
To Fairfax Rage, and Parliamentall Gown:
So is the Phoenix life, but then begun,
When on the odorous Pile his life is done.
For who reflecting on this WORTHIES fate
Vows not revenge against Fairfax, and the State?
And who will refuse in such a Cause to die,
That frees his Nation from base Tyranny?
(Nay the long Asse-ear'd Cockneies vexed with fears,
Might do some good, could they prick up their ears.)
So Lucas undeserved Death shall bring
Much happiness to the Kingdom, and the KING;
And Samson-like dead LUCAS shall kill more
Preputiate Rebels then he did before.
On Sir George Lisle.
LIsle, had I known thee, I should praise thee more;
But now, as does the Vulgar, I adore
Virtue by hearsay. May this be enough
To set thee forth, (more is superfluous stuff)
In WORTH, in LIFE, in DEATH, with LUCAS share,
There never lived, nor died a Worthier Pair:
And had not BOTH of YOU so MATCHLES been,
You had not felt Fairfax Vindictive spleen.
George sweetly rest, sprout Laurels from thy Dust,
Live ever with the world, and with the Just:
This Canzon with Apotheosde Patriots sing,
I dyed a Loyal Martyr for my King.
On the Death of both these Worthies.
When Lisles and Lucas Tragedy began,
They looked not at base Iretons Message wan,
But as some Libian Lion chaste by Hounds,
(When force availes not) trotting on the grounds,
Disdaines to fly, and rearing without dread
His Crisp'd maine up, turns often about his head,
And viewes the following Curres, then sure to dye,
Acts his last Exit with much Majesty.
No otherwise our Cordelion Knights,
That had (undaunted) in so many fights
Looked grim Death in the face, demand from whom,
The Parliament, or Fairfax came this doom?
It Is answered, then the Raven stretched his throat
When both the Houses made this bloody Vote,
That all who waged war for the Royal Cause
Should suffer death by their Draconick Laws.
Our Cavaliers well knowing 'twas in vain
To argue, where PRIDE, WILL and MALICE reign,
Not Reason, nor true Honor; first commend
Their souls to God, then crowning their last end
With justice of their Cause, yield to the guns
Of Fairfax, and his Earth-borne Myrmidons.
Ob. Some fools object, that going to their graves
They called the Sainted Faction Traitrous Knaves:
Resp. Did not great Caesar stabbed, and falling down,
Call Casca Rascal, then compose his Gown?
Brave Souls, when to their ends they nearer be,
Are strangely rapt, and Truths more clearly see.
FINIS.

