The two constant Lovers in Scotland: OR, A pattern of true Love expressed in
this ensuing Dialogue, between an Earls daughter in Scotland, and a poor
Serving-man; she refusing to marry the Lord Fenix, which her Father would force
her to take, but clave to her first Love Tomey o'th Pots.
To a pleasant new tune.
IN Scotland there are Ladies fair,
there is Ladies of Honor and high degree,
Hey down, down a down derry:
But one excels above all the rest,
and the Earl of Arundels daughter is she.
With hey down, derry down,
lang derry down derry.
Both Knights and Lords of great account,
comes thither a wooing for this Ladies sake:
It fell on a day that E. Arundell said,
daughter which of these lords will you take
Or which of them now likes thee best,
speak truth to me, but do not lie:
Speak truth to me, and do not jest,
who must heir my livings when as I die.
Lord Fenix is a Lord of high degree,
and has both Lands and livings free:
I tell thee daughter thou shall him have,
if thou will take any counsel at me.
With that the young lady fell down of her knee,
and trickling tears ran down her eye:
As you are my father, and loves me dear,
my heart is set where it must be.
On a Serving-man which is so poor,
for all he has is but pounds three:
He was the first Lover that ere I had,
and the last I mean him for to be.
With that her father was sore offended,
and fast he rode at that same tide,
Until he to the Lord Fenix came,
and said, take thee my daughter for thy Bride
The young Lady called up Jack her footboy
I dare trust no man alive but thee:
Thou must go my earand to Strawbery-Castle,
to the place where Tomy othpotts does lie.
And carry this Letter in Parchment fair,
that I have sealed with mine own hand:
And when Tomey looks this Letter upon,
be sure his Countenance thou understand.
And if he either laugh or smile,
he is not sorry at his heart:
I must seek a new love where I will,
for small of Tomey must be my part.
But if he wax red in the face,
and tricling tears fall from his eyes:
Then let my Father say what he will,
for true to Tomey I Will be always.
And thou must tell him by word of mouth*
if this Letter cannot be read at that tide:
That this day sen night and no longer hence,
I must be lord William Fenix bride.
The boy took leave of his Lady gay,
and to Strawbery Castle he did him fast hie:
A Serving-man did guide him the way,
to the place where Tomey oath Pots did lie
O Christ thee save good Tomey oath Pots,
and Christ thee save as I thee see,
Come read this Letter Tomey oath Potts,
as thy true love has sent to thee.
Then Tomey he waxed red in the face,
and trickling tears ran down his eyes:
But never a letter could he read,
if he should be hanged on th gallow-tree
She bid me tell you by word of mouth,
if this letter could not be read at this tide
That this day sen night and no longer hence
she must be Lord William Fenix bride.
Now in faith said Tomey, she is mine own,
as all hereafter shall understand:
Lord Fenix shall not marry her by night or day,
unless he win her by his own hand
For on Gilforth green I will her meet,
and if she love me bid her for me pray:
And there I will lose my life so sweet,
or else her wedding I will stay.
He called this boy unto accounts,
think whether he loved this Lady gay:
He gave him forty shilling for his message,
and all he had was but pounds three.
The boy took his leave of Tomey oath Potts,
fearing that he had staid too late:
The young Lady did wait of his coming,
and met him five miles out of the gate.
O boney boy thou art not of age,
therefore thou can both mock and scorn:
I will not believe what my love has said,
unless thou on this book be sworn.
Now in faith gay lady I will not lie,
and kissed the book full soon did he:
One letter he could not read at that time,
if he should have been hanged at gallo-tree
He said in faith you are his own,
as all hereafter shall understand:
Lord Fenix shall not marry you by night or day
unless he winn you with his own hand.
For on Gilforth green he will you meet,
and if you love him you must for him pray:
And there he will lose his life so sweet,
or else your wedding he will stay.
Let us leave talking of the boy,
That with his gay Lady is turned home:
Now let us go talk of Tomey oath Potts,
and how to his master he is gone.
WHen Tomey came his Master before,
he kneeled down upon his knee,
What tidings have thou brought my man,
as that thou makes such courtesy.
O Christ you save dear Master he said,
and Christ you save as I you see,
for Gods love Master come read me this Letter,
which my true love has sent to me.
His Master took this Letter in hand,
and looked ore it with his eye,
In faith I am fain my man he said,
as thou have a Lady so true to thee.
I have a Lady true to me,
and false to her I Will never be:
But ere this day senninght, and no longer hence,
I must lose my love through poverty.
Lord Fenix he will her have,
because he has more wealth then I:
now hold thy tongue my man he said,
for before that day many a one shall die
O Tomey said he, I love thee well,
and something for thee I will do,
For Strawberry Castle shall be thine own
so long as thou do mean to woo.
One half of my Lands I Will give thee a year,
the which will raise thee many a pound,
Before that thou lose thy bonny sweet-hart,
thou shall drop angels with him to the ground.
I have thirty Steeds in my Stable, strong,
which any of them is good indeed,
And a bunch of Spears hangs them among,
and a Nag to carry thee swift with speed.
My Suit of Armor thou shall put on,
so well it becomes thy fair body:
And when thou come on Gilford green
thou'll look more like a Lord then he.
My men shall all rise and with thee go,
and I my self with thee will ride:
And many a bloody wound will we make
before that thou shall lose thy bride.
Now Christ reward you dear master he said
for the good will you bear to me:
But I trust to God in a little space,
with my own hands to set her free.
I Will none of your horses master he said,
for they cannot well skill of their trade:
None but your gray Nag that has a cut tail
for heell either, stand or turn again.
One spear Master and no more,
no more with me that I will take:
And if that Spear it will not serve my turn,
I Will suffer death for my true loves sake.
The second part,
To the same tune.
EArly in the morning when day did spring
on Gilforth green be time was he.
There did he epsy Lord Fenix coming,
and with him a royal company.
Gold Chains about their necks threescore,
full well might seem fine Lords to ride:
The young Lady followed far behind.
sore against her will that she was a bride.
There Tomey passed this Lady by,
but never a word to her did say:
Then straight to Lord Fenix he is gone,
and gives him the right time of the day.
O Christ you save Lord Fenix he said,
And Christ you save as I you see:
Thou art welcome Tomey oath Potts he said,
a serving man into our company.
O how does thy Master Tomey oath Potts,
tell me the truth and do not lie:
My Master is well then Tomey replide,
I thank my Lord and I thank not thee.
O Christ you save Lord Fenix he said,
and Christ you save as I you see:
You may have choice of Ladies enough,
and not take my true love from me.
With that Lord Fenix was sore offended,
and fast away he rode at that tide:
God forbid Lord Fenix he said,
a serving man should hold me from my bride
But afterward Tomey did him meet,
as one that came not thither to fly:
And said Lord Fenix take thou my love,
for I will not lose her cowardly.
O meet me here to morrow he said,
as thou art a man come but thy self,
And if that I come any more,
the Devil fetch my soul to hell.
And so this wedding day was staid,
the Lady and Lords they turned home;
The Lady made merry her maidens among
and said Tomey I wish thou may win thy own.
Early in the morning when day did spring
on Gilforth green be time was he
He waited long for Lord Fenix coming,
but Lord William Fenix he could not see.
We waited long and very long,
until the Sun waxed very high,
There was he ware of Lord Fenix coming,
and with him other men three.
Thou art a false thief Lord Fenix he said,
because thou break'st thy promise with me*
Thou promisedst me to come by thy self,
and thou have brought other men three.
But in regard I call thee thief.
because thou have broken promise with me;
I vow and you were as many more,
forsaken sure you should not be.
These are my men Lord Fenix said,
that every day do wait on me;
If any of them do strike a stroke,
in faith then hanged he shall be.
They fetched a race and rode about,
and then they met full eagerly,
Lord Fenix away by Tomeys body glowed,
and he ran him quite through the Thigh.
Out of his saddle bore him he did,
and laid his body on the ground,
His Spear he ran through Tomeys Thigh,
in which it made a grievous wound.
But Tomey quickley start up again,
for as he was a Physician good,
He laid his hand upon the wound,
and quickly he did stanch the blood.
Full lightly he leaped to his saddle again,
forth of it long he did not stay:
For he weighed more of the Ladies love,
then of any life he had that day.
They fetched a race and rode about.
the blood in Tomeys body began to warm
He away by Lord Fenix body glowde,
and he ran him quite through the arm.
Out of his saddle bore him he has,
of from his steed that mounted so high:
Now rise and fight Lord Fenix he said,
or else yield the Lady unto me.
I Will yield the Lady unto thee,
my arm no more my spear will guide:
It was never better likely to prove,
to hold a poor serving man from his Bride.
But if thou will thus deal then with me,
lest of this matter should rise any voice:
That I have gotten the victory,
then thou shall have another choice.
Yonder is a lane of two miles long,
at either end then stand will we:
Weel set the Lady in the midst,
and whether she come to take her for me.
If thou will thus deal said Fenix then,
thou'll save my credit and honor high.
And whether I win her or go without her,
I Will be willing to give ten pounds to thee.
There was a lane of two miles long,
the Lady was set in the middle that tide
She laughed and made merry her maids among
and said Tomey oath Pots now I Will be thy bride,
Now all you Ladies of high degree,
and maids that married yet would be:
Marry no man for goods or lands,
unless you love him faithfully.
For I had a love of my own she said,
at Strawberrie Castle there lived he:
I Will change his name from Tomey oath Pots,
and the young E. of Arundell now he shall be
FINIS.

