The passage of the TREATY For the Surrender of OXFORD TO SIR THOMAS FAIRFAX.

And a LIST of the Names of the Commissioners on both sides, both upon the
former and later Treaties, and how far they have proceeded in the same for
the delivering up of OXFORD.

Also the Copy of a Summons sent into Hartlebury Castle by Colonel Morgan, and
Colonel Sandys his Answer.

These being examined by the original Copies, are printed and published
according to Order of Parliament.

LONDON: Printed by Elizabeth Purslow, May 20. 1646.

The Copy of a Letter from the Leaguer before OXFORD.
SIR,
ACcording as it was desired by Sir Thomas Glemham, the Governor of Oxford,
(as I certified in my last, and then sent you the Generals summons, and the
Answer from Oxford) Passes were granted on Monday last, May the 11. instant,
for Sir John Munson and Mr. Philip Warwick to come out of Oxford, and to
repair unto us that day, and meet our Commissioners at the place agreed, to
receive from Oxford what they should bring, to be communicated to the Generals
on our side; there were Colonel Rainsborough, Colonel Harlow, and Colonel
Lambert, who met with Sir John Munson and Mr. Philip warwick at the time and
place appointed, by whom we understood, that (at present) it was desired by the
Governor (in the behalf of himself, with the Nobility, Gentry, and
Inhabitants) that they might have liberty granted to send to the King, and to
know his Majesty's pleasure, and upon return from his Majesty there should be
a speedy Answer given to the Generals.

Our Commissioners acquainted theirs, how vain a thing it was to desire any
such thing, neither would the General admit of any such delays, and therefore
they were desired to give some speedy answer, with Arguments used to them to
show them the vanity of their standing out, and how much better it is to take
the opportunity whilst it is offered, lest by their wilful stubbornness they
be forced to far worser terms.

But (it seems) that Sir John Mounson and Mr. Warwick were so bound up and
limited in their Commissions, that they could not give that answer to ours
which was expected, and therefore promised the next day to procure a fuller
power, and more satisfactory Answer, and so they returned into Oxford, and
took leave of us that night, and one of the Generals Trumpeters was appointed
to go into Oxford with them that night, and to return with an answer the next
morning.

On Tuesday, May the 12 instant, our Trumpeter, returned (but not their
Cmissioners) with a desire from Sir Thomas Glemham, that because there are many
of eminency, Lords, with the Duke of York, and the two Princes there, as also
diverse Knights, and Oxford. Parliament Juncto men, and other Gentry and Clergy,
with the Inhabitants, and others that he means; he desired that the General
would grant them a longer time, because so many were concerned in it, that they
could not possibly present things (in a formidable way) in so short a time.

So we went on hasting the dispatch of the Line, and order was given for the
drawing up of the Batteries, resolving to lose no time, but preparing all we
can to assault them, and be in a condition to storm if they shall not
surrender; the latter, to spare as much blood as may be, being most desired by
us, yet confident they will not be advantaged within by delaying us, but by
thrusting themselves into harder straits, will be forced to worser terms by
standing out, if they shall be so wilful.

On that day Prince Rupert and some horse, all under an hundred, came out of
Oxford to take the air, on Colonel Rainsboroughs side, Rupert himself being
in his white hose, and rid without boots in his shoes and stockings, a party
of our men marched up very near them, and had a short skirmish, in which it so
happened that a bullet from one of our men hit Prince Rupert, and wounded him on
the right shoulder, but we hear that it has not broke or hurt any bone, being
only a fleshy wound, and we forced them to retreat into Oxford, where we heard
they were very busy that day, and also Wednesday and Thursday, the Lords
debating* the Council of war consulting, the Iuncto plotting, the Clergy
prating, the Townsmen meeting, and the Sovldiers enquiring what to do, each in
their several capacities laboring in what concerned their own faculties.

Yesterday we received farther from Oxford, that the Governor would treat by
Commissioners, which was accepted of and a Council of war being called, it
was concluded that Mr. Crooks house at Marston where the General quartered the
last year, should be the place, and Monday next the time, and that in the mean
time the said Commissioners to be nominated on both sides which will be done to
morrow, concerning which I shall certify you more at large by the next
Messenger.

They fallied out of Oxford again this day, and we had a small skirmish with
them, and lost some two men.

We have received the Copy of a Summons that was sent into Hartlebury Castle by
Colonel Morgan, with the Governors Answer thereunto, which I have sent you
here enclosed, and rest

Your humble servant, N. T.
Dated at the Fort before Oxford, May 15.1646.
The Copy of the Summons sent into Hartleburie Castle, by Colonel MORGAN.
SIR,
I Am commanded by the Committee of both Kingdoms, to require you immediately
to deliver unto me, for the use of King and Parliament, the Castle of
Hartleburie, with all the Arms, Ammunition, Artillery, and all manner of
provisions therein, without any spoil or imbezlement being made thereof, which
I conceive you have no reason to hold, being out of all hopes of relief, and
far stronger Garrisons then this Castle is, or can be made, are delivered up
for the aforesaid use; (witness those two later Garrisons then I suppose you
can know are, viz. Newarke and Banbury) which if you refuse to do, the world
will witness against you to be the cause of the effusion of all the blood
which shall be spilt in the reducing of this place, and exclude your self from
having such honorable terms as you may now receive from your servant,

Tho. Morgan.
Hartleburie, the 9. of May, 1646.
From the Governor of Hartlebury, these.
The Copy of the Governor of Hartlebury Castle his Answer.
SIR,
I Have received your Summons, which I must profess to be sent with all civil
circumstances, and therefore have appplied my self to give you such an Answer,
as (preserving my honor and trust reposed in me by his Majesty) may not be
altogether unsatisfiable to you: I am inclined to believe with you, that in
case Newarke be taken, we cannot probably expect relief from any place; But
(Sir) though I must acknowledge you a person of honor, yet in regard of the
distance we now stand in, I cannot justify my self to the world, in taking
your report barely: My desire therefore is, you would but allow me so much time
as can be but imaginably sufficient to inform my self of the certainty
thereof, and if I shall find it accordingly, I will forthwith treat with you
upon such conditions as may with honor and loyalty be admitted of by, Sir,

Hartlebury Castle the 9. of May, 1646. Your Servant, WILL. SANDI^.

For Colonel Morgan.
The Copy of a Letter from the Generals Head* Quarters, dated May 17, at
Heddington.
SIR,
THis day the Governor of Oxford sent forth the names of those persons whom he
has appointed to be Commissioners to Treat for surrender of the City,
desiring the like number of ours might be returned; They are to meet to morrow,
or on Tuesday (at farthest) at Marston, so that I hope a few days will produce
the surrender thereof, and that by Treaty; but if not in case they shall stand
upon high terms, I doubt not but the same omnipotent power of God, which has
led us into the Gates of many strong places will assist us to possess this
too: After which, if the Northren cloud dispell, as I hope it will (God
willing) I shall have opportunity to see you. Sir, I remain

Heddington the 17 of May, 1646. Your assured servant W. C.
The Commissioners for Oxford are.
Sir John Mounson. Sir John Heyden. Sir Thomas Gardner: Sir George Bynion. Sir
Richard Willis. Sir Stephen Hawkins. Colonel Gosnold. Colonel Tyllier. Doctor
Zouch. Thomas Chisley Esquire. M. John Dutton. M. Jeffrey Palmer. M. Philip
Warwick. Capt. Robert Mead.
Commissioners for the Parliament.
Lieut. General Hammond. Colonel Ireton. Colonel Lambert. Colonel Rich.
Colonel Harley. Scout-master Genesis Watson. Major Harison. M. Herbert. M. Waller.
Four more to be named afterward.


FINIS.

