THE TWO GRAND INGROSSERS OF COALS: VIZ. The Wood-monger, and the Chandler. IN
A DIALOGUE, Expressing their unjust, and cruel raising the price of COALS,
when, and how they please, to the general oppression of the Poor.

PENNED On purpose to lay open their subtle practices, and for the relief of
many thousands of poor people, in, and about the Cities of LONDON, and
WESTMINSTER.

By a Well-willer to the prosperity of this famous Commonwealth.

London, Printed for John Harrison at the Holy-Lamb at the East end of S.
Paul's, 1653.

The Preface to the Reader.
THough the people of this Nation have expected to see a general Reformation
of gross abuses and dishonest dealings, and thereupon have not spared for any
costs and charges to the just promoting and furthering it in all callings and
professions; yet such is the policy and mystical depth of deceitfulness of
some men in their courses, that they can even delude the most circumspect and
wisest Spectators. I verily believe, that of all the sly and subtle Cormorants
in this Nation, there are not any that do outstrip these two Craftsmen, to
wit, the Woodmonger, and the Chandler; and therefore it is endeavored in this
Dialogue to discover them to the full, and assure thy self (good Reader) it is
but the Truth, and necessary to be showed to the Worlds view: so it is referred
to thy approbation and judgment.

The two grand Ingrossers of Coals, viz. The Woodmonger, and the Chandler.
Chandler. HOW is it with you Brother Stop-coale? Me thinks you look something
dull and melancholic, and yet you nor I have any cause to be discouraged
especially at this time of the year.


Woodmonger. Why so, dear Cozen Hoord-coale? No man's state is certain, I am
full of fears, doubts, and jealousies, left some honest hearted and well
affected to the good of this Commonwealth, and for the general good of the
Belly, Cold, and Backtold generation of poor Tradesmen, with their Wives,
Children, and Servants, from whom (as you know a little better then I) we
Spunges do suck no small gains; I tell you I doubt some honest Commissioners
will be appointed suddenly to be Examiners and Overseers of our actions, and
then, you know what follows, I know your Cause and mine will be bad enough,
and too bad for us to uphold.


Chandler. Tush, what is that the matter? do thou not know the old Proverb?
Knaves have better luck then honester men: cannot we join and make a purse?
and you know, silver bags will work, especially with good store of Wine, and a
rich Feast; and for the cry of the poor I esteem it no more then a
flea-biting, and howling of a few poor Curres at the Moon: let the poor
cool their heels, we have swarms of them in our Parish, and I am glad of it,
for they support me, and are my best Merchants, especially in frost and snow,
and Saturdayes at night, or if it be on the Lords day in the morning, at these
times I can put off any that is black as a coal, though it be a stone, and at
any rates, because of the season; and poor fools they take me to be a very
charitable minded man: and besides all this, a against a good time, or in the
hardest weather, I send out to the Churchwardens and Overseers of the poor but
one half chaldron of Coals to be distributed to poor Families, though they
have the consciences to give but half, and keep the other to themselves; ah
Brother! it is so, yet all the poor are stilled, and pray to God for me, as a
wonderful charitable minded man, when as I tell you, I did it out of policy,
and not charity, and to get more custom for my coals.


Woodmonger. I commend your policy, I see that good wits jumpe together; it is
my method too I promise you, better to part with the draffe then to lose all,
only I differ from your practice in this, that you send half a chaldron to the
Officers, but I send to the poor themselves to fetch them, whereby I view all
my Customers, and have their manifold prayers, yet God knows I laugh at their
simplicity; for this is but a bait to lure them to fetch all the year after at
my own Yard, where I quickly get in and recover my coals that I gave them,
with advantage; but especially by three infallible polliticke tricks, viz.
small measure, high prices, and base coals.


Chand. Very well, and what cause have you or I to be melancholic? come, I
have a cup of rich Aligant to revive our spirits, will ye walk? I have
inhansed the price of my coals this last week from thirty shillings the
chaldron (which was too much) to thirty eight shillings, so that I can afford
you a mornings draught, the poor shall pay for it.


Woodmong. How do you bring this about? for I have had but a dead week this
last week; ah! this fine warm weather is as bad for our Trade, as it is for
the Hay-mongers, who expected seven or eight pound the load, and by reason of
this Summer-like Winter are forced to sell it in Smithfield for fifty five
shillings per Load.


Chand. Pish, pish, I see you are not so expert in your Trade as you ought; I Will
never want pollitick tricks to vend my Coals at what rates I please: but
principally I use these four or five devices, though they are all false, yet I
find they are all gainful, and taking.


Woodmong. What may they be? let me know, for if they be beneficial to you,
they cannot be amiss for me; for I am as eager to lay lime-twigs to catch
poor men's purses as you can be.


Chand. Why first I vent it out by Carmen, and poor folks, that indeed there
was a fleet come of 65. or 70. Sail, almost as far as Harwich, but there rose
a violent storm, so that most of the fleet was shipwrackt, and the rest
rendered unserviceable to put to Sea till next Easter at least: at the ^port of
this, O how the poor shrug in their shoulders* and pawn their pewter dishes
and brass, and any goods to the Brokers, to get some Coals in at any rate?
But if this works not so effectually as I thought, yet it seldom fails;
however I cause it to be noysed and rumored about, that in regard our fleet is
now come into Harbors, those insolent Dutch Pickeroons with some men of War,
lie upon or near Sunderland, and the North coasts, that a Collier cannot stir
out, and this affrights the meaner sort of people, that they cry out, Alas!
would these wars were once done with the Hollander, else we poor must starve:
and is not this a cunning slight? yet if this fails, I have a third Engine,
and that is a sure one, for I seem to be pensive, and complain to the poor
themselves, as they come to my Warehouse for Coals, how that indeed there was a
great fleet coming in, but putting in to Yarmouth, all the Colliers were
pressed for the States Service to be Seamen, so that the Navy cannot come up;
and then I do add, Seamen must be had, and we want Seamen, and we lost
abundance of Sailors in the last great fight, and Seamens service is hard now,
and many do shun it, and the pay is but small, and the Navy must speedily
put to Sea, and that the Hollander is maine strong already, and the Danes are
joined with him, so that to all likelihood, there is no hopes of Coals, and
then I sigh and say it is pitiful for the poor, but however I am almost
undone by this means, for most of my stock (as I pretend) lies in the safety of
that fleet of Colliers; upon this false story commonly told, I laugh inwardly
how it works upon poor necessitous people to buy up coals so eagerly, that
they are ready to fight, who shall be served first.


Woodmong. Oh admirable, and politickly done!


Chand. And yet to heighten my price I add, good people, you see my store,
when these are gone, I know not how to procure more, (though he has three or
four great Cellars full against harder weather come, and and higher rates, and
then I complain of the multitude of Ale-Brewers, and Beere-Brewers, and Diars,
and Cooks, and Smiths, and Founders, and Glassehouses; and pretend that these
and many others do in the time of year buy up all, or at least so many as
will serve for three years following; and this they conclued to be true indeed,
and this whets them on to furnish themselves, though at any price; and then I
vend my worst Coals, or mingle them with a few good ones: Nay, rather then
fail, I Will bid them come down to your Coale-Yards, for I know well enough you
and we are so wise as not to show all to public; Oh! this point of reservation
is as advantageous to our purses, as it has been to the Popish Jesuits, a
little quantity, says the poor, is better then never a whit; when as we laugh
at them when they are gone, and say to our selves, we have goods laid up for
many years.


Woodm. Oh rare policy! surely thou have mightily encouraged me to keep up my
mystery; for these are sure Holders, and will lick in moneys from all sorts of
people.


Chand. Moreover, I tell you Brother, a man must live by his wits; men of my
profession never make scruple of Conscience for what we do: I add moreover to
the former inventions, that there is a great decay of Woods, many being of late
grubb'd and stubb'd up, and that Heaths and Commons in many places of England,
where poor people had wont to gather Fearn, and Heath, and Gosse, and Furse,
are now cleansed and turned into Corn land, so that the poor must burn Coals
or sterve; besides the Hospitals, and Almshouses, Prisons, and sundry Courts
of Guards of Soldiers must all have Coals, and what hope is there that they
should not be at high prices? what do you think of all these practices?


Woodm. All extraordinary, and neat, and sure stratagems to get wealth and to
grow fat and suddenly rich.


Chand. These are my Pullies and Engines to inhance or to keep up Coals at a
high rate: I would hear now what devices you use to squeeze your Customers.


Woodm. Why I would not have you think that we do not only equalize, but
rather exceed these stratagems; you know first our Customers are not of the
beggarly rabble of poor Silk-weavers, Button-makers, Tailors, Rag-men,
Bonelace-makers, Tobacco pipe-makers, Wash-women, scolding Oyster-wives, who
seldom go above half a bushel at a time, and that but against some good time
too, but we deal with Brewers, and Diers, and Merchants, and rich Citizens,
some of whom fetches in forty, fifty, or a hundred Chaldron at a time, some
twenty, some five; none comes into our Purlews at less then one or two
Chaldron, besides Billets and Chamber-faggots for their Wives lying in; neither
do our Customers desire forbearance of pay, for they come with money in hand;
we do not use Chaulk nor Counting-books, down pay, ready receipt, and present
Cash are our Customers Arguments: we deal not with Fowls that want feathers;
it is good fishing at a coming Tide: now because you have discovered to me your
proceedings, you shall judge if we be not your Masters at this Game, both for
gains and knavery: as first, we all know that Noble men and the Gentry, and
Brewers will desire to be first served; now we complot, when as in Summer time
their Stewards, or Cash-keepers come to enquire how coals are likely to be?
and whether there be any lately come in; when they come to our Yards, we will
not seem to be within at first coming, but either our Wives or Yard-men shall
salute them with a kind of heavy countenance, and after the how do ye? and I
am glad to see you, and I hope my good Lord, etc. is well, with other slight
dissembling Complements are over, the Steward presently begins presently to
ask what we desire to hear, how go Coals? what rates do they bear? and
the like; our Wives have the Art pretty well, for we teach them, though we
need not to dissemble to give a sigh, and say, indeed Sir I am sorry to tell
you, we are very loath to sell any as yet, for our stores are almost spent,
and the Wars continue, and there were some fifty sail of Colliers ready to
go out, but there is an Order from the State to stop them, and the Colliers
are put into Friggots as fast and as soon as they come aboard, so that our
first return is lost, which was always the best, and when the Seas will be
cleared we know not; with many such affrighting speeches, to the amazement of
the Steward, who we know will furnish himself, at what rates soever, and so
begins to plead; well, my Lord has had his Coals a long time here, and they
were always good, and I do not intend to change this place, and go to another:
I must therefore have you promise me faithfully to let me have this next
week thirty or forty chaldron, we will not stand for price, and my Lord will
not stand to the hazard of Winter, and then provide: no, no, and therefore if
you please to remember me to your Husband, and make me a promise, I will give
you a pair of Gloves, and your Husband a pottle of Wine and a Neats Tongue, at
our meeting: Truly, replies the Wife, Sir, here has been my Lord such a ones
Steward, and such and such a Brewer, and I heard them talk of a hundred, or
two hundred chaldron a piece, and whether my Husband has promised them or not
I know not, but if he has, I doubt our store will not hold out to supply all;
but I Will do what I can with my Husband to furnish my good Lord: Well spoke,
replies the Steward, and to remember me the sooner, I do entreat you to let me
pay five pounds now, for I brought it for the same purpose; and I shall inform
my Lord of your great respect to him and care for him: thus our Wives feeling
the pulses beat high and thoroughly seemingly says, Sir, if you please to leave
so much moneys I shall show it my Husband, and it may prevail with him to
remember you the sooner. Thus it is with our customers, and is this not pretty
dissembling sport, for I have the money and presently I employ it, and deferr
the coals under some pretense or other at least three or four months? as thus
we live in hopes that the fleet will be speedily in the Thames, and then he
shall be sure to have good ones; let him resolve upon it, let him trust me to
provide for him: and so he rests satisfied, and glad that he is sure to have
them; though in that space I have the use of his money, and buy the Coals for
half those rates I had of him: how like you this Ginn?


Chand. Truly Brother I perceive you have cunning tricks to fetch in great Fish
into your Nets, and you want not Art to spread them; but where you catch one we
have a hundred come to us.


Woodm. Pish man, if that Art should fail, we use another; for you must know
we deal with a Fleet of Colliers as Hunters do with their Hounds, do not let
all run out at once at the Game, but now some, and then some; so we, though the
Fleet be an hundred sail, yet we meet them at Yarmouth, or before they come so
far, and suffer not above twenty or thirty to appear at a time, and then give
out the rest are suspected to be lost, or taken, and so persuade men to take
these while they may, and not to trust upon uncertainties of more coming in,
and the like; nay, we tell the Masters that our Yards are full at London, that
money is dead, now they must deliver and sell forthwith, or else their charges
will quickly eat out their gains, and so we get coals at our own prices, and
sell them as we list; besides this, we buy after ship-measure, but sell after
our own, and we have Carmen, whose Sackes (if the Magistrates would look
after them) are some of them half a foot too short, and almost as much too
narrow, and this fills our pockets all the year long; and they use to keep
their Sacks always wet, that they may shrink the more: I tell thee plainly,
that by this only trick we have gotten twenty bushels of coals clear to our
selves out of three chaldron; and is not this a thriving Trade?


Chand. I assure you Brother, you speak to the purpose, yet being we are by our
selves, and as I hope none hears us, I will scarce yield to you in this Craft;
for I seriously protest unto you, that my Measures, either half or whole peck
or bushel are scanty enough; for I thrive chiefly by false weights and false
measures, and quick return, quick return you know, makes a heavy purse; and I
hope it will not be always fair, calm, weather; Lilly and Culpepper, and the
rest of the stargazers, who for my belief can stare no further into a Star
than into a Millstone, yet all of them tell us of snow and frost and slabby cold
weather, which however the weather proves, yet these buzzes and
Prognostications have gained credit amongst many, both men and women, and so
bring in our Customers the faster, which we make pay for their simple
credulity; and for my part, I could find in my heart to spare half a chaldron
of Coals to be distributed amongst the star-gazing fraternity, to warm their
Noses at their Critical Conventions, and to uphold their Predictions, and to
procure them to write commonly of a cold, snowy, and a very hard Winter season
to come; you cannot imagine how people do confide in these Astrologers
conceptions; what think you Brother?


Woodm. Truly I know you to be good furtherers of our gains, and it is my
intent to make use of their sayings, but I intend not to bestow any thing upon
the Blades, for they do not really intend or aim at our good, nor ever had us
in their Calender amongst their friends, but write, as we use to say, at
hap-hazard; neither do they care whether we thrive or not: but to disclose
some deeper craft in our dealing yet, I tell thee, Brother Hoord-Coale, we
know that we are hated and cursed of every man, but then we Foxes fare best;
we have an intention to keep up such a thriving Monopoly amongst our selves,
that except the wisdom and Justice of a Parliament, or a Council of State
interpose and hinder us by stinting our number, or setting a Rate upon the
price, or limiting how much each of us shall lay out, or by taking the
Coale-pits into the States hands, and so manage them out and in with able
Convoyers; some of which I greatly fear: for I confess the profits of the Pits
belongs rather to the State than to us, which if they do, farewell the fairest
flower in my Garden: I tell you Brother, there is such a general exclamation
of people of all sorts against us, and of late there has been a suit at Law
and odious Petitions exhabited against our dealings, and not without just
cause, I confess, that I doubt our best days are past, if we can go clear
off with what we have gotten already; but however I am as busy yet, as a
hungry Ferret in a rich Cony borough; for as I hear there are now some 40. or
50. Sail of Colliers come into the Poole, and the poor people have great hopes
to see Coals fall in their prices, and that they shall be for them, when as,
alas, poor silly fools, our Agents at Newcastle have bought them for us; if
the poor will have them, they are sure to have them at what rates we please,
and out of our yeards: for they were all bought by us before they departed from
Newcastle; for if we be not disturbed, this Winter will be my best harvest, and
the worst weather brings our greatest incomes; what think you Brother, of this
our policy?


Chand. I commend your wisdom for preventing others, and I am beholden to you
for suffering me to put in a share; I promise you I have my half pecks,
pecks, half bushels and bushels, fitted for my own purpose; and I keep two
nimble Lads my Apprentices, that are excellent for not overfilling them, I
warrant you the poor get no heapd up, or overfild, or pressed down measure at
my shop; I say plainly to you, that viis and modis by one help or other, I get
half in half out of poor sneaking impotent people; and if my Coals fayl, I
have all other things which I know the poorest people must have; but whatsoever
they buy of me, they may resolve that they must pay double, as two pence for a
penny faggot, and so for a pound of cheese or butter, and for bread I am in
league with a Baker, that notwithstanding the present cheapness of Corn, and
the Lord Mayors Orders, knows how to puff up a loaf that should be but for
one penny to two pence, that of two pence to a groat, and the same order I hold
in all my other commodities, and yet my shop is so filled with goore people,
that never were Wasps more busy about a honey pot in a Summers day, then they
are at my Shop and Cellar on Saturday nights and frosty mornings.


Woodm. Did you think I had but one string to my bow? you know how I ingrosse
Wood of all sorts, as well as Coals; I have Billets but soundly nicked and
marked, I Will warrant you where I had them with three notches, I add three more;
and stack wood, and faggots, and sprey; I deal in hard coal, and charcoale,
in small coal, and what not for gains? if one mill will not grind, another
shall.


Chand. Well, well, our case is good enough yet, and for my part I fear
nothing; for the coldest weather, rough Seas, the Hollander out, and our Navy
at home, and none inform the Magistrate of our actions, are all pleasing and
comfortable to us: and I tell you Brother, this present season makes the poor
to shrink, the rich to provide: I had these three last mornings a hundred
poor people flocking to get coals, all fearing lest they will rise, which I
promise they shall, if my cunning and policy fail me nor.


FINIS.

