TWO LETTERS Of Great Concernment, WITH THEIR ANSWERS.

The One, From the Scottish Commissioners at London, to the General Assembly of
the Kirk of Scotland.

Together with the Answer of the aforesaid General Assembly to the said
Commissioners.

The Other, From the Synod of Divines in England, to the General Assembly of
Scotland.

Together with the Answer also of the aforesaid General Assembly in Scotland,
to the said Synod.

LONDON, Printed by J. Raworth, in the year 1645. July 28. According to the
Copy printed at Edinburgh.

Die Jovis, 23 Jan. 1645. Post meridiem. Sess. II.
The Letter from the Commissioners at London to the General Assembly.
Right Honorable, Reverend, and beloved in the Lord,
AS we are not without the knowledge, so are we not without the feeling of the
distresses of our Native Country, and of the troubles of our dear Brethren,
specially that the hand of the Lord is stretched out against you, not only by
Invasion from without of the basest of the children of men, but also by the
unnatural treachery of some within, who have dealt perfidiously in the
Covenant and Cause of God: They hiss and gnash the teeth; they say, We have
swallowed her up: certainly this is the day that we looked for: we have found,
we have seen it; the Lord has caused thine Enemy to rejoice over thee, he has
set up the horn of thine Adversaries: Yet (says the Lord, who is thy maker and
thy husband, the Lord of hosts is his name, and thy Redeemer the holy One of
Israel) for a small moment have I forsaken thee, but with great mercies will I
gather thee. In a little wrath I hide my face from thee, for a moment; but with
everlasting kindness will I have mercy on thee: for this is as the waters of
Noah, the Covenant of my peace shall not be removed, says the Lord that has
mercy on thee. When the foundation of the House of the Lord was laid, the
Priests and Levites sung together in praising and giving thanks to the Lord,
Because he is good, for his mercy endures for ever. And we hope at this time
upon the coming of our Reverend Brethren, and the sight of that which they
bring with them, the noise of the shout of joy, shall be louder than the noise
of the weeping of the People. This we may say, that not many years ago, many of
us would have been content to have losed our lives, that we might have obtained
that which the Lord, if not in a miraculous, yet in a mavelous and merciful
providence, has brought to pass in this Island, in these days, which many
before us have desired to see, and have not seen. God forbid that it should
seem a small thing in your eyes which is done here already, as it is expressed
in a Paper from the Parliament, and Letters from the Assembly. Ye are best
acquainted with the temptations and difficulties which ye meet with there,
which are also very sensible unto us; And when we consider how the Lord has
carried on his Work here, at the first taking of the Covenant, and since,
against much learning and contradiction, against much policy, power, and all
sorts of opposition, (such as Reformation uses to encounter) we are ravished
with admiration of the right hand of the Almighty. For our part, we may
confidently avouch in the sight of God, and before you, whom next unto God we
do respect and reverence, and to whom as your servants we are accomptable, that
in all our proceedings we had first of all the word of God before our eyes for
the Rule; and for our Pattern the Church of Scotland, so much as was possible;
and no less (if not more) than if all this time since we parted from you, we
had been sitting in a National Assembly there, and debating matters with our
Brethren at home: Where we were not able to get every thing framed to our
mind, we have endeavored as much as we could, to preserve our own Reformation
and practice, of which our Brethren will give you account in the particulars,
we hope, to your satisfaction. That an Uniformity in every thing is not
obtained in the beginning, let it not seem strange; The levelling of the high
Mountain of Prelacy, The laying aside of the Book of Common Prayer, The
Directory of Worship concluded in both Houses of Parliament, and the principal
Propositions of Church Government passed in the Assembly, all of them according
to the Solemn League and Covenant, the greatest of all, are three or four
witnesses to prove, that the Lord has done great things for us, whereof we are
glad, and which make us like them that dream: And we are sure, that not only
the Reformed Kirks, but the Papists will say, The Lord has done great things
for them.

All that we desire, is:

1. That the Directory of Worship may be returned by our Brethren with all
possible expedition, that it may be published here, and put in practice, as
that which is extremely longed for by the good People, and will be a remedy of
the many differences and divisions about the Worship of God in this Kingdom,
especially in this place: If there be any thing in it that displeases, let it
be remonstrate upon irrefragable and convincing reason, otherwise ye will in
your wisdom give approbation to it.

2. If there be any particular differences among some Brethren, which are not
determined, but passed over in silence in the Directory, and yet hinted at in
the Letter from the Assembly, we hope that in your wisdom ye will so consider
of them, that they may be laid aside in due time, and that in the mean while,
till the Directory be concluded and put in practice, there be no trouble about
them, for that were as Snow in Summer, and as Rain in Harvest. We know nothing
of that kind, that all of us who love Unity, Order, and Edification, may not
perfectly agree in, without scandal or disturbance: And we beseech the Lord to
keep that Kirk free of such Sects and Monsters of Opinions, as are daily set on
foot and multiplied in this Kingdom, through the want of that Church Government
by Assemblies, which has preserved us, and we hope, through the blessing of
God, shall cure them.

3. Because National Assemblies cannot frequently conveene, we humbly desire,
that such a Commission may be settled, as we may at all occasions, till the Work
be finished, have our recourse unto, for our direction and resolution: for we
know both our own weakness, and the greatness of the Work: wherein we can
promise no more but to be faithful in obeying your commandments, as in the
sight of God, whom with our Souls we pray, to grant you his Spirit, to guide
you into all truth: And thus continue

Worcester house, Jan. 6. 1645. Your humble and faithful Servants Subscrib.
LOUDOUN. JO. MAITLAND. ALEX. HENDERSON. SAM. RUTHERFURD.

DIRECT. For the Right Reverend the General Assembly of the Kirk of Scotland.
The Letter from the Synod of Divines in England, to the General Assembly.
Right honorable, right revered, and dearly beloved in the LORD JESUS.
AS cold waters to a thirsty soul, so is good news from a far Country. We your
Brethren, yet remaining in the Furnace of affliction, and still laboring in
the very fire, Have at length, by the good Hand of God upon us, attained so far
toward the Mark at which we all aim, that we shall now send you, by two of
your Reverend and Faithful Commissioners Mr Robert Bailie, and Mr George
Gillespie (our much honored Brethren) some good news of that great Work, after
which your zeal for Truth and Peace has so much thirsted, and for which you
have not loved your lives unto the death

Our progress therein has not been so expeditious as was desired and
expected. This, unto such as either know not, or consider not, The weight and
greatness of the Work, nor The manifold difficulties which have occurred to
obstruct our proceedings in this day of darkness and calamity (too sad to be
expressed) has been like unto hope deferred, which makes the heart sick:
Howbeit, we trust, That when their desire (namely that which we have prepared,
and are further in travel with) shall come unto them, It will be, through God,
a Tree of life, as to our great comfort and encouragement, we already perceive
it to be to both the honorable Houses of Parliament.

Touching the several Papers brought to us from your Honorable and Reverend
Commissioners, by the hands of the Committee appointed to treat with them in
matters of Religion (one of the Papers, being given in the 10 of November,
1643, Concerns the several sorts of Church Officers and Assemblies: Another,
bearing date the 24 of January, 1643, Concerns Congregationall Elderships,
and Classical Presbyteries: The other, being presented the 15 of August last,
Represents the necessity of making greater speed in settling the intended
Uniformity in Religion, according to the late solemn Covenant:) We hold it our
duty, in regard both of the arct and inseparable Union, which the Lord has
happily and seasonably made between you and us, and of your indefatigable and
inestimable labor of love to this afflicted Kingdom, to give your Lordships
and the rest of that Venerable Assembly, some brief account.

Concerning one Confession of Faith, and Form of Catechism, we make no
question of a blessed and perfect harmony with you. The public Doctrine, held
out by our Church to all the World (especially when it shall be reviewed, which
is in great part done) concurring so much with yours, may assure you of your
hearts desire in those particulars, so soon as time and opportunity may give us
liberty to perfect what we have begun.

The chief reason of laying aside the review of our public Doctrine, after the
happy and much desired arrival of your Reverend Commissioners here, was, The
drawing up and accelerating of a Directory for Worship, and of a Form of
Church Government; in both of which we stood at a greater distance from other
Reformed Churches of Christ, and particularly from yours (which we very much
honor) with whom our solemn sacred National Covenant requires us to
endeavor the nearest Conjunction and Uniformity, that we and our posterity
after us, may as Brethren live in Faith and Love, and the Lord may delight to
dwell in the midst of us.

Nor have our labors therein been frustrate: For we have per^^cted and
transmitted a Directory for Worship, to both Houses (...) Parliament; where it
has received such acceptance, that it is (...) passed in both the Honorable
Houses of Parliament; which (...) hope will be to the joy and comfort of all
our godly and dear ^rethren in all His Majesty's Kingdoms and Dominions.

We have not advised any imposition which might make it un^^wfull to vary from
it in any thing; Yet we hope, all our Reve^^nd Brethren in this Kingdom, and in
yours also, will so far value ^^d reverence that which upon so long debate and
serious delibe^ation has been agreed upon in this Assembly (when it shall also
^asse with you, and be settled as the common public Directory or all the
Churches in the three Kingdoms) that it shall not be he less regarded and
observed. And albeit we have not expressed ^n the Directory every minute
particular, which is or might be either laid aside or retained among us, as
comely and useful in practice; yet we trust, that none will be so tenacious of
old customs not expressly forbidden, or so averse from good examples although
new, in matters of lesser consequence, as to insist upon their liberty of
retaining the one, or refusing the other, because not specified in the
Directory; but be studious to please others rather than themselves.

We have likewise spent diverse months in the search of the Scriptures, to
find out the mind of Christ concerning a Form of Church Government, wherein
we could not but expect the greatest difficulty: For our better Progress
herein, we have with all respect considered the several Papers of your
Honorable and Reverend Commissioners, touching this Head; and do with all
thankfulness, acknowledge their great zeal, judgment, and wisdom expressed
therein; as also, the excellent assistance and great furtherance of your
Reverend Commissioners in this great Work; which now, through Gods goodness,
is very near to a period also.

In pursuit where (...) and scrutinie of every Proposition, that we might find
it agreeable to, and warranted by the Word of God, in a method of our own;
without resting upon any particular model or frame whatsoever already
constituted: What we have performed, and how far we have proceeded therein, we
leave to the information of your Reverend Commissioners, who have been eye and
ear-witnesses of all that has past, and we doubt not but you will shortly
receive a satisfactory answer from hence, so soon as it shall be passed in the
Honorable Houses of Parliament.

And now, Right Honorable, and Right Reverend Brethren, let it not seem
grievous that we have thus long delayed the satisfying of your earnest and just
expectation: It is the Lot of Jerusalem, to have her Walls built in troublous
times, when there are many adversaries. Nor let it offend, that (albeit we
acknowledge the many, great, and inestimable expressions of your love, zeal,
and helpfulnesse unto us every way in the day of our distress, to be beyond
all that we can in words acknowledge) we profess plainly to you, That we do
most unwillingly part with those our Reverend and dear Fellow Laborers, your
Commissioners, whom now you have called home, to render an account of their
employment here; which has been so managed both by them and the rest of their
Honorable and Reverend Colleagues, as deserves many thanks, and all
Honorable acknowledgement, not only from us, but from you also.

Give us leave to add, that the long experience we have had of the great
sufficiency, integrity, and usefulness of them all, in the great Work of
Christ our common Lord and Master, inforceth us (next to our greatest suit, for
the continuance of your fervent prayers) to be earnest suitors, not only for
the continuance of these excellent helpers, Mr Alex. Henderson, and Mr Sam.
Rutherfurd, yet remaining with us, but also for the speedy return hither of our
Reverend Brethren that are now going hence; for the perfecting of that Work
which yet remains. And this suit we trust, you will the rather grant, because
of the great and joint concernment of both Churches and Kingdoms in these
matters.

Now the spirit of wisdom and of all grace rest upon you in all your great
consultations, as at all times, so especially now when you shall be gathered
together in the Name of the Lord Jesus, for the further building up and
polishing of his Church; and cause the fruit of all your labor to be to the
praise and glory of God, and the comfort and rejoicing of the hearts of all the
Israel of God: He reward all our dear Brethren of that Sister Church and Nation
manifold into their bosom, all the labors, love, and sufferings which they
have afforded, and still do cheerfully continue, for our sakes and the Gospels,
in this distracted and bleeding Kingdom; suppress all commotions and bloody
practices of the common Enemy, in both, yea in all the three Kingdoms; set up
the Throne of Jesus Christ, and make all the Kingdoms to be the Lords, and our
Jerusalem to be a praise upon Earth, that all that love her and mourn for her,
may rejoice for joy with her, and may suck and be satisfied with the breasts of
her consolation.

Westminster, Jan. 6. 1644. Subscribed by Your most loving Brethren, and
fellow laborers in the Work of the LORD, in the name of this whole Assembly,
WILLIAM TWICE, Prolocutor. CORNELIUS BURGES, Assessor. JOHN WHITE, Assessor.
HENRY ROBROUGH, Scriba. ADONIRAM BYFIELD, Scriba.

DIRECT. To the Right Honorable, and Right Reverend, the General Assembly of
the Church of Scotland, these present.
The General Assemblies Answer to the Right Reverend the Assembly of Divines
in the Kirk of ENGLAND.
Right Reverend and well-beloved in the Lord JESUS,
AMidst the manifold troubles in which this Kingdom has been involved, and
under which it still labors, we greatly rejoiced when it was testified unto
us by our reverend Brethren, and under your hands in your Letter, and these
Papers by them presented to us from you, what progress you had made in the
much desired Work of Uniformity; and acknowledge, that the same has comforted
us concerning our work and toil of our hands, and seems to us as an olive
branch, to prognosticate the abating of the waters, which overflow the face of
the Earth.

When we consider, that you have walked in paths unusual, which have not been
haunted by Travelers there, as the public way, though pointed out as the good
old way by the Reformed Kirks, we do not wonder that you have carefully
adverted in every step to set foot upon sure ground; When we behold that strong
and high tree of Episcopacy, so deeply rooted by continuance of time, not
lopped of the Branches, and the stumpe of the root left in the Earth, with a
band of iron and brass, but plucked up by the roots; We do confess that the
Carpenters, though prepared have a hard task, requiring time to hew it down,
and root it up: And when we call to mind how much the Service Book has been
cried up, as the only way of Gods Worship, how many thereby have had their
wealth, and how difficill it is to forgo the accustomed way; We admire the
power and wisdom of the good God who has prospered you in your way, and led
you this length, through so many straits, and over so many difficulties in so
troublous a time.

We do for our part not only admit and allow, but most heartily and gladly
embrace the Directory of Worship, as a common Rule for the Kirks of God in the
three Kingdoms, now more straightly and firmly united by the Solemn League and
Covenant; And we do all in one voice bless the Lord, who has put it in the
hearts, first, of the Reverend, Learned, and Pious Assembly of Divines, and
then, of the Honorable Houses of Parliament, To agree upon such a Directory as
does remove what is none of Christ's, and preserve the purity of all his
Ordinances, together with Uniformity and Peace in the Kirk. Only we have
thought necessary, to declare and make known, That the Clause in the Directory
for the administration of the Lords Supper, which appoints the Table to be so
placed that the Communicants may orderly sit about it, or at it, is not to be
interpreted, as if in the judgment of this Kirk it were indifferent for any of
the Communicants not to come to and receive at the Table; or as if we did
approve the distributing of the Elements by the Ministers to each Communicant,
and not by the Communicants among themselves: In which particulars, we still
conceive and believe the order and practice of our own Kirk, To be most
agreeable and suitable to the Word of God, the example of our Lord Jesus Christ,
and the nature of that Heavenly Feast and Table. Nevertheless, in other
particulars we have resolved, and do agree, to do as ye have defired us in your
Letter, That is, not to be tenacious of old Customs, though lawful in
themselves, and not condemned in this Directory, but to lay them aside for the
nearer Uniformity with the Kirk of England, now nearer and dearer to us than
ever before; A Blessing so much esteemed; and so earnestly longed for among us,
that rather than it false on our part, we do most willingly part with such
practice and customs of own, as may be parted with safely, and without the
violation of any of Christ's Ordinances, or trespassing against Scripturall
Rules, or our Solemn Covenants.

We do in like manner agree to, and approve the Propositions touching
Kirk-Government and Ordination; and have given power to our Commissioners who
are to meet in Edinburgh, to agree to, and conclude in our Name an Uniformity
therein, betwixt the Kirks in both Kingdoms, so soon as the same shall be
without any substantial alteration Ratified by an Ordinance of the Honorable
Houses of Parliament of England, according to our Act of Approbation sent to
our Commissioners with you.

As for the returning of our Commissioners; though the council and assistance
of our Reverend Brethren might be of good use to us in these difficult times,
and their particular stations and employments importune the stay of these who
are come unto us, and the return of these who stay with you; yet preferring
the public good, and looking upon the profit may redound unto all by their
continuing with you, we have satisfied your desire, and renewed their
Commission; Praying God they may (as we are confident they shall) prove
answerable to our trust, and to your expectation.

Concerning one Confession of Faith, and Form of Catechism, we apprehend no
great difficulty: And to that which remains to be perfected in the matter of
Kirk-Government, we do believe, and both you and we know by experience, that
there is no word impossible with our God. He that has begun a good work among
you, will also perform it of his good pleasure. Go on in the Lord your
strength, and the Spirit of truth lead you in all truth: The God of all grace
and peace that brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus that great shepherd
of the sheep, through the blood of the everlasting Covenant, and by him has
called us unto his eternal glory, make you perfect in very good work to do his
will, working in you, and by you, and among you, that which is well pleasing in
his sight, stablish, strengthen, setle you, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Edinburgh 13 Feb. 1645. Subscribed in name of the General Assembly of the
Kirk of Scotland, by the Moderator of the Assembly.

The Assemblies Answer to their Commissioners at London.
Reverend and beloved Brethren,
THese sweet Fruits of your long continued Labors in the Work of the Lord
entrusted to you, brought to us at this time by these two of your number, whom
you were pleased to send, were received by us with no small joy and rejoicing,
as being, in great part, the satisfaction of our Souls desire, in that so much
longed for, so much prayed for happy Uniformity of these Kirks and Kingdoms:
And an evident Demonstration to us, that the Lord has not, even in this time
of his seen and felt displeasure, so covered himself with the cloud of his
anger, that our Prayers should not pass through.

The great and main difficulties through which the Lord has carried this Work,
as we do acknowledge, ought mainly to be made use of, for the praise and glory
of his power, who is the great worker of all our works for us; So your
overcoming of them is to us no small Demonstration of your zeal, wisdom, and
faithfulness, which without great injury both to the Lord the prime Worker,
and to you his Instruments, we cannot but acknowledge, has been much
manifested in the whole managing of this work in your hands.

The full answer to all the particulars you write of in your Letters, we leave
to the Relation of those that come from you, and are now appointed to return to
you: And as with much thankfulness we acknowledge your fidelity in what ye
have done already; so we have again renewed your Commission for the continuance
of your Employment there, for the perfecting of the Work so happily begun: For
the furthering whereof, as we shall not be wanting in our prayers to God for
his blessing upon your labors, so for your help and assistance, we have
appointed a Commission to sit at Edinburgh, to which at all occasions you may
have your recourse, as the exigence of the Work shall require.

How satisfactory that Directory of Worship presented to us by our Brethren
from you, was to us, we leave it rather to their relation at their return,
being ear and eyewitnesses to the manifold expressions of our joy and
gladness, then offer to represent it to you in a Letter: The Act herewith
sent, and ordained to be prefixed unto the Directory, will sufficiently declare
our hearty approbation of it: Our judgment also concerning the propositions of
Government and Ordination, and our earnest desire to have the Work of
Uniformity promoved and perfected in that particular also, will appear to you
by the other Act which herewith you will receive: Our zeal and desire to have
that Work fully closed with so much harmony as becomes the work of God, will
appear to you in our resolution and answer to that particular in the point of
Excommunication, concerning which you write.

These particular differences hinted at in the Assemblies Letter, for
Uniformity with that Kirk so much endeared to us, we have resolved to lay
aside, and have taken course for preserving harmony amongst our selves, whereof
our Brethren will give you more particular account. Anent your desire of Mr
Alexander Henderson his attending the Treaty, we are consident ere this you
have received our resolution.

Amidst the many difficulties wherewith it pleases the Lord to press us, as
we thought it necessary to publish and send forth a Warning to all sorts of
Persons in this Kirk and Kingdom, concerning the present affliction of this
Nation, and their sins procuring the same; So we thought it incumbent to us in
duty, as the best Testimony which we can give at this present to his Majesty,
to remonstrate unto him faithfully The great and growing dangers his Majesty is
now under, and the causes thereof. This Remonstrance we have sent to you, to be
presented to his Majesty, by such means, and at such time, as you who are there
upon the place shall judge fittest.

And now dear Brethren, go on with cheerfulness in the Work of the Lord: Let
no discouragement or opposition make your heart to faint, or your hands wax
feeble: Persuade your self the Lords hand shall still be made known toward his
Servants, and his indignation against his Enemies. Remember the Work is his,
who uses not to begin, but also to make an end, and is abundantly able to
supply all your need according to the riches of his glory. Be confident
therefore of this thing, that he who has begun this good Work by you, will
also in due time accomplish it to his own praise. To his gracious assistance we
heartily recommend you.

Postscript.
Edinburgh, 13 Feb. 1645.
It is earnestly desired That the Directory for Worship be sent to Ireland, and
that you recommend to the Honorable Houses of the Parliament, To think upon
the best way for the establishment and practice of it in that Kingdom. And that
the like course may be taken with the Government, and other parts of the
Uniformity, so soon as they shall be agreed upon.


Subscribed in name of the General Assembly of the Kirk of Scotland, by the
Moderntor of the Assembly.

FINIS.

