Two Prayers fit to be used in these times by all that love Peace and Truth.
1. A Prayer for the King to be said twice a day at least.
O Lord God, infinite in power, by whom the Thrones of Kings are established,
and their persons made sacred; take (we beseech thee) into thy immediate and
divine protection, thine Anointed Servant, the King, that no sacrilegious
profane hand may come near to touch him; in all his ways let thy Spirit
guide him, and thy holy Angels pitch their Tents about him; And though he be
deprived of all earthly Councillors, do thou continue to be his Counselor
from Heaven; comfort him in his troubles, defend him in his dangers, support
him in his Cause: Bless him in the comfortable fruition of his Royal Consort
the Queen, in the safe return of the Prince, in the prosperity and welfare of
the rest of his Royal Progeny, and in the confusion of all those that rise up
against him, and endeavor his privation in these blessings. Show some token
upon Him for good, even now O God, when the sonns of violence are in the
highest of their pride, when they have conspired and banded themselves
together, to separate those whom thou have conjoined, to level those whom thou
have not made common, to pull down him whom thou have exalted, and to root out
that Religion which thine own right hand has planted. Defeat their purposes,
O thou preserver of men, and let not their mischievous imaginations any longer
prosper, but blast all their counsels, wither away their power like grass
scorched with the Sun; Bow down at last their stiff necks and obdurate
hearts, to a desire of that peace which has so long been an abomination to
them, that this miserable Nation may no further pursue their own ruin, and
take pleasure in shedding their own blood; but being by so many bitter
punishments made sensible of thy anger, for this unnatural division, may at
last be reduced within their first obedience, to the glory of thy Name, the
vindication of our defamed Religion, the joy of our afflicted King, and the
happiness of this yet bleeding Kingdom; And confirm all this to us. O Lord,
by the merits, and through the mediation of thine own dear Son Jesus Christ
our Lord. Amen.

2. A Prayer for the ending of these present Troubles.
O Most just and powerful Lord God, to whom vengeance belongs, we cannot
but acknowledge, that the manifold miseries which have befallen us, are the due
reward of our deeds, and that we have deserved, that the things which belong to
our peace should still be hid from our eyes; for when of thy own free mercy
thou were pleased to grant us a long time of plenty and prosperity, more then
thou gave to any of the Nations that are about us, we became weary of our
happiness, and by our ingratitude pulled upon us these Judgments which now
threaten desolation to this late flourishing Kingdom, and since the time of
our affliction thou have given us space to repent, and we repented not,
iniquity has still more and more abounded; as heretofore thy mercies did not
allure us, so now thy judgments have not humbled us to a serious consideration
of our misdemeanors. Now (O Lord) we find our selves entangled and wearied by
our own counsels, the troubles of our heart are enlarged* our iniquities and
the punishments which attend upon them, are a burden too heavy for us to bear.
And therefore in the anguish and bitterness of our souls we return unto
thee, (in whom alone is our help) to have respect unto the prayers of thy
servants. O shut not thy loving kindness in displeasure, let not thine anger
burn against the sheep of thy pasture, but bind up the breach of this people;
let the sighing of the Prisoners come before thee; behold the tears of the
distressed Orphans and Widows, and of all such as are oppressed, and have no
Comforter. How long, O Lord, holy and true, do thou forbear to command
deliverances? Remember thy tender mercies which have been ever of old, and save
us as thou have done heretofore: Remember thy promise of deliverance to those
who call upon thee in the day of trouble; And when the blood that has been
shed by oppression calls aloud for vengeance, O then hearken unto the voice of
thy Sons Blood, which speaks better things; Behold the Lamb of God, who was
wounded for our transgressions, and bruised for our iniquities: And to this
end, regard the sincerity of thine Anointed, maintain thine own Cause, and
preserve unto him that power which thou have given him; bind his soul in the
bundle of life, let mercy and truth preserve him, and let his Throne be
established for ever before thee. Bless them that are peaceable and faithful
in the Land; and as for those that have risen up against him, we beseech thee
to melt and mollify their hearts to the entertainment of compassion and love;
reclaim them to obedience, lay not their sin to their charge, but guide
tdeir feet into the way of peace: Give to those that have done wrong the grace
to repent; and to those that have suffered wrong, minds ready to forgive: And
if any shall be averse from Peace, O thou that art the wonderful Counselor,
turn their wisdom into foolishness, confound their practices, and let their
mischief return upon their own heads.

And when thou have vouchsafed to give us that tranquillity which we beg at thy
hands, give us grace to embrace it with all thankfulness, to obey our
Goveruours, to live at unity among our selves, evermore blessing thy glorious
Name, which is exalted above all blessing and praise, through Jesus Christ our
Lord. Amen.

Printed in the Year, 1647.


