TWO LETTERS From the Agents of the five Regiments of Horse, the one to the
whole soldiery of the Army, the other to some who sent unto them, to receive
further Information and satisfaction.
Gentlemen and fellow Soldiers,
WE doubt not but our late endeavors to represent your condition to you, and
in yours the doleful condition of the distressed Nation, have come to your
view, and we question not but some envious, some self-seeking, and some
prejudicate or deluding persons are attempting, not only to make evil
constructions of the matter of that paper which we have offered, and to
misrepresent our intentions, on purpose, to preposses your spirits with
prejudice, as to prevent the impartial view of your Case truly stated, but
also by aspersions and calumnies to alienate yours and the peoples affections
from us, and render us odious to you and them; but we are much confident that
its still so fresh in your memories, that the fowlest reproaches were most
unworthily cast upon the Army, by some that were then Members thereof, and by
the Parliament it self, for our most harmless and most just Petition, that
you cannot be diverted by scandalls, or groundless reports, from the most
impartial enquiry after the reason and justice that is propounded to you; its
probable, your ears will be filled with objections, and cavills against that
paper that contains your Case; but we desire you would observe or whether such
cavils be against the substance or matter jointly, or any thing material, and
not rather against circumstances, manner of expression, and whether the whole
intent of the objectors be not only to cover the neglects and declensions from
our first principles with some plausible pretenses, thereby to feed you still
with vain elusive hopes of obtaining your own rights, and the peoples
freedoms, without your appearing as formerly for their recovery; but we know
your own most sad experience bears such clear witness to the truth of the
most material things related, that you cannot be deceived; the Countries
pitiful cries tell you there has been no pay procured, and their mournful
complaints and bitter groans, yea their loud-outcries against you (as those
who have co^zened them with fair promises of relief and freedom) witness to
purpose, that the Countries rights are not settled, nor their grievances
redressed; the Parliaments inability to procure any good for you or the people
testify, that the faith of the Army (passed in our Declarations, and protests,
for purging the House) is broken; your backs and purses tell you, there are no
Arrears procured, etc. but if in any thing be doubtful, we question not to
satisfy you, and we hope you are so sensible, that your dear native Country,
and your selves have pined away and consumed so long by feeding upon empty
words and fair promises, that you cannot be induced to sit still any longer to
hazard the ruin of your selves and the people; but we profess our Consciences
witness, that we have dealt so plainly and heartily, out of the integrity of
our hearts, without any selfe-interests or by-ends, that we judge it vain and
useles to compose arguments inducing any to concur with us, but we are
confident that the effectual means offered in our paper for speedy security
to the Army and people, their rights and freedoms will plead sufficiently with
every Heroic public spirit to join heart and hand in so just an undertaking
as is offered.

But it may be some would affright you from owning your Gase, as its now
offered, by suggesting that its irregular and disorderly for the Soldiers to
join in any thing before their Officers, or that its contrary to Law for you
to demand your rights, or that its a resisting of Authority, but we desire that
our Declaration of Iu. 14 p. 4.5. might be reviewed, wherein it appears that
the Parliament has declared that the equitable sense of the Law is supreme to
the Letter, and does dispense with it, when a peoples safety is concerned; and
that all Authority is fundamentally seated in the office, and but ministerially
in the persons; and that therefore its no resisting of Authori y, or
Magistracy, to side with the just principles and Law of Nature and Nations, to
preserve a people from perishing; and let it be remembered, that if you had not
joined together at first, and chose your Agents to act for you when your
Officers thought it not safe for them to appear, you had been now in no
capacity to plead for your own or the peoples freedoms; and let it be
considered, that Scotland associated in Covenant, and so by consent composed an
army to stand upon principles of right and freedom, when they had no visible
form either of Parliament or King to countenance them, and they were therein
justified and protected by their own and this Nation, and may not this Army
expect justly to be in like manner protected and justified in their joining
together, to insist upon the settlement of those freedoms, which they have
purchased with their blood out of the hands of the Common-Enemy which God has
subdued by them.

But if any envious tongues shall be blasting us with Anarchy, clamouring that
we intend to destroy Government in the Kingdom and Army, and bring all into
confusion: we suppose the aspersion it self is so irrational, that it will
rather give you the true Character of every such Aspersor, then reflect upon us
to our prejudice. Let it be observed, that the chief foundation for all our
rights and freedoms, which we are resolved most absolutely to insist upon, is,
a certainty of a constant Parliament every two years, and a certain time for
their sitting and ending; and a sure establishment of the just power that the
people betrust to those their Representatives in their Election, that they may
make Laws and repeal Laws, place and displace all Magistrates, and exercise
all other power according to their trust, without the consent or concurrence of
any other person or persons whatsoever; and we appeal to all rational men,
whether in this we strive not for the freedom that we first engaged to
maintain.

But we hope we shall speedily give such clear evidence to the whole world of
our resolutions to join with you, and all the freeborn people of this Nation,
to establish immediately the undoubted principles and rules of equal and just
Government, that the mouth of malice it self shall be for ever stopped.

Now it may be when the Justice of our endeavors shall shine through all other
reproaches; some will be muttering, that we have designed to divide the Army,
or the Soldiers from the Officers; but we appeal to your own consciences,
whether persuasions to be faithful in observing our Declarations, Promises,
and Engagement, wherein we joined unanimously, tend to division? is not this
the sum of all that we have offered, viz. That your own and the peoples
necessities, and the imminent danger of ruin, or at least slavery to you and
them, calls you to renew your union in the former desires, and in insisting
upon suitable answers speedily, lest you and the people be confounded and perish
by delays? and is this to divide? and as for rending from Officers, let it be
remembered, that though the soldiers acted without them at first, yet those who
were faithful, did afterward concur with them.

Gentlemen, We doubt not but the hazarding of our lives together for our
Countries freedom, have so endeared us each to other, and so imprinted the
principles of common freedom in our hearts, that its impossible to divide us
each from other, whilst we insist upon the same principles; and therefore we
presume to send, that you might speeeily manifest your concurrence with us in a
firm resolution, to insist speedily upon the soldiers Rights, Englands
freedoms, to be secured and settled, that so neither the distressed Commons
might any longer languish under oppression, and their eyes fail with expecting
deliverance, nor the Army be the object of p^verty, contempt, scorn, and
hatred; But through the assistance of the Almighty God (who we doubt not will
bear witness to the Justice of the Case) we may proceed to procure redress
for these Grievances thoroughly and effectually, and security for their native
freedoms, that so they may be in a capacity to raise our arreares for us
cheerfully and readily; and by this means, just peace and common right and
freedom might be firmly and securely established, We shall add no more, but
that the answer is much longed for, by

Yours etc.

For our honored friends and fellow soldiers of the several Regiments, under
command of his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, these.
Honored Gentlemen and fellow soldiers.
We salute you with all due respects: we received your Message, and rejoice
much to see you inquiring after Justice, Common rights, and freedoms, though
we are much troubled to hear, that many should endeavor to hide the truth of
yours and the Kingdoms Case, and to induce you still to suffer the delatory
proceedings, that threatens destruction to the Army and whole Nation: you
desire satisfaction from us, concerning the truth of the matters of fact
related in our papers (entitled, The Case of the Army, etc.) and we profess,
all that there is related has been so public, that we wonder at the audacity
of any to deny them, we can appeal to your own experience for the truth of
the most of those things mentioned; is it not too too evident, the neither we
nor our Officers have been vindicated in point of honor or right concerning
that Order and Declaration published against us, for though by public
Declaration to the whole world we were aspersed and branded to posterity for
enemies and traitors to the public peace in print, yet we have not as to the
equity or right of our Petition; or to our honor or fidelity to the state been
vindicated (answerable to the ignominy cast upon us) to the world by a
Declaration from the House.

Do not the poor Countries pitiful cries, and your non-payment of quarters;
witness that you have had no pay, much less your Arreares?

Do not the manifest vexatious Suites at Law (now depending against many that
have engaged in the late war) testify that there is no sufficient Indemnity?

Do not the dishonorable, uncertain provision for Widows, maimed Soldiers,
etc. manifest, that no such provision is made for them as is answerable to our
desires?

And for the common freedoms we are confident none will presume to averr, that
there are any settled: And we desire you to consider, that delays have made the
Kingdom almost sink already under their burdens, and in a few weeks the
Country (for ought we know or can secure our selves of) may serve us as once
the Danes were served. viz. cut our throats.

Now by this it is apparent, that the first principles have been declined or
neglected at least.

Touching the breach of the Engagement in dividing the Army to so great a
distance each from other, this is known to all.

And as for the breach of the engagement in respect of disbandment of the
Train is it not evident?

1. In regard the Muster-Master of the Train, has Order to Muster no more in
the capacity of a Train.

2. That the two Agitators of the Trame, Mr. Tom^ins and Mr. Robinson are
appointed to be Captains over two Companies, to be raised and placed in the
Tower.

3. That the two Companies of Fire-lockes for the Guard of that marching
Train, part of which is in Wallingford, and part in Wi^^^, have orders to
march to the Tower, and one that had little or no relation to the Army, is to
receive Adjutant General Deans Company to be Captain over it.

4. That four Quartermasters of Draught-horses have already listed themselves
Officers in several Companies, and are providing to leave their charges in the
Train.

5. That of eight Quartermasters of Draught-horses but one continues, who will
have the charge of some 60. horses, to draw the Carriages of the General and
General Officers only.

6. That all the other Quartermasters that do not list themselves in Foot
Companies, or other plices, are to be quite put off; as also near 200. Wagons
that belong to the Quartermasters, unless they will be private soldiers,

7. That all the Pioneers and their Officers; as also the Artificers, viz. the
Wheelers, Carpenters, Farriers, Black-smiths, Gun-smiths, Fasket makers, Rope
makers, Collar makers, and ladle makers, and others, are to be put off
forthwith.

8. That those Gentlemen of the Ordinance, and Gunners, and Matrosses that
stand, but not in the capacity of a Train, are to be sent with several
Regiments, having no particular Commanders appointed over them, as Lieutenant
General, or Comptrolers, to hear their several addresses.

That Mr. Peter's who belonging to the Trayn, and is one of the most knowing
men, from whom intelligence could be expected, informed all, who enquired, that
the Train were to receive only this months pay, and to be disbanded: so
likewise Comp^roller Deane, and every Colonel that was asked cencerning it.

As for refusing to stand as Englishmen for our Nations freedom, and persuading
the Soldiers and Agitators, that they stood as Soldiers only: we suppose
such arguings have been too public at the head Quarters, for any to have the
face to deny it.

As for that unworthy scandal, that we intend to divide the Army, we do not
only profess, that we abhor thoughts of any such design, but we wonder that
envy it self has the face to cast this aspersion upon us.

We beseech you, consider, Is it to divide the Army, to persuade them all, and
use our utmost endeavors to unite them in insisting upon the first principles,
whereupon we all engaged each to other, that we would not divide each from
other, until the common rights of the soldiery and people were settled? shall
it be counted a design to devide, to endeavor such a speedy settlement of
what we have declared, that the designs of the common Enemy to divide us, and
persuade us to desert the Public interest, might be prevented? believe it
(Gentlemen) to persuade you to sit still while you want pay, and the people
their rights, is to nourish discontentments in the Army and the people, and to
divide betwixt the people and the Army, and one part of the army from another.
Does not experience witness, that while you sit still, distractiens increase
daily some blame one, some another, there are the seeds of division daily
sown; and has not the King his Agents in all our Quarters, ^o kindle and blow
up the coals of heart-burnings and divisions? We question no^, but the all
seeing God will bear witness to the simplicity of our intentions. We have now
only one thing to desire of you, that in what particulars soever you are
unsatisfied, you would acquaint us with them distinctly, and that whatsoever
may be suggested to you against us, or whatsoever pretenses shall be, that we
represent your states falsely, that in all such matters, you would hear our
answer, before you pass judgment upon us. And we are confident, we shall make
the uprightness of our hearts and actions in this case, to appear beyond the
contradiction of Envy it self. Thus from former experience of your fidelity to
the common Case of the Army, and the whole Nation, promising to our selves,
that your exquiting into the bottom of our present Case is on purpose to se^le
your resolutions to concur with us upon such sure foundations, that you may
stand against all opposition; we shall only add a desire of your acceptance of
the most cordial affections of

Your and all the Peoples faithful servants, Robert Everard, George Sadler,
John Tailor. George Garrer, Tho. Beverley. William Prior. William Bryan.
Matthew Wealy. William Russell. Richard Seal. John Dober. William Hudson.
Agents to the five Regiments.


GENTLEMEN.
WE mention not in this our Answer the public and known declining of the
Declaration of the 17. of June, for purging the house; nor that Remonstrance of
June the 23. for paying the Army equal to those that deserted it; nor the
falling off from the Remonstrance on August the 18. wherein we protested, that
we would not suffer those that were guilty of such treasonable breaches of
their trust, in usurping the name and power of a Parliament, and voting for a
war to destroy us, and for the Kings coming to London upon his own terms,
to sit in Parliament, and yet between 60. and 70. of those sit there, and
nothing is visibly intended to be done, for their removeall. These and many
such we mention not, as too palpable to be hidden, and in this our Postscript,
we cannot but add one desire more, that you would consider the case of the
Army stated jointly, and not judge according to cavils and objections, that may
be made against words and clauses, but to make a candid construction of every
clause or sentence, always aiming to find out our sense and meaning.

FINIS.

