Two Letters sent from Amsterdam, and read in both Houses of Parliament the 11.
of this present June; Discovering to the Parliament, what courses are there
taken for the raising of Ammunition to be sent to the North: With the List of
the particulars of the Ammunition.
I Cannot learn that any Jewels more are pawned, then I have formerly
expressed, neither of the sale of any Jewels, save diverse Collers of Pearls,
part of the Proceed is remitted for London, a large sum having been offered me
by the party above mentioned; and I take the rest will be employed in Warlike
Munition, expressed in the enclosed note which I have drawn out of the
Original Commission, which Hand was well known to me, all must be speedily
furnished, and if for the presumed service, it is not like the distempers there
will be appeased without shedding blood, which God avert. I do purpose to lay
wait in what ships the said Munition will be laden, which shall be advised, if
you do think fit to give any notice hereof to the Parliament. I pray you let my
name be concealed ( pour diuter le tiltre despion) although I do with Zeal and
Arder affect the good Cause, yet would I not willingly be seen in this manner,
in writing hereof. I understand by an eyewitness, that all the Jewels are
brought here again to be pawned; and amongst them the great Collar of Rubies
fetched from Hamborough: Also the Three Brethren 4 or 5 very great Diamonds,
with diverse more, but no money to be had thereupon in this place* as the party
employed therein does tell me; so it is like somewill be staked, until the
Munition for War shall be satisfied, whereof I have heard an Inklin. I did
see M. Webster measuring or looking upon a Mortar to shoot fireballs, of the
wideness or breadth of the enclosed thread, weighing 4800 l. I hope England
will have no need of such Tormenta Bellica, which I believe have not been used
there in any Age. M. J. Webster does hasten exceedingly with all these things;
the Pistols I understand are provided.

From Amsterdam 12 June new style, 2 June old style. To John Beauchampe
Merchant of London,
FOr the Cloth Trade at present, I would advise you to write to him wholly, not
to buy in a piece at present, although he pretends loosing his Workmen, or the
like: for the loosing his Workmen, J doubt at this time moneys is not so rife
in that Country, and men so forward to buy that. I think little fear, but
that if he turns off or leaves buying, his Workmen will be glad to come again
at more settled times, and it may be sell better Cheap; therefore above all
excuses, as the state stands, wri^e ^im absolutely not to take off any until
further advises; for if things go badly there, and come to pillaging or
destruction, you should have all the Cloth he had in the House to be reckoned
to be your Cloth. I fear a storm to arise in the North, and I see it daily
grow blacker and darker, for store of moneys is made over to be sent thither,
witness the rising of the Exchange here so suddenly: And at present here is
Order to buy store of Pistolls for Horsemen, and Powder, and near upon 20
Brasse-peeces to be sent for the North-parts, But the Order is not from the
Parliament.

4 Pieces of Bat^ery, of 181. Bullet. 1 Piece carrying 8 l. Bullet. 6
Fieldpieces, carrying 6 l. Bullet. 1 Piece carrying 12 l. Bullet. 2
Culverings, carrying 8 l. Bullet. 2 Morter-pieces for Grenades. 100 Barrels of
Powder. 2000 pair of Pistolls, ready provided. 1000 Carrabins. 3000 Saddles.
Bullets, Ladles, Spunges, Carrages, Harness for draught Horses. The
Morter-peeces are a foot and half in Diameter at the mouth (metal and all)
shooting Grenades of 11 or 12 inches.

Die Lunae 1^ J^nii, 1642.
Ordered by the Lords in Parliament, That these Letters and List of Ammunition
shall be forthwith printed and published.

Jo* Brown Cler: Parliamentorum.

London, Printed for Joseph Hanscott and John Wright. 1642.


