TWO PETITIONS To the Right honorable the LORDS and COMMONS in Parliament
Assembled: The One, The humble PETITION of the Lord Major, Aldermen, and
Commons of the City of LONDON in Common Council assembled, To both Houses of
Parliament.

The Other, The humble Petition of diverse well-affected Citizens, and other
Inhabitants of the City of London, To the Right Honorable the Lord Major,
Aldermen, and Commons of the City of London in Common Council ASSEMBLED.

Which Petitions were presented to both Houses, June 1. 1648.

Together with the Answer of the Lords and Commons to the said PETITIONS.

London Printed by RICHARD COTES, 1648.

Die Iovis, 1. Iunii, 1648.
THat this House does return thanks to the Lord Major, Aldermen, and
Common Council of London for their good affections. As concerning the Contents
in the annexed Petition, their Lordships will send a Committee of members of
both Houses to the Lord Major, Aldermen, and Common Council this afternoon,
who shall return an Answer thereunto.

Joh. Brown Cler. Parliamentorum.

Die Iovis, 1. Iunii. 1648.
THe House being informed that the Sheriffs and diverse Aldermen and Citizens
were at the door, they were called in, and Sheriff Bide after some preamble
acquainted the House that a company of eminent and ancient Citizens on Tuesday
night brought a Petition to the Common Council, which they read; and they are
commanded by the Lord Major, Aldermen, and Commons in Common Council
assembled, the representative Body of the City to present the same, together
with a Petition of their own annexed, to this House: The one Petition was
styled, The humble Petition of the Lord Major, Aldermen, and Commons of the
City of London in Common Council assembled; The other styled, The humble
Petition of diverse well-affected Citizens, and other Inhabitants within the
City of London, directed to the Lord Major, Aldermen, and Common Council; The
which the Petitioners being withdrawn was read.

The Citizens were again called in, and Mr. Speaker by the command of the House
acquainted them, that the House does perceive the wisdom and moderation of the
Common Council in this business, and thereby their good affections to the
Parliament, for which he was commanded to return them thanks, and by them to
the Common Council: As to the Petition from the Citizens, they have resolved
to send Members of their own to the Common Council this afternoon upon that
business, and desired them that a Common Council might be called to meet
this afternoon to this purpose.

H. Elsynge Cler. Parl. D. Com.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE The Commons IN THE High Court of Parliament assembled:
The humble Petition of the Lord Major, Aldermen, and Commons of the City of
London, in Common Council assembled.
SHOWS,
THat your Petitioners sitting in Common Council upon the Affairs of this
City, had there presented unto them by diverse well-affected Citizens, the
Petition hereunto annexed; which being openly read, and seriously considered
of, they did apprehend that the same did contain several things of great and
good consequence, worthy due consideration, tending to the preservation of the
Parliament, and the settlement of the Peace and welfare of the Kingdom and
City: And therefore thought fit to present the same to this honorable House.

And humbly pray your Honors to take the same into your consideration; and to
do therein as in your Grave Wisdoms you shall see fit.

And they shall humbly pray, etc.

To the Right Honorable JOHN WARNER Lord Major of the City of LONDON, And to
the right Worshipful the Aldermen, and Common Council of the same, now
assembled: The humble Petition of diverse well-affected Citizens, and other
Inhabitants within the City of London.
Humbly showing,
THat your Petitioners out of a deep sense of their present and pressing
miseries of this afflicted Kingdom, and particularly of this City of London;
and likewise considering the imminent danger and destruction ready to swallow
up all hopes of future agreement, peace, and happiness, by new-engaging in a
Civil and bloody War, the very thoughts whereof do so surprise our hearts
with apprehensions of a general ruin and calamity, that we are necessitated
humbly to address our selves to this honorable Court, as the representative
Body of this City, and most proper means for us to apply our selves unto, to
desire your Concurrence (as formerly) to join with us in further Addresses to
the High and Honorable Houses of Parliament, for obtaining such remedies of
Grievances, and assurance from Dangers, as the present distempers of the Times
justly call for; and which as freeborn Subjects, (having only the glory of
God, the peace and preservation of our Country, in our eyes and aims, according
to our Covenant;) We may reasonably expect as the reward of our former
faithfulness, and inducement to our further service; and do thereupon humbly
offer to your serious consideration these particulars following, (Viz.)

First, We do with all thankfulness acknowledge the great care and wisdom
of this Honorable Court, in contributing your best assistance for a Personal
Treaty with His Majesty and Parliaments of both Kingdoms; whereby a right
and good understanding may be begotten betwixt them, Religion may be settled,
and the happiness of His Majesty's Royal Throne and Kingdoms, and of his
people may be firmly established, according to Covenant; which as we daily
hope and pray for, so by the blessing of God upon your faithful endeavors, we
despair not to see accomplished.

Secondly, That the Militia's of the City of London, and of the adjoining
Counties on both side the Thames, Viz. Midlesex, Essex, Hertford, Buckingham,
Kent, Surry Sussex, etc. may be associated for the better safety and freedom
of the Treaty above said, and the suppressing of all Riots and Tumults.

Thirdly, And we humbly offer to your further consideration to present to both
the Honorable Houses of Parliament, that Captain William Batten may be speedily
restored to the command of Vice Admiral of the Ships now at Sea in the
Parliaments service, as formerly.

Fourthly, As we cannot but with grief of spirit look upon the sudden and
unexpected distempers now risen in the County of Kent, and the sad consequences
which the same (if not suddenly prevented,) may produce, to the exceeding
detriment of this city, and of the whole Kingdom; so we cannot but (in
tenderness to our brethren and fellow Subjects of that County, whose late
association with this City to the great service of Parliament, we cannot
forget) become humble and earnest Petitioners to this Honorable Court that you
would be pleased in your great Wisdoms to find out some speedy expedient to
present unto the Honorable Houses of Parliament, for appeasing the same by way
of accommodation, and not by any engagement in blood, having regard rather to
their former services, then the present distempers, which they may be engaged
in by other provocations, and not from any disaffection to, or desertion of the
Parliament.

Lastly, We hope it will not offend this Honorable Court, if we your
Petitioners do once again remind you of those worthy Aldermen (Members of
this Court) now in displeasure of the Houses of Parliament, whose acquittall
and enlargement, we humbly pray may be thought fit to be insisted on as a
co^siderable branch of our Petition.

All which the Petit^^ners humbly submit to your grave Wisdom* and earnestly
pray for your present help and assistance, in furthering these or such of
these particulars, and of all such other means, as your wisdoms shall adjudge
fitting, for the peace and happiness of the Kingdom in general, and
particularly of this City of London, and the security thereof: In the pursuance
of all which, The Petitioners by Gods assistance are resolved effectually to
join with, and to assist you unto their utmost abilities.

And the Petitioners shall daily pray, etc.
FINIS.

