TWO LETTERS, The One, From the Right Honorable THE Lord Major, Aldermen, and
Commons OF THE City of London in Common Council assembled, To his Excellency
Sir Thomas Fairfax, and his Council of War. The Other, From His Excellency
Sir THOMAS FAIRFAX, TO THE Right Honorable the Lord Major, Aldermen, and
Commons of the City of London in Common Council assembled.

London, Printed by Richard Cotes, 1647.

FOR HIS EXCELLENCY Sir THOMAS FAIRFAX, AND His Council of War.
Right Honorable,
BY those of our Committee which came from you this day, we understand your
Excellencies and your Honorable Council of War, their expectation to be
possessed of all Forts from Gile's Fort, and that to be one, down unto the
River side, by six of the clock this Evening. And we take notice for what
reasons your Excellency is led to insist thereupon. For our parts that we may
manifest how ready we are to comply with all things which may beget a good
understanding, we have readily consented thereunto, as far as the Cognizance
thereof belongs to this Court, and have given directions accordingly to the
Committee of the Militia for drawing off al Forces and Ordnance; unto which
work they do now instantly apply themselves, and we are confident your
Excellency will find performance accordingly. The Committee of Militia will
also give Order for quitting such Forts on Southwark side, as are not as yet in
possession of your Forces. And now next unto Almighty God we do rely upon
your Excellencies honorable Word for our safety, and to be protected from all
violence of the Soldiery.

4 August, 1647. Michel.

FOR THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE Lord Major, Aldermen, And Common Council of the
City of LONDON.
My Lord and Gentlemen,
I Am very glad to find so ready a compliance in answer to my last desire sent
to the Common Council, and have accordingly given order for three Regiments,
of Foot and two of Horse, to possess those Forts you mention in your last, and
to lie thereabouts; I am with the rest of the Army marched up to Hammer fini^h
in order to the security of the Lords and Commons, who I suppose will to
morrow sit in Parliament, the preserving of their privileges and securing them
from violence, that with freedom they may sit to discharge their trusts, has
been the cause of my near approach to your City; And whereas you are pleased
to express your hopes of preservation from violence, you may be confident
nothing shall pass from this Army, but what shall be for the safety of your
City, and I doubt not, though some disaffected persons to the peace of this
Kingdom have endeavored to beget a misunderstanding between this Army and the
City, hoping thereby to imbroyle the Kingdom in new troubles; yet that this
Army will always so behave themselves as to witness to the world the
integrity of their hearts, in having no other design but the quiet and happy
settlement of a firm and lasting peace, wherein both the whole Kingdom, and
your City in particular will have cause to rejoice in the goodness of God;
the accomplishment whereof will truly glad the hearts of this Army, and in
particular of

August 5. 1647. Your most humble Servant T. Fairfax.

FINIS.

