AN ELEGY UPON the unhappy loss OF THE NOBLE EARL OF ESSEX.

LONDON, Printed for John Benson, and are to be sold at his shop in Dunstanes
Churchyard. 1646.

An Elegy on the Death of the noble Earl of Essex.
I Need no fatal quill that has the art
At every line it writes to break an heart:
For when I shall but once begin to express
The public cause, and subject of my verse,
More motives may be spared our unstrain'd grief
Will need no provocation; but relief.
Essex is dead. What thunder strikes our ears,
Threatening an inundation of tears?
This is a judgment more then we conceived,
To be by our best hope the most deceived:
And that the Noble Cause of our Redress,
Should now be so of our extreme Distress.
Or is 't a mercy, since Heaven did intend
At last, an exiled peace back to us to send?
Thus to make way, by softening our hard hearts
By such a blow; which the successive darts
It shot at our own persons, could not pierce
Who never had wept but at his frown or hearse.
That we exchanging for new grief, old hate;
(Though senseless of our own) might mourn his fate;
That tears begun for loss might end for sin,
And hearts twice broke let peace and mercy in.
But is he gone from us! Injurious Death
Have thou deprived him of that purer breath
Then quickens vulgar lumps; I then could wish,
That old Pythagoras Metempsychosis
Were not a fable, that the world might boast
A second Phoenix, now the first is lost.
When England lost it is darling in the fate
Of his loved Father (though unfortunate
In their desires) their hopes did still surviue,
Whilst he had left so brave a Son alive.
Whose early youthful blossoms did presage
Most glorious fruits in his more riper age
But all that then was hoped was that the Son
Should keep that honor which his Father won.
But he not bounded by strict president
His, as all other patterns quite out went.
Compleatest acts of ancient Hero's were
The essaies of his youth, whereon to rear
Fames highest Stories, their great aims were found
His first attempts, their battlements his ground.
So that great Essex's name is greater grown
By his Sons honor added to his own.
For even in them was long time verified
What Is said of Kings, for Essex never di'd
Till now. But now the Title too is gone
A Title men will tremble to put on
Though offered; since it strongly does oblige
To courage, council, combat, storming, seidge,
Devotion, Temperance, and what ever can
Render the wearer a most perfect man.
And surely, had Heaven blessed us but so much
As with a Son of his, he had been such:
This envious fiends suspected, and did try
Their utmost skill to bar him progeny.
But he shall live in his more lasting name
Borne on the wings of never-dying Fame.
No Chronicler shall need to write his praise
In moldy parchment left to after-daies
For as the holy Patriarchs Religion
Was lest to them by long-deriv'd tradition;
So shall his acts be handed to those men
Are yet unborne, and they the same again
shall tell their Childrens Children, till it grow
Part of their education to do so.
In his poor Cottage by a Winter fire
To his great granchildren shall the aged fire
From's easy chair relate the ancient stories
Of his exploits and virtues; whilst he glories
TO have trail'd a pike at Keinton, or received
A shot at Reading, or when 'twas relieved
TO have marched to Gloucester, then the memory
Of that unparalleled Newb'ry victory
Shall cause him rake his embers, and proceed
To tell the Generals virtue as his deed.
"And yet my Children, though all this did he
"He courted not the peoples cap or knee.
"Their praise or dispraise he did not regard,
"Virtue that set him on was his reward.
"And though he had (yet was) been praised by none;
"He durst in spite of all be good alone.
"He moov'd by his own principles, for it is known
"He was not wrought by Royal smile or frown.
"Like to the trusty Sun he kept his line
"Pursuing still his first and known design,
"He was not made for changes, nor could lend
"An I. in Parliament for a by-end.
"If he had foes they durst not mak't appear,
"His frown alone would strike them dead with fear.
"And if they wisp'rd any thing amiss
"They guard his name with a parenthesis.
"Still [He was faithfull] who so ever offended
"It Is much to be by All so well commended.
"But they were wise; who durst the same deny
"Sure he was desperate and resolved to dye.
"Who so durst meet him, durst do more then Death
"That ravished not, but stole away his breath
"Ah treacherous coward that did slily creep
"At unawares, to kill him in his sleep.
Now Noble Peers after his Hearse march on,
Mourn as you go, your great exampl's gone.
And you grave Patriots learn to know your loss,
He was your blessing whom some thought your cross.
You reverend Synod, cannot choose but shed
Some Fun'rall tears since your stout Patron's dead.
And you brave Soldiers will have moistened eyes
For he is fallen by whom you all did rise.
Weep Widows weep, he is gone that was of late
Your most indulgent, constant Advocate.
And you that once were foes some tears bestow
On your own selves, your fines will not be low.
Weep England now, thou se'st thy Champion's end,
Scotland weep too, for thou have lost a Friend.
But Ireland most of all, express thy grief
For he is dead that longed to send relief.
Weep Virtue too, for thou a Widow art,
And well mai'st act the chiefest mourners part:
And Envy weep, and starve, now he is gone
Thou Wilt scarce find goodness here to feed upon.
An Epitaph on the Earl of Essex.
BOast Marble, that conceal'st this Dust
Not of thy Lastingnesse, but Trust.
Ten thousand unto thee shall bring
Of vowed tears their offering.
The driest eye shall drop a Gem
TO enrich death's envied Diadem.
To thine, great Essex's Memory
Shall add it is own eternity:
Thereby thou shall thy self out last
Which else, like other stones, would waste
And mix thy Dust with them, that deep
Thou unprophaned now do keep.
Nay Death it self will sure prevent
Of His and Essex Monument
The least decay: For near did he
More glory in a victory.
On thee Death sits in state, and braves
Himself more then on neighbour-graves.
To kill a Prince, or Duke, or so,
Is counted but Death's common blow.
But when he slew brave Essex, he
Did triumph ore Humanity.
The Virger that is wont to relate
This Princes valor, that is estate,
The virtuous life and famous acts
Of Peers deceased, the extracts
Of every noble Family;
May find all in Epitome:
And save the labor of Retaile
And tell the people, HERE LIES, ALL.
Th. Twiss.


