The two City IUGLERS Tichborn, and Ireton: Being A DIALOGUE: WHEREIN, Their
Rebellions, Treacheries, Treasons, and Cheats, are fully discovered and brought
to light: With some particular Demonstrations of adhering to the Rump, and
Committee of Safty, to the Ruin as they intended both of Monarchy, City and
Country.

two men, representing Robert Tichborne and John Ireton

Printed for T. Vere, with out Newgate 1660

The two City IUGLERS
Ireton. WEll met Brother, where have you bestowed your self since the sad and
unhappy Dissolution of the RUMP? wherein we ruled like Lords of the Sopls, and
knew no power in competition with our own.


Tichborn. I rambled up and down, and ever since thought the most private hole
my best security, and like that foul Bird the Owl, did most of all converse
and stir abroad in the dark.


I. I wonder that we two whose souls did so much simpathize in contriving and
acting of mischief, could endure such a long divorce of our bodies and society.


T. I often wished your company, according to the old proverb, Birds of a
Feather will flock together, and being here so happily met I think now we
shall not part, until the gallows part us, for shame will never do it, that
we have swallowed down and drank after it.


I. Since for our deservings, and I th^nk if Justice be not blind and partial,
very few can lay a more deserving claim for their merit in this place then our
selves: we are thought worthy to be taken notice of, let us solace our selves
with a mouthfull of fresh air and seasonable disconrse.


T. Brother lead the way.


I. By no means, you are the elder -- sSir.


T. I did always think you more deserving then my self, and therefore grant
you the precedence.


I. I think it is no great matter who leads the dance now, for certainly we
must both sing the same song, and all our mirth will end in Lacryma.


T. I will rather be unmannerly then tedious, and when I go before I doubt not
but you will soon follow and not be long after.


I. But to begin with our discourse, what think you of us now the world is
furned, and we turned out of doors.


T. Nay we are not turned out but into the doors, so fast, that I fear there
will be no Redemption, with out a Habeas Corpus, which will convey us to the
place of Judgment, and from thence to the place of Execution.


I. It was a most unlucky hour when the Rump was first dissolved, and the
Committee of villainy erected in its place.


T. Tush had either stood you and I had bin secure, for we had got the trick
to play on both sides, and what then need we have cared which part had taken
place.


I But because neither did take place, I am now confined to such a place, from
which I would give my estate to be safe delivered, but that will not serve
turn, but I must now arm my self with the patience of Job, and with him say,
Naked I came into the world, and naked I must return again, for I am much
afraid a Pecuniary Mulct w^ll not serre the turn.


T. No certainly, for there is a Law called Lex Tallionis, which does command
an eye for an eye, and a tooth for a tooth, now if this Law be mad^ our Judge,
then I know what ought and must become of us for certainly we have not only
bin guilty of the undoing of many a family, but have bin joyful instruments in
taking away of many lives,


I. I adhered to ye Committee of Treachery not with a respect unto the Nation
or City but hoping that by that power I might continue safe, and escape the
deserved vengeance which the injuries of the people did tell, must necessarily
fail upon me, if I were not secured and protected by that Usurped Authority.


T. You thought alike of Church and State, served either to serve your own
turn, and that being secured served neither.


I. I saw the Church and State tottering which caused me to stick to the
strongest side, that so I might secure one,


T. When the Rump was established I was a Rumper and when the Committee of Safty
was erect d. I thought good there to secure my self under their wings.


I But who would have thought that while these two dogs were striving for the
Bone, a third party should have stepped in and got the purchase from them both


T. It was but just that we that had so long lived upon the spoil, should now
at length be spoiled our selves.


I. We played the game at Chesse, but with very bad success, for whilst we
encouraged the Rooks and Pawnes to take the King, we were by them taken at
length.


T. My Indulgency to Herisies and Factions which was the false foundation of
our tottering building could not continue, but must needs molter and fall down.


I. You made the first breach in the building, when you altered the City Rights
and Privileges and submitted to Olivers Tyrannical power.


T. Which was seconded by you when you were Lord Mayor, when you introduced the
stubborn power of the Soldiers to awe and countermand their Liberties, and
imagined that Huson with his Aule and Cobblers ends might at any time stich up
such breaches.


I. I did imitate you but as my example,


T. Which we both performed with so much resolution and confidence, as if it
had been impossible that we should ever have seen a turn again, but now the
turn will cause us to have a turn, where we must turn over the Ladder.


I. Where two wry faces and a Spanish shrugge will finish the work, and then
we shall sufficiently be rewarded for our pains,


T. But before we go to the work, it is usual and will be convenient for
public satisfaction that we make some confession of our lives and actions.


I. Twill not be amiss, but you being the elder shall have the precedence.


T. Let it be so, and I do remember that in my Mayrolty by my continual
compliance with old NOL the Proj ctor, that he esteemed of me as one of his
most able Instruments.


I. What did you act then?


T. Knowing that he had no great esteem of the Church, after he had made Paul's
a Den of Thieves and a Stable for his Rebellious Iades I brought the Market out
of Cheapsideinto Paul's Churchyard, where they now buy and fell as they in
Jerusalem did in the ancient time.


I. You did not well in defacing the place of Gods worship.


T. By that means I gained resp^ct with Oliver, the grand Imposter of all the
world, and was Sainted in his K^llender of Rebellion, honor enough for such a
poor sneak as I was.


I. But what did you gain by removing the Market?


T, My gain in that particular was not much, only I did show my dislike of the
Churches power and the government thereof but the scent and color of those
wares which are there sold, might have given some correction unto the noysom
smell of the Augean stables, but though the Commodities were sweet yet that Act
made me stink ever since in the Nostrills of the people.


I. How could you walk undiscovered to the eye and censure of the world.


T. Because all that sat at the stern of Government, were of the same
disposition. I made Religion my Stalking-horse, whereby I did compass my Game,
and was counted a Saint, while in very truth I was a white Devil.


I In the mean while where was conscience?


T. That is a mere Bugheare to awe Fools. I served my god Mammon,thought it
policy to thrive any tray Sacrilidge if it brought in profit, was Piety.
Learning, and Conscience I esteemed as things merely unnecessary and
inconsistent with the times.


I. Did you allow of cheating?


T, Yes, as a necessary Ingredient to the composure of a thriving man, and now
I think on it. I Will tell you a Story.

A necessitated Captain of the Army, having much money due for Debentures was
enforced to sell them at what rates he could; he maks his applycation to me,
made his propositions and although I seemed unwilling at the first to deal, I
was sharp set at the bait e, and after some small time we agreed upon the
consideration I was to give him for them which was very small; when he came for
his monyl told him I was not at that time provided with moneys, but that he
must take wares for his Debentures which his necessities did enforce him to
do, so I noos'd the poor Captain, who by that means, for he was inforst to
take the wares at my own rates for his three hundred pound, had but little
above the tithe of me. Now Brother let me h^are some of your good deeds.


I. I was always since the beginning, a true Servant in Rebellion, an Enemy to
Monarchy, and served the Rump with as much fidelity as Scot did the wench, when
he gave her five pounds for a nights lodging in her Q^^rters.


T. You were very liberally rewarded by them for your good service.


I, I should have bin if I could have obtaind to have held the Office of Lord
Mayor the second Year, which they endeadoured, and I made suite for,


T. How came it that you were dismissed of it?


I. The Court of Aldermen and Common Council did withstand me,


T. For what reasons, and upon what grounds?


I. For no great cause, but because I was a faithful servant to the Rump, and
did join with them against the City


T. Why would you be an adversary to that place whereof you were then the head?


I, In pollitick proceedings there is no respect to be had to private Relations:
I sought by that means to bring the^ to obedience to that power which then did
and ought to bear tule for I found them to be as weary of that Government, as
any prisoner of his confinement.


T. What means did you use to suppress their murmurings and hinder them from
breaking out into action?


I. By the Correspondency I held with my Brother Rumpers and with the
Soldiery, whose mouths I knew did water at the riches and treasury of the
City, and I tell you Brother, and nothing but the truth, If I had obtained my
second Mayrolty, I would have so curbed this contumations City, and made it as
fame as any Brewers horse, I would have put such a bit into their mouths, that
I would have turned them which way I had pleased.


T. Was your consent with the Rumpers for pulling down the City Gates, and
introducing the Soldiery into the City before that time, when Hewson caused
his Brother to be killed?


I. For the admittance of the Soldiery into the City, I did no otherwise then
as a Member of the Rump, not by any private directions or advise: but for the
puiling down of the Gates I had a full and perfect consent therein neither was
Haslerigge nor any who had interest in the Rump more forward then my self and
rather then they should have prevaild against the power then on foot, I should
have bin contented to have seen Hasleriggs intended sat to have befallen this
City, to have seen London in a flame, and then I might have appeared a child
of light, though my ^ctions and the world say, I am a son of d^rknesse.


T, What reward do you expect for all these your good services done.

We have gotnow a more just Master then we served before, and I make no
question but he will take care we have our due.


I. I Am sure we deserve as much as any, for our actions have bin as notorious
as any of the act ors who are taken more notice of.


T. Rest a while content, our turns will come when we shall be rewarded
according to our deserts, when I believe we may sing the old Catch.

We have often bin Rogues together,

Now must hang twixt wind and weather,


I. But Brother, my stomach is something squeazy, I would you would send to
Pauls-Church-yard for a Sallet for me, I know you have good credit amongst the
Hear be Women.


T. We are both fick of the same disease, and I think a little Extractum
Zunalis, or extracted Hemp rightly applied will work the cure on us both.


I. I could laugh methinks.


T. For my part I am not so jocondly disposed, but say, let them laugh that
wins, but how-ever were our Brother Hall Martin here I would adventure upon a
Catch, and make up the three men's Song.


I. As I was going lately to take the air, I met him sneaking near
Bloomsbury, for now he is altogether for a suburb^^^ life, but he was very
rich, for he had as many Ca^^nnckles about him as there are stars in the
Firmament in a frosty night, and more stinking Ulcers then ever poor Lazarus
had but they stunk so much that the dogs refused to be charitable unto him and
give them (...) lick, He went into a Cooks shop and no Mea^ would serve his
appetite but a Rump py^ unseasoned, for Pepper is a great Enemy ane vexation to
men in his condition.


T. I hear he intends to rally up a Regiment of Pickt-hatch Soldiers, and
march with them into France, they will need no other Ammunition but what they
have about them* for they are well enough furnished to destroy an Army, were it
twice as great a^ the Turks.


I. Now for want of his company we will conclud our discourse, hoping to have
it before next Sessions, then we may sing the three men's song together and
take our leaves like loving Brothers one of another.

Three merry boys, and three merry boys, and three merry boys are we,
That ever did sing three parts in a string, under the Tripple Tree.

Finis.
man (representing either Tichborne or Ireton)

man (representing either Tichborne or Ireton)


