THE FATHERS COUNCIL.

OR, Certain useful Directions, for all young persons, especially elder
Brothers, whose portion it is or may be, in these perilous days, to be left in
a Fatherless or Friendlesse Condition.

By W. T.

LONDON, Printed by G M, for Christopher Meredith at the sign of the Crane in
Paul's Churchyard, 1644.

THE FATHERS COUNSEL.
My Son,
GOD has given thee thy being, in a doleful age, thou live in times
streaming in blood, abounding in sin; and alas, therefore bloody, because
sinful, and thine unhappiness is the greater, (though perchance thy fear be
the less) that thy blossom years, render thee unsensible of the present
misery. Life is now, to them that can judge of it, a sad and melancholy thing,
death uncertain, yet at our doors, friends prove flaggy, and foes merciless,
the world deceitful, distractions rage within us and dangers without us, GODS
judgments round about us, and this is the temper of these times; And now my
Son, how will thou demean thy self, in this comfortless condition. To rest
upon Friends is but a fading shelter, Alas how many perils be there on all
sides, to take them from thee. To rest on other means, they may prove but
broken reeds, for where the Enemy comes, he commonly sweepes clean and leaves
men, almost as naked to the world, as Nature brought them into it; Now where
Friends and humane Supports fail, what shall be thy Refuge? Why, let Davias
charge to his soul, be the practice of thine, Put thy trust in God. Put thy
trust in God, for God and a good conscience in Sunshine days are the sweetest
joys, and in the times of trouble the safest harbors, when storms arise, and
winds blow, and billows swell, and no Haven appears, but blood and death
riot in all places, yet even then an honest and sincere heart, which has made
it is peace with God through Christ, is as safely harbored as Noah in his Arc,
when the waves surrounded him. Now, my Son, because it is not given me to
know to what times, or length of days God has reserved thee, and for that it
may possibly be thy portion, to survive the calamities this present age groans
under, and perchance in the mean time loose all those faithful Friends, to
whose counsels forthy Education, God and Nature has engaged thee, I thought it
fit to leave thee in supply of other helps, these ensuing Directions

the fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom: A good understanding have
they that do thereafter, the parise of it endures for ever.

world and the devil will be sure to cast upon thee.

you a Heaven upon Faith, and keep your soul alwa es in an improoving
condition.

however your Genius frame, I here charge you, that as you tender the
admonition of a Father, to whose faithful Instructions God has obliged you,
that you detest with a perfect hatred, that specious, but pernicious sin of
idleness, Yea that you abhor and abandon it with as much indignation as you
would a poisonfull Serpent; for this destructive vice will render you
displeasing to God, unprofitable to the world, unfruitful in your Family,
contagious to all men, scandalous to the best, and burden some to your self,
believe it, God has not placed man on Earth, as the Leviathan in the Sea, to
take his pastime therein, But man (says Job) is borne to labor; as the
sparks fly upward, so naturally. And here let no elder Brother shelter
himself under is fair estate, or plead the Inheritance of his Father, for his
sloth, for Caine and Abel, though heirs of the whole world had their
imploiments; and the precept is general reaching in all degrees of persons, Of
the sweat of thy brows shall thou eat thy bread.

Steward, be frugall, but not base, circumspect, but not unjust, One penny in
a pound ill gotten, may like a thief in the Candle, eat out all the rest of
your increase, Enlarge your heart in works of mercy toward others, as God
shall be pleased, to enlarge his hand of bounty toward you. This is the
surest way to make your life more comfortable and your estate more full. Let
your Hospitality be moderate, and according to the measure of thy estate,
rather plentiful then sparing, but not costly, for I never knew any grow poor
by keeping an orderly Table, but some consume themselves through secret vices,
and then Hospitality bears the blame. Be sure to banish drunkenness out of
thy house, which is a swinish vice, and does impair the health, both of body
and soul, consumes much and makes no show.

Exercises, constantly performed in thy Family, twice in the day at the
least, if not oftener, besides thy private Devotions; And that the same may be
performed with such honor, regard and reverence, as becomes so high a work,
post not off that service to some ordinary Servant (as is too commonly done)
(for who is sufficient for these things) but discharge it zealously distinctly
and understandingly in thine own person; Take heed of carrying on these
Exercises in thy household as a set and imposed task only, as thinking when
the prayers are ended, the business is done. I tell thee, thou may speak
much to God and pray little; This business is a work of the inner man; and
therefore whatsoever you do for God, do it with all your might; Call in your
will, understanding, affections, all the faculties of your soul to give
attendance on this duty. One thing more, if any sudden and unexpected accident
have moved thy passions, and raised some tempest within thee; O pray not to
God in that temper, but approach thou to God, as God came to Elijah, in a quiet
and still voice, not in a whirlewind. God is a God of love and peace, and
therefore compose thy heart and becalme all distempers in thy mind before thou
presume into the presence of so high a Majesty.

(my Son) I must admonish thee of a necessary duty, the which indeed (shame
to this enlightened and knowing age) is little known and less practiced, that
is, the Catechizing and instructing of servants and children in the grounds of
Religion, in private Families, by the Masters and Governors thereof; Which
course were it more generally and effectually set upon, certainly God would be
more glorified, his Word and Sacraments, more reverently handled, and the
People better edified, then our former days have seen. I know well the duty
of Catechizing (the general neglect whereof the Land has cause to lament with
tears of blood) does properly belong to the Pastoral charge, yet all Masters
of Families are or ought to be, like Abraham and Ioshuah, Priests and Prophets
in their own houses, and help lay the foundation of Religion in the peoples
hearts, that so by both working together, the business might be advanced to a
more glorious improovement; were this necessary duty thoroughly pressed, and
understandingly carried on through all parts of this Kingdom, then should we
not to our scandal and scorn, see so many Schisms in our Church, so many
disorders and fractions in the State, such diversities of opinions broached
amongst us, such unmannerly and unreverent carriage in Gods worship in many
places. In a word, then should we not see so many thousand poor souls perish
for want of knowledge, walking in the dark ways of their own seduced hearts,
and acting all things as their lusts, or (perchance) some ignorant leaders
guide them. My Son, according to thy place, power and parts do thou thy duty
in this particular, and stir up others in the prosecution hereof, as knowing
that he which converts a soul from the error of his way, shall shine as the
Stars in the Firmament.

Prove. 3.6. in all thy ways acknowledge him (says Solomon) and he shall direct
thy ways: This advise is better known then well improved, often spoken,
exceeding, seldom done, but take you Gods word for good secu\ritie, believe
it, the Psalmists words are true, Psalm. 9.10. He never fails them that
seek him; Now when you have consulted with God, be industriously inquisitive
into the disposition, inclination, stock, but especially the Religion of the
party commended to your choice, for its heavy drawing in an uneven yoke, and
however it be true, that parentage, parts and portion are good Ingredients in
your match, yet these must not be the principles to guide your choice, let her
be gracious rather then great, yet richly adorned, I mean, all glorious
within, and then what ever imperfections shall arise from her nature, they will
be her urthen as well as thine; Religion is the sweetest and strongest tie, and
those that are so conjoined, nothing but death, nay in truth, neither life nor
death can part them.

years, an unblameable life, in your own example, For your personal
demeanor and ordinary carriage amongst them will have a very powerful
Influence upon their dispositions, they being always exceedingly inclined to
take in the habits either of virtue or vice from their parents footsteps. And
therefore if you find any natural Infirmities (be it passion) or any other
innate quality) tolie strong upon you, labor to bear down the strength
thereof at all times, but especially in the presence of your children, least
your actual breakings out, inflame their sparks, and cause those ill seeds to
budd forth in them, which your nature has settled in their blood. Certainly
much Christian prudence may be showed in the education of Children, by stopping
the stream of their inclinations in the budd, before they flow too high, and
by seasoning their mind with religious principles before their corruptions are
fortified in them, otherwise at will prove true, Difficulter eradicatur quod
rudes animi combiberunt.



will thank death for it, not you Bring them up in Religion, learning and
obedience, and neglectnot to settle them in some honest vocation; for if thou
do not employ thy children, the devil will. Better thy son were a
basket-maker then an idle droane.

As concerning the ordering of thy Family, let that be like a little City
compacted in it self. Unity and unanimitieare beautiful accommodations in
every household, and where they are advanced and preserved inviolable, they
facilitate domestical imploiments, causing them to be carried on with more
alacrity and sweetness. In a word, where Truth and Peace, in any civil
society, do kiss each other, and go hand in hand together, they usher in
Gods love, and do clearly evidence that God is in that place indeed, for it is
God that makes men to be of one mind in a house: Therefore labor earnestly in
thy Family to make good the Apostolical counsel, namely to keep the unity of
the Spirit in the bond of peace.

be welcome to thy Table, grace them with thy countenance, and further them in
all honest actions, for by this means thou shall so double the bond of nature,
as that thou shall find them so many Advocates, to plead and apologize for
thee, behind thy back. But shake off those Gloworms, I mean Paracits and
Sychophonts, who will feed and fawn upon thee, in the Summer of thy
prosperity, but in adverse storms will shelter thee, no more then an arbor in
winter.

a poor man without receiving much wrong, for besides that thou make him thy
competitour; it is a base conquest to triumph where there is small resistance,
and can be little gain; neither attempt Law against any man, before thou be
sure, thou have right on thy side, and then spare for neither money nor pains,
for a cause or two so followed and obtained may free the from suits a great
part of thy life.

large dispensation of his blessings, be thankful, but not secure, perchance
some storm may be near at hand, and its wisdom in the midst of abundance to
expect a change or, on the otherside, if God shallcast thee under a Cloud, lay
some pressure upon thee, be humble, but not discouraged, perchance God will
have the world become more bitter to thee, that himself may become more sweet.

healthfullest condition, for howsoever a seduced heart does deceive us,
certainly that whih is best at last is best at first too, and that is the
happiest life which is ruled by dying Principles.

whosoever fears to offend him unfainedly, he needs fear nothing else.

my Son, though these unluckie birds light upon thy head, yet let them not
lodge within thy heart, and because every man has his bosom sin, which does
more strongly and more often besiege him, strive to find that out, and then
keep the strongest watch, where thou suspectest the greatest battery.

haesitante animo, with a doubtful and divided mind, but be always clearly
satisfied in thy judgment of the lawfulness of that which thy heart or hand
shall go about, otherwise thy too late providence may procure thee long
repentance; if the case be of that nature, that thou can not wind thy self
out, light thy candle at others, whom thou have cause to think by their place
and parts should see further then thy self. Certainly many Christians would
find more sound peace within, did thy seek themselves more abroad, I mean, if
in a prudentiall way, they did close in with some faithful Pastor or friend,
to be a constant counselor to them, and who in cases of difficulty and above
their reach might give them aim and direction; But alas so strong is old Adam
in us, that we oftentimes times fear to ask advise, because we would not be
taken off and unadvised from those things to which our corrupted hearts advise
us, this is a cunning slight of Sa^an, take thou heed of it, and in all thy
undertakings, consider and consult, and then go on with cheerfulness, and thou will conclude with peace.

on the Mountains high and lofty speculations, exceedingly take them; but if
the Preacher carry on his endeavors in an humble and low sail, they find but
cold acceptance. This is an evil under the Sun, and it is much amongst men,
it is a plague in the heart, which wanton wits will one day mourn for. But
thou, my Son, know, God never set up this glorious Ordinance of preaching, to
woo the fancy, but to win the soul: Abuse not therefore his loving kindness
unto wantonness, but ever esteem that most pleasant to thy ear, which proves
most fruitful to thy soul.

the word of grace, though in it self, it be the word of life, Yet hitherto
has been but a dead letter unto thee, nay thou art therefore worse, because
thou should be better; The light which thou have received will but heighten
thy sin, and add weight to thy punishment.

Many hear much yet take in little fruit, because they write much, but use no
after reckonings, and so by this means loose both their pains and profit; this
is one of Satan's sleights, who when he cannot hinder the free passage of Gods
Ordinances, labors to make them successlesse in their use. Take heed of this
delusion. Should thou note off half thy days, thou can call nothing more
thine own then what thou do remember, nor will that further pleasure thee
then as it shall be digested into thy understanding, and affection and
practice. Mistake not, I speak not this to discourage thee in the practice of
this particular, which I do highly commend, but to direct thee in the use.

run over the Story of thy former vanities, and to study the several passages
of Gods gracious providence over thee in the days of thy Youth, as to meditate
in such manner, Quanta super eos gratia Deus vigilat quos in sua de si deria
non relaxat.
Had not the good hand of God restrained me, when the lust of my flesh and the
pleasures of my eye, were the only joy of my heart; alas how easily might sin
and Satan have then enthralled me, and my lust have become my Law; but blessed
be God who has not given me over as a prey to my corruptions, he has broken
the snare, and my soul is delivered, Therefore whilst I live, will I praise the
Lord, yea, so long as I have any being, I will sing praises to my God.

Thy whole life, whilst thou sojournest in this valley of tears is nothing else
but a dying condition, a continual progress unto death, it will be thy
wisdom therefore without further procrastinations, to improve this golden, yet
sliding opportunity, to the best advantage of thy soul, as knowing thou
sowest here that seed, the fruit whereof will hereafter in another world either
for good or for evil, spring up to an everlasting harvest. And therefore in all
thy thoughts, words, actions, directions, and conclusions, Let that precious
rule of the Prophet David be thy vade mecum, live and die with thee, Keep
innocence and do the thing which is right, for that will bring a man peace at
the last. And since that, where thy treasure is, there will thy heart be also,
therefore where thy God is, there let thy treasure be.

All creature comforts have their allaies of bitterness, their ingredients of
sorrows in them, they are but shadows and vanity, being laid in the ^allance
to things above. Alas what is all the riches thou ^anst here enjoy to the gain
of Christ, what thy honor to the inheritance of the Saints, what thy comforts
to the joy of the Spirit; yea what thy life to that everlasting, ever glorious
being, whose joys shall never find either bounds or bottom; o therefore labor
instantly, pray uncessantly, that thou may be able to feel and say, The Lord
is my portion, therefore can I lack nothing; for he must needs have all things,
who possesses him that possesses all things. Now that thou may have sound
evidence in thy soul, that thytreasure is above thee, Lay out all the strength
of thy endeavors to gain a burning and flaming love toward God into thy soul,
o how happy Christians should we be, could we in David's words with David's
spirit say, Lord I love thee dearly. Indeed we cannot love him fully, yet in
his gracious and sweet acceptance, We love him sufficiently, if we love him
faithfully. And in what measure we love God, we are sure in a far higher and
more transcendent measure to be beloved of him. Nemo diffidate se amari qui jam
amat, quomodo enim amare pigebit qui amavit, nec dum amantes.

FINIS.

