TWELVE QVERIES Humbly presented to the serious Consideration of the High Court
of PARLIAMENT. About the two Soule-oppressing yokes of a Forced Maintenance and
Ministry, That have more oppressed the Consciences of the Knowing and Godly
People of this NATION, then all the Tyranny either of the KING or BISHOPS
beside.
FIRST, whether it is warrantable for Magistrates to force all the People in a
Nation, City or Town (some of them being godly, others being not, yet discerned
to be so) into one way of Church Communion, and to submit unto one and the same
Ministry.

2 Secondly, whether it is yea or no the duty of such as fear the Lord in a
Parish or Parishes near adjacent, to join themselves together, to walk in
Church Communion apart from those that yet appear ungodly.

3 Thirdly, whether it is the duty of such a People to choose a Minister one or
more, such as they are persuaded in their Consciences are faithful, and able
likewise to edify and build them up, and also to instruct such poor souls as
shall come in among them to hear.

4 Fourthly, when a People are at the Charges to maintain such a Ministry.
Whether it is not a great Oppression to force them to maintain another Parish
Minister, whether they judge him worthy or not.

5 Fifthly, whether it is not a sin in Magistrates to force upon any people a
Minister, of whom their Consciences are not satisfied: which if it were an
evil in the Bishops (as all our zealous Ministers have said) why then is it
not as great a sin in Magistrates now?

6 Sixthly, whether it is according to the appointment of Jesus Christ, for
Magistrates to force from the People a Maintenance for the Ministry; And if so,
in what Text of Scripture it is to be found.

7 Seventhly, whether it is a probable way or means to advance the Gospel, to
force a Maintenance for the Ministry, or whether it is not rather a means
whereby to foster an Idle, Proud, and sluggish Ministry.

8 Eighthly, which be the most watchful, Painful, and Profitable Preachers at
this day. Namely those that have nothing but by a voluntary Contribution, or
those that usually go to Law for maintenance.

9 Ninthly, whether it can be expected that such a Ministry will ever work any
effect upon the souls of such as are forced to maintain it against their wills.

10 Tenthly, when a man can take a forced Maintenance from him or them, on whom
his Ministry never wrought so far as to make them willing to give it. Whether
this does not give just cause to doubt that this man seeks the Fleece rather
then the Flock. And whether a wise Man would not suffer hard things, rather
then commit his soul, to the care of such a Ministry, or help to maintain it.

11 Eleventhly, whether does the Prophet Micah in his third Chap. and fifth
Verse. describe a true Ministry or no, in these words: Thus says the Lord
concerning the Prophets that make my people to err, that bite with their
teeth, and cry peace, and he that puts not into their mouths, they even
prepare war against him.

12 Twelfthly, The Premises considered, whether it be not a duty incumbent upon
the Magistrates (while the opportunity is in their hands) to break the neck of
those Antichristian Yokes aforesaid, and the only way to glad the hearts of all
Gods people, and to be called the Repairers of Isreal's Breaches.

LONDON, Printed for Samuel Howes in Pope's Head Alley, 1653.


