PAPERS Concerning the TREATY OF THE Commissioners at Marston, met to Treat for
the Surrender of Oxford to Sir Thomas Fairfax for the use of the PARLIAMENT.

WITH The perfect Copy of the Articles, argued between the Commissioners on
both sides, for the surrender of Bostoll Garrison, on Wednesday, June the 10.
1646.

With all the Ordnance, Arms and Ammunition Bag and Baggage.

These are true Copies of the Original Papers, and printed and published
according to Order of Parliament.

LONDON: Printed for E. P. June 9. 1646.

SIR,
TO satisfy your expectation about the transactions of the proceedings of our
Forces against these dying Garrisons, which daily draw on by turns and
desigrees: They were something peremptory in Bostoll, for a time, as if they
would have out-faced us into their terms; but Sir William Campion, has
declined by degrees, to hearken to accommodation, and Commissioners on both
sides were chosen to treat, for the surrender of that Garrison to Sir Thomas
Fairfax, for the use and service of the Parliament.

The Commissioners for Sir Thomas Fairfax, were Quarter-master-Gen. Gravener.
Major Harison. Major Huntington. Major Shilborne.


The Commissioners for Sir William Campion, were Sir George Aglingby. Capt.
George Kingsley. Capt. Duke Wyrell. Edward Campion.


Which Commissioners, having met, and had sevetall disputes about it, and
passed some overtures, they came yesterday to a conclusion, and agreed on
Articles, whereupon the Garrison of Bostoll, with all the Ordnance, Arms,
Ammunition, and all other provisions and furniture of War, shall be forthwith
surrendered for the use of Parliament, on Wednesday the 10 of June, 1646.
according to the enclosed Articles; whereas (for your better satisfaction) I
have sent you a Copy: By the next, I shall (God willing) give you the
particulars of Sir William Campions, and his Officers and Soldiers, their
marching out, and a List of what they shall leave in the Garrisons, which
before we are possessed of I cannot do: Only thus much, I can assure you, that
the place is strong, and good store of provisions in the Garrison; the chiefest
place of strength I know in England, Oxford, Wallingford, Lichfield Close,
Worcester, and Pendennis excepted, all which it is to be hoped, will ere long
be in our hands also; but for those the Enemy keeps in these parts,
Wallingford are not now so forward to sally as they were, yet desperately
resolute still in holding out, till they see what Oxford will do; and so also
their Garrison at Faringdon waits to see the issue of their Grand Treaty at
Marston. His Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, has removed his Quarters to
VVater-Eaton, nearer to the place of Treaty, which goes still on every
morning and afternoon; Their Commissioners and ours dine together, the
overtures go on with love by the Commissioners on both sides: Sometimes their
attendants will give harsh words to some of our servants, but such things are
passed by, and not taken notice of. The oftener they come amongst us, the worse
they like their own conditions: The Commissioners have gone over some of the
Articles, and for ought I can perceive, they may agree for the whole upon all
the Articles of the surrender of Oxford: I would acquaint you with the
particulars thereof, but that I am enjoined secrecy, and I do not see how I
can make any thing public without prejudice as yet, but within few days I
shall write more at large of it: I can assure you, That the wisdom of our
Commissioners (as in other things, God has blessed us so in this) it is to
admired, every thing being carried on with such sweetness, and so full of
gravitie and wisdom, and all submission and conformity to the Orders and
Ordinances of both Houses of Parlialiament; I doubt not but that God, who has
hitherto done wonderfully for us, will perfect his own Work to his glory, and
the shame of those who are the opposers thereof. We all wait Gods time, to
whom I leave you, and ever am

Marston the 7. of June, 1646. Your humble Servant N. T.

Articles of Agreement, made the 6 of June, 1646, between Quartermaster Genesis
Gravener, Major Harison, Major Huntington, and Major Shilborne, on behalf of
his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax on the one partee, and Sir George Aglingby
Knight, Captain George Kingsley, Capt. Duke Wyrell, and Edward Campion
Esquire, in behalf of Sir William Campion Knight, Governor of Bostoll, on the
other partee, as follows:
1. THat the Garrison of Bostoll, with all the Ordnance, Arms, Ammunition, and
all other provisions and furniture of war whatsoever, belonging to the said
Garrison, (except what is allowed in the ensuing Articles) be delivered to his
Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, or whom he shall appoint to receive them for the
use of the Parliament, upon the 10 day of June next ensuing; And that upon the
signing of these Articles, there be delivered to the Commissioners on his
Excellencies part, a just Bil of all the store then remaining in the said
Garrison, and the same to be preserved without spoil or imbezlement, and
delivered up as aforesaid.

II. That the Governor with his proper Servants, and all Officers in
Commission, and Gentlemen within the said Garrison, shall march away with their
horses Arms, and goods properly belonging to them; and that all common
Soldiers, and all other persons, (none excepted) within the said Garrison,
shall march away with their own proper goods to their own houses (if they
shall desire it) and shall have the Generals Pass and protection quietly to
remain at their habitations, they submitting to all Orders and Ordinances of
Parliament.

III. That all those that desire to make composition with the Parliment, shall
have the Generals effectual Recommendation, That their Fines shall not exceed
the rate of two years revenue of their real estates, and proportion^ble for
their personal; or that they may be accepted upon the condition expressed in the
Order of Parliament, providing for those that come in by the 1. of May last
(whether the parties for compounding shall choose) and that after composition so
made, such persons shall enjoy all liberties and immunities, without further
tax or assessement, equally and fully with the rest of the inhabitants of this
Kingdom.

IV. That all those that desire to go over beyond the Seas, shall have the
Generals pass for that purpose.

V. That no person or persons within the Garrison aforesaid shall be troubled
or molested for whatsoever they have said or done since the beginning of the
Parliament; and in prosecution of their Commissions in order to the said
Garrison.

VI. That all and every of the persons aforesaid, shall for the space of two
months next after the Rendition of the said Garrison remain free and unmolested
with in the Parliaments Quarters, for the settling and dispatch of their
particular affairs, they doing nothing prejudicial to the Parliament.

VII. That all sick and wounded persons in the Garrison shall have liberty to
remain in some adjacent Village, and care to be taken for them until they be
cured, and then to have passes according to the Articles.

VIII. That Hostages be given on both sides for the due performance of these
Articles.

Commissioners for the Garrison of Bostoll. Geo. Aglinby, George Kingsley, Duke
Wyrell, Edward Campion.

Commissioners for his Excellency Sir Tho. Fairfax.

Quartermaster-Generall Gravener, Major Harrison, Major Huntington, Major
Shelborne.

FINIS.

