TWO LETTERS Sent to the Honorable William Lenthall Esquire Speaker of the
honorable house of Commons, concerning the Seige at BRISTOLL And the taking
the strong Fort, with seven pieces of Ordnance: Also the taking of Sir Bernard
Ashley, where was killed Colonel Daniell, and Sir Rich. Craine deadly wounded.

WHich Letters were appointed to be printed by the honorable William Lenthall
Esquire Speaker of the House of Commons.



Printed by T.W. for ED. HUSBAND, Printer for the Honorable House of Commons.
1645.

To the Honorable William Lenthall Esquire Speaker of the Honorable house of
Commons.
SIR,
I Writ the other day unto you in what posture we were before the Town, we
have since incroached upon our enemies, and in many places got within pistol
shot, and have had hot incounters with them: On Monday morning last about four
a clock they sallyed out again, and we watched how to catch them, and that
evening, we took Sir Bernard Ashley, the best Soldier in Bristoll, and killed
Collonell Daniel, for he had seven bullets in his body, but being so nere the
works, we durst not a light to bring off his body, Sir Barnard Ashley we have
prisoner, though sore wounded: The other day, at our first coming, we shot
Sir Richard Craine (another great favourer of Ruperts) through the thighe, of
which he lies dangerous ill, the party of Foot under Livetenant Colonel
Kempson, has taken the strong Fort of Ports-head point, and therein six pieces
of Ordnance, and one Deny-culverin, so our ships may come in freely into
Severne, we have also seized on one ship in Avon, with twelve piece of
Ordinance. The last night we were all up in arms, expecting a sally out, of
one thousand horse upon our Guards, being extreme wet weather all night long,
the enemy drew out under their works, but their Scouts discerning our
readiness came not on, besides they had a most fierce alarm, Ports-head point
was taken and the Parliament ships comeing up the river, the towns men were
dismayed, and threw down arms, Rupert imprisoned some of them, and thus is the
condition of affairs for the present. We had by this raised as good works
against theirs as may be, and if Goring come on of the other hand. But singly,
either of them we fear not, I am in great haste, and can write no more but
that I am Sir.

Your most humble servant.
From before Bristoll August. 28. 1645. at 4. in the afternoon. Colonel
Morgan is before Barcklay Castle, and the General has sent a Regiment of
Horse to his assistance, our Horse before Bristoll, have done five days and
nights duty never comeing off the field.



To the Honorable William Lenthall Esquire, Speaker of the Honorable House of
Commons.
SIR,
I writ to you yesterday of the taking Sir Ber. Ashley and Ports-head Point,
and therein six pieces of Ordnance; I have only this to add, that Rupert is
resolved of a desperate sally, I hope he will be received, these two nights
past, he prepared but durst not come out: This morning at break a day I never
saw men Mount and advance more cheerfully then ours did, having an Alarm he
was coming: The duty is extreme hard with Horse and Foot: Captain Moulton
is come into the Holmes, and has writ to the General that he will be this
day at two a clock ready to assist him, to take in Ports-head Point, not
knowing it was taken.

August 29. 1645.
FINIS.

