TWO GREAT FIGHTS IN IRELAND NEAR THE CITY OF DVBLIN, BETWEEN. The Princes Army
commanded by the Marquess of Ormond, and the Lord Inchiquin; and the
Parliaments Forces commanded by Colonel JONES.

WITH The particulars thereof, the manner of their engagement near the Gates of
the City, and the number and names of diverse Captains, Cornets and Soldiers
which were killed and taken prisoners, and Colonel JONES his Proclamationt

ALSO, The manner how 13000. are encamped against the City, the storming at
Kildare, the battering down of the Walls with great Ordnance, the surrender
thereof upon Articles, and the Officers and Soldiers to march away with Bag
and Baggage.

LIKEWISE, Propositions from the Irish Army to the Parliament of England, for
the ancient Laws, Religion, Liberties and Customs.

Imprinted at London, for R. Williamson. 1649.

A GREAT FIGHT IN IRELAND Between the Princes Forces commanded by the Marquess
of Ormond, and the Lord Inchiquin; and the Parliaments Army commanded by
Colonel Jones, and Colonel Munk.
Right Honored,
THe Marq. of Ormond with 13000 Horse and Foot is sat down before the City of
Dublin, with a resolution to storm, if not suddenly surrendered upon summons;
but renowned Col. Jones has taken a resolution to fight it out to the last
man, and has already made a gallant attempt and inroad upon his Out quartes
with 2000 Horse and Foot; and after a sharp conflict Col. Jones made an
honorable retreat into the City with the loss of 7 or 8, besides some sew
wounded; but the Lord Inchiquins Brigade of horse being gallantly mounted, took
upon them great resolution, and embraced the pursuit within a quarter of a mile
of the Gates, where we had a second engagement, which continued very dubious
for the space of half an hour, till at last a considerable party of the Sea men
came in to our assistance, who by their lining of the hedges, did so gall the
Enemy, that they were forced to retreat, leaving above 30 men dead upon the
place; in which fight we took Captain Smith, Cornet Johnson, and about ten more
prisoners, with the loss of five-men.

Since which time, they have made another attempt upon our Out-guards, and upon
the near approoch of their forlorn hope consisting of about 60 horse, 30 of
ours answered their charge, and shot Lieut. Col. Dungans horse under him, took
him prisoner, and Major Dungan his brother was mortally wounded, our men
brought off 7 of their horse, and (blessed be God) but one man wounded, none
slain

They are encamped within a mile and a half of the City where they expect the
coming up of the Earl of Clanrickard, Lord Taff, and the Lord Dillon, with
their forces, for a sudden conjunction, and then to make a sharp storm.

Their Tents are pitched on this side Fingles, their horse and foot lie all in
our sight; Col. Jones is laboring hard to fortify against them, has given
Orders for the pulling down all the Outhouses that may advantage their design,
and has set forth Proclamation for all the Irish Papists, and other
disaffected Citizens, to depart the City within 12 hours after the publishing
thereof; by whose unwearied pains and vigilance, we are in some reasonable
possibility of the more safety thereby, and have hard duty to attend the Line
daily, but great will, vigor and readiness is in all men to perform the
service: We have about 7000 foot (with the Inhabitants) fighting men, and about
500 horse to face the enemy: Our provisions consume very fast, and every thing
is excessive dear, having now neither fish nor flesh to come to our Markets,
the enemy being possessed of that which should relieve us; and are in a
prosperous condiiion at present, and like to do what they please if our friends
in England do not relieve us suddenly, and moeey to pay them and those that are
already here, and more provisions for them all, for Wheat is here at 5. li. 10.
s. the quarter, Rye at 4. li. 10. s. the quarter, little to sell and little
money to buy it, our Men of War are come from Bewmorris, and diverse ships from
Chester, and no men nor money, it is impossible (in man's judgment) for us to
hold out till aid comes from England.

We have to st the good Town of Kildare, but it cost the enemy very deer; for
after three or four desperate assaults made by them on the hreaches, made by
their Canon, having lost many of their men, they sent for a parley, and
observing the undauted resolution of Lie. Col. Huteson and Cap. Dixon, who
commanded the me^ there, and most of the men under them, although many of their
men would not fight at all, and are since gone to the enemy, that they gave our
men quarter in two days to carry away what they had, where was great store of
corn and meal. Ballesoman is befieged, and it must be last because we cannot
come to relieve them.

We hear that Owen Oneal with his forces is joined with them of Kilkenny
against us, but we have no certainty thereof. We are in a very sad condition,
all our provisions being almost all spent. yet I hope the Lord will defend this
place, and that every one that puts his trust in him shall be delivered, to
whose blessed protection I commend you, and rest ever,

Your indeared, and most affectionate friend, SAMUEL COTTON.
Dublin 24 June, 1649.
SIR,
I Am heartily glad to hear of the quiet condition you are in at London, and do
assure you that we are so here at present, and hope by the blessing of God upon
the endeavors of those in authority, every man will in time sit peaceably
under his own vine. There have vanished of late out of these parts two sorts of
people, by whom we feared would much trouble befall the Nation, the one were
such as took part with those called Levellers, and the other though more weak,
and despised, were such as were called Diggers, which to me seem to incroach
not only upon Commons, but upon the very foundation of every man's just
propriety, yet what need I spend time or paper on either of these whom (as
before I have acquainted you) are scarce to be heard of with us, and seeing
they were so soon sudued by force its my hopes, that where ever they are, they
will now be the easier overcome by Love and truly we hear of so much good in
agitation by the house, that if they have strength to bring forth, all
interests will receive abundance of satisfaction, and the Nation will
undoubtedly be settled in so happy a condition that they will be a terror to
all their enemies.

The Soldiers that come this way for Ireland are most of them very Civil, and
deserve all the encouragement we can bestow upon them and on the other side,
some [especially of foot] carry themselves as though they were in Ireland
already.

The last certain news we had from Dublin was that no Enemy was then, before it
but every day expected yet said the messenger, col. Jones was in a good
condition and able to make strong defense.

Bristoll 22 June 1649,
The Resolutions at a Council of War at Whitehall, for an Establishment of the
Army.
UPon consideration of the several allowances for billet money, and additional
pay, requisite to be made to the several Regiments of Horse and Foot, and to
all other Foot within the present Establishment. In pursuance of the lat^ Act
of Parliament for that purpose, resolved as follows;
That for Sir Hardress Waller, Sir William Constables, Col. Ingoldesbie^ Col.
Barksteads, Col. Coxes, Col. Brights, and Colonel Fairfaxes Regiments being
disposed into Garrisons, or Quarters for the present, but to be drawn out upon
occasion for the field, there be allowed for billet money and additional pay,
3, d. per diem to each private Soldier, and non Commissioned Officers, of
which allowance, 2. d. per diem to be allowed from the seventh of May, 1649,
and the other 1. d. per diem from the fourth of June, instant.

And when they or any of them shall be called out upon field service, out of
the Garrison, and beyond the respective Counties, where they are or shall be
settled, then to have 1. d. per diem more for increase of pay; allowed to each
soldier, and Non-Commissioned Officer respectively, during such their
employment.

That for all other Foot settled in Garrison, there be allowed 1. d. per diem
for billet money, and 1. d. per diem for additional pay, and of these the
billet money to commence from the 7. of May, and the additional pay from the 4.
of June instant.

That for the Lo^d Generals, and Colonel Prides Regiments of Foot (while they
guard the Parliament and City) and to any other Regiment that shall come to
relieve, or assist them, (while such Regiments shall be upon that duty) there
be allowed for billet money, and additional pay to each private soldier, and
Non-Commission Officers 4. d. per diem, and this allowance to the Generals and
Colonel Prides Regiments, to be made from the 7th. of May, 1649.

That the same allowances (as to the Generals, and Colonel Prides Regiments) be
made to the several Regiments of Foot that go for Ireland, as upon the now
establishment, until they shall be transported into Ireland, and then the half
thereof to cease (as to billet money) and the other half as additional pay to
be continued, during the time limited in the said Act of Parliament: And of
this allowance to the Lieut. Genesis Regiment of Foot, the whole to be made from
the 7. of May, 1646. (in regard it continued that month in London) but to
other Regiments for Ireland, 2. d. per diem, to be allowed from the 7. of May;
and the other 2. d. per diem from the 4. of June.

Concerning allowances to the Horse and Drogoons; resolved, as follows;
That for such Regiments and Troops as stay in England; the full allowances by
the said Act be made accordingly, and also the same to those that engage for
Ireland, until they shall be transported, and then the one half thereof (as
for billet money) to cease, and the other half as additional pay to be
continued, during the time limited by the Parliament in the said Act: And of
this allowance to the Horse and Dragoons, The whole to be made to Colonel
Saunders, and Colonel Whaleys Regiments, from the 7. of May, 1649. (in regard
they continued then upon the guard of the Paeliament) but to the rest of the
Regiments 3. d. per diem from the 7th of May, and the other 3, d. from the
fourth of June,

That these Resolutions (being approved by the Lord General) be certified by
the Secretary to the Honorable Committee of the Army, as from his Excellency
and his Council of War.

By appointment of his Excellency, and the Council of War, certified and signed
by me R. H.

The Propositions of General Owen Oneal, the Lords, Gentry, and Commons of the
Confederate Catholics in Ulster.
To the most honorable and potent the Parliament of England.
IMprimis, That all Laws, Statutes, Penalties, made, past, or concluded against
the Roman Catholics, its Ministers or professors, their liberties and
exercises of the said Religion, since the 21 year of H. 8. to be neclaimed and
perpetually to be taken off, and to extend to that paray and their successors
for ever.

2 That the said Genesis Oneal desires that an Act of Oblivion be passed to extend
to all and every of his party, for all things done since the beginning of the
year 1641. 3 They desire that General Oneal be provided for a competent command
in the army, befitting his place worth or quality. 4 That on both sides, all
jealousies, hate and aversion be laid aside, unity, love and amity be renewed
and proclaimed between both parties. 5 That the Army belonging to General
Oneal and his party, be provided for in all points as the rest of the Army
shall be.

Subscribed, OWEN ONEAL.

FINIS.

