TWO PETITIONS FROM The Agents to ten Regiments of Horse and foot, and of the
Lifeguard, under the Conduct of his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax; To the
supreme Authority of this Nation, the Commons assembled in Parliament: in
behalf of themselves and all other the Freeborn People of England.

Presented in their names by the Lord Gray [an honest Member of the [House of
Commons] together with an Agreement of the people grounded upon the principles
of Common Right and Freedom, for the Parliaments concurrence thereunto.

Also the Votes of the House upon the said Papers thereunto annexed.

Printed in the Year, 1647.

To the supreme Authority of this Nation, the Commons in Parliament assembled.
The just and earnest Petition of those whose Names are subscribed, in behalf
of themselves, and all the Freeborn People of England.
SHOWS,
THat the Rights we claim in the Agreement (hereunto annexed) are our own,
both by birth and purchase. That we see no other means (under Heaven) to
preserve those Rights unto our selves, and our dear Fellow-Commoners, then by
so agreeing, and declaring.

That this Agreement shall (by Gods assistance) be maintained with the same
resolution of spirit, and hazard of our lives, wherewith our freedoms were (as
we thought) recovered, rather then we will suffer our selves by any force or
fraud to be deprived of them or any part of them.

That it is equally grievous to us, whether we be inslaved by King or Lords,
but to be in continual Conferences and Addresses, offered up by those we
Trust, into the hands of such, as have manifested their tyrannical Purposes
toward us, and toward you for our sakes, is a danger we can hold no longer.

We do therefore most earnestly beseech you, to join with your tried friends,
and natural Countrymen in this AGREEMENT (every way tending to your Weal and
Ours) and not with the King nor wit any others, by adventuring again the
price of our blood upon the unsafe and groundless Terms of Accommodation with
perfidious Enemies.

That your extreamly-long-forbearing to settle the Peoples peace and liberties
upon your own Authority (which indeed is theirs) without any just cause as
hinder you, (your Capital enemy being at your mercy, and a considerable Army
at your command) is matter of great jealousy, and has necessitated as to
betake our selves to this extroardinary way of remedy.

Generals Regiment.
Edward Sexby Thomas Watson Andrew Ley
Lieut. Genesis Reg.
Robert Everard Edmond Bear John Wa^ter
Col Whaley Reg.
Thomas Burr William Russell Richard Seal
Col Whaley Reg.
William Pryor John Nicholson
Col. Hewsons R.
Joseph Allen
Com. Genesis Reg.
George Hassall William Pickering
col. Hortons Reg.
Tobias Box
Col Okeleyes Reg. of Dragoones.
Humphey Davis William Brown
col: Lamberts R.
John Thomas
col: Sir Hardres Wailers Reg.
George Clarke
col: Backsters R.
Arthur Yongu^



Die Martis 9 November. 1647
Resolved, etc.

Hen. Elsing Cler. Parl. D. Com.

Resolved etc.

Mr. REYNOLDS and Mr. PRIDEAUX are appointed to prepare a Letter to this
purpose.

The Agreement of the People, etc.
HAving by our late labors and hazards made it appear to the world at how
high a rate we value our just freedom, and God having so far owned our cause,
as to deliver the Enemies thereof into our hands: We do now head our selves
bound in mutual duty to each other, to take the best care we can for the
future, to avoid both the danger of returning into a slavish condition, and the
chargeable remedy of another war: for as it cannot be imagined that so many of
our Countrymen would have opposed us in this quarrel, if they had understood
their own good, so may we safely promise to our selves, that when our Common
Rights and liberties shall be cleared, their endeavors will be disappointed,
that seek to make themselves our Masters since therefore our former
oppressions, and scarce yet ended troubles have been occasioned, either by want
of frequent National meetings in Council, or by rendering those meetings
ineffectuall: We are fully agreed and resolved, to provide that hereafter our
Representatives be neither left to an uncertainty for the time, nor made
useless to the ends for which they are intended: In order whereunto we declare,

1. That the people of England being at this day very unequally distributed by
Counties, Cities, and Burroughes for the election of their Deputies in
Parliament, ought to be more indifferently proportioned, according to the
number of the Inhabitants: the circumstances whereof, for number, place, and
manner, are to be set down before the end of this present Parliament. 2. That
to prevent the many inconveniences apparently arising, from the long
continuance of the same persons in authority, this present Parliament be
dissolved upon the last day of September, which shall be in the year of our
Lord, 1648.

3. That the People do of course choose themselves a Parliament once in two
years, viz. upon the first Thursday in every 2d. March, after the manner as
shall be prescribed before the end of this Parliament, to begin to sit upon the
first Thursday in April following at Westminster, or such other place as shall
be appointed from time to time by the preceding Represen^atives; and to
continue till the last day of September, then n^xt ensuing, and no longer.

4. That the power of this, and all future Representatives of this Nation, is
inferior only to theirs who choose them, and does extend, without the consent
or concurrence of any other person or persons; (...) and repealing of Laws, to
the erecting and abolishing of Offices and Courts, to the appointing, removing
and calling to account Magistrates, and Officers, of all degrees; to the making
War and peace, to the treating with foreign States: And generally, to
whatsoever is not expressly, or implyedly reserved by the represented to
themselves.

Which are as follows; 1. THat matters of Religion, and the ways of Gods
Worship, are not at all entrusted by us to any humane power because therein we
cannot remit or exceed a tittle of what our Consciences dictate to be the mind
of God, without wilful sin: nevertheless the public way of instructing the
Nation (so it be not compulsive) is referred to their diseretion. 2. That the
matter of impresting and constraining any of us to serve in the wars, is
against our freedom; and therefore we do not allow it in our Representatives;
the rather, because money (the sinews of war) being always at their disposal,
they can never want numbers of men apt enough to engage in any just cause. 3.
That after the dissolution of this present Parliament, no person be at any time
questioned for any thing said or done, in reference to the late public
differences, otherwise then in execution of the Judgments of the present
Representatives, or House of Commons. 4. That in all Laws made, or to be made,
every person may be bound alike, and that no Tenure, Estate, Charter Degree,
Birth, or place, do confer any exemption from the ordinary Course of Legal
proccedings, whereunto others are subjected. 5. That as the Laws ought to be
equal so they must be good and not evidently destructive to the safety and
well-being of the People.


THese things we declare to be our native Rights, and therefore are agreed and
resolved to maintain them with our utmost possibilities, against all
opposition whatsoever being compelled thereunto not only by the examples of our
Ancestors whose blood was often spent in vain for the recovery of their
Freedoms, suffering themselves through fraudulent Accommodations, to be still
deluded of the fruit of their Victories, but also by our own woeful experience,
who having long expected, and dearly earned the establishment of these certain
rules of Government, are yet made to depend for the settlement of our Peace and
freedom, upon him that intended our bondage, and brought a cruel War upon
us.

To the supreme Authority of this Nation, the Commons of England in Parliament
assembled.
The Petition of those whose Names are subscribed, in behalf of them selves,
and all the freeborn people of England.
SHOWS,
THat we are exceedingly amazed at your Vote upon our Petition, and Agreement,
and cannot but compare the same to the proceedings of the House upon our
Petition prepared for his Excellency, or upon the large and most just
Petition. Which was voted to be burnt by the common Hangman.

That your disclaiming of us herein, and your so speedy prosecution of an
accommodation with the King (who sought our bondage and ruin so long as he was
able) before the liberties of the people are cl^ered, and settled, or the Rights
of the Army provided or secured, give us too much cause to fear, the same
influences in the House, as lately voted the disbanding of the Army, usurped a
Parliament Authority, voted a new War; and the Kings coming to London upon
dangerous terms.

That we are so confident, of the equity of our Agreement, and justness of our
Petition, and so tender of the just Authority of this Honorable House, that we
are constrained again to entreat your second Review of both; and that you will
be so mindful of your own and the Armies Declarations, as to suspend all
thoughts of accommodation with the King, until those Foundations of common
Freedom, wherein the good of all men is included, be firmly settled, it bring
impossible for us, or any freeborn Englishmen, who rightly understand their
Liberties, ever to forsake, or decline the same.

And we dos further most earnestly desire all such worthy Members of this
Honorable House, as do yet remember their duty to their Native Country, not
to let flip this opportunity of joining with us in this Agreement for their
redemption and ours, out of the hands of our proud, cruel, and treacherous
Enemies, that we may live or dye together, in the vindication of our
Native-Freedome.

Subscribed unto by the aforesaid Agents of the respective Regiments.


