Two terrible SEA FIGHTS:

The First, Between 35 sail of English and the Dutch Fleet, near to the Isle of
VVight, on the 28 of October, 1652.

The Second, Betwixt one of the Parliaments Frigots, and two Dutch Men of war
near Pllmouth; with the event and success thereof: Also, a Relation of the
Ships and Prizes that have been taken on both sides, since the beginning of the
Wars between England and Holland.

Likewise, The Trial of six Witches at Edenbourgh in Scotland; and the Sentence
denounced against them to be tied up by the Thumbs, and to be burnt with
lighted candles under the soles of their feet, and in their mouths.

LONDON: Printed by R. VVOOD, 1652.

The Copy of a Letter from Edenborough in Scotland, showing the cruel and
bloody proceedings of the Scottish Kirk, against diverse supposed Witches; And
how they were sentenced to have their thumbes tied behind them, and to be
whipped by two Highlanders, and afterward they set lighted Candls under the
soles of their feet, and in their mouths, till they confessed themselves
guilty of that which was laid to their charge.
SIR,
ON Wednesday last, being the 20 instant, the English Commissioners for
Administration of Justice, sat upon Criminal matters at Edenborough: The first
day was spent in reading their Commission from the Commissioners at Dalkeith,
calling the Sheriffs of the several counties on this side of the Frith, and
those that appeared not were fined 200 l. Scotch each. Afterward the Gentlemen
of the several counties, who were to do their service, were called, and such as
appeared not fined 100 li. Scotch; and then several Delinquents were called,
and such set down for Trial, and fining of several persons for Adultery,
Incest, and Fornication, for which there were above 60 persons brought before
the Judges in a day. And it is observable, That (such is the malice of these
people) that most of them were accused for facts done diverse years since, and
the chief proof against them was their own confession before the Kirk. One
Ephraim Bennet (a Gunner in Lies) was indicted, convicted, and condemned for
co^ning of money; also two English men ^ondemned for killing one Scotch-man in
March last. But that (...) observable, is, that some were brought before (...)
^^ches, woe whereof had been brought before the (...) the time of the Arm (...)
coming into Scotland and having confessed it were turned ^ver to the civil (...)
^he Court demanding how they came to be (...). They declared, that they were
(...) to do it ^y the exceeding torture they were put to, which was by tying
their ^humbs behind them, and then hanging them up by them while two Highl^nde^
whips them: after which they set lighted candles ^o the soles of their feet,
and between their toes; then burned them by putting lighted candles into their
mouths, and then burning them in the head: 6 were accused, and 4 died of the
torture. The Judges are resolved to have an account of the ground of this
cruelty. It is very probable there will shortly be more discoveries of this
kind of Amboyna usage; On Wednesday last the Marq. of Argyle came to
Edenbourgh; and soon after came the joyful tidings of the release of all our
prisoners. Unto which may be added the happy success of our Navy at sea against
the U^llander, who have taken since the beginning of the Wars about 163, and
the enemy have surprised of ours about 57 Colliers and others.

The Fleet of the States of Holland is not so forward, as it was thought it
would be; It was said they would be re^dy the 26 of this month (which is to
morrow) but it is well if they get ready by the 26 of the next. It was noised a
while there should be no less then one hundred and twelve men of war, but it
will be hard if they set out but 70. for men are scarce and moneys flow. There
are about four hundred Merchant men to set forth for Spain, France, the
Streights, India, Guinny, Turkey, and Portugal; and for these they intend to
make way through the Channel with a strong convoy, which if they can, they will
then think they have sufficiently vindicated their reputation to the world,
that they can make way for their trade under your noses.

The Diet of the Empire is now at hand, to be kept at Reghensburgh; the King of
Scots has one Tailor with the Emperor to (...) his affairs; but things are
not in such a posture, that he and the Princes can or ought in respect of their
own occasions, to interest themselves in his. Besides the Empire has had a
short breathing time of peace, having been long exhausted, and but little time
to recruit and replenish; and ^t is thought their own affairs will take up no
less then 3 years time to dispatch, and put them in order.

Edinburgh 28 October, 1652.
The Copy of another Letter dated at Newcastle; certifying, that there are 100
sail of Colliers ready to put to sea, with the next Wind.
SIR,
SOme of the Dutch Free-boters (with whom this coast is very much pestered)
have surprised four small Vessels (between Barwick and the Holy-Island) that
were coming from Scotland: And meeting with a small Bark belonging to
Scarborough homeward bound, chased her a whole fore-noon, and at last forced
her to run ashore near Flamborough head, where the Country people coming to
her rescue, the Skellums were forced to leave her. Here is about a hundred of
lusty Colliers, and a very strong convoy to conduct them, lie all ready at the
mouth of the River, and only wait for a fair gale of wind, to speed them to
their wished Port. There came in here lately a small Vessel from Yarmouth, by
which we understand that some of the Hollanders made an appearance upon that
coast, and chased two small Vessels into Soale Bay, but upon sight of some of
our men of war, they tacked about, and now those parts are very clear of them.

Newcastle, October. 28. 1652.
The Copy of a Letter from Plymouth, concerning the Engagement of the English
and Dutch Fleets between the Isle of VVight and Portland.
SIR,
ONe of our Frigots (scouting out) met with two Flemish men of war, with whom
she maintained a very desperate fight for the space of two hours, in which time
she so shattered their tackle that the Butterboxes declined Engagement, and
night approaching our men could not follow the pursuit, but in their return to
the Fleet, they took a Dutchman laden with Wine and strongwater, and a
Frenchman laden with salt. It was reported here by the Owner of a Hive which
came from Falmouth, that on Thursday the eight and twenty of October, about
thirty of the Parliaments ships belonging to General Blake, were engaged with
the Dutch Fleet, and that there had been a very fierce and bloody Fight between
them near to the Isle of Wight, but what was the Event or success thereof he
could not resolve, they being said to be engaged at his coming from thence;
therefore I shall wave the further relation hereof till further confirmation;
Only this I can assure you (for I have it from very good hands) that on the
fourteenth instant, there was a very considerable Fleet of Hollanders descried
to pass by Falmouth, which (as they supposed) was bound for the Straits; and
that one of our men of War lighted on one of their straglers (a very rich ship)
and brought her into Falmouth. Thus desiring you to take this in good part, and
excuse me for being no larger; for though I am willing to serve you with
intelligence, yet I would not be accounted a broacher of falsities, or
publisher of untruths. 'Thus in haste I rest.

Plymouth, October. 26.
FINIS.

