TWO PETITIONS OF THE Lord Major, Aldermen, and Commons of the City of LONDON,
IN Common Council ASSEMBLED: To the Right Honorable THE LORDS and COMMONS in
Parliament Assembled: Which Petition was Presented to both Houses, July 18.
1648.

With the Answer of the LORDS.

Printed by RICHARD COTES, Printer to the Honorable city of London, 1648.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE The Commons IN High Court of Parliament assembled: The
humble Petition of the Lord Major, Aldermen, and Commons of the City of London,
in Common Council assembled.
SHOWS,
THat your Petitioners do thankfully acknowledge the favor of this honorable
House, in that (before they gave answer to the desires of the Town of Newcastle
upon Tyne, for laying an imposition upon Coals) they were pleased to
communicate the same to the Petitioners, who taking into serious consideration
the great increase and miserable condition of the Poor of this City, occasioned
by the extreme decay of Trade both by Sea and Land, want of employment,
scarcity and dearness of provision, cannot but be very sensible of the sad
effect (they fear) will follow, if any such Tax should be laid upon Coals,
which must of necessity lie most heavy upon the poorer sort; and will also be
an occasion of discontent to Seamen, and discouragement of Merchants trading
that way. And although your Petitioners cannot find any expedient for the
supply of the Garrison in Newcastle, as is propounded; yet they do offer to the
Grave consideration of this honorable House, That if the Profits of all places
and emploiments enjoyed contrary to the Self-denying Ordinance of the Fourth of
April, 1645. And the several Votes of the Tenth of June, 1647. and likewise
the profits of the several places belonging to the Customs, Excise,
Postmasters, Committee Men, Offices sequestered, and such like, may be disposed
of for the Public occasions of the Kingdom, and not converted to private
uses, (reasonable Salaries for such and so many as shall be necessarily
employed therein excepted) the same might advance a considerable sum for that
or other Public charge, during the time of the miserable distractions of this
Kingdom.

Your Petitioners do therefore humbly pray,

That no Tax or new Imposition be laid upon Coals; And that the aforesaid
representations may be effectually taken into the Grave consideration of this
honorable House;

And they shall ever pray, etc. Michel.

To the Right Honorable the Lords in high Court of Parliament assembled: The
humble Petition of the Lord Major, Aldermen and Commons of the City of LONDON
in Common Council assembled:
Shows,
THat the Petitioners calling to mind the happy successes and great benefits,
which not only the Parliament and City, but also the Kingdom received, when
the Forces within the late Lines of Communication were united to the City,
under the command of one Militia; And the inconveniences that have happened
since they were disunited, their strength thereby being much abated, and they
made more unserviceable to the Parliament and City.

And your Petitioners being very sensible thereof, and of the great benefit
that may be expected (by the blessing of God) by their re-uniting, having
received several Petitions from diverse well-affected persons Inhabitants of the
city of Westminster, Hamblets of the Tower, and Borough of Southwark,
declaring their desires thereof; And upon conference with them, (and finding
them not willing to be a Sub-committee as formerly) in our desire to further so
good a work, tending so much to the enabling of us to be serviceable to the
Parliament, City and Kingdom, your Petitioners did condescend, That the said
adjacent parts should have five for every Division, to be joined to the present
Militia of London, and to make one entire Militia: Provided, That they should
be nominated by the Common Council, and presented to the honorable Houses of
Parliament for their approbation and allowance; And having received several
Votes from the honorable Houses of Parliament for their re-uniting:

They therefore humbly pray, Militia of London, the Fifteen persons nominated
by the Common Council, and by them humbly presented and submitted to the
honorable Houses of Parliament for their confirmation.

And they shall ever pray, etc. Michel.

Die Martis, 18 Julii, 1648.
UPON reading of the Petition of the Lord Major, Aldermen and Commons of the
City of London in Common Council assembled; It is Ordered by the Lords in
Parliament, That these Lords following shall be a Committee to draw up such an
Ordinance as is desired in the said Petition, and in pursuance of the Vote of
this House 6. July, 1648. and that the names of such as they mention in their
Petition be presented to the said Committee.

E. Northumberland E. Rutland E. Lincoln E. Suffolk E. Middlesex L. North L.
Hunsdon.
Their Lordships, or any Two, to meet on Thursday next at Nine in the Lord
Keepers Lodgings, and to adjourn themselves as they please.

Io. Brown, Cler. Parliamentorum.

FINIS.

