TWO PETITIONS TO THE GENERALS EXCELLENCY, ONE From the County of
Hartfordshire, concerning the Papers of the five Regiaments.

AND The other from Rutland, concerning Tithes.

ALSO A Declaration about North-VVales, and the Taxes and Assessements; An
Order concerning his Excellencies Lifeguard. Some VOTES presented to the
General Council.

THE Generals Letter to Mr. Speaker, for the keeping of promises, and
engagements, upon Articles approved.

November. 1. 1647.
THese Papers are examined, and Printed, and published according to the
Ordinance of hoth Houses of Parliament.

Imprimatur,

G. Matt.

Printed at London by Robert Ibbitson, in Smithfi^^d, near the Queenes-head
Tavern, 1647.

To His Excellency Sir THOMAS FAIRFAX, General of the Parliament ARMY, raised
for Defense OF THE KINGDOM, The Humble Petition of diverse, your Excellencies
and the Kingdoms most humble Servants of the County of Hertford.
Shows,
THat your Petitioners having received great satis^action and comfort, from the
solemn engagement of the A^m^ at New^^arkes, as also from many declarations and
narrations solemnly set forth by your Excellency, and Army under your, command;
all tending highly to the satisfaction of the Kingdom, and more especially to
your Petitioners, and all the friends and wel-w^^hers to your Excellency, and
Army, And observing that some well known to be much disaffected to the Armies
engagement, Declarations, and Kingdoms peace have upon view of a book
entitled, The case of the Army truly stated, had private meetings, and long
consultations, to the great terror of your Petitioners, and many other of the
Kingdoms most real servants.

We therefore most humbly beseech your Excellencies care: that the endeavors
of all those who upon the least occasions, are ready to take all advantages to
raise, and foment new divisions may be fru^trated; as also that there may be a
settlement of the Kingdom answerable, and according to the solemn narrations
and Declarations put forth by your Excellency and the Army under your command.

And your Petitioners shall humbly pray etc.
TO His Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax Knight Captain General of the Forces
raised for the defense of the KINGDOM.
The Humble Petition of the Inbabitants of the County of Rutland.
Shows,
THat your Petitioners do with all thankfulness acknowledge the great care
and pains taken by your Excellency to restore the liber^^es, franchizes, and
immunities of the free born Subjects of this nation: Yet finding our selves
greatly oppressed with the payment of Tithes (our County being a champion
County, and the grearest part there of, consists of tillage, and ti^^^ of all
profits are there paid in kind, which in open seilds (amounts to the fifth
part) at the least of men's e^^utes, to the great oppression and burden of your
said Petitioners, because many suites in Law have been commerced, and
prosecuted against diverse of your Petitioners: as also upon an Ordinance of
Parliament bearing date the ninteenth of August 1647. giving power to the
Justices of Peace to distraine and make sale of your Petitioners goods, and to
give treble damages, many Judgments being Procured, and like to be procured,
by some covetous and contentious Ministers, and Impropriators residing within
the said County, if some speedy course be not taken for restraining them, it
will prove a yoke too heavy to be borne.

May it therefore please your Excellency to take into your serious
consideration, this our unseparable burden and greivance and these we humbly
beseech your Excellency to represent in our behalf unto the Parliam^nt for
some course to be taken therein, as to their wisdoms shall seem expedient.

And your Petitioners shall ever honor and pray for your Excellency, etc.
By the advice of His Excellencies Officers
A DECLARATION to the Knights, Esquires, and Gentlemen of North Wales.
Gentlemen,
WHereas I am informed, that there has been levied great sums of moneys
upon your Countries without any Authority of Parliament, which has much
impoverished the inhabitants, and will totally disinable them, if the said
levies be continued, from paying their share of the six thousand, pounds a
month granted by Ordinance of Parliament for the subsistence of the Army, which
I see your County is willing to submit unto, if they may be eased of all other
unwarrented taxes. I have therefore thought it fit to let you know: That if you
hereafter shall refuse the payment of any moneys attempted to be levied without
Ordinance of Parliament, I ^^all not only protect you in so doing, but also
call the actors to a strickt account: And shall also desire you to inform me
by a certificate under your hands of moneys since the reducements of your
Counties to the service of the Parliament have been levied, and by whose
warrants, that there may be such a proceeding against them, as in justice their
offenses will deserve.

Papers presented by His Excellencies Officers, to the General Council,
October. 29. 1647.
1 Resolved, that it be represented to the next general Council, That this
Commi^^ce does concur, it is not like to be effectual for the end in the
first head expressed, to propound the course there offered to the Parliament,
unless withal there may be offered something for the setting down of more
moderate rates for compositions, then in the last Propositions of both
Kingdoms, And that something be prepared by Sir H. Waller, Col. Overton, and
Cap. Deane, to off or to the General Council, and (if it be there approved) to
be tendered to the Parliament for some confideration of the Proposalls of the
Army, in that point of moderating Delinquents Compositions.

2. Resolved that consideration be had of the bodies of Cathedralls, and the
lands of persons continued in exceptions by particular names, to be offered for
further security, and the lands and Estates, lying within this kingdom, that
belong to persons within the compass of the Irish Rebellion.

By His Excellency Sir THOMAS FAIRFAX
WHereas I have received informations of the great burden that lies upon the
County by the supernumery Gentlemen of the life guard, who are not upon roll,
but rides in the Troop, in expectance of admittance, which gives great
offense. I do therefore think fit that you give present order and directions
to all the gentlemen who are supernumery, and not in the list of any Troop in
the Army, that they be forthwith dismissed from quartering with the Troop,
until such time as there can be sufficiency for their admittance into the lift
of the Lifeguard.

Given under my hand the 22. of Octo. 1647. T. FAIREFAX.
To Captain Cromwell, Captain of the Lifeguard, Or Cap. Leiuten. Ingram.
Mr. Speaker,
HAving lately received a Petition from diverse gentlemen (comprised in the
Articles of Exceter, and other Articles granted upon surrenders, and confirmed,
or approved of by the House of Commons) expressing their great sufferings, and
the many losses they have sustained, by the breach, or not performance of the
said Articles: I hold my self obliged to represent the condition unto you,
desiring, that you will please to move the Honorable House, that as they have
by their Vote on Wednesday the 6th. of May 1647. Declared their approbation of
the said Articles, they would beepleased to add thereunto, a command to all
Committees, and other persons whom it may concern: That they do take notice
of, observe, and not refringe the same. And that the concurrence of the House
of Peers may be desired therein, as also in confirmation of all other
Articles, which the House of Commons have approved, I also desire you to move
the Honorable House of Commons, that since by their Order on Friday 23 of
Octo. 1647. They have forbidden the permitting of any persons who have adhered
to the Enemy against the Parliament to come again into any of their Churches,
or to be admited into any of the Serieantes Innes, Innes of Court, or Innes of
Chancery, or to live in any of the said societies: The House would be pleased
to declare: That the same order may not extend to the prejudice of any who have
had Articles granted upon surrender of Garrisons, including that benefit: and
particularly, not to the prejudice of those, who being comprised within the
Articles of Exceter, have since compounded according to the Articles.

Sir, My own, and the faith and reputation of the Army, and public justice,
being so much concerned in these things, I am engaged and enforced thus to
trouble you, For which I humbly crave the pardon of the House, And referring
the particulars to their consideration, I remain.

Your Hamble Servant, T. FAIRFAx.

FINIS.

