TWO PETITIONS PRESENTED To the Right Honorable THE LORDS and COMMONS in
Parliament Assembled: The One, The humble Petition of the Lord Major, Aldermen,
and Commons of the City of London IN Common Council assembled: The Other, The
humble Petition of the Field Officers, Captains, and their Commission-Officers
OF THE TRAINED-BANDS of the City of London and Liberties thereof.

With the Answers of both Houses to the said Petitions.

Printed by RICHARD COTES, Printer to the Honorable City of London, July 5.
1648.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE The Commons IN THE High Court of Parliament assembled:
The humble Petition of the Lord Major, Aldermen, and Commons of the City of
London, in Common Council assembled
SHOWS,
THAT your Petitioners sitting in Common Council upon the weighty Affairs of
the City, had presented unto them by diverse Field-Officers, Captains, and
their Commission-Officers of the Trained-Bands of the City of London and
Liberties thereof, the Petition hereunto annexed; which being openly read, and
seriously considered of, they apprehend that the same is of great concernment,
worthy due consideration, tending to the Honor and safety of the King, and
preservation of the Parliament, and the settlement of the peace and welfare of
the City and Kingdom; and they (concurring with the Petitioners therein) have
thought fit to present the same to this honorable House; And they humbly pray
your Honors to take the same into your serious consideration; And to do
therein as in your grave Wisdoms you shall see fit.

And they shall pray, etc.

To the Right Honorable THE LORDS Assembled in Parliament. The humble Petition
of the Field-Officers, Captains and their Commission-Officers of the
Trained-bands of the City of London and Liberties thereof,
Shows,
THat out of the deep sense of the sad Miseries that lie upon these Kingdoms,
the only visible remedy whereof (under God) we conceive to be a Personal
Treaty with his Majesty; Which happy work we hear is like to be retarded, if
not frustrated, by fears and jealousies suggested, if it should be here in
London, (which is so much desired,) That in stead of settling Peace, it might
involve us all in blood, by Tumults that might be raised by Persons driving on
their own Designs and Interests: We think our selves bound in duty, for
promoting so desirable a Work, so much as in us lies, to offer our service
with our lives and fortunes to the utmost, to defend His Majesty's Royal
person, and this Parliament from all violence whatsoever, that they may meet
and Treat with freedom, honor, and safety, according to the ancient
fundamental Constitution of this Kingdom; and, That whosoever shall by
Tumults, Mutinies, Insurrections or otherwise, interrupt or force the Honor,
Freedom, and Safety of the King or Parliament; We, and all under our Commands
shall be ready as One man to live and die in defense of the King and
Parliament, according to our Covenant.

I. Wherefore we humbly pray, That for our enablement thereunto, the Militia
of the City of London and adjacent parts may be settled in one Committee: And if
in your Wisdoms you shall think fit, to join some persons of the Parts
adjacent to the Grand Committee, they may be such as have no places of Profit
which depend upon the continuance of the War, and our troubles; or have
showed themselves disaffected to the ends of the Covenant.

II. That the King may be brought to London with freedom, honor, and safety,
to Treat with His Parliament, for the settling of a safe and wel-grounded Peace.

III. That the Militia may have power to raise Horse, if need be, for the
defense of the King, Parliament, and City.

And we shall ever pray, etc.

Die Mercurii, 5. Julii, 1648.
THe Lords have commanded me to let you know, That they have considered of the
Petitions this day tendered by you unto them. They had of themselves made some
progress in those things mentioned therein; and they do now declare unto you,
That they have thought fit to grant your desires in all the particulars
contained in the Petitions; in confidence, That the City of London will be
care^ull to make good their great engagement now made for the preserving and
securing of His Majesty's Person and the Parliament from Tumults, Mutinies,
Insurrections, or other Disorders that may interrupt the Honor, Freedom, and
Safety of the King or Parliament; And they cannot doubt, but, That they will
still adhere to live and die in defense of the King and Parliament according to
their Covenant.

Io. Brown Cler. Parliamentorum.

Die Mercurii 5. Iulii, 1648.
The House being informed that the Sheriffs, diverse Aldermen and Commoners of
the City of London were at door, they were called in, and after a short
preamble made by Sheriff Bide, they presented two Petitions; the one entitled,
The humble Petition of the Field-Officers, Captains, and their Commission
Officers of the trained Bands of the city of London and liberties thereof,
which they said was brought to them Yesterday as they sat in Common Council;
the other from themselves, entitled, The humble Petition of the Lord Major,
Aldermen, and Commons of the city of London in Common Council; which after the
Petitioners were withdrawn were read.

Ordered,

Ordered, London, and such as they shall appoint, and with the Commanders of
the Soldiers in London, concerning their engagement for the safety of the King
and Parliament during the intended Treaty, and touching the manner of the
security.

The Petitioners being again called in, Mr. Speaker by command of the House
gave them this answer;

The House has read your Petition, and the Petition annexed; And they have
agreed to the joining the Militia's.

The other matters contained in the Petition, are of great concernement, and
have taken up much debate, and they have appointed another day to take up the
said debate; and have also appointed a Committee to confer with the
Common Council of the City of London, and such as they shall appoint; and with
the Commanders of the Soldiers in London about the same; wherewith the House
desires you to acquaint the Lord Mayor, that a Common Council may be called to
morrow at two of the clock in the afternoon, for a conference thereupon
accordingly.

H. Elsynge. Cler. Parl. D. Com.

FINIS.

