The Impartialest Satyr that ever was seen,
That Speaks truth without fear, or flattry, or spleen:
Read As you list, commend it, or come mend it,
The Man that penned it, did with Finis end it.
LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1652.

The Impartialest Satyr, etc.
DIvine Urania, aid my feeble pen,
My Savior and my Sovereign both were men:
The One God and man (before the world appointed)
The other Gods man (both the Lords Anointed)
The one the Lord of Glory, and Eternal,
The other a glorious Lord (by Grace Supernall.)
One was by Judas for a small sum sold,
The other for much Silver, Coin, and Gold:
The Jews knew not (for had they) says the Story,
They had not crucified the Lord of Glory: 1. Cor. 2.8.

But sure the Scots did know He was their King
Which they did sell, and to destruction bring.
Our Savior, at his bitter suffering passion,
Upon his Crucifiers had compassion,
When his tormented spirits, near spent did pant,
He prayed for them, declared them ignorant,
To this effect Father (I beg and sue)
Forgive them. for they know not what they do:
These blessed words, for cursed Jews were sovereign plaster,
Christ prayed not for those Knaves that sold their Master;
Their Bargain was not casual, or by chance,
Nor can they any way plead ignorance:
For what He was, they all did know right well,
They knew He was their King that they did sell:
The ignorant accursed Jews Sanedrim,
Were not so guilty of selfe-knowing sin.
Great Pontius Pilate, on's Tribunal Throne,
To judge (his Judge) the Eternal three in one:
He did not know who then our Savior was,
Yet did corrupt unwilling censure pass.
He was a Heathen, and from him was hid
Such knowledge that he knew not what he did.
Pilate had full Authority and Power
From Great Tiberius, Romes high Emperor,
But no Records, to memory can bring
That Subjects er'e had power to sell their King:
Scotch murdered Kings, large Histories have filled:
But Charles the First, was first sold, to be killed.
One hundred eight Kings Scotland had beside,
And fifty eight of them untimely died;
Beheaded, poisoned, murdered, slain, and starved
But sold for slaughter (none like Charles was served:)
Therefore when Christ (the Judge) shall all decide,
Jews shall (before those Scots) be justified:
Our Savior said unto the faithless Jew,
You knew not me, be gone, I know not you.
And he'l^ say to the perfidious Scot,
Depart from me for now I know you not.
You sinned against your consciences, you knew to
You sold him, whom was your obedience due to;
To whom you plighted had your faiths and troaths,
By Protestations, Covenants and Oaths:
Such Knaves, said they, would to the Vineyard go,
But then the Rascals consciences said no;
You swore to him, and him again forswore,
Once, twice, and thrice, and thrice, and three times more
I seem too long upon this Theme, but yet
Something remains, which I must not forget:
As Judas sold his Master for a price,
He did as you did, for base Avarice:
He had but 30 pence (as some declare)
Some cursed Scots, had each a greater share.
A King with Grace endowed, with Virtue crowned,
You sold him for two hundred thousand pound,
Which money was not justly shared, they say,
The strong'st got all, the weak went fools away:
That when the mighty Knaves had each his Fleece,
The poor Rogues had not 15 pence a piece.
That Money was the price of Blood, indeed
Of Royal Blood, which makes three Kingdoms bleed;
And sanguine swords over runs you like a flood,
Like Jews Aceldema, a field of blood.
Nor was the intention of Iscariot.
So bad as was the meaning of the Scot;
For Judas s^w his Masters Miracles,
Heard his Divine Precepts and Oracles:
He saw him (with his mighty wo^d) appease
And calm the tempest of fierce winds and seas. Mat. 8.26.

He saw him likewise on the water walk,
To raise the dead, and make the dumb to talk,
The blind to see, the lame go, the deaf hear,
Fiends disposlest, and Leopers cleansed clear;
He saw five Barley Loaves, and two small Fishes
Were for five thousand people plenteous Dishes.
He saw the Jews would take him, bu^ their power
Could not, till his appointed time and hour: John 7.30.

When as the Nazarites (through want of Grace)
Would cast him from a Rock, or some high place:
Then Judas saw a Miracle was wrought Luke 4.28.

By scaping from them, when his life they sought.
All these things Judas saw, and more then these,
He therefore went unto the Pharisees
To take their money, and his Master sell:
Supposing Christ would free himself right well
By Miracle, as he had done before, This is probable to be the intent of Judas.

Believing that he could escape once more;
But Scottish Jews, and Judasses did know
Their Master, no such Miracle could show;
They knew he could not escape, and that his being
Was sad conditioned, and too fast for fleeing:
Christ could have escaped away. but Charles could not,
Which proves the Scots worse then Iscariot.
And Judas did an honest trick or two,
More then the false King-sel^ing Knaves will do:
He brought the money back, and did repent,
Confess he had betrayed Blood Innocent:
Abhorring of his crime and ill got pelf,
And (in despair) repenting hanged himself,
His satisfactious penitence was such,
That those false Scots will never do half so much.
The money they again will never bring,
Nor stretched their Weasands in the fatal string.
JUDAS repented, and to hanging went;
But they will be hanged before they will repent.
My raging Satyr is yet rational,
The fury of it is not National,
Though men are all defiled with sins contagion,
God has his own in every Land and Region.
Amongst Jews, great numbers were Believers, when
Our Savior suffered for the sins of men.
And sure there is many an honest Loyal Scot
Whose Consciences this Crime did never spot;
Therefore they are rash Fools, and they do dote all,
That lay the blame upon the Nation total.
There Is many noble Scots have bravely bled,
Who Honored lived, and died in Honors Bed,
Whose Fame shall (many an Age) out live their lives,
Whose valors scarcely had Superlatives.
And thousands still are living at this day,
That do make conscience what they do or say,
This black aspersion cannot justly fall,
To scandalize the Nation general:
But Scotland harbors many a crafty Fox,
Of GEORGE BUCHANANS faction, and JOHN KNOX,
Their dainty Doctrine, at Geneva brewed,
Has made stark mad the misled multitude,
That their Opinions as fast grounded be,
As Squirrils when they skip from Tree to Tree.
Therefore it is thought the fault's not in the Scots,
It Is their Religion that has made 'em Sots:
It is their piping hot, fire new Presbytery;
(Keep from it, touch it not, it will besquitter ye)
And if it had been the Almighties will,
I wish (in Scotland) they had kept it still,
For wheresoever it comes, it mischief brings
The spoil of Nations, Kingdoms, and of Kings,
Of Peace, and on the sacred Tribe of Levi
Their mad-brain'd Tyranny lies too too heavy.
They, and the Levites of New Englands brood,
Have made old England drunk with English blood,
And with a show of holinesle and zeal,
They have destroyed our Church, lives, Laws, and Weal;
And as (by them) we are thus deeply wounded,
So they (by wounding us) are quite confounded,
Enslaved and conquered, ransacked, and Captived
Of Laws, of Liberties, and love deprived.
Thus is Gods Judgment fallen upon their heads,
As it will do on all that so mis-treads.
Thus I have done with Scots, I cold begin
With English Jews, which near as bad have bin:
But I love cleanliness, and do detest
That Foul that is so Foul, to Foul his Nest.
Yet is a Knave a Knave, do what he can,
Let him be Grecian, or Barbarian,
In England, Scotland, Ireland, France and Spain,
And in Wales too, there may be Knaves in grain.
The Eye of mortal man did never ken
A Nation that breeds not false-hearted men;
But though the most are bad, yet every where
Some honest men are scattered here and there.
And as they are thickly sown and thin come up,
So they drink deepest of afflictions Cup.
A Rascals Heaven is here, and here is his Love,
A good man's Hell is here, his Heaven's above:
A virtuous man sowes seeds of goodness here,
And Faith assures Hope Fruits eternal there.
And now of London some few lines I Will write,
And then my Satyr bids you all Good Night.
THe year full sixteen hundred and two score,
King C. from Scotland came, and never more
Was flattery used with great magnificence,
The City London entertained their Prince;
Mark how the cursed Jews Hosanna cried,
When Christ into Jerusalem did ride;
With boughs they decked their doors, and in their street,
They threw their garments trampled under feet:
These flattring duties then those Jews did show,
To whom both Heaven and Earth obedience owe;
Yet few days after their malicious strife
Did Crucify our glorious Lord of life.
Much like to this was Londons fading flame
Of love, when Royal C. from Scotland came,
They rung the Bells, and bonefires were consumed;
Thousands were sick with healths, and the air perfumed
With Cannons thundering war, and Chimnies reak:
Yea all that heart could think, or tongue could speak,
By flattring Loyalty was then expressed,
With th'entertainment of a mighty Feast.
This d^d brave London do, yet pray but note,
In three days after they would cut his throat;
For thousands of them did like Fiends conjoyne
To spend their lives, their souls, their goods, and coin,
And many a Thimble, Bodkin, and a Ring,
They offered up to sacrifice their King:
Oh faithless trust! accursed with flattry varnisht,
Like to a rotten Sepulcher new garnisht.
My Satyr, against all does not complain
In London, many thousands do remain,
Who are courageous, wise and pollitick,
And to their principles do stoutly stick,
Who never made their wealth the means to buy
Their own and every man's calamity,
Who are no weathercocks or woodcock Widgeons.
To be of any none, or all Religions,
Who did the former Government obey,
And to be ruled (by this) do not gainsay:
Who patient take their Lots as they do fall,
And constant, humbly, give God thanks for all.
In London many such now living be,
But very few of them are known to me.
FINIS.

