John Tailors MANIFESTATION, AND JUST VINDICATION Against IOSVA CHVRCH HIS
Exclamation, WITH A TRVE RELATION OF Church his Generation, with his foul
Combination, with a pretense of Reformation, of his wronged Occupation, has
brought all out of Fashion.

LONDON Printed by John Hammond. 1642.

John Tailors Manifestation AND lust Vindication against Joshua Church his
Exclamation, with a true Relation of Church his Generation, with his foul
Combination, with pretense of Reformation, of his wronged Ocupation, has
brought all out of Fashion.
MAster Church (for I can give you no less style) although I have ever hated
to dip my pen in filth, and mud: for the Proverb says, that whosoever wrastles
with a sir Reverence, that whether he give or take the fall, he shall be sure
to foul his fingers; but the general, many and mighty wrongs done by you Mr.
Church, and your associates, whom you have seduced against the government of
the Watermen, established by Acts of Parliament these 86 years: and Orders
also made, approved and confirmed by the Rulers and Assistants of the Watermen,
by the Lord Mayor of London, and Court of Aldermen, and by the Lords of the
Right Honorable privy Council, to five great Kings and Queens (videlicet)
to King Philip, Queen Mary, Queen Elizabeth, King James, and K. Charles, all
these Laws and Orders have been long withstood and opposed by you, and others
whom you have misled, as shall be plainly proved by that which follows. But
first I will describe your person (and part of your invisible good qualities)
and then I will proceed to your manner of Resormation.

First, it is well ^nown, that you have over lied a constant course of life,
you have from your beginning showed your self your mothers son; and as you
have her Baboon Monkeyfied visage, so she lest you a large portion of cursings
imprecations, and some wicked oaths (of which rare parts she was well stored)
and you have improved them so well, that you did dare to lend an oath against
me at a trial ten years past in Guild Hall; and had I not been entreated by
the Lord Mayor, I had gone near to have made a match betwixt the pillory and
your ears; and though your malice prevation not then (for the cause went on my
side) yet your spite is of that lasting metal, that it has first and last
continued these 18. years. But a word or two more of your mother is not
unsuitable.

It is further known, that in her widowhood you were bound Apprentice to her,
and for the true deserving of your freedom, you oftentimes spent what you got,
allowing her little or nothing, you most commonly mistaking the way, gave your
gettings to the Alehouse instead of your mother; by which service of yours,
she was beggerd, and glad to take the Alms of the Watermens Hall toward her
relief: your lodging was the most fitting for you in those days; for it was
many times in the cold Winter at Summers Key in a dung hot, where you battned
in the warm dung; and from the dung you had the name of Vermin, which name you
have to this day. For your Summers recreation your lodging was under a Crane at
the Custom House; and in these kind of courses you came to be a Waterman.

After your freedom, your mother has many times asked you blessing upon her
knees, most pitifully begging two tokens of you; which you uncharitably
denying, she (well knowing you) would call you damnd Rogue, and give you her
blessing the clean contrary way.

After this your hebaviour was so meritorious, that upon complaints and proofs
to our Hall my self with my brethren being Masters of the Company) have diverse
times by fines and imprisonments justly punished you both in body and purse,
although your demerits have deserved a courtesy often times more to be
inflicted upon you. For these doings of mine, and other of our Rulers, Mr.
Church has been angry these eighteen years, and (to keep your anger still in
motion) the Covernours or Rulers have rubbed up your memory, either with a
reproof, a fine, or a iayle, which you have deserved as due wages for your
good conditions: And for these things you bear us bitter malice. It was once
my fortune to see a Dog hanged that had one quality very like a foolish
trick which you have, which was, that if a man had cast or hurld a stone at
him, the Curre wound run and bite the said stone, and not meddle at all with
the party that threw it: So you (Mr. Vermin) when you have been a little touched
for your Rogury, and for your deboshed abuses, then you snarle, snap, bite and
back-bite us that are the doers of justice; but you never remember that your
base misdemeanour which was the cause that cast these grievances upon you.

In revenge of these parts of Justice you have (for many years) practiced to
overthrow all order, rule and government, you did eleven years past, raise
many hundreds of Watermen in a combination for that wicked intent; yet all your
knavery was covered with a cloak of Reformation: there you taxed me and all my
brethren, with bribery, corruption, and many vile abuses, which the Lord Mayor
then (being Sir Robert Duty) with the Court of Aldermen, did put to the
examination of a Committee; which Committee did make report to the said Court,
that we the Rulers were clear of those scandals, and that all your prating
was but lies and sla^ders; by which means we were free from your malice, till
within these two year. In which time you have bestird your self as if the
Devil were in you, having made a strong combination with many thousands of
watermen, persuading them not to obey the Rulers, nor to come to their Hall
upon their being warned thither for any wrongs which they shall commit: You
have boasted that it was now Parliament time, and therefore you may do what
you list; and when the Master of his Majesty's Barge told you, that if we did
him or any other Water-man injury, that upon complaint made of it to the Lord
Moior and proofs made of it, that then the Lord Mayor had power to right him
or them, and severely to punish us To which you answered, that the Lord Mayor
was your slave, and that you would have the government shortly out of his
hands. You at (another time) pointed with your finger to our Hal, and called it
a Rookes Nest, and that you had one hand in the Nest already, and that
shortly you would pluck all the Rookes out: And we have since that time been
three several times assaulted in our Hall, so that we have at every of those
times been forced to call the Constables to defend us from violence, and the
Constables will certify that we have been abused.

You Mr. (Church) came lately into our Hall, and in a pilfring manner you
took close up out of an out of an outward Room, a Table of Orders that hanged
there, by the Lord Majors command, that watermen might read and hear how they
should be governed: for the which fact I had you with a warrant before a
Justice, who would not bind you over to the Assizes, because you Bauld and lied
to him, that our grievnnces were to be heard by a Committee in Parliament,
within fourteen days after. I am sure you lied then: for it was much about
Alholowtide and we have no hearing yet, I would to God we had.

You and your Consorts have vowed to have me hanged, and Goodale swore he
would have my heart in his hand, and shake it, and one Matthew Burton, because
he could not hang me, he went and hanged himself upon a Sunday morning, being
the first of August last; but by chance his wise and others came timely and
cut him down; that being the first Sunday that he made Holi-day: for he did
formerlie use to work on all other Sabbaths. Another that served but 4 years
Apprentiship in all, for before 7. years were expired, he had two wives, he
for preferment (hoping to be Mastor of the Queens Barge) turned Recusant, and
failing of his hopes, remains an ordinary waterman; and he said lately, that
there would be Roman Catholics enough left as might drink a health to all our
confusions; or else that there would be Irish enough to cut all our throats.
These (and some other like these) are your Associates to reform abuses; but
you being their Leader, do verify the old Proverb, that it is a sweet
Procession where the Devil carries the Cross. You framed fifty Articles
against us in Parliament, which upon hearing, I doubt not but will gain you
your reward, for alleging so many lies against us in so honorable an Assembly.

By your doings and Rebellious courses you have made the Thames a wilderness:
for there is neither command nor obedience; but you have done reasonable well
for your self, in collecting moneys from many hundreds of watermen, promising
them wondrous businesses to be done; and with that moneys you have well
repaired your self with gold Bottons and Loops (if the suit be not pawned) but
I wish that your Painter that can play the Kinde-Coale solicitor so well, I
would have him (or some other) to paint your comely Effigies in that suit, and
hang it up for the picture of Ill luck.

You did do your best the other day to draw me into as much danger as you
deserved, by averring that I spoke most wicked abusive words against some
Parliament men; I would have you know (Mr. Vermin) that I was never such a
Knave to speak such (or any bad words) to any private friend, where I thought
my counsel would be kept. But I were a Villain, a Knave and a Fool, if I
would have said any thing before you and your Com-Rogues, whom I knew to be my
mortal enemies, and such as would spread my words ten times broader then my
meaning.

You have brought the River to that pass, that watermen do ply how and where
they list, that they abuse Fares, and exact upon them, that they fight, brawle,
rail, revile, throw stones and Brick-bats, and for all this, there is no
punishment: for you have told them that it is Parliament time.

For these sweet behaviors of yours you deserve to be Knighted with a wooden
Dagger, to be made Knight of the Post (or whipped at a Post) and I doubt nor
but all the watermen whom you have misled, and taken their moneys, will
shortly day, that they have (by your persuasion) had a bad opinion of me and
the rest of my brethren, and assure your self, I fear you not, nor do I hate
any of you all; and whosoever he be that either fears or hates you, must
needs be guilty of some foul thing, which you charge him with. We have all
too many faults, and he that desires not amendment, let the Devil have him: if
you or any man can Justly tax me, beshrew you, if you spare me: therefore
Jadvise you, Mr. Church, not to despair because you have fold your Two Wise
Acres of Thistleground, for when all trades fail, you may serve for a witness
for any man's love or money, or else, if I do grow rich (as it is not
impossible) I will entertain you to be my fool, and all this, Mr. Church, I
hope, is no Scandalla Magnatum.

I know you are a merry fellow, for you had lately a Piper, a Fuller, you
lacked but your Trumpeter at the Blackfriers, good Sack and Tobacco at a
Tavern in New-Fish-streete, where you sung Old Rose, or John Dory, and cried
Hey the generallity pays for all.

And now to tell you a few words in sober sadness, me thinks you should know
that I am not so bad as to be your Companion or to be thus abused by you, I
have served seven times at sea in Queen Elizabeth's service, I have been a
servant in in ordinary to King James and King Charles 27 years, I have been
Ruler of my company 8 several years, I have borne offices, and paid Subsidies,
and all duties these 40. years, I have written 220. Books, wherein I have
pleased both Kings, Princes, Peers and Commons (for I have neither written
profanely, or obscenely, nor have I any hand at all in those Roguish Hellish
Lies and Lybells that flutters daily about the streets; And therefore (Mr.
Church) you that do hardly pay one half penny a week to the poor, and never
had any other office but a Box-keeper at the Temple, to the Gamesters in
Christmas time; methinks you should have more manners than to abuse me thus
without a cause, as you have done; and a little more discretion then to think
your testimony or witness can stand against me; or you in any degree to be my
companion.

With all these virtues of yours, you do now seek and strive to be a Ruler or
Governor of the Water-mens Company, for you would have 8. honest men to be
sworn (I doubt not but you mean your self for one; but most (Worthy Sir) you
must learn first how to obey, before you will know how to rule, and it is a
plain case, that if 8. such fellows as you were sworn Rulers, we were like to
have a mad government: for you have brought the River into that disorder, that
whereas the Parliament with exceeding pains and charge, have sat long, whom
(with the King, God continue in unity) these Worthies I say, sitting late about
the great affairs of the Church and Kingdom, their Coaches that waited on
them, have had their Ax^ltree pins stolen out by Watermen, on purpose to make
the Gentlemen go by water, or else if they went by Coach, the VVheles might
flee off to the endangering of those that were in it; such Villainy was never
used till you overthrew our Government.

You tax us, that we give no account for all the moneys that we receive at our
Hall, either for Fines, or Quarteridge, or any thing else. Indeed we have been
forgetful to make account to you or your Companions: but when occasion shall
serve, we will show your betters Books of account, of 40 years continuance,
with our Auditors hands at them, for the troath is, we neither Receive nor
disburse any moneys, but upon oath we account for it yearly.

You say that we have 5 or 6 servants apiece, and when that a press is for men
to serve the King at sea, then we do spare our own men, and press others,
and that we do press the most Religious and honest men; to which Lie I must
answer, that I do not know any VVatermen, that has three men and though the
company be in Number 4000 at least, yet there are not above 50 of that number,
that have Two men apiece, and the most of them are Ancient VVatermen, and past
their labor, and some of them not their servants do never carry any
passenger, but work in Lighters to carry Coals and other goods: for mine own
part, I have but one servant, and if a press do come, I had Rather he should
go then stay at home, although I am sure that I do never trouble any one of
you to carry a ^^re from you.

You likewise scandal me, with the Company, with a press for men that went
into Germany 10 years ago, you slander me with buying and selling of men
there, but the troath is, we were not Authors of that press, nor had we power
to deny the warrants which we have to show, and as for any buying or selling,
or any corruption that way, or any other, I Pray you take my word, I do but
laugh at your foolery.

I would wish as many of the generality as do desire to be more guld then
they are, to gather more money, for you are lately fallen most wickedly out of
reparations; and now you and some of your leading crew, seeing their cause is
bad, they and you do patch it up with railing and reviling. And so I take
leave of you as you are, overwhelmed with ignorance and malice.

Your mischievous malice was apparently seen on Thursday last the third of
February 1641, For you knew that the Rulers of our Company were warned that day
to appear before the Lord Mayor and Court of Aldermen (upon your complaint)
and you knew further, that I being Clarke of the Company, was to be the only
man to speak and show writings in our defense against your slanders.

Then (Mr. Church) with a trick that you had, you went or sent for a Deputy to
a Sergeant at Arms, to attach me and bring me before an Honorable Committee
of the House of Commons. This you did on purpose to take me off suddenly,
because our Company should be unprovided to oppose your lies and slanders: But
all your knavery would not serve; for I had that favor to stay and do my
service, and afterward I went before the Commit, whom I found to be
Gentlemen of such wisdom and gravity, that I conceive that but little credit
was given to your testimony: for if any bad speeches had proceeded from me,
you ought not to have concealed such things three weeks and more.

But you (in a triumphing manner) made haste toward the Thames, and told some
Watermen, that you had laid me fast, and that I was in layie, and to be
hanged the next Monday, and that I was at twenty shillings charge every day to
a Messenger.

All this, and a great deal more, you have done to uphold your c^ with such
men as have been deceived by your trolling tongue; but I (...) that shortly you
shall be known what you are: For there is not any thing that I have said or
done in my life, to make me fear you or any others by your persuasions.

The Postscript.
IN imitation of your great Master (the Devil) you, with some others, did on
wednesday last (before a right worshipful Committee) at the Guild Hall,
London, with most odious lies and clamours, abuse and accuse my self and all
others that ever have been Rulers, and so with noise and multitude you did your
best and worst to drown all our just defenses. But that Committee ( I know) in
their grave wisdoms, will consider of what my self with my Brethren and you
are; to whose report I with all honest men do humbly submit; but you with some
others made haste to the Thames side, and at diverse places you did brag, that
you had cast the Masters and old Assistants out from all manner of further
government: And in so saying, you showed your self a boasting, lying Rogue.

Indeed you have gulld so many men of their monyes, that (to dawb up your
ragged credit) you must stop their mouths with somewhat, either bragging or
lying; wherein the King himself has not escaped your ieering malice: for you
in a scoffing manner, say (on Sunday last, Februry 6. in an Alehouse, that if
the King did stay but a little longer at Windsor, that they would make him
Mayor of the Town. Such a kind of sauciness has sometimes very well deserved
a whip; to which I leave you, Mr. Vermin.

FINIS.

