NO MERCVRIVS AVLICVS; But some merry flashes of Intelligence, with the
Pretended PARLIAMENTS Forces besiedging of OXFORD four miles off, and the
terrible taking in of a Mill, instead of the KING and CITY.

Also the breaking of BOOKER, the Asse-tronomicall London Figure-flinger, his
perfidious Prediction failing, and his great Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter
dislocated.

By JOHN TAILOR.

July 10th. Printed in the Year. 1644.

(...) the miserable missed People to believe once more in the unsaving
Public Faith, whereby they may be further cozened of the other 1 or 200000 l.
to reward your mighty Commanders, and your Brethren the Scots, who do speed as
well in the North as the rest have done about Oxford, is not to be feared or
doubted.

Thus (Monsieur Bookerus) I have anatomized and skellitonized your railing
Pamphlet and ridiculous Prediction: it is known too well, that the expectation
of some mischievous events was the ladder on which your meditations mounted.
You were believed amongst a company of catacoxcombrian Plebeians, as amongst
the Heathen the Delphian Oracle; amongst many you were accounted as the
Celestial Bearward, and that Vrsa major and Vrsa minor were your Cubbes, the
Dog-starre was your Whelpe, for you brought him up of a puppy. Master Booker,
Taurus is your best game. Bull, and that is a Beast of your own breeding, it is
supposed you sucked him since the first time he was a Moon-Calfe; Jupiters
thunder is your Taber, Mercury is your Bagpiper, and writes your Beare-gar-den
Bills, in the form of Planetary Conjunctions, Charles his Wain is but a Cart
to you, and Ariadnes Crown is at your disposal, Hesperus and Vesperus lights
you to bed and to breakfast, the Pleiades are your Handmaides, and Castor and
Pollux are your Pages.

In a word, I hold thee to be more than mortal, and that the Dragon being
sick, and much troubled with the Megrim in the Head, so that Aesculapius was
sent by Jupiter to give him a Clister, which being applied, the Dragon voided
thee out of his Tail for a worm. This was once your high estate and
estimation, but how art thou fallen, O thou wonder amongst wise men and
widgeons; the seven Planets are highly and implacably offended with thee, and
(instead of their influences) they will infuse into thee seven deadly sins, and
all the twelve Signs have shut their celestial Gates against thee, at the
command of Saturn and Jupiter, the stars are malevolent pretending and
portending revenge against thee for belying them, and calling and causing them
to witness thy lying Conjunctions and traitorous expositions of them. Aries
will brow-beat thee, with battering thy shameless Head and Face, and make thee
Horne-mad. Taurus will gore thee through the Neck, and hunch thy Lies into thy
Throat; Gemini will bastinado thine arms and shoulders with a cudgel called
Morbus Gallicus; Cancer shall gnaw thy slinking Stomach, and (like the worm
of conscience) torment thee, he shall crabbedly torment thee, and Crab-lice
shall crawle over thee. Leo shall rage hotly, roar terribly, and bite thee
horribly in the Dogdayes. Virgo shall accuse thee for a Rape, for lying with
her against her will, and belying of her in thy foisting fustianisme, for which
she will vex thee to the very gutts and belly, with Chollickes, Stranguries,
Dropsies, Convulsions, and Hippocondraicus. Libra has weighed thee in his
B^llance, and finds thee too light, his Aequinoctiall Scales says thou wants
so many Grains either of Troy or Averdepois of honesty, that he will possess
thy Reins with the loathsome Gonorea, and thy Kidneys with the Stone more
feeling and sensibly than that of the Philosophers. Scorpio (in secret)
remembers thee, therefore look to thy Prepuce, be careful of thy Priapus, for
he will have a fling at thy Testiculanorums. Thou have displeased Sagittarius,
in shooting dog-bolts and fooles-bolts in his name, without his leave, for the
which he will shut Sciatica shafts into thy Hippes and hucklebones, and pocky
arrows through thy Thighs. Capricorn will give thee no more Goats milk,
and will strike thy knees into such a stiffness, that thou shall never have the
grace to bow them to any other Gods than those of the Close Committee.
Aquarius, or Aquaticus, will dash and balderdash thee, ducke, sowse, pumpe and
plunge thee, into the bottomless Gulf of Mare mortuum; or if thou escape that,
he will plague thee with Goutes and Crampes, and lastly hurl thee headlong
into the perpendicularity of the vast watery Region; where thou shall
irremediably and irrecoverably be crippled in thy feet, root and branch, cap a
pe, top and tail by Pisces.

How think thou now of thy self (thou quondam wisdom of five Justices)
thou have spun a fair thread, big enough to make thee a Gregorian neck-lace,
I pray thee do but look in a glass, and see the figure of we two, I tell thee,
(without swearing) that I am very sorry for thee, but I could hardly weep to see
thee and all thy friends hanged: that is a full point.

Mercurius Aulicus and George Naworth do so far slight thee and thy for did
railing, as the Lion or Mastiffe regards not the barking and bawling of a
mangie Curte; only I my self (yea my very self) have out of my grace and
clemency vouchsafed to descend so low as to honor thee with this mine Answer.
If wishes were availeable, I would wish thee to play the lying Knave no more,
give over writing of Treason, and incensing People to Rebellion, confess thy
faults in abusing of me, and I perhaps will beg thy pardon.

THese are to signify, that all Merchants, and others, that are desirous
weekly to impart beyond Seas, the certain condition of affairs here, and of
the proceedings of the War; they shall have it weekly published in Print, in
the French Tongue, and every Thursday at nine of the clock in the morning: the
Reader may have them (if he please) at Master Bournes Shop at the old Exchange:
the Title of the thing is Le Mercure Anglois, which a while since was begun and
continued for two or three weeks, and finding it much desired, during these
three weeks past, that the publishing of it (through some occasions) was
discontinued: It shall for the future be continued according to the most
certain, and impartial Relations of affairs here, to come out at the time
and place aforesaid.

July 10th 1644

