THE Causes of the Diseases and Distempers of this KINGDOM, etc.
WHen a learned and well experienced Physician, has eitherby the Pulse, Vrin,
or other Symptoms, found out the cause of the dangerous disease of his
Patient, he will know or conjecture what is Cureable or past Cure: And as it is
with the Body of Man, so in the Body Politic of the Kingdom, if the causes
of our distempers and distractions would or could be known, they might with
wisdom and judgment be removed and taken away, and then (by consequence) the
Effects would cease. And though most men are either Fools or Physicians, (or
Some men are all these, some both of these, some one of these, and some neither.
both) yet few or none has either found or showed the causes or reasons of
these causeless and unreasonable disturbances. Amongst the many Thousands of
oppressed sufferers in this our afflicted England, my self (though no
Physician, yet the Son of a Chirurgian) am one, that has had a long time of
many trials and experiments of Waters, and Water-Casting, and I have lately
used my poor skill in Casting the Kingdoms Water, and though Physicians may
often fail in their conjectures, yet Fools and Children will tell truth.
Fools and Children will many times tell the Truth by chance.

I have Cast the Waters of Thames, Isis, Seaverue, Wye, Avon, Trent, Humber,
Owse, Tweed, Forth, Tay, Spey, Annan, etc. and (as I guess) I have found out
the true cause and causes, the needless why, the impertinent wherefore, and
the accursed unknown for what, this former flourishing Kingdom is thus
Rebelliously infected. And if I could as well Cure, as discover the diseases,
my gracious Sovereign and all his Loyal Subjects and Servants, should quickly
have their own again in Peace. But because England does not know well what
she ails, (though I cannot cure her) yet I will tell her how it is.

The Members of this great Body do complain of the Head, saying, that from
thence their grief began; the Head is troubled with too much Akeing, Cares,
with extreme overwatchfullnesse for the preservation of the misguiding
Members, and the misguided Body; The Members pretend the defense and
maintenance of the known Laws of the Kingdom.

The King, (according to those established known Laws) desires to Rule, and
also requires the lawful obedience due to His Majesty by those Laws, and no
otherwise. And those at Westminster, cannot but acknowledge, but that they are
all Traitors that do refuse to live in obedience to the King and those known
Laws. But the Westminsterians do call all the Protestants, and all others
that are obedient to those known Laws, Malignants, and Popishly-affected; And
without Law, (and against those Laws) they Kill, Imprison, and Sequester all
their Lands, Offices, and Estates. And those lawless men do not only commit
this outrage against particulars, but even against the whole Body of the
Kingdom; for they have Robbed it (violently) of the maine Pillar, prop, and
support of their Lives, Livelihoods and Fortunes, by taking away from them
their Elections of their Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses; for they have turned
all such out of the House of Commons, as would not join with them in this
horrid Rebellion, The Subject is robbed of his Right, and brought into slavery,
when the Knights and Burgesses (whom they have elected, according to the Laws)
are expulst out of the House of Commons, contrary to the Law.
when as (they being rightly elected and returned) by the Law they cannot put
out any, but for some legal Cause, as being outlawed after Rebellion, or for
being a Felon, Murderer or Traitor.

But these Traitors at Westminster, are so lawlessely impudent and insolent,
that as they dare not (themselves) be tried by the known Laws, so they will
not permit those whom they falsely accuse to be Malignants, to be tried by
those Laws, but have kept some in Prison more then these three years, because
they would not commit whoredom with the Beast at Westminster. Tush, these are
trivial matters, above the reach of a Scullers Nor would I have you believe,
that I wrote this Pamphlet, but I do know my self able to scann all your
Neckverses; if you have occasion to use me.
Capacity, it is known Mr Sergeant Wild will say, there are Presidents, that
the House of Commons have (as their wisdoms thought meet and convenient) put
out some Members without any legal Cause showed. ( the greater their fault in
so doing.) It Is true, I have heard there was This was one Mr Shepherd; and I
would he had then obtained his desire: or I wish, that either Mousetraps, or
any other snare might catch them, or make them mend their manners.
one (not many years since) that one was put out for desiring some Ginne or
Mousetrappe to catch Puritans, and that is one of your Westminster presidents.
By as good reason, because some Thieves and Robbers have not been hanged,
therefore all may lawfully steal and none be hanged by that president; or
because one of your Members got a Wench with child in his lodging, and was not
punished for Sir Edward Askew.
it, shall that be made a president for all others to get Bastards, or make
Cuckolds?

I do heartily desire, I might be permitted to join Issue with you, you have
three Judges with you, and it may be requisite (for an accommodation) that Mr
Seldom, and Mr Maynard, were made two more; (though they love their own quiet
and their wealth too much) they are known to be learned in the Laws. Those
five might be joined to ours here, and every one of us and you, submit to their
judgments, according to the known Laws; And (by the Laws) it will appear
who are Traitors, and who are honest If you had dared to suffer your five
famous Members to have been tried by the Law, we had had no Wars.
men. But Mr Sergeant Wild, and learned Mr Miles Corbet, will that is not
reason, for they have been enforced or necessitated to do many things contrary
to the Law; the more Knaves and Rebels still.

And shall we of the Kings side, say more truly, there is neither Law or Reason
to kill or imprison us, to take our Goods, Lands, and Offices from us, for the
poor threadbare and unjust Reason, that you were necessitated.

For the Turk does not cover his Tyranny with Law or Reason, when he takes
Goods or Life from a man, for he does it by will and tyrannical power, even as
you do now to us, for we do not know any injury that we have done you, or any
faults we have committed against you, but that you make our obedience to the
King, and our keeping of the Laws, our great and Capital Our wealth is also a
great part of our faults.
offenses. We are all bound in Loyalty to His Majesty, by the Law of God, by
the Laws of the Land, and by the Law of Nature, as our grand Parent. And for
His preservation, and defense to keep you from killing and murdering Him, and
all His loyal and faithful Subjects, we are now necessitated (according to
those known Laws) to oppose you, that are the opposers of all the Laws of
God and the Kingdom.

The causes of your Rebelling, and of the Kingdoms miseries was the great
necessity that you were in, and what (I pray you) was that great necessity?
These were the chief causes of the Kingdoms diseases.
because some Lord (whom you pleased to have) might not be made Lord Treasurer,
another High Admiral, and the Lord Say to be an Earl, and Lord Keeper of the
Great Seal* because some might not have the honor to be Ambassadors* one to
be Chancellor to the Queen, another Master of the Rolls; and of the House of
Commons, some to be Masters of Requests, Pym to be Chancellor of the
Exchequer, Hambden Cofferer, in a word, some to be Secretaries to the King,
Queen and Prince, or Gentlemen of the Bedchamber to the King or Prince, and
all Officers to be put out, and your selves or your Creatures placed in their
rooms; because this could not be granted, then you will have it by violence of
Fire and Sword: And this was the great necessity you pretend and speak of.
Because these things could not be obtained, you finding the multiplicity (and
simplicity) of Sectaries, you have made execrable use of their Repugnancie to
our Church Government established by Law; hoping that by your Cunning fishing
in these troubled Waters, to gain your ends of ambition, profit, malice, and
revenge, which does now appear to all seeing men, to be the ground of this
horrid Rebellious War.

For first, to begin with the Church, what can you find there amiss, for
Reformation, that you do not first condemn the Apostles themselves, and all
the Catholic Church ever since; for is it possible you can persuade Rational
men, that the Government of the Universal Church could be so suddenly changed
from the Pr^sbyterian Government (which you strain to support) supposed, or
seeming to you to be settled by the Apostles? Is it not mere madness to think,
that the Government so settled of Bishops, should so quickly cast out the
Presbytery, and that the said Episcopal Function and dignity has so continued
these 1600 years, and not one Godly Christian in so long time to be found (no
not one of note or Antiquity) until A modern Patriarch, who brought
Lay Elders, and little ruffs in fashion in Scotland.
Mr John Knox his time? But more strange it appears to me, that in all other
Reformed places, there is not that warmth, or fire of zeal, to be found any
where but in Scotland only, that will kill and slay all the English, to make
them obey their Kirk (or rather Querke) Government, which is to pretend
holiness and brotherly love, to cheat us of our Wealth, quiet, and Peace. I
will not meddle or speak of Reformed Churches, God keep them in unity and
Tranquillity; But because I have been in Scotland, and have seen somewhat, but
have heard and Read much more, of their Querk and their Ecclesiastical
government, I will say this, that I cannot find any great difference between
the Jesuit and them. The Jesuit would have the Pope only, to have all the
Spiritual and Temporal powers of the World in him; And the Presbyterians,
would be every one a several Pope. And this I will say, (and my opinion has
thousands to agree with it,) that it is more mild and tolerable, to live under
the Spanish Inquisition, then under their Presbyterian Querke Authority and
Tyranny, which (in a word) hatches Rebellion, seems and seeks sway and
domination over their King, with all his Loyal Subjects Lands and Riches, and
this is truly, verily, and sincerely their only zeal.

They may remember, that the Reign of Queen Elizabeth and her Royal favor,
with the Aid of the English Nation, should not ingratefully be forgotten; it
is not many years since that they feared that the French made War in
Scotland to settle the Romish Religion there; (which they then thought to be an
unreasonable proceeding by Strangers) at which time they had recourse to the
Crown of England for their preservation, (which then relieved them,) and I
have read in their Service Book of their Church of Prayers, Thanks, and Vows,
that they would never be against the English Crown, but spend their lives for
the service thereof. And now behold the Perfidious and most abhorred
ingratitude of these Monsters, their thankfulness is expressed in Killing and
Ruining us, and taking our Towns from us; But Another modern Patriarch, who
has added short hair, and long ears to Mr. Knoxe's Reformation.
Mr Henderson will say that the Scottish Nation (in thankfulness for that good
turn) they come now ( in Good suith) to show their brotherly love, to deliver
us from Popery. I must confess, that in your coming you showed a great deal
of Affection to us, but you should have been better welcome if you had had so
much manners, to have staid 'till the King had sent for you. Besides your care
for us is very much to be admired and Respected, that you took our danger of
Popery into your good Considerations, when as neither the King or His Counsel,
nor any honest man in the whole Kingdom, neither could, can, or shall perceive
any such an alteration or purpose. O but my Lord Lowden, and my Lord Say, and
Mr Hambden, perceived it through the Perspective Glass of their high Wisdome^
and they sent for you; But was your Prayers and Vows, made to my Lord Say, or
Mr Hambden, or for, and to the Crown of England; I know you will say it was
not to the Crown, but to the People that you owe your thankfulness (though it
may be made good (by Record) that that vast expense for your deliverance, was
merely from the Crown, and then so acknowledged by Record (as may be proved.)
But the Scriptures are now better understood by my Lord Lowden, and Mr
Henderson, for now the People are above the King, for Kings and Emperors are
but the Presbyterians A fair and high Presbyterian promotion.
Curredoggs, to keep the Wolf from their Flock, when they command them; And
therefore (they say) they being called into England by the Parliament, they
understand (in their Politic Capacity) that they are called by the King, when
God knows, the King had too many English Rebels and Traitors to molest Him,
His People and Kingdom, so that we had no occasion to send for strange Rebels
of another Nation to ruin us I desire not to be mistaken, for I tax none but
Rebels, either English or Scots, and it is known, that there are honest men
and knaves in every Nation.
totally. I will say nothing by whose authority the Parliament is called, nor
by whose Writ they meet, nor that there was ever any Act or Law made without
the Kings Confirmation, these things have been handled and discus'd by more
Learned men then my self, I will have nothing to do with things that are so
transcendent above my Reach. But I would gladly let you know, we are not
Ignorant of your craft and subtilty, in seeming to make those few Members at
Westminster to be the Parliament, because you and they have Covenanted to
divide the Spoil and Government of this Kingdom amongst you. For, first you
know when you were on your Mattch with your Army, there were three times the
number of Lords, wrote unto you from Oxford to disavow your calling in, then
there were at Westminster to call you. Besides the promises therein made The
Lords promised to defend their laws and liberties from violation and
alteration.
you, the which it is not unlikely but you may have cause to repent the not
accepting. And for the Members of the Commons House, the World knows that the
Major part were then at Oxford. But you will make walls and Stones to be the
Houses of Parliament to serve your ends, even as the Westminster men do, to
cover their Treason and Rebellion, cause and appoint their Such as Mr ^^st, who
over prophesied himself in Pigge at my Lord Majors Table, which proved perfume
in the afternoon to the Congregation at Saint Martins.
Tub-Orators and Pamphletteers, to inform the People that the King makes War
against His Parliament, when (in truth) if they mean the Parliament, by the
greater number of the Lords and Commons, the Parliament (in that sense) are
either with the King or for the King.

But the Authors and pursuers of this accursed War, are easily perceived and
known. The King (as I told you) requires the Maintenance of the true Protestant
Religion, and of the known Laws and Liberties of his Subjects, and for these
things He is opposed, (which is flat Treason) His life sought, and His Subjects
and Kingdoms spoiled. But you do make this War because you would enforce the
King to abolish Bishops, and take away all Deans and Chapters, and their Lands
to be divided between you and your Covenanted Scottish Brethren; And for your
better inabling you to swaye and Domineere over the King and His People, you
will and must have the power of the Militia, or else you will kill the King,
and all his faithful Subjects that shall defend Him. I have read the
Chronicles of England, wherein I find Commotions, and Rebellions to cause the
King to keep His Laws, but this is the first Rebellion that I ever heard of,
that will not only enforce the King to break His Coronation Oath made to His
People, but will either kill Him, or compel Him to break His Laws likewise;
so that if the King would have been perjured for their pleasure, they would
never have Rebelled against him, and indeed if they were not Perjured in
breaking their Oaths of Allegiance, and infringing all the known Laws, we had
never been thus mischeivously perplexed.

And if it be true, that the People do make Kings, (as your Apostle The first
Apostle, that ever left his Ears twice for Libelling.
Prinne says) therefore they may unmake them if they please: then by the same
Rule may we not say, we will have no more Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses,
for do not the People make them? yes Verily-truly, and Truly-verily.

Therefore advise well of your business, that you are so madly troublesome
about, if you begin to pull down Kings, I will assure you, we will have no
Lords or Gentlemen amongst us; And in that (I am sure) we have the advantage
(in number of People) there being more Poor then Rich to take our parts; and
we shall have as much Law, and more Reason for our justification, then you have
for this Horrid Rebellion. I would feign preserve the wilful, the obstinate,
the mislead, and seduced Londoners, or (as I may truly say) my Goatham, quondam
friends, I will not yet call you Bedlams) I hope you may yet recover your
crooked and crazed Wits, before all be spent and lost, the which I heartily
wish. I know some of you are Learned, I pray you recollect your Readings, and
tell me (if you can) if you ever found Laws or Government settled by the Sword
(that so continued) or Justice, or Right, suppressed long without being restored;
And therefore if you do still continue your disbursements in maintaining this
Rebellion, you will have the curse of all England, as your being the causers of
all our miseries, and consequently of your own undoing; for we all know, that
if you do lock up your Purses, that we and you shall have Peace laid at our
doors, I desire the common people to be no more cousened out of their Estates
and Lives.
By which means, we might have a free Parliament to stop all our Breaches, and
build up the Ruins which this unnatural War has made, without which, we
can expect no other but total confusion and desolation.

The Laws are the Touch, the Test, the rule and guide of all our lives and
actions, the Laws are terrible to none but Thieves, Murderers, Traitors, and
Rebels, every honest man and true Subject dares look the Law in the face boldly
without fear; we dare you to be judged and ttyed by the If the laws might
decide the Quarrel, we should quickly have a Close-Committee of Heads
standing on the top of the two Houses.
Laws, (as we dare.) Let no Sword, but the Sword of Justice, decide the
Quarrel, and cut off the offenders.

There are but two sorts of Enemies that are the Causers, and continuers of our
Calamities, these only are the hinderers and opposers of our Peace. The one
Cause is our sins, and the other the Rebels; they are the accursed
Amalekites, that disturbes and stops us from our enjoying our happy rest. If we
would reform the one, we should quickly tame the other; Therefore let all such
as are averse to Peace, and delight in Theft and slaughter, know, that though
the plundering Achan can filch a Wedge of Gold, yet there are stones to beat
out the Brains of such a Theevish knave; Let the wise Achittofooles, (or
accursed Counselors to this Rebellion set their Houses in order and go hang
themselves. The King is still the King, and (maugre all the malice of Hell and
Hellhounds) he is walled about with divine providence and protection; His
gracious God, in whom he only trusts, will defend him, and arise and scatter
his Enemies; though you have Robbed our Royal David of His Militia and
Military defenses, yet there is a Sling in store, that with a peble can make
the greatest Goliahes Grovell amongst you. Shamgar, shall not want a Goade,
Gedion a Pitcher, and every Loyal Soldier of the Kings, will be a Sampson, to
beat your Brains out with your own Rebellious jaw-bones, that her bloody
Issue (or Inundation) may be stopped by Calm and gentle Peace.

But if this afflicted Land has such an unexpected and undeserved happiness
stored up in the eternal Treasury of gracious Providence, then happy and
blessed are those men that are ordained to be the Instruments and means for a
blessed Reconciliation and atonement, thrice happy may they be, and the
fruition of blessings Temporal and Eternal be upon them and their
Posteritie^; boast no more of the Spirit, but endeavor to embrace his Spirit,
who pronounced the Peacemakers blessed; and said whose Children they should be
called. By which consequently it must follow, that the Peace-breakers are
accursed of God, and also may justly be called the Children of their Father the
Devil. Leave off Triumphing and glorying in your mischeivous Imaginations,
give over Bragging and Vaunting of your Villainous Victories, forbear to force
your Christian Brethren to murder one another in so damnable a Cause as this
unfellowed Rebellion.

But if you will run further on, and fill up the measure of your Iniquities,
with boasting of the success of your execrable Designs, in the end you shall
find, that to boast of wickedness is a degree beyond wickedness, and to be
Ostentatious in ungodly actions, is the road way to double damnation.

Before I conclude, I must propound a Querie, or ask you a question. You have
promised, that if His Majesty would come and comply with you, that then you
will make Him, a more Great, Rich, and glorious King then any of His
Predecessors ever were. Now we would fain know, and we do all desire you to
let us understand, how, which way, and by what means this Greatness, Wealth
and Glory may be by you conferred upon the King? if you will do us the favor
as to send us your mind in writing, we will pay the bearer, and if we can
perceive any probabiliti^s* that you can perform what you promised, we will be
humble suppliants to His Majesty, to accept your kind offer: in the mean time,
(before you make Him so Great and Rich as you talk of) I think it a very
goodstep, to that Greatness and State, if you will be pleased to give him his
own again, which you have proditoriously and perfidiously taken, and do still
detain from Him.

Thus have I truly showed the Causes of the Kingdoms griefs, to be at first a
Melancholy madness, then it was hydropically pult up (in many places) with
Ambition, Malice, Revenge, Avarice, Sects, Schisms, and Fantastical
Sathanicall Innovations and perturbations. I suppose that nothing can cure her
but the Law well applied; to which I leave you and our selves, and shut up all
with a distick.

O haples England! it is thy only good,
To Purge well, and give over letting Blood.

FINIS.

