TO The Right Honorable ASSEMBLY, The Lords, Knights, Esquires, AND Burgesses
of the Honorable House of Commons in Parliament:

THE Humble Petition of the Ancient Overseers, Rulers and Assistants of the
Company of Watermen.

Wherein is showed, How intollerably they have been abused and slandered, with
false accusations, by diverse Refractory and abusive Watermen, who have mislead
many others to their faction.

Their odious slanders being here truly confuted, and the Innocence of the
Rulers declared.

By John Tailor.

LONDON, Printed by John Hammond, 1642.

TO The Right Honorable the Assembly of the Knights Citizens and Burgesses of
the Commons House of Parliament. The humble Petition of the Overseers, Rulers
and Assistants of the Watermen.
Most humbly Shows,
THat whereas diverse months past the petitioners presented to this Honorable
Assembly, a Bill to be passed, as an Act of Parliament for the better
Government of the generallity of Watermen, which bill being twice read, was
committeed. And whereas the said Watermen exhibited a scandalous Petition
against your petitioners, thereby most unjustly charging them with diver
grievances, which petition was likewise committeed to the same Committee.

May it please this Honorable Assembly to be informed, that some of the
Watermen (though the Bill was preferred by the consent of such who are trusted
by the generallity, and contains nothing but that which tends to the good
of the Company) were so far enraged, and incensed against your petitioners,
that they threatened to raise many thousand watermen to be present at the
Committee, to oppose your petitioners proceedings; And that they would cut some
of your petitioners in pieces, and destroy some of them, as Doctor Lamb was
murdered, and they so affronted and threatened your petitioners counsel, that
(at one time) they durst nor appear for your petitioners at the Committee; And
some of them, namely Joshuah Church, boasted, that now during this
parliament-time, they were free from all Government; And needed not in any
thing to obey your petitioners their Rulers.

Insomuch, as by means thereof, diverse great disorders and outrages have been
lately committed by some of them, even in the view of some of your petitioners,
who for fear of being murdered by them, did not dare to enterpose their
authority.

Now for as much as by reason of your far more weighty and important
Affairs, you have been pleased for a time to surcease any farther proceedings
in this our cause; and for that we have Just cause to fear (touching which,
some of us have taken our oaths before Justices of the peace) that except some
provident course be speedily taken to prevent the same, there will be violences
offered to our persons, to the hazard of our lives, and many other outrages
committed by the rude multitude, who (in all their courses) are much guided and
persuaded by the said Joshuah Church.

May it therefore please this Honorable Assembly, that it shall so seem good
unto you in your grave wisdoms to convent before you the said Joshuah Church,
and the rest above named, and strictly to enjoyne them not only to forbear to
animate and encourage the generality in their disobed once, but (what shall in
them lie) to persuade them to be conformable to the Orders, or Rules of
Government, 80 years past, established by the Lords of his Majesty's privy
Counsel, the Lord Mayor and Court of Aldermen and Judge of the Admiralty,
which your petitions are by their Oaths bound to be careful to see to be
performed.

And as touching the redress of their pretended grievances, there is a course
prescribed unto them by the Stature of the second and third of Philip and Mary,
to appeal to the Court of the L. Major and Aldermen of London, nevertheless
your petitioners shall in all humbleness submit themselves to any other course
to be taken therein, by this Honorable Assembly for the more speedy preventing
of such mischieses, as otherwise are like to ensue.

And your Petitioners, as otherwise bound, shall humbly pray for the blessing
of God, on all your Counsels and resolutions.

The Overseers have always since the Stat. 2 and 3. Phil. and Mary (concerning
watermen) yearly made choice of the disscreetest and best sort of VVatermen,
And now, to the ^ntent that all t^^ world (...) take (...) and know (...) many
watermen ha^^ (...) mislead and persuaded out of their moneys, and from all
obedience, Rule and Order, and also what Grievous slanders have been laid upon
the overseers and Ruler, on purpose to bring all government into contempt, and
confusion, I will relate some parts of the A^ticles wherewith they charge the
Rulers withal in Parliament, with a true confutation of them, and disproofe of
all their most Jnjurious scandalts. Most humbly beseeching, that if the
Objections be proved true, Laid against the Rulers, they may receive such
deserved punishment as their demerits; otherwise that it may be inflicted upon
their unjust accusers. All which we most humbly leave to, etc.
for election of Overs^ers and Rulers (without consent of the generality) And
have yearly presented the same to the L. Mayor, and Court of Aldermen, who have
these 86. years, elected and sworn them. And for any of the Overseers or
Assistants, receiving bribes, as they are charged withal; It is humbly desired
that the delinquents be punished, if any such proofs appear, whether Accusors
or Accused.

Whereas they allege, that Overseers at first admittance do take an oath of
secrecy not to reveal the Bribes taken, or how disposed of, it is humbly
desired that Rob. Gibbs, VVil. Smith, Thomas Blackman, who have been Overseers
(and are our opposites) be examined who administered any such oath unto them

Whereas they falfly charge the Overseers for extorting 5 l. from Lau.
Watson, before he could be made free, who having served his Mr. about 6.
years and a half (he then being in the Kings service) his Mr. and Dame dying,
he fell by Order to the disposing of the Overseers: whose time expited, and
comeing to be made free, the Company demanded 6 Months wages of him (for the
use of their poor) which was 4 l. 4 s. of which sum he paid the Company 30
s. the rest they gave him back to buy clothes, which was 54 s. which is upon
the Companies account, in the year 1629 under the Auditors hands.

Next, they accuse the overseers for receiving 10 l. of T. Gyllet, who as they
say served but 2. years of his time, and that the said 10 l. should privately
be given as a bribe to Andr. Bartlet, to make Gyllet free, which is a slander,
for Gyllet was in the year 1604. hired by one Rob. VVashfield, whom he served
above 3. year, and served the remainder of his time with Rich. Oxford; for the
10 l. It was, at his making free, 1631. given to the poor of the company in
open Court, the said Gyllet standing 28 years upon our Register before his
making free. And after in the year 1632. John Heather one of the Overseers, now
opposite) charged J. Tailor, one of the Assistants (for receiving the same 10
l. of Gyllet, as a bribe to make him free) for which slander, Tailor brought
his Action against the slanderer, and recovered of him Costs and Damage, in
Guild Hall.

And for William Cooper served one Thomas Burbydge of VVapping 3 years before
this Master entered him, the said Burbidge still promising his servant that he
should loose no time (as was confidently affirmed by his dame, before he was
made free) and after being entered for seven years, he served five year, and
almost a quarter; he gave no bribe to the company, but some moneys to the
poor, which is past upon their account, 1631.

So that Cooper was 8. years and a quarter on the River, before his freedom.

John Durfor having served out his years, was made free for the ordinary fine,
which all other Batchellors pay, being 3 s. 4 d.

And for Lewis Watkins, the widow Lewis her son, he served full 7. years,
and was made free in October, 1637. for the ordinary Batchellors fine, 3 s. 4
d. without any bribe at all, yet our adversaries are not ashamed to slander us
with ta- 24 s. 8 d. bribe.

Whereas the overseers are charged with extorting moneys from the general,
yet that for confirmation of their book of Orders, for 20. years last past,
which is most untrue, for the book of Orders was confirmed in Anno 1626. and
Batchelors at their making free, did of their good wills give some 2 s. some 2
s. 6 d. and some 1 s. or 1 s. 6 d. for the space of 6. years after, and never
penny was taken since 1612. which is past upon the Account under the Auditors
hands, as may appear, as (...) other moneys by them received for fines are:
and it is certain, that the Book cost the company above 115 l. before it was
confirmed.

Abraham Plasted paid nothing when he was admitted to Row but a friend of
his (a Fruiterer in Southwarke) did give to the poor of the Company in 1631.
and is upon the account (...)

Whereas they complain that the Overseers for a brybe, have made one Simon
Keyn free, which is untrue, for he was made free by a refference from his
Majesty, as under a Master of the Requests hand may appear, when we are
commanded to produce it.

And for one William Parrat, that should be made free for a brybe, we know no
such VVatermen in the River.

And further, they charge the Overseers with taking another brybe of seven
Pounds for a servant turned over unto him of the Goodwife Slyes, which Goodwife
Sly had her husband then taken captive at Argier, with Turks, and that the
Rulers did take the servant from the poor woman (he b^ing then all the means
to maintain her and 2 Children, whom the Rulers are slandered to sell Allen
for 7. pound, which is also most false and untrue, for this servant, which the
Ove^seers are so unjustly charged for contrary to our knowledges was, which
John Heath one of the Overseers now Opposer) who held him contrary to order,
and never was paid one penny to the Hall for him: this is a most malicious
slander.

And for one Coopers son, that should be made Free for a bribe, we know no
such thing done, neither was any such made free.

And for the servant that was crossed out of our Regester for misdemeanor by H.
Quenbrough his Mr. and after entered to one John Kyrkham; Kyrkam paid no bribe,
though you are bold to say the contrary) but the ordinary charges for entrance,
is 2 s. 2 d. which he is ready to affirm, and depose.

Whereas the Overseers are charged with a brybe o^ 20 s. taken of Marrhew
Pryte, for a servant turned unto him, which is untrue, for the Oversers took
of him but 10 s. for selling his servant to his brother (being a Land man)
contrary to order, which was but half his fine, and it is upon the Accoun^.

And for extorting forty shilling from John Buck, it is false, for he paid to
the poor but 20 s. which is also upon the account, also he paid the said money
by 4. or 3 s. a year, and was at the least 4. years in paying it.

And for Aaron Evans, his paying 5 l. for a brybe, is untrue, as he will depose
the contrary, that he paid not the vallew of one penny.

And for Henry Lide, nothing was paid for not paying his quarteridge, though we
are taxed to take 10 s. neither was he threatened to be imprisoned; for how
could Lide pay Quarteridge at the VVatermens Hall, he being absent 3. years,
and from the East Indies.

And for the complaint made concerning the widow Wright and the extorting
forty shillings from one Cook, as a bride, that Cook should have the widows
servant, is altogether untrue and scandalls are.

Wheareas M. Rob. Clark is charged to take 20 l. for a Bribe, of one John
Clarke for an Apprentice, it is a slander, for the Apprentice was Rob. Clarks
and he (in leiue of only 5 l.) did with leave, let him to John Clark for 2.
years.

And for extorting forty shillings from Christopher Parker, before his
Apprintice-hood was expired, is most untrue, as all slanders are.

David Williams for keeping his servant 6. Months, contrary to order, his
fines for the same being 15. shillings, he paid only 8. shillings at the
entrance of his man; which money is upon the Account. 16 35.

Josias Bend was committed to the Counter for abusing the Company, in saying,
They would make any man free for money.

And for William Brewton, he brought certificate, that his time was expired
before his Marriage, and the suggestions against us concerning him, is
altogether untrue.

And for Luke furnell, paying 5 s. it is most untrue, and a mere fiction.

And for Thomas Blackman, a late Ruler, finding the Rulers to take Bribes, as
he slanders them, Indeed he did in his time, persuade the Company to make an
Apprentice free for a Bribe of 6 l. which they would not do; the apprentice
then was not, nor yet is out of his time) and after, Blackman being put out of
the Hall, he Petitioned the Lord Mayor, and Court of Aldermen, with most untrue
complaints, where he was disproved in all his allegations, and dismissed from any
more being Ruler or Assistant, as by an order of Court, and his submission
under his own hand appears.

Whereas the Overseers are charged with extorting a bribe of 5 s. from Andrew
Cuttler, for saving his man from whipping, it is very untrue, neither can any
thing be proved in all that complaint.

And for the overseers extorting 4 l. 3 s. from Thomas Harwood is most untrue,
he kept a servant unentred eighteen months contrary to order, whereby his
fines came to 3 l. And the company being at 40 s. charge, to bring him to
conformity, they received of him for all, but 25 s. which is past upon the
account, 1637. also we have testimony under the hands of most substantial men
in Putney, of the bad carriage, and behavior of the said Harwood; and the
Rulers have also Harwoods Confession, and submission under his own hand, and
his sines to the full were more then 8 l.

And for the extorting 5 s. from James Webb. it is untrue, nor did any Ruler
ever show so little discretion, as to be so familiar, to drink with an
Apprentice, and to set him at liberty for a pint of Wine.

Robert Brown, for being behind-hand 4. years, and three quarters, and not
paying his quarteridge, according to order, which is but 2 d. a quarter, which
he should pay once a year, it being 3 s. 6 d., was the 15 day of January 1639.
committed to the Counter; and then he caused the Company to be by Warrant
brought before Master Recorder, who upon reading the Order for the same,
enjoined Brown to submit himself unto it, which he did the fifth of
February, 1639. and paid 5 s. for his time, which is past upon the Account,
1639.

And for the second complaint concerning James Weeb. and his wife, and his
servant, it is altogether most untrue and mallicious.

William Early paid his Master 5. of 20 s. for seeling his man's time or
Apprentiship to himself, and be as a freeman, which is past upon the Account.
1639.

And for his Master, William Teero, who should likewise have paid, he paid no
fine at all.

John Middleton was committed to the Counter for abusing the Overseers in their
Hall, and saying, Who had to do with his man's playing at Dice, which is
contrary to Apprentices Indentures, and never was any sum of xls. demanded of
him.

Thus is truly declared Part of the foul standers which they have (not only
been so Jmpudent, as to prefer them in a Bill to the Homorable House of Commons
in Parliament; they have also reported the said lies to many worthy Gentlemen
and others (whom they have carried by water) by which means they caused many
men of quallity to believe them, to the great disgrace of 40 ancient men, 14.
of them being his Majesty's servants, 2. of them being Esquiers, and the most
of them subsidy-men And on the 3. of March last, 1641. they most falsely and
maliciously affirmed before the Right Honorable, the L. Mayor, and Court of
Aldermen, that the Rulers were twice Voted against in Parliament, which is so
far from truth, that it is certain, the cause was yet never heard in
Parliament; and that Honorable Court will never Vote against men before a
hearing. Thus by slanders, clamours, threatenings, multitudes, noyses, voices,
most odious and shameless lies carried it against us; some of them have not
been sparing to abuse his Majesty, to wrong the High Court of Parliament, to
vilify the Lord Mayor, and Court of Aldermen, using all bad means (to the
furthering of their Projects) against us; so that if we should write one
quarter of the wrongs we have suffered by them, the Book would out-swell the
patience of the Reader, but by this that has been said, the rest may be
conjectured.

There are no Governors of any Company that are in such servile command to make
account to every Idle fellow of their proceedings in their Halls, or places of
meeting: nor can any Rules be so perfect, but some errors will happen, as long
as men are men. But for us to be thus odiously traduced and slandered, we
thought it best to declare it to the world, least by concealing of it, we
should be accounted Insensibly stupid, or extremely Guilty.

They have formerly slandered the Rulers with counterfeiting his Majesty's
hand, and pressing men into Germany, eleven years ago; and that the Kings
Subjects were bought and sold for money, all which was 10 years past proved
false, for the King did affirm the warrants to be signed with his own hand,
and the service to be his Majesty's (therefore it is reason the men that
served, should be paid) But for the Rulers buying or selling of any men, they
were long since cleared upon examination before the Officers of his Majesty's
Navy, who signified the same under their hands, to the Lords of the Privy
Counsel, which Certificate and warrant the Rulers have to show. Yet these
uncivil men are not ashamed to tax them now again with the same.

In 1634. they requested John Tailor to take some pains to move his Majesty,
and the Lords for the suppressing of Hackney Coaches; they made a collection of
6 d. or 12 d. apiece from many of them, to bear the Suit, so that Tailor
Received xixl. 4 s. of them, he was 16. Months about it, and what with passing
by water, and expen^es, and fees to Masters of Requests, Clerks of the
Counsel, the Signet, and other Officers, and passing of seals, it cost Tailor
34 l. besides loss of time, but the Nineteenth of Jan. 1635. There was a
strict Proclamation for the total suppressing of all Hackney Coaches out of
London and Westminster, which Proclamation is yet to be seen, and fit to be
observed; but for all the pains, charge, and loss of time, some shameless
fellows do tax Tailor with couzning them of their money.

But to conclude, the Rulers do dare their oposers to make what proofs they
can against them of any crimes, they are so unjustly charged withal; which the
Rulers are as innocent as confident, that never any thing shall be proved, nor
will any of their adversaries ever dare to go about it.

FINIS.

