Ranters of both Sexes, Male and Female: BEING Thirteen or more, taken and
imprisoned in the Gate House at Westminster, and in the New-prison at Clerken
Well. WHEREIN John Robins does declare himself to be the great God of Heaven,
and the great Deliverer, and that his wife is with child with Jesus Christ,
the Savior of the world. With diverse other blasphemous Opinions, here truly
set forth. Maintained before the Right Worshipful Justice Whittacre, and
Justice Hubbert.

Written by John Tailor.

There is a Pamphlet in this kind, written with too much haste, I know not by
whom, with but few truths, which in this are more largely expressed.

London, Printed for John Hammon. 1651

Ranters of both Sexes, Male and Female: being thirteen or more, taken and
imprisoned in the Gatehouse at Westminster, and in the New prison at
Clerken-well.
ALthough many thousands, of us poor mortals cannot perceive with our bodily
eyes, or by our darkness of Reason and dullness of Understanding, see or know
any Visible Church Militant upon Earth, yet Christ has a Spouse, which he
knows and protects, assists and preserves; and is with her always to the end of
the world, which the gates of Hell shall never prevail against. This Church
has always been opposed, oppressed, and molested by Heretics, who with their
cursed opinions have done their uttermost endevors to rend and tear her in
pieces, with swarms of Sects, Sectarians and dangerous blasphemous opinions
and divisions.

All these Heretics, Schismatics, and Sectarians (by reason of their
multiplicities of opinions, and diversities in their irreligious Religions) did
hate one another with a most inveterate and deadly hatred, insomuch as they
scorned and despised to converse, eat or drink together, they would never meet
or congregate together, at any of their public or private exercises of their
blind zealous devotions. Yet notwithstanding all these several and various
disagreements, they always concurred and agreed together, to ruin the race,
and Rebel against the Lord and his Anointed; The Devil would permit them to
join in league against God and his Church, Edomites, Moabites, Ishmalites,
Ammonites, Amalekites Gebabites, The Philistians, Tirenians, and Assyrians.
Ephraim against Manasses, Manasses against Ephraim, Herod against Pilate,
Pilate against Herod, Sadduces, Pharisees, Herodians, Libertines, Cillicians,
Cerenians, Astans, and Alexandrians. All those did hate one another and yet
they agreed together, as the 83 Psalm specifies, and the whole relation of our
Saviors life and death does express it by the pens of the Evangelists, and
Acts of the Apostles.

I have a Recital of the Names and Opinions of many wicked and detestable
Heretics, Heresies, and blasphemous wretches, but that I will not hold my
Reader in too long and tedious suspense, Therefore I will now proceed to the
matter intended, and promised in the Front and Title of this Book.

About the tenth or twelfth of May 1651. there were apprehended and taken in an
unlawful Assembly these persons following: Thomas Kerbye, Thomas Tidford, Anne
Burrell, Elizabeth Sorrel Widow, Elizabeth Sorrel junior. Mary Vanlopp.


These were brought before the Right Worshipful Laurence Whitaker Esquire (a
judicial Justice of the Peace and Quorum, for the County of Middlesex) he did
examine the said parties, and found their opinions to be so blasphemous, and
damnable Heretical, that it amazeth me with horror to write them, and I am
sure it will strike terror and astonishment into the hearts of any true
Christian, either to read or hear it. They are termed, or called by the name
of Ranters, and their Opinions they affirmed to be as follows.

They said that they did believe that one John Robins is God the Father, and
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, and that the Child which is yet unborn, and
now in the womb of Joan Robins, (the wife of the aforesaid John) shall be the
Savior of all those that shall be saved, both in this world and in the world to
come; And that Cain (who murdered his Brother Abel) was the third person in
the Trinity. And that all those that do deny it, do deny their own salvation.

They believe also that the said John Robius had power to raise the dead.

This was all which they acknowledged to be the grounds and principles of their
Faith and Religion, for the which detestable and execrable Blasphemies, they
were all six committed Prisoners to the Gate House at Westminster, and there
they do remain till some course of Law and Justice may order them according
to their demerits.

Also here follows a true Relation of seven others of the said Crew, (whereof
John Robins (their supposed ungodly God is one) their Names are as follows;
and they are all in the New-Prison (or Bridewell) at Clerken-well.

John Robins. Rich: King. Joshua Garment. Joane Garment. Joane Robins. Margaret
Hollis, Eliz: Haygood.
To give a further Testimony of the truth of what is before written, I desire
the Reader to take notice of the Copy of their commitment by a Warrant or
Mittimus, from the Right Worshipful Tho: Hubbert Esquire, one of the Justices
for the Peace in the aforesaid County of Middlesex.

A true Copy of Justice Hubberts Warrant, for committing these seven persons
to the New-Prison at Clerken-well.
Middlesex.
YOu shall by virtue hereof receive into your Custody, the Bodies of John
Robins, Richard King, Joshua Garment, Joane Garment, Joane Robins, Margaret
Hollis, and Elizabeth Haygood, being persons that are great Blasphemers and
unlawfully assembled together: The aforesaid Robins being acknowledged by them
to be God Almighty, and their great deliverer; and for holding very gross and
blasphemous Opinions, as appears by their several examinations taken before
me, and behaving themselves very rudely and uncivilly, clapping their hands,
and fillipping with their fingers, casting themselves down upon the ground,
and singing, and useing strange postures. Requiring you safely to detain and
keep them in your Custody, till they shall be delivered by due course of Law;
and this shall be your Warrant.

Dated this 24th of May 1651. Signed THO: HUBBERT.

Thus the Devil shows by his raging, that his reigning draws toward an end,
sometimes his Malice works upon particular persons, as upon Noah in Drink, Lot
with Incest, David with Adultery, etc. But his whole and maine general drift
ever has bin, and ever will be, to disturb and destroy the Church of God, to
sow his mischievous tares of damnable Errors, and mingle his hellish seed of
Sects and Schisms, with the pure and all-saving Word of God; of which not
only the sacred Scriptures do mention frequently. But amongst all Nations in
all ages they are declared in Histories, as in Eussebius, Socrates. St.
Augustine, and all the ancient Fathers do testify; and for the present, the
proofs of these miseries are most plain and too lamentable apparent.

Nor were people ever grown to such an impudent height of impiety, as they are
at this day; for in King David's time, he wrote that The Fool said in his
HEART there was no God, whereby I note that though that Fool were an Hypocrite,
yet he was ashamed to speak with his mouth, the blasphemous Atheism which he
said in his heart.

But now, in these times we have amongst us the hardened hearts and shameless
impudence of Pharaoh, and cursed Rabshecka, too many there are that say in
their hearts, and speak with their tongues, Who is the Lord?

It is no new work of Satan, to sow Heresies, and breed Heretics, but they
never came up so thick as in these latter times: They were wont to peep up by
one and one, but now they sprout out by huddles and clusters (like locusts out
of the bottomless pit) They now come thronging upon us in swarms, as the
Caterpillars of Egypt. They have turned our Bethell to Babell, (the house of
God out of all Order, into all disorderly confusion) The Church of Christ has
more then one Enemy to cope withal, she has many new adversaries, that it is
hard to find names for them,

We have more then a good many of such as are called, Adamites, Novatians,
Annabaptists, Brownists, Nicholaitans, and counterfiet Catholics, Arminians,
Antinomians, Newtralists, Familists, Lutherans, Independents, Roundheads,
Dippers, Seekers, Shakers, Ranters, with many others not worth the naming:
these are all professors to be Protestants, every one pretending to be in the
right, and not any of them but are contrary one to another; So that it were a
hard task to make search for the Protestant Religion, or to find a Congregation
of Religious Protestants.

There is not any one of these fore-recited Sects that do agree in opinion with
other Sectaries, or with themselves; As I have read in a German History, that
when Luther had first opposed the Pope, and the Lutheran doctrine was newly
revived (or newly hatched) then presently, several strange Opinions and
Religions, began to increase, and multiply. Some hot-brained preachers, said
that the Catholic or Romish Religion was too loose, and full of liberty, and
that Luthers was too strict and harsh, therefore they would have a middle way
between two Religions, to extract one (or none) and because these people were
so giddy pated that nothing could please them, they were called Caput Rotundi
(or Roundheads;) which shows that the name of Roundhead is near of a 150 years
antiquity. These mad people molested Germany much, they had one amongst them
whom they called Joseph, and his Wife they said was the Virgin Mary, and she
being with child, they said, that the child in her womb was the Messiah, and
Savior of the World. Germany could not suppress them, insomuch that after
many Battles and bloody Bickerings, with the loss of 50000 men's lives, the
woman's time of delivery came, and she was fairly brought to bed with a Girl,
whereupon all the seduced Rabble fled and dispersed themselves several ways,
and the counterfeit Joseph and Mary, were both burnt for a warning.

The like stir was kept in Westphalia, by one John, a Cobbler of Leyden, he had
three Prophets (as good men as himself) named Knipper Dolling, John Matthew,
and one Rottman, They preached mad delicate Doctrine, and they crowned the
Cobbler ( John of Leyden) King of Munster, at last the Bishop (who was lawful
Lord of the Province, and City of Munster) made war upon the Cobling King, and
after he had begirt the Town with a straight siege some few weeks, provision so
much failed, that the Streets were full bestrewed with famished karcasses, the
City was taken by assault, and the King was surprised, and pulled in pieces
with hot Iron Pincers, his Prophets, and Associates had also their rewards
according to their Merits.

And it is not yet 50 years past since one William Hacket of Owndell in
Northamptonshire a Wheele-wright, did affirm himself to be Jesus Christ, he
had seduced two Gentlemen so far that they did believe him to be their Savior,
and they proclaimed him to be so, they ran crying out in the streets of London,
that Jesus Christ, was come with his Fan in his hand to purge his floor, and
that he was at John Walkers house at Broken Wharfe. This noise and outcry,
raised a great hurly burly in the City, till in the end Hacket was taken,
drawn, and hanged in Cheapside, for his odious blasphemies against God, and
high Treason against Queen Elizabeth; Copinger, and Arthington (his two
prophets) were imprisoned, one in the Compter in Woodstreet, the other in
Bridewel, where they dyed miserably.

Also in the year of our Lord 1611. the 9th of King James, one Bartholmew
Legate (an Arian Heretic) did deny Christ to be God, for the which he was
burned in Smithfield on the 18th. of March, in the year aforesaid. And on the
11 of April following, was burned one Edward Wightman for the same blasphemous
opinions, Wightman suffered at Litchfield. The King did offer them both mercy
if they would recant, but they refused mercy, and dyed obstinate.

Concerning these 13 Wretches, whom I have taken occasion to write this short
Relation of, All that I can say for them, is to desire God to grant his blessed
spirit to cast out the accursed spirit out of them, and that all Heresies,
Sects, and Divisions may be expelled from the true Church, that through, in,
and for Jesus Christ (all that do profess to be Christians) may be the
faithful sheep of the true shepherd, and eternally, happily of his one and
only blessed sheepfold.

FINIS.

