A Letter from Rhoan in France Written by Doctor Roane one of the Doctors of
the late sick Commons, to his Fellow Doctor of the Civil Law. Dated 28, of
June last past.

With an Ellegy written by his own hand upon the death and burial of the said
Doctors Commons.

O poor Roane,
Thou are quit gone
And left all alone,
O Hone, oh Hone!



Printed in this happy year, 1641.

Letter from Roan in France, written by Doctor Roan Dr. of the Civil Law, to
one of his fellow Doctors. Dated June 28, Anno Dom. 1641.
SIR.
I Hope you are alike sensible with me of the danger of these difficult times:
it is true, I am held but as a Fugitive, as one fled into France, and it was but
time (And I am glad I took occasion by the fore-lock,) otherwise I knew our
own Ecclesiastical Canons would have bin charged and bent against me, and
what I pray you have you got by your tarrying at home, when their terrible
thunder shall strike you sooner and nearer and at home, then me being abroad
and far off? Therein the detriment of your delay, and the benefit of my active
dispatch, you being now present to abide all their perverse sentences: and I
privileged from all their peremptory censures.

But I pray Master Doctor, but let us recall to our selves ab Origin from the
beginning of our first acquaintance, when you and I were first Students in
Trinity Hall in Cambridge: it is true, that when we were first there fellow
commoners, our ambitions were to be after Doctors of the Commons, and though I
then trivanted my time, and was none of the best proficients, yet what by the
freeness of my purse, and favor of friends, I took my Degree when the time
of commencement came, and so shuffled in amongst the rest of my fellow
students, that it was put upon me, without question, and then that one old
English meeter came into my mind. A Master of Art is not worth a fart,
Unless he be in the Schools:
A Batcheler of Law is not worth a straw
Unless he be amongst fools.


ANd then I knew withal how to cheat the Latin proverb which says, Cucullus
non facit Monachum: presuming that the head, and that only made the Doctor:
Sir I would not have been so plain to any but your self, whom I know to be a
fellow practitioner in all my former proceedings, and come a like sufferer in
these our present C^lamities, which makes me unto you so freely to confess my
self; and not without a sorrowful sigh to say, Qui non ante Cavet, Iste,
Passus erit quod sit triste.
Since he is not well to speed,
Who before hand takes not heed.


YOu know Doctor (and no man better) that being Cucullated and admitted into
the Commons, we must carry our selves like soldiers doubling our files to the
right hand and to the left, and such is our case in dealing with our clyents,
for receiving of our fees, it is not fitting that the left hand should know
what the right hand does, and notwithstanding I know my insufficiency in the
imperial or civil Law, as only verst in the ordinary Tenants and common
places; for I ever loved too much my pleasure to take ^oo much pains at my
study, yet I so sk^ued my self into Causes and took the occasion of all
adva^tages, gathering up crumbs, I cared not from under whose Table, that in
process of time I picked up a thousand pounds in my purse, which not willing
it should lie idle and rust in a corner, I was apt to put it out to Opus and
Vsus: But (child as I was) delivering it into the hands of Child the Scrivener,
I was cheated of it all at a clap, never was Roan served such an horse trick;
notwithstanding which, I bore it cut bravely, and though both purse and pockets
were prettily emptied, yet I ba^ed nothing in my countenance, and Dominie
Doctor was then the only thing I had to trust to, which supported me in my
credit assisted with my small practice, and loud clamor in the Courts.

For how could we live at that full rate, to feed high and drink deep, to
carry all our deportments in that gentile garb, by ordinary fees; and common
gratuities? no; where skill is scanted we must use slight and subtilty, and
when learning is lacking we must fly to Legerdimane; nay sometimes fee as we
would be feed, and bribe as our desire is to be bribed, this is lex Talionis
the Law of Tallying, manus manum fricat, claw me, claw thee, nay indeed, the
true law of charity, to do to others as we would have done to our selves and
therefore how often have I come off, with silk stockings to diverse of my Lord
Archbishop schiefe servants with suits of Satin, plush cloaks, beavers and
the like, and sometimes presented their Chaplains with Canonical Cassacks and
Leviticall girdles; not passing the gate, without a memorandum to the porter,
now if any shall say what was the event or success of these? to them I answer,
then had I countenance in the high Commission Court (a pox take it, and would
I had never known it,) and his mighty Metropolitan-ship, would either take
notice of me, by affording me a gracious nod, or sweetning me with a smile,
or perhaps saying, how does my good Doctor and this get me credit amonst my
Clyents, Intelligence from the Sumnors, and paritors, practice by the means of
the Courtiers and a current Correspondence with the chief Doctors of the
Commons, so that I was not only favored by Surrogates, but friended by the
Judges of the Courts themselves.

Moreover I was Martins Minion, Lambs best beloved, and Ducks delight, and in
which of their Courts soever I pleaded, or was of Counsel, I carried the
cause, though it were false and corrupt, as the Lattin I uttered or mine own
Conscience, and then I thought Doctor Roane to be as good a man within his
Prerogative Courts of Freedom: as Dr. de-Roan in his great principality of
France, for the registers of courts, were as my retainers or rather receivers,
by agitating of whom I passed all mine Acts whether in false or true Lattin
substance or non sense, all was one between them and me, as things were
carried amongst us, witness the first Act for process and others, as the Acts
ad Procedendum, ad Continus ndum, ad molius Inquirendum, ad sententium, ad
Detractandum, ad Concludendum, ad finitum, and I am afraid if I had stayed by
it, and not took my heels in time, I had been served by this with a writ of
Diem clausit Extremum; and these Courses I have bin forced to run, otherwise by
this I had been forced to have begged or sold Ballets in the streets, but I
praise my Star, I have past over all these difficulties, but most for escaping
of that most dangerous Writ ne excat regnum.

But in the way of news thus briefly: The Protestants and Papists, are together
by the ears in France, and they are all of them as sick of the magni potent
Cardinal, as you of your metropolitan Canterbury.

And now let me recollect you of a passage, which as it is in my Register so I
make no question it fell in your remembrance, how I fetched of one of our proud
peremptory Proctors who look^ as high and big as Guy of Warwick, when he had
killed the dunne Cow of Dunmowe, or came newly from the sla^ghter of Colubrand
the mighty and huge Danish Grant, whose brains he beat out with his pilgrim
or palmers staff: this courageous cup Conqueror, walking late in the evening
meeting with a Citizen and his wife in Fleetstreet, took her away perforce,
and like a Familist, in the heat of his zeal, hurried her away to his
chamber, and made that use of this pretty matron, that you and I have done of
many; but mum: no more words of that, for the proverb tells us, it is an ill
bird that will beray her own nest. And we of the Commons made conscience to
hold all such Commodities in common: but now I repent me of passing those
bandy acts, but silence for that, and stet too: but to return where I left.

This cunning and crafty (I will not say Cuckold) Citizen after complaint made
brought him within the compass of our spiritual Courts, and prosecuted the
cause against him by one of his fellow proctors, but the cunning delinquent
seeing me to be one of his Counsel, I undertook his defense, by
pretending, he took him for a knave, and her for a prostitute, and having but
one witness, the plaintiff was condemned in Court, and I brought the
business to an easy composition, a good and bountiful supper ended it, where
I fed prodigal like a lusty Roan-horse, with a full manger of provender before
him.

I have intelligence here in France, that some pen or other having had
commiseration of the fall of our Commons, have not only sorrowed with us in
that sickness, but took the pains to make its last will and Testament; and
what legacies the Court has left behind it, I know not whether the will be
yet proved or no, nor who be the heirs and executors; but of this I am
certain, that after death there must be a burial; and (if it come not too
late, for which I should be sorry) I would entreat you to let this funeral
Elegy, to be hanged upon the hearse, which I would entreat you to bear this
title following.

A Funeral Elegy made by Dr. Roan now a fugitive in France, upon the fall or
death of Doctors Commons.
Mourn Court of Honor, thou in the first place,
The Doctors Commons, is a common case.
For now your Heralds shall no more behold
Titles, and Arms of Gentry bought and sold:
For when old Adam digd, and his wife span,
Which was the Lady? who the Gentleman?
And thou great Chamber, but so lately graced,
With Luminous stars, in thy bright Zodiac placed;
Who, as they in their several Orbs did shine,
From each ones Luster did proceed a fine.
Since thy whole firmament, at once is shook,
As if in some great Tempest Thunder-strooke.
Summon thy servants on this hearse to wait,
From those that bought their places at high rate?
To every Clarke, Examiner, even he,
That in cut-fingerd gloves can take a fee,
And cheat the Client, (for all profit's sweet)
With thirteen stradling lines in every sheet.
Mourn likewise you, late of the high Commission,
Since your great Court is sentenced to perdition:
And he the chief in that Prelattick power,
Is leapt at once from Lambeth to the Tower.
You of the Episcopacy (I mean those tainted,)
Who might have been canonized and Sainted,
Had you fair courses run, leave drinking sack,
And dye your white sleeves into mourning black.
Nor do you bring to hang upon this hearse,
Sad Epitaphs, either in prose or verse.
I rather wish that these his funeral clothes,
May be decor'd with Ex Officio oaths,
New Canons, and the unlimited Et caetera,
To which, let other Courts, bring in their Vetera,
And Nova Testamenta: The Office of wills
Will better furnish you then Chancery bills,
(though pitifully complaining) Let all men
This know, here is no work for Poets pen:
Unless that Davenant were put in mind,
And sent too to the place where he is confined;
To undertake that charge, as the most fit,
Both for his present case, and pregnant wit.
In which; how swan-like had our Suckling sung,
Were he not now in France to learn the tongue?
And thou, that lately in thy place did brag,
Thou famous Pursivant, brave Bonny-Rag,
Since now thy business will no better fadge,
I wish thee, sell thy guarded Coat and Badge,
To buy a black cloak, and to grace the throng.
Thy fellow Maze bring with thee along?
Mourn also you of the Arches, for you know,
Your Courts shall now no more be kept in Bow.
You of the Delegates, by which we have fed,
Most delicately, that now may seek our bread,
Let not the Court of Audience her grief smother:
Where we would hear our selves speak and no other.
And thou Prerogative Court have lost thy Glory,
We shall no more gain by the Consistory:
Mourn Baudy Court, or Court of Defamations;
Bring to this hearse your Excommunications,
And processes with Scales, mourn all you Doctors,
Advocates, Surrogates, Farritors and Proctors;
Since all these Courts the Parliament does damb,
Mourn and lament you all with Duck and Lamb;
For your abuses the whole State abhors,
And you your selves have no Compurgators.
Bear part in this our grief, you Custom Farmers,
Who have been others long, now your own harmers.
As being forced of late back to restore,
What from the King you had deteynd before,
Tunnage and poundage: be ye now Petitioners,
That Farmers, be not changed into Commissioners.
Mourn ye too, that pretended to be rectors
Of the abused State, all you Projectors
And Patentees; help this our hearse to deck*
With Kilvert, and A bell about his neck:
And thus much I, for Doctors Commons Crave,
That he may go with decence to his grave.
Doctor Roan one of that Society,
From Roan in Normandy.
FINIS.

