THE Resolver Continued, OR, SATISFACTION TO SOME SCRUPLES ABOUT The putting of
the late King to death.

IN A Letter from a Minister of the Gospel, To a Friend in London; Together,
with a word to the Parliament, the high Court of Justice, Malignants,
discontented Friends, and the People of the Nation.

Ad generem cereris, sine cade and vulnere, pauci
Descendunt Reges, and sicca morte Tyranni.
Ju. Sat. 10. -- Victiona haud ulla amplior, potest, magisve opima mactari
Jovi, quam Rex iniquus. -- Seneca. Herc. fur. Assemble your selves and come,
gather your selves on every side to my Sacrifice, that I do sacrifice for you,
even a great Sacrifice, upon the Mountains of Israel; that ye may eat flesh,
and drink blood, ye shall eat the flesh of the mighty, and drink the blood of
Princes, etc, -- Ezekiel. 39.17.10. London, Printed by J. Clowes, for Hannah
Allen, at the Crown in Popes-head-Alley. 1649.

THE Resolver Continued, OR. Satisfaction to some Scruples, about the putting
of the late King to death.
Dear Friend,
TRuth is the Daughter of Time, not but that Truth was before Time, [for it is
of an Eternal Nature;] but because Time, that discovers all things,
discovers it: Therefore Truth is called Times daughter. But in more proper
Phrase, Time may be called Truths discoverer. Partiality, and Passion are two
great Clouds that do eclipse Truths discovery, and till those are blown
over [though that truth be up, yet] it is not seen. The truth of A Peoples
power both to question and punish Tyrannous Princes, is a Truth bearing date,
before the Creation of Kings.

Pure nature, and right reason, were as two great Pillars upon which that Truth
was Engraven with great Characters; so he that ra^ne might read this, that as A
people (...) unto Kings, when not. See it was in their power, for to nullify
that being, when it proved naught. It Is true, Government is of a divine
Original, but the disposal thereof is humane. God made Power, but People made
Princes.

Kings, in regard of Power, they are of God, [and by him they reigne] but yet
in regard of their Persons, they are but from men. As the Deity would not
permit people, to live without a Government; so it would not privilege
Governors to rule without control.

Lex indeed is from heaven, but Rex is mundane. As Kings were after, so they
are under Law. The Septer of Government is golden, but the hand which holds
it is clay: when this is broken [because rotten] that remains, because it is
righteous. Albeit people may not cast off just power, yet they may cast off
unjust Princes. And as it is their Privilege, so it will be their prudence
(both pious, and politic) to entrust that Rule, in the hands of many, which
has been abused, and ill managed in the hands of one. When power contracted
purifieth (as it does most commonly, when it is pent up, in a Monarchtick
Cabin) the best way to rarifie it, is to give it the larger room of an
Aristocratick counsel.

These beams shined bright enough, and were seen clearly in former Ages;
until the pride of Princes, made them desire, and the flattery of Parasites
made them believe, they were responsible to none, but God: they saw clearly,
and convincingly: that as a People made them their Rulers; so they were bound
to rule, and to be ruled, by a Law: which if once they did cast off, the people
might cast them off. He was not (as we say) a Widgeon, that when he committed
the Sword of Justice to an inferior Officer, was wont to say As long as I do
Justice, manage this for me, but when I cease to do Justice, use it against me.

Tyranny invaded all Governments together. The Popes infallibility, and the
unquestionablenesse of Kings, are both of them Monsters of the same Litter. And
as the Pope was cried up to be the sole Head of the Church, and if he carried
Millions to hell (said the Jesuits) none may control him: so Princes were
Proclaimed sole Sovereigns of States, and that their will were all the Law by
which they ruled [said their Flatterers] none might say unto them; what do
thou.

I cannot tell, what fatal Conjunction has been, between the two visible
Heads (as they were commonly called and accounted) of the State Ecclesiastique,
and Pollitique. But surely, their corruption has so been alike, as that I am
apt to believe (if they were not twins, borne at once, yet) they are
Brethren of Iniquity, bredd, and brought forth from the same Womb of
Wickedness and Pride. If as the Corruption of both did Coutemporize in the
birth, it join in its Death; I shall not wonder, They that said, No Bishop, no
King; spoke truth, though unawares. And the downfall of Papal Bishops, and
Tyrannous Kings, will not differ much in the time.

I am glad my last was so satisfactory unto you, as that you were pleased to
call it a Resolver.

It is the glory of truth, when it is held forth by any it can reslove; Only,
some are so impudent, as to say, that it is not day when the Sun it self does
shine: we have a saying, who so blind, as he that will not see? Surely,
wilfulnes is the greatest blindness.

It Is a Divine truth, men are not only Ignorant, because they cannot, but
because they will not know the truth.

The Schoolmen have well observed, that there is Ignorantia pravae
dispositionis, as well as Ignorantia purae negationis, without doubt, in many
things, the reason why people see no more, is not for want of light, but for
want of will; This makes me think the scruples of many about the King are
rather the brats of wilfulness, then any thing else.

Yet I shall not deny, but that unto some weak ones, what you mention may have
a face of reason, to continue them as Scruples; But that others, whose parts,
and intellects, are head and shouldiers above mine, that such can stumble, at
those Strawes, you must pardon me, if I do not believe.

At your entreaty I shall once more trifle away an hour, to satisfy you in the
things you mention; and I hope you will pardon me if I be plain, and I shall
rejoice my (...) may have power to resolve any, that really scruple (...)
receive, or give satisfaction is a beseeming employment.

The Commander that does lead your scrupling party, has a great name, it is
called Covenant; and that name you the argue.

Let it be granted, that Charles Stewart was guilty, and (...) a Bill of
Indictment, may be read against him in Letters of blo^ yet did we not in
particular Covenant to preserve his Person What if he broke Covenant with us,
[turning Tyrant, when he should have ruled as King] and so did deserve to dye
like a Malefactor, who might have lived as a Monarch.

What of this [say you] should we break Covenant with God? and should we
presume, to put him to death as a Traitor, whom we swear to preserve as a King?

In answer unto this, I shall offer unto your serious consideration, these
things: and because I know you are wife, I will rather speak words, then
dilate in sentences.

First, the Covenant which was made [and you mention] was not an absolute, but
a conditional Covenant; It was not a Covenant of free grace [such as God
makes with men] but of his love mixed with Justice [such as an Indulgent
people make with a seduced Prince] yet so, as to be just unto the Nation, while
merciful unto him.

Had we sworn hand over head [as we use to say] to preserve the Kings Person
Perfas and nefas, in all cases whatsoever; this had been a Covenant altogether
of Free Grace unto him; but not of Justice unto the Land. And certainly, such a
Covenant as this, had it passed the hands of some Minions of Monarchy: could
never have entered into the hearts of any that are Lovers of equity. It is
above my power to Covenant with my enraged parent, who stands ready to
destroy me, and my brethren, that come what will, I will preserve his life.
Suppose it were so, that if I killed not him, he would kill me? Or suppose, he
should kill some of my brethren, durst I, or ought I to Covenant [in that case]
his preservation? Or if I were so weak as to make rashly; were it not my
wisdom to receede repentingly from such a Covenant? Doubtless the civil
obligation of a people unto Princes, does not amount higher, [if so high] as
the natural tie of children unto parents.

Secondly, the condition of the Covenant is clear; for it is expressy
provided, that the Kings person should be within the pale of the (Rights and
Privileges of Parliament, the true Religion and Liberties of the Kingdom) all
the while, the Covenant should bind any unto his preservation.

Though the life of the King were to be preserved as precious, it was because
it was bound up in the bundle of Religion, Liberty, and Privileges; if
therefore it fell out of that bundle, it lay but as a common thing: It is true,
if in the preservation of the true Religion, and Liberty of the people, the
Kings life could have been preserved: he might have lived until now (for ought
I know;) But since, his life would procure the danger of those greater things: I
see not, why his death may not be called their preservation. Whether the true
Religion could be preserved in his preservation, let Mr. Prinnes Royal
Favorite inform you; To prepare; And let his Commissions unto Lish Papists
for their Rebellion enable you to pass a censure. And for the Privileges of
Parliament, and Liberty of the People: how inconsistent their preservation, and
his Person, were together, is needless to say, much more needless to argue.

Thirdly, neither was the Covenant (be it such as you immagine) eternal: the
Contents thereof were not for an everlasting Almanac, (or if it were, we might
in our old Latin call it Erra Pater) it was a Covenant made in a time of War,
in Order unto an open, and then potent enemies, redusing, unto terms of a
just peace.

And (as far as I can judge) that part which concerns the Kings person: was
a summons sent unto a Town, or Castle with Conditions, which (if accepted) have
power of a Covenant.

If the King had either first, or last, (which he was many times entreated
unto) accepted of the Covenant, it had been binding.

Though one party stretch forth his hand, yet if the other do not strike, it is
rather a Covenant intended then made; but the Kings first, and continued
refusal, are, and were our release.

Nay, had he at all taken it (and by his taking of it, laid that part of the
Covenant that concerned him, as an obligation on us) yet his actions were, and
have been, so contrary unto the Covenant, and the great things, thereof; As
that he did totally nullify and violate it; and surely the violation of any
Covenant [so far as it is conditionall] by one party, leaves the other
nnocent, in case he observed it not.

When my Wife turns adultresse, my Covenant with her is broken, And when my
King turns Tyrant, and continues so, my Covenant with him also is broken.

Indeed it is a pretty note of one of the Rabbis [upon the Proverbs 29.4.]
that the Holy Ghost does not vouchsafe to call him a King who does oppose his
people: But,

Fourthly, the end of that clause, which concerns the executed King: it
declares that it was to let the world know, we had no thought, nor intention,
to deminish His Majesty's just power and greatness.

Now clear it is, that it is not the just power, nor the just greatness, of
any King that ever was, to be free from the Power and Authority of Justice, and
Majesty it self: such a losing of a King, Buckanan rather accounted, the losing
of a Monster, then the losing of a man.

I may rather promise to maintain and preserve that which is the just power,
and the just greatness of any Prince, or Person, whatsoever in the world, and
yet notwithstanding, I may without breach of promise, judge the unjust actions
of the said Person, and bring him unto Justice too.

It has ever been the unjust usurpation of Tyrannous Princes, by the unlawful
claim of great Tyranny; to plead an exemption from legal Trial, for illegal
facts: such an exemption, were not a just greatness, but a great injustice.

By this you may therefore guess, that all those scruples, pretendedly built
upon the Covenant, have more of show, then of strength: And such as in this
pretend Religion, do indeed affront reason.

The Covenant may, and does remain inviolable, notwithstanding the Trial of
Charles Stuart: And humbly confident I am, in the great day of Account, it will
never be charged upon either Authors, or Approvers of the late Execution, that
they were Covenant-Breakers with the great God. I confess, I dare not
entertain such dishonorable thoughts; either of the Composers or Imposers of
that Covenant, that it was their aim, thereby so to ensnare both themselves
and others, as that the receiving thereof should bind them (in all cases) up to
such a prosecution of the Kings person, as that the Law, Religion, Privileges,
and Liberties should all rather sink and perish, then he should suffer Justice.
What a mere mockery had been of the Almighty? to enter into a Covenant, the
maine and sole end of which, was Reformation; And yet not to Covenant for, but
rather to Covenant against the Honorable, just, and necessary trial of
exorbitant and Tyrannous Princes, and Governors (by what Title soever.)
Certainly the Reformation of the Arbitrary power of Princes (which necessarily
includes a punishment of such as in that way has deformed the beauty, and
almost destroyed the being of State) is as great a piece of Reformation, as
ever the English (or any) State could, or should set upon.

The true and righteous end of the Covenant (so much urged) I never did, nor
could ever take to be, other then a holy, righteous, honorable, and lasting
Reformation, and settling of all things amongst us, Ecclesiaticall and
Political; and this to be endeavored after by all (jointly and severally) in
so vigorous and resolved a manner, as that whatsoever forms or persons in the
one, or other, should be found prejudicial thereunto; or inconsistent
herewith, should be laid aside: And also, that all such as were, or should
appear to be enemies unto this, should be brought unto condign punishment;
This I say, I am persuaded was the end of the Covenant: And while this is
pursued, the Covenant lives. It is true (indeed) the preservation of the King
when the Covenant was made, did seem to conduce in part unto this great end:
But since it appears altogether inconsistent therewith: The Justice executed
upon him (in my eye) is no more a breach of Covenant; then the throwing of a
Logge out of the way, is a deviation from that Journey, the Arrival unto the
end of which, the logge did hinder. Thus may the Captain of the Scruplous
party be taken and conquered: And now incold thoughts tell me, has this
Captain any more then the bare Covenant? Is not the scruple built upon it, as
the House upon the sands: or is it any better then a specious Sophisme, that as
an Argument has only a name that it lives, but is dead. Does not the Covenant
in the full spirit and vigor of it, live, though the King be dead? But I
forbear, as remembering; that the scruple taken from the Covenant, is not so
much your own as others: therefore I proceed.

The next Pile of Sand upon which a scruple is built, is this: what power (say
you) had that high Court of Justice to try the King? Let it be supposed, the
King was a Criminal Offender (guilty of death.) And let it be supposed (say
you) the Covenant had not a binding power upon us, to hinder proceedings
against him, yet Quo Jure, Qua Potestate, did that Court so adjudge him? to put
a Malefactor to death without Law, is as well unjust, as to punish an Innocent
person, under pretense of Law.

As unto this, you know my Profession is not Law; therefore as unto that
querck, I shall be but brief (referring you unto the Speeches both of the
President, and the Solicitor of that Court, for ampler satisfaction) therefore
only thus.

First, If Charles Stuart held his Crown by Conquest of Arms (as by his Plea
of succession from the Conqueror he did pretend; and as some of his friends
(though the peoples foes) have urged.) Then, without doubt, by the same Right
in which (upon this plea he urged) he ruled by the same he suffered: Himself
was conquered and a Prisoner of War. Its true, that he surrendered himself (a
fair way of giving up unto mercy, when he could hold out no longer) and that
unto the Scots Army (but under English pay) and so a Prisoner unto Englands
Sword.) An Army of Switzers, serving the King of France for his money, may as
well pretend, that such Prisoners, or Towns as they take, are properly their
own: as the Scots (under English pay) may pretend that the King was theirs: So,
that still I say, he was a Prisoner unto Englands State, and the case is no
whit altered; but the same: Therefore if he held by Conquest; then as he held,
so he was, or might be tried; But,

Secondly, It was, and is the power of a Parliament, to erect such a Court, as
in this case they did. A lawful Court by a lawful power authorized, and by
law proceeding, may try any Prince in the world: Therefore the power by which,
and the way in which, the King was tried (being so just) why should any presume
to question it?

Objection: But (say you) how could that House be called a Parliament, when the
Lords joined not with the Commons? and when most of the Commons were kept out?

Answer I thank Mr. Prione for that light, which in particular I have gaired
from his Sovereign power of Parliaments: whereby I understand well enough, that
the Commons may act without the Lords; and also that the House of Commons,
though under fifty, may act without the rest (supposing them to be absent.)
restraint; and kept out, who otherwise would have been in. reply only (as in
my last) that that restraint was lawful. The late Parliament in Scotland, who
gave Authority to Hambleton to invade England, was not in part, but in whole
forced from Edinburgh: and the present Parliament (that now sits there)
sits by the power of the Sword; And yet I am confident, you are so good a
friend to the Scotchman, as that you will not think the driving away of the
former, or the settling of this Parliament there, to be unlawful. I told you,
and I still tell you, necessity is the Law Royal. It dispenceth with all
Laws, (...)
The Rabb^^s have a saying, the merciful God does not hold the necesstated
guilty there was a necessity for what the Army did; as to the taking out of
those rotten Members; and that necessity was their Law.

Objection. But they which sit are not free.

Answer. Why should any presume to say so, when they do not; they are of years
sufficient (as Christ said in another case) Let them speak for themselves. Nay
they have, and they do speak once and again they are free: Did they not before,
and do they not now sit free? And unto this day (since more are come in;) Do
they either disclaim the Authority of the High Court of Justice; or so much as
hint, that they were under a force? Altum Silentium: here is not a word of
this: and therefore I pass from it, let this suffice to satisfy, that piece
of the scruple, that questioneth the power whereby that honorable piece of
Justice was acted.

As to the next of President; it is so poor a scruple, that a Puff blows,
it away. Presidents are good inc^rragements, but bad Rules: It is lawful to
act in businesses of this nature, (as in others) without a President. We have
been beholding to former Ages, for Presidents in so^ things (neither have they
left us without foot steps in this.) And why may it not be our glory, to give a
brighter and clearer President unto future Ages in this; as it has been theirs
to give us in others; But,

First of all: though Presidents are not recorded, shall we therefore conclude,
the thing was not; many things have been which we know not off, A non dici, ad
non esse, is a kind of Argument, hushed at by boys; It is too weak in any
thing to say, such a thing was not spoken, therefore it was acted.

Secondly: Histories both of Foreign, and of our own Nation, abound much with
Presidents of this nature; The Jews (who had at first the best Common wealth,
and afterward the best Kingdom that ever was) are presidentall unto us in
this business; in trying those who either were Superiors (as the Judges in
the time of their Common wealth) (or their Kings in the times of their
Kingdoms.) Shickard: Helach, Melach, cap. 3, Sect. 4.
(a great Reader and a good Linguist) tells us, Ordinario judicio Reges, ob
transgressionem legis, petuisse convenicio, and ad verbera damnari. Hit meaning
is; that it was ordinary amongst the Jews, not only to call unto the Bar,
but (as we say) to bring unto the Whipping post their King. Indeed, this feemed
unto him a Paradox at first, cap. 19.
but afterward he found it confirmed, Consensutotius antiquitatis Hebrae (i.
e.) by the consent of the whole Hebrew antiquity: Halach: Kelehammikd. cap. 5.
and upon it he does observe also (out of their writings) that Kings were, and
might be brought to whipping; As out of one of their books he does observe.
That in case of multiplying of Wives, Horses, Gold and Silver, if he did exceed
in those he was to be whipped; His word is. (...) Masmonid: in Halach. (...)
cor. 3
and so likewise he observes out of the Sanhedrin the same things: he does
observe also concerning the High Priest, that he was questioned (though not by
all, yet) by th great Synedrion: And Caneus also observes out of the
Talmudicall writers; that if the High Priests were refractory, and
contumatious, refusing to approve of, and to follow that which they did jointly
ageee unto, he was adjudged to dye. And by the way I would ask this question,
what exemption (by virtue of any Scriptues) there can be showed, that the King
had from the Law more then the High Priest. Josephus tells us, that when
Antipater had divided his Kingdom between his two Sons, See Schikard de jure
Regio apud Hebraos, Theor: 14 (...): Joseph. lib. 14. cap. 17. Hutius Iud.
(...) In Talmud codex Sanhedrin: cap: 2: Sect. 2. Si Judaerum Reges a civibus
puniti non sunt, hoc non magnopere ad nostrum justitutu^. (...) which word Cock
observes out of Entropius to signify to command.
and when one of them ( Herod by name) was observed to manage all business in
his own name, and particularly to put one Hezekiah (though a Thief) unto death
(which was contrary unto the Jewish law, which ordained that in that case of
death, the King should not proceed of their own head unto death) he was
hereupon suspected of Tyranny, and accused hereof, and brought before the
Council; where his insolent carriage was such, as that it struck a fear into
all, except one Shamea, who took him down for it, and urged Council to consider
it, least (says he) if we permitting his insolency, and he should be condemned
by us ( according unto the Law, observe he thought, that according unto the
Law, they might condemn him) he by the violation of righteousness should
escape, and slay us. Now it is observable, that this was after the Jewish
affairs begun to decline; and they were (in a manner) under the Roman power,
even then the Synedrian Senators, durst then (as Josephus confessed (...) -- (i.
e.) according unto the Law,) deal with their Princes indeed: there is a
passage in Talmud (at which I stumbled) it is this: the King neither judges,
nor is judged; when I read this, I began to scruple, as concerning their
practice: (and yet I remembered well enough what Buckanan says, that if the
Kings of the Jews were not punished by them, yet that did not make much,
either for, or against our purpose) but looking into the Gemara Sanhedrin
Chapter 2. that is entitled Cohen Gedol: I find an explication of that passage
in the Talmud: And there it is said by the Rabby Joseph, that that Tradition of
the Kings, being neither a Judge, nor adjudged, is understood of none, but of
the Kings of Izrael, for (says he) the Kings of the House of David, did both
judge, and were adjudged; And making there a question, why it was not so
amongst the Kings of Izrael: he gives this reason, because of that which
happened in the case of a Servant of King Janneas. Now the tradition of that
business is there recorded thus; King Janneas his Servant had committed
murder; upon which one advertized the Elders thereof, and desired that he
might be questioned for it; they thereupon Command the King to give up his
Servant to be tried: He does send him upon that, to the Synedrian. But he was
Commanded to come himself, to give testimony in his Servants Case: hereupon he
came, and Simeon said unto him, King Janneas stand thou up, neither think thou
only, that thou stand up before us; but before him who made the World.

Upon this the King answered, I stand not up at your Command, but upon the
Command of your Colleges etc, upon which Symion (looking about him, and seeing
them all looking upon the ground) what (said he unto them) are you now
thinking? there is who will be avenged of you? Perush trammischanio tl. page
115.
and immediately they were struck unto the ground dead; Whereupon (says the
Gemera) passed this Decree, that the King was neither judged nor did judge.
etc. Another also of the Jewish writings, witness that that Tradition, was
only concerning the Kings of Israel, and that the Kings of David's house, they
did both judge, and were judged. Halach. Melach cap. 9. Sect. 3.
And another writing of the Jews, says that, the Kings who came of David's
loins, were both judged, and did judge, and that it was lawful to deal with
them; But the wise men did make that Tradition concerning the Samaritan Kings,
because their hearts were proud. etc.

Out of this Talmudicall Tradition, I observe thus much,

First, That the Kings of Judah (for they were the Kings of the house of David)
were questionable: and therefore they were questioned upon occasion.

Secondly, the Kings of Israel were so too, de Jure, (and sometimes) de facto:
my meaning is, they always lawfully might (though sometimes actually, they
were not questioned) that was after the revolt of the ten Tribes; when they had
not only cast off the power, and right of the people, but also the Law and
Yoke of God himself.

Thirdly, that if the Kings of Judah actually were, and the Kings of Israel
rightfully ought to be brought unto Trial, then the calling of Kings to
account, and proceedings against, according unto desert; Js not a business of
so new, and strange a nature; as sonie would make the world believe to be. And
truly, till I find a Scripture forbiding it (I shall not dare to sensure the
questioning of Kings, as sinful; for as much as sinning is the transgression
of the Law (and where no Law is, there no transgression can be.) Bartolus spoke
no more, (nor indeed less) then right reason, and an impartial judgment will
suggest when he said, that, a King might commit treason, and be a traitor, and
Rebel unto his Country and so be may be judged and delbroaned, and otherwise
punished, by that Lord against whom he has offended, who is the peoples and
those that represent them.

I must be ingenious, and confess, that Shickard seems to question, whether
the Jews ever did put their Princes to death? He says, they did not with
every kind of punishment, nor (as he thinks) with Capital punishment,
punnish any of their Princes.

But notwithstanding this opinion of Shickard, I am no way moved to think, but
that both they might, and did upon occasion put their Kings to death. Surely,
he that may be whippped for a lesser, may be hanged for a greater fault; And if
so be, the Jews might and did (as Shickard himself acknowledges) bring their
Kings unto whipping, why might they not upon the same reason, bring them unto a
greater punishment, when deserved?

And to put it out of doubt, that instance which I gave in my last, (out of the
2 Chro. 25.27.) makes it clear, that they did put Amaziah King of Judah unto
death.

Obj. But you will say, that place is not clear: because in some translations,
it is rendered, they committed. Treason, in others they made conspiracy;
therefore you will say, can either of those be presentable?

Rep. To this I reply thus much; how ever the Word is translated, we must eye
its meaning, not translation; It is not our happiness, that all the words in
the Bible are truly translated: (...) From (...) Ligare
or that where they are, they are rightly understood; The Word therefore in
that place which is translated ( they made a conspiracy) * properly signifies,
to bind, and to agree together, as under a bond. Now all be it, that it is
sometimes used to be taken in a bad sense, it is not therefore to be understood,
where ever the Word is used, that it is taken in a bad sense; For the same word
is used in the 2 Kings 9 14. concerning Jehu, it is said, he conspired against
Joram: Now certainly what he did against Joram, was not unlawful, neither is
the word so to be understood; for we know he was annoiuted by God unto that
work, and it is probable in that he had, the concurrence of the servants of
God, of whom it is mentioned verse the 11. Now there be three Reasons that make
me something confident that this act of putting King Amaziah unto death, was
lawful and immitable.

First, because the Holy Ghost records it, without mentioning any thing that
might blemish it; It is not noted there as in other conspiracies, that it was
done by any private man, or by his servants; but rather it is recorded, as the
act of all the People; for it is said, they conspired against him in Jerusulem.

Secondly, 2 Kings 15.10. 2 Kings 21.29.
because the Holy Ghost, does not record any public Cognizance, that was
taken for the thing as a crime, nor any punishment inflicted upon any for it,
as we find in other cases of conspiracy.

Thirdly, the Holy Ghost shows it was done publicly, so as he knew of it,
whereupon he fled for it, they send after him, and when he was slain he was
openly brought back upon horses, which does show without doubt, that had it not
been done by authority, and allowed of, it would never have been owned so
openly.

2 Obj. But you will say, how comes it to pass, that Shickard ( who
professedly seems, to enouire after the Jewish peoples power over their
Kings) had not observed any such things amongst the Rabbis.

Answ. For that, I conceive the true reason why he did not find any thing among
the writings of the Rabbis (now extant) was this, because their works are not
ancient enough, to give instance of this practice; for besides pecuniary
mulckes and whippings, the Jews had not for diverse years, Mainord. in Hilch.
Sanhedrin cap. 11.
any other puuishment among them, for any crime whatsoever. It is observed of
the Criminalia Judicia, that they ceased among the Jews, some years before
the destruction of the second Temple; and so much is observed out of the
Jerusalem and Babylouish Talmud. Hence it was, that the Jews did not put any
to death, for any fact whatsoever.

An instance of which, we find in the case of one that defiled himself with a
Beast * (which by the very known Law was death, In Berachos. fol. 58.
yet) he was only whipped for it, and the reason that is given for it is this:
because from the time that they were forced to go from their own land, they did
not put any man to death; that is, they had no power, (or at least they thought
so) to put any unto death, for any crime whatsoever. Hence Buxstorfe *
conceives, In Lexicon Talmud. p. 514.
was that speech of theirs ( John the 18.31.) it is not lawful for us to put
any man to death; not but that their Law did allow of putting of men to death;
(as they themselves acknowledged, John the 19. and 7.) But it seems, that
power was taken from them, and they could not execute it; So that you do see,
there might be a great reason why Shickard could not light upon a passage, that
might show him, that the Jews did put any of their Kings to death, because
that the Jews for many years (even for some years before Christ's death) had
not that Power, in any case whatsoever.

Thus far (and a little further then I thought) have I waded in this business
of President, and to wind up all: you see how your scruples drawn, both from
the Covenant, from pretended want of Authority in the Council, and also of
want of President may be resolved; What you add besides these, are
inconsiderable, that I shall pass them by; only, a word unto your fear about
the consequence of this business.

Ob. You will say, Prudence in private persons does (much more) Policy in
public States should foresee the worst, and so order things, as that the
success, or event of them, may be weighed before they be done; and you
conceive, had the event of this work been well weighed, it had never been done?

Answ. Unto this I return shortly thus,

First, suppose the event as bad as some wretches brag, and some weak ones
fear; suppose upon the conjunction of Malevolent asspects, of desperate foes,
and Apostate friends, another War should arise; yet here will be our comfort
and our advantage, that our enemies are such as oppose not only us, but Justice
it self, and so Justice will be engaged to preserve, not so much our persons,
as his own actions.

Secondly, Why should we so much dis-trust that sweet, and powerful
Providence, that all along (especially of late) has appeared so clearly for
us? why shall we not hope that the same God, that has given us so many signal
victories (in great battles) over that man of blouud (when a live, and in the
field) and who has also helped us, to suppress so many and such unparalled
insurrections of his mutinous friends (of late) who (I say) should we not
hope, the same providence will be as propitious unto us, in an other war, and
in other tumults as formerly.

Thirdly, Confident I am, that if Ireland and Scotland join together; and if
(which God prevent) all the Murmuring and disaffected Persons in England should
Contribute to Invite, and Assist them in an Invation: yet notwithstanding all
this England should not dye; but live to show forth all the works of God: who
has delivered us, who does, and who yet will deliver us; What Nation ever
perished in the Work of righteousness, and in the pursuing thereof. Suffer
for a little, and shake a while (peradventure) we may; but surely those
sufferings will be turned unto joy, and those shakings unto settling; Yet (my
friend) let me tell you, England was never in better posture to secure it self,
and Scotland never worse, to invade us: but I am above the arm of flesh, I
have learnt to cease from men; it is the Lord alone that has been, and will be
exalted amongst us: though we fall we shall rise: it is the Privilege of just
and righteous people, that no weapon formed against them shall presper.

As touching the Government intended by the House of Commons in time of
Parliament, and Committee of Estate in the Intervale: I doubt not to affirm,
but that time will discover it, as good a way for the Public, as possibly the
wisdom of man can devise. It is true, if men be mad, it will be chargeable to
settle it, but if settled, the benefit of it will quit the Cost: Either I have
been very unhappy in the Authors that I have read, or else upon my little
reading; I can rationally conclude, that the best of Governments is that which
Aristotle calls Aristocracy (especially if it be in part mixed with
Democracy) Let there be so much of the Democratick way, as to acknowledge all
Power fundamentally in the People; and all Persons entrusted with it as their
Trustees: and accordingly let it surely be provided, that such Trustees be
questioned for betraying or ill managing their trust, and in Order hereunto let
a Council of State manage all affairs in the Intervall of Parliament; and
yet, let those also be questionable for ill management in time of Parliament; I
say, let this be once settled, and the Laws of this Nation reduced: I shall
have reason to believe, that England will quickly be a happier Commonwealth
then it has been a Kingdom.

There be three things, which for fourscore Years I looked upon, as
indubitable Aphorisms of State, which ascented unto, and pursued, would soon
end our Murmurings, and render us a Happy People.

First, That The Supreme Power of all Law whatsoever, is in the whole body of
the People defused (as the soul through the whole body aturall) not confined
unto any particular: It was therefore both well and rationally resolved by Mr.
Mead, That the Scepter did no ways depart from Judah, nor the Lawgiver from
between his feet (though without a King of David's race, when the Shiloh came:)
therefore it was in the People.

It is a Conceit not fit to be quartered in the brain of man: that Kings make
Scepters: The truth is, that Scepters do declare Kings; yet so as that
Scepters may be where Kings are not: Scepters may be, and Power of all Laws,
and Authority, They are as the Spirit of life, running through the whole body
of a Nation; which albeit it put forth it self in some Members, more eminently
then another; yet it is not because it is in those Members so Originally but
only because it is used by them Organically; Organically Kings and Princes are
but Persons, they are not Powers.

Secondly, all the Power of any State in General and particular is therefore
derived from the people of that State, and so power or Majesty is properly
there. In truth Majesty is in the People, as in the King, but it is only in the
King, as in their Herald: It is recorded, that at Jerusalem in the midest of
the Synedrion, Cuneus in Repub. Jud. lib. 1. cap. 9.
there was hung a Scepter, which (says my Author) was an Ensign of that
Majesty which Marcus Tullius observes to be in the people: And it is
therefore well observed by the same Author, that not the Kings, or the Princes,
but the Consuls, and the Senates, the Roman Commonwealth it self did act then
when this Law was given unto their confederate, that they should preserve
without fraud, the Majesty of the Roman People.

Thirdly, That Power therefore that is in any particular person is in them, but
as in Feofees in trust for the people: And when they abuse it, as their persons
may be punished for that abuse, Cri^en laesae Majestatis quod adversus populuns
Romanum: and lib. 1. sect. 1. ad legem Jul. Majest.
so the power it self may be recalled. Vlpian does therefore well note that it
is a Crime against Majesty, which is against the people of Rome; or against
it is security.

Seneca, (my friend) said well, when he said, that Commonwealths were not made
for Kings, but Kings for Commonwealths: who is there so little read in
Hystory, that knows not that people were before Princes: the first Government
in the world was by Families, then in time it grew to Cities, and Towns, and
afterward it extended it self further; And who is there so Irrational (that
I say not Irreligious) as to immagine, that ever the great, wise, Just, and
gracious God should make the world, and the Nations thereof, for the sake of a
few Princes, and having made all, should vassalize all unto the wills of them,
to live as they list without control: Surely did not self-love, Private
Jnterrest and the rest of that unworthy Gang, blind our understandings, we
should quickly see, and understand; that were Princes as useful in their
places, as possible they might be; yet if once they turned to be useless, and
hurtful, they may be laid aside, I could never yet think a king, more (if so
much) unto a body Politic then a right Eye or hand unto the body natural;
yet, you do know who said, if a right eye, or a right hand offend thee, pluck
it out and cast it off. I am apt to think you will deal with this as you did
with the former, and expose it unto public view: I shall therefore ere I
close it up, offer a few seasonable words to all sorts amongst us.

First [as meet is] I shall begin with the Parliament; were I near them, and
had the advantage of their ear, I should humbly whisper thus much. Honored
Worthies! you have begun well, go on; your actings are good, let not your
Actings be bad: Take heed of self Interest, [the fatal Rock of all Statists]
if you drive that, it will destroy you: you are but men, (and so may err) you
should be Christians (and so wise to prevent what may be) God has already
discovered many rotten Members amongst you, and be sure, if any of you be such,
he will discover you also; The divine Wisdom knows how to use bad men unto
good purposes: and not only to cast them off, but to punish them when the work
is done. Remember this: It is a shame in all, and it will be a sin in you, if
you do gain while the Nation loses: Take heed of driving at the making of
your selves a perpetual Parliament for your own profit, Hasten to confute the
slander that is frequently cast upon you; (by doing what in you lies) though
warily, and wisely, to put a period unto this Session; And remember to do such
things, as that your families may bless you, and that the next Parliament may
not question you. If I thought that the words of a worm might have power, I
would not beseech, but Conjure you, by the great name of Justice and Equity,
that you so cleanse and open the Fountain of Justice (I mean the Law) that so
righteousness that may run down amongst us as a mighty stream: deliver this
Nation from its Normand bondage of slavery: let us have our Laws in our own
language: your fathers did well, when they gave us our Divine service in our
Mother tongue; thereby they delivered us from worshipping of an unknown God. Do
you give us our Law in our own tongue also, that we may know when we offend,
and how to Obey. Blind obedience is as well dangerous in Civils as
Spiritualls, Cynthius aurem vel et.
but Cynthius pulls me by the Ear: therefore I leave yours only (because of
my Profession) let me whisper out this also, eye the Lord Jesus in all your
actings, advance his Kingdom (as much as in you lies) and believe it, the
advancement of his Kingdom, will be the best security unto our Commonwealth,
Remember the Scepter of his Kingdom, (I mean the Word) take heed while you do
a good work of easing of the People of Tithes, you do not something that shall
deprive them of the knowledge of the Truth; If you do not provide a Competent
maintenance, for a settled Ministry, you may do as much hurt to the souls as
you can do good to the bodies of us; but you are wise, Verbum sapienti.
and this word shall suffice to have been spoken unto you.

Secondly, Unto you, Oh you righteous Judges, (for so I dare call you) of the
high Court of Justice: let me say you have done a good work, in Avenging the
blood of Innocent ones, upon Charles Stuart: but let me tell you, so did Jehu,
in avenging the blood of Naboth upon Ahab: Take heed, Oh take heed; that though
you have done Justice, that you do not suffer from God as Murderers; In my
heart I honor you, hence it is that I shall boldly tell you so much, God
certainly will avenge King Charles his blood upon your head, if you did shed it
out of a vain glorious desire to be counted bold, Gallant, and or from any
particular spleen, or Malice, or aiming at any private or any sinister end.
That act which is Just in it self, may be unjust in its end, but I hope better
things of you and such as accompany righteousness and Integrity, (though I
thus speak) only remember to examine your hearts: Endeavor that way to clear
your selves i And then let me tell, you need not snffer any fear to possess
you, for what may befall you for doing of Justice, It will be your honor, to
dye as Martyrs, for sentencing of a Murderer; If so be the same spirit be
amongst you all, which I have cause to hope is in some of you, I shall say no
more then this unto you; fear not man who can kill the body, but after that
can do no more.

Thirdly, unto you whom (for distinction sake) I must call Malignants, I would
not use that word of Odium: bu^ only for distinction: If your ears be not
wholly stopped: and if you have not so much of the Serpent in you, as to refuse
to hearken unto the Charmer; Let me beseech you be wise once: were I to stand
upon some high and great Mounnaine, (as the Father fancied) and had the voice
of a mighty Trumpet, I would take that for my text, to preach upon unto you; Oh
mortal men how long will you delight in vanity and follow after lies; What a
mad thing is it to opose that God, who has again, and again appeared against
you: some of you have rid, a silly people, as Balaam did his Ass, and your
Asses under you (I mean the people seduced by you) have seen the Angel of the
Lord in the way with a drawn sword; Therefore they have been feign once, and
again to turn aside: be not so cruel to smite them, or to cause them to be
smitten by riding on again, Kent and Essex have been smitten for your sakes:
be so good unto them and to your selves, as to cease to make any more
Insurrections, least that God who has appeared against you, and destroyed your
King, destroy you also, If I say, I honor some of you, I do not Complement:
and if I profess I love you as a Christian to your good, my Consience hereto
bears me witness that Hye not; Oh, Commune with your hearts upon your beds
and be still; consider what you have done, and how you have spead, and do no
more. But if you will go on notwithstanding all this, my soul shall mourn in
secret for you, and I shall pray Christ that he would save your souls, when
you expose your body and Estate to ruin.

Fourthly, I have a word to say to you, Oh you discontented friends! that word
is this; what is the matter that you Murmur: Are you troubled that the work is
done without you: should you not rather rejoice that it is done for you; If I
should say some of you, many years since, have longed to see this day (nay that
I have been in company when you have prayed for it) If I should say this, your
hearts would tell you, that I might, and not exceed truth. Friends, the fault
was yours, you would not be in the work, when invited: Let me be friendly unto
you, and beseech you to search your heart, and to see if some root of
bitterness (some particular interest of your own) do not make you to speak
evil of that which is good: Oh, why should you begin to smile upon those that
hate you with their hears. And why should you think of joining hand in hand
with those, who first with your help would destroy us; and afterward devour
you. Many of you are Ministers (whom I do honor) let me beseech you to tell me
seriously, whether Christ sent you to preach the Gospel, or to vent your
thoughts in State Affairs. I know you look toward Scotland: and I am afraid
their Interest makes you over Act your selves. I should take it as a Courtesy,
if you would Quaere; some of your Scotch Acquaintance, and resolve me in these
things,

First: whether the King that came out of Scotland into England, had more power
here, then he had there; And why it has been reputed so lawful, (that I say
not laudable) for the Scotchmen, to try, and put their Kings, (some of them) to
death, and yet they Question the same in us; surely we have ever thought that
King James and his race had as little reason to be unjust in England, as in
Scotland. And if they might Question him, (as they have former Kings) why may
not we.

Secondly, I desire to know, whether or no the Actions of the Army in keeping
out sundry of the Members, of the House of Commons, may not be as lawful, as
the Act of their Kirk in raising of an Army not only with, but against their
Parliament, the last Summer.

Thirdly, One Question more I would ask, suppose a year hence a full
Parliament should declare, what this Parliament has done, and the high Court
of Justice against the King to be law: why may not this be as valide and as
good: as when a Parliament of theirs did declare that the putting of James the
3 to death (though in a private way) (by private persons) was right and
lawful: and that Declaration of theirs made it Valid.

I will leave these Questions with you, if you shall not be so kind as to
resolve them. I hope I shall not be distracted in my thoughts about them. Only
let me beseech, for by that dear bond in which [I hope] I am bound up with
many of you to be wise. And if in all things you may not be so clear, [for
present] in the actions of the Parliament and Army; take heed how you blow up
such a fire, as happily may burn yourselves, yet not consume us.

Lastly, I will conclude with one word to all the people of this Land, and
Nation. That word is this, I beseech you (my fellow country men) lay hold on
that opportunity of peace, which now presents it self unto you, sweet peace,
blessed peace, begins to court you; you have long longed for it, it now
beseeches you to embrace it, Oh that you were wise in this your day, to know
the things that belong unto your peaee! [which are doubtless Justice and
Righteousness What would you have? ease from Taxes? settlement of our shaking
security to enjoy your proprieties? Why, you have all these present in
themselves, and they seem to beseech you to accept of them. Oh that God would
make you wise to take hold on them! you have to lon^ befooled your selves
already, by hearkening unto those, that would seduce you unto tyranny: take
heed of giving ear unto any, that spe^^ to you of Levelling and Levellers [as
if there were a design to (...) all men's Estates level, that one should have
no more then another I dare assure you that if such a generation of fools (to
say no wone) be any where, they are so inconsiderable, that what they say, does
but declare in them their own madness, then any thing else. Or else this let me
tell you, there are some, whom you have hearkened too much to already; who if
they could engage you to endeavor to suppress this Parliament and Army; they
would not only Level your Estates, but take them away altogether.

To conclude, remember it will be your safety to sit still: Take you but heed
of Tumults and Jnsurrections, and the like, and you need not fear, but peace
will settle it self with you. Let me speak this great word [which I have good
ground to speak] if God will make you so wise, as patiently to wait a while,
you shall see England a happy Nation. Other parts of the world look upon you,
as you go on, they will follow. It will be a glory unto the English Nation, to
give an example unto all the people of the Earth, to free themselves from
Tyranny and Slavery. I fear not to say, however, for our sins may permit some
tumults among our selves to scourge us; yet within a few years we shall enjoy
truth, peace and prosperity, which shall make us [I had almost said
unalterably] happy.

I have even now done [my dear friend] and I confess if you blame me, I will
thank you for it, that I have spent so much time, about these things; You and I
[I hope] look after higher things, then these of this nature; and a greater
delivery from slavery and bondage, then that of the body we pant after and
expect. We shall be delivered from the bondage of corruption, and ere long we
shall be translated into the glorious liberty of the children of God; The whole
Creation together with us, travailes in pain, and groans for this: The day of
Redemption is at hand: err long we shall see him, who wilsettle all things.
Does not the Spirit it self make Intercession for us, with groans that cannot
be uttered? Does not the spirit and the Bride cry, come; Surely ere long, the
Lord whom we look for shall come. In the mean time, we know all things work
together for good unto them that love God: even unto them who are called
according unto his purpose. I shall break off, and close up all with this
subscription, that I am still,

Your friend and Servant, N. T.
Febr. the 20. 1648.
FINIS.
March 12, 1648-49. Imprimatur Theodore Jennings.


