A Letter from Horsum in Sussex, Relating the present Estate of that County to
his friend in London.
SIR,
I Received Yours of the 27 of June, and thank you for your Intelligence: You
tell me that upon the request of Colonel Morley, it was granted him of the
House of Commons to raise our County of Sussex. Such are the sudden
commotions of the Times, that it is done already; so that that noble Colonel
may now spare his pains, unless he make extreme haste into this divided
County. The Country is generally risen about Horsum, and protest they will
fight for the King and the Country. At Pulborough they are in the same
condition, for the People there are much exasperated to hear some of their
Neighbors are imprisoned by a Warrant from Colonel Stapley and others, for
daring to Petition the high and honorable Court of Parliament. With us at
Horsum here are now 500 lusty men in Arms, the occasion was this. Upon Friday
June the sixteenth, the Magazine which was laid up at this Town was commanded
away by the Committee to Arundell, but our Contrymen are generally so ill
affected, that they rose, with one Consent, and two or three hundred appeared
in an instant, leaving their Mattocks and Plowes to rescue the Swords and
Muskets: To the Market-house they come immediately, and cause George David (who
thanks God he is well mended in these times) and the rest of the pious zelots,
who had loaded the Carts with countrey-Armes, to carry them back into the
Market-loft: Since that, these stout Rusticks have endured watching every
night, and by turns have attended the Arms some nights sixty at a time. On
Tuesday night last at a full Assembly in the Marketplace it was voted
unseasonable, unreasonable (as Master Chatfell said of the Petition) to watch
them any longer, and Resolved upon the Question, That the day following, being
Wednesday, at the sound of Drum and ringing of the Bells, those men both in
Town and Country who are resolved to fight for the King and the Liberties of
the County, against the encroachments of one Freeman, and his Followers, should
come in and take what Arms they pleased. About eleven of the clock yesterday,
there was a great appearance, two or three hundred at least, every one chose
his Musket and other Arms* and then marched out to train in the Common. On
this day, June 29, there came in as many more Contrymen, expecting Arms
likewise; so that now there are five or six hundred well Armed, and many of
them very good Horse. This we doubt will be but the beginning of sorrow to
our distressed County, for all the well-affected begin to leave us, and then
what can we expect but mischief? As soon as the Drum beat Captain
Shepherd felt himself not well his Belly-ak't, as if he feared the Egyptians
would make a Drum of it, and he thought best to go to Lewis for some Physic.
Lieutenant Hunniwood that knocking agitator left his forge and went to London
for some forces Mistress Chatfield advised her husband to withdraw for fear
they should do him more mischief then with songs.

The Soldiers say had they known of their going they would have held their
Styrrops. Their words and demands are very high; as yet they hurt noe man, but
threaten to dis-Arme three or four which is the total number of us that are
well-affected. But that was allwaies the subtletie of our desperate Malignants
to pretend they would do no body any hurt; that they may gain the more love,
but we have learnt they are Egiptians and therefore may and must be
plundered: But good Sir how shall we do it? Our Minister is gone and dares
not stand to tell us; the well-affected are all fled: Master Dod and Penfold
are trussing up their packets for Arundell again, and those who are accounted
the godly; so that we fear the wicked will inherit the earth again. To
conclude, our fears are great, the County is risen both here and at
Pulborough and they pretend the bottom of the business to be, because their
Petition was not answered: Bold varlets; had they been answered as their
neighbors the Surry men were, perhaps they would have been as quiet as they.
But the better we use them the worse they appear; their number is so great
and likely to increase so much that unless a thousand be sent down presently
they are like to be as high here as in Essex. For your coming down I know
not what to advise you, if you come your person will be in danger, if you come
not, your Arms. Farewell.

Your loving friend, R. T.


