John Tailors last Voyage, AND ADVENTVRE, PERFORMED from the twentieth of July
last 1641. to the tenth of September following. In which time he past, with a
Scullers Boat from the City of London, to the Cities and Towns of Oxford,
Gloucester, Shrewesbury. Bristoll, Bathe, Monmouth and Hereford. The manner of
his Passages and Entertainment to and fro, truly described. With a short touch
of some wandering and some fixed Scismatiques, such as are Brownists,
Anabaptists, Famalies, Humorists and foolists, which the Author found in many
places of his Voyage and Journey.

By John Tailor.

Printed at London by F. L. for John Tailor, and may be had at the shop of
Thomas Bates in the Old Baily. 1641.

To his Friend Mr. John Tailor, on his voyage and Journey.
IF true affection does your muse inspire
To The honored welfare of your native place,
Then set your hand to now I you desire;
The time is now, when you may do us grace.
This Subject sure is large, if you think of it
You are not bounded, but you may at ease
Survey, collect the good the honor profit
Of trade, of City, Country, Rivers, Seaes.
It may provoke some yet not thought upon
To raise the ruins of this decayed place;
To procecute this hopeful work begun
And leave some honor to our after Race.
From ancient Monmouth Geffery took his name,
So Henry did from Huntington likewise;
Why may not Gloucester ad to Tailors fame,
Since that from thence his birth and name did rise.
Gloucester this 3 of August. 1641. Yours to command HENRY ELLIS.

John Tailor Water-Poet ANAGRAMME: Loapety-Troian roweth.
STrange News! There is arrived at our Key;
A wandering Poet always in his way;
Whose wilful Errors makes him thus to vaunt,
Aeneas-like, I came from Troyonvant.
I rowed in Rivers sometimes checked by Milles,
Steered under Bridges, and came over Hills.
The Oars of pleasure and of profit brought
This Water-Poet hither in his boat;
And hence he must, but yet he will I trow
To the Britains rather then the Latins row:
English will serve him rightly to rehearse
His crooked travells in good prose or verse.
When as the winds of fancy cease to blow him;
If he have watermen to row or tow him;
Expect Relations, I believe in fine
The Poets waterworkes will go in wine,
And all his dry-land passages appear
With casual events both here and there.
Now I do wish he may accomplsh it
Without expense of any thing but wit.
Gloucester 3. August. 1641. Yours IO. DORNEY.

JOHN TAILORS LAST VOYAGE, AND ADVENTVRE performed from the twentieth of July
last 1641. to the tenth of September following.
OF famous Rivers, Brooks, Bournes, Rills, and Springs,
Of Deepes and Shallowes my invention Sings,
Of Rocks Impenetrable, fourds and Mills
Of Stopps, and Wears, Shelves, Sands, and mighty Hills
Of Navigable passages (Neglected)
Of Rivers Spoiled, men beggered and dejected.
Of Tame, of Isis, Seaverne, Wye, and Teme
Lugg', Laden, Doyre, and Monnoes Pearly Stream,
Of these, of more then these, and of their Uses,
And of their miserable strange Abuses.
I truly treat that men may note and see
What blessings Navigable Rivers be,
And how that thousands are debarred those blessings,
By few men's Avaritious hard oppressings.
I also show how those faults may be mended
And no man have just cause to be offended.
And with a pair of Oars (for that intent)
I once from London unto Lincoln went,
Whereas a passage seven miles was cut through
From Lincoln into Trent, and to Gainsborowe;
That way I past, and into Humber past
To Hull, from thence to Owse, and York at last,
Another Voyage to the West, again
I (with a Wherry) past the raging maine
From London to the Isle of Wight, and thence
To Salisbury (with Time and Coins expense)
Since when our gracious sovereign did ordain
The Uiscount Dorchester to take the pain
To view what wrongs the River Thames did bear
I served then, and every Stop and Wear
And all impediments, I found I writ
And hoping for amendment) printed it.
For care was taken, and true industry
That from fair Oxfords University
To London I Annottomiz'd the flood
And showed it is qualities both bad and good.
Promise was made, Thames wrongs should be reformed
And some small helps were speedily performed
But yet not half is done that then was spoken
(All promises are either kept or broken)
For as a monument, of our disgraces
The Rivers too too foul in many places.
I have described here many an injury
In three great Rivers, Severne, Thames, and Wye)
Besides two Rivers Avon, one makes speed
To Bristol, (and does make it rich indeed.)
And would Bathe cure that Rivers great amiss
That City would be richer then it is,
But each man to himself bears private love
And no man will the general grief remove.
The other Avon Ruins past Gloucester West
From Bristols Avon fifty miles at least,
It glides to Stretford Town from Coventry
And into Severne falls at Tewxbury.
Of Rivers, many writers well have done
Grave Camden, Draytons Polyolbyon
And painful Speed, does in his Mappes declare
Where all these Brooks and waters were and are,
But yet not any one have sought (but I)
To find their wrongs, and show some remedy.
I show the mean neglect of Navigation
For few men's profit, public lamentation,
T'e increase some five or six men's Treasury
Whiles twenty thousand lives in misery,
From shore to shore brave Rivers are damned so
That not a wooden dish has room to go,
no not a hand breadth, but that all is stopped
And from the poor man all relief is stopped
It is the goodness of our God to give
To us four Elements, whereby we live:
Those Elements, Fire, Water, Air are named
And Earth (of which althings are made and framed,
And all those blessings, the great God of Heaven
(Some more, some less to every man has given.
By air and breath (and breath no man buy
Air serves all creatures in community)
And though earth yield materials for the fire,
Which many a son (by right) holds from his sire,
Yet sure me thinks the water should be free
For passage, for all men of each degree.
And though the Rivers in proportions are
Shared thine, or mine, or this or that man's share
Yet sure, where God gives water, boats to bear
It should not be stopped up, with Mill or Wear.
And now my meaning plainer to disclose,
A little while I Will turn my Verse to Prose.
AS Rain from the Firmament is drawn from the Sea, and other waters and
vapors of the Earth, and Air, by the vigor of the Sun, whereby Rivers
spring and overflow Grass, Groves, Fruits increase, fishes multiply, beasts
and cattle breed and wax fat, Corn plentifulls, Butter and Cheese in
abundance, and all other blessings for the life of man or beast is nourished
with milk of Heaven (as rain may justly be called) So Navigable Rivers are
the Cherishing veins of the body of every Country, Kingdom, and Nation: And
as the veins of man does distill supporting sustinence, to every part and
member of his Body; so do passable Rivers convey all manner of commodities
from place to place, to the benefit of all and every place in every Country
and Teritorie.

My self bearing a natural affection to Portable Rivers, and a settled
inclination and desire of the preservation and use of them, did for the same
intent especially lately pass with a small Scullers boat into five great
Rivers of this Kingdom; for the which intent, (to bear charges) I procured
diverse of my friends to subscribe to several Bills, for them to pay me some
several small sums of money, upon my delivery to each of them a book at my
returue of the passages and entertainements which I had in my journey; which
book this is, which you are now reading, and how I past out and came back
again, with many occurrences that happened I have truly related as follows.

On the twentieth day of July last, 1641. (the second day of the dogged
Dogdayes (I with my two men and a brace of boys were embarked with a Scullers
boat first from London, and within half a quarter of an hour after, I past
from my house near the Bears College on the Banckside, I took leave of some
friends, and had a flagge advanced as a token of my public departure; but some
enemies gave out that I was Run away, who I do know (since my return,) to
be a crew of malicious Vermin, (that still being the most ancient name of
their Captain and leader,) on the day afforesaid with many stops, stays, and
taking leaves, we gat to Oatlands at night, and lodged at Weybridge at the
sign of the six Ankers. The next day, being wendnesday I strived against the
stream as far as Great Marlow, in Bucking hamshire, where I Lodged at the
sign of the Crown. Thurseday the 22. of July, I past (with much toil) from
Marlow to Goring; and the next day I came to Abington. If it be demanded why I
was so may days in passing 130 miles, I answer that the River (by reason of a
great drought) wanted water in may places, so that we were forced to wade, and
lead or hale the boat diverse times, and moreover we did pull the said Boat
over or thorough 14. Locks, besides many other impediments, which hindered our
passage.

As far as above Stanes (which is forty miles by water from London, The River
Thames is by the care and providence of the Lord Mayor well conserved and kept
from impediments of Stops, Wears, Sand beds and other hindrances of passages
of either Boats or Barges, and from Stanes to the furthest part almost there
is no stoppage (but only Wears, which Wears have Locks to open and shut for
the passing to and fro of all manner of vessels (passable thorough from London
to Oxford; betwixt which Cities the Barges do draw up nineteen of those
Locks with engines (like Capstanes) which are called Crabbs. I do relate this
hear, because the Reader may by that which follows understand, that though
Wears be necessary in Rivers, yet they ought not to stop up all passages, but
to suffer Locks to be opened and shut as Thames has.

Thurseday the twenty seven, I passed with my Boat from Abington to Oxford,
where I was well entertained with good cheer and worshipful company at
University College; The next day I passed to a place called Bablack Hive (or
Hithe.) And on Thurseday the twenty nine, I passed by Lechlad, and came to
Creeklad; This town of Creeklad is five miles distant by land from Ciciter,
but it is easier to row sixty miles by water on the River of Thames, then it
is to pass between those two towns, for there are so many milles, fords and
shallowes with stops, and other impediments that a whole days hard labor with
my self and four more could neither by toil or Art get but to a Mill of one
Master Hortones at a place called Suddington, a mile short of Ciciter, so that
according to land measure we went but four miles in a long days travel. The
last of July I left Suddington Mill, with the honest welcome of the Miller and
his wife, and with much a do for want of water I gatt to Ciciter, where the
River was so dry that it would bear my boat no further; at the hither end of
that Town there stands a great Barn belonging to one Cook, of whom I hired a
Waine, wherein I put my Boat my self and my Men, Boys and luggage, this
Waine did in less then five hours draw me from the River Isis near Ciciter,
to a brook called Stroud, which book has it is head or Spring in Bessley
Hundred near Misserden in Cotswould in Glostershire, ( Stowd and Churne might
be cut into one, and so Severne and Thames might be made almost joined friends)
are within 4. miles of Churne, which has its first spring nere Coberley, 7.
miles from Gloucester and falls into Isis about Laechlad, so that 4 miles
cutting in the Land betwixt Churne and Stroud, would be a means to make
passages from Thames to Severne, to Wye, to both the Rivers of Avon in England,
and to one River of Avon in Monnouthshire, which falls into the River of Vske
near Cirlion in Wales. By which means goods might be conveyed by water too
and from London, in Rivers at cheap rates without danger, almost to half the
countyes in England and Wales. But there is a devil or two called sloth and
covetuousnesse, that are the bane of all good endeavors and laudable Actions,
but more of this shall be said hereafter.

I being vncarted (with my boat) at a place called Stonehouse, in the
Afforesaid brook called Stroud, with passing and wading, with haling over high
banks at fulling milles (where there are many) with plucking over suncke
trees, over and under strange Bridges of wood and stone, and in some places the
brook was scarce as broad as my Boat, I being oftentimes impeached with the
bowghes and branches of willowes and Alder Trees, which grew so thick, hanging
over and into the brook, so that the day light or Sun could scarce peep
through the branches, that in many places all passages were stopped; so that I
was some times forced to cut and hew out my way with a hatchett; with this
miserable toil all the day I gat at night to a Mill called Froombridge Mill,
whereas (for our comfort) was neither Victualing house, meat, drink or
lodging, but that a good gentlewoman, one Mistress Bowser, there did comiserare
our wants, and though she were not accustomed to victual or lodge Travelers,
yet the rarety of our boat, and strangenes of my adventure moved her so far
that she at an casie rate did furnish us with good diet, my self with a bed
in an out-house, and my men and boys with a sweet new mowed and new made
hayloft.

I am much engaged to a gentleman (one Master John Stephens,) whose worthy
father Nathaniell Stephanes Esquire) is one of the Knights of the Shire for the
County of Gloucester, in this Honorable and high Court of Parliament. To this
House at Estington (corruptly called Eston) I was invited from the Mill with my
company, where we both at dinner and supper had welcome and good entertainment
on Sunday the first of August. I do further acknowledge my gratitude, ^o
Master Mew the Minister there, both for his Spiritual pains taking, twice the
said Saboth, and and also I thank him for other courtesies which he bestowed
on me.

Monday the second of August I took my leave at Froombridge Mill, and (falling
to our old work again of haleing and draweing from Mill to Mill, and from one
hindrance to another, I came at last to Whitmister, where after I had plucked
my boat over, I with my Murnivall of followers were stayed at the command of a
worthy Gentleman named Master Thomas LLoyd, to whose house near there we went
upon small intreatty, whence my sudden entertainment was so freely generous as
might have beseemed the person of a good Knight or Esquire. The said gentleman
went with me to the brooks mouth, and saw me entered into the River of Severne,
where (with thanks) I took my leave of him, and in two or three hours space
I swom up the Severne to the ancient City of Gloucester, where I was borne, and
where by reason of almost fifty years absence I was scarce known. But the
right worshipful Thomas Hill Esquire, Mayor of Gloucester gave me noble
entertainment, and invited me and my servants to his house: the next day at
dinner, and afterward about three in the afternoon, he came to the key at the
River side, where I entered my boat and took leave of him, and went to
Tewxbury being (some twelve miles by water that night, the fourth of August I
past by the city of Worcester up the River to Bewdley, where I lodged at the
sign of the Pyde Bull; The third of August, I went from Bewdley (being an
extreme rainy day) and that night approaching I saw a fair house belonging to
a Knight named Sir William VVhitmore, thither I went and demanded of some of
his servants whether lodging might be had for money, where a poor man did
answer, that if I would but cross the River with him, and go but half a mile
up a hill, I should have the best entertainment his poor cottage could
afford, and necessity having no law, I accepted willingly;

And surely that fair house I last spoke of, was of a strange operation, for I
was wet to the skin when I went thither, and in less then half a quarter of
an hour I came away as dry as ever I was in my life; this is a mystery or a
Riddle, for I saw not the butler.

The sixth of August I past thorough many sharp streams, fords, and shallowes
to a place called Coondlane-end, where I lodgd at a Smiths, it being the one
and only house there

The seventh of August (being Saterdy) I arived at Shrosebury, where I took
harbor at one Luckmans house upon the lower bridge, in the afternoon I went
to the Major Thomas wingfield Esquire, he bad me welcome (but had no leisure to
bid me drink,) but he came from the Town Hall with me to my lodging, and saw
me in my boat, and afterward with his hand and seal of his office, took
his leave dryly of me. But Master Thomas Jones, an Alderman there, that had
borne the office of a Bayliffe there, six times before Shrewesbury was a Mayor
Town, and (as I was informed he was the first Mayor of that place, and he
has also been high Sheriff of the County of Salop (or Shropshire) that
Gentleman invited me to dine with him on monday the ninth of August, where
there was no want of good company, fish, flesh, foul, venison, wine, and
welcome.

That afternoon I left Shewesbury, and returned down the River twelve miles
by water to Coonde-lane-end, where I lodged at my old Hosts the Smiths house.

The tenth of August I came to the City of Worcester, where the Right
worshipful William Norris Esquire, Mayor there made me extraordinarily
welcome, giving his testimonial under his hand and seal of Mayoraltie, that I
was there with my boat.

Wendnesday the eleventh of August I returned to Gloucester, where I was well
entertained at a venison feast, by the right Worshipful Master Mayor and his
Brethren. And presently (after dinner) I took boat and left Gloucester, and
past down the River 12. miles to a place called Gatcombe, there I stayed while
such time as the tide would serve me toward Brystow, (which was about
midnight,) But one Master Hooper that dwells there, being a very good Seaman,
did give me good instructions and directions to avoyde many dangers in that
nightly passage, besides I followed the tract of a boat laden with fruit which
was bound for Bristow, so that after all nights labor amongst rocks and
perrilous deepes, whirling Gulfes and violent streams, about the Break of
day, on Friday the 13 of August, I came to Kingroad, and staying there a while
for the flood, I past up that River of Avon at Hungroad by Crockhampill, and by
nine of the clock in the forenoone I came to the rich and famous City of
Bristoll.

My entertainment there I will set down in brief, which was by the Right
Worshipful John Tailor Esquier Mayor, a Gentleman endowed (by the bounty of
Heaven) both with right and left hand blessings, on Sunday the fifteenth of
August my self and followers were his invited guests twice: and the next day
he gave me a Certificate under hand and seal of my Arivall at that City,
and at my taking leave of him (he knowing that travel was chargeable) did
discharge a piece at me, and I unfearefull of the shot, did put it up most
thankfully; my humble thanks to my Cousin Master Thomas Tailor at the Marsh
there, whose friendship and favor I cannot requit or forget.

On the sixteenth of August I departed from Bristoll, toward the City of
Bath, which is ten miles distant by land, and near seventeene by water, which
with passing by water over four or five Milles and Wears, I attained to, at
which City of Bathe I stayed two nights, being welcome to the Right
Worshipful Master Matthew Clift Mayor, with good entertainment from him and
some other Townsmen, I took his hand and seal of Mayoraltie for my
Certificate, and so returned to Bristoll again on wednesday the eighteenth of
August.

The nineteenth of August, at midnight I left Bristoll, and with the tide past
down the River into Kingroad, where I lay at the Hole mouth (as they call it)
till the flood came, and day light beginning to appear, with the same tide I
past the broad water twelve miles to the River of Wye in Monmouth shire; that
day I past by Cheapstow, by the old Abbey of Tinterne, and to little Tinterne
where I lay all that night, in a very cleanely wholesome welsh English Alehouse.
The twenty one I came to Monmouth (the shire Town of that Country) where one
Master William Guilliam) did give me such entertainment at his house (on
Sunday the twenty two of August) as I am bound gratefully to remember.

Monday the twenty three of August, I left Monmouth, and (with a whole days
labor by water) according to the miles by land) I got not a foot of ground;
for at night when I came to a place called Lidbrooke, I was twelve miles from
Hereford, and I was but twelve miles from the said City when I was in the
morning at the Town of Mounmouth, this does show that the River of Wye does
run a little crooked from Lidbrooke. I went (on Saint Bartholomewes day) to
the Town of Rosse, where I lodged nere Wilton Bridge there: and on the
twenty five I went to Foane Hope; and the twenty six day about ten of
the clock I gat to the City of Hereford, which was the last place and the
end of my painful travel, Ioruney, Voyage, Perambulation, and Peregrination,
or what you please to call it; At Hereford I was invited to three several
places to dine on the friday, and I being not able to satisfy them all, gave
them all the slip, the three places were Edmond Ashton Esquire Mayor, the
second the Vicars at the Minster or College; thirdly, at a Tavern with
diverse Gentlemen, but I having gotten the Mayors hand and seal, because I
could not please all, left all, and stole away like a true man, leaving my
thanks for Master Mayor, and Master Phillip Traherne, with all the rest, for
their kindness to me the day before.

At my being at Hereford I was in a quandary or brown studdy, whether it
were best to sell my boat, and return to London by land, or else to bring the
boat home again either by land or water, or both, or how I could: at last I
determined and. resolved to bring the monumentall vessel back again, which
I did as follovveth.

On friday the 27. of August I passed down the River of Wye to a place called
Inckson Wear, where, with great entertainment and welcome I was lodged and
my men also at the house of one Master Aperley, dwelling there, to whom (for
many) favors I do acknovvledge my self to be extraordinarily beholding. And
on the Saturday I came to Lidbrook to my former Host Master Moss, where
understanding and knowing the passage down Wye and up Severne to be very long
and dangerous (especially if stormye weather should arise, the boat being
split, torn and shaken that she did leake very much) these things considered,
and that I was within five miles of Severne by land to Newnham, and that by
water thither there was no less then 50 miles, I hired a Wayne frow Lidbrook
to Newnham. And on Monday the 30. of August I past up Severne, by Gloucester
(and working all night) came in the morning betimes to Tewxbury, into another
River called Avon, which by thegreat charge and industry of Master Sands is
made Navigable, many miles up into the Country. Tuseday the 31 of August I
came to a Market Town in Worcestershire called Pershore. On the first of
September I came to the Ancient Town of Evesholm (corruptly called Esham) and
seeing that River to be further and further out of my way home, I hired
another Wayne from Esham to Burford, where I found a crooked brook called
VVindrush, in which brook (after one nights lodging) with my appendixes having
taken each of us a Burford bait, we passed many strange letts and hindrances
into the River of Isis or Thames: Again at Newbridge 12. or 14. miles from
Oxford by water. By which University I past to Abingdon. The fourth of
September, where I stayed till Wednesday the eight day: from thence was I with
my boat at home on the Friday following And thus in less then twenty days
labor 1200. miles were past to and fro in most hard, difficult and many
dangerous passages, for the which I give God most humble and hearty praise and
thanks; and now I crave the Readers patlence a little whilst I briefly treat
of a few things that may be profitable as well as pleasant.

I have before related of certain stops, milles, and wares that do hinder the
passages of boats of Thames and Isis, now I will treat a little of the abuses
and uses of other Rivers.

As for the River of Severne, it is almost as much abused as used, for an
instance, there are Coalemines near it, and by the benefit of that River, mane
a hundred family is served with suficient fuel at cheap rates, but some of
those Colemines do yield near 1000 tons of Rubbish yearly, which by reason
of the neerenesse of the River is all washed into it, and makes so many
shallowes, that in time Severne will be quite choked up, and all passage
stopped, but of that River more at the conclusion.

Avon River, that serves Bristoll would also be made to serve Bathe, and many
other parts and places, if Locks were made at west Hanham wear, and at
Kenisham, (with 4. or 5. places more) for the River does offer Gods blessing to
the peoples mouths, if they would but open their lips to receive them.

The River Wye is debard of all passages with Boats, by 7. Wears, 2. of them
are Monmouth Wear, and Wilton Wear, the other 5. are Inkson Wear, Carow,
Founehope, Hancocks and Bondnam Wear, these seven wears (like the seven
deadly sins) do dam up all goodness that should come from Monmouth to
Hereford by water, and if the iron milles in the forest of Deane do eat up
all the wood there (as it has already done reasonably well and ill) within
these few years, if the passages be stopped with Wears that coals cannot be
carried by water to Hereford and many other places, it is to be feared that
many rich men will be glad to blow their fingers ends in the Winter through
want of fiering, and numbers of poor will perish with extreme cold; the
complaints and cries are grievous already; which if I had not heard and seen I
would not have believed: and 7. locks at those Wears would help all and
hinder nobody, or else only two Locks would do much good, the one at
Monmouth Wear, and the other at Wilton, which is but eight miles from
Hereford, and good way by land, for the carriage of any thing that might be
brought by water.

For the other Kiver Avon, it comes from beyond the City of Coventry, and
running by the Towns of Stretford, Evesholme, and Pershore, it falls into
Severne at Tewexbury, so that Gloucestershire (my native Country) is encompast
round with Navigable Rivers, of which City and Country I will speak a
little for Countries sake, but most of all for love I bear to truth and
Charity.

Records and Histories do make trve relation of the antiquity of the City of
Gloucester, that it was built by Arviragus (a Britain King) in the time of
Claudus Tiberius Caesar, The said Claudius being the Roman Emperor, and
commander of the whole World; in whose Reign our blessed Savior suffered;
King Arviragus and Lucius (the first Christian King do lie there buried: when
the Saxons had the rule and domination here in the reign of Vier Pendragon and
the renowned worthy King Arthur, that City and County had a Duke, a Bishop, and
a Major; above 1100 years past, their names were Edell, Eldadus, and Eldor,
the shire is divided in 33. Hundreds, of which the City it self is one, and
two Hundreds more named Kings Burton and Dunstone, with 30. Towns and Villages
are annexed to the said City; which is all under the command of the Major and
his brethren. It has been anciently famous for the Trade of Merchandising,
(now altogether decayed, the more is the pity) King Henry the third was
Crowned there the 28. of October 1216. there has been many Dukes and Earls of
Gloucester since the Norman Conquest, as first Robert fittz Hamon, second
William de Mondevill, third Robert de Millent, which Robert was taken prisoner
and was exchanged for King Stephen, the said King being then taken prisoner by
Maude the Empress) the fourth Earl of Gloucester, was William son to the
said Robert, and Lord of Glamorgan, was buried at Kinsham 1183. John (who was
afterward King of England) was the third Earl of Gloucester, the sixth was
Almerick Mountfort, buried at Keinsham. Sixth Geoffery de mandevile, he was
slain at a Tilting or Tournament 1216. The 7. was Gilbert de Clare 1230. The
8. Richard de Clare 1262. The 9. Gilbert de Clare, the second of that name
1295. all these three were buried at Tewxbury. Richard de Mount hermer was the
10. Earl 1323. Gilbert de Clare (the son of Gilbert the second) was the 11.
Earl, was slain at Sherbin in Scotland, and buried at Tewxbury 1313. Hugh de
Audley the 12 Earl dyed 1347. buried at Tunbridge. Thomas of Woodstock, the
son of K. Edward the third, Duke of Gloucester, was murdered at Callice 1397.
Thomas Spencer the 13 Earl, was beheaded at Bristow 1400. Humphrey
Plantagenet, the fourth son of K. Edward the fourth (who was called the good
Duke Humphrey) was murdered, buried at S. Albons 1440. Richard Duke of
Gloucester (afterward King of England) was slain at the battle of Bosworth,
and buried at Leicester, 1485. Henry of Oatlands the fourth son to our
Sovereign Lord King Charels, was borne at Oatlands in Surey on wednesday the
eight of July 1640. now Duke of Gloucester, whom God bless. And so much (though
much more might be said for the honor of Gloucester and Glocestershire.

That commerce and Trade is the strength and sinnewes of the common wealth, the
chief and only subsistence of Cities and Corporations, it is apparently
evident. And the greatest honor and glory of Kingdoms, and the reasons why
several means there are that brings wealth and honor to a city, all of them
put together in one balance, and the trade of Merchandising in the other, it
shall overprize them al, upon it alone hangs and depends almost all other
trades, it brings great wealth and honor to all places where it is prosecuted
with success. Witness that of Leogorne, which within this 30. or 40. years
was but a poor fishing town which by that trade alone is now the greatest
Mart of the Medeterenian Seas. As likewise the Low Countries, although they
cannot build a ship, but must fetch the materials from 6. several kingdoms,
yet they build and have more ships then all Christendom besides, and have not
any thing almost of a natural staple commodity to deal upon, yet by that
trade alone they have engrossed the greatest part of the trade, of the
Christian World to themselves; and some of them (if they please) may be
gaineful in the trade of merchandising there. Now that the City of Gloucester
is situated in as convenient a place as any other within this Kingdom, the
reasons following shall demonstrate. First the said City has been an
ancient Port town, graced and infranchesed with privileges as ample as
London, or any other city or Town within this Kingdom, and dignified with the
title of the 3. son of the Kings, and has been famous in former ages for the
trade of Merchandising now altogether decayed; And is likewise situated in as
rich a soil as any in this Kingdom, whose Markets are always stored with
abundance and varieties of all commodities that the kingdom of England
affords, incident to the life and being of man. And it is likewise situated in
as convenient a place for any trade of Merchandising being upon the famous
River of Severne, then which there is not any more miles Navigable within this
Kingdom, and also the River of Avon being made Navigable with in four miles
of Warwick which stands in the heart and center of the said Kingdom, having
both the said Rivers, the advantage of all opportunities both for exportation
and importation of all goods and commodities whatsoever into and from at least
a third part of the said Kingdom, and which parts vents as many foreign
commodities and yields as many varieties of commodities as any other part of
the said Kingdom does. And which said parts cannot be served by or from any
other parts; then by the said Rivers unless they will fetch and bring their
commodities over the land three or four score miles at a great charge, which
cannot be conceived they will do, if it may be brought home to their doors
by water; the said City having by special grant under the Great Seal, a
spacious and convenient Key or Wharfe built of stone near the Kings
Custom House upon the said River, at which Key or Wharfe the Sea does in its
due course continually ebb and flow for the bringing in and out of ships, and
other boats of convenient burden, so that a ship of a hundred and fifty
tun, or thereabouts, may at every tide come to Gatcombe, which is but 12
miles from Gloucester, and therelye secure, and the River of Wye runs into
the Severne ten miles above Kingrode, where ships of two or three hundred
Tons may lie secure and safe.

And I have observed, that the trade that Bristoll drives up to the city of
Gloucester: and beyond it, in small Barks hoighes and Trowes, is at the least
two hundred Tons of all commodities, every spring, which is every fortnight
or less. And it is conceived and more then probable, that if the said trade of
Merchandising were settled within the said City of Cloucester, (as heretoforeit
has been) that neither the trades men of the said City of Gloucester, nor
others that live three or four score miles above it, will go down to
Bristoll, and may have their commodities in Gloucester, for diverse Reasons and
inconveniences that may thereby happen.

As first it saves threescoure miles riding in a dirty Country, next the
ventring of their goods from Bristoll to Gloucester by Water, sometimes cast
away, sometimes (the spring not serving) they are benept, and so cannot have
their commodities to serve their turn, but usually much abused by Trow-men, so
that many that live up the River beyond Gloucester, are thereby greatly
discouraged, and do many times buy their commoditys at London, Souththampton,
Hull, and Chester, and so bring it home by land three or fourscore miles at a
great charge, which if the trade were settled at Gloucester they would not do,
for which Reasons aforesaid and many other that might be alleged, it has
caused diverse men well skilled and versed in the said trade of Merchandising,
much to wonder that the said trade has been so long neglected, many of which
has concluded that the said City of Gloncester with the said key and havens,
and the Kings custom house thereunto, do lie as convenient for the said trade
of Merchandising, as any other City or Town within this kingdom, and might
drive the greatest trade of any other ( London only excepted.) For this City of
Gloucester, stands almost within (or near) the Center of this kingdom, and
for exportation and Importation, of all Native and foreign commodities (by
Reason of the riches of the soil) and Commodiousnesse of the Adjacent Rivers,
it is comparable to any place, except the Metropolis London. The village of
Galcombe being at first built for the trade of Gloucester, (most commodious.)
Now forasmuch as it may be objected, that the River of Seavern is dangerous, I
must confess it is so to those that know it not; and through want of practice
(whereby experience shows) but to those that know it, noe danger at all. For
there is not one Barge in twenty that has been cast away, but it has been by
the owners covetousnes in loding too deep, or venturing too rash upon the tide,
for fear they should be be kept, and so loose the spring, all which with a
certain trade up and down the River might wisely be prevented; All other
difficulties that can or may be alleged, are of small consequence to hinder,
if men of means and ingenious spirits do undertake it. The reason aforesaid
has induced some men well affected to the public good, and welfarre of this
City, to endeavor a beginning of this most honorable action, and were they
seconded with that encouragement from others, which if they were as willing, as
every way able, both with their place and means, The necessity of this cause
so earnestly requiring it, the necessity of this cause (I say) so greatly
moveing it, there is no doubt but by the blessing of the Almighty, and that in
a short time it might raise the ruins of the decayed trade of this City, so
much complained of by all, and make it as honorable as now it is contemptible,
which is and shall be the deadly prayers and desires of him, who presents this
Hoping that no Churlish Naball, Mallicious Sanballar, corrupted Tobiah, proud
Haman, unmercifull Dives, or any of the deadly sins, can or shall hinder so
good a work.

FOr who can (but with pity) here behold
These multitudes of mischiefs manifold,
Shall Rivers thus be barred with stops and locks,
With Mills, and Hills, with gravels beds, and rocks:
With wears, and weeds, and forced Islands made,
To spoil a pulique for a private Trade?
Shame fall the doers, and the Almighties blessng
Be heaped upon their heads that seek redreffing.
Were such a business to be done in Flanders
Or Holland among the industrious Netherlanders,
They to deep passages would turn our hills,
To Windmills they would change our watermils.
All helps unto these rivers they would aid,
And all impedunents shall be destroyed:
Our vagabonds (the wandering brood of Caine,)
They would enforce those runna gates take pain,
Whereby much profit quickly would accrue,
(For labor robs the hangman of his due.)
In common reason, all men must agree
That if these Rivers were made clean and free,
One Barge, with eight poor men's iudustrious pains,
Would carry more than forty carts or waines.
And every waine to draw them horses five,
And each two men or boy to guide or drive.
Charge of an hundred horse and eighty men
With eight men's labor would be served then,
Thus men would be implovd, and horse preserved,
And all the Country at cheap rates be served.
It Is said the Dutchmen taught us drink and swill,
I Am sure we go beyond them in that skill,
I wish (as we exceed them in what is bad,)
That we some portion of their goodness had:
Then should this worthy work be soon begun,
And with successful expedition done?
Which I despair not of, but humbly plead,
That God his blessings will increase and spread
On them that love this work, and on their heirs,
Their goods and chattels, and on all that is theirs?
I wish them blessed external, and internal,
And in the end with happiness eternal.
In the most part of my Journey, I came to few places but their was to be found
plenty of beggars, or Doggmaticall, Scismaticall, full of Beggarly Rudiments,
as the Apostle says, Galathians. 4. Opinionated diverse ways; and every one
would have his own fancy, to stand for his Religion; for they all differ one
from another, yet all join against that which they have been baptized and
brought up in; In one place there is a blind old woman, and she repeates, and
Interprets: in another a Pavier, and he will take upon him to mend the way.
Then their is a Strange fellow (a Baker,) one light loaf and he will new bolt,
sift, Knead, and mould Relligion. In another a quondam Brewers Clearke, (would
feign be a Priest) and Preaches most wonderfully in a malt house, besides a
zealous Sowgelder, that professes most desperate doctrine. Good Lord in thy
mercy look upon us, and give us true peace and unity, both in Church and
Common wealth.

FINIS.

