VERY SAD NEWS FROM IRELAND,

Two strong Garrisons taken from the REBELS: Mariborough Fort, and the Castle
of Athlone.

A thousand Protestants, Men Women and Children, at the mercy of the bloody
Rebels

Besides the loss of the Lord Dillon, Viscount Castelow, Sir William Gilburt
and his Son, 4. Ministers, and diverse Officers.

With Lists of their Names, and particulars of the losses in either of the
Garrisons, and the names of the chief Rebels, and their places.

A Remonstrance of the Protestant Clergy in Ireland, and the fortifying of
Dublin by the Marquess of ORMOND.

October 25. 1646.
These Papers concerning Ireland are printed and published according to ORDER.



LONDON, Printed for N. S. Anno Domini 1646.

Very bad News from Ireland.
Honored Sir,
A Little help will save this Kingdom, neglect will hazard the loss of it; the
ruin of which will be a fearful Alarm to both the other. Sir William Gilburt
Governor of the Fort of Mariborough in the Queens County, in the Province of
Leimster, had before the Cessation three complete Companies of Foot, and a
Troop of good Horse, with which he did not only secure his own. Garrison, but
preserved the Lord Dillon, Viscount Castle low. and his Forces in the Castle of
Athlon, in the County of Conaught upon the borders of Leimster, a Protestant
Garrison some ten miles, or more from him; but the Cessation being agreed, two
of those three Companies, and the Troop of horse were called off by the
Marquess of Ormoud, and not only the Castle of Athlone was (by this means
left naked) but Mariborough Fort in great danger. Sir William Gilburt having
only one Company left to keep the Garrison, and the Lord Dillon not 100. men in
Athlone.

Sir William Gilburt therefore sent up his eldest Son, his Deputie-Governour,
and a Gentleman that has done good service against the Rebels, to the
Parliament of England, whose dispatch for employments has been much wished for
by us.

Supplies so much, and so long desired, not coming, makes the old Irish to
insult the more, though one rout would (I verily believe) turn the skales.

But a Peace being concluded between the supreme Council, and the Marquess
of Ormond, it puts us into a far worse condition: Ormond and Digby with their
forces are got fafe to Dublin, and there they are fortifying, and mending their
Works from the College to St. Kevan, and Newstreet, and so to St. James Gate,
and since their return from Kilkennie the Guards have been stronger about the
City; For the Marquess of Ormond and the Lord Digby are in some fear of the
Rebels that are risen against the peace concluded.

The Rebels missing their design of murdering the Marquess of Ormond, and
Digby, with them in Kilkennie, as was plotted, they with their Forces marched
into the Queens County in Leimster, within 20 miles of Kilkennie, and there
took the Fort of Mairborough by surprise, notwithstanding the Peace concluded,
Sir William Gilburt, with all the Officers and Soldiers, Ministers, and
Inhabitants, to the number of 1000. men, women, and children of the Town that
are Protestants, all being at the mercy of the Rebels.

And the Castle of Athlone in Conaught was also taken by them in the like
manner. The Lord Dillon and all his Officers and Soldiers were surprised, and
are at the mercy of those bloody Rebels.

These Forces of the Irish (in number almost 1000. and all armed) are within
little now then twenty miles of Dublin.

These two places which they have taken, the loss of them is great, Athlone
stands upon the River side just upon the mouth of Lough Ree, toward
Castle-More, and Mariborough Fort is in the heart of Leimster.

Sir, for your further satisfaction herein, I refer you to the Papers here
enclosed, and shall ever apply my self to be

Cork the 2. of Septem. 1646. Your most humble Servant, N. T.

A Remonstrance from the Protestant Clergy of Ireland, to the Marquess of
ORMOND.
May it please your Excellency,
WE Archbishop, Bishops, and the rest of the Clergy of the Kingdom of
Ireland subscribing, are wonderful sensible how your Excellency (out of zeal
to Gods glory and the Protestant Religion, and out of loyalty to his Majesty)
has in this great distemper, with much hazard, singular wisdom, and vigilant
care, preserved not only in this City, but also in all the out-garisons the
free and full exercise of the true reformed Religion, according to the Lyturgie
and Canons so many hundred years received in the Church, which (with bleeding
hoarts we may say) is more then we know to be in any part of the three
Dominions. As also we do most heartily acknowledge, that by your very great
pains and labor, you have at last concluded a most necessary peace, which we
humbly conceive to be the only means to continue those great blessings of
Religion and Loyalty amongst us, and to be the only hopeful way to reduce
this whole Kingdom to his Majesty's obedience. And withal we do most
ingeniously profess, that out of your Piety and Nobleness, you have
vindicated our Callings and Places from contempt, and protected in from
personal injuries, and provided a subsistence for us, without the which many
of us had undoubtedly starved. Out of the deep sense of all which, and many
more favors then we are able to express, we were the most unthankefull of
all men, if we should not praise God for your Excellency, and return to you our
most hamble and hearty thanks, faithfully promising to continue our fervent
prayers to God, and our very best endevors for strengthening your hands in
managing the great trust His Majesty reposeth in you, and in maintaining
Religion, and the peace now established amongst us. Having made this just and
necessary Remonstrance of our gratitude and resolutions, we do most humbly
beseech your Lordship to continue (as we are very confident you will) your
care to preserve the Religion, book of Service, public worship in the decency
and comeliness thereof, and the true Apostolical government of the Church now
exercised amongst us, against all opposition whatsoever, And graciously to
persist in your care to provide some competent maintenance for us, till we may
conveniently return to our Benefices. And if any of our number shall be
disaffected to the Religion, Book of Service, public worship and government of
the Church, His Majesty's Service, or disturbers of the present peace, we do
not supplicate for such, but leave them to your Lordship to be proceeded with
as you shall find convenient.

Subscribed by the Protestant Bishops and Clergy

A List of the Names of the Families of the Rebels that rose against the Peace.
THE Family of the O-moores. The Family of the Fitz-Patricks. The Family of the
Brennons. The Family of the O-Conners. The Family of the O-Ryleyes,
A List of the Places out of which these Rebels rise.
In Leimster.
The Kings County. The Queens County. County Catebigh. The County of
Wexford. The County of Kilkennie. The County of Westmeath. The County of
Raymond.
In Conaught.
The County of Galloway. The County of Clare. The County of Towmond.

They had their Rendezvouzes between Caterlagh and Kilkennie in Leimster.

A List of the chief places from whence these Rebels are relieved.
O. Carolus, O. Drone, Kilkennie, Caterlagh. O Kirne, Slewmerosle, O. Done,
Laghlin, Ido.
A List of what was taken in the Castle of Athlone, in the County of Roscomen,
which is taken by the Rebels.
The Lord Dillon, Viscount Castelon. The Governor of the Castle. 8 Officers.
80 Soldiers. 100 Arms. With the rest of the Ammunition of the Castle.
A List of what was in the Fort of Mariborough in the Queens County, which is
taken by the Rebels; As also in the Town, where they were all at the mercy of
the Rebels.
Sir William Gilburt, Governor of the place. Mr. William Gilburt his Son. An
Officer under him. E. Fitz-Gerhard. All Sir William Gilburts Officers and
Soldiers. All the Arms and Ammunition in the Fort. 4 Protestant Ministers.
(VIZ.) Mr. Humphrey Gore. Mr. Hugh Gun. Mr. Essex Digby. Mr. John Birkhead.
1000 Protestants, men, women, and children.
FINIS.

