CHRISTMAS IN and OVT: OR, OUR. LORD and SAVIOR Christ's Birthday.

To the Reader.
Good Joshua once ordained a Holy Day,
Because the Sun stood still in Gibeon,
And at his Prayers that the Moon did stay
His course, above the Veil of Aialon:
And shall not Christians still give thanks and praise
On the yearly day our blessed redeemer came?
Shall Powder Treasons and thanksgiving days
Be still observed in Records of Fame?
Then let not Christ's Birthday forgotten be,
Remember him that does remember thee.
Thine JOHN TAILOR.

LONDON, Printed by T. H. for Francis Coals, and are to be sold at his shop in
the Old-Bayly, 1653.

Christmas, or Christ's Day, or Christ's Birthday.
INimitation of my great and glorious Lord and Master (Jesus Christ) in love to
them that hate me, I am come to them that love me not. My Almighty Master was,
is, and ever will be GOD, from whom nothing was, is, or ever shall be hid; and
head d not only know, but commiserate the miseries of his enemies (most
miserable mankind) to whom he had often sent his Partriarks, Prophets, and
other Messengers of Peace and prosperity, and how they were, and should be
entertained in the world; God knew before, and all Histories of the secred
Volumes, or other Books of Eclesiasticall Writings will testify.

And as my good Master did know how coursely he should be dealt withal (by
misbelieving hard hearted Jews) yet he came on this Day, from whom I have my
name of CHRISTMAS, or Christ's Day: Even so, I come this 25. of December, though
I know I shall be hardly welcome to a great many; yet I am sure that as many as
love my Master, will rejoice to see this Day: But as my surname of Mas, there
is much exceptions taken, by some that understand not what Mas, or Christmas
means.

I have heard Learned men say, that the word Mas does signify some heavy or
ponderous thing, as Massa is a Wedge of Gold or Iron, or any thing that is
pressed or made into a lump of any thick matter of Dough, or Curds, Cheese, or
such like; but my surname of Mas is mistaken, for my name is Christi missi, or
Christ sent, as being sent from God to us this Day. Christ had his Mission, he
came not before he was sent (as himself said to his Disciples.) He that
believes in you believes in me, and he that believes in me, believes in him
that sent me. Here it is plain that my Master was sent, and as he was sent, so
he sent his Apostles, and they gave mission to the succeeding Ministry, and
they that were sent went, and none were so bold to intrude into the Ministry
without his Mission or Commission of being sent: and so much concerning my name
of Christmas.

But I am more properly called Christ's Day, for he himself did honor me with
that Name, and though all days are his (for as he is God, he is the Ancient of
Days) for whem the Jews did speak of ABRAHAM, Joh. 8, 56, My Master said,
Before ABRAHAM was, I am for ABRAMAM saw my Day and rejoiced in it, and was
glad. He appointed me to be the peculiar Day of his blessed Birth, he was
promised in Paradise, foretold and foreseen by the Patriarks and Prophets;
proclaimed by Angels, with Glory be to God in the highest, peace on Earth, good
will toward men, Luke 11. 14 A Song or Christmas Carroll, of three parts, to
God. to Earth, to Men (Glory, Peace, and Good will) a gracious Consort sung by
celestall Spirits, Angels, and a multitude of heavenly Soldiers, they sung and
rejoiced all for our good, and not for their own: Then let men sing Psalms
and Anthems in Churches, and Hymns and Carols in our Houses, let us give glory
to God on high, and he will give us peace below.

Faith is very clear sighted, for ABRAHAM was more than two thousand years
before Christ came in the flesh, yet (with the Eye of Eaith) he saw Me, he saw
my Master and my Masters day, and rejoiced in it; and his rejoicing was
approved of, but the Jews which rejoiced not were reprehended. The holy
Patriark rejoiced, and Christ allowed it, and he did dislike the unbelieving
Jews that rejuyced not. The Jews did not (and do not) observe it, but all
Christians did, do, and will celebrate it and acknowledge it, for no Christian
will strike, blot, or scrape Christ's Day out of the Kallender.

The Prophet Isaiah did write of Christ's coming 600 years before he came, in
these words, Behold a Virgin shall conceive and bear a Son, and he shall call
his name IMMANUELL, or EMANUELL, Esaias 8. v. 14.

And again in the 9. Chapter v. 6. For unto us a Child is borne, and unto us a
Son is given: He is born, and unto us a Son is given born of the blessed Virgin
his Mother, and given by Almighty God his Father: a Child Natus, a gift Datus,
Is borne, Is given: The Prophet says not, was borne and given, but is, which
is ever, in the present Tense, Borne still in the heart, soul, and memory of
every Christian. He that Was, and Is, and Is to come, Was borne a Child and is
born a Child unto us, Was given a Son, and is given a Son unto us, this Day of
my Masters blessed Nativity.

In the second of S. Luke, v. 10 11. Then the Angel said unto them, be not
afraid, for behold I bring you glad tidings of great joy which shall be to all
the people, a Savior is born on this Day, Christ's Day, Christ's Birthday, my
day, Christmas day.

The Angel appeared to the Shepherds, and told them news of a Lamb, the Lamb
of God that takes away the sins of the World: a Lamb that was come to save all
the sheep of Israel that were lost, and lost everlastingly we should have been,
had not this blessed Lamb come and redeemed us.

And as he was a Lamb, so likewise he was a Shepherd; the true Shepherd the
chief Shepherd, 1 Pet. 5. 4. the good Shepherd, Joh. 10 11. 14. so we read
that his Birth and Birthday was first made known unto Shepherds. Indeed
Shepherds were in odious and contemptible abomination amongst the Idolatrous
Egyptians, Genesis 46. 32. So was and is my Master Christ's Name and Birthday to
the misbelieving Jews, miscreant Turk, and Sectarian, Schismatic, outside
seeming Christians. This day he that was prophesied of to come, did come, and
he that was promised is come; an Angel preached at his coming, and Qaires and
multitudes of blessed Spirits sung, when our Savior came, who was, is, and
ever will be, not only a Savior, but salvation it self.

He was the Word, and the Word was God, and God was the Word. Here God (the
Word) was a Child, a Babe, an Infant; and here the Word was not able to speak
a word, Joh. 14. And the Word was made Flesh, and dwelt among us, we saw the
glory thereof, as the glory of the only begotten Son of the Father, full of
Grace and Truth.

God sent his Son this day; note who he was that did send, and what it was that
he sent: He sent first to us, that should in all humility have been Petitioners
to him; we were enemies to God, to us he had sent often by his Messengers; but
this Day he sent his Son, who was and is himself.

Therefore let our deserved misery, and Gods undeserved mercy, love and
compassion, be thankfully remembered this day, and every day in all places,
times, ages, and generations.

This Day, Mercy and Truth are met together, and Righteousness and peace have
kissed each other, Truth shall flourish out of the Earth and Righteousness
has looked down from heaven, Psalm. 85. Here was a gracious and happy meeting,
here the Lord Chief Justice of Heaven and Earth, brings justice, truth, and
righteousness to judge, and mercy and compassion to save; here mercy showed
her self a good Mistress to misery: This Day he came in clouts that will come
in Clouds. And without controversy great is the Mystery of godliness, which
is, God is manifested in the Flesh, justified in the Spirit, seen of Angels,
preached to the Gentiles, believed on in the world, and received up in Glory, 1 Timothy 3. This was a great M^stery indeed; this was the sum and substance of
all Tropes, Types, Figures, Shadows, Sacrifices, Ceremonies, and the one and
only absolute fulfilling and accomplishment of all Prophesies. And in the
first Chapter to the Hebrews, verse 1, 2, 3. the Apostle says: And at sundry
times, and in diverse places, God spoke in the old time to our Fathers by the
Prophets; in these last days he has spoken to us by his Son.

Thus my Master (who had no beginning) did begin this day to come and dwell
amongst sinful men; the Son of God, the King of Glory came this Day, and this
Day was the first Day of Christianity to all Christians, and as many as have
true faith in Christ.

This was he to whom God the Father said, Psalm. 2. Thou art my Son, this Day
have I begotten thee. And this was he that in the same Psalm was prophesied to
say, Lord I will preach thy Law and declare thy Will. The Evangelist S. Luke
says, Chap. 2. Ver. 12, 13. And this shall be a sign unto you, you shall find
the Babe swadled and laid in a Cratch, some read ^t in a Manger. Here is to be
noted the great humility of my Master that though he were Lord and maker of
all, the first joyful tidings of his birth was, not brought to Princes and
Potentates, or to Scribes, Pharisees, Lawyers, or Doctors; but he was
graciously pleased to be first declared to poor and humble Shepherds, and not
to be borne in any magnificent or stately Palace, or in the best room in the
Inn: No, the Inkeeper had his Chambers filled with Guests more welcome and
gainful then Christ: There was no room for him in the Inn, therefore the
Redeem of mankind had entertainment in a Stable amongst Beasts, swadled and
laid in a Cratch.

Neither would he be borne in any great or glorious City, Jerusalem had not the
honor to be graced with the Birth and first presence of the Son of God; in
great Cities there has ever been more misery than mercy, and more persecution
than pity; therefore great Jerusalem was the place of his bitter death and
passion, and little Bethlehem was honored with his birth, as it was prophesied
many years before, by the Prophet Micah, Chap. 5. in these words: And thou
Bethlehem Ephrathah are little to be among the thousands of Judah, yet out of
thee shall he come forth unto me, that shall be the Ruler in Israel, whose
goings forth have been from the beginning, and from everlasting.

And Heb. 2. 16. For he in no wise took the Angels, but the seed of Abraham he
took.

He took our nature (in the seed of Abraham) upon him, the nature of Angels he
took not: He came this day to help us, who had most need of a Savior; he gave
to us not only a dignity which he gave not to Angels, but also he gave
himself for us, and sure we cannot take a safer or wiser course, than
thankfully with all humility to give our selves to him that gave himself for us.

My Master gave power to his Church to celebrate and to ordain and command the
annual celebration of his blessed Nativity, I have twelve days to attend me,
and twelve months I do absent my self before I come again, the kind or
course entertainment, the courteous or churlish usage to me, does not, or
cannot increase, or diminish my Masters glory; or add to me, or take from me
one minute of time; if men could be as faithful and charitable as Abraham as
humble as David, as mild and meek as Moses, as zealous (...) Elias, as patient
as Job, as solicitous as Martha, and as devout as the blessed Virgin Mary:
those gracious gifts have been, are, and will be a happiness unspeakable to
such as are by supernall grace endowed with them, but the profit of them is
only theirs that have them, for he that is rich in mercy cannot be enriched by
the piety-vertue, or merits of men, so that every Christian may truly say,

Lord, the great love thou beat'st to me is thine,
But all the profit of it is only mine.
So likewise if poor old Christmas day be made welcome, I am not the richer or
fatter, if I be ill entertained, I will neither be poorer or leaner: Let them
make me a feasting or fasting day, all my joy or grief is not of long
continuance, I am but a short day, and not far from the shortest day, a^^
therefore their loves are but short to my Master, that will not rejoice and be
glad at the coming of his anniversary Birth day.

The old year was before Christ, when misbelieving Jews and Gentiles lived in
the darkness of ignorant Idolatry under the Law, (or without the Law) but the
New year came when the Father of Lights sent my Master (the Light of the
world) who by the glorious light of his Gospel expelled and dispersed the
black clouds and mists of Egyptian blindness, and devillish-Idolatry.
Therefore with the old year let is shake off our old faults, (the deeds of
darkness) and with the new year let us be renewed in our minds, and follow the
true light, and amend our manners, and let our hearts be filled with praises and
thanksgivings, before our bellies be overfill'd with meat.

There were lately some overcurious, hot zealous Brethren, who with a
superbian predominance did do what they could to keep Christmas day out of
England, they did in diverse places Preach Me for dead in Funeral Sermons, and
labored tooth and nail to bury me alive in the grave of oblivion; they were of
opinions, that from the 24. of December at night, till the 7. of January
following, that Plumb-Pottage was mere Popery, that a Collar of Brawn was an
obhomination, that Roast Beef was Antichristian, that Mince Pies were Relics
of the Whore of Babylon, and a Goose, a Turkey, or a Capon, were marks of the
Beast.

In detestation of which superstitious diet, they assumed to themselves
spiritual and temporal jurisdiction, power, and authority to search and
plunder Pottage-pots, to ransack and rifle Ovens, and to strip spits stark
naked, and triumphantly carry the pillage to be disposed of as they pleased,
for the profit and edification of the righteous, and chastisement of the wicked.

As there are many sundry Nations, so are there as many inclinations: the
Russian, Polonian, German, Belgian, are excellent in the Art of Drinking, the
Spaniard will Wench it, the Italian is revengefull, the French man is for
fashions, the Irish man Usquebagh makes him light heel'd, the Welsh man's
Cowss-boby works (by infusion) to his fingers ends, and translates them into
the nature of lime-twigs, and it is said, that a Scot will prove false to his
Father, and dissemble with his Brother; but for an English man he is so clear
from any of these Vices, that he is perfectly exquisite and excellently endued
with all those noble abovesaid exercises.

I am old and bold to tell the nose wise Brethren of these critic days, that
my great Master is King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, who is the ancient of
days, who never had beginning, and never shall have end. And on this day,
which is kept in a thankful remembrance of his blessed incarnation, 1652 years
since, I [Christmas] have not failed to make my aniversary and yearly progress
into Christendom.

When my Master Christ was graciously pleased to exchange his unexpressible
grory for man's unsupportable misery, when (in his mercy) he put off the Majesty
of his God head, and took upon him our miserable Manhood, leaving his glorious
Throne for a Maunger, when he laid by his immortal honor, and clothed
himself with our shame, to free all true believers from eternal damnation:
Then (on his days birth) my day began. Then on that day, and at that time, as
the Shepherds were in the field, they were saluted with an Angel, and a
multitude of the heavenly Host with a most celestial Carroll.

Luke 2. All glory be to God on the Highest,
And on the Earth be Peace,
Good will toward men, it is the will of Christ,
Our joys should never cease.
Thus was my good Master ushered into the World, and for his sake, I with my
followers (being 12 days in number) honest Stephen and true John, with my
Innocents Pages, and all the rest have been welcomed and joyfully entertained
ever since, by all sorts of people that have loved or do love and honor the
memory of the birthday of my gracious and glorious Lord and Master.

But now of late the case is quite altered, Christ and Christmas are both alike
welcome; and if the Savior of Mankind should come personally here amongst us
again, he were likely (through ignorance, malice, and madness) to be
re-crucified: if Christmas may be so bold as to ask those fiery spirited
people the same question as my Master might have asked the Jews; for which of
my good works that I have done do you stone me?

So I may say to England, what harm have I ever done unto you? I am sure I
never persuaded you to be so uncharitable as to cut one another throats, and
to starve and famish the poor as you have done continually) and do still ever
since you banished me from your territories, and it is to be feared that you
will never be quiet, or have a happy Peace amongst you, till you do give me
better welcome for my Masters sake; he is the Prince of Peace, and his peace
you will never have that do unthankfully despise and neglect to solemnize the
day of his most blessed Nativity.

It is a lamentable and too long a story to relate in what a pitiful quandary
I and my followers have been in any time these twelve years, when we came into
this Country: I was in good hope that so long a misery would have made them
glad to bid a merry Christmas welcome: But welcome or not welcome, I am come,
and at my coming (a little before day) I heard the Cock crow merrily, which I
took for a good Omen, or Preface of a most free and joviall accommodation,
which rejoiced me much, for I and my men were as hungry as Hawks, and as cold
as Snow-ball: the sable curtains of the night being drawn, I gazed to and fro
to make choice of the best houses, and housekeepers to take up my quarters
amongst them; but alas, the comfort that I found was colder then the weather;
indeed I saw many stately buildings, but very little smoke from the Chimnies,
for most of the owners did carry their Kitchins in Boxes, and the best and
dearest part of their Roast-meat in Pipes; besides there was a great complaint
that Mr. Tax and Mr. Plunder had played a long game at sweep-stake amongst them,
and that they would willingly have provided good cheer for me, but that they
are so miserable poor that they were not able to feed themselves.

This was no good news to me and my company; we had not been used to such
uncomfortable breakfasts, which made us all search up and down the chief Cities
for better cheer, but my especial mind was to try the courtesy of London,
where I entered a fair house which had been an Aldermans, but it was now poffest
with a grave Fox-fur'd Mammonist, whom I found sitting over a few cinders to
warm his gouty toes, (for no other part of him did need the comfort of a fire,)
from head to heel he was fur'd like a Muscovite, and instead of a Bible he had
a Bond in his hand, which he poard upon to see if it were forfeit or no; he
seldom looked upward, but as it were riveted his eyes to the earth, as if he
had been looking for a Mine: his keys of his treasure were hanged at his waste,
and his clutches always on them, and he no sooner espied me and my Company,
but he cried Thieves, Thieves, and reviled his poor starveling servant, saying,
thou Villain, have thou let in base Rakehells to rob me, and cut my throat.

Then I began to entreat him to be patient, saying, Sir, there are none here
that intend to hurt you, if you take any harm, it must be your self that must
do it to your self, and not we. My name is Christmas these gray haired men
that are with me, are men of my old acquaintance; they are all poor and true;
we are come to dine with you, but if it be not your pleasure to give us
entertainment, it is not our purposes to force it.

This old muckworme cast as dogged a look upon me, as if I had brought him a
privy Seal to borrow money, and at last he opened his mouth and said, thou old
faucy intruding fellow, I prithee let me have thy absence, thou come to do
nothing but mischief, to make men waste and spend so much to entertain thee in
twelve or thirteen days excess of riotous Gluttony and Gurmondizing, that for
12. months after they can hardly purchase a good meals meat; besides thou art
attended and waited on by a cutsed crew of Gamesters, Cheaters, Swearers,
Roarers, and whim wham Gambolls; me thinks one of thy age should have left off
thy Coltish tricks, and prodigal expenses: Do thou see any one that has a
care to live and thrive in the world, to be so mad as to mind thee and thy
Bables, we are grown somewhat wiser in twelve years, than our Fathers were in
twice eight hundred: There dwells my worshipful good neighbor (Sir Achitophel
Pinchgut, and M. Nabal (an ancient Justice of the Quorum) it is neither they or
my self that had ever come to have any estates, if we had entertained thee, or
relieved Beggars: I tell thee if we and a great many more had been as lavishly
minded as thou would have us to be, we had then been as poor as thou, or any
of the rest of the vaggabond beggarly Varlets that are thy hangers on, and so
let them hang still, or starve, all is one to me; therefore without any more
ado, avoid my house, I have nothing for thee, neither am I in the giving
humor at this time.

I could have answered him with divine Commandments and Precepts, with many
humane Histories and Examples concerning good housekeeping, and charitable
Hospitality; but every virtue (in this Age of Vice) is between two extremes,
(as my Master was betwixt two Thieves) as liberallity is in the middle, but
prodigality and covetousness are on each side of her, always ready to spoil
and devour her.

All true Christians do know, that what relief soever is given to the poor,
is lent unto my Lord and Master Christ, and he has, is, and will be bound to
see it paid with Heavenly interest; but he is a surety that few Usurers will
accept of.

At my departure from this old Father Penny-wise, his Son. (M. Pound.
foolish) desired his crabbed Sire to bid me stay and dine with him, at which
the miserable Curmudgeon was even half mad with anger, calling his Son
spend-thrift, and prodigal Jack-an-Apes, saying, that if he bad me to dinner,
that I with my followers, would take the boldness to sup with him, and lodge
in his house till Twelftide was past, and that I would draw more Guests to his
house then he had a mind to bid welcome, and more Beggars to his gate then he
had a mind to relieve.

Thus was poor Christmas used, which made me and my men look blank upon the
matter, and without bidding him farewell, I took a going welcome from him, and
wandering into the Country up and down from house to house, I found little or
small comfort in any; some would only smile upon me, and (because I should not
piss at their doors) they would give me a cup of single, slender, lean, small
Beer, or Ale, which had the virtue to cause a man to make an Alphabet of faces,
for it would have warmed a man's heart like pangs of death in a frosty morning.
And as thinking or remembering former prosperities, do make adversities seem
the more heavy: So I call to mind the vigorous spirit of the Buttry, Nappy
Nut-browne, Berry-browne, Ale Abelendo, whose infusion and inspiration was wont
to have such Ale^borate operation to elevate and exhillerate the vitals, to put
alementall Raptures and Enthusiasms in the most capital Perricranion, in such
plenitude that the meanest and most illiterate Plow jogger could speedily play
the Rhetorician, and speak alequently, as if he were mounted up in to the
Aletitude. This merry memory (or sad remembrance) of Ale, caused me to ask the
reason of this alteration, to which question an honest Smith made this answer.

Alas Father Christmas (quoth he) our high and mighty Ale, that would formerly
knock down Hercules, and trip up the heels of a Giant, is lately struck into a
deep Consumption, the strength of it being quite gone with a blow which it
received from Westminster, and there is a Tetter and Ringworme called Excise,
does make it look thinner then it would otherwise do; before these times every
Brewer did keep two strong fellows to carry the Malt, and one weak boy to
pump the Water; but now they have shifted or changed hands unluckily, for the
poor boy carries the Malt, and the two strong knaves carry the Water.

Indeed (to speak truth) my best and freest welcome with some kind of Country
Farmers, I will describe one for all the rest in Devonshire and Cornwall, where
though both the Armies had been with them, and given them several visits,
insomuch that if the Cavaliers had taken their Horses, thee other Party made
bold with their Oxen; if the one had their Sheep, the other played sweep-stake;
so that (according to the Country phrase) great Crock, and little Chock, all
was I go; yet as soon as they spied me, they saluted me with much love and
reverend courtesy. The Good Man, with the Dame of the house, and all the rest
of the men were exceeding glad to see me, and with all Country courtesy and
solemnity, I was had into the Parlour, there I was placed at the upper end of
the Table and my company about me, we had good cheer and free welcome, and we
were merry without Music.

A, ha, quoth J, this piece of the world is well mended, our Dinner is better
then our Breakfast, this was as Christmas would have it, here is neither too
much cost, nor too l^ede meat; here is no surfeit on the one side, or hunger on
the other; they are always the best Feasts where the poor are relieved, for
the rich can help themselves.

After Dinner we arose from the Board, and fate by the fire, where the Harth
was imbrodered all over with roasted sted Apples, piping hot, expecting a bole
of Ale for a cooler (which presently was transformed into warm Lambswooll:)
within an hour after we went to Church, where a good old Minister spoke very
Reverendly of my Master Christ, and also he uttered many good speeches
concerning Me, exciting and exhorting the people to love and unity one with
another, and to extend their charities to the needy and distressed.

After Prayers we returned home, where we discoursed merrily, without either
profaneness or obscenity; supper being ended, we went to Cards, some sung
Carrols, and merry Songs (suitable to the times;) then the poor laboring
Hinds, and the Maid servants, with the Plow-Boyes, went nimbly to dancing, the
poor toyling wretches being all glad of my company, because they had little or
no sport at all till I came amongst them; and therefore they leaped and skipped
for joy, singing a catch to the Tune of hey, Lets dance and sing and make good
Cheer,
For Christmas comes but once a year.


Thus at active Games and Gambols of Hotcockles, shooing the Wild Mare, and the
like harmless sports, some part of the tedious night was spent; and early in
the morning we took our leaves of them thankfully, and though we had been
thirteen days well entertained, yet the poor people were very unwilling to let
me go; so I left them quite out of hope to have my company again for a
Twelve-months space, that if I were not banished in my absence they should have
my presence again the next 25. of December 1653.

Glory be to God in the Highest, Peace on Earth, and to Men Good Will.
FINIS.

