WESTMINSTER FAIR, Newly Proclaimed.

My Muse thus venters to open her Ware,
And bids you welcome to Westminster Fair.
WHEREIN,

Votes Orders, Ordinances, this September,
Are to be sold, with many a rotten Member,
A Parliament Man; I need say no more:
A close Committee-man that loves a W --
A Sequestrator; sure the Devill's not worse
Then an Excise man, far a greater curse:
Only a Pursuivant, to make Hell full,
The Country poor, the City a mere gull.
It Is but a penny, in: too small a fee,
To sell you Spectacles, these strange sights t'see.
Printed in Kings-street 22. Sept. 1647.

Westminster Fair.
Sound Drums and Trumpets.
O yes, O yes, O yes, I cry,
Parliament wares, good people buy.
IT is Decreed and Ordered by the Synod of Divines, assembled in holy
Convocation for the Reformation of Moses Law, David's Psalms, the Apostles
Creed, and the New Testament etc. That this Fair (now consecrated) shall
forthwith begin: wherein all their Synodicall const^utions, learned and pious
debates, consultations and conclusions, (besides Votes, Ordinances, and Orders)
shall be set to sale for the present payment of the Army, without further
delay; and the remaining sums to be put into a large Chest with 4. Locks,
the Keys whereof shall be kept by a Committee of 4. of the holy Synod; viz. by
Corah Edwards, Ananias Gouge, Dathan Burges, and Abiram Byfield: and they the
said Commissioners shall carefully keep and preserve all profits arising from
the said Fair, in sale of all the said Commodities, hereafter mentioned, for
payment of the Army, for transportation into New England, or Virginia, in case
the Army will not disband, there to newplant a Presbyterian Nurcery, and to
build us stately Palaces, and buy us all things necessary for our intended
journey. That if we shall have any remaining gaynes, or sums, (the premises
above considered) that a moyity go to impeached Members, whether of the Lords
or Commons from time to time; that so they may provide them of all necessaries
to go with us, the better to effect so great and pious a Work, and to go
forward with our Reformation there, which we are not suffered to finish here,
with all allacrity, joy, and comfort; and for the more easy coming in of the
Countries to the said Fair, that all and every the said Forts. Fortifications,
Halfe-Moones, and Brest-workes, be speedily flung down and laid level with
the earth and that those 4. that keep the said Chest before mentioned, shall
not (upon any pretense whatsoever) open the same at any time, without there be
four Earls, three Lards, eight Commons, (provided they be impeached Members)
and four of the most grave, sober, wise and discreet of the Synod of Divines
for the pious uses aforesaid.

This Fair was no sooner proclaimed with great solemnity (by all the Assembly)
but the Boothes, Shopps. and Stalls were presently furnished with all manner of
Parliament Commodities; as Votes, Orders, Ordinances, New Directories, and all
the pretty toys that the whole body of a Kingdom could devise.

The first Shop I came into, was a fair large Room with goodly Hangings,
stately stools, and at the upper end an empty Chair richly imbroydered, and
two or three at one corner whispering with wri^ings in their hands: I asked what
they sold there? presently one cries out, Who buys any Bishops Lands?

Come customers, come; here is fertile Earth will yield,
As fair a grain as ere was sown in field:
Here Is pastures, corn, and here are well grown woods:
Here Is Bishops houses; all their books and goods;
Here Is Canterburyes head, empty of brains,
Take It in your hands, I Will sel't you for small gains.
Here Is Altars, Railes, Organ-pipes, and Bellows,
Pictures of Saints, and other painted fellows:
Heers Crosses, Surplices, Miters, and Copes,
Caps, Hoods, and Rochets; beside hemp for Sacrilegious snares to hang them.
ropes. --
Would you know how to sway the Royal Throne?
Live all like Kings, and make a King like none:
I sell that Art, of all the Devil ere made,
You never saw more better at the trade.
Come buy new tricks, new juglings, new disclosed,
To teach you how your King shall be deposed.
Buy a new Covenant, Declaration;
It Is as good as ever ruined Nation.
Buy a new Creed, for two pence that is the price,
'Twill teach you a New way to Paradise.
Buy a new Directory, newly made,
Buy a Scoth brother, now a Reformade:
Buy a good King, two hundred thousand pounds,
Jockies must have, to cure his That the Cavileers gave him, at Marston moore,
where he run away, and bid the Deele take the hindmost.
mickle wounds.
If you want treasons, or confounding plots,
To ruin Kingdoms, or ou^vie the Scots,
Here buy this Plot, and take it on my word,
It is the best the Devil can afford;
Here Is a new Plot to fetch you in more Plate,
And make the Public Faith renew its state.
Come buy this J^m; sure it cannot harm ye,
'Twill stop the mouth of your devouring Army.
Here Is a new Stratagem for the City;
To pump two M^llions, it is so witty;
Come Fat-heads buy, your hansell's very sure,
Advance your sums, and keep your hands in ure:
Here Is aid for Ireland, soon shall quell,
The Rebels there, and send them all to hell:
That you kind Cuckolds, may enjoy their land,
And pay the Army that they may disband.
Here is an Witness Tomkins, Challoner, and the Kings Messenger.
Ordinance come out to day,
To take your Lives, and your Estates away.
Another too for Tithes, that all must pay,
Or else to Prison go without delay.
Here is an Ordinance, after all our losses,
To be revenged on the harmless Crosses.
Here is another, the more's the pity.
To banish the Cavaliers from the City.
An Ordinance too, good heaven forbid the banes!
Able to turn their very Sw^rds to Kaines:
Another too, a lamentable story,
That no man shall deride the Directory.
Here is another too, see it I pray --
To grant the City-brats a Holy day.
With a new trick, to keep the land in union,
That none but Rebels receive the Communion.
This made the people, when we caused the stir,
Profanely call us, Gods of Westminster.
Then cride another, Sir what will ye buy,
I pray step in, and do not so pass by,
Here Is a Bunch of Lords impeached of Treason,
Come buy them quickly, while they are inseason.
See for your love, and for your money ^uy,
Name what you want, I Will fit you presently:
Buy fairings for your Children, here are toys,
Fit for your purpose, be they girls or boys.
Here Is Parliament Vestments, of all sorts and sizes,
You may have here, at very easy prizes,
Many a storm and shower they will abide,
Besides a World of knavery they will hide.
Sir look upon them, view them at your leisure,
The price is small, and they will do you great pleasure:
Here is King Pyms robe, the price not very great,
(And no Excize on it, as he set on Meat)
Though he has worn't, it is nere the worse for wearing,
Girt it but close, you need not fear the tearing.
Here Is Fasting-dayes (like thinchapt Jackalent)
Shall help you at a pinch, when all is spent;
And here is a new day of Humiliation,
Shall humble all this sortish Nation.
Here Is a new Ordinance, now fetch about,
To fling down the works, to let the Cuckoo out
Of this new Gottam, that will no more advance
The Soldiers pay; but their own ignorance.
Another oth' Synod, there standing by
With an extended throat, and mouth did cry,
Who buys the Holy Ghost, pray come away;
Give money quickly, for I cannot stay.
"What all pass by? it is strange, Time turns her wheel,
And bends her brow upon us, that we feel
No hansale yet; our Ware's bewitched sure,
And (like our selves) there is none will it endure:
Its doomed to dismal Fate, dispis'd and scorned,
Though nere so costly, or so much adorned;
Here Is omne vale, yet no money flies,
Our Wares dog-cheape, and thus our credit dies;
For such a Fair I never did behold,
We bring our Ware, but nothing can be sold.
I wonder cried one, what was our intent,
To keep this Fair so near the Parliament;
For we are mocked here by sancy Jacks,
That bid the Pedlars to put up their packs:
We thought our Ware would sell at any price,
And off our hands been vented in a trice;
That this last Act upon the English Stage,
Would forded money for our Pilgrimage
Unto new England: brethren jog away,
Lest that the Army give us all our pay:
With that a Messenger came running through the crowde,
And to the Synod thus he spoke aloud,
To Tyburne or new England choose you whether,
To one you must, you may go altogether;
For all the Laws oth' Land you have out run,
And I come here to tell you what is done:
The King and the Army will cast you from your sphere,
For dire aspects, that you have caused there,
You are disvoted, and from hence are hurled,
To lie like stars shot on the lower world.
Your Wares not worth a sart, for all your cogging,
See where the hangman comes, away be jogging,
With that like men of senses quite bereft,
They trudged away, and all this stuff they left.
A friend of mine to me did then repair,
Desiring me to write this famous Fair,
Which I have done, and put it here to sell,
Buy then this Fair on me, and so farewell.
Die Sab. Septem. 22. 1647.
It is Ordered by the House, that thanks be given to the Author of this
learned piece entitled Westminster Fair, and that it be forthwith printed and
published; and that no Pursuivant or other Officer hinder the free sale thereof.

Tho. Tel-treath, Cler, to the abused Commons.

FINIS.

