A SHORT RELATION OF A LONG JOURNEY, Made ROVND or OVALL By encompassing the
Principality of Wales, from London, through and by the Counties of Middlesex
and Buckingham, Berks, Oxonia, Warwick, Stafford, Chester, Flint, Denbigh,
Anglesey, Carnarvan, Merioneth, Cardigan, Pembrooke, Caermarden, Glamorgan,
Monmouth, Gloucester, etc.

This painful circuit began on Tuesday the 13 of July last, 1652. and was
ended (or both ends brought together) on Tuesday the 7. of September following,
being near 600. Miles.

Whereunto is annexed an Epitome of the Famous History of WALES.

Performed by the Riding, Going, Crawling, Running, and Writing of John Tailor,
dwelling at the Sign of the Poets Head, in Phoenix All^y, near the middle of Long
Aker or Covent Garden.

To all my Honorable, Worshipful, and honest Friends, that have subscribed to
this following Bill; I humbly desire them to read it again, and consider the
Contents of it, and content me accordingly.

A Tailors Bill, with few or no Items: by or for John Tailor.
NOw in the seventy fourth year of mine Age,
I take an English and Welsh Pilgrimage:
From London first I bend my course to Chester,
And humbly I to all men am Requester;
That when I have past over Hills and Dales,
And compast with my Travels famous Wales,
That when to you that I a Book do give,
Relating how I did subsist and live,
With all my Passages both here and there,
And of my Entertainment every where.
Write but your Names and Dwellings in this Bill,
I Will find you, for the Book give what you will.
Twelve Voyages and Journies I have past,
And now my Age says this may be my last.
My Travels Story shall most pleasant be
To you that read, though painful unto me.
IN this Bill I did promise to give to my friends (Subscribers) a true Relation
of my Journey, and Entertainment, (which I have done) and I do give to them
more then I promised, which is a brief Chronicle of Wales, (which I did not
mention in my Bill) I know there are four or five sorts of Adventurers with me
in this wearisome Journey, some of them have paid me already (before I went)
and their pain is past: If all the rest do pay me (being near 3000) I am
deceived; If none do pay me I am miserably cousened: For those that have paid,
or can and will pay, I thank them; for such as would if they could, or will
when they can, I wish them ability to perform their wills for their own
sakes, and mine both: But for those that are able to reward me and will not, I
will not curse them, though I fear they are almost past praying for.

A Short Relation of a Long Iourny, etc.
A Traveller that loves to see strange Lands,
May be a man or not a man of 's hands:
But yet it is very requisite and meet,
He should be furnished with good brains and feet;
For he that wants legs, feet, and brains, and wit,
To be a Traveller is most unfit:
And such am I by Age of strength bereft,
With one right leg, and one lame left leg left.
Beggars on their backs their brats do rear;
But I my issue in my leg do bear:
I dress it often and impatiently
It lies and cries not, though it make me cry;
Yet I dare challenge Scottish Jock or Jackey,
Or any light-heel'd nimble footed Lackey,
To travel such a Jaunt as I have done,
With the right leg going, and the left leg run:
Or if I please, the case I Will alter so,
To make the worst leg run, the best to go.
And sure my heart was stout, men may suppose,
To venture Travel with such legs as those.
But there be some few that do understand,
It Is merry walking with a horse in hand.
Such was my Lot, I had a stately Courser,
None courser quality'd, and for a worser,
There Is neither Halifax, or Hull, nor Hell,
That for good parts my horse can parallel;
He was a beast, had heated been and cheated,
Too much hard over rid and under meated,
That he as gaunt as any Greyhound was,
And for a Horses Skelliton might pass:
You might have told his ribs, he was so thin,
And seen his heart and guts, but for his skin;
He was not pursie foggy, cloyed with grease,
And like his Rider loved rest, ease, and peace:
Dun was, and is the Dumb beast, and was Done,
E're I begun, or he with me begun.
He had a black List, from the Mane to Tail,
Which is a color that does seldom fail:
To change of paces he had been inured,
But yet not one to endure, or be endured;
His Trot would fling a Dagger out ot'h sheath,
Or jolt a man to death, or out of breath.
His Ambling was invisible to me,
From such smooth easy garbs his feet were free:
His common Pace in Sunshine or in shower,
Was (as he pleased) about two mile an hour.
I never yet could put him in a sweat,
For he was never free, but at his meat.
Thus John upon Dun's back, were both Dun John,
And thus the tedious way we wandered on.
Now to proceed in order duly, truly,
I London left the thirteenth day of July:
The Ways as fair as man could well desire,
'Cause I had none to draw Dun out o'th mire:
I fifteen miles (to Rislip) that day went,
Baited at Edgworth, to give Dun content;
There my acquaintance, of good fame and worth,
Did welcome me: the next day I set forth,
With Boots, Sans Spurs, with Whip, and Switch of Burch,
I got on, twenty miles to Stoken Church:
The fifteenth day, S. Swithin, I and Dun,
Did shuffle sixteen miles to Abington;
There till the Tuesday following I abode,
From thence I sixteen miles to great Tue rode,
There at the Swan mine Host was free and kind,
He had but one eye, the other side was blind;
But surely he a right Good Fellow was,
And there one night my Dun did eat good grass.
On July's twenty one from Tue I went,
And unto Warwick strait my course I bent,
There did I find another sign o'th Swan,
Mine Hostess kind, mine Host a Gentile man,
And for your love to me, good Master Venner,
With humble thanks I am your praises Penner.
My gratitude to Master Jacob Harmer,
His Drapers shop could never make me warmer,
Then high and mighty Warwick's drink did there,
It made my brains to Caper and careere,
It was of such invincible strong force,
To knock me (in five miles) twice from my Horse:
And sure I think the Drink was certainly
Infused with the conquering ghost of Guy.
On July's two and twentieth day I came
Unto an ancient house called Hunningham,
There were two Ladies of good Worth and fame,
Whom for some reasons I forbear to name:
Their Son and Grandson (John) I Will not forget,
He Is nobly minded as a Baronet;
Four days they kept me with exceeding cheer,
And gave me silver because Travels dear.
From thence my Journey 5 miles I pursue,
To Coventry, most samous for true blew;
There the fair Cross of ancient high Renown
Stands firm, though other Crosses all are down.
It Is a dry City, and dry let it be,
'Twas not made dryer one small drop for me:
Like a Camelion there I brake my fast,
And thence I twenty miles to Lichfield past;
There at the George I took my lodging up,
I well was lodged, and well did sup and cup,
When there by chance, I cast my wandering eyon
The ruined Church, with grief I thought on Sion:
I sighed to see that sad confusion,
Like the Hebrews by the Brook of Babylon.
On July's twenty seventh I rode alone
Full sixteen miles unto a Town called Stone.
Next day to Nantwich sixteen long miles more,
From thence to Chester near the Cambrian shore:
There was my welcome in such noble fashion,
Of which in Prose I Will make some brief Relation.
MY Lodging at Chester was in the Watergate street, at the Sign of the
Feathers, I lay on a Feather-bed, and in the same house I met with two Brothers
of mine acquaintance thirty years, they brought me to the Chamber of a Reverend
Italian Physician, named Vincent Lancelles he was more then 80 years of Age,
yet of a very able body, and vigorous constitution: The Young men's Names were
Thomas Morrine and Francis Morrine, the people were pleased (out of their
Ignorance, or in small Wit) to call the old Gentleman a Mountebank; but I am
sure he was deservedly well reputed and reported of, for many Malladies and
Diseases which he cured, whereof diverse were judged incurable: He helped such
as were grieved for three several considerations.

First, He cured the Rich, for as much as he could get.

Secondly, He healed the Meaner sort for what they could spare, or were
willing to part withal.

Thirdly, He cured the Poor for Gods sake, and gave them money and other
relief, as I my self (with thankful experience) must ever acknowledge: For
he looked upon my lame leg, and applied such Medicine, as did not only ease me,
but I am in hope will cure me, the grief being nothing but a Blast of
Lightning and Thunder, or Planet stroke, which I received nine years ^ast at
Oxford.

For a further courtesy, when I was taking my leave of Chester, I demanded
what I had to pay for Lodging, Diet, and Horse-meat, mine Host said, that all
was fully paid and satisfied by the Good old Physician. My humble thanks
remembered to Captain Vincent Corbet, but more especially to Captain John
Whitworth at Chester.

On Friday the 30. of July, I rode (and footed it) ten Miles to Flint (which is
the Shire Town of Flint-shire) and surely War has made it miserable, the
sometimes famous Castle there, in which Richard the Second of that Name, King
of England was surprised by Henry of Bullinbrook, is now almost buried in it is
own Ruins, and the Town is so spoiled, that it may truly be said of it, that
they never had any Market (in the memory of man) they have no Sadler, Tailor,
Weaver, Brewer, Baker, Botcher, or Buttonmaker; they have not so much as a
sign of an Alehouse, so that I was doubtful of a Lodging, but (by good hap)
I happened into the house of one Mr. Edward Griffith, where I had good meat and
lodging for me and my dumb Dun Beast, for very reasonable consideration, and
this (me thinks) is a pitiful description of a Shire Town.

Saturday, the last of July, I left Flint, and went three miles to Holy-well,
of which place I must speak somewhat materially: About the length of a furlong,
down a very steep Hill, is a Well (full of wonder and admiration) it comes from
a Spring not far from Rudland Castle; it is and has been many hundred years
known by the name of Holy-Well, but it is more commonly and of most Antiquity
called Saint Winifrids Well, in memory of the pious and chaste Virgin Winifrid,
who was there beheaded for refusing to yield her Chastity to the furious lust
of a Pagan Prince; in that very place where her blood was shed, this Spring
sprang up; from it does issue so forceible a stream, that within a hundred
yards of it, it drives certain Mils, and some do say that nine Corn Mils and
Fulling Mils are driven with the stream of that Spring: It has a fair Chapel
erected over it called Saint Winifrids Chapel, which is now much defaced by
the injury of these late Wars: The well is compassed about with a fine Wall of
Free stone, the Wall has eight Angles or Corners, and at every Angle is a fair
Stone Pillar, whereon the West end of the Chapel is supported. In two
several places of the Wall, there are neat stone stairs to go into the water
that comes from the Well, for it is to be noted that the Well it self does
continually work and bubble with extreme violence, like a boiling Cauldron or
Furnace, and within the Wall, or into the Well very few do enter: The Water is
Christalline, sweet, and medicinable, it is frequented daily by many people of
Rich and Poor, of all Discases, amongst which great store of folks are cured,
diverse are cased, but none made the worse. The Hill descending is plentifully
furnished (on both sides of the way) with Beggars of all ages, sexes,
conditions, sorts and sizes, many of them are impotent, but all are impudent,
and richly embrodered all over with such Hexameter poudred Ermins (or Vermin)
as are called Lice in England.

Monday, the second of August, when the Day begun, I mounted my Dun, having
hired a little Boy (to direct me in the way) that could speak no English, and
for lack of an Interpreter, we traveled speachless eight miles, to Rudland,
where is an old ruined wind and war-shaken Castle; from that Town, after my
Horse, and the Boy, and my self had dined with Hay, Oats, and Barraw Causs, we
hors't and footed it twelve miles further, to a fine strong walled Town, named
Aberconwy; there I lodged at the house of one Mr. Spencer (an English man) he
is Postmaster there, and there my entertainment was good, and my Reckoning
reasonable: There is a good defensive Castle which I would have seen, but
because there was a Garrison, I was loath to give occasion of offense, or be
much inquisitive.

The next day when the Clock struck two and four,
I mounted Dun, Dun mounted Penmen Mawre;
And if I do not take my aim amiss,
That lofty Mountain seems the Skies to kiss:
But there are other Hills accounted higher,
Whose lofty tops I had no mind to aspire:
As Snowdon, and the tall Plinnillimon,
Which I no stomach had to tread upon.
Merioneth Mountains, and Shire Cardigan
To travel over, will tire horse and man:
I, to Bewmaris came that day and dined,
Where I the good Lord Buckley, thought to find.
But he to speak with me had no intent,
Dry I came into's house, dry out I went.
I left Bewmaris, and to Bangor traced it,
There Is a brave Church, but Time and War defaced it:
For Love and Money I was welcome thither,
It Is merry meeting when they come together.
Thus having traveled from Aberconwy to Beumorris and to Bangor, Tuesday 3.
August, which in all they are pleased to call 14 miles, but most of the Welsh
miles are large London measure, not any one of them but has a hand breadth or
small cantle at each end, by which means, what they want in broadness, they
have it in length; besides the ascending and descending almost impassable
mountains, and Break-neck stony ways, does make such Travelers as my self,
judge that they were no Misers in measuring their miles; besides, the land is
courser then it is in most parts about London, which makes them to afford the
larger measure: for course Broadcloath is not at the rate of Velvet or Satin.

Wednesday the 4. of August I rode 8 miles from Bangor to Carnarvan, where I
thought to have seen a Town and a Castle, or a Castle and a Town; but I saw
both to be one, and one to be both; for indeed a man can hardly divide them in
judgment or apprehension; and I have seen many gallant Fabrics and
Fortifications, but for compactness and compleatness of Caernarvon, I never yet
saw a parallel. And it is by Art and Nature so sited and seated, that it
stands impregnable, and if it be well mand, victualled, and ammunitioned, it is
invincible, except fraud or famine do assault, or conspire against it.

I was 5. hours in Caernarvon, and when I thought that I had taken my leave for
ever of it, then was I merely deceived; for when I was a mile on my way, a
Trooper came galloping after me, and enforced me back to be examined by
Colonel Thomas Mason, (the Governor there) who after a few words, when he
heard my name, and knew my occasions, he used me so respectively and
bountifully, that (at his charge) I stayed all night, and by the means of him,
and one Mr. Lloyd, (a Justice of Peace there) I was furnished with a Guide, and
something else to bear charges for one weeks travail; for which courtesies, if
I were not thankful, I were worth the hanging for being ungrateful.

The 5. of August I went 12. miles, to a place called Climenie, where the Noble
Sure John Owen did, with liberal welcome, entertain me.

The 6. day I rode to a Town called Harleck, which stands on a high barren
Mountain, very uneasy for the ascending into, by reason of the steep and
uneeven stony way; this Town had neither hay, grass, oats, or any relief for a
horse: there stands a strong Castle, but the Town is all spoild, and almost
inhabitable by the late lamentable troubles.

So I left that Town (for fear of starving my Horse) and came to a place
called Bermoth, (12. miles that day, as narrow as 20.) That place was so
plentifully furnished with want of provision, that it was able to famish 100.
men and horses: I procured a brace of Boys to go two miles to cut grass for
my Dun, for which I gave them two groats; for my self and Guide, I purchased a
Hen boyld with Bacon, as yellow as the Cowslip, or Gold Noble. My course
Lodging there, was at the homely House of one John Thomson, a Lancashire
English man.

Saturday the 7. of August, I Horst, footed, (and crawling upon all 4.) 10.
slender miles to Aberdovy, which was the last lodging that I had in
Merionethshire, where was the best entertainment for men, but almost as bad as
the worst for horses in all Merionethshire.

August 9. I gat into Cardiganshire, to a miserable Market Town called
Aberistwith, where, before the late troubles, there stood a strong Castle,
which being blown up, fell down, and many fair Houses (with a defensible thick
Wall about the Town) are transformed into confused heaps of unnecessary
Rubbidge: within four miles of this Town, are the silver Mines, which were
honorable and profitable, as long as my good friend Thomas Bushel Esquire, had
the managing of them, who was most industrious in the work, and withal by his
noble demeanor, and affable deportment, deservedly gained the general love
and affection of all the Country, of all degrees of people: but since he has
left that important employment, the Mines are neglected.

From Aberistwith, I went to the House of Sir Richard Price, Knight and
Baronet, where my entertainment was freely welcome, with some expression of
further courtesies at my departure, for which I humbly thank the noble Knight,
not forgetting my grateful remembrance to Mr. Thomas Evans there: that whole
days journey being 9. miles.

Tuesday the 10. of August, having hired a Guide, for I that knew neither the
intricate ways, nor could speak any of the Language, was necessitated to have
Guides from place to place, and it being Harvest time, I was forced to pay
exceeding dear for Guiding; so that some days I paid 2 s. sometimes 3.
besides bearing their charges of meat and drink and lodging; for it is to be
understood that those kind of laboring people had rather reap hard all the day
for six pence, then to go ten or twelve miles easily on foot for two shillings.
That day, after sixteen miles travel, I came to the house of an ancient worthy
and hospitable Gentleman, named Sure Walter Lloyd, he was noble in bountiful
housekeeping, and in his generositie, caused his horse to be saddled, and the
next day he rode three miles to Conway, and showed me the way to Caermarden,
which they do call 18 small miles, but I had rather ride 30 of such miles as
are in many parts of England; the way continually hilly, or mountainous and
stony, insomuch that I was forced to alight and walk 30 times, and when the
Sun was near setting, I having four long miles to go, and knew no part of the
way, was resolved to take my lodging in a Reeke of Oats in the field, to which
purpose, as I rode out of the stony way toward my field-chamber, my Horse and
I found a softer bed, for we were both in a Bog, or Quagmire, and at that time
I had much ado to draw myself out of the dirt, or my poor weary Dun out if
the Mire.

I being in this hard strait, having night (of Gods sending,) Owl-light to
guide me, no tongue to ask a question, the way unknown, or uneven; I held it
my best course to grope in the hard stony way again, which having found,
(after a quarter of an hours melancholy paces) a Horsman of Wales, that could
speak English, overtook me and brought me to Caermarden, where I found good and
free entertainment at the house of one Mistress Oakley.

Caermarden, the shire Town of Caermardenshire, is a good large Town, with a
defencible strong Castle, and a reasonable Haven for small Barks and Boats,
which formerly was for the use of good Ships, but now it is much impedimented
with Shelvs, Sands, and other annoyances: It is said that Merlyn the Prophet
was born there; it is one of the plentifullest Towns that ever I set foot in,
for very fair Eggs are cheaper then small Pears; for, as near as I can remember,
I will set down at what rates victuals was there.

Butter, as good as the world affords, two pence half penny, or three pence
the pound.

A Salmon two foot and a half long, twelve pence.

Biefe, three half pence the pound.

Oysters, a penny the hundred.

Eggs, twelve for a penny.

Pears, six for a penny.

And all manner of Fish and Flesh at such low prices, that a little money will
buy much, for there is nothing scarce, dear, or hard to come by, but Tobacco
pipes.

My humble thanks to the Governor there, to William Guinn of Talliaris,
Esquire; to Sure Henry Vaughan; and to all the rest, with the good woman mine
Hostess.

Concerning Pembrookshire, the people do speak English in it almost generally,
and therefore they call it little England beyond Wales, it being the farthest
South and West County in the whole Principality: The Shire Town, Pembrook, has
been in better estate, for as it is now, some houses down, some standing, and
many without Inhabitants; the Castle there has been strong, large, stately,
and impregnable, able to hold out any enemy, except hunger, it being founded
upon a lofty Rock, gives a brave prospect a far off: Tenby Town and Castle
being somewhat near, or eight miles from it, seems to be more useful and
considerable. My thanks to Mistress Powell at the Heart there.

Tenby has a good Castle and a Haven, but in respect of Milford Haven, all the
Havens under the Heavens are inconsiderable, for it is of such length, breadth,
and depth, that 1000. Ships may ride safely in it in all weathers, and by
reason of the hills that do enclose it, and the windings and turnings of the
Haven from one point of land to another, it is conjectured that 1500 ships may
ride there, and not scarce one of them can see another. The Haven has in it 16
Creekes, 5 Bays, and 13 Rodes, of large capacity, and all these are known by
several names.

The goodly Church of S. David's has been forced lately to put off the dull
and heavy coat of peaceful Lead, which was metamorphosed into warlike bullets.
In that Church lies interred Edmund Earl of Richmond, Father to King Henry the
seventh, for whose sake his Grandson (K. Henry the eight) did spare it from
defacing, when he spared not much that belonged to the Church.

Thus having gone and riden many miles, with too many turning and winding
Mountains, stony turning ways, forward, backward, sidewaies, circular, and
semicircular, upon the 17. of August I rode to the house of the right
Honorable, Richard Vaughan Earl of Karbery, at a place called Golden Grove;
and surely that house, with the fair Fields, Woods, Walks, and pleasant
situation, may not only be rightly called the Golden Grove, but it may
without fiction be justly styled the Cambrian Paradise, and Elysium of Wales;
but that which graced it totally, was the nobleness, and affable presence and
deportment of the Earl, with his fair and virtuous new married Countess, the
beautiful Lady Alice, or Alicia, daughter to the right Honorable the late
Earl of Bridgwater, deccased: I humbly thank them both, for they were pleased
to Honor me so much, that I supped with them, at which time a Gentleman came
in, who being sat, did relate a strange discourse of a violent ram which fell
on the mountains in part of Radnorshire, and into Glomorganshire; the story
was, as near as I can remember, as follows:

That on Saturday the 17. of July last, 1652. there fell a sudden shower of
rain in the Counties aforesaid, as if an Ocean had flowed from the Clouds to
overwhelm and drown the mountains, it poured down with such violent
impetuositie, that it tumbled down diverse houses of stone that stood in the way
of it; it drowned many Cattle and Sheep, bore all before it as it ran,
therefore a poor man with his son and daughter forsook their house, and the
father and son climed up into a tree for their safety, in the mean time the
merciless waters took hold of the poor maid, and most furiously bare her away,
down between two mountains, rolling and hurling her against many great stones,
till at last it threw her near the side of the stream, and her hair and
hair-lace being loose, it catched hold of a stump of an old thorn bush, by
which means she was stayed, being almost dead; but as she lay in this misery,
she saw a sad and lamentable sight, for the water had fiercely unrooted the
tree, and bore it down the stream, with her father and brother, who were both
unfortunately drowned: the Maid, as I was certified, is like to live and
recover.

My humble thanks to the good young hopeful Lord Vaughan, and to all the rest
of the Noble Olive Branches of that most Worthy Tree of Honor, their Father,
not omitting or yet forgetting my gratitude to Mr. Steward there, withal the
rest of the Gentlemen and servants attendant, with my love to Mr. Thomas Ryve,
unknown, and so Golden Grove farewell.

The 18. of August, I hired a Guide who brought me to Swansey (16 well
stretched Welsh Mountainous Miles) where I was cordially welcome to an Ancient
Worthy Gentleman, Waker Thomas Esquire, for whose Love and Liberality I am much
obliged to him and the good Gentlewoman his Wife; he staid me till the next day
after Diner, and then sent his man with me a mile to his Sons house, named
William Thomas Esquire: There, as soon as I had rewarded my Guide he slipped
from me, leaving me to the mercy of the House, where I found neither mercy nor
manners; for the good Gentleman and his Wife were both rode from home; and
though there were people old enough, and big enough, yet there was not one kind
enough, or good enough to do me the least kind of courtesy or friendship; they
did not so much as bid me come into the house, or offer me a cup of drink; they
all scornfully wondered at me, like so many Buzzards and Woodcocks about an
Owl, there was a shotten thin scul'd shallow brained simpleton fellow, that
answered me, that he was a stranger there, but I believed him not, by reason of
his familiarity with the rest of the folks, there was also a single-soal'd
Gentlewoman, of the last Edition, who would vouchsafe me not one poor glance of
her eye-beams, to whom I said as follows.

Fair Gentlewoman, I was sent hither by the Father of the Gentleman of this
House, to whom I have a Letter from a Gentleman of his familiar acquaintance; I
am sure that the Owner of this Place is famed and reported to be a man endowed
with all affability and courtesy to strangers as is every way accommodating to
a Gentleman of Worth and Quality; and that if I were but a mere stranger to
him, yet his Generosity would not suffer me to be harbourless, but by reason of
his Fathers sending his servant with me, and a Friends Letter, I said that if
Mr. Thomas had been at home I should be better entertained.

To which Mrs. Pumpkins looking scornfully, ascue over her shoulders, answered
me with (it may be so) then most uncurteous Mistress, quoth I, I doubt I must
be necessitated to take up my lodging in the Field: To which the said ungentle
Gentlewoman (with her posteriors, or butt end toward me) gave me a final
Answer, that I might if I would.

Whereupon I was enraged and mounted my Dun, and in a friendly manner I took my
leave, saying, that I would wander further and try my fortune, and that if my
stay at that house, that night, would save either Mr. Shallow-pate, or Mrs.
Jullock from hanging, that I would rather lie, and venture all hazards that are
incident to Horse, Man, or Traveller, then to be beholding to such unmanerly
Mungrils.

Thus desperately I shaked them off, that would not take me on, and riding I
knew not whither, with a wide wild Heath under me, and a wider Firmament above
me. I road at adventure, betwixt light and darkness, about a mile, when
luckily a Gentleman overtook me, and after a little talk of my distress and
travail, he bad me be of good cheer, for he would bring me to a lodging and
entertainment; in which promise he was better then his word, for he brought
me to a pretty Market Town called Neath, where he spent his money upon me;
for which kindness I thank him. But one Doctor (as they call him) Rice Jones,
(or Doctor Merriman) came and supt with me, and very kindly paid all the
reckoning. That days journey being but 6 miles sterling.

The 19. of August I hired a Guide for 3 s. (16 miles) to a place called
Penline, where sometime stood a strong Castle, which is now ruined; adjoining to
it, or in the place of it, is a fair house, belonging to Anthony Turberville
Esquire, where although the Gentleman was from home, the good Gentlewoman, his
Wife, did with hospitable and noble kindness, bid me welcome.

Friday, the 20. of August, I rode a mile to an Ancient Town, named Coobridge,
from whence I scrambled two miles further to Llanstrithyott, where the Noble
Gentleman Sure John Awbrey, with his Virtuous Lady kept me three days, in the
mean space I rode two miles to the house of the Ancient and Honorable Knight,
Sir Thomas Lewis at Penmark, to whom and his good Lady, I humbly dedicate my
gratitude: The same day after Dinner, I returned back to Llanstrithyott, which
was to me a second Golden Grove, or Welsh Paradise, for Building, Situation,
wholesome Air, Pleasure and Plenty, for my free entertainment there, with the
Noble expression of the Gentleman's Bounty at my departure, I heartily do wish
to him and his, with all the rest of my Honorable and Noble, Worshipful and
friendly Benefactors, true peace and happiness, internal, external, and
eternal.

Monday, the 23. of August, I rode eight miles to the good Town of Cardiffe,
where I was welcome to Mr. Aaron Price, the Town Clark there, with whom I
dined, at his cost and my perrill, after Dinner he directed me two miles
further, to a place called Llanrumney, where a right true bred generous
Gentleman, Thomas Morgan Esquire, gave me such loving and liberal
entertainment, for which I cannot be so thankful as the merit of it requires.

Tuesday, being both Saint Bartholomews Day, my Birth day, the 24, of the
Month, and the very next day before Wednesday, I arose betimes, and traveled
to a Town called Newport, and from thence to Carbean, and lastly to Vske, in
all 15 well measu'd Welsh Monmouthshire miles: at Uske I lodged at an Inn, the
house of one Master Powell.

The 25. of August I rode but 12 miles, by an unlooked for accident, I found
Bartholomew Fair at Monmouth, a hundred miles from Smithfield; there I stayed
two nights upon the large reckoning of Nothing to pay, for which I humbly thank
my Hospitable Host, and Hostess, Master Reignald Rowse and his good Wife.

Monmouth, the Shire Town of Monmouthshire, was the last Welsh ground that I
left behind me: August 27. I came to Gloucester, where though I was born there,
very few did know me; I was almost as ignorant as he that knew no body: my
lodging there was at the sign of the George, at the house of my Namesake,
Master John Tailor, from whence on Saturday the 28. I rode 16. miles to
Barnsley.

Of all the places in England and Wales that I have traveled to, this Village
of Barnsley does most strictly observe the Lords day, or Sunday, for little
children are not suffered to walk or play: and two Women who had been at
Church both before and after Noone, did but walk into the fields for their
recreation, and they were put to their choice, either to pay sixpence apiece
(for profane walking,) or to be laid one hour in the stocks; and the pievish
wilful women (though they were able enough to pay) to save their money and
jest out the matter, lay both by the heels merrily one hour.

There is no such zeal in many places and Parishes in Wales; for they have
neither Service, Prayer, Sermon, Minister, or Preacher, nor any Church door
opened at all, so that people do exercise and edify in the Churchyard, at the
lawful and laudable Games of Trap, Catt, Stool-ball, Racket, etc. on Sundays.

From Barnsley on Monday the 30. of August, I rode 30 miles to Abington, from
thence, etc. to London, where I brought both ends together on Tuesday the 7. of
September.

Those that are desirous to know more of Wales, let them either travel for it
as I have done, or read Mr. Camdens Brittania, or Mr. Speeds laborious History,
and their Geographicall Maps and Descriptions will give them more ample, or
contenting satisfaction.

ONE Humphrey Lloyd Esquire, did exactly collect the British, or Welsh History
from the Original, till the year 1510. after which it was continued by Doctor
David Powell, till the year 1584. Printed then and Dedicated to Sir Phillip
Sidney Knight: those who are desirous to read more largely, let them make use
of their larger Book: But for such as love brevity, or cheapnesse, let them
read this which follows.

Cambria Brittania: OR, Ashort Abreviation of the History, and Chronicles of
WALES.
By JOHN TAILOR.
CARADOC of Lancarvan, (a studious Antiquary, and a learned diligent Collector
of the Successions and Acts of the British Princes) did write the History of
Wales, from the time and Reign of Cadwallador, who lived in the year of our
Redemption, 685, and continued the said Chronology near 500 years, till the
Reign of Henry the second King of England. It has always before those times,
and ever since, that Writers for fear, or flattery, or profit, have used
shameful (or shameless) partiality, in publishing the fames of their own
Princes, and Country, above measure, and beyond truth; but in their detracting
and traducing others, they have been too liberal; and in relating their
Valor, Virtues, or Injuries of such they fancyed not, they have been too
sparing, or wilfully negligent.

But to make bold and speak the truth, it is worth good consideration, to know
what reason the English had to make War against the Welsh; Wales had ever been
a free Country, not subject to any Prince, except their own; they owed no
Homage or Alegiance neither to England, or to any other Crown, or State; their
Language, Laws, and Customs, were of their own institutions, to which Laws
both Prince and people were subject; they lived quietly upon their own, and
they never went forth of their own bounds to rob the English, or to spoil and
invade England, or any other Nation. Then the question is with much ease
proposed and answered. What cause did the Welsh give to the English to make
War upon them, to invade, plunder, spoil, and kill? the Answer is, or may
be, Because the English were ambitious, and covetous, and also stronger then
their Neighbors, and being able and willing to do injury, and oppress the
Welsh, they many times attempted to subject and conquer them; and they (on the
other side) did manfully resist, and oppose their English Invadors, as this
brief Relation will truly declare and manifest.

Thus force resisted force, the Saxons, Danes, English, Irish, and Flemmings,
all severally, and sometimes joined together, to conquer, and make prey and
purchase of poor Wales, they all striving to have the Goods and Lands that
belonged not to them; and the Welsh men (with their best endeavors) justly and
valiantly holding their own. They had kept their Country and language 2700.
years, and the Historians, Antiquaries, and Gentry of that Nation did record
their Laws, Pedigrees, and Genealogies, with as much, or more, exact truth then
many, or any other Nations. They had lived under their own Governors (from the
time of Heli the High Priest of the Jews,) 1800 years before Cadwallador, who
went to Rome, and died there; from which time the chief Rulers of Wales, were
sometimes styled Kings, sometimes Princes; these were many times under one King
or Prince, of Northwales; sometimes they had three Princes or Kings, as
North Wales, South Wales, and Powis Land. These three Princes, although they
had many and mighty Enemies, did often make War upon each other, spoiling,
and harrasing their Country, to the advantage of their Enemies and ruin of
themselves. But to proceed to the History.

In the year 688. Ivor (a kinsman of Cadwalador) was Prince some small time;
and he also went to Rome, and there ended his days.

The Next Ivor, Roderick Molwinnoc, the second Prince of North Wales rained 30
years; he was Grandchild to Cadwallador, a valiant man, he died Anno 755.

The third was Canon Tindaethwy, a gallant Prince, he Warred with good success,
against Offa, King of Mercia, who would have invaded North Wales; but Canon did
defend himself so stoutly, that Offa with much loss retired: the English at
that time had not one foot of ground in Wales.

Anno 800. Mervin was the fourth King of North Wales, he married Esylht,
Daughter to Canon; in his time Egbert, King of the West Saxons, invaded and
spoiled Anglesey, and Kenulph, King of Mercia, did much mischief in Powis
Land, whereby Mervin being overpowred, was slain, valiantly fighting against
the King of Mercia.

Anno 843. Roderick the second (called the Great) was the 5. King of
North Wales; he had much war with the English Mercians, with various success,
but for the most part fortunate. In his Reign, the Danes came and spoiled
Anglesey, against whom Prince Roderick manfully fighting was unfortunately
slain. But some do write, that he did beat the Danes out of Anglesey, and
slain afterward in a Battle against the Englishmen, Anno 876. when he had
reigned with much love and honor 39 years.

The 6. King or Prince was Anarawd, the son of Roderick; and about that time of
Anno 877. the Normans, with their Duke Rollo, invaded a great Province in
France, which from the name of Normans, (or Northern men) is to this day called
Normandy.

In the year of grace 878. the Danes and English men came with great powers
against Wales, between whom and the Welsh was then a bloody battle, near the
water of Conwy, where the Welsh had a mighty Victory, which they called the
Revenge for the death of Roderick. Prince Anarawd died, after much trouble, in
Anno 913. having Rained 34. years.

Seventhly, or the 7. Prince was Edwal Voel, the Danes spoiled Anglesey, and
the English burnt and spoiled Brecknock. Athelstane King of England, enforced
the Welsh to pay him a yearly tribute of 20 pounds in Gold, 300 pounds in
silver, and 200 Bieves, or Cattle. Afterward Edwal Voel had reigned 25 years,
he and his Brother Else were both slain, fighting with the Danes, Anno 938.

The 8. Prince was Howell Dha, he was a kinsman to Edwal Voel, he was a Prince
of South Wales, but he afterward had all Wales; the English vexed him often,
and did much hurt; but still Howel galantly resisted them, and died much
lamented, in the year of Christ 948.

The 9. were Jevas and Jago, or James, both Brethren, and sons to Edwal Voel.
They had cruel wars with Owen, and his Brethren, (the sons of Howel Dha) in
which Bickerings Owen (with his Brothers) were slain. About this time the
Danes spoiled Anglesey, and burnt Holy-head. And also Wales was much troubled
by Edgar King of England; but it was agreed at last, that the tribute of gold,
and silver, and cattle, which was laid on the Welsh Nation in Edwal Voels time,
after it had been paid near 13 years, should be remitted, and in lieu thereof,
the Princes of Wales were enjoined to pay a certain number of Woolves heads
(for at that time four-leg'd Woolves did as much mischief amongst Beasts,
Sheep, and Cattle, as two-leg'd Woolves have done in these latter times
amongst men,) and by the means of the yearly payment of the aforesaid Woolves
heads, there was not one of those ravenous beasts in three years payment to be
found in all Wales, or the Marches of England.

The Brethren the Princes fell our, (for Lordship and Love can brook no Rivalls
or fellowship) James imprisoned Jevaf a long time, at which time, the Danes
entered Anglesey, and did much spoil, Howell the son of Jevaf, made sharp war
against his Uncle Jago, or James, and beat him, and releast his Father, after
which he took his eldest Uncle Meric, and put his eyes out; but never restored
his Father to his former estate, but kept the Principality to himself: This
was about the year of our Lord 974.

The 10. King or Prince of North Wales (or almost all Wales) was Howell ap
Jevaf, or the son of Jevaf, Anno 975. there was great wars and much bloodshed
betwixt South and North Wales; but Howell took his Uncle James, which had
imprisoned his Father Jevaf, and then possessed all Wales in peace, for a short
while, for the Danes brake in and spoiled many Towns and places in North Wales,
and did much mischief to the Cathedral of S. David's. And in 982. a great Army
from England, wasted and spoiled Brecknock, and a great part of South Wales;
but Prince Howell made war against them, slew many, and made the rest flee. The
second year after Howell entered England with an Army, in which war he was
slain valiantly fighting, in the year 984. to whom succeeded his Brother.

Cadwallon, the 11. Prince, he first warred against Jonavall the son of Meric,
whose eyes Howell had caused to be put out, who by right was right Lord of all
Wales: In the end Jonavall was slain by Cadwalhon, and the next year after
Cadwalhon himself was killed by Meredith, the son of Owen, Prince of
South Wales, Anno 985.

The 12. King or Prince was Meredith ap Owen, or the son of Owen, which Owen
was son to Howell Dha, before mentioned; he began in the year 986. and had a
most troublesome Government; for the Danes again wasted Anglesey. They took
Prisoner Lhywach, Brother to Prince Meredith, and put his eyes out, and the
Danes took 2000 Prisoners, and either carried them away, or put them to
ransom, and in the year 98. the Danes came again and spoiled St. David's,
Lhandydoch, Llanbadarne, Llanristed, and all Religious Places of Devotion that
their heathenish power could master.

In these troubles Prince Meredith was forced to give those miscreant Danes, a
penny a Head for every man that was then alive in all his Dominions; which
payment was called the Black Armies Tribute; about this time all South Wales
was overran by the English, and (to fill the measure of the Affliction in
Wales) Meredith made mighty havoc in Glamorgan-shire: So that there was not
any place in Wales, free from the fury of fire and sword. But to make the
measure of misery heap and run over, the Danes came once more and made a prey
of the Isle of Anglesey; with which continual troubles Meredith being
overladen and wearied, resigned his Princely Authority to Edwal ap Meric ap
Meredith, or his own Grandchild: Meredith died 998.

Edwal the 13. Prince of North Wales, was scarce warm in his seat, but Meredith
sought and fought for re-possession, and after much bloodshed, lost his labor.
Then the Danes came again and spoiled much in North Wales; and the Prince
valiantly fighting was slain, and the same Danes came again to S. David's,
ransacked it, and spoiled all the Country.

The 14. King was Aedan ap Belgored, he fought for the Principality with Conan
the son of Howell, and slew him in the year 1003. About this time the Danes
spoiled many places in West-Wales; and in this Princes Reign all the Danes in
England were slain in one night; and Anno 1015. Prince Aedon was slain by his
successor.

Lhewelyn ap Sitsylht, after he had killed Aedan, was the 15. Prince; he had a
peaceful and plentiful beginning, till a low born Scot, whose name was Run,
feigned himself to be the son of Meredith ap Owen before named: But Lhewelyn
met him, and fought with him, and in the end made Run run, till at last he
killed him; And after that, this Prince was slain by Howell and Meredith the
sons of Edwal, 1026.

The 16. Prince was Jago (or James) the son of Edwal, he rained over
North Wales, and Rytherch ap Jestin swayed in South Wales, 1031. But by
continual contention betwixt the Grandchildren of Howell Dha, Rytherch (Prince
of South Wales) was slain by the English; and then arose new Wars in
NorthWales, for Griffith ap Lbewelyn ap Sytylth war'd against Jago, slew him,
and possessed the Principality, Anno, 1037.

Griffith ap Lhewelyn was the 17. Prince of North Wales, he overcame both the
English and the Danes, when they would have invaded his Land, in Anno, 1038. He
had much trouble with Prince Howell of South Wales; but in the end he overcame
him, and possessed his Principallity; after this Griffith was treacherously
taken, by Conan the Son of Jago, and as Conan was carrying him away toward
some Irish Ships, the Country arose up speedily and happily, and (after a
sharp fight) redeemed their Prince Griffith, and Conan was forced to fly for
his life. After that the Prince had another great fight with Howell ap Edwin,
which Howell was joined with the Danes and English, and in a bloody battle the
English and Danes were overthrown, that very few escaped; Howell was slain and
Prince Griffith victorious; but peace lasted not three Months, but Ritherich
and Rees, two of Jestins Sons, made War upon Griffith, and after a cruel fight
all day, the dark night parted them, that both Armies returned with great
loss to their homes.

About this time there reigned in Scotland a bloody usurping Tyrant, named
Mackbeth, he caused a Lord, one Bancho, to be murdered, whose Son, named
Fleance, escaped and fled into Wales, and was courteously entertained, with
love and welcome to Prince Griffith; Griffith had a bountiful Daughter, with
whom Fleance grew to be so familiar, that he got her with child; for which the
offended Prince caused the head of Fleance to be struck off, and in rage cast
off his Daughter, who was in short time delivered of a Male Child, named
Walter: This Walter grew to be a tall goodly Gentleman to whom few or scarce
one was comparable for strength, feature, valor, agillity and affability: And
when one in derision called him Bastard he killed him, and fled into Scotland,
in the year 1052, and in the Reign of Robert Bruise King of Scots, then with
which King, the said Walter won such favor, for some gallant services which he
had done, that with love and honor, he was made Lord Stuart, or Steward, of
Scotland, and receiver of the Kings whole Revenue; and from that Office did
come the name of Steward, now called Stuart, of which Surname many Kings,
Princes, Lords, and Gentlemen have been and are descended.

Griffith ap Ritherch ap Jestin, made hot War against Griffith ap Lhewelyn, but
Lhewelyn overcame and slew him, 1054. then he made an inrode into England, and
with the aid of Algar Earl of Chester, he spoiled all Hereford shire, and
burnt the City of Hereford to ashes, and returned with much spoil.

But in the conclusion the Danes were aided by Harrold King of England, and
assisted by some perfidious Welsh Lords, they entered Wales with great Forces,
at which time this Noble Prince Griffith ap Lhewelyn, was treacherously
murdered by his own men, and his head presented to Harrold King of England.
Thus this gallant Griffith, lived beloved, and died lamented, when he had
governed 34 years.

Blethyn and Rywalhon, were the Sons of Conum, and Brothers by the Mothers
side to Griffith ap Lhewelyn; in the Reign of these two, William, Surnamed the
Conqueror, came into England, Anno 1066. and in 1068. two Sons of Griffith ap
Lhewelyn, did raise War against Blethyn and Rywalhon, their names were Meredith
and Ithell, in these Wars, Fortune played a Game at Cross Ruff, for Ithell was
slain on the one side, and Rywalhon on the other; Meredith fled, and Blethin
was Master of all Wales: Shortly after the Normans spoiled Cardigan, and a
great part of West-Wales, and in the year, 1073. Blethin was traitorously
murdered by Rees ap Owen ap Edwin. This Blethin was the 18. Prince who left
four Sons: But for all that,

Traherne his Kinsman got the Principalities of North Wales, and was the 19.
Prince, at which time Rees ap Owen, with Ritherch ap Caradoc, had equal all
South Wales, but Ritherch was quickly murdered treacherously, and Rees then had
all South Wales, but Rees and another Brother of his were both slain in hot
fight, by Caradoc ap Griffith, and in Anno, 1087. Traherne was slain by his
Cousins, of the Line and Race of Howell Dha.

The 20. Prince of North Wales was Griffith the Son of Conan, and Rees ap
Theodor had South Wales, but Rees was mightily troubled in Wars with some
Kinsmen of his, who in the end were all slain; then was St. David's spoiled and
burnt by Rovers, and Rees was murdered at Brecknok by his own servants, aided
by some Normans: at that time Robert Fitzharmaco Knight, and one of the
Gentlemen of the Privy Chamber to William Rufus King of England, surprised the
Lordship of Glamorgan, which the English do hold yet; also 12. Commanders with
him did likewise take Portions of Land there: Their Names were, 1. William de
Londres, or London. 2. Richard Granavilla, or Greeneville, or Greenefeild. 3.
Paganus de Turberville. 4. Robert de St. Quintin. 5. Richard Sywarde. 6.
Gilbertus Humfrevell. 7. Reignold de Beckrolls. 8. Reinoldus de Swilly. 9.
Peter le Sorre. 10. Johanes de Flemming. 11. Oliverus St. John. 12. John
William de Esterling, now Stradling.


After much trouble, many cruel fights, with great slaughters of, and against
Normans, English, Irish, Scots, and continual War with South Wales, and diverse
places more in Wales; this victorious Prince dyed, much beloved and lamented
for, when he had Nobly Ruled 50. years, Anno 1137.

The 21. King was Owen Gwynneth, who was Sou to the last Famous Prince
Griffith, he began with Wars against South Wales, where the English had taken
possession, with Flemmings, Normans, and others; he chased them away, burnt and
spoiled Caermarden, and returned victoriously to North Wales, 1142. in the
year, 1143. seven great Lords, all of them of Princely blood and pedigree, were
slain in Wales; Also at this time the Irish did much spoil, and in conelusion
were spoiled by Prince Owen, and near this time, Howell and Conan, Owens Sons,
gave the Normans and Flemmings a bloody discomfeture at Abertivye, and returned
to their Father with spoil and honor: Yet these Wars continued still, but the
Flemmings and Normans were beaten twice more at the Castles of Carmarden and
Lhanstephan, from the year of Christ, 1138. to 1160 being 32. years, Wales had
not so much as six Months peace and quietness.

And then, before one year was expired the Princes of South Wales quarrelled
with Prince Owen, and after some dangerous bickerings Owen had the Victory. In
Anno, 1163. Henry the Second, King of England, made great preparations for War,
he entered South Wales, as far as Brecknok, and returned without any cause of
triumphing. And in the year, 1165. the said King Henry the Second came in
Person again, having in his Army the stoutest of Englishmen, Normans,
Gascoigners, Flemmings, Guiencys, and some fugitive Welsh; but Prince Owen
joined with South Wales, and others, after much fighting, and loss on both
sides, King Henry returned without Conquest, and fewer men then he brought
forth: Also the next year, 1167. the same King made a greater inrode into
Wales, to as much purpose as he had, done twice before. Also, presently, in the
^ick of these troubles, another Army of Flemmings and Normans came to
West-Wales, did much harm, and in the end returned with much loss.

Then presently, to make the misery of Wales complete, the Welsh Lords fell
together by the ears one with another; and after a weary and troublesome Reign
of 32. years, the magnanimous Prince Owen Guineth dyed, Anno, 1169.

His Son David succeeded the 22 Prince, who was fain to fight for it, and kill
his Brother Howell, before he could attain the Princedom. Then did Henry the 2.
King of England enter South Wales, took the Town of Caerleon from the Lo.
Jorworth, and quite destroyed it: and in 1172. after a tedious molestation,
Prince David ap Owen was expulst from his Rule: and,

Lhewelyn ap Jorworth, being lawful Prince, took the Government, 1194. Richard
the first of that Name being then King of England. This Prince had a quiet
beginning in North Wales, but South Wales was much vexed; for K. John of
England, with David ap Owen, before named, who was deposed or expulsed, came
with an Army against Prince Lhewelyn, who fought and beat K. John, and took
David prisoner, and kept him fast; and the same year there was another bloody
Battle fought, between the English and the Lords of South Wales, and many men
slain by the treachery of some Welsh Lords, for private interests.

In 12 years Prince Lhewelyn had not one months quietness, yet he was still
victorious.

1211. K. John came into Wales with a mighty Army, with a purpose to destroy
all that had life; but he returned with great loss: and the next year he came
again, when (by reason that the English King had many Welsh Lords to take his
part) Prince Lhewelyn ap Jorworth came to an agreement with K. John, and gave
him 20000 l. and 40 Horses: But covenants not being kept by occasion of the
harsh dealing of the English Nobles, and their Officers, made to the Prince to
raise an Army, and take some Castles and Countries, for which K. John caused
the Gentlemen (which he had for Pledges) to be all hanged; and with another
great Army he came into Wales again, to no purpose; for K. John had his hands
and head full of troubles at home, with the Pope and the French, that he was
forced to leave Wales, and return, to his great grief and loss.

In the year of Grace 1214. there was great wars between the Lords of
South Wales and Powis, Welsh against Welsh, and much mischief done on both
sides: And Anno 1215. Prince Lhewelyn made an Inrode into England; then he
won Shrewshury, sacked it, and returned into South Wales, he took Caermarden
from the English, raised the Castle, and took 12 Castles more, and returned
home triumphant: shortly after he subdued all Powis Land to his obedience, and
in Anno 1217. he brought all Wales to his subjection. He had not a weeks rest
from the year 1218. to 1221. but either Welsh, English, Flemmings, or other
troubles kept him from idleness, and still it was his happiness to be Victor.

King John of England, being reconciled to the Pope, the French expulst from
thence, and the Kingdom in quiet, the King (having little to do at home) would
have the the other bout with Wales, which he attempted with much Charge, and bad
success, and shortly after died; to whom his son Henry the 3. succeeded, who
made a speedy expedition against Lhewelyn, and returned home with much
detriment, and peace was made for a small time; for in Anno 1231. K. Henry made
another great preparation against the Prince, to the effect aforesaid.

In 1232. Lhewelyn made an expedition into England, and returned with much
Riches and Honor. In 1233. South Wales raised new wars; but the Prince went in
person and beat them into some quietness, overthrew their Castles and strong
holds, and returned renowned.

And the same year K. Henry the 3. came into Wales, with a greater Army then
ever, compact of diverse Nations, with an intent to destroy all he could, but
was deceived in his purpose, and went home a loser: Then K. Henry sent the Arch
Bishop of Canterbury, with the Bishops of Rochester and Chester to make a peace
with Lhewelyn, but it could not be effected.

Then this peerless Prince died, beloved, and lamented, and was buried at
Conwy. He married Jone the daughter of K. John, by whom he had two sons David
and Griffith; this David kept his brother Griffith in prison all his reign.
The Noble Prince Lhewelyn ap Jorworth, reigned 56 years.

To whom David ap Lhewelyn succeeded, being the 24. Prince, Anno 1240. This
Prince was cursed by the Pope, and hated by the people for imprisoning his
Brother Griffith; for which the K. of England came against him with an Army,
but a peace was made, and Griffith not released, who striving to break prison
and escape, by tying of Lines and Sheets, with such other stuff which he had,
and as he gat out of a high window, he putting all his weight to the Lines,
they brake, and he being fat and heavy, fell with his head downwards, where he
lay a most pitiful dead spectacle, for his head and neck were beaten forcibly
into his body.

Then K. Henry the 3. (as his Predecessors had often done) strived to have
Wales under his obedience, to which purpose he in 1245. raised a mighty Army,
and was more mightily met and foiled by Prince David; soon after David died,
when he had Ruled 5 years, 1246.

Lhewelyn ap Griffith, or the Son of Griffith that dyed with a fall, was the 25
Prince, for his Uncle, Prince David had no Issue, this man was valiant, but
unfortunate, for his two Brethren, Owen and David, made War upon him, but he
vanquished them, and was Master of all Wales: he strived much to shake off the
yoke of England, and perforce he chased all the English out of Wales, with
great slaughter, 1256. King Henry the Third, with two great Armies entered Wales
in several places, did much spoil, received much loss, and returned angry.

In 1258. James Lord Audley with Germane Horsemen, did much spoil, and killed
many in Wales, but in the end, the Welshmen gave them such welcome, that few of
the Germans returned. In these times in all places in Wales was continual
strife, spoil, and bloodshed; for the English would Have; and the Welsh would
Hold: In 1267. Lhewelyn entered England, spoiled and destroyed Chester, and much
of that County; but after that, the Welsh had a great overthrow at a place
called Clun, and in 1268. Henry of England with an Army entered Wales again;
but by the means of Cardinal O^tobonus (the Popes Legate) a Peace was made,
and the Prince paid to the K. of England 30000 Marks. In Anno 1272. King Henry
the 3. died, and his son Edward the 1. went to Chester, from whence he sent a
Summons to command Prince Lhewelyn to come to him and do homage: But the
Prince refused, and would not come to the King. Then two English Armies entered
South Wales, and North Wales, and West-Wales, at once; but (upon hard
conditions) a Peace was concluded, which lasted not long; for Anno 1281. they
fell to it cruelly again: The Prince said, that it was a bard thing to live in
War always; but it was harder to live in continual slavery: soon after,
Prince Lhewelyn was slain, valiantly fighting, and all Wales fell to the
Crown of England, after it had continued from Brute and Camber 2418 years, to
the year of Christ 1282.

Kings sons and Daughters of England, that have been Princes of WALES since
1282.
1 EDward of Carnarvon, son to K. Ed. 1. 1289. 2 Edward of VVinsor, son to Edw.
2. 3 Edw. of Woodstock, son to Edw. 3. or the Black Prince. 4 Richard of
Bordeaux, son to the Black. 5 Henry of Monmouth, son to Henry 4. 6 Edw. of
VVeslm. son to Henry 6. 7 Edw. of VVeslm. son to Edw. 4. 8 Edw. son to K. Ric.
3. at 10 year old instal'd P. 9 Arthur, son to K. Henry 7. 10 Henry D. of York,
2. son to H. 7. E. 6. son to H. 8. 11 Mary, Princess of Wales, Daughter, etc.
12 Eliz. Princess. 13 Henry. 14 Charles, sons to King James.
FINIS.

