THE Essence, Quintessence, Insence, Innocence, Lye-sence, and Magnifisence OF
Nonsense upon Sense: OR, SENSE upon NONSENSE.

The third Part, the fourth Impression, the fifth Edition, the sixth Addition,
upon Condition; that (by Tradition) the Reader may laugh if he list.

In Longitude, Latitude, Crassitude, Magnitude, and Amplitude, lengthened,
widened, enlarged, augmented, increased, made wider and sider, by the addition
of Letters, Syllables, Words, Lines, and far fetched Sentences.

And the lamentable Death and Burial of a Scottish Gallaway Nagge.

Written upon White Paper, in a Brown Study, betwixt Lammas Day and Cambridge,
in the Year aforesaid.

Beginning at the latter end, and written by John Tailor at the sign of the
poor Poets Head, in Phoenix Alley, near the middle of Long Acre, or Coven
Garden.

Anno, Millimo, Quillimo, Trillimo, Daffadillimo, Pulcher.

In Laudem Authoris.
MUst Nonsense fill up every Page?
Is it to save the expense
Of wit? or will not this dull Age
Be at the Charge of sense?
But (John) though Fortune play the Whore,
Let not the Vulgar know it;
Perhaps if you had not been poor,
You had not been a Poet.
Your Estate's held in Capite,
It lies upon Pernassus;
Complain not then of Poverty,
You are as rich as Crassus.
H. B.
Nonsense upon Sense, etc.
Mount meekly low, on blew presumptuous wings,
Relate the force of fiery water Springs,
Tell how the Attick, and Antartick Pole
Together met at Hockley in the Hole:
How Etna, and Vessuvius, in cold blood,
Were both drowned in the Adriatic flood.
Speak truth (like a Diurnall) let thy Pen
Camelion like, rouse Lions from their Den,
Turn frantic Wolpacks into melting Rocks,
And put Olympus in a Tinder box:
Report how Russian Cats do bark like dogs,
And Scithian Mountains are turned Irish Bogs,
Feast Ariadne with Tartarian Tripes,
Transform great Canons to Tobacco-pipes:
Make Venus like a Negro, white as jet,
And puffe-paste of the Tomb of Mahomet.
Then mounted on a Windmill presently
To Dunstable in Derbyshire I Will fly:
From thence I Will take the Chariot of the Sun,
And swim to Scotland, and bring news what is done:
From thence I Will soar to silver Cintha's lap,
And with Endimion take a nine years nap:
There I Will drink healths with smug-face Mulciber,
At all the twelve signs in the Hemisphere.
Tush tell not me these things are past dispute,
I Will from the Hesperides bring golden fruit:
Such as the Poets Palfrey Pegasus,
Fetched from the fertile Molehill Caucasus,
It Is not the Persian Gulf, or Epshams Well,
Nor Westminsters sweet Plum-broth (made in Hell)
Can change my resolution, I have vowed,
To speak with silence and to write aloud,
That Bulls of Basan, and the Circean Swine,
Shall all dance Trenchmore at these words of mine.
Rouse up thou Ghost of Gusman, and apply
Thy self to me and let us write Tempe dry:
Be ruled by me, we will empty all Hellicon,
In scribbling against the Whore of Babylon.
The Dunsmore Cows milk shall make Sillibubs,
And our Religion shall be brought in Tubs.
Make have unto the fair called Bartholomew,
And thence from the Heroic Mungrell Crew,
Take the fine gugaw hobby horses all,
Which we will man, and then a Counsel call
And conquer Callice, Kent and Christendom,
Knock down the Turck, and bravely ransack Rome;
What can be done more? What more can be sed?
Let Us play at Blind man-buffe for Ginger-bread:
We Will have a dish of Dabs in Fish-street dressed,
And with the Lobsters Ladies we will feast.
For as the Gowt is but a pleasing itch,
The best Bear-garden Bull-dog was a Bitch.
We have both eight and eighteen parts of speech,
Whereby I learn Ash burns as well as Beech,
Gargantua's scull is made a frying pan
To fry or follow the Leviathan,
That Gogmagog, Nick Wood, or Mariot,
Nor Creatan, Miloe, or Iscariot
Were not such valiant stomack'd men as those
That eat the Devils gowty petitoes.
Hark, hark, how from the South fierce Boreas rores
Give me a Sculler or a pair of Oars.
I Will make the Orient, and the Occident,
Both friends at Smithfield in the wild of Kent:
For now Tom Holders Mare has broke her Cruppe
Dress me a dish of Ae-dipthongs to supper.
The Dean of Dunstable has bought and sold
Twelve lies new Printed, for two groats in gold.
It Is almost past the memory of man,
Since famous Arthur first in Court began:
Yet though King Lud did reign in Troynovaunt,
Will Summers was no kin to John of Gaunt.
What news from Tripoly? ware horns there ho:
The West-wind blows South-North at Ierico.
Steer well and steady, boys look, look to the Helm,
Fetch Goesberries that grow upon the Elm:
Like Cormorants lets live upon the Air,
And of a Whirle-poole make a Marble Chair.
Blind men may see, and deaf men all shall hear
How dumb men talk, because Cow-hides are dear.
Go to the Utopian Kingdom and relate,
That to their King these lines I dedicate:
Bid him take note of me, and understand
He has not such a Poet in his Land.
Down by the dale with milk and cream that flows.
Upon a Hill (below the Valley) grows
Hungarian Peacocks white as crimson Geese,
There sat a Rat upon a Holland Cheese:
No sooner did blind Bayard see the sight,
Two beauteous ugly Witches took their flight
To tell the King of China wondrous news,
How all Scotch Knaves were hanged and English Jews.
The Athenian Hidra, and the Bird Torpedo
Were caught in France in Mouse-traps near Toledo.
A Scolopendra coming near Pickthatch,
Made drunk a Constable and stole the watch.
Do what you can, Madge howlet is an Owl:
And Beans with Buttermilke is rare wild Foul.
The Cobblers daughter, we three both together,
We Will match, he will give a thousand pieces with her;
Besides the smoke of Keinsam and Bell-Swagger,
Who often at Mims did use his dudgeon Dagger:
Then shall the Perecranians of the East,
South, North, and West, with every bird and Beast;
All knuckle deep in Paphlagonian Sands,
Inhabit Transilvanian Netherlands:
It Is the only gallant way to gain promotion,
To squeese Oil from the Cindars of Devotion,
Translate our Rowndhead Turnips into Carrets,
And turn the lowest Cellars to high Garrets:
Let Neptune be a shepherd, and let Vulcan
Make have to Greeneland, and there drink his full Kan.
Titus Andronicus has writ a Treatise,
Of Molehils in the entrance of Dame Theatis,
Wherein a man may learn before he looks
To catch mince-pies with neither nets nor hooks:
There policy with practice cut and dried
Were carted both in triumph through Cheapside.
If Monday hang himself no further seek.
Henceforth Tuesday shall begin the week:
No more of that I pray, I am afear'd
There Is not one hair upon Diana's beard.
Great Agamemnon late combined with Hector,
To preach at Amsterdam an Irish Lector,
Which shall convert the Horse, the Ass, and Mule
And all the Beasts in Hipperborean Thule
If Sunshine will with shadows but consent
We Will make the winter of our discontent
To force fierce Crook-back into better tune,
And turn Decembers heat to frost in June.
When this external substance of my soul
Did live at liberty, I caught wild foul,
I was a Caiftiffe in the Court of Spain,
And played at shuttle-cock with Charlemaine:
Then I did magnify and mundifie,
Then I the Fairy Queen did putrify,
And purify again, and dignifie,
All such as did her greatness deifie,
Females did edify and fructify,
And Amplify and coldly gratify.
The Lake of Lerna I did clarify,
My Verse the Aethiop Queen did beautify.
With rage my patience I would qualify,
I can both certify and testify
How Death did live, and life did mortify:
Fear always did my courage fortify:
He Is crafty that his wits can rectify,
To vilify, make glad and terrify,
And with course words old debts to satisfy,
That man I Will ratify and notify
To be one that himself will Justify,
And fie, fo, fum, concludes him with O fie:
Thus from complexions I have Mineralls drawn,
Brave Captain Fumble laid his sword to pawn
To ransom Jeffery Chaucers Cipresse Gown.
Thersitis with a Rush knocked Ajax down
Imperious Momus wrote the Atlantic story
Of wars betwixt Achilles and John Dory:
'T was dedicated to the Isle of Lundy.
An Embleame right of transit gloria mundi.
Thus the great Amadis de Gal was able
With Nonsense (like sense) to endure a Fable
Thus Mirmidons, upon the plains of Sarum
Did beat up Pompies quarters with alarm.
Let not the distances of place molest us,
Abidos is not forty miles from Sestus:
As Hero loved Leander, I Will agree,
Though he and she were mad, what is that to me?
It Is like Cleopatra and Antonius
Met, but saw not the Cardinal Baronius:
The Capitol, and silken Rock Tarpeyus
In a Seadan to Lichfield shall convey us;
And like a wheel-barrow we will cut and curry,
And fetch good news from Shropshire and from Surry:
There is no Eunuch of the Race of Brutus,
That either can confute us, or cornute us.
Old Solon was no jester, nor no jyber,
And English Thames is better then Romes Tyber:
I took a Camel, and to Naples went I,
Of pickled Sausedges I found great plenty;
The Gudgeon catcher there o'retop'd the Nobles,
And put the Vice Roy in a peck of troubles:
Brave tag rag multitude of Omnium Gatherum.
Shuffle 'um together, and the Devil father 'um:
But now and then was squez'd a rich Delinquent,
By which good means away the precious chink went:
Renowned was the Rascal Massennello,
In fifteen days he was raw, ripe, and mellow.
Laugh, laugh, thou whining Fool Heraclitus,
And weep thou grinning Ass Democritus:
The gray Horse is the better Mare by half,
The Bull at Bear-Garden, and Walthams Calfe
Are reconciled, but not concluded fully
Who pleaded best, Demosthenes or Tully:
I am indifferent, fill the other Kan,
Logic has art to make an Ape a man.
I weeping sing, to think upon the Quiblins
Twixt Roman, and Imperial Guelphs and Giblins.
How Munsters John a Leide, and Knipperdoling
Were barbarous Barbers in the art of poling.
From Sense and Nonsense, I am wide, quoth Wallice,
But not so far as Oxford is from Callice:
Give me a Leash of merry blades, right Bilboes,
True tattered Rogues in Breech, Shirts, Skirts, and Elboes,
And each of them will make a fit Disciple.
To ride up Holborn to the tree that is triple:
A man may think his purse is quite turned Roundhead,
When all the crosses in it are confounded:
It Is said that Poetry a thriving trade is,
And gets a World of wealth from Lords and Ladies;
The Devil they do, false shameful Lown thou lie,
And when thou can no longer live, thou dy'st.
Lend me Rhamnussnes Flanders blade, I Will lash
The sober Centaure, turn great Oaks to Ash:
A long Devils broth, be sure you bring a spoon,
Our mornings shall begin at afternoon;
And Minos, Eacus, nor Rhadamantus
May rore and rant, but never shall out rant us.
As we are Temporal, let us be Temporizers,
We scorn to be surpised, we will be surprizers:
Let Us make grim Pluto stink, the welkin rumble,
And Hollophernes bluster, blow, and grumble,
Rending up mighty Thistles by the roots,
Because an Ostler stole away his boots:
Then with a multiplying Gally pot,
I Will know the projects of the crafty Scot;
And then he shall be forced to hide his head
In Tenebris, in Poland, or in Swead:
Fough, this Tobacco stinks; thou dirty Hag,
Stand further near, I Will put thee in a bag.
Search Asia, Afric and America,
To find the Goddess Berecinthia,
And know how Pirramus and this befell
Together by the years late in Bridewell.
Words are but wind in Term time, but Vacations
Are fit to publish silent Proclamations.
There was a business never understood,
The woman's suit in Law was just and good:
She lost the day, this did her Cause disgrace,
The Lawyer put some ill into her Case.
Before I Will live this life, I Will take a knife,
And drown my self, and then what needs a Wife?
Strange things are done by Art and humane power,
Q^inborow Castle landed near the Tower.
Much like a Prodigy old time played Rex:
A Kentish Castle came to Middlesex.
May not a man called Newgate dwell at Higate,
And wed a Widow at the Pie at Algate?
Therefore let us like or dislike Presbytery,
It will work finely if it once besquitter ye.
Bring me a Salamander from Surat in France,
The Alps and the Pirenian hills shall dance.
Is Greenewich Park there smiling Nioby
Shall laugh and lie down like an Oyster Pie.
F^me is a lying slut* she told me tails,
That in October Christmas came from Wales:
Believe it take the wings of Icarus.
And walk to Hounsditch, and to Erebus,
There tell them plainly how the case stands here.
And bring us word how matters do go there.
Unto the Market I Will run presently,
And there a peck of troubles I will buy,
One told me they would multiply and grow:
All England with them I will plant and sow.
Which as they ripen daily I Will take care
That every living soul shall have a share:
I Will serve my self first, and I Will have such store
In time of need to serve a thousand more.
But I forget my Theme. O foul offense!
This nonsense has a taste of too much sense:
The Ass, Goos, Woodcock, Buzard, and the Gull,
Beat out their brains, and put them in my scull;
And tell the men of Gotham it is thought fit
The Wisemen there should lend me all their wit:
For Nonsense I will tax all Christendom,
Great Emperors and Kings shall pay me some,
And many a Major, or justice of the Peace
Will give me tribute and the Tax increase
To such a height, that Cardinals from Rome,
Cuckolds, and Costables shall pay me some:
Strong Hull, with fatal Hell, and Hallifax,
Shall naturally bring me tole and tax:
The mighty stock of Nonsense I will win:
Shall Be the universal Magazine,
For Universities to work upon
The Rich Philosophers admired Stone:
Then I make Poets rich, and Usurers poor;
And thus resolved at this time write no more.
This Dedication is humbly directed to a living man, quartered into four
Offices (viz.) a Scavenger, a Beadle, a Cobbler, and half a Constable.
TO the high and mighty Davidius Vulcanus, Duke and Dominator of the Dunghils,
and absolute, resolute, dissolute, Scavenger of the Town and Territories of
Gravesend in Norfolk, great Master and Baron of the Wheel-barrow, the only
Farmer, Transporter, Lord of the Soil, and Privy searcher of all Mixens, and
Muckhils, simple or compound, in the Liberties aforesaid. Cleanser, Clearer,
and avoyder of the most Turpitudinous, Merdurinous, excrementall offals, Muck,
and Garbage. Refiner, Purger, Clarifier, Purifier, Mundifier, Excluder, and
Expulser of Putrifactious and Pestiferous Contagions; the Potentissimo,
Excellentissimo, Invader, Scatterer, Disperser, Consumer, and Confounder of
offensive unsavory savours, smells, scents, and Vapors: Great Sultan, Sultan,
and Grand Signiour over all varieties of stinks, and stinkards; most Triumphant
Termagant, irresistable Conqueror and Commander of the major and minor (the
great and the less) Turditanians, chief Corrigidor and Beadle of all the
Precinct, sole Transplanter, Terrifier, Controler, and Corrector of Beggars and
Vagabonds. The terrible Hue and Cry, Crier, chief Court-Cryer, Jayle-Keeper,
and only Consiner of the Hogs; chief and most frequent vigilant Watchman,
demy-Constable, and Image of Authority, the most accomplished Cobbler, exquisite
Translator, and exact Reformer of oppressed, decayed, wicked, and oppressed
soals: And the only judiciary rectifier, underlayer, and setter upright of such
Brethren and Sisters as do go aside, and tread their foot awry in these days
of Vanity, and paths of Iniquity: In hope (Great Sir) I have not abated you of
the least tittle of your title, your Honorable style being so high, that no
Christian, Pagan, Heathen, Turk, Jew, Infidel, Cuckold, or Canniball, can
never climb to the top of it, there being a late report that your multiplicity
and many affairs of State have disturbed your rest, and impaired your health,
insomuch as it is thought your pericranion is crazed or cracked, and you
thereby in danger to fall into a Callenturian disease, which is to be doubted
may produce a Vertigo in your head, whereby your wit may be troubled with a
superfluous flux, which may prove a molestation to your self, and the whole
Town, that has in it self, and in every place round about it, more troubles
then they can well bear. But if their hard fortune should be, that when you are
working to your own Ends, and that you should call for your Aule, and death
should mistake and bring you your Last, whereby such a privy member as your
self might be publicly lost; it is feared, grief would overflow the whole
Town, and that some of the Townsmen (with the help of their Wives) would run
stark horn mad: To prevent this great detriment of such a loss as that Town
may undergo in this time of scarcity of wit, wisdom, and wise men; for fear
you should fall into the dangerous diseases of the Mubblefubbles, or the
grumbling of the Gizzard: Therefore to drive away dumps, and to give you some
Recreation, I have made bold to present your greatness with this Dedication,
which if you will vouchsafe but to read and understand, and in so doing you
shall do more for the Author, then he ever was or shall do himself.

J. T.

Allandro pasqueto Valatrumpa entangrino liuroe.
IL vento Chioli, Mauritambull Teda fulgare,
Antro della campo ill Danto Corda sublima
Pantathos, stremo standina eschine vandri
Been in shendo, tircia, penthe dissadi.
Mecrops Sans sida vocifera Randa Bavinea,
Allatendrea quanto, Eltrada Pizminoy venta,
Mega Pollimunton, Theorba quasi quicunque
Tripolina Tiphon, Quabacondono sapho.
Terra tragmus sophye, sunt diacalcitheo Geata.
Avostre Obserdandi Zhean De Fistye Cankie De Sallamanca Andalowsia.
Or thus you may English it, in the transcending praise of the Author and his
Book.
TIll PHOEBUS blustering blasts shall cease to blow,
And AEOLUS shall hide his radiant Rays,
Till VULCANS Forge be framed of Scithian Snow,
And NEPTUNE like a Shepherd spend his days;
When SATURN shall sell Mouse traps and allow
MARS to sing Madrigals, and round delays:
Then shall thy Book and thee be out of Date,
And scorn the envy of consuming Fate.
To your Worthiness in all observance Devoted, John De^istie Cankie of
Sallamanca in Andalusia.
SWift Pepasus lend me thy Hoofes and Wings
Tempe, and Aganipp, and such strange things
As Poets do call Hellicon, and Muses
(That with ingenious wit the brain infuses)
In nimble strains make my invention wag,
And tell the sad death of a Scottish Nag.
A Nag of Nags, (as those that knew him say)
Whose birth and breeding was in Galloway,
Which Country (though it barren be and bare)
His Mother was a well reputed Mare:
He had all paces, and more swift then Wind,
Could trot before and amble well behind;
He had two sorts of gallops, false and true,
That when he did but run, men thought he flew!
Sure he was kin to winged Pegasus,
And of the race of great Bucephalus;
But I Will not rake up old Antiquity,
To prove his Ancesters old Pedigree:
Let it suffice, that such a Horse he was
That could in measure bravely pace and pass,
A Bay, a gallant Bay, most swift and quick,
Not having one base scurvy jadish trick.
There Is many brave men, in their finest trim
Wants what this Nag had, sound of wind and Limb.
He di'd untimely by a sad disaster,
And death unluckily unhors'd his master.
Though Horses of diseases have too many,
Yet in his life time he had never any:
He had no Chin-gall, Wind-gall, Navell-gall,
Or Staggers, Spur-gall, Light-gall, Shacksgall,
Nor Worms, or anticore, or Salenders,
Nor Scatches, Dropsy, or the Mallenders,
No Palsy, Fever vexed him, or Pompardy,
No frenzy troubled him, he was so hardy;
No Glanders, Cough, the Yellows, or Pole evil,
Or Spavens, Splinters, Fashions, or Colt-evill;
Nor Ring-bones, Quitter-bones, no Curbs or Hawse,
Were of this Nags death any grief or Cause;
No Cramp or Canker, Crestfall, or the Vives,
Or bloody Riffes that shorten Horses lives.
He had no Crown-scab, nor was ever found
To have the Hawks, or Toothach, or Hide-bound,
Or Bots, or Botch, or Paps his health did wound.
No tongue-hurt Farley, rotten Frush, or Cloyed,
No Kybes, or broken wind his health annoyed;
No Bladders, Surbates, Wrench, or Tyrednesse,
No strain, no Scottish fleas, or lowsinesse;
No prick 'ith soale, Neck-creek, or shoulder-splat,
Or Strangle, he never troubled was with that;
He had no Pin and Web, loose-hoof'd, or gravel'd,
Bloud-shot, or foundered whensoere he traveled:
Horse hip'd he was not, or in's Groyn a Wen,
Nor Rot in the Lungs, nor shed his hair, what then
Did kill him? some suppose it was the Pose;
But we are all deceived, 'twas none of those:
No Megrim was his death, or Calenture,
He with a Surfeit died an Epicure.
But change of Pasture, altring of the Air
The health of M^n or Horse may much impair:
For by old PAR it plainly does appear,
(Who lived in Shropshire sevenscore thirteen year)
Was by an Honorable Earls expense,
With Care and Cost to London brought from thence;
But change of Air and Diet took short course,
And laid him dead, like Master FRADSHAMS horse.
This Nag in Scotland kept a temperate diet,
(For Gallaway's a Country free from Riot)
Nor can it be reported any where,
That ever Horse did dye of Surfeit there:
With Provender they are not proud, pricked up,
With moderation there they bite and sup;
Their fate is fruitful Fearn, and wholesome Heath,
Which frugall food preserves long wind or Breath,
Or Moss as soft as down or good chopped straw;
(For Horses there think Hay Apocrypha)
An English Horse-loafe's Antichristian,
And all their Nags are Presbyterian:
For had I Aristotiles wit, my pen
Would prove strange Sects in Horses as in men:
The Spanish Jennet, and the Flaunders Mare,
Betwixt them many strange opinions are:
The Sumpter Horse will prance a lofty Gate,
Proud with the Burden of ill gotten plate;
The Naples Courser, and the German steed,
The Barbary Horse that amongst the Moors does breed,
The Cart horse, French Cavalla* Irish Hobby,
The Welsh Tit that loves Oats beyond Couse bobby:
A man may write and talk, and wast his wind,
Yet never make these horses of one mind;
And many sects there are that disagree,
Who in Religion like to Horses be:
And sure more Horses have to Churches gone
Within th^se ten years, then was ever known:
This Nag, near Hampton Court did catch his death
And to his Master did his skin bequeath;
His Brains, Wit, Reason, and his honesty,
He gave to's Country as a Legacy:
His Corpse had near a hundred Graves and Tombs,
In light foot Hounds, Kites, Crows, and Ravens Wombs:
Thus at his Funeral solemnity,
He was most swift, and did both run and fly.
The Second Part to the same Sense.
WHen as a Woodcock did a Phoenix hatch,
Once in the Reign of Julian the Apostate,
When Spiders Nets an Elephant did catch,
The Alehouse had no fire to make a Toast at;
Then in those merry lamentable days,
Upon a Christmas Evenear Michaelmas,
New Market heath did hoarsly sing the praise
Of Apuleins, or the Golden Ass.
The Adamantine fall of seven fold Nile,
Had boiled Musk-Millions from the Mount Pernassus,
Whereas the sing song wanton Crocodile
Made Roman Cressus smile, and Lidian Crassus,
When Charing Cross the Sun of Summers Leg.
Had Kitned in the eyelids of a Nowne,
And Christmas Carrols played at Mumble peg,
With the Bulls pizzel of a Market Town;
Then shall a Pronowne and a Participle
Fight doggedly for wagging of a straw,
And then Tom Thum with Gogmagog shall tipple,
And show the Learned Lawyers what is Law.
Then Ghastly flesh of shillings fried in steaks,
And Ointments drawn from warm ingratitude
Did draw the teeth of two and forty weeks
From out the heels of squemish magnitude.
But yet (O yet) a new laid Madrigall
Had baked the haunches of a Spanish child,
And matcht'em to Sir Guy the Seneschall,
Who lived Adulterously with Bosworth field,
Whilst this was doing, all undone, and Done,
As men undo a Trowt to make a Loach,
For as with spoons a Lord may eat the Sun,
So lays a Bitch her Litter in a Coach.
The Times have been, (but Time is turned to pap)
That men might speak like Sea-crabs with a Quill,
And old Devotion wore a cornered Cap
Upon the Stomach of a Water-mill.
But as a Bag pipe-flying in the Air,
Does water all the Earth with Scottish Jigs,
So Times do change their turns at Sturbridge Fair;
For all the World now rides on Ale and Wigs.
O that my wings could bleat like buttered pease,
But bleating and my Lungs have caught the itch,
Which are as musty as the Irish Seas,
Which in their left side now have both the Stich.
I grant indeed* that Rainbows laid to sleep,
Snort like a Woodknife in a Ladies eyes,
Which makes her bark to see a Pudding creep,
For creeping puddings always please the Wise.
The ^or^^ of custom makes a man to piss
A cast of Merlins in King Dido's mouth:
Hence comes the squint eyed Proverb, which is this,
All men are borne their backsides to the South.
A Letter late came from the Stygian Lake
That told me Cerberus himself had choked:
He took a Millstone for a buttered Cake,
when first red Herrings were at Yarmouth smoked:
The Oriental Chilblains of the West
Flew like a Colliflower in Chequer broth,
And then the Fairy Queen in Buckrum dressed,
Rod through the Air well mounted on a Moth.
Man as he is a Cloakbag, is a fish,
But as a humane Creature he is a Cock:
Which boyld with pindust in Chafing dish,
Eats like stewed Mustard made in Vulcans smock.
Once in an evening when the morning Sun
Did hotly speak with cold Meridian splendour;
There was a jolly Friar told a Nun
That Feminine was Masculine Male Gender,
Things have their times, as Oysters have their wool:
Dogs have their days as Distaffes have their Gall,
So all men living ought to dwell at Hull,
For Hallifax cannot contain them all.
A Statesman once corrupted is a Gun,
That ferrets Screachowls from Bellona's Beard,
To make a handsome Codpiece for the Sun
To were upon the pommell of his Sword.
Man unto Man, is Man; but Man to Man,
Is Herrings flesh, made of a yard of Ale,
With the ingredients of a D^^pping pan.
Whiles Pancradge Church begets an Issue Male.
An Ox was lately in a Mouse-trap taken;
Read but the book of Weekly News, and note
How many stock fishes were made far Bacon,
Broyld on the Top-m^st of a Mussell Boat,
New Heroglyphick threefold twisted Lines
Of things that were, and were not, how Augustus
With Ovids Metamorph^ses combines,
To try us oftentimes, but never trust us.
The faculties of every humane soul
Are made of Turpentine and Venson bones:
Engendered in the night cap of an Owl
That gives a Glyster to the Torrid Zones:
For as a Pistol lisps when he does court
Three pair of guts, bound up in true loves knots,
So Easter Term is cu^to'd but in sport,
While Hobby-horses cured are of the Bots.
Then smoth thy brow with milk-white discontent,
And raise thy spirits up beneath thy feet:
For Shrovetide now has swallowed Iack-a-lent.
Because few Mariners are in the Fleet.
I know I am a man abhorred of Bells
That ring in Concave of an Heteroclite;
I know the Cuckolds thoughts of Bathe and Wels,
Do sizzle like a Mil-stone in a Net.
I saw, but what I viewed, I never saw
A row of Teeth penfeatherd in a Trowt,
Whilst Perkins Horse orethrew a Case in Law,
And he himself got fee farm of the Gowt.
How can a Mayor Rule, but with a Lask,
That may squirt Steeples in the teeth of Fame?
For if they do, their touch stone and their Flask
Will fill the Wind with Polecats of the name.
The clock does strike when time bewrayes his hose,
And Oysters catch the cough with being kind.
As Putrocks wear their Buttocks in their nose,
So Fables wear their Bables in their mind.
I grant indeed, that whosoever may and can, Deep Ppilosophy.
Can never may, since may does can abey; Deep Ppilosophy.
But he that can and will, may will as man, Deep Ppilosophy.
But man can will, yet his will cannot may. Deep Ppilosophy.
Call True the Tailor hither presently,
For he must make a Mantle for the Moon:
Bid Atlas from his shoulders shake the sky,
And lend and send me his left handed spoone.
For Pride's a Pitchfork that the wail does fill
Of Ursa Mayor (God of Apple Cakes,)
Sloth is the Cucking stool of Holborne hill,
Much like a Soap boyler upon a lakes.
Oh that I were in love with Bobbin-lace,
Or great with child of Tullies purple Gown;
Then to mine Ankles I would screw my face,
To make a Pair of Boots for black Renown.
Feign would I leave, but leave at me does grin,
As does a Custard when his nails does ache;
Or like a blew Bore in a Pudding skin,
So I must manners leave for manners sake.
Then rest my Rimes, before my reason's done,
For women are all Wag tails when they run:
Who sets his wits my Sense to undermine, is
A cunning man at Nonsense, farewell. Finis.
The third part of the fourth Edition to the five Senses, or Sense aforesaid.
I Will say no more, but what I mean to speak,
And speaking what I say shall silence break.
Mambudget, let no words be uttered neither,
Let Us separate our speeches close together.
Reach my fierce flye-flap, Van-Trump, stand aloof,
My Arms and Armour's close Committee Proof;
Give me a Butterbox with not on rag on,
I Will pickle him like to a Dutch flap Draggon:
An Ordinance of Parliament shall scatter ye,
Our Ordinance is Ordnance, that can batter ye.
Me vat a whee, is Cambria British French,
Dick shifts a Trencher, but Tom keeps the Tr^nch.
An Annagram is John King, and King John,
Five quarters of one year is four to one:
May not a M^ser while a poor man's want,
And give him lodging, clothing, and provant,
And hang himself, and give the Devil his due,
Perhaps the News is too good to be true.
I care not where mine Hostess, and mine Host lie,
TO have meat and drink for nothing, is not costly.
I could have written mad verse, sad verse, glad verse,
But you shall be contented now with bad verse;
I neither weep or sing of sweet Rebellion,
Or story old I lift not now to tell ye on:
The Royal mad Lancastrians, and Yorkists
Scarce harmed so much as some cornuted Forkists,
The most uncivil civil Goths and Vandals
Did not on their own Country bring such scandals.
The Turks, the Jews, the Canibals and Tartars
Never kept such wicked, rude, unruly quarters.
Ierusalems, Eleazer, John, and Simon
Did never yield Poet baser stuff to rhyme on.
Like bloody Sylla, and consuming Marius,
One mischief did into another carry us.
Amongst all Trades (some thousands zealous Widgeons)
Were hardly more in number then Religions.
In Preachers Rooms were Preached, for which I woe am,
The basest people Priests like Jeroboam.
That one may say of London, what a Town is it?
It harbors in it many a Corbraind Brownist:
It Is scattered full of Sects, alas how apt is it
To be a Familist, or Annabaptist
Whilst Knaves (of both sides) with Religions Mantle,
Have rifled England by patch, piece, and Cantle;
That I may say of thee O London, London,
What has thy Wealth, Wit, Sword, and furious Gun done?
And what has many a mothers wicked son done?
Whereby (against their wills) there is many undone.
Thrice happy had it been for our tranquillity,
If th'Authours of this incivility
Had been a little checked by Gregory Brandon,
With each of them a hempen twisted band on.
FINIS.

