A Petitionary EPISTLE Directed to the LORD PROTECTOR, AND People of the
Commonwealth of England, Scotland, and Ireland, to continue in unity.
GREAT SIR,
FOR so You are, God having exalted You to be the absolutest Imperial Chief,
that hitherto has Headed these Nations; our preceding Blessings fills us with
hopes of future Successes; our Faith cannot miscarry if diffidence in You, and
disobedience in the Peeple, prove not the Rocks to split this glorious Vessel
of Englands Commonwealth, and its chief Commander, upon their entrance (...)
and into the Harbor of Peace and Honor: Therefore in the love of Christ I
beseech you not to take amiss my honest plainness, which will keep at distance
from indecent rudeness.

Though in the cure of these distempers I lanch deep into the sore of
corruption, and apply Corrosives to cleanse it, you shall have balm to heal it
without a scar, and Cordialls to cherish and strengthen the Vitals.

My Lord, I address to you, Recollect what you were, consider what you are; who
has chosen you, and what you are to do for him, read Deuteronomy. 17. from Ver. 14.
to the end, your Office is there bounded. Peruse the 18. of Jeremiah, and turn
over the Records of Jeroboam and Jehu; let their sleightings of the Promises
annexed to their preferment, and the superstructures of their own devices
added to the Lords foundation, be pondered by you: The Lord has given you a
heart and head suitable to the work he has designed you for; The world will
witness while it continues, that you have an immense portion of prudence and
courage, yet you have not done the work that is expected from you; the heady,
stiff-neckt disobedience of the people forcing you to run into your self, which
will never do the work.

You have been excellent in modelling, framing and regulating of Armies; but
how fruitless has been your purging forming, and creating of Parliaments? the
Lord having blasted all your undertakings in that kind, the reason being not
seen, if discerned, not desired. My Lord submit only to the Lord Almighty in
this particular, and he will give your Subjects hearts to maintain you in that
Throne he has made their hands to lift you into: My prayers and labors have
been, and are, that your Glory may not only continue, but increase.

A great contest is between you and the People, as to the Election of a
Parliament, God can and will only umpire it; trust him with both your
interests, and make your Elections by lot; divide and rule, is Machivil's
Maxim; but division is the mother of destruction, is Christ's Assertion.

Brethren of this united Commonwealth, of what judgment soever you be, in all
Christian love I come to you, and wish that as so many beautiful and sweet
flowers growing in the Lords garden, you may be chosen in your several
varieties, gifts and operations, to be included in the silken bond of Peace to
make a Poesy that may be pleasing both in the eyes and nostrills of the Prince
of Peace.

What are you weary of your well-being? David's complaint was, Lord where are
thy loving kindnesses? have thou forgot to be merciful? But instead thereof,
the Lord complains, How are my mercies and deliverances forgotten? Have I not
freed you from servitude both spiritual and temporal? have I not cleansed you
from your own blood you lately wallowed in by a civil war? Have I not removed
the Pestilence from you, and not suffered the Famine to approach you? Have not
I given you faithful, wise and couragions Governors that have made you quiet at
home, feared abroad, and famous to all Nations? But what has been your return
unto him for all these mercies, except pride, covetousness, hypocrisy, and
disobedience? for which you must expect fearful judgments, unless a timely
return by repentance and amendment be speedily made with all submission to the
Lords Ordinance by himself constituted, continued and approved; the neglect and
breach of which has brought you into all these contentions; greater calamities
are you falling into, unless you agree to prevent them in leaving it to
beidecided by our merciful Lord God, who only can compose it.

Parliaments are like the brazen Serpent; once your cure, now your idol; see,
what have they done, since the first Scottish Kings reign, till this time: Say,
if any one begun and ended to the Prince and peoples content; what
inconveniences have not some brought? how have you esteemed of of them? How
have some of them acted that which they condemned unlawful in the
Star-chamber-practice upon Burton, Pryn, and Bastwick? How have their Acts been
lately violated? witness the last Act for Prisoners, suspended at the arbitrary
pleasures of some during the intervals of Parliaments Sessions: And those Acts
which provide for the dispose of treasure, broken by factious persons, and when
complained on, not only connived at, but also countenanced by some in
Parliament; which if you be not careful to preserve those Laws you find, you
teach the people to break those you make. How can you hope for any good to be
effected by Parliaments as now elected? Have you not seen sometimes the
Presbyterian, otherwhile the Independent? nay, have you not complained of a
Cavalier-prevailing party in them? You know it is a remnant that is faithful:
How often have you suggested the major part to be corrupt, which has caused you
to purge Parliaments, and gave you an entrance into Scotland; And can you
forget how in the last Parliament in the very beginning by those factious
Elections they had chosen Members, which if the Lord in mercy had not
restrained them, before this time we should have been plunged in blood and
destruction. I tremble when I think on the Hazlerig-troop of secluded
Remonstrants in the beginning of that Parliament, did term him whom the Lord
chose, and themselves fought with in the same cause for their Countries
redemption, Tyrant and Usurper. How have they by there murmurings and
provocations caused him (like Moses) to strike when he should but speak? and
by their frowardness and ragings, forced him (as Aaron) to make a Calfe like
the Egyptian Ox, an other House instead of a House of Peers? But we hope the
vanity of Messages and Messengers during the last fortnights sitting, will for
the future free us from the like mischieves.

How at present do we plunge him to preserve us? Alas! the quarrel is between
Christ and Antichrist: Are not He and the King of Sweden the prime Champions or
Christendom that stand for the reformed Religion? Look round about you, and
see if you are not in the midst of flames; you will find Tinder-boxes and
Fuel from all parts to increase them, and factious bellows to blow them
higher, but few to bring a bucket of water to quench them. Consider what
condition you are in; you have yet peace at home, the Portugal, French Dane,
Dutch and Spanish have for their affronts sought compliance, or suffered for
not doing of it: What would you have him to do? how support the Armies and
Navies? has he had Kings, Bishops, Deans and Chapters with Delinquents Lands?
Or, are they dispersed among the people? How has this City lately in a manner
had cities added to it? Where are his banks, favorites, riots, works of
ostentation, for which he extorts your treasure, and mis-imployes it? You
Citizens, can you be wise and provident in your particulars, as in adventuring
your wealth to sea, engage your credit, and with patience expect a gainful
return; and you Contrymen the like in your crops; and will it not persuade
you to the like cheerful patience when the welfare and honor of the Public is
concerned? Will you when you are by your skilful stout Pilot whom the Lord
enabled to steer you safely in all your bypast storms and dangers, and has
brought you even to your desired Havens mouth, the winds rising high and the
rocks in his way, will you then bind your Pilot hand and foot, and wilfully
cast him, and your selves away? You see your danger, and necessity, and be
assured no Forrainer sides with any that are declared enemies to this Nation,
but for their own advantage, our destruction. To prevent which, stand upon your
Guards both by Sea and Land, enable our Protector accordingly, you have had
long experience of him, and the Lords love to him; Petition him speedily to
settle all differences, by calling of a Parliament, in which improve your
reason and prudence to exempt malignant and lewd persons, and such as are
factious, and according to your judgments and affections, make choice of such
as shall best like you, and though they have never so few voices let them come
to the lot; you have no other way then this left you, it will give quiet, and
the Lord will bless it, for the excellent and frequent use of it, read how the
Land of promise was divided by it, Achan discovered, Saul elected King by it,
Jonah detected; it periods all differences, it preserves Christ's Coat whole,
which you Episcopal, Independent, Rebaptized, Presbyters, Quakers, and others,
do all pretend to, and are ambitious to ingross, and so tug and contend for it,
that you will tear it in pieces unless you are as wise and civil as the
soldiers who cast lots for it. Ye are all alike aspiring like the sonns of
Zebedee, to sit at the right and left hand of Christ; to have the Magistracy
and Ministry in your power; but the Lord by this will dispose them to such as
himself can only search and finds to be upright-hearted: This was the way the
Apostles followed after their wisdoms and affections had voted two
Competitors, one of them must supply Judas his vacancy, and Mathias by it was
admitted to the Apostleship; This way the Lord will continue till the end of
time; for in the end of days Daniel shall stand in his lot, Dan. 12.13.

Now that you may be persuaded to embrace this Ordinance, give me leave to show
you where the Lords displeasure has gently chastised the infringement of it:
Call to mind when succors were to be sent to relieve our distressed Brethren
in Ireland, the supplies were drawn forth by lot, the Lord Lambert and Col.
Scroop, both gallant and faithful persons were chosen by it, the Lord Lambert
for reasons best known to the then Governors, did not go when God by it said
Go; but after when he would have gone in splendour he was eclipsed and
withheld, and Col. Scroop who had submitted to the Lot, and after Election
refused to go, his Regiment suddenly broke and moulder'd away. Lay these gentle
corrections to heart, and join all by prayer to God, and petition to the
Protector that you may thus elect a Parliament; it wiil quiet all distractions,
and unite the Members with their Head; none dare or can oppose it, but such
whose consciences judge themselves unworthy of it; whose hearts tell them the
Lord knows them, and will not admit them by it Consider you are a People blessed
by God, the wonder of the world, and that the Lord has given you a CHIEF which
has exceeded all Presidents, and will be a pattern to Posterity. The Lord in
his abundant mercy ingrave upon your hearts and bring the meditation often to
your minds of Samuels warning to the Israelites, 1 Samuel 12.24, 25. Only fear
the Lord, and serve him in truth with all your heart; for consider how great
things he has done for you.

But if you shall still do wickedly, yoe shall be consumed both ye and your
King. Which the Lord for the love of his Son Christ Jesus avert, is the fervent
prayer of

Your obedient subject and christian brother, N. T
From a loyal and loving heart, March 22. 1658.
Postscript.
THis piece is like the wedding supper; see Luk: 14 from Ver. 24. to 26. it was
intended to the Governors, but could not get admittance; the governed are
equally loved and concerned, and therefore invited: the seed is from above,
it is now sown (though by a weak hand,) God in his time will bless it with
increase: The sowers reward will be as the poor man's that saved a city,
Eccle. 9.15. But I have done my duty; and that is my comfort.

Horace. Est modus in rebus, sunt certi denique fines,
Quos ultra citraque nequit consistere rectum.
In things there is a measure, and an end,
Which RIGHT on this, or that hand will not bend,

FINIS.

