THE RESOLVER, OR, A SHORT WORD, TO THE LARGE QUESTION OF THE TIMES.
CONCERNING The Parliament: And confirming the Proceedings about the KING.
BEING, A Letter written to a dear Friend, tending to satisfy him. At least,
to show the Author rational, in approving the proceedings of the Army.

Debita sanguineo, mors sanguinolenta tyranno. He that sheds man's blood, by man
shall his blood be shed.

Genesis 9.6. Thou shall not be joined with them in burial, because thou have
destroyed thy land, and slain thy people.

Esaias 14.20. Indignus enim est quem terra sinu suo excepiat ac contegat, is,
qui eam vastarit, and innocentium sanguine corrupit:

Marlorat in locum. Imprimatur

GILBERT MABBOT.



London, Printed by I. C. and are to be sold at the Crown in Popes-head-Alley
1648.

The Printer to the Reader.
THis Letter should have been Printed upon the third of this instant January,
But something hindered them: Since that the Armies seizing of the Members, has
been fully vindicated, both by themselves, and others. Yet they being here more
brifely touched upon. And the question of the proceedings about the King, not
as yet spoke too (at least) so directly as here. I hope this will not be
unpleasing to the Reader to peruse, nor to the Author to see it in Print.

Jan. 17. 1648. Imprimatur, GILBERT MABBOT.

THE RESOLVER, OR, A short word to the large question of the times, concerning
the Armies seizing the Members of the Parliament, and confirming the
proceedings about the King, etc.
Dear Friend,
THe transactions of affairs on foot are weighty, and in our conclusions
concerning them, we had need be wary. He that is to pass over the amazing Sea
of politiques, had need have a stout Ship, and a skillful Pilote. Its cowardice
not to own a good cause, when it so appears. But its madness to account every
cause good, that is so called; rashness in any thing (especially of weighty) is
irrational. I have a long time bin a serious, and silent spectator of the late
Tragedies which have been over-acted upon the English Stage: And if I should
say, I have beheld them with my eyes, my heart would at once witness against
me, and condemn me. Misery has a power upon men (much more upon Christians) to
cause mourning. A safe, and a speedy period of these sad, and shaking affairs
is, that which is desired by all, and endeavored by some: But alas! Who is
sufficient for these things. I confess, I long and look for a full, just, and
grounded peace, because the mouth of the Lord of hosts has promised it; But
the question is, whether the things now in agitation, have a tendancy
thereunto. Now, that justice (rightly administered) is the path to peace; I
think none that is but morally-wise will deny. And that punishment of
offenders, is a prime piece of justice, was ever maintained by those, who were
any thing verst in politiques. The doubt then is not for, much about the
matter, as about the manner of the things now transacted.

Two things you scruple, in order to the removal, of which this is,

First, you question: Whether the Armies seizing, and secluding the Members of
the Parliament be not rather a violation of justice, then an expedient for
peace. For suppose them (say you) guilty, yet to ceize and secure them, was not
regular: and confident you are, that it was the breach of their privileges,
and so not only above the power, but against the Protestation of the Army. And
secondly, you say, you are in the dark about the peoples power over Princes,
and the quaere, whether the trial of the King, either by Army, or Parliament,
may be lawful.

In Answer to both these, I return briefly thus.

First, as touching the Armies seizure of the Members, and therein of their
breach of privilege, I return thus.

1. I am as yet ignorant of those Arcana Imperii, i.e. what the privileges of
Parliament are in their just latitude, Only I am apt to think, that as all was
not prerogative. (just) which the King and his faction so named; so neither are
all those just privileges (which alone were protested to maintain) which
certain Parliamentary Grandees are pleased so to declare: Certain, the King did
deceive, while he said, every thing (or most) which the Parliament did against
him, was an invation of his prerogative; And why the Parliamentees may not
delude also, when they cry out breach of privileges, I know not. But I hope
that ere long, we shall know the just bounds of Parliamentary Privileges, and
then, we shall see who transgress.

2. As yet its not declared by those, whose innocence continues then in the
house, that what was so done by the Army, was a breach of Parliamentary
Privileges: Nay, while they desire to know the reasons thereof, do they not
tacitly include, that it was not. It were as easy for them to say, you have
broke the Privileges, as to entreat an account of that action. The Justice,
who only asks the Constable, why he secured such a person upon suspicion of
felony, and does in it silently hint, that the very securing was unjust.

3. What ever be their Privilege in Parliament, I am persuaded to think that
it is not (at least) a just Privilege to be free altogether from Arrests, (for
then what would the City Creditors do, etc.) And I am easily convinced, that it
may be as just to Arrest (and above an Arrest, the Army has not acted) for
suspicion of Treason, as for any debt whatsoever.

4. The Commission of the Army was to take, and secure (at least) all such as
either more publicly, or more privately, were enemies to the Kingdom: And why,
a Parliament Man being such, should be exempted, I know not: sure there was no
such proviso, in the Commission: that in case they were Parliament Men, that
acted against the Kingdom, they should not be taken hold of. It had been well
for some rotten and Revolted Members, such a clause had been in: but then it
were ill for the Kingdom.

Lastly, Admit the action exentrick, and not avoiding to the formalities of
Law, (which have him at best, a hinderance to justice) yet the case is
extraordinary, necessity is the Law royal. And how many Acts, which in their
fieri, or doing, have not bin so legal; have yet in their fact or Act, bin
declared (even by the Parliament,) necessary, and therefore warrantable, is
known to all: That there was a necessity to compel, (and for to authorize) the
other is clear. Suppose that some Pilots, to whose care the safety, and
steerage of some ship were committed, should upon their being a shore, and in
company with some Pirates, conclude to go aboard, and to conspire there against
the owners, and venturers in the Ship: either to betray it to the Pirates, or
to detain it themselves. Now suppose some of the Seamen, who were to man it, as
to War, and to fight for the safety, and security of the Ship, should upon
the hearing, or knowledge of their design, stop the perfidious Pilots, and not
permit them to go abroad that morning when they intended to do as they
designed, and detain them safely, till they had given an account hereof to the
Merchants and owners: would, or could any man say? the men of War, or Seamen
did more, then upon this necessity, they were bound to do. I know you are
quick, and can apply. The allegory of a Ship is platonic. And what the Members
were about to vote that morning when they were seized, is not Apocriphall.

This to the first of the scruples. As touching the other that consernes the
quondam King. Reserving my large thoughts, till a fitter opportunity, at
present, I shall only offer briefly, as follows.

First. No King is ex Lex, i.e. either, without, or above the Law: Indeed some
have said, the King could not sin, I am sure it is false Divinity, and fained
Law, why Kings should have a Prerogative to do evil, without controwle, or
trial, is above my thoughts to conceive, and against reason to conclude, 'Twas
Court Divinity, that the King was responcible to God only, but this Divinity of
the Court, is not current.

Secondly. The Armies Charge is no more, then what this very Parliament, and
some of the Apostate Members, long since have taught them, and the Kingdom to
make.

Thirdly. Kings, when faulty, may be dealt withal; some have thought (and that
rationally) that the Kingdom of Judah, was carried captive for their Kings
cruelty: and the reason they give, is, because the people, did not resist their
King. Certain, if it were a fault in them not to resist, it can not be
injustice in us to question a King. I shall at this time only acquaint you with
what I find in Alstedius (a great and sedulous Reader, and a man impartial and
unbyassed) He in his Enciclopedia, in the 23. book, page 1427. lays down this
conclusion. All and every Subject may resist a Tyrant.

Upon this, he comments thus. Concerning this conclusion, it has been
anxiously disputed, both by Divines, and Politicians. For things (he says)
have in this business bin inquired after, which he thus sets down. 1. Who is a
Tyrant. 2. Who may resist him. 3. Why, and wherefore. 4. How long.


As to the first and second, he says thus. A Tyrant is one who either wants,
or has a title. He is a Tyrant without a title, who usurpes, or invades,
either openly, or clandestinely, a Commonwealth which is not his, by the just
title either of election, or succession. And concerning this, there is no
doubt, but its lawful for any one (even a private person) to put him to death,
etc.

But a tyrant with a title (who also is called freeborn) is one who by
public authority, either of election, or succession, has obtained Imperial
power, but does abuse it. The notes, signs, and Characters of such a one are.
Partly general, as to violate the fundamental Laws of a Commonwealth, to be
an injury to his Subjects, to abuse the rights of Majesty, to do (what in him
lies) to overthrow the state of the Commonwealth: More special marks are, to
convert the treasury of the Commonwealth, either to his own private use, or to
the detriment of the public: to wast, diminish, or alienate, the goods of the
Kingdom, to take away the Estate of the Subject, and exhaust them, either by
force, or fraud, to wage war to the undoing of the Subject, etc. And so he goes
on reckoning up the signs of a Tyrant, and amongst others, (I forbear all,
being in have) he reckons up the prohibition or hinderance of (much more
certainly the warring against) Parliaments or conjunctions of state. Now
concerning such a one (says he) we do judge thus. That if he have been often
admonished, and do not repent (alas! we know of admonition, but who knows of
repentance?) if he reine the Commonwealth; if he make a prey of all, ( i.e. if
he persist to attempt it) if he break his Oath (as certainly, the man you wot
of, has) if he hastily oppose godliness, He is to be dethroned by the Ephori
( i.e. which is the Parl.) who gave, or committed the regal power unto him.
But if this cannot conveniently be done, he is to be suppressed by Arms, as an
enemy to the Country or Kingdom. Now the most weighty of those reasons, which
are urged to maintain this opinion, are these, as he thus recites there.

1. Subjects are obliged to Princes but conditionally, viz. whiles they govern
justly. For a Prince is constitued by the people, through their Heads, (or
Presentatives) to be a Father, Preserver, Protector, Defender, and Shepherd of
the Subjects. By the same he is, or may be exauthorized, (or Dethroned) and
suppressed by force, when he is a Destroyer, Oppressor, and wicked Ruler. And
so is a Lion, a Bear, a Woolfe, or Vulture. He is an evil Pilote, who does
make a hole in the Ship (i.e. the Common wealth in which he lives) and as much
as in him lies, destroys, and overthrowes the universal Society over which he
is, in that he overthowes the fundamental Rights, and Laws, as well of
Ecclesiastical, as of Civil Power. The Subjects therefore are obliged to the
Prince, so far as he governes the Commonwealth aright. Now the obligation
cease, when the condition thereof fails.

2. Princes do constitute aright or power, of resisting themselves: because
either tacitly, or expressly, they give consent to that condition: that the
States or Peers of the Kingdom, should rise up against them, if they do
otherwise then right, or as they ought.

3. A Prince acting against the agreements, and fundamentalls of a Kingdom,
and thereby losing that (otherwise) inviolable Majesty? Becomes upon this a
private person, to resist whom, is generally allowed of by all.

4. The constitution of a King does not take away that lawful defense against
force, and injury, which the Law of Nature does grant to any: especially to a
people, who would punish a Prince that is a notorious Tyrant.

5. The Civil Laws (which, my friend, were Imperial, and are still in great
force in foreign parts) do confirm this opinion; while they delare thus: We
are not to obey a Prince ruling either above the limits of the power entrusted
him; or beyond their power committed to him: For the Commonweal by
constituting a King, does not rob, or deprive it self of the power of its own
preservation, and give it to him.

Examples of such as have resisted the chief Magistrate, occur, 1 King. 1.2.
Where the 10 Tribes revolt from Rehoboam. 2 Chronicles. 26. Where the high Priest
resists King Vssiah. 2 King. 11. Where the high Priest Jehojada gave command,
for the putting of Queen Athalia to death, etc. But he adds, far be it from
us to say, that it is lawful for every, or any private person, to put a Tyrant
to death. So the windows, yea the gates would be wide open to the
Manslaughter, and Murder of all Kings, etc. -- But forasmuch as a Tyrant is
therefore resisted, that the public safety may remain secure, it follows
therefore, that the Peers and Powers of State, who are, as it were, the
compendium (says he) of the Commonweal, (as indeed our Parliament is) that
they give judgment by public authority, conserning the Kings government, and
that they ought to remove that Tyrant; yet so, as that they accommodate the
assistance of the people. I might add to these reasons of his, but I forbear.

Now as to the third thing: viz. For what end, or why a Tyrant is, or may thus
be resisted. This he gives shortly thus. That so the Commonweal may be
secured, and the Tyrant himself (if it may be by any means) may be brought to
be fruitful, (i.e. by repentance.)

To the last particular: How long this is to last, or continue. He says, Till
he (that is the Tyrant) amend. But if no hope thereof appear, so long as the
safety of the Kingdom will permit.

Object. But if the Peers, or Powers of State (says the same Author) further
him (i.e. the Tyrant-King) and nourish his Tyranny. What may, or shall the
people do?

Answ. For a good time, or a long time, they must forbear, or be quiet. Till
patience it self, often, and long abused, turn into impatiencie. Thus that
light of Germany, Transylvania, yea of Europe (as a fire, and no flattering Pen
styles) Alstedius.

Quest. But (you will say) in all this, here is no mention of putting Kings to
death.

Answ. True: None directly. But I presume, you are so rational, as not to deny
it consequentially. Certainly the same grounds urged for deposing, etc. of
Kings, will also hold their putting them to death, where justice and necessity
call for it. The security of a Kingdom is to be prized, above the security of
a King. And when it cannot be otherwise, better one man dye, by the Sword of
Justice, then many (yea a Kingdom) bleed by the Sword of Tyranny.

But what Instances can be given (will you say.) Its good acting by a President.

I Reply. It Is lawful without. Suppose some Instances could not be given, must
therefore the thing be unlawful? Surely, non sequitur. If some Kings formerly
were so good, as not to deserve it: or some People so weak, as not to inflict
it. Shall not others be so wise as to punish, when their Kings shall be so
wicked as to deserve it.

But we need not run to this short (yet sure) refuge: I could give Instances
enough to clear this. That If Kings deserve, States may inflict death upon
them. Thryninius (the proud) was dethroned, his goods confiscated, and
certainly (says Livie) had he been taken (for he fled) should have been
otherwise punished. If you say, his crimes were above Charles Stuarts, I think
when you have read Livie, you will say, they were less. For he says, He was
guilty, of not harkening to the advice of the Senate, That he made War of his
owe head (as the King did against the Scots, and that against the consent and
counsel of the Parliament) That he violated the Laws, etc.

The Histories of the Athenian and Lacedemonian Commonweals, are plentiful
in this kind.

Q. But they are Heathen.

A. What then? Had not they Justice: And shall not Christians, rather go
before, then not follow them therein. But our English Histories tell you of
Edward the 2d. John, and others, that were dethroned by Parliament. I am in
haste, therefore I shall only refer you to Buchanan: and if have not time to
read him. Any of the Scots (and you know some) will tell you, of Kings enough,
which their Kingdom has tried, and proceeded against.

Q. But here is no Scripture-Justice you will say.

A. True: It needs not. The The Law of Nature, and Nations in these cases will
suffice. Jus politicum is enough in Politcks. Why should any (especially who
content themselves with, yea and contend, that jus humanum, may suffice in
Church-affaires) why (I say) should these require jus divinum in Civills; yet
is not the Scripture altogether silent. For there we read of Amaziah king of
Judah, put to death by his Subjects, with a general consent, (the Spirit of
the Lord not mentioning (as he does in other things) the least disallowance
thereof) 2 Chronicles. 25.27. I confess, I find not the cause fully expressed; But
in the Hebrew notes of Rabbi Solomon Jarchi I find this: That the heart of
every man was grieved for his sons, for his brethren, and kinsmen, which were
slain by his means, in war against Josias king of Israel. Note, this was but
for a rash war waged against another King, to the slaughter of his Subjects;
what then shall be done to him, that has waged a long, bloody war against
his Subject? Sed manam de tabulam.

I have almost done, you know he was no Independent (so nicknamed) who said,
Fiat justitia, and ruat Mundus. Better certainly, expose the Kingdom, to an
other shaking by War, (through the execution of justice) then expose it, to a
three years famine; (president whereof we have, 2 Samuel 21.) for not punishing a
bloody house. Surely the blood of the English is as dear to God, as the blood
of the Gibeonites, and the house of Stewards, as bloody as the house of Saul.

I have thus hastily scribled this paper, if not to your satisfaction, yet at
least, to my own: And I hope by this you will see, that I am more rational,
then cast in that approbation which I gave to the Armies Remonstrance. For a
close, I protest, that I am persuaded, that the things now agitated are of the
Lord: Therefore it is that I approve them: And humbly advise you, not to oppose
them; least you be found Tiomachan. To fight against him ignorantly, whom, I
hope you love sincerely, viz. the God of love, and also of Justice, Its easy
to do that in an hour, which we cannot undo in a year: After-wit indeed is
bought, and accounted best, but you know it costs dear. I believe some repents
of the last Summers rashness, and will do whils they live. But this not in
Kent; for since old and good Sir Anthony is dead, the Committee has lost its
life. And some of them act, as if they made little account of their Souls:
Godfrey of Bulloigne is not amongst them. There is one indeed of that name: But
alas! he read The Armies Remonstrance, wondered at it, Cried it up, And then
sat down again, and is now, etc. a Jacobine Proselite. --

As touching your fear of an inundation of Errors, and a devastation of the
Ministry, and Learning. You know, that I hate Errors as much as you; and I
confess, tho I fear them (for they are evil) yet I hope the Weapon of our
Warfare being Spivituall, will also be mighty. And as to Learning, and the
Ministry, you know, I have cause to love them: And, I must confess, I am so
far, from fearing any evil to befall them. That I expect, (I have reason to
hope) their advancement.

But to end. Its a fitting season: Rotten leaves, (and branches too) fall
apace. Be not you high minded, but fear: The day is surely dawned, in which
the loftiness of man, shall be bowed down; and the haughtiness of men shall
be made low, and the Lord alone shall be exalted in this day. Its my advise to
you, and indeard for my self, to provide a ransom from Divine Justice
hereafter, rather then to hinder, or speak against, the executing of humane
justice here. At the great day, Christ will not distinguish between Kings and
Clownes. Princes at his bar, will be proceeded against, according to their
deserts.

Indeed it is true, the World counts them, and the Word calls them Gods: But it
says also, that they must die (at best) as men: And for my part, if they
deserve it, I think it all reason, they should dye as Mallefactors. When Kings
fall from their goodness, they lose their Diety: And when they fight against
their Subjects, and break their oaths, they forfeit their Kingship. If Charles
Steward have done evil, and deserve it, in Gods name, and the Kingdoms Peace,
let him die: I shall pray that free grace may save his soul, when Justice
shall destroy his body.

I am Sir, Your friend and servant, N. T.
Jan. 1. 1648.
FINIS.

