RELIGIONS LOTTERIE, OR THE Churches Amazement.

Wherein is declared how many sorts of Religions there is crept into the very
bowels of this Kingdom, striving to shake the whole foundation and to destroy
both Church and Kingdom.

Namely these 16. hereafter mentioned.
1 Papists 2 Arians 3 Arminians 4 Canonists 5 Athiests 6 Adamites 7 Familists 8
Anabaptists 9 Lutherans 10 Separatists 11 Brownists 12 Puritanes 13 Novolists
14 Time-servers 15 Rattle-heads 16 Roundheads.
Whereunto is annexed each of their several opinions, with sufficient
Arguments to consute each opinion, and to prove them Enemies to the peace of
the Church and Kingdom.

London, Printed by T. F. for F. S. July 20, 1642.

Religions Lottery, OR, The Churches Amazement.
THe first that I shall begin with in this discourse is the Athiest, he being
indeed the worst of all creatures, as in this his difinition may plainly
appear.

Athiest.
An Athiest is one that believes that there is no God, only ascribes all
things to the power of chance and fortune, he looks only upon the natural
things of the world, not dreaming of any other Deity.

Answ. To confute this Argument, I will use but only this one Testimony, The
Heavens declare the Glory of God, and the Firmament shows the work of his
hands, Psalm 19. verse 1.

Papist.
The Papists among us are a people who would have a Church consisting of
Cardinals, Archbishops, Bishops, Deacons, Jesuits, Friars, etc. independent to
the Crown or civil Magistrate, he will acknowledge no High Priest but the
Pope, from whom he expects remission of finnes and absolution.

Answ. To confute this opinion of the Papists, I shall only use this Argument
to prove that there is no High Priest but Christ Jesus, you may read in the 7.
chap. of the Hebrews, at the 17. 23, 24, 25. verses, etc. The Lord testifies
of Christ's saying, Thou art a Priest for ever after the order of Melchesideck.
Likewise they have many Popes and many High Priests, because they are not
suffered to continue by reason of death, but our High Priest, because he
continues for over has an unchangeable Priesthood.

Arians.
The Arians among us are people that would maintain the Moysaicall Law, with
the same Leviticall Ceremonies.

Protestants Answer.
The Old Law was abolished by the new Testament, Even as by the first man Adam,
all men was made sinners, so by the second man Christ Jesus, all men became
Heirs unto Salvation.

Arminians.
The Arminians among us are a people which would have the Church governed by
Archbishops, Bishops, they are half Papists and half Protestants, they would
have Altars, Cushions, Wax-Candles, with the first and latter Service, one at
the Deske, the other at the Altar, with many other superfluous Ceremonies.

Protestants Answer.
Either that these Ceremonies may be lawful or no J will not question, but J
am sure they are not effectual to Salvation, but rather a Rock of offense at
which may stumble; Therefore they ought to be abandoned, for whosoever so
sins against his Brother and wounds his weak conscience, sins against
Christ, Cor. 1. 12.

Adamites.
The Adamites are a people which would live under no command of Magistrate or
Church, they would be mere Libertines and live as they list, following that
place of Scripture, Increase and multiply, and in their society they are so
overcome with the flesh that they cannot pray.

Protestants Answer.
That this opinion is grounded on a vain and fruitless foundation may be
easily discerned, for St. Paul tells us in his Epistle to the Galatians, chap.
5. ver. 13. this Lesson; For Brethren though you have been called unto
liberty, yet use not your liberty for an occasion to the Flesh, but by love
serve one another.

Familists.
The Familists would have no Bishops nor governors in the Church, but all
things common, as wife, children, goods, etc. and that no punishment should be
inflicted on offenders, but only to pray for them and leave them to Gods mercy.

Protestants Answer.
To confute these, I will use no other Argument but the word in the
Commination, Cursed is he that lies with his Neighbors Wife.

Anabaptists.
The Anabaptist would have no Government at all in the Church, neither would
they have any Baptized, but such as are of age, and they pray more for such a
Church then for grace or faith.

Protestants Answer.
You may read that Christ rebuked his Disciples, saying; Suffer little Children
to come unto me, and forbid them not, for of such is the Kingdom of God, and
if Children be Saints in the Church Tryumphant, it cannot be denied, but that
it is lawful by Baptism to be made Members of the Church Militant.

Novolists.
Novolists are those that change in their opinions oftener then the fashion,
sometime they are Papists, sometime Puritanes, they are never constant in one
thing, but always wavering like a Read shaken with the wind.

Protestants Answer.
To these I will only give a Christian like admonition, Examine your selves
whether ye be in the faith prove your own selves, know you not that Jesus
Christ is in you, except ye be Reprobates, Cor. 13. 5.

Time-servers.
Timeservers are always of the strongest side, they commend no description but
what they are like to have, they are like Virgins wax capable of any
impression, Bishops or no Bishops, what the Parliament shall please to ordain
that they will follow, and till then they are of all Religions, or as I may
justly say of no Religion.

The Protestants Answ. To these I will likewise bestow a friendly admonition,
make your Election sure, beware lest any man spoil you through Philosophy and
vain receipt after the tradition of men and not after Christ, for in him
dwells all fullness of grace, Colosians, 2. 8.

Ca^onists.
The Canonists desire the government of Bishops still to abide, because they
stand upon Canon Law, likewise they stand for all Canonical Ceremonies.

Answ. I need quote no Scripture to prove this opinion unlawful, the Report
strikes terror through the whose Kingdom, only I desire that all the Canons
betwixt this and Canterbury, may be sent to the Tower, where they shall meet
with a little Canonere that will make them fly with a powder.

Lutherans.
The Lutheran would have no Bishops, but a Church government under the King,
they would have all Ordinances agreeable to the Ordinances of the Primitive
Church.

Protestants Answer.
That there was in the time of the Apostles Bishops, and that some of them were
Bishops is apparently manifest, and that the Office of a Bishop is allowed of
by St. Paul, you may find in the third of Tim, ver. the 1. This is a true
saying, (...) a man desire the Office of a Bishop he desires a good work.

Seperatists.
The Separatists are men that would have no Bishops but Elders, Ecclesiastical
and Layicke.

Prot. Answ. That the government of the Church especially in teaching do no
way belong to Laymen, is made apparent in these words; Having then gifts,
differing, according to the grace that is given as, whether prophecy let us
prophecy according to our proportion of faith, that is, every one must labor
diligently in the calling in which he is placed, Romans 12. 6.

Brownists.
The Brownist would have no Common Prayer, only extemporary Prayer, by the
motion of the Spirit.

Answ. Their opinion is not much different from the Separatists, and may easily
be confuted by the same Argument.

Puritans.
The Puritan is the most commendable of all the rest, for he would have a
Religion for which he has a president, to wit, the Kirk of Scotland.

Prot. Answer, To which opinion I can say little, only I conceive, that the
difference in the Ordinance alters not the effect, since in the fundamentals
we do perfectly agree,

Rattle-heads.
The Rattle heads are a company of shallow-pate haire-brain'd shittle witted
Coxcombes, that neither regard Law not Religion, they regard nothing but to
make mischief, build Castles in the Air, hatch Stratagems, invent Projects,
and do mischief with dexterity, and after fly for it.

Answ. To thief I have little to say, only I wish that they had more grace, so
leaving them to the prick of conscience* and the lash of a Beadles whip* I
rest.

Roundheads.
The Roundheads are people that would have the Church and Service orderly
performed, but yet they are the chief Ringleaders to all tumultuous
disorders, they call the Common Prayer Porridge, and they will allow no
Doctrine for good, nor no Minister a quiet audience, without he preach absolute
damnation.

Protestants Answer.
To these men that are disturbers of the Church I say with St. Paul,
Corinthians, 13, 17. If any man d^stroy the Temple of God, him shall God
destroy. For the Temple of God is Holy.

Thus having finished my intended course I rest. Praying to God the Author of
true peace,
That truth may flourish and dissension cease.


FINIS.

