CROP-EARE CURRIED, OR, TOM NASH His GHOST, Declaring the pruining of Prinnes
two last Parricidicall Pamphlets, being 92 Sheets in Quarto, wherein the one of
them he stretched the Sovereign Power of Parliaments; in the other, his
newfound way of opening the counterfeit GREAT SEAL. Wherein by a short Survey
and Ani-mad-versions of some of his falsities, fooleries, nonsense,
blasphemies, Foreign and Domesticke, uncivil, civil Treasons, Seditions,
Incitations, and precontrivements, in Mustering, Rallying, Training and Leading
forth into Public so many Ensigns of Examples of old revived Rebels, or new
devised Chimeraes. With a strange Prophecy, reported to be Merlins, or
Nimshag's the Gymnosophist, and (by some Authors) it is said to be the famous
Witch of ENDOR'S.

Runton, Pollimunton Plumpizminoi Fapperphandico.

By JOHN TAILOR.

Printed in the year, 1644.

Errata.
In page 8. lin. 20. for bold, read bowld* lin. 25. for Penury, read Penry,
in p. 13. line 29. for told, read took.

There are diverse Latin words thrust into this mine Answer to his pestiferous
Pamphlets, which words I neither understand, know the Authors, or thank them
for it, as in page 11. lin. 5. and in page 18. lin. 30, 31. Celarent and Fleta,
etc.

TOM NASH HIS GHOST, OR, THE CURRYING OF CROP-EARE, etc.
IN this Mad, Sad, Cold Winter of discontent. About the end of October last
1643, The Moon being near her change, and obscure in our Horison, not one
Star appearing, the sky (like an Ebon Canopie) muffled up the Hemisphear in
an universal sable robe of Melancholy black, so that darkness was made a
Mask which hid the Mournful visage of our Mother Earth; In and at such a
time, when nothing was waking or walking, but Thieves, Lovers, Careful minds,
Owls, Batts, Ghosts, Witches and Goblins etc. About the Waste or Navel of the
night, Drowsy Somnus came stealing to me, and with his Leaden Mace arrested
me, at the suite of my old Lady Nox, which Arrest I obeyed by untying,
unbuttoning, and quite undoing my self, and to bed; Where suddenly I winck'd
at the faults of all the world, shutting up the two shop windows of my
Microcosme, and (like a nimble Clothworker) I presently set a Nappe upon my
Thredbare eyes. I had not layne long in this silent pleasing Embrace of
Mounsieur Morpheus but there appeared unto me a poor old swarty fellow, with
starcing hair, Neglected beard, Ashy Ghastly look, with a black Clo^th Cloak
upon his back, which he had worn as thin as if it had been Searge, whereby I
conceived him to be a Poet) I begun to be puzzled with this strange Apparition,
and asked him whom he was, and what his business was with me.

Quoth he, my name is Thomas or Tom Nashe, who when this Ayerie shadow of mine
had a corporeal substance, I had a yerking, firking, jerking, Satiricall and
Poetical vein, Pegasus was my Palfrey, the Muses were my Minions, Tempe,
Aganipp^, the Thespian, Helliconian and Castalian Fountains did yield me
Diarnall and Nocturnall Tributary Nectar: Fame and Defame were my Vassalls, and
I could make them both wait on whom I list, I knew Honor, and I Honored it,
spurnd at Flattery, I loved Truth, I despised Riches, yet I lived and dyed Rich
enough to be a Poet. And so much shall suffice to tell the what I was.

Now in the next place Il'ecertifie thee whence I came, and what mine errend
is: know this, that about the 30th year of the Reign of Renouned Queen
Elizabeth, She and the Protestant Religion (which She defended and Maintaind)
were oposed and troubled with Heritiques, Papists, Schismatiques, Separatists,
Brownists, Annabaptists, Familists, and Atheists; All of these disagreeing, yet
all against the Church, and Government Ecclesiastical and Civil here
established. Amongst those innumerable Locusts that then were spewd from the
Bottomless Pit, there crawled and swarmed over the Kingdom, a Crew of
Rascals called Martinists; whose Laxative Purity did most shamefully in
printed toys, Pamphlets, and Lying Libells, besquitter all England over with
such points of Doctrine, as was never known by Christ and his Apostles. And
these Martins Entitled their Pasquills by the Impudent and saucy names of
Martin Mar Prelate. These scandalous Railings of theirs were then answered by
as Grave, Wise, Learned, and Reverend men as England yielded, and they were (by
Scriptures, Fathers, Counsels, Divinity, Humanity, Learning, Wit, Wisdom,
Truth, Sense, and Reason) Confuted; but none of these were available, for like
Anvills, the more knocks they had the more obdurate they were; insomuch that
those Martins like Caterpillars increased most pestiferously,

I perceiving, that wisemen could do no good with those Vermin Began to take
them in hand my self, and (whetting my Wits) I put some Aquafortis and Gall
into my Inckhorn, with which I wrote a delicate discourse of Martin Mar tone,
and Mar to there and with a mess of Papp^ with a Hatch^^, I made the Nest of
Mischievous, Malevolent, Malignant Martins take their flight from hence into
the Low Countries.

But the venom of these Vipers was so dispersed and scatterred in sundry places
of this Land, that though my Satires whip had lashed their leaders from hence,
yet the Impostumated Matter of theirs was never thorough Ripe till now of late*
for now thou see they have Perfited their hellish plots, their Pens and
Pulpits, have (under the pretense and show of Religion and Law,) almost
overthrown both.

Wherefore, my well-wishing and beloved friend John Tailor, my Ghost has made
a short escape from Elisium, to stir thee up to Nip, and Whip, strip and Snip,
these Matchless, Headless, Heedlesse Rebels, who are divided into three
parts, Burtonians, Prinnians, and Bastwickians; for it is certain that from
Burtons Divillity, Prinnes Illegal Law, and Bastwicks poisoned Pills and
Pamphlets, the most part of all the Horrid and Barbarous Impieties and
Cruelties have proceeded, wherewith this Afflicted Kingdom is most miserably
oppressed and over run.

Concerning William Prinne, he has lately writ two damnable and detestable
Books, stuffed with as much Hipocrysie Villainy, Rebellion and Treason as the
Malice of the Devil, and his own mischievous brain could invent. The one is
partly Titled THE SOVEREIGN POWER OF PARLIAMENTS. The other, is called THE
OPENING OF THE GREAT SEAL. Jack, (kind Jack) I Conjure thee to take this
Railing fellow in hand, look upon his wicked works, veiw his villainies,
squeese the Quintessence of his eighty and odd sheets of printed Confusion
into 12 leaves in Quarto, that the abominable charge of his worthless high
prized Volumes, (at ten or twelve shillings) may by thee be Epitomized*
Abreviated, and Curtall'd in Bulk, and price to sixpence a piece. Fear not,
go on Boldly, I will leave my Genius with thee, which shall Inspire thee, and
infuse into thee such Terrible, Torturing, Tormenting, Termagant flames and
flashes as shall Firk, Ferret, and force Prinne and his partners run quite out
of that little wit that is left them* and desperately save the Hangman a Labor,
farewell.

This being said, the Ghost vanished, whereat I started up, put on my clothes,
fell to reading the aforesaid books at large, and with my pen made this short
following abstract.

Room for an old empty Pageant, drawn by the Trojan (or Grecian Horse) or
rather by Sinon, the inventer of that wodden Palfrey. But this Beast claims
his pedigree from Bucephalus, and has had his ears twice Crop'd, to bring him
into the Capital Roundnesse of the Fashion, and (known to be so full of
mettle) was marked (least he should be stolen,) with two brands in the cheeks;
he braggs further to be descended from Baalams Ass, and overdoes his
Predecessor in Imitation, for that Ass did reprove but, one Prophet (for which
he had a large Commission) but this animal, (Sawcily) reproves all the
Prophets without Wit, Reason, Sense, Order or lawful Commission. This worthily
marked Iennet (like the Egyptian Ass that carried the Goddess Isis) so all
the usurping Major Penningtons Magazin are enclosed in Prinnes four books (or
parts) of the Sovereign power of Parliaments, Ordered to be printed by the
Fornicating Brownist M. John White, and confirmed by the New broad Scale,
(lately opened by himself) And although three of those parts of his four
(being eighty six sheets) printed close in large Quarto; has been soberly,
solidly, and fully answered in less then one leaf in Quarto, by too worthy a
writer for him to Reply upon, yet he still Brayes alowd, (like Apulcius his
Ass) cries out, no man dares or can answer him, because it is done by Weight
and not by Number, like a Scold at Billinsgate, is ready to cry for anger,
because no body will scold with him; wherefore, to salve or plaster the poor
scorned wranglers credit, as also to save his longing for this once, who
desires to see his own picture by Reflection in a looking Glass, Sirrah Boy,
bring me hither my pensill, for I have all the four feet of the Beast sure
enough in the Trammels, that he can do no hurt, with Kicking, and his mouth is
muzzled with his new Great (or Broad) Scale, that he is sure enough for Biting,
and therefore let him frisk, and wince, and bray as long and loud as he list, I
will rub the Galled jade till he be sensible, and either cure him, or make him
see that there is no way but one for him, and that ere long his skin must
come to Gregory the whit tayer; and to that purpose like a Dutch Limmer, I thus
draw my first line in the just Simmetry; and therefore have at the foreleg of
the beast on the near side, as it is delineated in his first part of his
Sovereign or Power of Parliaments.

First, Sir to ommit your Imbost swollen Tiles (to your four good parts) which
are like the Gates of Mindus, large enough for the whole town to run out at. I
come to the preface of your first part, wherein you say That some Members of
Parliament Induced you to enlarge that part of your Discourse, In this you are
beleivd, for by you it was produced; by them you were Induced, and by the
Devil you were seduced both to begin, prosecute, and finish the whole frame
and form of your formlesse falsities and fooleries, besides it is not to be
imagined that any true Christian, Protestant, or Loyal Subject, would either
have induced, encouraged, approved, and rewarded your impious Studies and
Voluminous pains taking, but only some of the sweet Members: thus far I
allow you.

In the thirty second line of the preface, you Protest before the Great Judge
of Heaven and Earth, that you have wittingly maintaind nothing, but what your
judgment and Conscience both, Biased to no Sinister ends: Rub, Rub, hold
Biasse, that which follows, will show the Reader what your Bias'd JUDGMENT,
CONSCIENCE, is. And in the sixty first line he protests again, That the
effecting and restoring of a blessed Harmony of Peace and Quietness,
throughout our Kingdom, was one principal end of this his Labor. The end of
your Labor, will certify us the care you have in observing the truth of your
great protestations. And so much for your preludium, face, or preface; Now I
proceed to the first of your 4. Good parts.

On his first part of his Sovereign power of Parliaments. In the second page
it is said that by A Declaration in Parliament (that is by a Faction in
Parliament) Commissions are granted to Papists against Law to secure the King
in these Wars. And page 3. that it is unsafe for his Majesty to put Arms
into the hands of papists, and make use of them to protect the Kings person or
Crown. The Declaration we confess was out, but neither in nor out, by, or
from, any power or Authority of a Parliament; for all the world knows that a
Parliament is the highest and most Supreme Court, of greatest power,
Veneration, Dignity and Authority, to which all other Courts must submit, and
from which Court there is no appeal on Earth. Furthermore a Parliament does
Consist of a King, all the Peers and Barons of the Land, with the Knights and
Burgesses of every County, Borough and Town in the Kingdom; such a
Parliament has Sovereign power, whereof, and wherein the King is the Head,
and the two Houses of Lords and Commons are the Body, which as long as the Head
and Body are joined, is the only highest and Superlative Court, and has the
whole Sovereign power in it; and such an honorable high, (yea highest) Court
and Senate was this, till such time as some Factious Members, by suffering
Clamours, Routes, disloyal demeanours, and Tumultuous Assemblies and meetings,
drove away the head to escape danger and seek safety, whereby parts of the
honorable and Loyallest Members followed, leaving behind them a few Factious,
Ambitious, Rebellious Sectaries, who having no Head, or scarce a good limb,
do with headless and heedlesse impudence presume to call themselves a
Parliament. And you Sir, with your Inck-squittering Treacherous Pamphlets are
the maine proppe and pillar to uphold the sovereign unsavory power of their
Factious Conventicles. And thus have I briefly showed thee what is, and what is
not a Parliament. And therefore the Declaration aforesaid, is from the power of
no Parliament, but that the King (by their leave) may make use of His Popish
subjects, as the pretended Parliament did (without the Kings leave) of Ireish
Rebels slain at Worcester, and their popish Walloones, maintained to have
Mass at Fulham, but according to your Rule (M. P.) one must ask his fellow if
he be a theife, let you and your abetters be your own Judges, and hang ye all
if you condemn your selves, the case is altered, when Ploydens Bull is in the
pound. I would have thee know that a papist is a thing that would live, and
has the sense to flee from danger and some wit to avoid it, he has also the
skill, means, and courage to fight and defend himself, and he holds it better
to serve his King, under whom he has security and shelter, (as long as he is
Loyal) then to be inthral'd by you, from whom he can expect nothing but Ruin
and destruction.

Concerning your long Treatise which you call the Treachery and Disloyalty of
papists against their Sovereigns. Me thinks their old treacheries should be no
presidents for you or any man or Members whatsoever to be Rebels and Traitors.
For as those Crimes in them do seem odious to you, so your Villainies
(transcending theirs) cannot be made Amiable by any of your Sophisticating
Legerdemaine Meanders. The powder Plot, I confess was Hells Master piece, but
you have done your best (amongst you) to outdo it; They that had a hand in it,
(to the perpetual brand and infamy of that Religion) did all profess to be
Roman Catholics, but let impartial Truth be the Judge, and it will be found
that the Contrivers and Actors in that horrid Plot, were of no Religion at all,
and that they usurped the name and style of Christians, (as you and your Crew
do the Titles of Protestant and Parliament) for the chief of them had run out
of fair Estates, by riotous feasting, drinking, drabbing, gaming, and all
manner of profuse licenciousnesse, which when all was gone, and themselves
involved and precipitated into bottomless Debts, then they grew melancholy
desperate, and to raise their broken Fortunes upon the ruins of this mother
Kingdom that nursed and bred them, devised that abhorred and detestable Plot;
some there were of good estates and shallow capacities, who were seduced to aid
with money and means, by the persuasions of Garnet and others, (for such a
Treason, or scarce any other mischief cannot be plotted without the brain of a
Jesuit, which makes very understanding heads conjecture that Prinne, and his
Faction does hold correspondency with them in these their abominable
unparalleld Treasons.) Never was it heard or read that any, that profess to be
Christians, did contrive or attempt so cruel, bloody, barbarous and execrable
a Design; therefore I conclude them neither Christians or Roman Catholics,
but mere Atheists, Libertines, and incarnate Devils. But by this I may be
drawn into some suspicion, that I am popishly addicted or affected; to which I
answer, that the true Church was once at Rome, for Saint Paul, Romans 1. 8. gave
God thanks through Jesus Christ for them all that their Faith was spoken of
(in some Translations) famous, or published throughout the whole world: that
faith Rome is fallen from, and in the stead thereof, she has a Faith and
Religion, so intermingled with humane Traditions and inventions of men, which
is unsafe for a Christian to live and die in. But for all this a Protestant
must not cast away all that is used at Rome, for they have God's Word there,
they have the Scriptures there, which though they abuse, yet we have free
liberty to use; and it is not their Religion, or ours that are Protestants, or
any other who hold the Fundamental points, grounds, and Articles of the
Christian Faith, that can be compulsively thrust into the souls of men, for an
enforced Religion takes no root in the conscience, a persuasive may, which made
the Patriarch Noah, Genesis 9. 27. say, God persuade thee Japhet to dwell in the
Tents of Shem; here is a Prayer for God's persuasion, not for man's enforcing
the conscience.

I have been the longer about this argument concerning the Papists, because my
nimble Antagonists does Cuckoo-like play upon the same tone and tune. So much
in answer to Prinnes first argument.

The second is page 5. and 7. The Papists have exercised a greater power over
Kings than this Parliament does; therefore this Parliament may do what it does.
Well, confessed, shake hands with the Pope, and be friends, we see these
Round-headed Boatmen row the same way with the Romish Rebels, howsoever like
Cut-purses they seem to quarrel one against another, that they may make a fray
in the midst of a crowd unspied.

The third and fourth Arguments are, page 7. and 9. Some Kings have been forced
to call Parllaments, and have been deposed by their Subjects; therefore all
Kings may be forced to the like, and be deposed by Parliaments. Well, bold
Brother, now we begin to perceive how your judgment and conscience is biassed.
Why could thou not as well justify the Devil? Lucifer did rebel, therefore
all may rebel, but I will help thee to a more concludent and significant
Argument.

Penury was tried legally at the Assizes, and hanged in Queen Elizabeth's time,
for less Treason than this, therefore Prinne ought to be tried legally, and
hanged in King Charles his time for this Treason. Also in the seventh Page and
thirteenth line he mentions the deposing and death of Vortigerne, (a wicked
King) to bolster out Treasons, and color Rebellions against a good King; also
how Sigebert King of the West Saxons, was deposed and murdered; and Ofred King
of Northumberland likewise deposed; Ethelred his next Successor slain by his
Subjects at Cobre, and how the People expulsed Bernard and Ceolwulph Kings of
Mercia, and the like they did to Edwin King of Northumberland: these seventh
and eighth Pages are sufficiently stuffed with Treasons of great Antiquity,
some of them a thousand, and some twelve hundred years old, which were done by
wicked Subjects against most wicked Kings, some of them Pagans, and not any of
them a good Christian, and some usurpers that came to the Regal Dignity, by
murdering the lawful Heirs; so that these presidents are incerted by Prinne
out of the damnable, inveterate, impertinent malice of his heart, for out of
the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks. And it is an inscrutable Quere,
what mischief Prinne would not do, to do the King a mischief.

Page 5. line 39. He calls this our present Protestant Parliament. It is
approved by lamentable experience, that the word [ present] is too true, but as
for the Parliament, it is past any good Subjects understanding to know where it
is; it is confessed, that it was at Westminster, but Rebellion has scattered and
shattered it into so many places, that upon the matter it is in no place, but
of this I have spoken of before. It is also a transcendent ignorance and
impudency in this fellow, to call this seditious Conventicle a Protestant
Parliament; I pray thee, which way Protestant? Do they hold any Grounds,
Maxims, or Tenets of the Protestant Religion? It Is most manifest that the six
years Persecution of the Protestants in the bloody Reign of Queen Mary never
destroyed and ruinated half so many Protestants, as those Brownisticall, and
Anabaptisticall, bloody, tyrannical Sectaries have done within these two
years, for none but Protestants have and do suffer, and no Religion but the
Protestants is despised, derided, disgraced and trampled under foot, therefore
neither Protestant Parliament, or Parliament, or Protestant.

Now, Sir, to your fifth and sixth Arguments, from p. 19. to 32. you affirm
that Popish Parliaments, Lords and Subjects, have by force of Arms compelled
their Kings to confirm their Liberties, etc. and have affirmed, that when a
Parliament was once met together, by lawful Summons, it might not be dissolved
or discontinued again at the Kings mere pleasure, and therefore this
Parliament may do and defend the like.

Proceed with your Popish practices and positions, and fulfill the iniquity of
your forefathers, yet you do not so politickely as you were wont, to let the
People see whence you derive your pretended Authority for abusing your present
Prince, Take heed, least they take up the Proverb, We have put down one Pope
and set up many. Moreover in page 27. line 7. It was told King Richard the
Second that if he absented from the Parliament forty days, not being sick,
they might by Law rise or break up. Though you have no more power to dissolve
than call a Parliament, I pray, who forbids you to take the benefit of that
Law? who holds you but you may rise and break up? It cannot be said but you
have risen, (with a witness) to such an height of impiety and Rebellion, as no
age or Nation can parallel; and for your breaking up it has been superlative,
for there is no Law of God, or Nature, or Nations but you have broken up and
down too; and if Treason, Murder, Burglary, Felony, were accounted any breaking
of Laws amongst you, and that you should all have legal Trials for those
Crimes, The Lord have mercy upon you, there are but few of you that could be
saved by your Book; therefore let your factious Conventicle rise, and go home
to their houses when they please; the King has been absent from them more than
five times forty days, for it is almost two years since they drove Him from
them, therefore they may rise, and yet never break up any Parliament. I
remember in page 28. line 15. the Cheshire men are much beholding to Master
Prinne for calling them Rude and beastly People, (I wish you would go in person
thither and tell them so) because they tendered themselves as a Guard for the
person of King Richard the Second, in a time of Rebellion, for which they are
honored ever since with the Proverb of Cheshire chief of men.

Page 33. to p. 42. His Arguments are concerning the power of Parliaments, and
that the whole Parliament is greater than the King alone. They are such absurd
equivocations, as (although he still follows the footsteps of his Fathers the
Papists) yet his Brethren the Jesuits would be ashamed of such kind of
arguing; and therefore he does wisely to conceal their Association; for who
knows not, that the Parliament, that is to say, the King, the Head, and the
two Houses, the Members assembled together, have a Sovereign and transcendent
Power, and excelling Dignity; but it follows not therefore, that the two
Houses considered apart from their Sovereign, much less a few Members (a
small parcel of that part) are of like eminency and authority, no more than it
follows, Master Burton a Divine, Doctor Bastwicke a Physician, and Master
Prinne an utter-Barrester stood all on the Pillory, and lost their ears, in
one and the same hour, for one and the same Crime, of railing, slandering, and
seditious libelling, therefore Master Burton, Doctor Bastwicke, and Master
Prinne have all three one and the same soul, suffered all in one and the same
Body, Bastwicke and Burton lost their ears for Prinne, by way of sympathy or
co-ordination, (because Prinnes Ears were lost long before) and so se invicem
supplent: and any two of them have all the capacities of all three; the Divine
and Physician make a Lawyer, the Lawyer and Physician make a Divine, and the
Divine and Lawyer make a perfect Physician, this is Prinnes Logic, by which
he may prove his half Ears to be whole ones, and the Five Members to have as
much power as both Houses.

In page 42. for his Answer to the Objection concerning the Kings absence from
Parliament, affirming, that He is absent as a man, but present as a King; it is
as learned as that is loyal which justifies the shooting bullets at Him in his
personal capacity, yet obeying Him in his Regal capacity, and I believe both
had their original from the same Master of Sentences, The Spirit of the Air
which rules in the hearts of such children of disobedience.

In page 44. and 45. Concerning his Arguments from Scripture, I will say no
more, but when the Fox preaches, beware your Geese, for I am sure the Devil
had his Scriptum est, (it is written) as well as he wrests, mangles, and
misapplies it as ill as ever did the Devil. If any Diraan please to search, he
shall find that the Devil has but his due in this trial, betwixt Master
Prinne and himself.

Page 46. to 112. As for his Law and Law-bookes, let him look them over again,
(if he took them not upon trust) as he does the rest of his Learning, from
Indexes, Glossaries, Covels Interpreter, Lexicon Juris, etc. And he shall
find, that they never attributed the most absolute and supremest Power of Head
and Body (to use his own phrase) to the Parliament, but when it is a perfect
true Parliament, consisting of the Head, the King, as well as of the Body, the
Houses; nor would any man that is not as headless as Prinne is earlesse, have
been so heedlesse in his own Authors, let all men that mean to be coozened
become Prinnes Clients, he shall vouch Book-law enough, but not one law-case to
the purpose; witness his instances of the Parliament lawfully deposing the
King; and of the Parliaments power to dispose the Kingdom to what Family they
please, and the like; he that wants a Kingdom, let him come to Prinnes market,
he will afford large penniworths, now he sets Kingdoms to sale, any man may
buy one, or if he miss, he shall be sure to have Bulls enough at a cheap rate.

Page 51. and lin. 33. He says, King Edward the Confessor, took his Oath at
his Coronation upon the Evangelists, and blessed Relics of S. S. (what is all
that to King Charles?) indeed Prinne and his Members are worthy to have a King
that will swear by Relics, for with a most treacherous diffidence, they will
not believe a most gracious Christian King, that has often sworn and
protested by the true Almighty God to defend and maintain the true Protestant
Religion, the Laws of the Land, the Subjects Liberty and Right, with all the
Privileges of Parliaments, all which Oaths and Protestations his Majesty has
never broke, though a crew of perfidious Villains do slander Him most
traitorously, with the aspish venom of their viperous Tongues, the pestiferous
poison bawled, belched, and vomited from hireling Schismatic Preachers, and
the Presses being oppressed with printing of infamous Lies, and Libells, for
which (no doubt) but your great Master (the Burgess of Barathrum, as sure as
George Peard is Burgess of Barstaple) who set you on work, will not fail to
pay you your wages.

In page 52. that William Conqueror took his Oath before the Altar of the
Apostle S. Peter: this is as suitable stuff as the rest, but me thinks Prinne
should not name an Altar, without an H. and if the Apostle knew you gave him
his just Title of Saint, it is unknown how kindly he would take it; but
diminitive mighty Isaak with your Taskmasters (the Members) that set you on
work would utterly dislike your utter Barrestership, for daring to Saint any
Apostle or Saint whom they by their Votes have unsainted.

Page 79. He urges the deposing of King Edward the Second, and in page 80. he
makes another traitorous president of the deposing of King Richard the Second,
but he never mentions the mischiefs that this Kingdom endured by those wicked
paracidicall Villanes, I will reckon a few of them.

First, Parson John Ball with Wat Titler, Jack Straw, and Jack Shepherd, arose
in rebellion, etc. Anno 1379. murdered Simon Sudbury Archbishop of Canterbury,
for which insurrection and murder 1500. Rebels were hanged in several places,
look to it Prinne one place will serve your turn.

Anno 1450. One Blewbeard was a Captain of Rebels, but they were quickly
foiled, some hanged, and some taken, and for a token of remembrance, James
Fiennes Lord Say, then Lord Treasurer of England, was found guilty of many
Treasons, and handsomely hanged, in the 29. year of King Henry the Sixth.

After that, Jack Cade a Bricklayer, and withal a counterfeit Mortimer, did
then, as some of his Tribe do now, tax the King with evil Counselors; thus
Cade raised an Army of Rebels, which were not suppressed without the loss of
5000 men, besides other outrages committed.

Anno 1454. As the Battle of S. Albans, betwixt the Yorkifts, and
Lancastrians, King Henry the Sixth lost 8000 men, and the Duke of York 6000.

At Blore-heath field in Shrop-shire, 1459. between the King and the Earl of
Warwick 4000 men slain, the 38 year of Henry the Sixth.

At the Battle of Northampton, 3000 men were slain, between Queen Margaret
and the Barons, and there King Henry the Sixth was taken prisoner.

At the Battle of Wakefield Queen Margaret told Richard Duke of York and
beheaded him, 4000 men slain.

Anno 1460. At the Battle of Towton, Queen Margaret brought into the field
60000 men, and King Edward the Fourth had 49000 in which fatal Battle 36000
men were slain.

Anno 1462. At the Battle of Exham in the North, between Queen Margaret and
the Lord Marquis Mountacue 16000 men were slain.

Anno 1467. At the Battle of Banbury, the 7. of King Edward the Fourth,
between William Herbert Earl of Pembroke, and Queen Margarets Forces 7000
slain.

In the 9. of Edward the Fourth, at the Battle of Lose-coatesfield in
Lincolnshire betwixt the King and the Barons 10000 slain.

At the Battle at Teuxbury, Prince Edward eldest son to King Henry the Sixth
was stabbed and murdered, and 3000 slain.

And lastly, at the Battle at Barnet betwixt King Edward and the Earls of
Warwick and Oxford, who were both killed and 10000 slain, the King being Victor.

This I have inserted by way of digression, to show how the Divine vengeance
was the reward for the deposing of a lawful King, for so all the world knows
Richard the Second was; above eighty years was this woeful Land an unnatural
bloody Theater, wherein Englishmen against Englishmen did act all manner of
unchristian cruelties, in which Dissension more than 60 of the Blood Royal
were slain, besides others in abundance of Nobility and Gentry, as also more
than 125000 common Soldiers, as our Histories relate, and to such a pass as
this has Master Prinne and his Faction done their best to bring it to again,
as within these three years they have prettily begun and prosecuted.

Page 87. He quotes the falling away of the ten Tribes from Rehoboam for a
president for Rebellion, page 88. all along he mentions the deposing of wicked
Popes, page 9. he repeates the words of Caiphas, That it was expedient that one
should die for the people, (though a King, yea Christ the King of Kings) that
the whole Nation perish not, rather then the whole Nation perish for him. O
thou blasphemous beast, Do thou so far hate the Lord's Anointed, as to
justify the crucifying of our Savior, in expression of thy malice to thy
Sovereign? Good Sir, there is no such necessity that either the King or
Subject should die one for another, or that they should so much as distaste
each other, nor had this lamentable Distraction been between them, but that
your delicate Master the Devil has, by your means, set them at Division. In
his 91. page he speaks some Truth, That the King has not power to tyrannize
over his Subjects, or to oppress them with perpetual irremediable slavery.
Good Master Gandergoose, it is confessed, that the King has no such power, nor
ever did he exercise any such Tyranny as you talk of, but you and your
Accomplices have usurped a Traitorous power to your selves, whereby ye have
tyrannized over his Majesty's Subjects in more savage and barbarous manner than
Turks or Tartars would have done. page 92. Prinne speaks a parcel of
nonsense in capital Letters, It is lawful for the people (submitting
themselves) to subscribe the King and his Successors what Law they please. O!
what might this fellows Head be worth at a hard Siege, when one of his
Brothers Heads was sold at Samaria for 80 pieces of Silver, 2. King. 6. 25.

Page 97. he says, that King Edward the sixth, and Queen Elizabeth did hold
their Crowns by Parliamentary title rather then by the course of common Law.
Baw waw, indeed their Legitimacie was objected against by some opulent Papists,
because their Father the King had married the Lady Katherin, who was first his
Brother Arthurs wife, and after 21 years marriage, the King caused her to be
divorced from him, and he marrying other wives in her life time, the Childrens
Right (by birth) was by some Malignants questionable; to clear which doubts,
the King caused their Legitimacie to be confirmed by Act of Parliament, and so
much in Answer to that absurd Treason.

Page 101. he says, Charles the third, Emperor was deposed by the Princes,
Dukes, and Governors of Germany because he was mad. Surely thou art not well
in thy wits, to meddle with that mad Emperor, whose madness or deposing
concerns neither thee nor thy mad Cause thou pratest and lie so in; then he
talks of Wenceslaus the Emperor, and Childerick King of France, how they were
both deposed; And yet in the 104 page he confesses, the King has no Peer, He
is not to have a Superior, and that the King ought not to be under man, but
God. If Justice be demanded of him by way of Petition, (because no Writs runs
against him) if he do not Justice, this punishment may be sufficient to him,
that God will revenge it; and yet presently again he says, the Parliament is
above the King. Thus you see how sometimes the Devil gives him leave to speak
truth against his will, though presently he fall from it again, as being not
toothsome; was ever such a Crop-eard Ass, that would thus contradict himself?
In the 106 page he says, the Emperors had not highest power in Rome, and yet
he cannot deny that Saint Paul appealed to Caesar, from whom there was no
appeal.

In the 112 and last page, he calls the Rebels that the Kings Forces took at
Ciceter, good People, he complains much of their hard usage, (I think he
means because they were not hanged) it was winter, he says, and that they
were forced to go barefooted in Triumph to Oxford, truly we are beholding to
your Faction for the kind entertainment you have given to the Kings good
Subjects when you have taken them, you have either lovingly cut their Throats
in cold blood, or courteously hanged the^, or hospitably famished them, freely
imprisoned them, bountifully robbed and plundered them, and favorably banished,
ruined, and undone them, and all this and more you have done for the Liberty of
the Subject, by the command of the Public Faith. Moreover he says that the
good People from Cirencester were Chained together with Ropes; that is a Bull,
Sir, I doubt not, but there will come a time, when young Grigge shall teach
thee in a trice (with a trick that he has) what the difference is between a
Chain and a Rope; and so I leave Repeating and Paraprasing any more on Prinnes
most matchless, first of his four Proditorious parts.

The Reader may wonder why I spend no more Paper about the first part, and I
doubt all his whole Book is not worthy of so much. But I assure you when I had
surveyed every limb of the Monster, and pared of the excrescences, I had much
ado to find thus much considerable matter in it, yet I am resolved to do him
the honor, and afford him the patience, to view his second part, if it be but
for love to his new Hebrew word (the Militia) for if his Brethren understood
that it were Latin, the language of the Beast, they would never endure the use
of it.

An Answer to Prinnes second Part of his Sovereign Power of Parliament.
IN his Preface he complains of Ignorance, (ah ungratious Boy do thou rail
against thy Mother!) in such as understand not a Parliament, and that his Books
(he hopes) will be get a firm Peace; Indeed he that made light out of
darkness, is able to produce good out of evil; but how Prinnes Books
(stuffed as full of lies as lines) wherein every word breathes Treason, every
syllable incites to Rebellion, and the whole Chaos and confused mass of it is
an unshap'd lump of all the Villainies, Assassinations, Murders, Treasons,
Rebellions, Deposings, Imprisonments, and all the calamities that has befalne
to unfortunate Kings and Princes, in all Nations, either Christians or others,
since the worlds creation; at least as much as his treacherous studious search
could find out, he has packed and hudled together, purposely to root out and
ruinate His sacred Majesty and Royal Posterity, to raise a never ending
Contention, and to make His Majesty's Dominions perpetual fields of blood;
these are the marrow, pith, and intention of M. Prinnes sweet Peacemaking
Books. At the latter end of his Preface, he uses a piece of the Letanie,
saying, Good Lord deliver us. But I wish him to take heed that it come not to
the hearing of the Members, or the Close Committee, that he spoke such words,
for then he will be mistaken for a Protestant, and so excluded from all grace,
favor, and community with the godly.

Page 3. In this second part you may find out of Prinnes own Confession.
First, convenience, second necessity, and thirdly custom; all concurring for
the Kings ordering of the Militia. Take heed M. Prinne what you say, for if M.
Saint-Johns, and your Masters of the highest lower House hear you, they may
perhaps occasion a conference betwixt you and Tom Nash his Ghost, to be cried
up and down the streets, as they dealt with your betters before you; and if
your good Mistresses in London understand it, farewell all further
Contribution, your late Triumphant Bays, will be turned to Funeral Ewghe, and
if you can mend the matter no better, then you do, by begging the Question and
arguing so barrenly, to wit, that it must be granted, that the whole power of
his Majesty, and his Predecessors, in the Militia, was derived from the
Parliament. This stuff he treates on, from the third page to the twelfth,
wherein he crosses all that he says in the third page formerly repeated, but
if you can confirm your fine flourishes no better then by Equivocations,
Amphibologies, and mystical Sophistical Fallacies, by one while taking the
Parliament for King and People, (as in the usual sense it ought to be taken
and the Laws made by them all;) And another while making use of the word
Parliament, in your own sense only, for the two Houses in contradiction to
the King; your Grant must be only, to have and to hold, six foot in Knaves
Acre, under an overthwart beam, for you hate the name of the Cross, on the
highest Promontorie in the Province of Foolciana; or if it light in the line of
Communication, as a special part of that Province is situated near to them,
then your Grant may be to have as much room for your Quarters as you had for
your Ears, and that your Head may be mounted on London Bridge, and made one of
the overseers of the City, which by your writings seems to be a special part
of your Ambition, I am sure a just Reward of your most unmatchable undertakings.

Page 12. As for the consequence of denying His Majesty the Militia, and of the
Parliaments seizing upon Hull, with other Ports, Forts, the Royal Navy, Arms,
Ammunition, Revenues, and detaining them still from His Majesty, which you say,
His Majesty and all Royalists must necessarily yield, nay you should have
entreated to have them yielded out of courtesy, for else you can never enforce
them, are not his, but the Kingdoms, in point of Right and Interest, they
being first transferd to, and placed in his Predecessors, and himself by
Parliament. Here is an excellent proof.

Weaker then that of Tenterton Steeple being the cause of Goodwine Sands, for
say those Logitians, there were no such dangerous Sands, before that Steeple
was built, or sunk, so that Steeple was the cause of those Sands, but I can
conclude more directly and contrario, as thus;

The Kings of England had always power over the Militia, ever since England
had a King there;

But there was a King of England, before there was any Parliament, and so soon
as there is story of any people in England;

Therefore the Parliament gave not the King of England power over the Militia.

If the story of Brute be true, my Mayor cannot be false, if any Chronicle of
England be true, my Minor will not fail; how then the conclusion can be denied
I perceive not, except in the disputation betwixt the Collier and the Devil,
which I leave to Prinnes Logic to resolve, and reduce the Contradictory by
Impossibility, which if he do not in Celarent, he cannot escape doing it in
Bocardo, where I leave him to read over his Fleta, it may teach him more Law
and Conscience then to excuse the Rebellion in England, by a Rebellion in
Ireland of their own making, as that is the best color which yet this Brazen
face can cast upon it.

Page 25. and 26. he comes upon us with a drove of Bulls, of his own usual
Breeding; That the Parliament (meaning the two Houses only) cannot be guilty
of Treason; secondly, that the Statutes against Treason extends not to them;
thirdly, that they are greater then the King; fourthly, that the Oaths of
Allegiance and Supremacy bind only in Relation to the Pope and Foreign
States, but not with reference to the Houses; or only out of Parliament time,
not whilst the Parliament is sitting; These are such Mockado Fustian Non
sense, and such silly Childish shufflings, as that the sense in plain English,
is to say, That the King has Authority against other Princes, but no power
over his own Subjects, or that those in his own Realms are his Sovereigns,
and other Sovereigns are his Subjects; or when he consults the most
carefullest for the good of his Kingdoms, he desires to be required by being
unking'd by them; such strange Paradoxes, absurd Solesismes, and monsters of
Policy, Morality, Reason, Nature and Religion, are the offspring of this new
State Emperick; who perhaps expects other applause, or, at the least,
Approbation, as he is assured of his own Narcissian admiration, only because
he sees but the shadow, understands not the substance of what he superficially
delineates, by a Pen that drops Poison instead of Ink, to support the
pretended Fears and Iealousies, by an enumeration and malicious
interpretation, of all the acts of Justice since the third year of his now
Majesty's Reign, upon those who were restrained from bringing this Rebellion
sooner to the Birth; give Prinne but such another Fee as he had at his
Triumphall Return to London, and he will be an Advocate for those in the third
of Iacobi, and for those in the 13 of Queen Elizabeth; yea for Ravilliac,
Judas, and Lucifer, for all were but Rebels and Traitors, only one was a
little elder then the other; Thus from the 25 page to the 40. he reckons up a
pack of grievances, wherewith the Subject was charged, which were all
redressed, long ago, as soon as His Majesty was rightly certified of them; but
no Acts of Grace can procure an expiation from inexorable Master Prinne.

But why trouble I my self to satisfy one, whom Reason cannot satisfy, one,
whom no Protestations, or Oaths of Princes, no Acts of Grace or Statutes past
in Parliament can satisfy, and therefore let him rest unsatisfied till he be
hanged. He is ill to trust who will trust no body, the Proverb tells us* yet
for this once, let him go on give him Rope enough, and he will hang, himself;
In his 40 page he says, the King has no power to choose his Privy Counselors;
but Prinne and his Magnificent Members, would have the choosing and authorizing
of new Privy Counselors, and Officers of State, for those, he tells us, his
Vtopian Parliament has power to appoint, (yet the King may not choose or
appoint any of them their servants) he should have added in time of Rebellion.
In page 41 to 64. and so from thence to 65 and 79 he prates (to little or no
purpose) that the King has no Negative Voice, but what the undeceived Majesty
of the vulgar, Captain Highshoes, and Colonel Mawworme, and their companions
please to propose must be granted; who, till those can agree whether the Lord
Say or the right horrible Kimbolton shall be Protector: his Excellency or the
Lady Waller high Constable of England, Pym, or Prinne (for I hope he will not
plead all this while for other folks and forget himself) Lord Keeper of the
new great Seal, Sergeant Wild, or Speaker Lenthall, Master of the Rolls,
Burton or Marshall Archbishop; for that calling would be as lawful in one of
their hands, as the Court of Wards was when the Lord Say was Master of it,)
Peard, Glinne or Prideaux chief Justices; Feilding or Stamford, (for they are
both virtuous and thrifty men) Lord Treasurer; I would entreat Warwick, to
provide for his own and their security in the Admiral Ship of Fools, and
wish a fair Gale for them as far as New England, till they shall learn more
sincerity in Religion, more loyalty to their Sovereign, more charity to their
Christian Brethren, and Prinne cease falsifying and perverting Records,
Presidents, and Allegations; and then a Property maker has promised to restore
his Ears again; in the mean time, let him confess himself worthily Branded
for Falsifying, Lying and Slandering (even Scandala Magnatum) Forgerie, False
witness bearing, Perjury, and all manner of Villainy, with which his Books
swarm as thick, as the lower House door did with Brownists and Anabaptists at
the beginning of this Parliament, or as Westminster Hall and the Palace yard
did with Tumults before the death of the Earl of Strafford, or the putting the
Bishops out of the House, or as the high ways and streets, did with Puritan
Punks, when Prinne and his fellows (St Rebels) returned from Limbo to be
Canonized at London, which City they have ever since transformed to be a Hell
upon Earth.

Further (to root the seduced people in dislike of his Sacred Majesty, and to
make them Irrevocable Rebels, as also to blast the Integrity of his Majesty's
Royal Person, his Honorable Councillors and Servants,) he names Ganestone
and the Spencers, Empson and Dudley, and others that were displaced by
Parliaments for Delinquencie; it is right William, but those Parliaments had
proofs for what they did, and the King was with them, and confirmed their
censures: but you are not so much as the bares Skelliton of a Parliament, which
if it were a full Body, yet it wants a head, therefore all your Votes and
censures are Headless.

Page. 48. his running head talks of a Parliament in Running Mead, (near
Windsor) wherein King John Assented to such Acts of settling and securing
Magna-Charta, and all other good Laws and Liberties formerly granted. I tell
thee Prinne, that King John did well in so Assenting to his Peers and Commons,
for then and there their requests were just and Lawful; neither did King
Charles (a more Christian and surer Titled King, then King John) ever deny his
Royal Assent to any just request for the Redress of greivances, releife of
His Subjects, and Tranquillity of his Kingdoms.

Page 55. He has a fling at Alice Pierce, King Edward the Third's Concubine,
it is marvel that Rosamond and Jane Shore escaped him, and it had been as
congruent for him to have brought in Lais, Thais, Faustine, Messalina, and all
the rabble of royal and base Whores that have been since the Creation; for
what though Alice Pierce (being her self proud of the favor of so puissant a
King) did sometimes, with impudent and uncivil behavior intrude her self to
sit with the Judges on the Bench, to countenance and prefer some private
Causes for her own ends or her friends; to which I answer, that the Judges were
either bribed Knaves, or timorous Fools, in suffering such a Coapesmate to sit
with them upon any terms of right or wrong. But to what purpose this
Gentlewoman (who was dead and rotten 250 years before King Charles was borne)
should be raked up as a Testimony against Him now, this is a mere Riddle to
me, and is a task for an Oedipus only to unfold.

Page 75. The King cannot by his Prerogative lay the least Tax upon any of his
Subjects; but, I pray, what authority or Prerogative have you, and your potent
Members to rob, spoil, and plunder the King and all his good Subjects, who is
so just, merciful, and chaste, that neither the Devil nor any of the Members
have dared to say the contrary? there is a bone for thee to pick.

Page 78. Prinne (like an unmannerly Fellow) calls the famous General Jack
Cade Rebel and Traitor; I pray Sir, moderate your passion, for me thinks,
fellows should agree, and when Thieves fallout, etc. You know the Proverb.

In page 79. That the affirming the Petition of Right, the Bills for Trienniall
Parliaments, the continuance of this, the Acts against Ship Money, Forest
bounds, illegal, new-invented grievances and oppressions, the Statutes for
suppression of Star Chamber, High Commission, Knighthood, Bishops Votes:
although the King has done all these and more, yet this Scarrab Cadworme
says, that The King's Grace is not eclipsed, to say. They are no Acts of
Grace, but Acts of Oath, Duty, Law, and Conscience. Thus does this filthy
Varlet most traitorously beslubber the goodness and gracious favors of a
matchless and unparalleld Christian King.

And thus you have the sum and substance of his second part of the Sovereign
Power of Parliaments.

Upon his third part of the Sovereign Power of Parliaments.
ALthough his third and fourth parts are already answered by the learned Sir
John Spelman Knight, Doctor Fearne, and Master Digges, too reverend and able
Pens to take notice of the name of such a prinnified, prurigenous Puppy, from
whom he stole his rational and Theological Passages, nothing being his own,
but the outfacing with a multitude of pretended Testimonies, haled in, as he
teaches his Clients to hire Knights of the Post, to witness that which they
know nothing of, saving (I say) that there is nothing that concerns England,
but the same again (quoth Mark a Belgrave) to the Tune of Anthony, now, now,
the old Song still; like the last hour and half of a Puritan Sermon, or one
of his long-winded Traverses of Burton's Apology, or Bastwickes Letany, in
stead of a plea or answer, withouten that the aforesaid Henry Burton at
Friday-street aforesaid, in the manner and form aforesaid, did beat his wife
aforesaid, by reason of the independent sister aforesaid, to beat out the evil
spirit aforesaid, and (withouten that) it was for the lust aforesaid, or
withouten that the said John Bastwicke Doctor of Physic aforesaid, was so
overrun with the Morbus Gallicus aforesaid, that when he was a Captain in the
Rebellion aforesaid, at the Newarke in Leicester aforesaid, he was not able to
get up to his horse aforesaid, without a stool aforesaid; and withouten that,
William Prinne aforesaid, in the Church-lane there aforesaid, in the Assembly
of Adamites aforesaid, exercised his gifts aforesaid, to the edification of the
Sisters aforesaid, who gave him the Gold aforesaid, and (in the fear of God)
joined in the Rebellion aforesaid, as they will be ready to aver and
maintain, but never to prove any thing, if those his Books have not
sufficiently proved it; yet for all this I will afford him the honor to shame
him, in answering of his third part, and thus I begin.

This third part he begins to magnify Treason in his delicate Dedication, most
loyally to three Arch-Rebells, namely, the Lord Fairfax, and the two Knights
Williams, Waller and Breerton, wherein he styles them, Deservedly Renowned
Worthies, calls their valor, zeal, activity, and industry, incomparable;
(you should have said their Rebellion too;) it is confessed, that their invisible
Victories have been many and miraculous, and their being often beaten has been
apparently perspicuous and manifest, for which they have been jeared with
Public Thankesgivings, as Master Prinne makes himself merry with mocking
them, in his foisting Epistle; and it is not possible that these three Worthies
should be so threedbare in their understandings, or that their wits should be
so stupefied, as not to perceive this fellows flouting flattery; as for their
Victories we do rather pity than envy; and concerning the Worthies, I have
seen nine of their Figures or Pictures in Haberdashers Shops and Tavernes,
hanged up to garnish the rooms, but Master Prinnes three Worthies shall not be
hanged up in a private room or shop, a large field is fittest for such mighty
Martialists. And for the valor of those three Worthies, it was never known
that the Lord Fairfax struck a blow, except it were to his Tailer or his
Footman; and for Sir William Waller he has been so happy that he was never
wounded, but only in his reputation. But O, O, Sir William Breerton! noble,
valiant, singular, supereminent, courageous Sir William Breerton, I could laugh
heartily, were I once so happy as to see him within half a mile of a Battle,
O sweet face, most amiable Sir William Breerton.

In his Preface to the Reader, he says, he has been always a cordial
endeavourer of Peace ( as right as my leg John Jarret) you might as well have
said Rope-ye-all, Halter-ye-all, as cordial.

In his third Page he seems to invite his Majesty to visit the Parliament, and
tells Him (and all loyal Subjects) by an old President, what kind
entertainment He might expect, for he says, that Julius Caesar was, in the
Capitol, stabbed, and murdered by the Senate, with no less than twenty three
wounds. Sir, your kind invitation shall not be forgotten, and I assure you, it
is one of most the significant passages and explanations of your Loyalty in
all your whole Books.

Page 5. That the King has denuded himself of all Regal Authority; this
shall pass for one of your small Treasons, wherein you show the denuded
nakedness of your Biased Judgment and conscience. page 3. This liberal
Gentleman, proclaims liberty, and plenarily leave to rebel, He releaseth all
his Majesty's Subjects from their Allegiance; surely, thou have made a League
with Sin, Death, and Hell, and they have blinded thee so, that thou can
neither see what thou say, or understand what thou writest. Thou give the
King's Subjects leave to cast off their Allegiance, and they give thee leave to
be hanged to requite thy courtesy; but thou and thy Members (of Maintenance)
must and shall know that all the King's loyal Subjects do understand, that the
Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, made to their Sovereign, is such a tie,
and security, as it is the only chain upon earth, except love, to bind the
consciences of men, and to hold humane society together; from which Oaths
though Master Prinne (with Papal Authority) would dispense withal, yet his
Majesty has good and faithful Subjects enough, who scorn and deride your
foolish, traitorous dispensations, and doubt not (by God's assistance) to mould
you and your seduced Rabble of Rebels into better fashion.

Page 13. If the King himself shall introduce Foreign Forces and Enemies
into his Realm to levy War against it, or shall himself become an Enemy to
it. This doubtful supposition is so idle and trivial, that the best Answer to
it is to laugh at it. page 14. he talks how King Henry the second of France
was casually slain at a Tournament by the Lord Montgomery, and then he tells us
of Sir Walter Tirrell's Arrow (glancing against a Tree) slew King William the
second of England; presently he makes a step into France again, and brings us
word, that King Charles the first, being mad there, was deprived and kept
clsoe, and that the deaths and deprivations of these Kings was then proved to
be no Treasons, because they were done out of no malicious intents. This is
Bombast to stuff out his big-wombe Book, and as near the matter as Braseol
and Banbury. Page 17. He plays the Huntsman, and compares the Keeper of a
Park, and the Dear in it, to a King and his People. Suppose this Comparison
were granted, then you must also grant, that you have rebelliously broken down
the Park pale, or wall, so that the Dear are scattered and divided, the best
of them (I am sure the truest Hearts) do keep within their bounds, and live
under the protection of their Keeper, whilst you have got all the whole Heard
of Rascals amongst you, and much good may do it you with them. In Page 22. he
makes a leap from hence into Asia, and relates strange News, how Tamberlane
conquered Bajazet, and put him in an ironcage; then you are sure it was not a
Pillory, but if a time of Peace were, (were it not for depriving the Hangman of
his due) I would beg thee, and show thee in Fates and Marts, for a Motion,
whereby thee and I could not choose in short time but be without abundance of
money. From page 23. to page 60. he tautologically talks Natural Nonsense,
and Artificall Impertinencies, which in page 60. he says, he gathered from one
Albericus Gentilis. page 61. he stumbles upon Truth again, and says, That it
is out of controversy that no man ought to resist against the King. Page 63,
64. he cites 32 Arguments of Scripture to maintain the Cause, the chief of
them is Daniel in the Lions Den, he might as well have brought in Jacob's Well,
and the Woman of Samaria.

In page 66. be brings in the story of Ioram, 2 Kings 6. how he sent a
messenger to the Prophet Elishaes house to take away his head, and that the
Prophet did cause the door to be shut, to keep out the King's messenger: from
whence the learned logical Prinne inferres, that because the Prophet did not
obey the King, but shut his door against the Messenger, therefore King Charles
his Subjects may oppose, resist, and rebel; a very trim Argument. From thence
to page 73. he repeates old fusty business over and over, and there he runs
for more luggage headlong into the Red Sea, and dragges the memory of crowned
Pharaoh, (...) example of God's judgments on that obdurate and impenitent
King: this was somewhat to the purpose, but I cannot perceive where or how.
Page 81. The King with the Lords and Commons in Parliament, have the whole
Realm entrusted with them, of which great trust the King is only Chief and
Sovereign: now I agree with you, Sir, if your writings had been all such as
this, and your Members and Committees, Votes and Orders, correspondent, then we
had had no Rebellion, and your high prized Books would have been justly
valued, to be worth nothing. A little after he says, The King is the supreme
Member of the Parliament, (thou ill bred Fellow, thou might have said HEAD)
and that contrary to the trust and duty reposed in Him, through the advice of
evil Counselors, wilfully betrays this trust, and spoils and makes havocke
of his People and Kingdoms: these are but the old lies, fears, jealousies,
doubts, ifs and ands, newly revived and furbushed: as in page 86. he has
another, which is, If the King should command us to say Mass in his Chapel,
to which I answer, If the Sky fall, etc. and the one of those ifs is as
possible as the other. Page 108. He musters up 51 of the ancient Fathers to
lend him their hands to defend his falsities, wherein he has wrested and
abused their integrity sufficiently, but I observe that he meddles with neither
of the Gregory's, either the Great, or Nazianzen, his policy is not to mention
them, because then young Gregory herhaps may be put in mind of him; for Prinne
is crafty and observes the Proverb, He must have a long Devil, that eats
with a spoone.

Page 92. He has wrested the sword out of the hands and cut off the heads of
all his opposite Goliahs. It Is well bragged, but if it be true, that you have
cut off all the heads of your opposites, you have been bloudily revenged for
the loss of your ears; I prithee, when thou die, bequeath one of thy
law-bones to be kept amongst the dreadful Weapons and Ammunition of the
Members Magazine, it may do strange things amongst a Crew of Philist^ms.

Page 134. He contradicts himself with Statutes of King Henry 8. Ed. 6. and
Qu. Eliz. That words against the King (even in preaching) are high Treason, as
well as raising Arms: very right, and those Statutes being yet in force, what
would become of all your reverend railing Pulpit-men? (I will not slander them
to call 'em Preachers) upon my conscience thy destiny and theirs would be all
one, (if the said Statutes were duly executed) and you would all leave your
old Trades, and deal in the two rich commodities of Hemp and Timber, till
your last gaspes. Page 142. he railes at the King again, as if he were hired to
it, or that he had nothing else to do; also he be labors the Cavaliers ex
tempore, by the Titles of Cut-throates, bloody, inhumane, and barbarous, with
other such pretty names, as the Gentleman pleases to bestow upon them, for
which I hope they will not all die, till some of them be out of his debt. Page
143. Christians did not resist persecution under Pagans, ergo, Christians must
not resist Christians, and because Subjects are Christians as well as Kings,
therefore Christian Kings must not resist Rebels. In his last Leaf, he has
waded through this weighty Controversy, and proved that both by Law and
Conscience this Rebellion is justifiable; and thus the Reader may perceive how
Prinnes Judgment and Conscience is biassed.

Upon Prinnes fourth Quarter, or part of his Sovereign Power of Parliaments.
IN page 13. he brings in a mess of musty Presidents, like the moldy Bread,
ragged Clothes, and clouted Shoes of the Gibeonites, when they deceived
Joshua; as for allowing or not allowing the King's meniall Servants: It Is no
doubt but the King should be well served if such a Coxcombe as Prinne had
Authority to choose his Servants. Page 15. Parliaments have power above Magna
Charta: I believe Parliaments have power if there be cause to repeal Statutes
either in Magna Charta, or any other Laws; but though Parliaments have this
power, yet I would have Master Prinne to understand, that Conventicles and
factions Assemblies have no such Authority, except they steal and usurp it.
Page 24. he falls to his old vomit, and taxes his Majesty with English, Irish,
Scottish, French, and Germane Papists, and that they are whole Armies of them
maintained by his Majesty, against his good Subjects, (of which you are none,
therefore you need not fear.) Page 32. The Parliament has unwillingly taxed
and plundered men: your Votes, Imprisonments, Banishments, and Robberies
committed daily on the persons and goods of such as were his Majesty's
loyallest Subjects, (they being all firm Protestants) and your Mandates and
large rewards to the Thieves and Plunderers, with your Receipts and sale of the
stolen goods, to strangers, Amster-damnable Jews, other forraigners and
unnatural Natives, who have either bought the said goods for money (with which
money you have maintained this Rebellion) or truckd and barterd it for other
Commodities, as you have done lately with the Hollanders, for Butter, Cheese,
Fish, etc. by these Practices of Robbery and Tyranny, it is apparent how
unwillingly this Thing, called a Parliament, has, and daily does, Tax and
plunder.

In his 33. Page he speaks truth, That by the same power the Parliament had to
raise an Army without the King, by the same power they may raise money to
maintain it, which is as much as to say, by the same power they had to be
Rebels, by the same power they might Murder, Rob, Plunder, Ransack and ruinate
His Majesty's true Liege people, and by the same power you have made bold to
do the like with all his Majesty's Honors, Mannours, Royalties and Revenues;
all which you have done by the same power, and liberal grants of that
bountiful Potentate who offered to give all the Kingdoms of the world to our
Savior. Page 34. He taxes His Majesty with placing of Popish Governors in
his Garrisons, and such Commanders in his Armies; indeed you are not to be
blamed much for your being greived at those Governors and Commanders, because
through God's assistance by them and their good directions, you have been often
times greivously beaten, and questionless they are not quite out of your debts
(except you mend your manners) they are such just paymasters, that they will
pay you all: also every body will not believe that all are Papists whom you
please to call so.

Now I come to the survey of his ample Appendix; wherein at the first, he rakes
up Romes Foundation, and to small purpose, he hales Romulus, Remus, Numa
Pompilius, and all the Heathen Kings, and Emperors out of their Vrnes and
Tombs; then he has a bout with the East and Western Empires, and all their
wicked Emperors with their Tragical ends. In his 11. Page he blaspheamously
outfaceth S. Paul, and his Doctrine both, Romans 13. 1. to 6. That Kings are
Subjects, to the highest powers, which highest powers Prinne interpretes to be
the people; take heed, though you have the pestilent art to make Law to be no
Law, and stealing to be no theft, yet it is dangerous to pervert or juggle with
holy writ. But why do I cast away admonition upon an Atheistical railing
Rabshekah, who has perverted, wrung, wrested, construed and mis-applied the
Patriarks, Prophets, Apostles, yea Christ himself. Page 12. he presents the
miseries of the unfortunate and perfidious King. Zedechias, how his children
were murdered before his face, his eyes put out, and after, how he was carried
Prisoner in Chains to Babylon. Also he mentions many other deplorable deaths
and disasters, that fell upon diverse Kings and Princes. All which Testimonies
and presidents are so applied, as nothing else but Treason and Villainy can be
found in the applications. In the 14. page he is saild into Sparta, amongst the
Kings of the Lacedaemonians, and there he makes inquiry how many of them have
been brought to untimely ends. In page 15. he tells us how the Sabeans confined
their Kings to their Palaces, and used to stone them if they went out of their
bounds without leave. But your Scholars (the Tumultuous Rabble) did in Routes
and Roguish Assemblies with cudgells, march with their Tatterdmallians against
White Hall when his Majesty was there last.

Page 18. 19. and so to page 51. He runs through all the History of France, to
find proditorious presidents, to prove Treason to be Lawful in England. page
51. he makes a skip into Spain, and does as much there. page 60. he has found
out a Kingdom of Oreida, and that there many of the Kings were deposed, or
Murdered. page 62, and 63. he travells Aragon and Navarre, and from thence into
Castile, Portugal, Cordova, Vallencia, Granado, Gallicia. page 80. he is got
into Hungaria. page 82. he is in Bohemia. page 85. you may have him in Poland.
page 89. he is making a privy search in Denmark. page 98. he forrageth through
Sweden. page 99. he makes a step into Assyria, Cyprus, Lombardia, Naples, and
Venice, and in the 100. page he is come back into Scotland, and there he
tarries raking up all the Treasons in that Kingdom, from the reign of
Fergusius (their first King) till these mad bad times; which theme he follows
to the 112. page Then he posts into Asia amongst the Kings of the Gentiles,
Israel, and Judah. He is now in Persia, feasting with Ahasuerus; and presently
you have him in Babylon, eating Grass (like an Ass) with Nebuchadnezzer, from
whence he makes a spirt to see King Darius, and kindly he visites Daniel in
the Lions Den. Thus you may perceive how nimble and active this Gentleman has
been, to play the Kennell-raker in grubling in all the nasty common Sewers, and
contagious Dung-hills of damnable Treasons, and perfidious Treacheries in all
the Kingdoms of the World, maliciously and purposely, to defend, maintain,
and countenance this odious Rebellion, now on foot in England. And, it is to be
conceived that he could never have Traveled from Region to Region, and from
Realm to Realm, with such Celerity and Subitorie quickness, but that he had
the help of some Mephostophilus or Familiar, or else he bought, begged, or
stole some Winds from a Lapland Witch; without which aids from the
Instruments of his Grand Master ( Don Diabolo) he could never have flowne to
and fro, to so many Territories to fetch mischief hither.

Page 125. He says, David was made King by Gods Appointment, and the Peoples
Election; I tell thee, (thou Owleiglasse) if thou did understand what thou
say, thou would say somewhat more understandingly to be understood; for
if thou note, what God himself says to David, by the Prophet Nathan, 2. Sam.
12. 7. Thus says the Lord God of Israel, I anointed thee King over Israel, and
I delivered thee out of the hands of Saul; where is the peoples Election here?
God says he chose him from the sheepfold, to be a King, Psalm. 78. 71. and
seeing God did choose and anoint David King, I must crave M. Prinnes leave, to
believe the people did it not, but it is certain that David was made King by
Gods only Assignation; and that he that made the Peoples hearts, did also give
them grace with unanimous consent to be obedient to his Ordinance; so that with
loud shoutes, and acclamations of Joy, the people expressed their Loyalties and
loves at David's Coronation, in which they had no Election at all, as this
pretender pretends. Page 127. That God, and David's designation of Solomon to
the Crown, did not take away the Peoples Liberty, Right, and Power to elect
and nominate their Kings, my sweet Stercucian prudent Prinne, neither God or
David did ever take that Liberty, Right and Power from the People, for the
people never had any such privilege or prerogative to elect and nominate, and
therefore such Right and Power which they never had, was never taken from them.
Page 146. he names Zimri, Omri, and other Parricides and Homicides, Usurpers,
Rebels and Castawayes, these he brings in to fill up the measure. Page 149. is
crammed as full of Treasons and Revileings, as he was able to put in, till he
comes to the 153 page and there he tells me old news, How Darius set Princes
over his Kingdoms and Provinces; And that Nebuchadnezzer, set Daniel over the
Province of Babylon; let the Reader judge if Prinne does not give himself the
Lie. How dares this Varlet allege that King Charles has not Power to set
Deputies and Lievtenants over His Dominions and Provinces, or to choose His
Privy Counselors, Officers of State, Trust, and Meniall Servants, and yet he
confesses that two Heathen Kings, Darius and Nebuchadnezzar, had power to do
it, and did it, and (for any thing that I can perceive) those Kings had power
so to do, and did use that power without asking their Subjects leave or
consent.

From page 154. to 160. he brings in Chimeraes, Whimseyes and mere Connundrums
in such store, as they would furnish six French and Italian Mountebanks to
vent their sophisticated Oils, Unguents, Drugges, Album Greaka, or black white
Dogs da^es; Page 177. he says, that a Prince or Lord of a Country are not
Princes without Subjects; very right, if a King has no Subjects, then he is no
bodies King, but you and your Comrades, would have no King, and therefore, by
that rule you are no Subjects, or (I am sure no good ones.) From page 177. to
186. he makes a long Relation of the causes why the Netherlandish Provinces
fell from the King of Spain; as suitable to his purpose as Mustard and
Mince-pye together, and then he brings in Julian the Apostate, slain by a
Christian Soldier; Page 188. That the Pope and Prelates alone, (without the
consents of Parliament, Peers, or People) have deposed and judged Heretical
and Tyrannical Kings to death, and devote them to Assassination. This is but
crowding upon the old fidle, because the Pope has done so to wicked Kings,
therefore you will take a devilish power (somewhat worse then a Popish) to
supplant and ruinate a Just King and His Posterity. Page 189. he presents
Tarquin, Nero, Vitelius, their banishments and deaths. Page 204. That Queen
Elizabeth did aid and succor Protestants that lived in other Countries, and
that the King of Spain did the like for Roman Catholics; This is Prinnes
Foble Boble, as plain as a Packstaffe; I wish that he and his Tribe would
imitate that good Queen, and succor the Protestants, and not destroy and
beggar them daily, as they do. Page 208. he swells and blisters out his Volum,
with the sentence of degradation and deprivation of Wenceslaus the Emperor, as
much pertinent as the fifth wheel in a Coach. Page 216. he is vehement in
persuading men to be Loyal Rebels, to be Valiant true Traitors, to persist in
their execrable disobedience, for which he promises everlasting felicity; and
lastly, he peremptorily concludes all Temporal and Eternal loss, dishonor,
and perpetual torments, to be the Portions of all true Subjects; and then he
closes with zealous Prayer, and Invocation, for the continuance, maintenance,
and prosperity of Treason and Rebellion. And thus have I delineated, or rather
Anotomiz'd and disected the four Quarters of this Monster. Now I proceed to
his Head, and the works of his Head-peece, his Opening of the New Great Seal.

William Prinnes, Opening of his New Great Seal of ENGLAND.
ADulterate Presidents, are (very seldom) Parents to Legitimate Consequences.
This New Great Seal is Begotten, and Borne into the World, licked into fashion
by Committees, Members, Votes and Ordinances, and Nursed, Cherished, Dressed,
Tricked and Trimmed by M. Prinne, who has painfully searched through the very
Bowels of Antiquity to find out the original of Seals, and whence his New
Seal may lineally derive its first being and pedigree.

To begin which goodly piece of service, he loades his Margin with Notes and
Testimonies of Scripture; The first mark whereby you may know from whence this
Babye is descended, he quotes, the Signet which Judah left with his daughter in
Law, Tamar, as a Pledge when he had committed Incest (or Adultery) with her, as
it is in Genesis 38. A very fair beginning, to prove this Seal lawfully borne
and bred from Judah's Signet, which was left in pawn as a token for Bawderie.

The second descent of it he proves to be from Theft, Covetousness, and
Murder, as 1. Kings, 21. 8. How Jezabel stole Ahabs Seal, and with it sealed
counterfeit Letters (in the Kings name) whereby Naboth was perjuriously
accused, and Murdered, and Ahab had the Vineyard. And from that Seal, and the
notable effects which it produced, M. Prinne derives his New Seal, and
presageth what worthy acts it may produce.

I will name but one more of his Marginall Testificandums, Estber. 3. and 12.
there he mentions King Ahsuerus his Ring, which he delivered to Haman,
wherewith he sealed an Edict, that all the whole Nation of the Jews, young and
old, that lived in the Kings large Dominions (127. Provinces) should all be
slaughtered in one day. But I desire the Reader to take notice, that though
Haman was a proud ambitious man, yet he did use no counterfeit Seal, nor
usurped any power but what he had from the King; but M. Prinne and his
Masters, have neither the Kings Seal, leave or power, to destroy His
Subjects, and Ruinate His Kingdom, but I would not have them to forget, (and
make application too) that Haman was hanged although his fault was not Treason.
But this is another strong Argument, what shall become of the Protestants, and
His Majesty's Loyallest Subjects, if M. Prinnes new founded Seal were in force
and vigor. And thus, out of his own Annotations, he has proved his Seals
originalls, from Adulterous Incest, Theeving, Avarice, Murder, Perjury, and
Destruction; and what can be expected, but the like mischiefs, and miseries
from this Newborn, Counterfeit, Adulterated Mungrell.

His very Title of Opening of the Great Seal, puts me into some suspicion of
Blasphemy in it, as alluding to the Lambs, opening the Seal in the
Revelation, (but I omit that, as too serious for this manner of Encounter.) And
I have spyed a Cross in his second page, to begin withal, which makes me
ready to cry out Popery, Popery, and I thought it would have frighted him out
of the Court, but I perceive the Devil is Elder, and M. Prinne is more
impudent then the Legend tells us, (and I am sure that Legend is as true as
most of Prinnes writings are.) The Devil was in Saint Christophers days, for
then he ran aside at the sight of the Cross, for fear of him that dyed on it;
But now Prinne goes on in despite of both, (though indeed) somewhat like the
Devil, all on one side, and tells us a Tale of Crosses, page 3. and at length
of Seals, though it be a long time er'e he could find that English Kings had
any, event ill the Reigns of Offa and Edwin. Nor any Broad Seal till Edward
the Confessor; The best is, he there by grants, that the Kings grant is good
under his Sign Manual, or Signet, yea (if need be) under his hand without any
Seal, (but this I leave to Lawyers.) And when the Broad Seal came into use,
it was the Seal of our Lord the King, or the Kings Broad Seal, and the
Chancellors were called the Kings Chancellors (not the Peoples, nor the
Parliaments) page 10 and 11. that the Kings from time to time ordered, and
altered the Great Seal at their pleasures, and that King Richard the first,
pretending that the Great Seal was lost, when Roger his Vicechancellour was
drowned before the Isle of Ciprus, and that the King caused a New Seal to be
made. All this is granted, but no part of this does say that a Parliament made
that Seal, ('it is said the King caused it to be made) besides, that was not a
counterfeit Seal made by a Faction, without the Kings Consent, or, which is
more, against Royal Commands and Proclamations, to the contrary. Then he goes
on honestly, that our Kings have altered their Seals with various
Inscriptions, Styles, and Arms, but always of their own, and in their own
names, never of the Parliaments. (For I think their Arms and Motto, except it
should be A Beast with many Heads, are yet to seek.) Nor was it ever meddled
with in Parliament, but for the Kings behalf, in the Kings name, by the Kings
Authority, and according to his will, as even those two Instances of a New
Broad Seal, made for Edward the first, page 18. 19. Whilst he was absent
militating in the Holy Land; And for Henry the sixth, when he was an Infant of
nine mouths old, and his Uncle the Protector, do more then manifestly
convince, directly contrary to what he produces them to prove. Nor were there
any proportion or parallel betwixt an absent, and a present King, betwixt an
implicit Consent, and an express Command to the contrary, betwixt the state
of a Child, and a Mature experienced King; if the intents of our Parliaments
were as Loyal as those appeared to be, (Whereas indeed the contrary is
apparent,) but that he presumes that all his Geese shall pass for Swannes, and
that he can persuade the People that the Moon is made of the same Calves skin,
that his new broad Seal shall be affixed unto.

Yet the better to secure himself, and his Associates, from high Treasons in
this point (for they are deep enough in other matters) I would advise them to
be contented to make use of the other Seals, which he says were made by their
Authority, (but I must tell him, not without the King) and may be new-made by
themselves, viz. the Seal for Statutes, Merchants, in certain Corporations,
the Seal for the Hundred, Rape, or Wapentake, City, or Borough, left to the
discretion of the Justices of Peace (if they have any) or to the keeping of
some honest good man of the County (M. Pym was once reputed fit to have been
the Keeper of this Seal) p. 20. this Seal is great enough yet to have the
stoned Horse carved in it for the bearing, which Pym's father bequeathed to
Aguis, or the Seal of Alnegers and Collectours, etc. or that leaden Seal for
clothes (which he insists upon as if it were as authentic as the Popes Bull)
or the Seal of the Customers Office (which they are well skilled in improving
for themselves, though they rob the King of it) and the seals of cloth of
Gold, Silver, Velvet, Damaskes, Chamlets, Silks, Tobacco, and Tobacco-pipes,
and of as many trinkets as are enumerated in their late Book of Excise and
Rates; and let them take in the Seals of Yarmouth and Linne-wosted-makers to
boot; but let them not meddle with the Duchy Seal, the Exchequer Seal, the
Seal of the Court of Wards and Liveries, not the Seal of the Augmentation,
(which he spends so much wast paper about, in his page 21, and 26.) for fear
of a Praemunire, especially if they have any cares to lose, as some of them have
hitherto; but above all, meddle not with the Great Seal, it is not Prinnes
Assertion, that the Parliament is incapable of Treason, and out of the
intentions of the Statutes concerning Treasons of that kind, which can protect
you against a Tiburne Pole-axe, except you can procure the King's consent, as a
part of the Parliament, as the case was in the Times of King Edward the first,
and King Henry the fixth, (which he repeates again, for no other purpose but to
manifest how his Noddle is furnished with the Art of Memory to insert things
over and over to the purpose aforesaid, as much as in the total comes to
nothing;) but these remembrances are of small validity to make way for Master
Prinnes pardon; as the whole Parliament was forced for a less Rebellion than
this, in the time of Richard the second. Or unless you be resolved to make
good your Speakers promise at the beginning of this Parliament, To make his
Majesty the richest King in Christendom, against your wills, by forfeiting
your Estates, Lands, and Lives, and having let the Kingdom in combustion, you
fall (like Phaeton) for prosuming to guide that Chariot whose luster dazzled
your eyes, and whose sublimity astonisheth, yea confounds your understandings:
And so confounded be all they that exalt themselves against God, and against
the King. Let their lives be ^^^bsome, and their deaths Herodian lousy and
virmiculated, Let their mouths be sealed up with the speechlesnesse of their
self guilt. And let their eyes be picked out by the Ravens of the valleys, and
eaten by the young Eagles. But let the King ever rejoice in the strength of the
Lord, and be exceeding glad in his salvation. Mat. 22. 12. Prove. 30. 17. Psalm.
21. 1.

Thus have I (with less than Herculean labor in six days) cleansed this
Augean Stable of all the noisome filth that Prinne had raked in many weeks,
from all the dung-hils in the world, all which Merdur^nous Mucke I have laid at
the doors of the right Owners, viz. Master Prinne and his Members; I have been
fain to encounter with him in the dark, for his Margins has been so thatched
with abused and wrested Authors, that as the Grand Signior had so many
thousands of Arrows to shower at once upon the Christians, that they obscured
the Sun, and darkened the Firmament, yet there was room enough under the
shadow of those Arrows to fight (in a good Cause) and foil the Turks; so I,
in the Cymerian umbrage of this Cloud of Testimones, have cop'd with him, and
in the Combat so bruised him, that three of his small guts are dislocated, the
Vertigo taking possession of his pulsive Brain-pan, and (as I was certified) he
takes a Diet next his heart every morning five spoonful of warm Cow Dung
mixed with Earwigs, compounded Caterpillars, and the Marrow of a Salt Bitch, so
that there is some hope that he will recover, but never be his own man again,
yet he may live longer than a Cat, or a Dog, or a better thing.

If I had had any correspondency with him, I could have furnished him, with
Authors, Testimonies, Witnesses, and Proofs more suitable for his four
Parts, and his Great Seal too, as Laz^^ill^ de Tormes, Don Quixot, Gusman de
Alfarech, Bevis of Hamp^on, The mirror of Knighthood, John Dorry, the ancient
Bards, Druides, Peripatetickes, Stoickes, Epicureans, and Gymnosophists: these
learned Thebanes would have been so suitable to his writings, that their
authentic Assertions had like a Torrent overwhelmed me, so that I had been
quite drowned before I could have answered half his Sovereign Powers, and for
his Great Seal, (...) been as far from my knowledge, as he and it are from
Truth and Realities.

I (...) how to manage and husband this New Great Seal, the cheapest and
thriftiest way, for as yet it is of small force and less virtue, People do
begin to perceive (...) they have been coozened with Public Faith, and large
promises for great sums, which have been (and must be) paid invisibly, and
now that (by beggarly experience) they see how the Game and Gear goes, they
are unwilling to be sealed for fools, and pay for the sealing too. Therefore
because it is like to prove a dead market with the New Great Seal, and that
wax is dear, I advise to save that charge, and seal with Butter; I have heard
of Obligations sealed so in the Welsh marches; or if that thrifty device fail,
your Seal will make an excellent mould to make Wafer Cakes, or cast well
kneaded Ginger-^read in. There are diverse other necessary uses which it may be
put to, which I leave to thy grave and ingenious, studious consideration.

How now, my running-witted, tolling-headed, taling tongued, rattle-brain'd
Roundhead? How likest thou this ve^^ie? Will thou have another bows? If thou
dare but take up the cudgels once more, as good as thou think thy self at
Defensive Arms. I Will fetch thee about like a Iack-an-apes, over and under his
Chain, so that all the Gentlemen Spectatours, (who shall be Judges) shall not
only pass their sentence on my side, that I have sufficiently dry-bast^d
thee; but I will let thy humors blood for the Simples in the head-vein and
break thy, Mazz^rd, so soudly, that all the world shall see that thou have but
a crazed Pericranium; and so, somewhat commiserating thy distracted condition,
I in a small degree of true charity, leave thy excessive imaginary zeal to
farewell, and behang'd. What should any man say more to his Friend.

William Prinne.

A Prophecy.
A Prophecy concerning the precedent Answer, found in a Whirle-poole, three
Leagues below the bottom of the Ocean, by a diver, who was sent thither in
these times of necessity for Pym's purse, which because he found guarded by
Hampden's Ghost, he could not bring, for that had been enough to have redeemed
all this Isle, (except himself) but he brought this from a pennon whereon it
was hanging, whilst the Neiades and Nereides were busied about an Ephemerides,
for perpetuating Bookers Almanacke, till Naworths honest just-dealing
Prognostication shall make a Comment upon Haly by the last years success, and
till the Puritan manner of canting Ass-trologers (like that of Scriptures)
shall appear out of Guido Benatus, wherein having told a tale of their
troublesome Army, he leaves out, BUT THE KING SHALL PREVAIL IN THE END. And
railes upon the Licencer, because he put the rest out, upon discovery of that
his juggling, and also they sat in Consultation about proroguing the
Confutation (if it could be) of Prinnes legislative Sovereign Power of
Parliaments, and opening the New Broad Seal, and diverse other special pieces
of that Minnion and Favorite of Aeolus, Neptune, Proserpine, yea and the Grand
Signior Pluto himself, all which have special influence into the occurrents
of these Times.

In the third year of the Grand Session of the infernal Plebeians spirits,
and in the second year of the Pigmies Giant-like warring against Heaven, when
the Furies shall be in Conjunction, Beelzebub and Jezabel in a Quartile Aspect,
Asmodeus ascendant, Judas in the second House, Lucifer culminant, and Balaam
Lord of the Assembly, the North Pole shall be translated to Troynovant, the
Constellation called Corona shall be assaulted by Mars, and great endeavor
shall be to draw it beneath the Moon, and one Prinne (son of the Centaures)
mounted to the Sphere of Mercury, shall persuade the middle world (made giddy
with lately running round) that all is reduced to the Natural Motion, and the
great Platonique year returned: but Charles Waine (driving a contrary way)
shall force Ixions Wheel to become retrograde, and cause a motion of
Trepidation in all the Circulatours and Roundheads of Thule, and the greatest
Antic Island; and when this son of the Centaure has lead the World through
four times four Signs by an Ignis fatuus more dangerous than that of
Phaeton, and maintained worse Paradoxes than Copernicus, reaching at loves
Scepter with the hands of Briareus, and scorning Juno more than Niobe did, and
seems to rest secure, only laughed at by Logicians, hissed at by the
Searchers of Clioes Records, and despised by the Priests of love, by reason of
his false quotations, disunderstandings, mis-applications, blasphemy against
God, Treasons against the King, Arguments drawn from absurdities, general
Conclusions drawn from particular examples, and from most notable Nonsense,
that in the Times and Acts of Rebellion, parallelld for the most part from, and
in the Nadir (or Altitude) of his Pride, shall write with the Rays of a Comet,
that he has copiously confuted all Royallists, Malignants, Papists, clamorous
Objections, and Primitive Exceptions, against the Proceedings of this present
Parliament, in four several Treatises, lately published concerning the
Sovereign Power of Parliaments, and Kingdoms, which has given good
satisfaction to many, and silenced the Tongues and Pens of most
Anti-Parliamenteers, who have been so ingenious as seriously to peruse them;
then shall a holy water Clerk of Thetis contract his Iliades into a rotten
nut-shell, and inspired with ability rightly to interpret that old Saw of Rabbi
Selimon, Answer not a fool according to his folly, (or according to his
manner) lest thou also be like him. Aptly apply the inverted opposite Maxim,
Answer a fool according to his folly, or according to his deserving, least he
be wise in his own conceit: and although Lilbourne the Libeller, or a Mushrom
hatched by this blazing star in the black Night of Sedition, and that sincere
upright verst man Withers with the rest of the Rabble of railing Poets be
retained in fee by the Rebels to write weekly Lies for them; yet Tom Nash his
Ghost returning to this Charon, with some distilled wilde-fire-water in an
inke-horne, shall provide such a whip for this proud Horse, such a Bridle for
this senseless Ass, and such a rod for this mad fools back, as shall tame
Cerberus, whose Triple head sounded nothing but the three-syllabled and the
three-letterd Lords, and barked against the radiant beams of Majesty, and
shall cause the many heads of Hydra to be mortified and expire -- in confusion,
like the Heteroclitall monstrous Body of Five Members, shrunk into three, and
one of them half withered too: all which shall happen before the end of the
first Olympiad of the Lesbian expedition, and the Glasconian refining of
Reformation: this is decreed by the three fatal Sisters, confirmed by the
three infernal Judges, and entered into the Books of the four times three
Sybills, in the Public Hall of Contingency, 7000 years before the
imagination of Eternity.

POSTSCRIPT.
I Would not have Prinne, or his dismembered (divided) Masters Memorable
Memberhoods, to imagine me so sterill as to be all this while pumping to answer
his Traitorous lying Pamphlets, but let him and them know, that this my Book
was written in October last, 1643. when their Savior Pym was alive, (which had
he then been dead, I had not mentioned) many alterations have happened since my
writing, and the printing part of it before the end of December last, but I
being extremely stricken lame, and the Press and Printers full of work of
greater consequence than to curry Crop-ear'd Iades, till now; and as I have
formerly handled Booker, the Proditorious Prediction-monger, and Mr Prinne the
unutterable utter Barrester, (or rather the Kingdoms Common Embarrater) so
have I also written Answers to the nimble, villanious, quick, pretty, little
witted Mercurius Britanicus, the Scottish Dove, (Pigeon or Widgeon) the Scout,
and all the Rabble of lying railing Rascals and Rebels, all these things are
laid (like rods in piss) till I can get them printed: and could I but have
means, and the Press leisure, I dare undertake with my poor Goose quill, to
stop the mouths or cut the throats of all the seditious Pulpitteers, and
roguish Pamphletteers in England, or else I would lose my labor.

FINIS.

