SOME SMALL AND SIMPLE REASONS, Delivered in a Hollow-Tree, in Waltham Forest,
in a Lecture, on the 33. of March last.

BY AMINADAB BLOWER A devout Bellows-mender of PIMLICO.

SHOWING The causes in general and particular wherefore they do, might,
would, should, or ought, except against and quire refuse the Liturgy or Book of
Common Prayer.

Oxon Aug: 10th 1643 PRINTED, Anno Millimo, Quillimo, Trillimo.

Some small and Simple Reasons, delivered in a Hollow Tree in Waltham Forest,
in a Lecture, on the 33. of March last.
MY Dear-beloved, and Zealous Brethren and Sisters here Assembled in this holy
Congregation, I am to unfold, unravell, untwist, unty, unloose, and undo to
your incapable understandings, some small. Reasons, the Matter, the Causes, the
Motives, the Grounds, the Principles, the Maxims, the whyes and the wherefores,
wherefore and why, we reject, omit, abandon, contemn, despise, and are and
ought to be withstanders and opposers of the Service Book, (called by the hard
name of Liturgy) or Common Prayer, which has continued in the Church of
England 84. years.

I have exactly examined and collected some Notes and observations out of the
Learned Hebrew translated volumes of Rabby Ananias, Rabby Achitophel, Rabby
Iscariot, Rabby Simon Magus, Rabby Demas, and Rabby Alexander the Coppersmith,
and all nor any of their writings does in any place so much as mention that
Book, or any such kind of Service to be used all by them; I have farther taken
pains in looking over some Caldean, Persian, Egyptian, Arabian, and Arminian
Authors (of which I understood not one word) I also (with the like diligence
and understanding have viewed the Turkish Alacron, and there I found not any
syllable concerning either Liturgy, Common Prayer or Divine Service. As for
Greek Authors I must confess I understand them not (or negatively) for which
Reason I leave them, as impertinnet, and touching the Latin Writers, they are
partial in this case, the tongue being Romanian, and the Idiome is Babilonish,
which seems to me an Intricate confusion.

I having carefully veiwed the Tomes and Tenets of Religion, and books of all
manner of Hierogliphicks, writings, Scrolles, Tallies; Scores and Characters,
and finding nothing for the maintaining of that Book or Liturgy, I looked into
the Ecclesiastical History, written by one Eusibius, and another fellow they
call Socrates, wherein I found many Arguments and Incitements to move men to
such doctrine as is comprised and compiled in the Liturgy. After that I
searched into the Acts and Monuments of this Kingdom, written by old Fox and
there I found that the Composers of it were Bishops and Doctors, and great
learned Scholars men of unfeigned Integrity, of Impregnable Constancy. who with
invincible Faith suffered most Glorious Martyrdom by the Papal Tyranny, for
the writing and maintaining that Book, with the true Protestant Religion
contained in it.

Brethren, I must confess that I was somewhat puzzled in my mind at these
things, and I could not be satisfied till I had consulted with some of our
devout Brothers our brother How the Cobbler was the first I brake my mind to and
we advised to call or summon a Synod to be held in my Lord Brooks Stable (the
Reverend Spence^ the stable Groom being the Metropolitan there. At our meeting
there was Green the Felt-maker. Barebones the Leatherseller, Squire the
Tailor, with Hoare a Weaver, and Davison a Bonelace-maker of Messenden, and
Paul Hickson of Wickham Tailor with some four or five Bakers dozzens of
Weavers Millers, Tinkers, Botchers, Broomemen Porters, of all Trades, many of
them bringing notes with them fitting for our purpose, which notes they had
taken carefully from the instructions of the demi-martyrs and round and Sound
Confessors, St. B. St. B. and St. B. out of which (with our own Capacities and
ingenuities to boot) we have collected and gathered, these sound and infallible
objections against the Book of Common Prayer, or Liturgy, as follows.

For our own parts (my Brothren) it is for the Reputation and Honor of our
Holy Cause and Calling to contest, malign and cavil, where we are not able
either to convince by Reasons or Arguments; therefore I having traced the Book
from end to end, and yet (upon the matter) to no end for such ends as we would
conclude upon, I find nothing in it disagreeing to Gods word or or agreeing
with our doctrine. The first prayer called the Confession, is quite contrary to
our appetites and profession, for to consesse that We have erred and strayed
like lost Sheep, is to acknowledge our selves to silly horned Beasts and
Cuckolds, our Children (by that reckoning should be Lamps, our Wives Yewes and
we (their innocent husbands) must be Rame; and every Lay Preacher, or Preaching
Treadesmen would be accounteda Bellwheather to the flock or Heard

Neither do we think it fit to make our selves appear so weak witted, or
Pusillani mious as to confess that We have left undone those things Which we
ought to have done, and done those things which we ought not to have done, for
such a confession will lay open our Disloyalty our Intrusion our
Transgressions, Rebellions, and Treasons we shall therein acknowledge our
selves, by omitting of duties, and committing of Villainies in Churchand State,
do deserve justly the severity of God, and the Kings Laws to be our deserved
Wages: besides, we hold it to be a retractive deminishing of valor, a Popish
kind of Cowardly Effeminate submission, which our stout hearts stiff necks,
and stubborn knees will never stoop or bow to, for the old Proverb is Confess
and he, etc.

Concerning the second Prayer (called the Absolution) for the remission of
sins through Christ, though Christ has given power and commandment (to his
lawful Ministers) to declare and pronounce in his Name to all true repenting
sinners, the absolution and remission of their sins yet we will not believe
it to be available, but esteem it as Popish and Superstitious.

As for the Lords Prayer, which the Pa^ist^ call by the Romish or latin name
of Pater Noster we must confess it is Pithy and short but had our advices
been at the making of it, it should have been two yards and a half longer,
(by Londons measure) besides we would like it better if it were not Commanded
or enjoined upon us. Mat. 6.9. and Luke 11.2. for our faiths cannot brook to be
limited within the compass of any Command. Deeree, Edict, Law, Statute, Order,
Rule, Ordinance, Government, or Authority, either of God or the King; besides,
in that prayer there is mention made of forgiving such as Trespass agianst us,
which our Doctrine or Natures cannot incline to, for we do never remember a
good turn and very seldom or never forget or forgive Injury. Therefore for
these considerable Causes (and many more) we think it requisite to forbear
that brief Prayer, and zealously to advance the Altitude of our spacious Ears,
to receive the longitude of a three hours repetition for our more furctifying
Edification.

Thirdly, for the desiring the Lord to open our lips that our mouths might show
forth his praise: it is known that we can do that extempory (by the spirit)
and it belongs to our Teacher to open his lips and pray, but it is our parts to
give spiritual attention, and not to open out lips but only at the singing of
old Robert Wisdoms Madrigall, or the like. And whereas we are commmanded to
stand at the saying of Gloria Patri, to avoid that Ceremony, we hold it best
not to say it at all.

As for the 95. Psalm (or, O come let us sing, etc.) we object against it for
two Reasons, the one is of falling down and worshipping and kneeling; and the
other is, we will neither kneel, fall down or worship, because it is an
expression of humility and revererce, which we utterly refuse to give either to
God or man. As for the order of reading the first Lesson, we could like it
better if it were not so ordered; It were necessary we had freedom to read
what when and where we list (for order is odious) and whereas there is
appointed a Hymn, called by a latin name, Te Deum laudamus, we do conceive
the matter of it to be very good, but that it was composed by a Bishop (one
Ambrose) of a City and Province in Italy called Millaine, and that the said
Ambrose was not only a Bishop, but (for his godly life and holy writings) he
was made a Saint; for these causes we leave him and his Hymn to, as being too
much conformable to edification decency, order and obedience

Likewise the second Lesson may be read, but not that which is appointed for
the day, for (as is aforesaid) we cannot abide any thing that is appointed or
ordered by Authority, that our Consciences being at liberty we may the more
freely show our selves the lawless sons and daughters of confusion.

And though it has been a custom very significant (and as ancient as the
primitive times of Christian Religion) to repeat the Articles of the Beleise
standing, our understanding, notwithstanding does withstand that kind of
Posture, for no other reason, but because the Church ordained it, and the Law
commands it; and truly we do know no sense or Reason to stand to any saying of
Faith, for it is one of our principles that whatsoever we say we will stand to
nothing.

Next follows the Lords prayer again (as the Protestants-call it) and a
prayer composed of Versicles, wherein the Minister and People, do (as it were
by Questions Answers) desire Gods mercy, and the granting of salvation, after
which they pray O Lord save the King, which is by us wonderfully dislik't and
omitted, and when we are to render the cause of it, we shall not want
insufficient Answers which we have studiously pond^ed in the learned Colleges
of Amsterdam, and New England. Then there follows, Give Peace in our time O
Lord, which we utterly detest, for if once that Prayer be granted, many of us
(except the King be more merciful then we deserve) shall be hanged for
rebellion and treason (and glad we escape so too) the best we can look for is
the advancing again the Protestant Religion, and then down go we with all
our spiritual inspirations and Long-winded Repetitions, we shall be silenced
(which is a terrible torture) or banished from our zealous Sisters, our
Collections and Contributions will be abrogated and annihillated, our Puddings
and Plum-broth will be in the forlorn hope, and our selves excluded,
extirpated, exiled, excommunicated, as extraordinary, extravigant, unexempled
Rascals and Coxcombes for these considerations of martial validity, weight,
and deep consequence (altogether Repugnant and Malignant to our holy profession
of Brown^sme and Anabaptisme) we will neither have Peace (although we dare not
fight in war) no Peace I Will pray for, therefore good brethren, I pray you no
prayer for Peace.

And for saying, God make our hearts clean within us, and take not thy holy
spirit from us; these words are impertinent for us to speak, for we know our
hearts to be clean and pure already, and for the Spirit. it is tied so fast to
us that it cannot be taken from us, or from any that will believe us.

For the Evening prayer, there is one Collect for Peace and another for the
enlightening of our darkness; we have already declared our minds, though all
the world knows us to be Hipocrites, yet we do know that a godly ^oyall peace
will coufound us, therefore we will not Hypocritically pray for that which we
desire not to have; and for our darkness though it be palpable to be felt
(like the darkness of Egypt, yea more dark then Ignorance it self) yet we,
have by instigation found light in abundandance, our weights are light, our
Mothers. Wives, Sisters. Annts, Neeces, Daughters and female servants are
light, our invisible Horns are light, our Words Deeds. Thoughts* Consciences,
payment of debt and Religion is light (or of light account) our faith in God
and loyalty to the King, are most Translucently light, Apparently light, Reful
gently light, Illustrately light, Transparently light, Internally light,
Externally light. Infernally light, Emblazond, Perspicuated Cognominated,
Propogated, and Promulgated to all the world to be light (lighter then any
thing that can be called lightness) lighter then Vapor, Air, Smoke. Flame,
Dust, Chafe, Wind, Feather, Froath, Cork, Yeast, Fogge, Puste, Blast, a Whore,
Vanity, yea more light then Vanity it self.

As concerning Quicunque Vult (or whosoever will be saved) it is an argument
that he that will be, may be, and he that will not may choose whether he will or
no, which implies a free will (a very Popish conclusion) also that Creed is
concluded to be called Catholic, which word we like not,

Next follows the Latinie, which is a hard word to us, and sounds in our
spacious Ears as it were latin (or the Beasts language) we confess there are
some few sentences, that may be tolerated, but we ought to remember our selves
and take heed, that we avoid praying against fornication, sedition, Conspiracy,
false Doctrines. Heresy, hardness of heart, and contempt of Gods Word and
Commandment; for you know Brethren, that these are daily and nightly
Contemplations, and Recreations; besides it seems to be a swearing kind of
Invocation (As) By the Incarnation, by the Nativity and Circumcision Baptism,
Fasting, Temptation, Agony, Bloody sweat, Cross, Passion, Death, Burial,
Resurrection, Ascension, and coming of the Holy Ghost (All which is most
certainly true) but we ought to find out some other By word then the word By,
for though by them all true Believers are saved, yet that is no warrant or
argument we should swear by them.

Then there is praying that the Church may be ruled and governed in the right
way, which if that be granted, what will become of us that do know our selves
to be none of the true Church, therefore that prayer belongs not to us.

Then follows beseechings for blessings to be upon the King, Queen, and
Royal Posterity, and that they may have Victory over all their Enemies, and
all the World knows we are none of their friends, therefore these prayers are
Apocryphy to us, neither will we be so simple to pray against our selves, and
the Case is plain that Rebellion must be tamed before the King can be
victo^^ous.

Then follows praying for Bishops (whom we cannot abide, nor can we show
wherefore) and amongst the rest there is a prayer for all women lahouring with
child, in which prayer many a loose harlot may be comprehended, therefore it
had been firter to have prayed for all women laboring of child lawfully
begotten, for verily it is sinful to pray for either Root Stock, Lim. Bough,
Branch, Sprigge, Leaf, Fruit or seed of the wicked. I like well of the last
verse (except one) of this same Latin, wherein we pray, that the fruits of the
earth may be given and preserved to our use (but with this proviso) that we
alone and none but we (who labor in the holy Cause) should enjoy them in due
time, or at any time.

Then there are prayers for Mercy, for Grace, for Desence and victory in war,
for preservation from Plague and Pestilence, for Bishops again, and Curates,
for Rain for fair weather, for Relief in dearth and famine; then there
follows 84. things which they call Collects, wherein many holy Saints are
Remembered on certain peculiar days, and though we can justly find nothing but
what is agreeable to Gods word in the whole Liturgy, yet the purity of our
singular Doctrines do hold it profane and Popish for we have the Spirit to
prompt us, insomuch as our grave Patriots have lately thought it fit to unsaint
all the Saints, and all the Churches and Houses of God in London, have been
these many months distoabed of their Sanctimonious names, and are all
excommunicated out of the weekly diseased Bill; for now the Churches are to be
called no more St. John, St. Peter, but Peter's, Andrews, James, John's, Georges,
Church or Parish: with so many dyed of such and such diseases, or by casualty
such or such a Rascal hanged himself, for playing a Judas part against his
Sovereign.

Next follows the ten Commandments (which we neglect to say) because they
are of the old Testament, and the Law was given to the Jews, we that are
Christians are freed from it by the Gospel; besides it is said to have two
Tables, one showing our duty toward God the others toward man, concerning the
first of them we hold our selves clea^e from Idolatry, swearing and
profanation; for the second, we conceive it not to bind us either to give
honor to the King or Magistrates (they being the Fathers and P^otectors of our
Country, Wealth, estates, and all we enjoy under God) nor to our natural
Parents, if they be not of our faith.

At the Communion there are prayers for the King again, and the Belief, with
Repeating some portions of Scripture to move men to Charity and good works all
which we omit, for only faith is our practice, and for good works, or
Charity, we hold it to be unnecessary, and therefore we will neither use or
do any: Neither will we receivelying, standing, sitting, nor kneeling (by any
means) nor any way that is commanded by order, in what place or Country
whatsoever; as for public or private Baptism, we are able to do that our
selves, either in a Basin a River, a Brook, a Pond a Pool, a Di^ch or a Puddle,
nor do we hold it fitting but that we be Godfathers and Godmothers to our
Children our selves, and call them what Scripture names we list. Nay, we will
Church our wives our selves too. And as for Matrimony we will save that
charges, and take one another words, for we must take our wives words for our
Children, and why nor for themselves, as for the visitation of the sick and
Burial of the dead they are both fit to be done, the one is necessary, because
the Brethren and Sisters may meet and salute and Feast.

And as for the Burial of the dead the case is all men's, besides Boys, women
and Children, but a grave and learned long standing Lecturer did lately find
out the right way of Burial; for an old man that dyed in the Parish of St.
James near the Dukes place within Aldgate, at which Funeral he Preached and
in his Sermon he told the dead man his faults very Roundly, and abused the
Corpse more for ten shillings then any Conformable Preacher would have done for
twenty, and when he came to the laying the Body in the Ground, he ommitted
all old order and Ceremonies of Burial, only thus briefly he said, Ashes to
Ashes, dust to dust,
Here Is the Hole and in thou must.


So there is an end, and an end of my Lecture.
A Poscript.
IT is humbly desired that the Reader do not censure the Writer with any
thought, or touch of Prophanity, for in this foregoing discourse he has only
disciphered the foolish Grounds, Tenets which the Teachers of the Pestilent
Sects of Schismatiques, and Separatists, do hold and maintain.

Yours, J. T.

FINIS.

