TWO DISCOURSES 1. Of BAPTISM, Its Institution, and Efficacy upon all
Believers. 2. Of PRAYER Ex tempore, OR By pretense of the SPIRIT.


By JER: TAILOR D.D.

1 COR. 14.32. (...).

And the spirits of the Prophets are subject to the Prophets.

For God is not the Author of confusion, but of peace, as in all Churches of
the Saints.

LONDON, Printed by J. Flesher for R. Royston, at the Angel in Ivy-Lane.
MDCLIII.

A Discourse concerning PRAYER Ex tempore, etc.
I Have read over this Book which the Assembly of Divines is pleased to call
The Directory for Prayer; I confess I came to it with much expectation, and
was in some measure confident I should have found it an exact and unblameable
model of Devotion, free from all those objections which men of their own
persuasion had obtruded against the public Liturgy of the Church of England;
or at least, it should have been composed with so much artifice and finenesse,
that it might have been to all the world an Argument of their learning and
excellency of spirit, if not of the goodness and integrity of their Religion
and purposes. I shall give no other character of the whole, but that the
public disrelish which I find amongst persons of great piety, of all
qualities, not only of great, but even of ordinary understandings, is to, me
some argument that it lies so open to the objections even of common spirits,
that the Compilers of it did intend more to prevail by the success of their
Armies, then the strength of reason, and the proper grounds of persuasion,
which yet most wise and good men believe to be the more Christian way of the
two. But Sir, you have engaged me to say something in particular to satisfy
your conscience. In which also I desire I may reserve a leave to my self to
conceal much, if I may in little do you satisfaction.

England and all Christendom. If the thing were good and pious, I should learn
to submit to the imposition, and never quarrel at the incompetency of his
authority that engaged me to do pious and holy things. And it may be when I am
a little more used to it, I shall not wonder at a Synod, in which not one
Bishop sits (in the capacity of a Bishop) though I am most certain this is the
first example in England, since it was first Christened. But for present it
seems something hard to digest it, because I know so well that all Assemblies
of the Church have admitted Priests to consultation and dispute, but never to
authority and decision, till the Pope enlarging the phylacteries of the
Archimandrites and Abbots, did sometimes by way of privilege and dispensation
give to some of them decisive voices in public Councels. But this was one of
the things in which he did innovate and invade against the public resolutions
of Christendom, though he durst not do it often, and when he did it, it was
in very small and inconsiderate numbers.

Zelum Dei, but whether secundum scientiam, according to knowledge or no, must
be judged by them who consider the matter and the form.

ex tempore forms do succeed in room of the established and determined
services, I shall give you my judgment of it, without any sharpness or
bitterness of spirit, for I am resolved not to be angry with any man of
another persuasion, as knowing that I differ just as much from them as they do
from me.



Solomon, Eccles. 5.2. Be not rash with thy mouth, and let not thy heart be
hasty to utter any thing before God, for God is in heaven and thou upon earth,
therefore, let thy words be few. The consideration of the vast distance between
God and us, Heaven and Earth, should create such apprehensions in us, that the
very best and choycest of our offertoryes are not acceptable but by Gods
gracious vouchsafeing and condescension: and therefore since we are so much
indebted to God for accepting our best, it is not safe ventured to present him
with a dowbaked sacrifice, and put him off with that which in nature and humane
consideration is absolutely the worst; for such is all the crude and imperfect
utterance of our more imperfect conceptions. But let Solomon's reason be what it
will, good we are sure it is. Let us consider who keeps the precept best; He
that deliberates, or he that considers not but when he speaks: What man in the
world is hasty to offer any thing before God, if he be not who prays ex
tempore? And then add to it but the weight of Solomon's reason, and let any man
answer me if he thinks it can well stand with that reverence we owe to the
Immense, the infinite, and to the eternal God, the God of wisdom, to offer
him a sacrifice which we durst not present to a Prince, or a prudent Governor
in re seria, such as our prayers ought to be.

reasoning I desire it may be remembered, that it is the argument God himself
uses against lame, maimed, and imperfect sacrifices, Go and offer this to thy
Prince, see if he will accept it: Implying, that the best person is to have the
best present; and what the Prince will slight as truly unworthy of him, much
more is it unfit for God. For God accepts not of any thing we give or do, as
if he were bettred by it: for therefore its estimate is not taken by its
relation or natural complacency to him, it is all alike to him, for in it
self it is to him as nothing. But God accepts it by its proportion, and
commensuration to us. That which we call our best, and is truly so in humane
estimate, that pleases God, for it declares that if we had better, we would
give it him. But to reserve the best, says too plainly, that we think any
thing is good enough for him. As therefore God in the Law would not be served
by that which was imperfect in genere naturae: so neither now nor ever will
that please him which is imperfect in geuere morum, or materia intellectuali,
when we can give a better.

ex tempore forms have much the worse of it. But it is pretended that there is
such a thing as the gift of Prayer, a praying with the Spirit, Et nescit tarda
molimina spiritus sancti gratia. Gods Spirit (if he pleases) can do his work
as well in an instant, as in long premeditation. And to this purpose are
pretended those places of Scripture which speak of the assistance of Gods
Spirit in our prayers, Zech. 12.10. And I will pour upon the house of David,
and the inhabitants of Jerusalem, the spirit of grace and supplication. But
especially Romans 8.26. Likewise the Spirit also helps our infirmities; for we
know not what we should pray for as we ought, but the Spirit it self makes
intercession for us with groanings that cannot be uttered, etc. From whence the
Conclusion that is inferred is in the words of Saint Paul, That we must pray
with the spirit, therefore not with set forms, therefore ex tempore.

Authors of it I suppose will own it. And therefore we will examine the maine
design of it, and then consider the particular means of its persuasion, quoted
in the objection.

Pelagians did, yet he denies not this. But what then? Therefore without study,
without art, without premeditation, without learning, the spirit gives the gift
of prayer, and it is his grace, that without any natural or artificial help
makes us pray ex tempore? No such thing: The Objection proves nothing of this.



Paul's expression) and yet our belief comes by hearing and reading the holy
Scriptures and their interpretations. Now reconcile these two together, Faith
comes by hearing, and yet is the gift of the Spirit, and it says, that the
gifts of the Spirit are not ecstasies, and immediate infusions of habits, but
helps from God to enable us upon the use of the means of his own appointment
to believe, to speak, to understand, to prophecy, and to pray.

a speaking by the Spirit, Vid. Act. 19.21. Act. 16.7, 8, 9, 10.
1 Cor. 12.8. No man can say that Jesut is the Lord, but by the holy Ghost. For
if the holy Ghost supplies us with materials, and fundamentals for our
building, it is then enough to denominate the whole edifice to be of him,
although the labor and the workmanship be ours, upon another stock. And this
is it which the Apostles speaks, 1 Cor. 2.13. Which things also we speak, not
in the words which man's wisdom teaches, but which the holy Ghost teaches,
comparing spiritual things with spiritual. The holy Ghost teaches, yet it is
upon our cooperation, our study and endeavor, while we compare spiritual
things with spiritual; the holy Ghost is said to teach us, because these
spirituals were of his suggestion and revelation.

Habitus infusi infunduntur per modum acquisitorum, whatsoever is infused into
us, is in the same manner infused as other things are acquired, that is, step
by step, by humane means and cooperation, and grace does not give us new
faculties, and create another nature, but meliorates and improves our own. And
what S. Paul said in the Resurrection, is also true in this Question, That is
not first which is spiritual, but that which is natural, and then that which
is spiritual. The graces and gifts of the Spirit are postnate, and are
additions to art and nature. God directs our councels, opens our
understandings, regulates our will, orders our affections, supplies us with
Objects, and Arguments, and opportunities, and revelations in scriptis, and
then most when we most employ our own endeavors, God loving to bless all the
means, and instruments of his service, whether they be natural or acquisite.

Paul calls it, 2 Cor. 4.13) acquired by humane means using divine aids? that
is, by our endeavors in hearing, reading, Catechizing, desires to obey, and
all this blessed and promoted by God, this produces faith. And if the spirit of
Prayer be of greater consequence, and has a promise of a special prerogative,
let the first be proved, and the second be shown in any good record, and then I
will believe it too.

Epist. Jud. ver. 20. But ye (beloved) building up your selves on your most
holy Faith, praying in the holy Ghost, keep your selves in the love of God. All
of the same consideration, Faith, and Prayer and Charity, all gifts of the
Spirit, and yet build up your selves in faith, and keep yourselves in love, and
therefore by a parity of reason, improve your selves in the spirit of prayer,
that is, God by his Spirit having supplied us with matter, let our industry and
co-operations per modum naturae, improve these gifts, and build upon this
foundation.

viz. Eucharisticall or thanksgiving, that is, prayers or songs which are
spiritual in materia. And if they be called spiritual for the efficient cause
too, the holy Ghost being the Author of them, it comes all to one, for
therefore he is the cause and giver of them, because he has in his word
revealed, what things we are to pray for, and there also has taught us the
manner.

Paul, (The spirit helps our infirmities) How so? it follows immediately,
For we know not what we should pray for as we ought: So that therefore he is
the Spirit of supplication and prayer, because he teaches us what to ask, and
how to pray, so he helps our infirmities, (...), it is in the Greek
Collaborantem adjuvat. It is an ingeminate expression of helping us in our
labors together with him. Now he that shall say this is not sufficiently done
by Gods Spirit in Scripture by Prayers, and Psalms, and Hymns, and Spiritual
Songs, and precepts concerning prayer, set down in that holy repository of
truth and devotion, undervalues that inestimable treasure of the Spirit; and if
it be sufficiently done there, he that will multiply his hopes farther, then
what is sufficient, may possibly deceive himself, but never deceive God, and
make him multiply and continue miracles, to justify his fancy.

Ephesians. 6.17, 18. Take the sword of the Spirit, which is the word of God.
Praying always with all prayer and supplication in the spirit. The Word of God
is the sword of the Spirit; praying in the Spirit is one way of using it,
indeed the only way that he here specifies. Praying in the Spirit then being
the using of this Sword, and this Sword being the Word of God, it follows
evidently, that praying in the Spirit, is praying in or according to the Word
of God, that is, in the directions, rules and expresses of the Word of God,
that is, of the holy Scriptures.



we most endeavor and most use the means? He that says, No, discourages all
men from reading the Scriptures, from industry, from meditation, from
conference, from humane Arts and Sciences, and from whatsoever else God and
good Laws provoke us to by proposition of rewards: But if, Yea, (as most
certainly God will best crown the best endeavors) then the spirit of Prayer is
greatest in him, who (supposing the like capacities and opportunities) studies
hardest, reads most, practices most religiously, deliberates most prudently;
and then by how much want of means is worse then the use of means, by so much
ex tempore Prayers are worse then deliberate and studied. Excellent therefore
is the council of S. Peter, 1 Ep. Chap. 4. ver. 11. If any man speak, let him
speak as the Oracles of God, (not lightly then and inconsiderately) If any man
minister, let him do it as of the ability which God gives: (great reason then
to put all his abilities and faculties to it) and whether of the two does most
likely do that, he that takes pains, and considers, and discusses, and so
approves and practices a form, or he that never considers what he says, till
he says it, needs not much deliberation to pass a sentence.

spoke as they were moved by the holy Ghost, says Saint Peter. And certainly
they were moved by a more immediate motion, and a motion nearer to an
Enthusiasme, then now adays in the gift and spirit of Prayer. And yet in the
midst of those great assistances and motions they did use study, art, industry,
and humane abilities. This is more then probable in the different styles of the
several Books, some being of admirable art, others lower and plain. The words
were their own, at least sometimes, not the holy Ghosts. And if the Fathers and
Grammarians were not deceived by false Copies, but that they truly did observe,
sometimes to be propriety of expression in the language, sometimes not true
Greek, who will think those errouts or imperfections in Grammar, were (in
respect of the words I say precisely) immediate inspirations and dictates of
the holy Ghost, and not rather their own productions of industry and humanity?
But clearly some of their words were the words of Aratus, some of Epimenides,
some of Menander, some of Saint Paul, [ This speak I, not the Lord, 1 Cor. 7.]
and yet because the holy Ghost renewed their memory, improved their
understanding, supplied to some their want of humane learning, and so assisted
them that they should not commit an error in fact or opinion, neither in the
narrative nor dogmaticall parts, therefore they writ by the Spirit. Since then
we cannot pretend upon any grounds of probability to an inspiration so
immediate as theirs, and yet their assistances which they had from the Spirit
did not exclude humane arts, and industry, but that the ablest Scholar did
write the best, much rather is this true in the gifts and assistances we
receive, and particularly in the gift of Prayer, it is not an ex tempore and an
inspired faculty, but the faculties of nature and the abilities of art and
industry are improved and ennobled by the supervening assistances of the Spirit.

ex tempore, I suppose his thoughts go a little before his tongue; I demand
then, Whether cannot this man, when it is once come into his head, hold his
tongue, and write down what he has conceived? If his first conceptions were of
God and Gods Spirit, then they are so still, even when they are written. Or is
the Spirit departed from him, upon the sight of a pen and Ink-horn? It did use
to be otherwise among the old and new Prophets, whether they were Prophets of
Prediction, or of ordinary Ministry. But if his conception may be written, and
being written is still a production of the Spirit, then it follows that
set-forms of Prayer deliberate and described, may as well be a praying with the
Spirit, as sudden forms and extempore out lets.

ex tempore Prayers, save only that in these there is less consideration and
prudence; for that the other are (at least as much as them) the productions of
the Spirit, is evident in the very case put in this very Argument: and whether
to consider and to weigh them, be any disadvantage to our devotions, I leave it
to all wise men to determine. So that in effect, since after the pretended
assistance of the Spirit in our Prayers, we may write them down, consider them,
try the spirits, and ponder the manner, the reason and the religion of the
address; let the world judge whether this sudden utterance and ex tempore
forms be any thing else, but a direct resolution not to consider beforehand
what we speak.

praying with the Spirit. In what sense the holy Ghost is called the spirit of
Prayer, I have already shown, viz. by the same reason, as he is the spirit of
faith, of prudence, of knowledge, of understanding, and the like. But praying
with the spirit has besides this other senses also in Scripture. I find in
one place, that then we pray with the Spirit, when the holy Ghost does actually
excite us to desires and earnest tendencies to the obtaining our holy purposes,
when he gives us zeal and devotion, charity and fervor, spiritual violence
and holy importunity. This sense is also in the latter part of the objected
words of Saint Paul, Romans 8. The Spirit it self makes intercession for us
with groanings, etc. Indeed this is truly a praying in the spirit; but this
will do our reverend Brethren of the Assembly little advantage as to the
present Question. For this spirit is not a spirit of utterance; not at all
clamorous in the ears of the people, but cries loud in the ears of God with
[groanes unutterable] so it follows, and only [He that searches the heart, he
understands the meaning of the spirit.] This is the spirit of the Son, which
God has sent into our hearts, (not into our tongues) whereby we cry, Abba,
Father, Gal. 4.6. And this is the great (...) for mental Prayer, which is
properly and truly praying by the Spirit.

Paul, from whence this expression is taken, and commonly used, I will pray
with the spirit, and I will pray with the understanding also. Here they are
opposed, or at least declared to be things several and disparate: where by the
way observe, that praying with the spirit, even in sense of Scripture, is not
always most to edification of the people. Not always with understanding. And
when these two are separated, St Paul prefers five words with understanding,
before ten thousand in the spirit. For this praying with the spirit was indeed
then a gift extraordinary and miraculous, like as prophesying with the spirit,
and expired with it. But while it did last, it was the lowest of gifts, Inter
dona linguarum, it was but a gift of the tongue, and not to be the benefit of
the Church directly or immediately.

Paul did so undervalve the praying with the Spirit, that he preferred edifying
the Church a thousand degrees beyond it. I suppose he would have been of the
same mind, if this Question had been between praying with the Spirit and
obeying our superiors, as he was when it was between praying with the Spirit
and edification of the Church, because (if I be not mistaken) it is matter of
great concernment toward the edification of the Church to obey our superiors,
not to innovate in public forms of worship, especially with the scandal and
offense of very wise and learned men, and to the disgrace of the dead Martyrs,
who sealed our Liturgy with their blood.

Paul joins them as terms identicall, and expressive one of another meaning,
as you may please to read ver. 14. and 15. 1 Cor. 14. I will pray with the
Spirit, and my Spirit truly prays. It is the act of our inner man, praying
holy and spiritual Prayers. But then indeed at that time there was something
extraordinary joined, for it was in an unknown tongue, the practice of which S.
Paul there dislikes. This also will be to none of their purposes. For whether
it were ex tempore, or by premeditation, is not here expressed; or if it had,
yet that assistance extraordinary in prayer, if there was any beside the gift
of tongues (which I much doubt) is no more transmitted to us, then the speaking
tongues in the spirit, or prophecyring ex tempore and by the spirit.

Paul also there adds by way of instance. If praying with the spirit in this
place be praying ex tempore, then so is singing too. For they are expressed in
the same place, in the same manner, to the same end, and I know to reason why
there should be differing senses put upon them to serve purposes. And now let
us have some Church-musick too, though the Organs be pulled down, and let any
the best Psalmist of them all, compose a hymn in metricall form, and sing it
to a new tune with perfect and true music, and all this ex tempore. For all
this the holy Ghost can do if he pleases. But if it be said that the
Corinthian Christians composed their songs and hymns according to art and
rules of music, by study and industry, and that to this they were assisted by
the Spirit; and that this together with the devotion of their spirit, was
singing with the spirit, then say I, so composing set forms of Lyturgy by skill
and prudence, and humane industry, may be as much praying with the spirit as
the other is singing with the spirit. Plainly enough. In all the senses of
praying with the spirit, and in all its acceptations in Scripture, to pray or
sing with the spirit, neither of them of necessity implies ex tempore.

Collecta of the premises is this, Praying with the spirit, is either when the
spirit stirs up our desires to pray, Per motionem actualis auxilii, or when
the spirit teaches us what, or how to pray, telling us the matter, and manner
of our prayers. Or lastly, dictating the very words of our prayers. There is no
other way in the world to pray with the spirit, or in the holy Ghost, that is
pertinent to this Question. And of this last manner the Scripture determines
nothing, nor speaks any thing expressly of it, and yet suppose it had, we are
certain the holy Ghost has supplied us with all these, and yet in set forms
of prayer best of all, I mean there where a difference can be. For as for the
desires, and actual motions or incitements to pray, they are indifferent to
one or the other, to set-forms or to ex tempore. 2. But as to the matter and
manner of prayer, it is clearly contained in the expresses, and set forms of
Scriptures, and it is supplied to us by the spirit, for he is the great
Dictaror of it.

ex tempore prayer are the words of the holy Spirit: it is not reason nor
modesty to expect such immediate assistances to so little purpose, he having
supplied us with abilities more then enough to express our desires aliunde,
otherwise then by immediate dictate. But if we will take David's Psalter, or the
other hymns of holy Scripture, or any of the Prayers which are respersed over
the Bible, we are sure enough that they are the words of Gods Spirit, mediately
or immediately, by way of infusion or ecstasy, by vision, or at least by
ordinary assistance. And now then, what greater confidence can any man have for
the excellency of his Prayer, and the probability of their being accepted, then
when he prays his Psalter, or the Lords Prayer, or another office which he
finds consigned in Scripture? When Gods Spirit stirs us up^o an actual
devotion, and then we use the matter he has described and taught, and the
very words which Christ, and Christ's Spirit, and the Apostles, and other
persons full of the holy Ghost did use; if in the world there be any praying
with the Spirit, (I mean in vocal prayer) this is it.

And thus I have examined the entire and full scope of this Question, and
rifled their Objection. Now I shall proceed to some few Arguments which are
more extrinsecall to the nature of the thing.

ex tempore prayers, to pray their Sermons over, to reduce their doctrine into
Devotion and Lyturgy. I mislike it not for the thing it self, if it were done
regularly for the manner, and the matter were always pious and true. But who
shall assure me when the preacher has disputed, or rather dogmatically decreed
a point of predestination, or of prescience, of contingency, or of liberty, or
any of the most mysterious parts of Divinity, and then prays his Sermon over,
that he then prays with the Spirit? Unless I be sure that he also preached
with the Spirit, I cannot be sure that he prays with the spirit, for all he
prays ex tempore. Nay, if I hear a Protestant preach in the morning, and an
Anabaptist in the afternoon, to day a Presbyterian, to morrow an Independent,
am I not most sure that when they have preached Contradictories, and all of
them pray their Sermons over, that they do not all pray with the spirit? More
than one in this case cannot pray with the spirit, possibly all may pray
against him.

this, I say, while we should attend to our addresses toward God, we are to
consider whether the point be true or no, and by that time we have tacitly
discoursed it, we are upon another point which also perhaps is as Questionable
as the former, and by this time our spirit of devotion is a little discomposed
and something out of countenance, there is so much other employment for the
spirit, the spirit of discerning and judging. All which inconveniences are
avoided in set forms of Liturgy. For we know before hand the conditions of our
Communion, and to what we are to say Amen, to which if we like it we may
repair; if not, there is no harm done; your devotion shall not be surprised,
nor your Communion invaded, as it may be and often is in your ex tempore
prayers. And this thing has another collateral inconvenience, which is of
great consideration; for upon what confidence can we solicit any Recusants to
come to our Church, where we cannot promise them that the devotions there to be
used, shall be innocent, nor can we put him into a condition to judge for
himself? If he will venture he may, but we can use no Argument to make him
choose our Churches, though he should quit his own.

ex tempore or by study make better? Who dares pretend that he has a better
spirit then David had, or then the Apostles and Prophets, and other holy
persons in Scripture, whose Prayers and Psalms are by Gods Spirit consigned to
the use of the Church for ever? Or will it be denied but that they also are
excellent directories and patterns for prayer? And if patterns, the nearer we
draw to our example, are not the imitations and representments the better? And
what then if we took the samplers themselves, is there any imperfection in
them, and can we mend them and correct Magnificat?

as they have been reformed by the Church of England, they would against all
defiance put in for the next place to those forms or Liturgy which Mutatis
mutandis are nothing but the Words of Scripture. But I am resolved at this
present not to enter into Question concerning the matter of prayers. But for
the form this I say further.

Prior and potior in promissis, she has a greater and prior title to the
spirit. And why the Church has not the spirit of prayer in her compositions as
well as any of her children, I desire once for all to be satisfied upon true
grounds either of reason or revelation.

ex tempore forms the spirit of Christ teaches them. So much then as
certainties are better then uncertaines, and God above man, so much is this set
form (besides the infinite advantages in the matter) better then their ex
tempore forms in the form it self.

Moses a set form of prayer and benediction to be used when he did bless the
people. 7. That Moses composed a song or hymn for the children of Israel to
use to all their generations. 8. That David composed many for the service of
the tabernacle. 9. That Solomon and the holy Kings of Judah brought them in and
continued them in the ministration of the temple. 10. That all Scripture is
written for our learning, and since all these and many more set forms of prayer
are left there upon record, it is more then probable that they were left there
for our use and devotion. 11. That S. John Baptist taught his Disciples a form
of prayer. 12. And that Christ's Disciples begged the same favor, and it was
granted as they desired it. 13. And that Christ gave it not only in massa
materiae, but in forma verborum; not in a confused heap of matter, but in an
exact composure of words, it makes it evident, he intended it not only pro
regula petendorum, for a direction of what things we are to ask, but also pro
forma orationis, for a set form of Prayer. In which also I am most certainly
confirmed (besides the universal testimony of Gods Church so attesting it) in
the precept which Christ added, When ye pray, pray after this manner: and
indeed it points not the matter only of our prayers, but the form of it, the
manner and the matter of the address both. But in the repetition of it by
Saint Luke, the preceptive words seem to limit us, and direct us to this very
form of words, When ye pray, say, Our Father, etc. 14. I could also add the
example of all the Jews, and by consequence of our blessed Savior, who sung a
great part of David's Psalter in their feast of Passover, which part is called
by the Jews the great Hallelujah, it begins at the 113 Psalm, and ends at the
118 inclusively. And the Scripture mentions it as part of our blessed Saviors
devotion, and of his Disciples, that they sung a Psalm. 15. That this
afterward became a Precept Evangelicall, that we should praise God in Hymns,
Psalms, and spiritual Songs, which is a form of Liturgy, in which we sing
with the spirit, but yet cannot make our Hymns ex tempore, (it would be wild
stuff if we should go about it.) 16. And lastly, that a set form of worship
and address to God was recorded by Saint John, Apoc. 15.
and sung in heaven, and it was composed out of the songs of Moses, ( Exodus
15.) of David, Psalm. 145.) and of Jeremy, ( Chap. 10.6, 7.) which certainly is
a very good precedent for us to imitate, although but revealed to Saint John by
way of vision and ecstasy. All which and many more are to me as so many
Arguments of the use, excellency, and necessity of set forms of Prayer for
public Liturgies, and of greatest conveniencie, even for private devotions.

Augustine calls it, Lib. 3. de Trinit. c. 4.) which all Churches (and
themselves said it was by Ordinance Apostolical) used in the Consecration of
the blessed Sacrament. But all of them used the Lords Prayer in the Canon, and
office of Consecration, and other prayers taken from Scripture, (so Justin
Martyr testifies, that the Consecration is made per preces verbi Dei, by the
prayers taken from the Word of God) and the whole Canon was short, determined
and mysterious.

Walafridus Strabo, Aymonius, Cassander, Flacius Illyricus, Josephus Vicecomes,
and the other Ritualists, and in the old offices themselves. So that I need not
put you in mind of that famous doxology of Gloria Patria, etc. nor the
Trisagion, nor any of those memorable hymns used in the Ancient Church, so
knownly and frequently, that the beginning of them came to be their name, and
they were known more by their own words, then the Authors inscription.

Milevis in Africa, Placuit ut preces quae probatae fuerint in Concilio ab
omnibus celebrentur, nec aliae omnino dicantur in Ecclesia, nisi quae a
prudentioribus factae fuerint in Synodo. That Is the restraint and prohibition,
public prayers must be such as are publicly appointed, and prescribed by our
Superiors; and no private forms of our conceiving must be used in the Church.
The reason follows, Ne forte aliquid contra fidem, vel per ignorantiam, vel
per minus studium sit compositum: Lest through ignorance or want of
deliberation any thing be spoken in our prayers against faith [and good
manners.] The reason is good, and they are eare-witnesses of it that hear the
variety of prayers before and after Sermons, there, where the Directory is
practiced, where (to speak most modestly) not only their private opinions, but
also humane interests, and their own personal concernments, and wild fancies,
born perhaps not two days before, are made the objects of the peoples hopes,
of their desires, and their prayers, and all in the mean time pretend to the
holy Spirit.

ex tempore forms of prayer, where the gift of the man is more then the
devotion of the man: nor will I consider that then his gift is best, when his
prayer is longest: and if he take a complacency in his gift (as who is not apt
to do it?) he will be sure to extend his Prayer, till a suspicious and
scrupulous man would be apt to say, his prayer pressed hard upon that which our
blessed Savior reprehended in the Pharisees, who thought to be heard for
their much babbling. But these things are accidental to the nature of the
thing. And therefore though they are too certainly consequent to the person,
yet I will not be too severe, but preserve my self on the surer side of
charitable construction, which truly I desire to keep, nor only to their
persons whom I much reverence, but also to their actions. But yet I durst not
do the same thing, even for these last reasons, though I had no other.



though indeed the expression is very inartificiall) are premeditate and
described, or they are ex tempore. If they be premeditate and described, then
the Spirit is as much limited in their conceived forms as in the Churches
conceived forms. For as to this particular, it is all one who describes and
limits the form, whether the Church, or a single man does it, still the Spirit
is in constraint and limit. So that in this case they are not angry at set
forms of Prayer, but that they do not make them. And if it be replied, that if
a single person composes a set form, he may alter it if he please, and so his
spirit is at liberty. I answer, so may the Church, if she see cause for it: and
unless there be cause, the single person will not alter it, unless he do
things unreasonable, and without cause. So that it will be an unequal and a
peevish quarrel to allow of ser forms of prayer made by private persons, and
not of set forms made by the public spirit of the Church. It is evident, that
the Spirit is limited in both alike.

[Conceived forms] in this objection they mean ex tempore prayers (for so they
most generally practice it) and that in the use of these the liberty of the
spirit is best preserved. To this I answer, that the being ex tempore or
premeditate will be wholly impertinent to this Question of limiting the spirit.
For there may be great liberty in set forms, even when there is much variety;
and there may be great restraint in ex tempore prayers, even then when it shall
be called unlawful to use set forms. That the spirit is restrained, or that it
is free in either, is accidental to them both; for it may be either free or
not free in both as it may happen.



sound of more liberty to their spirits, that every one might make a prayer of
his own, and all pray together; and not be forced or confined to the Ministers
single dictate, and private spirit. It is true, it would breed confusions, and
therefore they might pray silently till the Sermon began, and not for the
avoiding one inconvenience run into a greater, and to avoid the disorder of a
popular noise restrain the blessed Spirit; for even in this case as well as in
the other, Where the spirit of God is, there must be liberty.



Palladium that is contended for, and a princely liberty that they leave unto
the Spirit, to be free only in the supplying the place of a Vocabulary and a
Copia Verborum? For as for the matter, it is all there described and appointed,
and to those determined senses the spirit must assist or not at all, only for
the words he shall take his choice. Now I desire it may be considered sadly and
seriously: Is it not as much injury to the spirit to restrain his matter, as
to appoint his words? Which is the more considerable of the two, sense or
Language, Matter or Words? I mean when they are taken single and separately.
For so they may very well be (for as if men prescribe the matter only, the
spirit may cover it with several words and expressions, so if the spirit
prescribe the words, I may still abound in variety of sense, and preserve the
liberty of my meaning; we see that true in the various interpretations of the
same words of Scripture.) So that in the greater of the two, the Spirit is
restrained, when his matter is appointed, and to make him amends, for not
trusting him with the matter without our directions and limitations, we trust
him to say what he pleases, so it be to our sense, to our purposes. A goodly
compensation surely!

Pray this, or Pray thus, Pray these words, or pray after this manner? or
though it had been less then either, and been only a Directory for the matter,
still it is a thing which our Brethren in all other cases of the same nature
are resolved perpetually to call a restraint. Certainly then this pretended
restraint, is no such formidable thing. These men themselves do it by
directing all the matter, and much of the manner, and Christ himself did it,
by prescribing both the matter, and the words too.

Paul to the Corinthians, when he prescribed orders for public prophesying,
and interpretation, and speaking with tongues. The spirit of some he so
restrained, that he bound them to hold their peace, he permitted but two or
three to speak at one meeting, the rest were to keep silence, though possibly
fix or seven might at that time have the Spirit.



what reason or revelation is against it? What inconvenience in the nature of
the thing? For can any man be so weak as to imagine a despite is done to the
spirit of grace, when those gifts to his Church are used regularly and by
order? As if prudence were no gift of Gods spirit, as if helps in Government,
and the ordering spiritual matters were none of those graces which Christ when
he ascended up on high gave unto Men. But this whole matter is wholly a
stranger to reason, and never seen in Scripture.

In materia speciale, the second is tyrannical and Antichristian. And to it
persecution of true Religion is to be reduced. But as for this pretended
limiting or restraining the spirit, viz. by appointing a regular form of
prayer, it is so very a Chimera, that it has no footing or foundation upon any
ground where a wise man may build his confidence.

Paul, by saying The spirits of the Prophets must be subject to the Prophets?
What greater restraint then subjection? If subjected, then they must be ruled;
if ruled, then limited, prescribed unto, and as much under restraint as the
spirits of the superior Prophets shall judge convenient. I suppose by this
time this objection will trouble us no more. But perhaps another will.



in the name of the people, and therefore great reason they should know
beforehand, what is to be presented, that if they like not the message, they
may refuse to communicate; especially since people are so divided in their
opinions, in their hopes, and in their faiths: it being a duty to refuse
Communion with those prayers which they think to have in them the matter of sin
or doubting. Which reason on the other part ceases, for the Minister being to
speak from God to the people, if he speaks what he ought not, God can right
himself, however is not partner of the finne, as in the other case, the people
possibly may be.

But being crafty I caught you, says Saint Paul to the Corinthians] and
discourses and arguments ad hominem, upon their particular principles and
practices may more move them then the most polite and accurate that do not
comply and wind about their fancies and affections. S. Paul from the absurd
practice of being baptized for the dead, made an excellent Argument to convince
the Corinthians of the Resurrection. But this reason also ceases in our
prayers. For God understands what we say sure enough, he has no prejudices
to be removed, no infirmities to be wrought upon, and a fine figure of
Rhetoric, a pleasant cadence, and a curious expression, move not him at all;
no other twinings and complyances stir him but charity, and humility, and
zeal, and importunity, which all are things internal and spiritual. And
therefore of necessity there is to be great variety of discourses to the
people, and permissions accordingly, but not so to God, with whom a Deus
miserere prevails as soon as the great office of 40 hours not long since
invented in the Church of Rome, or any other prayers spun out to a length
beyond the extension of the office of a Pharisee.

with God, if the persons be not so fit. In that there may be indiscretion, but
there may be impiety and irreligion in this. The people may better excuse and
pardon an indiscretion or a rudeness (if any such should happen) then we may
venture to offer it to God.



Vulgus Cleri, should instruct the people out of the fountains of the Church,
and upon the public stock, till by so long exercise and discipline in the
Schools of the Prophets, they may also be entrusted to minister of their own
unto the people. This I am sure was the practice of the Primitive Church when
Preaching was as ably and religiously performed as now it is. But in this I
prescribe nothing. But truly I think the reverend Divines of the Assembly are
many of my mind in this particular, and that they observe a liberty indulged to
some persons to preach, which I think they had rather should hold their peace,
and yet think the Church better edified in your silence then their Sermons.

[Why should not the same be allowed in praying as in preaching] it were better
to substitute this. If they can pray with the spirit, why also do they not
preach with the spirit? and if praying with the spirit be praying ex tempore,
why shall they not preach ex tempore too, or else confess that they preach
without the spirit, or that they have not the gift of Preaching? For to say
that the gift of prayer, is a gift ex tempore, but the gift of Preaching is
with study and deliberation, is to become vain and impertinent. Quis enim
discrevit? Who has made them of a different consideration? I mean as to this
particular, as to their efficient cause. Nor reason, nor revelation, nor God,
nor man.

England, so apparent need, that the Papists have made it an objection against
us) and this his gift of Prayer will be to edification. But otherwise, I
understand it is more fit for ostentation, then any spiritual advantage. For
God hears us not the sooner for our ex tempore, long, or conceived prayers;
possibly they may become a hindrance, as in the cases before instanced. And I
am sure if the people be intelligent, and can discern, they are hindered in
their Devotion, for they dare not say Amen till they have considered; and many
such cases will occur in ex tempore prayers, that need much considering
before we attest them. But if the people be not intelligent, they are apt to
swallow all the inconveniences which may multiply in so great a license; and
therefore it were well that the Governors of the Church who are to answer for
their souls, should judge for them, before they say Amen, which judgment
cannot be without set-forms of Liturgy. My sentence therefore is, (...), Let
us be as we are already. Few changes are for the better.

England, which was composed with much art and judgment by a Church that has
as much reason to be confident she has the Spirit and gifts of Prayer, as any
single person has, and each learned man that was at its first composition, can
as much prove that he had the Spirit, as the objectors now adays: (and he that
boasts most, certainly has the least.) If I say it be pretended, there are
many errors and inconveniences both in the order and the matter of the
Common Prayer Book, made by such men, with so much industry: How much more, and
with how much greater reason may we all dread the inconveniences and disorders
of ex tempore prayers? where there is neither conjunction of heads, nor
premeditation, nor industry, nor method, nor art, nor any of those things (or
at least not in the same degree) which were likely to have exempted the
Common Prayer Book from errors and disorders. If these things be in the green
tree, what will be done in the dry?

ex tempore and conceived prayers will be secured from error by the Directory,
because that chalks them out the matter. I answer, it is not sufficient,
because if when men study both the matter and the words too, they may be (and
it is pretended are actually) erroneous; much more may they when the matter is
lest much more at liberty, and the words under no restraint at all. And no man
can avoid the pressure and the weight of this, unless the Compilers of the
Directory were infallible, and that all their followers were so too, of the
certainty of which I am not yet sully satisfied.

England in her united capacity, and every particular in the diffused capacity
receive by this new device? For the public it is clear, that whether the
Ministers pray before they study; or study before they pray, there must needs
be infinite deformity in the public worship, and all the benefits which were
before the consequents of conformity and unity, will be loft, and if they be
not valuable, I leave it to all them to consider, who know the inconveniences
of public disunion, and the public disunion that is certainly consequent to
them who do not communicate in any common forms of worship. And to think that
the Directory will bring conformity, is as if one should say, that all who are
under the same Hemisphere are joined in communi patria, and will love like
Countrymen; for under the Directory there will be as different Religions, and
as different desires, and as differing forms as there are several varieties
of men and manners under the one half of heaven, who yet breath under the same
half of the Globe. But I ask again what benefit can the public receive by
this form, or this no form, for I know not whether to call it. Shall the
matter of prayers be better in all Churches? shall God be better served? shall
the word of God and the best patterns of prayers be always exactly followed?
It is well if it be. But there is security given us by the Directory; for the
matter is left at every man's dispose for all that, and we must depend upon the
honesty of every particular for it; and if any man proves a Heretic, or a
Knave, then he may introduce what impiety he please, into the public forms of
Gods worship; and there is no law made to prevent it, and it must be cured
afterward if it can; but beforehand it is not prevented at all by the
Directory, which trusts every man. But I observe, that all the benefit which is
pretended, is, that it will make an able Ministry, which I confess I am very
much from believing, and so will every man be that considers what kind of men
they are that have been most zealous for that way of conceived prayer. I am
sure that very few of the learned, very many ignorants, most those who have
made least abode in the Schools of the Prophets. And that I may disgrace no
man's person, we see Tradesmen of the most illiberall arts, and women pretend to
it, and do it with as many words (and that is the maine thing) with as much
confidence, and speciousnesse, and spirit, as the best among them. And it is
but a small portion of learning that will serve a man to make conceived forms
of prayer, which they have easily upon the stock of other men, or upon their
own fancy, or upon any thing in which no learning is required. He that knows
nothing of the craft may be in the Preachers trade. But what? Is God better
served? I would feign see any Authority, or any reason, or any probability for
that. I am sure ignorant men offer him none of the best sacrifices ex tempore,
and learned men will be sure to deliberate, and know. God is then better
served, when he served by a public, then when by a private spirit. I cannot
imagine what accruements will hence come to the public: it may be some
advantages may be to the private interests of men. For there are a sort of men
whom out blessed Savior noted, who do devour widows houses, and for a
pretenc^ make long prayers. They make prayers, and they make them long, by this
means they receive double advantages, for they get reputation to their
ability, and to their piety. And although the Common Prayer Book in the Preface
to the Directory be charged with unnecessary length, yet we see that most of
these men, they that are most eminent or would be so, make their prayers
longer, and will not lose the benefits which their credit gets, and they by
their credit, for making their prayers.

Add to this that there is no promise in Scripture, that he who prays ex
tempore shall be heard the better, or that he shall be assisted at all to such
purposes; and therefore to innovate in so high a matter without a warrant to
command us, or a promise to warrant us, is no better then vanity in the thing,
and presumption in the person. He therefore that considers that this way of
prayer is without all manner of precedent in the Primitive Church, against the
example of all famous Churches in all Christendom in the whole descent of 15.
Ages, without all command and warrant of Scripture, that it is unreasonable in
the nature of the thing, against prudence and the best wisdom of humanity,
because it is without deliberation, that it is innovation in a high degree
without that Authority which is truly and by inherent and ancient right to
command and prescribe to us in external forms of worship, that it is much to
the disgrace of the first reformers of our Religion, that it gives
encouragement to the Papists, to quarrel with some reason and more pretense
against our Reformation, as being by the Directory confessed to have been done
in much blindness, and therefore might err in the excess as well as in the
defect, in the throwing out too much, as casting off too little, which is the
more likely, because they wanted zeal to carry it far enough. He that
confiders the universal deformity of public worship, and the no means of
union, no Symbol of public communion being publicly consigned, that all
Heresies may with the same Authority be brought into our prayers, and offered
to God in behalf of the people, with the same Authority that any truth may,
all the matter of our prayers being left to the choice of all men, of all
persuasions, and then observes that actually there are in many places, heresy,
and blasphemy, and impertinency, and illiterate rudenesses put into the
devotions of the most Solemn days, and the most public meetings; and then
lastly, that there are diverse parts of Lyturgy, for which no provisions at all
is made in the Directory, and the very administration of the Sacraments left so
loosely, that if there be any thing essential in the forms of Sacraments, the
Sacrament may come ineffectuall by want of due words, and due ministration. I
say, he that considers all these things (and many more he may consider) will
find that particular men are not fit to be entrusted to offer in public with
their private spirit, to God, for the people, in such solemnities, in matters
of so great concernment, where the honor of God, the benefit of the people,
the interest of Kingdoms, the being of a Church, the unity of minds, the
conformity of practice, the truth of persuasions, and the salvation of souls,
are so very much concerned, as they are in the public prayers of a whole
National Church. An unlearned man is not to be trusted, and a wise man dare
not trust himself; he that is ignorant cannot, he that is knowing will not.

The End.

