ALE ALE-VATED INTO THE ALE-TITUDE: OR, A Learned Oration before a Civil
Assembly of ALE-Drinkers, Between PADDINGTON and HOGSDON, The 30. of February
last, Anno Millimo Quillimo Trillimo.

By JOHN TAILOR.

LONDON, Printed in the year, 1651.

A LEARNED LECTVRE, IN PRAISE OF ALE.
ALE Beloved Brethren, I am come this day to make an Oration in a Tub, having
drank all the ALE. the Barrel is turned into a Tub, and the Tub transformed
into a suitable Pulpit: and my hope is, I shall please you better then with a
tale of a Tub: my Theme or Text is but 3. Letters, ALE, which though they are
short and brief in the pronunciation, yet they are Copious and ample, both in
Mystical, and Intrinsicall Expositions, and Historical Relations.

The Letter A. is the Captain, the Leader, the Conductor, the Duke, Ram, and
General of the Letters, Words, and Syllables of all the Speeches, Tongues, and
Languages, that have been, are, or will be amongst all Nations and People in
the World.

And therefore the Letter A. is, in the Original tongue (or Hebrew) called or
known by the name of ALEph, the first Syllable being ALE, and as an addition
of Honor to A, and ALE, all the following Letters are called ALEphabet; and in
Greek the first Letter is ALpha.

For further proof of the Antiquity and high estimation of Ale, it is Recorded
in famous Histories, that many Countries. Kingdoms, Nations, and Persons have
had their derivations, and names from A and Ale; for this Land, this very
England, was at the first called Albion: also Albion was the name of a Giant,
one of the sons of the Sea-god Neptune, and the Country of Albania in Greece
(otherwise called Epirus, whereof the most valiant and famous terror to the
Turks, Scanderbe^, (or George Castriot was King) had their Original Epithites
from Ale: the Mahometans (with their abusing of Ale in the right use and
brewing of it) were madly inspired with Enthusiastic Rhaptures, that our of
the Grounds and Dregs of Ale they brewed their Alcaron, by the aid of Alecto
one of the 3 Infernal Furies.

The first part of any name that begins with ALL, it does import that the party
or place have been, or may be great and fortunate.

For was not ALExander for his great Conquests called the Great? and it is to
be supposed, that if he had drank no worse drink then Ale, he had not been
poisoned in Babylon. There was also ALExander Severns, a Grave Philosopher, a
good and mighty Roman Emperor; and in memory of ALExander, there are many
famous Cities named ALExandria, one in Egypt, which the great ALExander caused
to be begun and finished in 18 days, although it was 6 miles (within the
Walls) about.

Alaricus, a Potent and conquering King of the Goths, in the year 408. sacked
the City of Rome, and burnt it to the ground: and Alcibiades a valiant Noble
man of Athens, of the Race and lineage of Great Ajax Telamon, atcheived many
great exploits with success and victory, to the Honor and profit of the
Athenians; yet (for some small faults) they ingratefully banished him, and in
Frigia his head was stook off.

Two Grecian Emperors of Constantinople, their names were ALExius and
Cassandra (the Sister of the Worthy Hoctor and Daughter to King Priam) was
called ALExandra, because that by the Virtue of Ale she was inspired with the
gift of Prophesying of several sorts of truths; but her evil Fate, and the
Trojans ill luck was, that she never was believed, though she always
Prophesied truly. Also there were diverse Saxon Kings named Ala: and Aladine was
a common name to the Sarazen Kings and Princes. Albumazer a learned Arabian
Magitian, was (by his own Report) much forwarded in his skill and knowledge of
Astrology by the operation of Ale of his own Brewing, the Receipt whereof he
had from Alphonsus a King of Naples, and Sicilia; besides, Ale does infuse such
vigor and valor into men of the sword, that as the History of Barbary (or
Mauritania) Relates, ten Tuns of Ale was sent from a Consul of ALEppo to
Sebastian, King of Portugal at the Battle of Alcasor, which Ale made them
fight so courageously, that 3 Kings were slain that day in the field, namely,
Sebastian of Portug ALE, Mulley ALEt, King of Fesse, and one more, which I
omit, because I have forgot his name; but I remember our brave English Stukeley
was killed then, and there; and he was partly a King, for the Pope had given
him the Kingdom of Ireland, and the troath is, that Stukeley wanted but two
small trifles of the full inheritance of it, which was only possession and
Coronation.

Bacchus, who is likewise named Liber, which is frank, free, merry, and at
liberty; he was also called Liber Pater, which is a free liberal Father; he
was the first inventer and Brewer of Ale, for which he is named Alysius, by
many Grave and Learned Writers, as in Bishop Coopers Dictionary, and others,
and it is unquestionable that Bacchus was honored as a God, amongst the
Ancient Heathen, for his admirable Invention for Potable drinks; of which ALE
was then in his time, to this time, and shall be in after times, the chiefest.

ALE is of that Venerable, and Reverend esteem, that the most Worthy, Wisest,
and Wealthiest Senators are called Aldermen; for there is Sage ALE, and to be
Sage, is to be Grave and Wise; and by drinking Sage ALE, the Wise men of
Greece were called the seven Sages.

From this ALE beloved, all beloved ALE there are many Virtues have had their
Original; Charity is a Virtue, and though in these times she is almost dead
with cold she has taken against her will; yet as in Reference from or ALusion
to ALE, Alms are the fruits of Charity, and therefore all great Kings and
Princes do maintain (for the distribution of their Alms) some Grave,
Reverend Person who has the Office and Title of the Kings (or Queens) ALmoner.

Moreover, ALE (taken to the purpose will ALEvate and lift up the spirits with
ALacrity, ALias Mirth, ALias Courage, ALias Exhilleration and Jocundity.

The foundation and invention of the mystical Art of ALcumy, was from the
force and fume of ALE: Can it be imagined that so many Grave and Learned men
have labored in vain so many Years and Ages, with such excessive and
infinite charge, but that they have found or know where to have the Rich, Rare,
Invisible Philosophers (or ALEosophers) Stone; some of them with ALaborate
pains, and some pretty cost, have attained so much skill and knowledge, that
they have turned Land into Silver, and all into smoke and fume, and with as
much Iron and Brass as would furnish a house, they have made a piece of Gold
as big as a lowse. But to return to my Text, ALE; a mad wag, in a merry Song,
does affirm that ALE is not only a Moover, Exciter, and Instigator to Arts
and Sciences, but also that ALE of it self and in it self, is an Alcumist; as
for example.

It will turns your gold to silver wan,
And your silver into Brass.
A Tailor it will make a man,
And a man it will make an Ass.
I must acknowledge that there are many and diverse sorts of drinks of great
Antiquity and use in this Island, as Syder, Perry, Matheglin, Mead, Braggot,
Pomperkin, etc. These are all Native and natural amongst us, of whom I will
say little, because their use is not of that Amplitude or universallity as ALE
is.

First, Syder is made of Apples, and held to be most Ancient, and that CAINE
(having learned of his Mother EVE) did practice it when he was a Vagabond, and
got a great estate by it. My Country (Gloucester shire) is most plentifully
stored with it; when it is new it is Laxative, and being old it must be
sugared, and a skillfull Vintner can make it pass for White Wine, or Clarret,
with a dash of red Perry; the Ancient Writers cannot agree, from whence it had
its original, some will derive it from Persepolis in Persia, others from Perue
in America, one fetches the Pedigree from Periander, (one of the Grecian Sages)
but my opinion is, that it was invented by one Parry a Welshman, a cousin
German to Owen Tuedor, (of the Lineage of the Emperor Pertinax, and kinsman to
Cadwallador Magnus, the Epilogicall King of the Cambria Britains) howsoever
Worcester shire is now the Fountain and Magazine of Perry, it is delicious in
the palate, and in some places and constitutions it is very operative to
qualify drought, and quench thirst.

Matheglin, (as it is related in the History of Monmouth) was first made in a
fruitful Valley at the foot of Penmenmaure, and (in the British Greek) a Valley
is called a Gli^ne; in that Gli^ne or Valley then inhabited one Matthew, who was
called Matthew of the Gli^ne, this Matthew had many swarms of Bees (and
brethren) you know Bees make Honey: This Honey of the Glinne, with the industry
of this Matthew, was first invented, and it still does bear the Authors name
Mathoglin; it is purgative, by reason of its melioration, it eases
obstructions, it expells tremor cordis, it provokes dormosity, or sleep* it is
(for the most part) confined to the principallity (or 13. Cantons) and in those
famous Territories it is equivalent with Muskadell.

Mead, came from the Meades and Persiant, and though inferior to Matheglin,
yet it is much like it in taste and operation.

Braggot, is not of any Ancient standing, it is an inflaming kind of tap-lash,
made of sundry Spices, being hot and dry in the third degree, it is good
against cold and moist in the second; the Original and Author of it is
unknown.

Pomperkin, some derive it from Pomerania, (a Dukedom in high Almaine) others
from Pompey the Great; but it is not probable that so great a Spirit was the
Inventer of so small and inconsiderable a drink; it is made of Apples, which
are squeezed and pressed with water put amongst, it is a poor conditioned
confection, and it is thought that Perkin Warbeck was the Author of it, in his
Rebellion against K. Hon. the 7.

Beer, is a Dutch Boorish Liquor, a thing not known in England, till of late
days an Alien to our Nation, till such time as Hops and Heresies came amongst
us, it is a saucy intruder into this Land, and its sold by usurpation; for the
houses that do sell Beer only, are nicknamed Ale houses; mark beloved, an
Alehouse is never called a Beere-house, but a Beere-house would have but small
custom, if it did not falsely carry the name of an Alehouse; also it is common
to say a Stand of Ale, it is not only a Stand, but it will make a man
understand, or stand under; but Beer is often called a Hogshead, which all
rational men do know is but a swinish expression: But to return to my Text,
ALE, from whence I have digressed, and too much made use of your patience.

It is past man's understanding to conceive the admirable flowing and
overflowing Innundation of ALoquence that Rhetorickally runs from the trowling
tongue of a constant ALE-drinker: he will speak ALEgories, so mystically
sententious, that the wisest Bachan ALian Wine-bibber can never comprehend or
understand literally. ALE will make a man impartial in his knowledge; for he
that is quick and nimble in his ALE, will not know his ALiance from ALiens; for
if you note the grave actions of a man in his ALE, how he will wink and nod
upon you with grave and discreet postures; mark him when he holds up his
finger, and turns up his ALbum Oculi, (the white of the Eye:) then is his
judgment Ales, quick, or swift, and his tongue is Ala, a birds wing, and his
whole self is Alius nemo, or no man such, and then may he be justly esteemed
to be no man of this world, but that he is mounted and ALEvated to an ALtitude
higher then the Alps; then will he talk of Religion beyond belief, interpret
Scripture beyond all sense, and show you points of the Law above all the reason
that can be ALEged. Matheo ALEman by the virtue and inspiration of the first
Sylable of his surname, ALE, did write that well composed Book, and most
excellent fancy of Guzman de ALfarach, or The Spanish Rogue.

I should be endless, and speak much to no end, if I should repeat all the
good and virtuous words which do begin with ALE, as ALEgiance was Allowed for a
Virtue in the days of Yore, and it is so yet in France, Spain, and in other
places; for which causes of tranquillity and plenty, which former times
afforded, our Reverend and Wise Ancestors gave them the name of ALcion days,
as fair, clear, and merry; for the Bird called Alcion or Halcion, or Kings
Fisher, does never show her self, or is seldom seen in foul tempestious
days, or stormy weather. And cheerful times of the Heavenly Sunshine of Peace
and calmnesse were a long time the undeserved blessings which our English Edon
enjoyed: then one friend, or one neighbor, or more, did esteem a Pot of ALE
for a better Companion in Company, then of ten Pot Companions that delight to
be drunk, and do or study mischief.

Besides all this, beloved, the word ALEbria is in our translation, a
nourishing, and the word ALiment is nourishment, or preserving, and what is
more approved for the nourishing and preserving of sick or aged People, then
ALE? It was wisely and truly said, that Wine makes the heart of man glad, but
(not to be profane) if it be considered by whom, and when, and where those
words were spoken; it is plain and evident, that though the words are true and
unalterable, yet the person that spoke them is gone, and gathered to his
Fathers in rest and happiness, the time when is much altered, and the place
where most barbarously changed: first they were spoken by a King, and a
Prophet, who could speak nothing but truth; secondly, those words were uttered
in a time, when plain honest dealing was used between man and man, without
deceit or equivocation; and thirdly, they were spoken in the City of Jerusalem,
the greatest and most famous Metropolis of the world at that time.

It is to be more then conjectured, that there was not then in that great City
(or scarce any where) to be found one crafty Wine Merchant, one juggling
Cooper, or one sophisticating Vintener: that Wine was the pure and comfortable
Juice of the Grape, without any mingle mangle, blending, balderdashing
commixtion, that Wine would glad the heart of man indeed; and he that will
fetch me a quart of that, shall have twelve pence, and thanks for his pain:
But most of our Wines now a days do not glad, but mad the heart of man, as by
daily and lamentable experience we perceive by the frequent quarrelling,
sighting, wounding, killing, and murdering, which happens by the excessive
abuse of abused fuming Wines, and intexicated brains; of all which, ALE (most
virtuous ALE) may plead, not Guilty.

We have many good Towns in England, whose names are derived from ALE, as
ALEsbury, so called because of the strong ALE which was brewed there, Nut brown
ALE, as brown as a berry, and there the first Cawdles and Aleberies were
invented for the comfort and restoratives of old or sick folks, or women that
lay in.

The ancientest Records of the famous Town of Abington in Barkeshire do
testify, that the old name of it was ALEBENDONA, (and according to the old
appellation) it is to this day, seldom or never unfurnished with most Ptable,
Potent, high and mighty ALE. Sanbich, Darby, Dover, Canterbury, Northdowne,
(but especially Windsor) are Towns and places famous for brewing of this
excellent Liquor.

There are Antiquaries that do more then suppose, that Hercules had never
achieved or accomplished his twelve labors, but by the Virtue and Vigor of
ALE, whereby he vanquished Giants, Monsters, Dragons; for which Conquests and
Victories (for the perpetual honor of ALE) he was called ALcides.

Also there are and have been many good Knights and Gentlemen, with others of
great worth and honor in England, whose names began with ALE, as Sir ALEn
Percy Sir ALEn Apsley, the Worshipful Knights, and Gentry of the Families of
the ALeffs, and ALEworths, or the ALthams, ALEsops, ALEas, etc. with the most
famous Master Edward ALEn (our ever to be remembered Roscius, and renowned Stage
Actor) he Acted an excellent part and piece of Charity in his life time, in
founding and furnishing a neat and comely College at Dulledge in Surrey, three
miles from London, for the perpetual relief of poor aged people, and a Free
School for the education of youth: he got not his estate by Totos dies
potare, by sitting whole days drinking, he had wisdom and discretion to know
the right use, and avoid the wrong abuse of ALE.

For ALE is an enemy to idleness, it will work and be working in the brain
as well as in the Barrel; if it be abused by any man, it will trip up his
heels, and give him either a fair or a foul fall, if he be the strongest,
stowtest, and skilfullest Wrastler either in Cornwall or Christendom.

But if ALE be moderately, mildly, and friendly dealt withal, it will
appease, qualify, mitigate, and quench all striffe and contention, it will lay
anger asleep, and give a furious man or woman a gentle Nap, and therefore it
was rightly called Nappy ALE by our Learned and Reverend Forefathers.

Besides it is very medicinable, (as the best Physicians do affirm) for Beer
is seldom used or applied to any inward or outward maladies, except sometimes
it be warmed with a little Butter to wash the galled feet, or toes of a weary
Traveller; but you shall never know or hear of a usual drinker of ALE, to be
troubled with the Hippocondra, with Hippocondragacall obstructions or
convulsions, nor are they vexed (as others are) with several pains of sundry
sorts of Gowts, such as are the Gon^gra, P^dogra, Chirogra, and the lame
Hip-halting Sciatica, or with the intolerable grief of the Stone in the
Reins, Kidneys, or Bladder; for an experimental proof whereof, a Reverend
Grave Judge dyed lately, who all his life time was a hater of ALE, he being
perpetually or continually vexed with the tormenting pain of the Stone, and
when he was deceased, his body was opened, where in his Bladder was found a
Stone as big as a Turkies Egg, which the skillfull Physicians and
Chyrurgians did put into a Basen of ALE, and in a few hours the ALE did
dissolve the said Stone to small Gravel. Take this into your considerations
all you ignorant haters of ALE.

For, are not your eyes opened, your minds illuminated, your understandings
enlightened, and all your spirits illustrated with grateful Capacities? As to
remember the benefit of health which ALE has universally been the monumentall
means to produce and propagate to our Nation, within this three or four
years: Note but the great ALteration in the weekly Bills of mortallity, and
you will find by true observation, that French Wines being prohibited, and
Beer (as the Proverb says) is down the wind, ALE being in such deserved
request, that for one flaggon of Beer that is drank, four pots of ALE are
acceptably taken, whereby Physicians have not been so much employed, or
Churchyards so fat as formerly they were wont to be when ALE was despised,
flighted, and neglected: therefore I say, let as many as do love the
preservation of their ^^ves and healths, let them drink ALE, and also let ALE
be their drink.

Moreover, ALE is melodious humonically musiquALE, for it puts men into
Quavers, Semiquavers, Minoms, Troubles, (Treables I should say) Tenors,
Counter-Tenors, Be^^^, and more then sol, fa, ut, etc. for ELA is an Anagram of
ALE, and ELA is the ALdeboron, or highest Note of Music, either in wind
Instruments, strung Instruments, or Voices; and truly it would do a deaf
body much good to hear the strange Tones, Tunes, and Voices, which do ascend
and mount above ELA three Notes and a half, from the merry Harmonious Songs,
and Catches of men in their ALE; for ALE will make a man sing Selengers Round,
to the tune of Green sleeves, or Trenchmore, to the tune of Laugh and lie down.

Also ALE will make a man a Linguisht, it will teach him the Greek Tongue in
two hours, if he ply his ALE ALphabet diligently: Me vat a whee, and me pat a
whee, shaugh at orum, probibi tibi, etc. in Arabic, Cornutian, Diocrisian,
Paracelsian, and Catharackt.

Thus (beloved brethren) I have related unto you (in part) the Antiquity, the
Honor, the Virtues, and several uses of ALE, which uses will be profitable
to you, and to all such as will make good use of ALE.

The Application of all that I have said, does consist only in your selves;
the Lesson is short, (as my Text was) it is no more then this, make constant
Application of ALE to your selves, and apply your selves constantly to ALE. And
so my loving Brothers, I hold it no offense to shut up all with a friendly
conclusion, that before we part company, we may (for the better remembering of
our Text, which was ALE) every man drink off his two Pots for Edification.

From my house at the sign of the Poets Head in Phoenix Alley, near the
Covent Garden, or the Globe Tavern, nigh to the midst of Long Aker, where ALE
is my ALiment and Element.
For your better Recreation here follows some few Lines in praise of ALE,
written in merrier Times, by a most Learned Author.
THE EXALE-TATION OF ALE,. The ancient Liquor of this REALM. OR, A Clear
Definition of its Efficatious operation in several Pa^es, Arts, and
Professions.
NOt drunken nor sober, but neighbor to both,
I met with a friend in Ales-bury Vale;
He saw by my face, that I was in the case
To speak no great harm of a Pot of good Ale.
Then did he me greet, and said since we meet,
(And he put me in mind of the name of the Dale)
For Ales-bury's sake, some pains I would take,
And not bury the praise of a Pot of good Ale.
The more to procure me, then he did adjure me,
If the Ale I drank last were nappy and stale,
To do it its right, and stir up my spri'te,
And fall to commend a etc.
Quoth I, To commend it I dare not begin,
Lest therein my credit might happen to fail;
For many men now do count it a sin,
But once to look toward a etc.
Yet I care not a pin, for I see no such sin,
Nor any thing else my courage to quail:
For this we do find, that take it in kind,
Much Virtue there is in a etc.
And I mean not the taste, though thereby much graced,
Nor the Merry-go-down without pull or hale,
Perfuming the throat when the stomack's aflote,
With the fragrant sweet scent of a etc.
Nor yet the delight that comes to the sight,
To see how it flowers and mantles in graile,
As green as a Leek, with a smile in the cheek,
The true orient color of a etc.
But I mean the Mind, and the good it does find;
Not only the Body so feeble and frail:
For Body and Soul may bless the Black-bowle,
Since both are beholden to a etc.
For when heaviness the mind does oppress,
And sorrow and grief the heart do assail,
No remedy quicker, than to take off your Liquor,
And to wash away Cares with a etc.
The Widow that buried her husband of late
Will soon have forgotten to weep and to wail,
And think every day twain, till she marry again,
If she read the Contents of a etc.
It is like a belly-blast to a cold heart,
And warms and ingenders the spirits vital,
To keep them from damage, all spirits owe their homage
To the Sp'rite of the Burtery a etc.
And down to the legs the virtue does go,
And to a bad Footman is as good as a sail,
When it fills the veins and makes light the brains,
No Lackey so nimble as a etc.
The Naked complains not for want of a Coat,
Nor on the cold weather will once turn his tail;
All the way as he goes, he cuts the wind with his nose,
If he be but well wrapped in a etc.
The hungry man takes no thought for his meat,
Though his stomach would brook a ten-penny nail;
He quite forgets hunger, thinks on it no longer,
If he touch but the sparks of a etc.
The Poor man will praise it, so has he good cause,
That all the year eats neither partridge nor quail,
But sets up his rest, and makes up his feast
With a crust of brown bread and a etc.
The Shepherd, the Sower, the Thresher, the Mower,
The one with his scyth, the other with his flail,
Take them out by the poll, on the peril of my soul,
All will hold up their hands to a etc.
The Soldier, the Saylor, the True man, the Tailor,
The Lawyer that Sels words by weight and by tale;
Take 'em all as they are, from the War to the Bar,
They all will approve of a etc.
All Religions and Nations, all Countries and fashions,
Rich or poor, Knave or Whore, dwarfish or tall,
High or low, this I know, all will bow, I Will avow,
To the high power of a etc.
The Sallamander, Brazier that baths in the fire,
Whilst his Bellows are blowing a blustering gale
Will shake off his full Kan, and swear each true Vulcan
Will hazard his wits for a etc.
The Blacksmith, whose bellows all summer do blow,
With the fire in his face still, without e're a Veil,
Though his throat be full dry, he will tell you no lie,
But where you may be sure of a etc.
Who ever denies it, the Prisoners will praise it,
That beg at the Grate, and ly in the Goal:
For, even in their Fetters, they think themselves better
May they get but a two penny black pot of Ale.
For though they be enclosed in the Grate,
They Will sing and be merry, and care for no Bale;
Nor for hunger, for cold, for fetters or fate,
The Comfort consists in a etc.
The Beggar whose portion is always his prayers,
Not having a tatter to hang on his tail,
Is as rich in his rags, as the churl in his bags,
If he once but shakes hands with a etc.
It drives his poverty clean out of mind,
Forgeting his brown-bread, his wallet, and maile,
He walks in the house like a six-footed lowse,
If he once be enricht with a etc.
And he that does dig in the ditches all day,
And wearies himself quite at the Plough-taile,
Will speak no less things, than of Queens and of Kings,
If he touch but the top of a etc.
It Is like a whetstone to a blunt wit,
And makes a supply where Nature does fail:
The dullest wit soon will look quite through the Moon,
If his temples be wet with a etc.
Then DICK to his Dearling, full boldly dares speak,
Though before silly fellow) his courage did quail,
He gives her the smouch, with his hand on his pouch,
If he meet by the way with a etc.
And it makes the Carter a Courtier straightway;
With Rhetorical terms he will tell his tale;
With Courtesies great store, and his Cap up before
Being schooled but a little with a etc.
The Old man, whose tongue wags faster than his teeth,
(For old age by nature does drivel and drale)
Will frig and will fling, like a dog in a string,
If he warm his cold blood with a etc.
And the good Old Clark, whose sight waxes dark,
And ever he thinks the Print is too small:
He will see every Letter, and say Service better,
If he glaze but his eyes with a etc.
The Cheeks and the Jaws, to commend it has cause,
For where they were late but even man and pale:
They will get them a color, no Crimson is fuller,
By the true die and tincture of a etc.
Mark her enemies, though they think themselves wise,
How meager they look, with how low a wail:
How their cheeks do fall, without spirits at all,
That alien their minds from a etc.
And now that the grains do work in my brains,
Me thinks I were able to give by retaile,
Commodities store, a dozen and more,
That flow to Mankind from a etc.
The MUSES would muse, any should it misuse;
For, it makes them to sing like a Nightingale,
With a lofty trim note, having washed their throat,
With the Caballine Spring of a etc.
And the Musician of any condition,
It will make him reach to the top of his Scale:
It will clear his pipes, and moisten his lights,
If he drink alternatim a etc.
The Poet divine, that cannot reach Wine,
Because that his money does many times fail;
Will hit on the Vein, to make a good strein,
If he be but inspired with a etc.
For Ballads ELDERTON never bad Peer,
How went his wit in them, with how merry a gale;
And with all the sails up, had he been at the cup,
And washed his beard with a etc.
All Writers or Rimers, for such whose mishap,
Is from Newgate up Houlbourn, to Tyburn to sail;
Shall have sudden expression of all their confession,
If the Muse be but dew'd with a etc.
And the power of it shows, no whit less in Prose,
It will file one's Phrase, and set forth his tale:
Fill him but a Boul, it will make his tongue troul,
For flowing speech flows from a etc.
And Master Philosopher, if he drink his part,
Will not trifle his time in the Husk or the Shale;
But go to the Kernel by the depth of his Art,
To be found in the bottom of a etc.
Give a Scholar of OXFORD a pot of Sixteens,
And put him to prove that an Ape has a tail:
And sixteen times better his Wit will be seen,
If you fetch him from Botley, a etc.
Thus it helps Speech and Wit; And it hurts not a whit,
But rather does further the Virtues Morale:
Then think it not much, if a little I touch
The good moral parts of a etc.
To the Church and Religion it is a good friend,
Or else our Forefathers their wisdom did fail,
That at every mile, next to the Church style,
Set a consecrate house to a etc.
But now as they say, Beer bears it away;
The more is the pity, if Right might prevail:
For with this same Beer, came up Heresy here;
The old Catholic Drink is a etc.
This Beer's but an upstart from Dutchland here come,
Whose Credit with us sometimes is but small:
For in the Records of the Empire of Rome,
The old Catholic Drink is a etc.
O! the ancient tales that my Grandam has told,
How merry we have been in Parlour and Hall;
How in Christmas time, we would dance, sing, and rhyme,
As if we were mad with a etc.
The Churches much owe, as we all do know;
For when they be drooping and ready to fall,
By a Whitson or Church-Ale, up again they shall go,
And owe their repairing to a etc.
Truth will do it right, it brings Truth to light,
And many bad matters it helps to reveile:
For, they that will drink, will speak what they think;
TOM tell-troath lies hid in a etc.
It is Justices friend, she will it commend:
For, all is here served by measure and tale:
Now true-tale and good measure are Justices treasure
And much to the praise of a etc.
And next I allege, it is Fortitudes edge:
For a very Cow-herd, that shrinks like a Snaile,
Will swear and will swagger, and out goes his dagger,
If he be but armed with a etc.
Yea, ALE has her Knights and Squires of degree,
That never were Corslet, nor yet shirt of mail,
But have fought their fights all, 'twixt the pot and the wall,
When once they were dubbed with a etc.
And (sure) it will make a man suddenly Wise,
Er'e-while was scarce able to tell a right tale:
It will open his jaw, he will tell you the Law,
As made a right Bencher of a etc.
Or he that will make a bargain to gain,
In buying or setting his goods forth to sale,
Must not plod in the mire, but sit by the fire,
And seal up his Match with a etc.
But for Soberness needs must I confess,
The matter goes hard: and few do prevail
Not to go too deep, but temper to keep;
Such is the Attractive of a etc.
But here is an amends, which will make all friends,
And ever does tend to the best avail;
If you take it too deep, it will make you but sleep;
So comes no great harm of a etc.
If (re^ling) they happen to fall to the ground,
The fall is not great they may hold by the Rail:
If into the water, they cannot be drowned,
For that gift is given to a etc.
If drinking about they chance to fall out,
Fear not the Alarm, though flesh be but frail,
It will prove but some blows, or at most a bloody nose,
And friends again straight with a etc.
And Physic will favor ALE, as it is bound,
And be against Beer both tooth and nail:
They send up and down all over the Town,
To get for their Patient a etc.
Their Ale-berries, Cawdles, and Possets each one,
And Sillabubs made at the Milking-pale,
Although they be many, Beer comes not in any,
But all are composed with a etc.
And in very deed, the Hop's but a weed,
Brought over against Law, and here set to sale:
Would the Law were renewed, and no more Beer brewed,
But all good men betake them to a etc.
The Law that will take it under her wing:
For at every Law-day, or Moot of the hale,
One is sworn to serve our Sovereign the KING,
In the ancient Office of a CONNER of ALE.
There Is never a Lord of Manor or of Town,
By strand or by land, by hill or by dale,
But thinks it a Franchise and a Flowr of the CROWN,
To hold the Assize of a etc.
And though there by writs, from the Courts Paramou^t,
To stay the proceedings of the Course Paravaile;
Law favors it so, you may come, you may go,
There lies no Prohibition to a etc.
They talk much of State, both early and late,
But if Gascoign and Spain, their Wine should but fail,
Noremedy then, with us Englishmen,
But the State it must stand by a etc.
And they that sit by it, are good men and quiet,
No dangerous Plotters in the Commonweal
Of Treason and Murder: for, they never go further,
Than to call for, and pay for a etc.
To the praise of CAMBRIVIUS that good British King
That devised for his Nation (by the Welshmens tale)
Seventeen hundred years before CHRIST did spring,
The happy invention of a etc.
But he was a Paynim, and ALE then was rife,
Yet after CHRIST came and bid us all hail,
Saint DAVID tid never trink Peer in her life,
Put all Cwwrwwhibley a etc.
The North they will praise it, and praise it with passion,
Where every River gives name to a Dale:
There men are yet living, that are of the old fashion,
No Nectar they know but a etc.
The PICTS and the SCOTS, for ALE, were at lots,
So high was the skill, and so kept under seal:
The PICTS were undone, slain each mothers son,
For not teaching the SCOTS to make Hither Eale.
But hither or thither; it skils not much whether:
For drink must be had, men live not by Keal,
Nor by Havor-bannocks, nor by Havor-jannocks,
The thing the SCOTS live on is a etc.
Now, if you will say it, I will not denay it,
That many a man it brings to his bale:
Yet what fairer end, can one wish to his friend,
Than to die by the dart of a etc.
Yet, let not the innocent bear any blame,
It is their own doings to break over the pale:
And neither the Malt nor the good Wife in fault,
If any be potted with a etc.
They tell whom it kills, but say not a word,
How many a man lives both sound and hale,
Though he drink no Beer any day in the year,
By the Radical humor of a etc.
But, to speak of Killing, that am I not willing;
For that, in a manner, were but to rail:
But Beer has his name, cause it brings to the Buyer;
Therefore welfare say I to a etc.
Too many (I wis) with their deaths proved this;
And therefore if ancient Records do not fail)
He that first brewed the Hop, was rewarded with a rope,
And found his Beer far more bitter then ALE.
O ALE ab alendo thou Liquor of LIFE!
That I had but a mouth as big as a Whale!
For mine is too little to touch the least tittle
That belongs to the praise of a etc.
Thus (I trow) some Virtues I have marked you out,
And never a Vi^e in all this long t^aile,
But that after the Pot there complet^ a Shot,
And that's thonly blot of a etc.
With that my friend said* That Blot will I bear,
You have done very well, it is time to strike sail;
We Will have six pots more, though I die on the score,
To make all this good of a Pot of good ALE.
FINIS.

