A DIALOGUE BETWEEN A PEDDLER AND A Popish Priest, In a very Hot Discourse full
of Mirth, Truth, Wit, Folly and plain Dealing.

By JOHN TAILOR the Water-Poet.

TRACT I.

Revived, Reviewed and Reprinted.

LONDON, Printed for, and Sold by, Henry Hills in Blackfriars, near the
Waterside, 1699.

depiction of two men in a boat

To the Worshipful, the Eight Rulers, Assistants and others the Members of the
Company of Watermen.
JOHN TAILOR, the Water Poet, who was the Author of this Tract, was long since
a Member of Your Company; and, for his singular Loyalty to his Royal Master
King CHALES the First, honored with his Badg; and likewise made a Yeoman of
the Guard.

His Conversation was honest and diverting; his Brain was so Fruitful, that it
overflowed with pleasant thoughts and Witty conceits: Who ever Reads his Works,
may easily discover he was no Plagiary; borrowed from none; but all his
Writings were purely Original; touching always on such Subjects, which none had
ever attempted; Although he wanted the Imbellishments of Learning, yet he had so
great a Stock of Natural Parts, That Been. Johnson, in that Age, (the best Judge
without doubt) Esteemed and Valued him, as one of his Sons.

In his own Writings, we find him mention Sevenscore several Tracts, published
by him: Though in the Volume which passes for his Works, there is but Sixty
three; many of them coming to my Hands which are not inserted in that Volume. I
have Industriously labored to procure the Remainder; and chose to Publish them
Singly, and Gradually, and presume to Dedicate them to You, who claim the
greatest Title to them. I shall not attempt to give Encomiums; it is sufficient
the Works praise the Author. By this Means, even the poorest may easily obtain
so admirable a Collection; and not feel the want of their Money. (For it is pity
any thing of his should be buried in Oblivion) I chose to publish this Dialogue
first, between the Peddler and a Popish Priest; to show his Stedfastness in the
Protestant Religion; which all his time he labored, both by his Exemplary Life
and Pen, to Testify: For, when the Civil Wars had reduced him to great
Necessities, his Body full of Infirmities, and loaded with Years; yet still he
continued with his Pen, to assert his Loyalty to his Prince, and his firm
principles of Religion, and Zeal toward his God. If this may find Acceptance,
and Approbation from Your Worships; 'Twill give me encouragment to present You
with the Remainder and Subscribe my self,

Your Worships, most Humble Servant Henry Hills.

'TWas Taylor's Custom when he Journey took,
To make a Bill, and place before his Book.
His Benefactors all subscribed unto it,
And John with willing mind did still pursue it.
Now, though John Taylor's dead, if you think fit,
That I revive those Works John Tailor writ,
It Is in Your powers to make him Live again,
Approve m'attempt, 'twill recompense my pain:
I Will try my Skill to raise him from the Dead,
And Weekly Print You, what Your Poet said.
Bacchus was always thought the Poets friend,
Ben. Johnson's Rhimes did often Sack commend;
Nay, though great Ben. much Learning had acquired,
Yet he writ best, when with good Wine inspired;
But, Taylor's Genius, by Nature only taught,
Was with such rich Conceit and Fancy fraught;
That Bacchus now to Neptune must submit,
Wine makes Men Witty, but Water full of Wit.
I Will say no more, all his Works plainly show it,
He well deserved the Name of Water-Poet.
I hope my Labors may encouraged be,
Whilst I, like him, thus beg Your Courtesy.
THE PREFACE.
A Romish Priest and Poland Peddler met,
And in a sad Discourse they both are set.
He that will know what Talk they used, he may
Read over the Book, and then know what they say.
Written in manner of a Dialogue, By JOHN TAILOR.
A DIALOGUE Between a PEDDLER and a ROMISH PRIEST.
A Poland Peddler went upon a day,
Unto a Romish Priest to learn to pray;
The Priest said, Peddler get thee to the Cloister
And learn the Ave and the Pater Noster.
Pe. Now good Sir John (quoth he) what talk is that,
I hear you speak, but God in Heaven knows what.

Priest. It is that Worthy Holy Latin Letter
Does please the Lord well, and our Lady better.

Ped. Now good Sir John, I know not what they be,
The Latin Tongue is Heathen Greek to me.

Priest. Peddler, if thou to me wilt but repair,
Within one Month I Will teach thee Latin Prayer.
And though thou understand not what thou say,
Thou shall speak pretty Latin when thou prayest.

Peddler. To pray so Sir, is only but in saying,
In Words, not Sense, a Prating, not a Praying;
Shall I that am a Man of perfect Age,
Talk like a witless Parret in a Cage?

Priest. A Parret can but Prattle for her part,
But toward God has neither mind or Heart.

Ped. Then seeng I have Head and Heart to pray,
Shall not my Heart know what my Tongue does say?
For when my Tongue talks, if my Heart miscarry,
How quickly I may mar your Ave Mary?
And I Sir having many things to seek,
How should I speed, not knowing what I speak?

Pr. God understands all Tongues, and knows, and he
The thoughts and Secrets of the Heart does see.

Ped. Then if I think one thing and speak another,
I wrong my self, and Christ, and his blessed Mother;
For when I Pray they would my Pack repair,
Your Ave Mary is a fruitless Prayer.

Pri. The Latin prayers are but general Heads,
For our Reliefs in all our Wants and Needs:
The Latin serves us as a Liturgy,
As curious Arts direct Surgery,
And in that Language Mass is said and sung,
For private things pray in thy Mother Tongue

Ped. Then I must have a Tongue, Sir John, for either,
One for the Mother, and one for the Father.

Pr. Think thou the Mother does not know such small things?
Christ is her Son, man, and he tells her all things.

Ped. But where did that blessed Virgin learn her Latin,
For in Her days was neither Mass nor Mattin,
Nor yet one Priest that Latin then could speak,
For holy Words were Hebrew then or Greek,
She never was at Rome, nor kissed Popes Feet,
How came She by the Mass fain would I weet.

Pri. Peddler, if you believe the Legendary,
The Mass is older far then Christ or Mary,
For all the Patriarchs both more and less,
And great Melchisedeck himself said Mass.

Pe. But good sir Priest, spoke all these Fathers Latin?
And said they Mass in golden Copes or Satin?
Could they speak Latin long ever Latin grew?
(For without Latin no Mass can be true)
And you that would enforce us to this task,
Me thinks it is like a May Game or a Masque.

Pri. Well Peddler thou art too too curious,
Thy purblind Zeal fervent, but furious,
I rather would a hundred Monks direct,
Then such an Puritan of thy mad sect;
This thou must know, this cannot be denied,
Rome governed all when Christ was Crucified.
Rome, Heathen then, but afterward Converred.
And grew so honest, and so holy-hearted,
That now our Emperor is turned to a Pope,
Whose Holiness (as you have heard I hope,
Has made a Law that all the World must pray
In Latin Language to the Lord each day;
He Is Christ's full Vicar, and I Will boldy say,
That what he does command we must obey;
He bids us pray in Latin, and even so
We must do, whe're we understand or no.
He has full power to confound or save,
And who dares then but do as he will have?

Ped. This purpose to some purpose puts me back,
And has more Points then Pins are in my Pack,
What ever power you give unto your Pope,
He cannot make a Man an Ape, I hope,
And if he be full Vicar to our Lord,
Should not His words and Christ's keep one accord.

Pri. Doubtless they do, and never are contrary, In Paternoster, Creed, or
Ave-mary.

Ped. But Christ's Disciples when they made their motion,
Unto their Master, how to make devotion,
As I have done to you (sir John) to day;
I pray you in what Tongue bade he them Pray?
Christ did not one word Latin to them speak,
Their talk was then all Siriack, Hebrew, Greek.
He bid all Nations pray after one manner,
But bid not all take Latin for their Banner.
Your Latin is but one of the Translations,
Why should it then exclude all other Nations;
And on my Soul, sir John, if I do say
In mine own Mother Tongue when I do Pray,
Lord help me, Lord forgive me all my sins,
Yea (why not) Lord supply my Pack and Pins;
And every thing whereof I stand in need,
(For this depends upon our daily bread)
I hope in God that I shall speed as well,
As if in Latin I my wants did tell.
And since some Tongues have more antiquity
then Latin, were it not iniquity,
To force all People to Pray like the Pope?
No good, sir John, you will not say so I hope.

Pr. Well Peddler, one thing I would fain make plain;
Return we to our Lady back again,
And if thou had as much capacity
As roving Wit, with great audacity,
The Case is clear, that Virgin Mary meek,
Could all and every Tongue and Language speak.
Have thou not heard, man, how the Holy Ghost,
Came down like Cloven Tongues at Pentecost,
And filled the House where all the Twelve were ready,
And one Tongue truly lighted on our Lady?
And think not that I talk of Toys and Dreams,
Ask but the Reverend Jesuits of Rhemes,
And what they write of this but wisely Note.

Ped. In faith (sir John) it is not worth a Groat;
Will I believe't think you, because they say it.

Pr. Nay but they prov't as no Man can deny it;
Says not the Text that when the Lord ascended,
Unto the Twelve he earnestly commanded,
That from Jerusalem they should not go,
Until the Comforter did come,
They all conjoined with one joint consent,
And to an upper Room together went,
Where Mary was and other whole Six score,
That with the Twelve did daily God adore.
Then (says the Text) when Pentecost was come,
They were together then both all and some,
And all were filled with the Holy Ghost.

Ped. Now good sir Priest you count without your Host;
I see well that your Rhemish Jesuits Tongues,
Has clove the Text even to the very Lungs.
That (ALL) for which you reckon up Six score,
Is here meant only of the Twelve, no more;
Nor Mary is not named there as than,
What need we then believe it, holy Man.
On with your Spectacles (sir John) and read,
And credit this as one point of your Creed,
The Holy Ghost did fall upon no more,
Then he was promised unto before:
Now he was only promised to the Twelve,
Look on the Text, I pray, and judge your selve;
Speak Man, and be not silent, I am sorry,
To see you ignorant of such a story;
For shame let not a Peddler with his Pack,
Put you with all your Sophistry to wrack.
For as the Stories in themselves are diverse,
Flowing and falling into sundry Rivers,
In diverse Chapters so they stand divided, the 1. and 2. chap.

So that the Case may clearly be decided;
For when those Six-score were at first convened,
There was another mystery then meaned;
To wit, Mathias free Election,
And so Saint Peter gave direction,
That all those Six-score then should bear Record,
Of their proceedings then before the Lord:
The choosing of a Pastor was in hand,
Which without Churches, knowledge cannot stand,
And so Mathias, (by the power of Heaven)
By lot was took as one with the Eleven.
Then (says the Text) all these together were,
What all these were does very plain appear,
To be the Twelve in the last Verse before,
And not make Leap Year of eleven verse more.
To draw all back to that Hundred and twenty,
Indeed this way we should have Tongues in plenty,
They differ in Twelve verses, the Text says,
Besides the time is different full Ten days,
The first upon the day the Lord ascended,
The other when the Holy Ghost descended.
Such glazen arguments will bide no Hammer,
For they are but bad Logic and worse Grammar;
As for the Holy Ghost it is verified,
His coming down unto no Law is ti'd:
Sometimes invisible, and sometimes seen,
As diversely at diverse times has been.
Few needs to see his coming with their Eyes,
His works are Witnesses which may suffice;
And so St. Paul this gist found privately,
By Ananias hand assuredly. Acts 9.

And so Sir John, to show you all my Pack,
And let you see my Breast as well as Back;
I wonder ye consider not the end,
Why God the Holy Ghost in Tongues did send:
Know ye not Women are forbidden Preaching,
Know ye not Tongues were only given for Teaching;
Women (at home) have hardly leave to speak,
But they take leave, and often silence break;
Their Husbands must permit their Tongues to walk,
And therefore, in Gods House, they may not talk:
And then, Sir John, what worship do you win
Unto our Lady, when you bring her in
As a Companion with the whole Six score,
Who gat the wholly Ghost and she no more;
And where the Pope has made her Queen of Heaven,
You make her here like one of the Eleven:
In this her dignity does seem to fall,
You thrust her to the Kitching from the Hall.
And this is also one of your rare Themes,
Held by your reverend Jesuits of Rhemes,
That Latin came not with the Holy Ghost,
When as the Tongues came down at Pentecost.
Now if it came not then, I pray express
How came it by that perfect Holiness,
That in it only, and no other Tongue,
Both Mass and Mattins must be said and Sung?
Your last refuge will be unto the Pope,
So knit up all together in a Rope.

Pri. Were thou at Rome, and half these words did speak,
Peddler, it were enough thy Neck to break;
But here (...) live, and talk and prate secure,
And undervalue that blessed Virgin pure,
Yielding no honor, or no Adoration
To her, or to her days of Celebration.
(Go but to Spain, and show thy vile condition,
Thou shall be tortured in the Inquisition.)
Her Miracles of small worth you esteem,
Her merits at low value you misdeem,
Her sacred Relics you condemn, despise,
And all her attributes you much misprise:
Thou say with Six score I do make her share,
Your selves with her your course Wives do compare,
Shame and Confusion does to all belong,
Who dare the best, most blessed of creatures wrong.

Pedl. Indeed (Sir John) you come upon me now,
With something which my Faith does disallow.
I pray you to consider but a little,
You give her many a Title and a Tittle,
For which you have no Warrant in the Word,
And yet pursue us both with Fire and Sword,
As Heretics for doing not as ye do,
Yet, what the Word bids, and no more that we do;
Think you that any Man can be so mad,
As to hold Christ his Savior, and so bad,
As to hold Mary for his Saviors Mother,
And not to love her far above all other,
Above all Creatures, she was full of Grace,
And sure in Glory she has suprem place
And eminence, all other Souls transcending
In joy and bliss, that never shall have ending.
The Holy Ghost inspired her beyond measure,
She was possessed with Heaven and Earths whole treasure,
And grant she could speak Latin, and all Tongues,
Yet Mass or Mattins to her not belongs.
Of all that mortal were she was the best,
And her immortal Soul is now most blessed.
Her memorable Honor to preserve,
Her days of Celebration we observe,
The Feast of her Anuntiation,
Her clear and pure Purification,
The Church (in reverence) has ordained these days,
On which we should send up our Prayers and Praise,
To our good God, whose mercy was so great,
To leave his glorious and immortal Seat,
And to the Blessed Virgins Womb he came,
And took on him our filthy Sin and Shame;
And on these days we pray that we may be,
The Virgins followers in Humility,
That our true meekness, and our lowliness,
May raise us to Eternal blessedness;
We hold it the sure way to our Salvation,
To follow her in Holy imitation;
Through heavenly influence her excellence,
Must be admired with love and reverence,
And those that dare compare most sawcily,
Their Wives or Mothers with her sanctity,
Are saucy Knaves in Pride and Ignorance,
Or Atheists, fit to lead the Hang-man's dance;
We love her then, though we believe not in her,
Nor (by will worship) do we think to win her;
We hold her blessed for Christ's flesh conceiving,
But far more blessed for Christ's Faith receiving:
She was his Mother, so's the Church his Wife,
Which was to him much dearer then his Life;
Now if that one could fall at odds with the other,
He would respect his Wife before his mother;
For who so once to him a Wife does take,
Must Father, Mother, Friends and Kin forsake.
And this is every Spouses carriage,
But most in this Spiritual Marriage:
As Mary's mother of Christ's humane life,
She Is but the Daughter of his heavenly Wife;
By which Church only, faith does me persuade,
Of Christ blessed body she is a member made;
Whereby these glorious Titles she has won,
Made, Mother, Wife, Child, Sister to her Son.
All this Sir John I do but briefly say,
To let you see you play us much foul play.

Pri. Well Peddler, though that Pack about thou bear,
Thou Art some Apostate Monk or Friar I fear,
Of Luthers love, or Calvin's cursed crew,
And sent abroad such business to brew,
Disguised like the Person of some Peddler.

Ped. No faith (Sir John) I am not such a medler,
Nor have I mind or means so high to mount,
A little I can Read or cast Account;
My wits are weak to utter Rhyme or Reason,
I know not what you call your Kerrieleison.
So help me God (Sir John) I know no better,
Nor in your Latin can I read a Letter:
For Latin is a Language admirable,
And my poor Friends and Parents were unable
To purchase one scrap of it, for my share,
And sure without it I can sell my ware;
And though I have no Latin, yet I can
Ask what I want of either God or Man,
In mine own mother Tongue, I know and see,
How simple Souls by you abused be;
And how your doctrine half our Prayers would carry,
From Christ our Savior to the Virgin Mary.
I also do perceive how you do frame,
Strange innovations to that heavenly Dame,
Ascribing her that honor, which to none
Is due, but only unto God alone:
Of which she takes small notice, nor will she
For it at any time your helper be.

Pri. Read but the Legend, Peddler, and there view
Her miracles, approve her honor due,
For which the Pope in Latin does prefer,
That Mass and Mattins must be said to her.
Read, and Consider, and believe it well,
Or else thou art at least half way in Hell.

Ped. Sure Hell is not within the Popes Commission,
Though Purgatory, and the Inquisition,
Are things which he himself of late created,
Yet of small worth, by wise Men they are rated;
I answer as I often before have said,
I Love, and Reverence that blessed Mother Maid,
But I believe in God, and when I pray,
Christ help me (when my Soul or Corpse do stray)
And so what ever I either have or want,
I neither Pray to he or to she Saint;
And as for Tongues, I have but one, no more,
And wot ye well, although I had Six score,
I would conform my self to Paul's commanding,
Pray with my Tongue, Pray with my understanding.
Think you the twelve, when they received the tongues,
Talked, and knew not whereto their talk belongs,
Yielding a sound, not knowing what they said,
Idle in Preaching, Idler when they Prayed?
No each of them knew well what he did say,
And why not we (Sir John) as well as they?
For since each Man has one Tongue at command,
Shall Men speak Tongues they do not understand?
Alas good sir, had I been trained at School,
As I am but a silly simple Fool,
A hundred Questions more I might have moved,
But here I cease for fear to be reproved,
For these few doubts I learned in sundry places,
Me thinks such Men as you should clear all Cases.

Pri. Now Peddler, I confess thou puts me to it;
But one thing I will tell thee, if thou wilt do it;
If to our Prior thou wilt with me go back,
Perhaps he will buy all that is in thy pack,
And teach thee better how to Pray then any,
For such a holy Man there are not many,
Be here to Morrow Between six and seven,
And thou will find thy self half ways in Heaven.

Ped. Content Sir John, but there is one thing more,
I must have your opinion in before,
Suppose the holy Prior have no leisure,
To talk of every purpose at our pleasure,
Your Book which is the Golden Legend named,
(Wherein as many Lies as Lines are framed)
And, on my conscience, I do think that you,
Do know the most on it to be most untrue;
And therefore tell me Sir before you go,
Whether your selves believe it, yea or no?

Pri. Yes verily we do believe it all,
And hold it holy and authentical.

Ped. Then I Will repeat a tale or two in Prose,
Which few wise Men believe as I suppose.

IN the 45, and 46, Leaf of the aforesaid Book, I have read, that in the Reign
of King William the Conqueror, the Danes had a purpose to War against England;
to prevent which, King William sent Helliseus the Abbot of Ramsey Ambassador
into Denmark, who having ended his Embassy, as he returned homeward, he was on
the Sea dangerously distressed with an impetuous and terrible Tempest, so that
the Master of the Ship, and all the Mariners did yield themselves as lost Men:
In which extremity they all prayed devoutly to our Lady for help, and suddenly
there appeared walking on the Water a Reverend personage in the form or
likeness of a Bishop, who called the Abbot Hellizeus to him, and told him, that
our Lady had heard their prayers, and that she had sent him to deliver them
from the Storm, and that it was her pleasure to have the day of her Conception
kept holy yearly for ever on the eight day of December; which the Abbot
promised to do, and presently the Angel vanished away, the Tempest ceased, the
Abbot arrived safely in England, and reported what he had heard, seen, and
suffered; and lastly the Feast was commanded to be kept on the 8, day of
December accordingly.

Also in the same Book and Leaf is related, that a Cousin german of a King of
Hungary, who reigned I know not when, whose names were I know not what, did
marry with a Lady (I know not who) at a place I know not where, did, I know not
why, forsake his Wife, I know not wherefore, to serve our Lady I know not how;
for the story lies thus, that he was a devout and daily invocator to the
blessed Virgin, and (being newly married) the same day of the marriage the
Bridegroom staid alone in the Church, remembering that he had not that day done
his accustomed Orisons, wherefore he sent his new Bride home, and himself
stayed in the Church to perform his devotion; where presently our Lady appeared
to him, and taxed him with unkindness, in that he would leave her and betake
himself to another, but if he would forsake his Wife, and follow her in a
devout Life and Conversation, then she promised to give him the Kingdom of
Heaven, whereupon it is said, he presently forsook his Wife, and ever after was
a true servant to our Lady.

What think you now (Sir John) is this good stuff?
It edifies me, much like Blindman buff;
Is It not a shame, that you these things dare do,
To wrong poor People and our Lady to?
You have no starting hole, nor no excuse
To cover or to color your abuse;
But by your leave, I Will tell a tale or twain
In Prose, and fall into our Verse again.
In the 88 Leaf I did read of another nameless Lady, that dreamed she was
before the Shrine of our Lady on Candlemas day; she then (as she dreamed) had a
burning Candle in her Hand, which Candle she was three times commanded to offer
to the Image of the Virgin, which she not doing, the Angel strove with her for
it, and brake it in the midst; at which the Lady awaked, and found half a
Candle in her Hand, which she ever after kept as a holy Relic, and with the
touch of it did many Miracles, and cured a great number of diseases only with
the very touch of the said Candle.

There was a Thief whom they called a Knight, that had long time used to Rob
upon the Highway, by which accursed Gentleman-like Trade, he was grown very
Rich, and kept tall Fellows to attend him, who were as arrant Thieves as
himself; amongst them there was one performed or served the office of his
Chamberlain, that was a Devil in the shape of a Man. It fell out so they Robbed
a Holy-man, who desired he might speak with the chief or Master Thief; which
being granted, the Holy-man requests that he might see all the Servants
together; whereupon they were called: then said the Holy-man, here are not all,
and then they missed the Chamberlain, and called him, who was no sooner come
into the said Blessed-mans presence, but he cried out, saying, I am a Devil in
this humane form, who have followed this Knight a long time to destroy him for
his bad Life, but I could never have any power over him to hurt him, because he
did daily, with great devotion, oftentimes salute the blessed Virgin Mary, with
Ave Maria. Leaf, 105.

In the 217 Leaf there is a tale of a Monk, that was a great Letcher, who by
accident was Drunk and Drowned in a River which he fell into, and the Devils
came busily about his Carcass to carry it to Hell; but because the said Monk
had used constantly to pray to our Lady, she then appeared her self, and
commanded the Devils to depart, and then she gave the Soul of the Monk into his
dead Body again, and ever after he had a care to live honestly.

In the same 217 Leaf there is a Relation of a Knt. that had spent all his
substance wastfully in riot, and being desperate in his wants, he would have
sold his Wife to the Devil for a great sum of Money; but the Bargain being made,
and the good Gentlewoman to be delivered to the Friend, our Lady appeared to
her, and laid her in a sleep, taking upon her self the shape of the sleeping
Gentlewoman; which when the Knight would have delivered, the Devil began to
Roar and Howl, and trembling said, that the Knight had deceived him, in
bringing the Mother of God to him instead of his Wife; and with that the Devil
fled away, and the Knight with repentance took his Wife again; and in
conclusion our Lady gave them wealth, so that ever after they lived together
lovingly.

In the 220 Leaf it is said, that as the Body of the blessed Virgin was carried
toward her grave or burial, a Jew in despightful manner laid both his Hands on
the Bier, and violently would have overthrown it, when presently his Hands
sundred from his Arms, and clave fast to the Bier; at which the Jew roared,
cried out and repented, and St. Peter commanded him to kiss the Bier, whereby
he was presently recovered, and had his Hands restored to his Arms again.

In the 218 Leaf it is related, that in the City of Barrges, Anno 226, the
Christians being at Mass on an Easter Day, a Jews Child came amongst them at
the Mass and received the Sacrament of the Altar: And after all the Ceremony
and Service was ended, the Young Jew returned, and his Father demanded of him
where he had been; he answered, that he had been at Mass amongst the
Christians; at which the Old Jews was so enraged, that he took his Son and
threw him into a Hot Fiery Furnace; but our Lady suddenly appeared unto the Boy
in the Furnace, and by Her power did preserve him from the fury of the Heat, so
that he came forth, not having so much as the hair of his Head touched or
Scorched with Burning. Whereupon the People took the Old Jew and cast him into
the Furnace, and presently he was consumed.

Also it is said, that the House that the blessed Virgin dwelt in at Bethlehem
was removed by heavenly Angels, and carried through the Air many thousand Miles
over Sea and Land, to the Country of Dalmatia, where it did remain for a
certain time, and then it was again removed to Lorretto in Italy, where it
remains to this day, being a Holy place, much visited by Pilgrims, and (by
virtue of it) many Miracles are wrought daily.

And thus the Book you brag of, far excels
The Lies of Jews, Turks, Moors, and Infidels;
And sure the Heathen hearing of these Lies,
The Christian Religion despise;
He that will one day guerdon good and bad,
T'whose word we must not dare a bate or add,
Against those he will draw his vengful Sword,
That mingle fables with his sacred Word.
Pri Thy blinded Zeal my very heart does grieve,
Thou understandst not what thou should believe,
Think thou so many grave and learned Men,
Have lived and died in blear-eyed errors Den,
Do think all Popes, all Cardinals, are Liars,
Abbots, most zealous Monks, most holy Friars?
Do think all these for many a hundred Year,
Did not profess and know the truth sincere?
These Men maintained the Church in glorious state,
'Till Luther and cursed Calvin 'gan to prate.

Ped. Like as a Squirril skips from Tree to Tree,
Even (so Sir John) you from the matter flee;
Our talk was Latin, and our Lady first,
And you to other Arguments out burst.
I tell you, I that Virgin love and honor,
Although my prayers do not wait upon her,
Nor do I hold her Relics of such price,
To raise Souls to the heavenly Paradise:
You, her supposed apparel do adore,
Hair-lace and Slippers (which she never wore)
Her Comb, her Girdle, and her Gown of Silk,
Her Apron, and the Pot that held her Milk,
Her Cloak, her Hankerchief, her Hood, her Hair,
To these you mumble many a Latin prayer;
And therefore I defy you, and in sadness,
I hold such holiness a kind of madness:
And so (Sir John) we two will make an end,
And each of us about his business wend;
Yet ever we part I would fall to again,
And of the Latin speak a word or twain;
There was but one Tongue at the birth of Abel.
And many at the building up of Babel;
A wicked work, which God would have confounded,
But when Christ came, all Tongues again resounded,
To build his Church by his Apostles teaching,
Which was in Praying sure as well as Preaching;
For Prayer is the full and true perfection
Of Holy service (saving your correction)
Then if our Lord to mine own Tongue be ready,
What need I then with Latin move our Lady,
Or if to both my Prayers must be in,
I pray sir tell with which should I begin,
And to pray jointly to them both as one,
Your Latin Prayers then are quickly gone;
For Pater Noster never will accord
With her, nor Ave Mary with our Lord.
If I have him, what need I seek another,
Or will he nothing do without his Mother?
And this (Sir Priest) was much in Question,
Disputed long, with deep digestion,
Whether the Ave Mary should be said
To God, or to our Lady when they prayed:
With which, Saint Andrews University,
Was puzzled with a strange diversity,
And sat so long they cooled all their Kale,
At last the Master Cook heard of the Tale,
And like a mad Man ran among the Clergy,
Crying with many a Domine me asperge,
To give the Pater Noster to the Father,
And Avies to our Lady altogether;
And every Man may think (that wise or grave is,)
She Is more then satisfied with Creeds and Aves;
At which the Clergy (fearing more confusion)
Were all contented with the Cooks conclusion.

Pri. Pedlar, this tale is of thee Coined new;

Ped. Sir John, I Will leese my Pack if it be not true:
Again all learned Monks and Friars have read,
How Christ himself taught us of his own Head,
That every Soul that is with sin oppressed,
Should come to him, and he would give them rest:
Come all to me (said he) not to another,
Come all to me (said he) not to my Mother.
And if I do as our good Lord commanded,
I know our Lady will no ways withstand it.
And so if I should say my Prayers in Latin,
Unto the Lord at Even-song or Mattin,
And never understand what I were saying,
Think you the Lord would take it for true Praying?
No sure, he will not, for I truly know,
My Tongue and Heart must both together go.
And here upon I Will tell you what befell,
To learned Clerks, that Latin well could spell,
With whom by chance I lodged at an Inn,
Whereas an old Wife on her Wheel did spin,
And toward Evening she fell to and Prayed,
But neither they or I knew what she said;
One said she Canted, others said she Mumbled,
And still strange language from her Lips she Fumbled,
Round run her Wheel, and round her Tongue did run,
She Mumbled, and she Slaver'd, and she Spun;
What think you now (Sir John) of this old Hussie.
Where was her Heart when as she was so busy.
At last (said one) Dame wot you what you say?
No, not (quoth she) but well I wot I Pray.
You Pray (quoth he) and know not what I grant,
Alas how can you be so ignorant?
The Woman, musing little at the motion,
Said, Ignorance is Mother of Devotion.
If Ignorance be Mother, then (said he)
Sure Darkness must her only Daughter be.
Prayed you, (quoth I) when all the time you Span?
What matters that, quoth she, God's a good Man,
And knows what I speak in the Latin Tongue,
Either at Mattins or at Even-song.
Alas, good Sir, was not this Wife abused,
Whose Soul and Senses all were so confused?
You know these unknown Tongues can profit no Man,
And one Tongue is enough for any Woman;
But when we Pray in true sincerity,
As God commands in Spirit and verity,
The Heart sends up the Tongue as Messenger
Unto the Lord, a pleasant Passenger.

Pri. But Peddler, here is a pretty little Book,
Wherein if thou will spare the time to look,
Set forth by a good Catholic Divine,
Which out of doubt will settle thy Ingine;
With it thy conscience will be better framed,
The Gag of the new Gospel it is named:
He clearly proves by Zachary's example,
When he did sacrifice within the Temple,
And all the People prayed and stood without,
They knew not then what Tongue he spoke no doubt;
Ergo the Mass may be both said and sung,
In othet Language then our Mother Tongue.

Ped. Sir John, I see your holy Catholic,
Upon the Text has put a pretty trick;
Did Zachary speak in a Latin style,
When all the People staid withour the while?
He was a Jew sure, and knew Hebrew well,
And spoke no Latin for ought you can tell;
For if the People heard not what he said,
Could they or you know in what Tongue he Prayed!
Since understanding comes by the Ear,
He cannot understand that does not hear.
Prove is, that Zachary spoke Latin, then
I Will siy all Monks and Friars are honest men.
Because a learned Priest may pray in Latin,
And mumble over his Even-song, Mass, and Muttin,
Ergo a Pedlar to the Lord may Pray,
And know no syllable that he does say;
So when you put me to your Pater Noster,
I ask an Egg when I would have an Oyster.
And seeing thus our Faith does disagree,
That neither I with you, nor you with me
Can be united with one mind and heart,
I think it best we take our leaves and part.
I Will pray that God, in grace and mercy, would
Bring all his Straying Flock into his Fold.

FINIS.

