THE KINGS MOST EXCELLENT MAJESTY'S VVellcome to his own House, Truly called
the Honor of Hampton COURT, Who came thither on the 24. of August, and so
consequently hoped and humbly desired to White Hall.

Written by his Majesty's most humble servant John Tailor, one of the Yeoman of
His MAJESTY'S Guard.

Alius Poeta Aquatticus.

From my House at the Crown in Globe Lane (Alias Phaenix Ally, nere the Globe
Tavern in Long Aker.

Printed in the Year. 1647.

THE KINGS Most Excellent MAJESTY'S, VVellcome to his own House, Truly called
the Honor of Hampton Court.
MOst Gracious (suffering) Sovereign Lord and King
Had I a quill pluckd from the Phaenix wing,
Or Homers Muse, or Virgills towering style,
(Thy ten times long wished wellcom to compile)
Had I all these great aides, all were to few,
Thy Subjects long expected joys to show
Thy presence has inspired this Muse of mine,
More then Apollo and his triple Trine,
He Is dull braind, and a Poet cannot be,
That wants a Muse (great King) and writes of thee.
A juster Master servants never had
And servants false to man, to to bad
But as the Eagle never cast his eyes,
On abject, objects, vermin, gnatts or flies,
So thou not minding injuries, have still,
With thine own goodness overcome their ill.
Ungrateful men took clothing, wages, food,
From thee, and have repaid thee ill for good:
Which thy Heroicke mind still slighted has,
As most unworthy of thy Royal wrath.
There Is not a grace, a virtue or an Art,
But are in^hroned in thy Princely Heart:
Faith and Fame unshaken with the wrongs,
Of perjured wri^ers and perfidious tongues,
Thy (...) Hope in thy Majestique Breast
That fixed belief, shall be made manifest
By Charity, which thou have showed to those
Who are thy cursed causeles mortal foes.
Whereby thy virtues patient constancy,
Has won thee a more glorious victory,
Then if (by conquest) thy sharp sword should pierce
Through all the Kingdoms of the Universe.
Thy Mercy and thy Justice are the Jems,
And richest Jewels in thy Diadems.
To sum up all; it is truly understood
There Is nothing may be named just or good
But is in thee ingraff'd, and nothing ill
Thou say or do, but it is against thy will.
Thy Master Christ (the light made thee discern,
And this blessed Lesson thou from him did learn.
That he that Loves, Father, Mother, Wife,
Children, earths goods or glory, or his life
More then his Savior (such a sordid Spirit)
Is most unworthy of his Masters Merit:
This precept thou have practiced this thy troath
Kept in thy Christian Coronation Oath,
Wife, Children, Crown, and Kingdoms, friends, Life, all
Thou hazzard'st either to rise, stand or fall,
Thy Love (Great King) to thy great King of Kings,
By thee has been pr^^'d above all things,
For which he will crown his Gifts in thee, and he
Will crown thee glorious with Eternity:
Thy Constancy has trip'd up Fortunes heel,
Thy mind never minded her Inconstant Wheel:
What good, or bad Occurrances effected;
Thy Spirits were never errected or dejected;
Not with a stuped Humor stoicall,
But with a Christian Mind Majesticall:
And with Impregnable strong confidence,
Still trusting in the Almighties Providence.
Now may we see that Patience, Clemency,
Religion, and true Magnanimity,
Are Talents lent, whose value does excel:
And all the Proffits their's that use them well.
And (Royal Sir) Thou have done well (no doubt)
Thou have not wrapped thy Talent in a Clowte,
But so improved thy trust, in thy Trustee,
That ten fold ten times more thy trust shall be.
And now poor England, has so many years
Bin Plagued with causles Jellosies and Fears,
Which (like Black clouds) dispersed with wavering wind:
Made Wit squint-eyed, and Understanding blind,
Whearby each hour was frighted hence sweet Peace
And every moment miseries increase:
But as bright Phoebus (interposed by Clouds,
Which with a mourning face the earth e'n shrowds)
At last dispells them with his Radient Ray,
And makes the dolsome dark, a glad some day.
So we (mistaken Subjects) hood-winck over
With Ignorance, our sights again recover,
King Charles shines clear, as Sols Corn scant Beams
Has proved our Jeallous Fears were ^^sse then dreams,
Mild Dove-like King brings Peace with the Ollive Branch,
Whose Love (like Balsome, Bleeding wounds will staunch
Our cheerful faces, shows our minds (like Mirrors)
Free from suspicious thoughts, or needless Terrors:
Hearts over flowed with Joys, Thanks up erected
To God, who for us has this good effected:
Our joyful eyes shows April drops of pleasure,
And showrs of Joy fill the Horizons measure,
The Almighty has thy troubles seen and heard,
And has thy upright heart in such regard
That (mauger mischief) His outstretched Arm
Has, does, and will defend thee still from Harm,
Base Shiemei Railes not as he erst has done,
Nor rake-hell Sheba (Bieri's cursed son)
Does rore and rail with loud Infernal yell,
Or cry out, to your Tents o Israel
That Sectaries no more contention Breed
But humbly learn to know their Christian Creed,
That Iudasses no more Hayle Master say
When as they mean their Master to betray.
That Reverend Levites of a new hatched Brood,
Make England drunk no more with English Blood.
That we may have our Qveene and Prince once more,
And use them Kinder then we did of yore.
Triumphing trumpetts sownd shall mount toth' stars
Hnd not the dreadful charge of civil wars,
Sweet Peace (we hope shall still the Churlish Drumb,
And Murdering, Thundering, Guns. Commanded Dumb,
Justice and Mercy both Kiss (when they meet)
No heavy sad complaining in our street,
No more shall England bath in her own Gore,
Or leading to captivity no more.
Sword (drunk with blood) shall in their Scabberds rest,
No plundering or free quartering shall molest.
The painful farmer, ploughman, or the swain,
And weapons shall give place to gowns again.
The Church resume her rights she had before,
The Clergy to be scandalized no more.
Thus each man hopes he shall his right enjoy
And all cease one another to destroy.
The King shall have his own again, and see,
His enemies ashamed and odious be.
Upon thy Head still flourish may thy Crown,
And ten times troubled be thy high Renoune
That thee and thine in glory here may Reign,
Until the King of glory come again:
For such as speak peace, and do war intend,
For any Sinister or privateend.
That of tranquillity do prate and prattle,
But wish for war, yet dare not see a Battle,
Let all such never claim a Christian Name
Whose trade or pleasure in Blood and Flame,
Of their dear Country; to Rippe, Rend and tear,
Their Mothers Woombe, which did such Bastards bear.
Belike some fear that Peace would drive 'em hence
To England New, or the Isle of Providence:
Virginia, Barmoodies, or St. Kitts.
Barbados, Mevis, or befides their wits:
But those that offering to the Altars bring,
To raise new wars against Kingdom Laws and King,
Let them go Westward to the Triple tree,
And like false Traitors, hang both he and she.
Those Sons of Hittits and of Amorites,
God do to them, as to the Midianites,
As Heathen Sisera, and as Fabin did
At Endors Field, (where Kishowes Brook does slyd)
As they became as dunge, so let them be,
That to a blessed Peace will not a gree,
The peace of God, grant us thou God of Peace,
Let us cease sin, thou will it our sorrows cease.
Let Us frame our lives according to thy word
Ang let no Sword be drawn, but Justice Sword,
To which ends, thou good God of Consolation,
Send happy peace to this afflicted Nation.
So welcome good King Charles to Hampton Court,
And God be still thy shield, defense and Fourt.
FINIS.

