THE DIVISIONS Of the Church of ENGLAND CREPT IN AT XV. SEVERAL DOORS BY
DIVERSE, Each having Members very earnest in the seeking to have such a Church
and Discipline here established, as is agreeable with their Religion.

For Bishops
1 Papists. 2. Arians. 3. Arminians. 4. Canonists.


Against Bishops.
5. Athests. 6. Adamites. 7. Familists. 8. Anabaptists. 9. Luthetans. 10.
Seperatists. 11. Brownists. 12. Puritans.
Betwixt both.
Novelists. Time-servers.


Each in their true colors without any dissimulation in the world.

LONDON Printed and are to be sold by R. Smithers. Anno Domini. 1642.

The Divisions of the Church of England.
FIrst, Atheists among us, are such people who would have no church government
here at all, but live in an independent way, as themselves please, without
control, having no Church Discipline, nor regarding, nor caring for Godly
people, their company, nor their prayers.

2. Roman Catholics among us, are a people who would have a church consisting
of Cardinals, Archbishops, Bishops, deacons, Jesuits, Friars, etc. independent
to the crown or civil Magistrate, and all the Discipline of the church to be
wholly ordered by the Clergy, and used in what manner, where, where, and as
they please, no man having authority to question them why they do thus: or
thus. The service book and the Masse-booke they would have in latin exactly
performed, confession to the Priest, and absolution from him, and no prayers to
be used, but what they allow.

3. The A^ians among us are a people who would have an high priest to be above
the rest, and all the rest of the Clergy to be Prelates or Priests at the
least, and no office or duty to be performed by them without Rochet, surplice,
cap, tippet, or the like, according to their degree, and the service to be
exactly performed with Organs, and other music, and singing as is appointed
by the high Priests, that is the Bishops, etc.

4 The Arminians among us, are a people, who would have the church governed by
Archbishops, Bishops, etc. to whom should be given such authority and respect,
that whatsoever they in their Court do establish out to be confirmed by the
King, and his Counsel, to whom they would have such respect given, that they
should not be thwarted in any design. These would have the Discipline of the
church to consist in the Prelates Courts, and what is there done by them, their
Doctors, proctors, etc. to pass unresistably in the church, or to any member
thereof, the first and latter service they would have exactly performed, one at
the desk, the other at the Altar, with their cushions, basins, wax candles, and
the rest of that rabblement, set in places as appointed before them.

5. Adamites are a people, who would have an independent society, which neither
Magistrate nor church should command, nor meddle with, but live as they list,
and labor to increase and multiply in the world, fearing neither government,
nor discipline, and in their societies, they are so overcome with lust, that
they cannot pray.

6. Famalists among us, are a people who would have an independent church,
neither would they have any Bishops, Elders, presbetors, nor Government in the
church, and would have all things common, not only goods, and cattle, but
wife and children, And that no punishment should be inflicted upon any
offender, but only to pray for them, and so leave them to the mercy of God.

7. Anabaptists amongst us, are a people who would have an independent church,
neither would they have any government of the Clergy at all in the church, for
fear of an Antichristian church, neither would they have any baptized, but
such who are of age, and judgment, to know what it is to be baptized. These
would have churches, meetings, and members of their own election, and take in,
and cast out whom they please, and their prayers are more that God would grant
thema church after their desire, then for grace and faith.

8. Novelists amongst us, are a people who affects change of government, and
discipline, to day they follow the Bishops to hear them preach at Court, then
they applaud the government, another day they follow the religius divines in
London, then they cry down the Bishopr, for an Antichristian government,
another time they begin to pause upon it, and consider of the pleasantness of
the formality, of the Church of Rome, and yet are never constant in any thing,
one while they are all for the hearing of the service in Cathedralt, and by and
by they care not for the service, and only follow Sermons.

9. Time servers are those who are always of the strongest side, as near as
they can, when most would have Bishops, so would they, when the Bishops are
likely to go down then they would have none, they commend no Discipline but
that which they see they are like to have, in Cathedrals they commend all their
ceremonies, but where the Service is not read, or in company that so affect it
they command, and applaud prayer by the spirit. 10. Canonists are those amongst
us, that would have the government of Bishops still to abide, because they
stand by Canon Law upon the same grounds, they labor for Canon-discipline, and
the canonical hours and form of prayer, and all other canonical Rites and
ceremonies.

11. Lutherans are those amongst us, who would have no Bishops, but a
Church Government under the king, consisting of the Clergy and Laity together:
and whatsoever in the discipline ordinances of the church is of man, and
correspondent to the church of Rome to be altered and changed to the nearest
conformity to the primitive church.

12. Seperatists are a people among us, who would have the Bishops cast out,
and the government of the Church committed to Elders Ecclesiastical, and
Layicke, and moreover an independent church government granted besides, for the
free use of liberty of conscience without correction, or control in divine
ordinances, and Ecclesiastical discipline, only popery and popish Innovations
excepted.

13. Brown^sts are a people among us, who would have the Bishops cast out, and
their discipline, and the book of Common Prayer no more used, but the
Government of Elders established to govern the church, and such Discipline
confirmed by the Parliament, as shall be by the Church presented, when the
evil Members are cast out, and no prayers to be used but extemporary prayers,
and that whosoever have received the gift of preaching, may freely preach, of
what calling or condition soever he be, in case he be a godly man, and by the
church approved.

14 Puritans among us are a people, who would have the Bishops removed, and the
church no more to be ruled by them: but by a Presbyteriall Government, as it is
in Scotland, and the very same Government discipline, and ordinances which they
have, they would have here, approving of it in their judgments and conceive it
to be the happiest Government in the world; especially if we enjoy it, because
the Church in Scotland, and ours in England, is all in one and the same Island,
and under one and the same King.

15 The Author, and those of his mind, pray to God for a Reformation, and that
God would be with the great Assembly in the settling thereof, waiting Gods
time, and their accomplishment thereof: not doubting, but that God will be with
them, to work such a reformation, as shall make the church of England
glorious, and what that high Court shall establish, we doubt not, but that
their Declaration will be sufficient to give satisfaction to all true hearted
Protestants, and all who wish well to the King, Church, and Kingdom of England.

16 All true hearted Protestants desire and pray, that God would be pleased,
to be with that great Assembly, and to guide them, that they may establish
such things, and only such as may be pleasing to Almighty God, for the honor
of the King, the comfort to the Church, and the good of the whole Kingdom, and
that for Christ his sake, Amen.

FINIS.

