TENANTS LAW A TREATISE of great Use, FOR TENANTS and FARMERS Of all Kinds, And
all other Persons whatsoever.

WHEREIN The several natures, differences and kinds of Tenures and Tenants are
discussed, and several Cases in the Law touching Leases, Rents, Distresses,
Replevins, and other accidents between Landlord and Tenant, and Tenant and
Tenant between themselves and others; Especially such who have suffered by the
Late Conflagration in the City of London.

Flamma Consumpta, Resurgo. The second Edition.

By R. T. Gent.

LONDON, Printed by T. M. for S. S. and are to be sold by W. Jacob, by
Barnards-Inn in Holborn, and John Am^^y over against St. Clements Church in the
Strand, 1670.

To the Tenants of England, especially those of the City of London.
I Have often observed many Inconveniences and Damages to happen to Tenants
oftentimes by their Ignorance and Timerosity, not knowing how to defend
themselves against insulting and cruel Landlords; and oftentimes they commit
many delinquencies to the Landlord, and trespasses and Nusances against one
another unwittingly, not knowing when they offend; and most often they plung
themselves into the Mire, and are ins^ared in the Net of trouble, like a Bird,
by their overmuch striving to get themselves free and at liberty from it, and
entangle themselves more and more, and work themselves the farther and faster
in, till they beat themselves out of breath, and break their Wings, and lose so
many Feathers, that they scarce ever get flush again. One cause hereof is; many
delight to delude and flatter themselves, by setting a fairer gloss upon their
cause then it will bear when it comes to the Test, and to give wrong
instructions to their Clerk or Attorney, whereby it cannot be rightly Stated to
learned Council; and then what the Event of this will be, I leave to your
selves to Judge.

I have taken the pains to compose this Treatise, to teach you to undeceive
your selves, and not to seek refuge from the Law, in such cases when you your
selves have done the injury: and likewise to show you how you may ward your
blows, and defend your selves against such as are injurious unto you, Malicious
and Superbous.

I have methodized the particular Directions enacted for ending Controversies,
between all Persons concerned in the late dreadful Fire of the City of London;
whereby they may with more ease, compose their own differences, and inform
themselves of the Rules for New Building* I wish you much profit; which is all
the design herein intended, by a Lover of his Country,

R. T. Gent.

The Contents.
CHAP. I. A Division of the several kinds of Tenants and Tenures. Page 1. CHAP.
II. Of Leases, Covenants and Conditions; Provisoes and Reservations, Surrenders
and Assignments of Leases. 41. CHAP. III. Of Payment of Rent, Acceptance and
Extinguishment thereof, Demands, Entries, Dates, Continuance, Limitations and
Determinations of Leases. 71 CHAP. IV. Of Corn sown, who shall have the Crop;
of Estovers, and Trees blown (...): of Distresses, what things may be
distreyned, and how used; who may take a Distress, for what cause, when and
where. 90 CHAP. V. Of Rescous, in what cases it may be lawful; Replevins, how
to be sued out; and of Avowries to Declarations upon Replevin. 109 CHAP. VI.
What cases a Tenant or other shall be said to commit waste in Houses* Gardens,
Woods, Pastures, Orchards, etc. And what waste shall be punishable, and what
not. 120 CHAP. VII. The Tenants Law, touching New Buildings within the City of
London. 133
Tenants Law.
CHAP. I. A Division of the Several kinds of Tenants and Tenures.
EVery Subject of this The kinds of Tenants and Tenures.
Kingdom that occupies any Lands, or inhabiteth in any House or Tenement, is
said to be a Tenant, Tenens a Tenendo; because he must hold of some Lord or
other.

And diverse and various are the natures and kinds of Tenants and Tenures in
this Land at this time; Although they have been more numerous, and indeed
excessive slavery to the people, so that their exhorbitant Cruelty has caused
their Dissolution.

Those which are ceased to be, are Tenure in Villenage, where the Villenage.
Lord might vassal and enslave his Tenants person at his pleasure, but not kill
him.

Pillenage, where the Lord might Pillenage.
pillage his Tenant of all his goods.

Frank-Almoigne, or free Alms, Free-Alms.
was a Tenure begun and had its original, either at or soon after the
foundation of Monasteries and Religious Houses, and extripated with them. The
nature of it in old time was, when a man being Seized of Lands or Tenements in
his Demeasne as of Fee, of the same Land did enfeoffe some Abbot or Prior and
their Covents, or some Dean and Chapter and their Successors, or some Parson of
a Church and his Successors, or any other Religious person who was in a
Capacity to take such Alms, to hold the same Lands and Tenements to them and
their Successors in Liberam Eleemosynam, in Free-Alms, or Frank-Almoigne, of
the grantor and his Heirs: and such as held in Free-Alms were bound in
consideration of such grant or Feoffment, to perform certain Divine and
Religious Services and Exercises, for the Souls good, Life and Prosperity of
the grantors and all others.

And they confirmed all their grants with grievous Anathema's and Imprecations
against all such as should in any wise diminish or take away such their grant,
or convert the same unto any other use; (which some justly believe to be none
of the least Causes why Purchasers of Church Lands find such ill success, as
seldom to enjoy it to the fourth Generation.)

But, as I said before, this Tenure and the Religious Houses ended together, or
immediately one after the other; So that none can grant any Lands or Tenements
in Liberam Eleemosynam at this day.

Tenure in Capite and Knights-Service Knight Service.
is also by Act of Parliament in the twelfth Year of his now Majesty's Reign,
(together with the Court of Wards which was dependent upon that Service,) taken
away, and a^^ those Tenures are now turned into common Soccage.

So that the more usual Tenants amongst us at this day are

Tenant in Fee-Simple, in Fee-Taile. Fee-Simple.


Tenant in Tail, after possibility of Fee-Tail.
issue extinct.

Tenant in Dower, by the courtesy Dower, Courtesy, Term of life, for years.
At Will.
of England; Tenant for Term of Life, for years upon Lease, in writing, or
Lease parol.

Tenant at will; by the common Law, or by custom.

Tenant by Copy of Court-Roll. Copy.


Tenants in Coparcenery, Joynt-Tenants, Coparcenery.
and Tenants in common.

Fee-Simple.
A man that is seized in Lands or Fee-Simple.
Tenements, to hold to him and his Heirs for ever, is said to be Tenant in
Fee-Simple, and such an Estate is called Feodum Simplex. The word Feodum in
Latin being taken to signify Inheritance; and Simplex implies pure, plain, or
unmixt: and indeed Fee-Simple is the most pure holding that is, being unmixt or
entangled in it self. But as the whitest Color will be soonest stained; so is
this pure Tenure most subject to be spotted and involved in troubles above any
other; Which the Law calls Incombrances.

If a man were to deal as purchaser Incombrances of Fee-Simple.
with a Tenant in Fee-Simple, he has a happy bargine if he meets with a Simple
Tenure and a Simple Tenant; I mean, the one free from Incombrances, and the
other from deceit: which many have found it a difficult thing to obtain.

I shall therefore by way of caution set down the several troubles and
incombrances this pure and Simple Tenure, called Fee-Simple, is subject unto.

Fee-Simple may be incombred, with several Judgments, Statutes Merchant and of
the Staple, Recognizances, Mortgages, Wills, Precontracts, Bargains and Sails,
Feoffments, Fines, Amerciaments, Joyntures, Dowers, and many other fraudulent
Conveyances, if a knave once possess it; and last of all, may be quite
forfeited for Treason.

But Fee-Simple being free from any of the aforementioned incombrances, is the
most free, absolute, and ample Estate of Inheritance that that any man can
have; And therefore a Tenant in Fee-Simple, is said to be Seistus in Dominico
suo, ut de feodo; that is, seized in his Demeasne as of Fee.

Tenant in Fee-Taile.
All Freehold inheritances before Fee-Tail.
the Statute of Westminster 2. Cap. 1. were Fee-Simple at the common Law; so
that Tenant in tail was instituted by force of that Statute; By which Statute
there is a twofold Tenant in Tail, viz.

General, and special Tail.
He is said to be Tenant in general General Tail.
Tail, who holds Lands or Tenements to him and to the Heirs of his body
begotten.

For if in this case he Marry many Wives, and have issue by them all; every one
of them may (the Elder dying) come to inherit this Land, because every one is
the issue engendered of his body.

It is the same case if Lands or Tenements be invested upon a Woman and the
Heirs of her body, And she have several Husbands, and Children by them all,
every one of them is in a possibility to inherit those Tenements, being all
begotten of her body.

But where Lands or Tenements are settled upon a man and his wife, and the Heirs
of their bodies between them two lawfully to be begotten; Special Tail.
this is Tenant in Special Tail, because in this case none can inherit, but
such Children as are by this man begotten upon the body of this wife named in
the Grant: And if that wife dye, and the man takes another wife, and has
issue of her body, the issue by the latter wife cannot inherit by virtue of
such a grant; And if the first husband dye, and the wife marry again and have
issue by a second husband, that issue cannot inherit.

There be several other Estates in Special Tail, according to the Devises,
Limitations, and Conditions Special tail with limitation.
invented and settled by the Donor; as sometimes to a man and his Wife and the
Heirs Males of their bodies between them two to be begotten; in this Case the
Females cannot inherit.

So that if Lands be invested upon a man and his Heirs Males of his body, and
he has issue two Sons and dies, the eldest enters, according to the grant,
and has issue a Daughter and dies; this Daughter shall not inherit the Land,
but the Brother, because he is the Heir Male.

And if a man has Lands granted to him, and to his Heirs Males of his body;
and he has no Son, but only a Daughter, and the Daughter has a Son and dies
living her Father, and after that the Donee dies; in this case the Donee dying
without issue Male in the Law, the Son of his Daughter, which is his
Grandchild, shall not inherit, but the entayle is extinct, and the Land shall
Revert to the Donor. Tail Tenures Encumbrances.


These grants in Tail are the causes of much strife, and stir up many
chargeable suits, though in my judgment they are useless: for the intent of the
Donor is seldom observed in them, he intending to preserve the Memory of his
own name to perpetuity; which cannot be, since a Fine and Recovery will docke
it.

Tenant in Tail after possibility of Issue extinct.
When Lands and Tenements be Possibility of Issue extinct.
granted to a Man and his Wife in special Tail, and one of them dye before they
have issue, the Survivour is Tenant in Tail after possibility of issue extinct;
but if they have issue, during the life of the issue the Survivour cannot be
said to be tenant in Tail after possibility of issue extinct. But if the issue
dye without issue, and leave none to inherit by virtue of the Entail, then the
Surviving Donee is tenant in Tail after possibility of issue extinct.

And none can be tenant in Tail after Donee in special Tail.
possibility of issue extinct, but one of the Donees in special Tail; which
tenant in Tail after possibility of issue extinct, is not chargeable with
committing of Wast, because the inheritance was once in him; but if he does
Allien in Fee, it is a forfeiture of his Estate, and the Heir in Reversion may
enter.

Tenant by the Courtesy of England.
When a Man marries a Wife seized in Fee-simple, or in general Fee. Tail, or
one that is Heiress unto Lands or Tenements in Special, and has a Child by the
same Wife male Tenant by the courtesy.
or female born alive, and the Wife dye; whither the Child be living or dead,
the Husband shall hold the same Lands during his Life, as Tenant by the
Courtesy of England, which is a Tenure used in none other Country but in
England: And although the Child dye as soon as it is born, if it were but heard
cry, the Husband shall hold the Lands after his Wifes decease during his Life
as Tenant by the courtesy; the crying of the Child being a sufficient
Testimony of its being born alive.

Tenant in Dower.
Tenant in Dower.
This kind of Tenant is always of the Feminine gender; and is when a man is who
seized of Lands or Tenements in Fee-Simple, or in general Tail, or as Heir in
Special Tail, marries a Wife and dies; the Wife after the death of her Husband,
shall have during Her life the third part of such Lands or Tenements as her
Husband had during the Coverture, whether she had any issue by him or not, so
she be above nine years of age at her Husbands death.

This is the Dower at the Common Law; Dower at Common Law.
but by custom in many places it is otherwise: for in some places she shall
have the half, and in others the whole; and in all these cases she is Tenant in
Dower.

In Kent it is the custom, for the Dower by the Custom.
Woman to have half her Husbands Lands durante viduitate, so long as she
continues a Widow; but if she marry again she looses all: so likewise is the
custom there, if a man marry a Wife having an Estate in Lands, etc. and she
dye without issue, he shall have half while he remains sole: but if he marry
again he loses all. And in Kent they say the reason thereof is, because they
do not love that their Lands should help to maintain any Children but such as
are of their own getting; but how sure they are hereof, Ignoramus.

Tenant for Life.
He that holds Lands or Tenements for the term of his own Life, or for term
of the Life of any other person; In this case the Lessee either for term of his
own Life, or for another, is Tenant for term of Life; And this Tenant for Life
has in him the Freehold, this being the lowest degree of Freehold.

In a grant for term of Life, it is Lessor and Lessee.
said to be from Lessor to Lessee. Note, there is Feoffer and Feaffee, Donor
and Donee, Lessor and Lessee: so there is likewise Grantor and Grantee, Obligor
and Obligee, Mortgagor and Mortgagee. Feoffer and (...).


He that enfeoffeth another in Lands or Tenements, is called the Feoffer; he to
whom the feoffment is made, is the Feoffee.

So when a man gives Lands or Donor and Donec.
Tenements to another in tail, he is called the Donor; and he to whom the gift
is made is the Donee.

And likewise he that lets to another Grantor and Grantee.
any Lands or Tenements to hold for term of Life, for Years, or at Will, is
called the Lessor; and he to whom the Lease is made, is called Lessee: which
Lessee for Life (as I said before) is tenant of Freehold. So also he that
pawneth Lands to another Mortgagor and Mortgagee.
is called Mortgagor, and he to whom it is pawned is called the Mortgagee.

Tenant for Years.
Tenant for term of Years is, when Tenant for years.
a man demiseth, and lets any lands or tenements to another to hold for a
certain number of years agreed upon between the Lessor and the Lessee; by force
and virtue of which Lease, the Lessee enters into the said tenements.

This Lease for term of years may be granted by word of mouth, and this is
called a Lease parol: which shall bind the Lessor so long as the term is
accorded for, if the Witnesses live to prove the Lease Parol.

But the more safe and usual way, is to take a Lease by Deed indented, which
needs no other Execution but only sealing and delivered. For by virtue of that
Lease, the tenant may enter whenever he will.

But a Lease for term of Life must Livery and Seizin in Lease for Life.
be executed by Livery and Seisin; because the freehold passes with that
Lease; which it cannot do without Livery and Seizin.

This was the Case of Allen and Waller at the Lent-Assizes at Maidstone 1654.
Waller brought an Ejectione firm against Allen; the Defendant proved a Lease
Parol at a certain rent during his Life: which last word of the Defendants
witness gave the verdict against him, because none can be tenant for Life,
without Livery and Seizin.

Also if a man make a Lease to one for Years, the remainder to another for
Life, or in tail, or in Fee, here the Lessor ought to make Livery and Seizin to
the Lessee for Years; or else nothing shall pass to him in remainder, though
the Lessee enter and enjoy his term of Years; but the Freehold and the
Reversion remains in the Lessor. But if the Lessor makes Livery and Seizin to
the Lessee, then the Freehold passes over to them in the Reversion, according
to the grant.

Likewise if a man make a Lease of Lease for Years takes right after the
delivery.
Lands or tenements to another for term of Years, and the Lessor dye before the
Lessee enter into the tenements; nevertheless he may enter, notwithstanding the
death of the Lessor, because the Lessee has right to the tenements by virtue
of his Lease, immediately after the sealing and delivery of it.

Tenant at Will.
When a man demises Lands to another Tenant at Will.
to hold to the Lessee at the will of the Lessor, and by virtue of this Lease
the Lessee is in possession; here the Lessee is tenant at Will, and has no
certain Estate in the tenements he holds, but the Lessor may eject him when
he pleases.

But if the Lessee sow the Land, and the Lessor eject him out afterward He
that sows shall Reap if Tenant at Will.
before the Corn be ripe, the Lesse^ shall nevertheless have his Crop, and
shall have free Egress and Regress to cut and carry it away, because he knew
not when the Lessor would enter upon him.

But if a tenant for years sow his Land so near the end of his term, that his
Lease expire before the Corn be ripe, he shall not come to reap it; but the
Lessor or other who has the Reversion shall have the Crop, because the Lessee
knew certainly the end and determination of his term and Lease.

In like manner if a house be let to Not so in Tenants for years.
a man to hold at Will, and the Lessee enters the House, and brings in
thither his Goods and Housholdstuff, and afterward the Lessor ejects him out;
here he shall have liberty of egress and regress, to fetch away his
Houshould-stuff.

Also if one seized in Fee-Simple, Fee-tail, or for term of Life, in an House,
and has Goods in that House, and makes his Will, appointing his Executors, and
dies; now to whosoever the house descends, the Executors shall have liberty in
some reasonable time to enter and carry away the goods.

And if a man by Deed of Feoffment grants certain Lands to another, and
delivers him the Deed, but executes it not by Livery and Seizin; the Feoffee in
this case may enter that Land, and hold it at the will of the Feoffer; but the
Feoffer may eject him out again when he will.

If a man dwell in a House as tenant Tenant at W^ll not bound to repai^s.
at will, he is not bound to repair the said house, as a tenant for term of
years is bound to do.

But if a tenant at will shall commit voluntary wast, as to pull down Houses,
and Cut, Grub, Fell, or destroy Trees, the Lessor may bring his Action of
trespass against him for so doing; and the Lessor upon a Lease at Will, if he
has reserved a yearly rent, may either distreyne, or bring an Action of debt
for the same, if it be in Arreare, which he pleases.

Tenant by Copy of Court-Roll.
Tenant by Copy of Court-Roll.
This is a very ancient tenure, and depends only upon custom; and there are so
many and various kinds of customs in Coppy-holds in several Manors and
Countries, that it would take up a large Volumn to discourse of them all; which
is not now our present Intention; but we shall refer that Subject to a further
opportunity, and here shortly in general terms set forth the nature of a tenant
by Copy of Court-Roll. In a Manor wherein there is a Custom, and has been
so used time out of mind (for nothing can be a Custom, unless it be Tempore
quo non extat Memoria, time out of mind,) that certain tenants within the said
Manor, have used to have Lands or tenements, to hold to them and their Heirs
in Fee-Simple or Feetail, or for term of life, or upon any other condition, at
the Will of the Lord after the custom of the same Manor; such tenants are
called Coppy-holders; that is, tenants by Copy of Court-Roll: for a Copy of
the Court-Roll is all the evidence they have for their estates in the said
Lands.

Now a tenant by Copy of Court-Roll, Copy holder cannot alien by Deed.
may not alien his estate by Deed; for if he do, it is a forfeiture to the
Lord, and the Lord may enter, and take the forfeit.

But if any tenant by Copy of Court-Roll, will alien his Lands, he may do it
by a surrender into the hands of the Lord, to the use of him that shall have
it; and any kind of estate that a Freeholder can make of his Land by Deed, a
Coppyholder may do the same by surrender.

The tenant by Copy of Court-Roll is also bound by the custom to repair his
houses; and if he suffer any tenement or house to fall down for want of repair,
or if he pull it down, he forfeits his Coppyhold to the Lord of the Manner.

There are seven Properties incide^^^ for the Maintenance of a good Custom.
First, It must be reasonable. 2 Ed 4. 24. 13 Ed. 3. 4. 42 Ed. 3. 4.


Secondly, It must be certain.

Thirdly, It must be according t^ Common Right.

Fourthly, It must be on good consideration.

Fifthly, It must be Compulsory. 5 H. 7. 9. 42 Ed 3. 3 H. 6 13 31 Ed 3.
Prescript 1. 22.


Sixthly, It must be without prejudice to the King.

Seventhly, It must be to his profit that claims the same.

In Customs there is User, Non user, Abuser, and Interuser.
Vser, Is when according to time and occasion a Custom is used.

Non user, Is when, for want of time and occasion, or through negligence, or
forgetfulness, a custom is not used.

Abuser, Is when Custom is ill used; for as User does nourish Custom, so does
Abuser destroy a Custom.

Interuser is in some cases, where a Custom may be used in one sort, and
^ometimes in another, and yet a good Custom, if there be good Consider^tions
for the Exchanging thereof at ^imes.

If the Lord have used at the Ad^ission Fine at the Lords will.
of his Coppy-hold tenants ^ometimes to take for a Fine two ^ence, or sometimes
four pence for ^n Acre, sometimes twelve pence an Acre; this User is so
uncertain; that ^^ makes the Fines Arbitrable at the Lords will.

If the Lord of a Manor have used Admission without Fine.
^ime out of mind to admit his Coppy-hold tenants without Fine, this Usage
shall bind the Lord as well as a Fine certain.

If the Lord have used to have certain Work of Tenants.
Work-dayes of his tenants; And that has not been used by the space of twenty
years last past: yet that Non User is no discharge to the ^enants, so that
there be any alive that can remember the same.

If the tenants have used when they Interuser for Rent.
Sow their Lands to pay the Lord Rent-Corn, and when it lies in Pasture to pay
their Rents in money, this is a good Interuser.

If the tenants have used to pay^ Idem.
their Lord every fourth year a double Rent, and every sixth year an half Rent,
this is a good Interuser.

If the tenants have used to have Aluser by Cattle.
Common of Pasture in their Lords Woods for their Horse-Cattel, and they put in
their Neate-Cattel and destroy the Woods, this is an abuser; But it is but
fineable and no forfeiture of the Common, no more than if they have Common for
a certain number of Beasts in the Lords Soil, and they exceed the number; this
abuse by the Surchargeing, is only fineable and no forfeiture.

If a man have a Fair to be used Forfeiture.
two days, and he keeps it three days, this abuse is a forfeiture.

Every good Custom is grounded Customs must be reasonable.
upon good Reason, and that shall be said in reason a good Custom, that in
reason is a good Law; for Law and Custom be of that affinity, as both do allow
like Reason, and both do forbid like Inconveniences; And the final effect of
both is to discuss and to discern every man's true right, and to give to every
man that which is his own; for although Custom in ^ome cases differ from Law,
and ^oth admit Execution of some Acts without some Ceremonies required ^y the
Law; yet the end and effect ^f Custom is to maintain the like ^eason, and avoid
the like incoveni^ncies as the Laws does.

If the tenants of a Manner will ^rescribe to hold without paying any ^ents, or
Services for their Coppy^olds, this is no good Custom. But ^o prescribe to hold
by Fealty for all ^anner of Services is good and rea^^nable.

If a Lord will prescribe never to ^old a Court but when it pleases himself,
this is not good; But to ^rescribe never to hold a Court for ^^e special good
of any one tenant, ^^cept the same tenant will pay him a ^ine for the same;
that is good and ^easonable.

If a Coppy-holder surrender his and to the use of a Stranger, in con^^deration
that the same Stranger ^^all Marry his Daughter before ^^ch a day; if the
Marriage succeeds ^ot, the Stranger takes no benefit by ^^e surrender. But if
the surrender be in consideration, that the Strange^ shall pay such a Sum of
money a^ such a day; though the money b^ not paid, yet the surrender standet^
good. Many Customs there are which at the beginning were voluntary; and now by
continuance ar^ grown Compulsary: Quae initi^ fuerunt voluntatis ex post facto
fuerunt necessitatis; Says the Civ^^ Law; which also in many Cas^ does agree
with the Common Law.

Tenant in Coparcenery.
There are two kinds of tenants i^ Tenants in Copercenery.
Coparcenery; that is, Parceners a^ the Common Law, and Parceners b^ custom.

After the course of the Common Law, when a Man or Woman seized in Lands or
tenements in Fe^^ Simple, or Fee-tail, and has no other issue but Daughters,
and dies the tenements descend to the Daughters equally as Coheirs; and the^
shall enjoy every one an equal part thereof, as tenants in Parcenery, o^
Copartnership, and are all as it were ^ne Heir to their Ancestor; And ^^ese
Coheirs or parceners may have Writ called Breve de participati^^e facienda, to
have the Lands e^ually divided and shared amongst them.

If a man seized of Lands dye without issue, and the tenements descend ^^ his
Sisters; or if he has no Si^ers, and it descends to his Aunts: ^^ey be Coheirs
or parceners as a^resaid.

If there be two parceners, one ^arries and has issue and dies, and
^fterwards her Husband holds one ^alf, as tenant by the Courtesy; ^he Coheir
or parcener that survi^eth, and the tenant by the Courte^e, may make partition
between ^^em; And if the tenant by the ^ourtesie will not consent there un^^,
the Surviving parcener may com^el him by a writ de Participatione ^^cienda.

But if the tenant by the Courtesy ^^sires to have partition, and the
^^rceners surviving will not agree to (...); the tenant by the Courtesy can
^ave no remedy: for he cannot ^ave a writ de Participatione facienda against
the surviving parcener, although the parcener may have it against him.

Parceners by Custom.
This Tenure is Gavel-kind, and i^ Partners by Custom.
used only in Kent, except in some certain places in England besides and in
North Wales. But the me^ of Kent only claim this as a right remaining unto them
unconquered and it is thus: If a man be seized in Fee-Simple or Fee-Tail in
Lands o^ tenements of the Custom and Tenur^ of Gavel-kind, and has issue
diver^ Sons and dies; All the Sons shall be Coheirs, and equally inherit those
Lands and tenements as Females do and may make partition by writ d^
Participatione facienda, and divide as in the case of Daughters at the common
Law.

Joynt-Tenants.
When a man being seized of certain Joynt-Tenants.
Lands and Tenements, does thereof enffeoff three or four, o^ more, to have and
to hold to them and their Heirs; or to hold to themselves, for the term of
their lives, or for another life, and they become seized by virtue of that
Feoffment; these are said to be Joynt-Tenants.

Likewise if two or more disseize Disseizor^
another of any Lands or Tenements, to their own use, the disseizors be
Joynts-tenants; but if it be but to the use of one of them, they be not
Joynt-tenants.

Now the nature of Joint tenants is, that the whole estate shall go to the
Survivour.

As, if there be Joynt-tenants in Fee-Simple, and the one of them has issue
and dies, the two that survive shall have the whole Tenements, and nothing
thereof shall go to the issue of him that is dead: And if the second tenant
have issue and dye, the third who is the Survivour shall enjoy Survivour.
the whole, and shall have it in Fee-Simple to him and his Heirs.

But now there is a difference in tenants in Parcenery: for if there be three
Copartners, and one has issue and dies before there be any partition made,
that part which belonged to her that is deceased, shall descend to her issue.
And if such a Parcener dye without issue, her part shall descend to her
Coheirs: so that this they have by descent, and not by Survivourship as
Joynt-Tenants have.

And as the Survivourship takes Survivourship.
place amongst Joynt-tenants, so it does amongst all persons who have Joint
Estate, or possession with others in Chattels Real or Personal.

As, if a Lease be made to several persons for term of years, the Survivour of
the Lessees shall enjoy all the Tenements during the term by virtue of the
Lease.

And in like manner Goods and Chattels personal, whereof there be partners,
shall go to the Survivour. And if a Bond be made to many persons for one Debt,
and some of the Obligees dye, the Survivour shall have all the Debt: And so it
is in all Covenants and Contracts amongst Partners.

There may also be Joynt-tenants for term of life, and yet they have several
Inheritances.

If Lands be given to two men to Several Inheritances.
hold to them for term of their lives, and to the Heirs of their two bodies,
here these Donees are Joynt-tenants for term of their lives, and have several
Inheritances: For if one of them have issue and dye, the Survivour shall enjoy
the whole during his life by Survivourship. And if the Survivour have also
issue and dye, then the issue of them both shall enjoy the estate equally
between them, as tenants in common, and not Joynttenants.

Now the reason why these are said to have several Inheritances, is because it
is impossible for them to have an Heir between them, as a Man and a Woman may
have.

Therefore the Law makes this distinction according to reason and the form of
the gift; that is, to the Heirs that one gets on the body of his Wife; and
so likewise of the other: so that by this reason it must of necessity be, that
they have several inheritances.

And if after the death of the Donees, the issue of one of the Donees dye also,
leaving no issue of his body Surviving, in this case the Donor or his Heirs may
enter into the moiety of the Lands, as in his reversion, though the other of
the Donees has issue living.

In like manner if Lands be given to two Females and to the Heirs of one of
them; in this case, the one of them; that is, she that has it but for life,
has a freehold, and the other has a Fee-Simple: and if she that has the Fee
dye, the other who has the Freehold shall enjoy the whole during her life by
virtue of her Survivourship.

And if Tenements be given to two, and to the Heirs to be engendered of the body
of one of them; here the one has Freehold, and the other Fee-Tail.

If there be two Joynt-tenants, and they are seized of an Estate in Fee-Simple,
and the one by Deed grants a Rentcharge to another out of that part which
appertains to him; now during the life of the grantor, this Rentcharge is
good and effectual, but it becomes void after the death of the Grantor. For the
Tenant that Surviveth shall hold all the Land by Survivourship, discharged from
the Rentcharge of the other.

But amongst Coheirs or Parceners Difference between Coheirs and Copartners.
it is otherwise: for if there be two Parceners in Tenements in Fee-Simple, and
before partition one charge his part by his deed with a Rentcharge, and dies
leaving no issue, whereby his moiety descends to the other Partners; here that
part shall not be freed of the Rentcharge, because he comes to this moiety by
descent as Heir at Law.

If Joynt-tenants be desirous to make partition between them, they may do it by
consent and agreement amongst themselves; and such partition is good and
binding against each other: but unless it be done by mutual consent amongst
themselves, the Law cannot enforce or compel them, or either of them to do it;
because Joynt-Tenants cannot have a writ de Participatione facienda, as tenants
in Copartnership may have.

If there be a joint Estate of Lands and Tenements made to a man and his wife,
and to a third Person, her the third Person shall have as much as the man and
his wise; that is, one mo^ety: for the man and wife can have but half the
estate, because they ar^ but one person in Law.

In like manner it is if Land were made to a man and his wife and to two
others; here the man and wife can have but a third part and the two others the
other two parts.

Tenants in Common.
Such as have Lands and Tenements Ten^nts in Common.
by several title, and not joint title, and none of them knows what is
several to him, whether it be in Fee-Simple, Fee-Tail, or for term of life;
these are said to be tenants in Common, because they ought by the Law to hold,
enjoy and occupy such Lands and Tenements in common and undivided, and to take
the profits in common; and do come to the same Lands and Tenements by several
titles, and not by one joint title.

If a man enfeoff two Joynt-tenants in Fee, and one of them Aliens his part to
another in Fee; this Alienee and the other Joynt-tenant be Tenants in common,
because they now stand seized by several titles; the one Joynt-tenant by virtue
of the first Feoffment made to him; and the other Joynt-tenant, and the Alien
be comes seized in his moiety by virtue of the Feoffment of the other
Joynttenant; so that the several Feoffments make their titles several, whereby
they become Tenants in common.

If there be three Joynt-tenants, and one of them aliens his part to another
person in Fee, here the Alience is Tenant in Common with the other two
Joynt-tenants, and of the other two parts, the two Joynt-tenants be seized
jointly, and the Survivour of them shall have the whole of those two parts by
virtue of Survivourship.

If there be two Joynt-tenants in Fee, and one of them gives his part to
another in tail, here the Donce, and the other Joynt-tenant become tenants in
Common.

Also if Lands be given to two men, and to the Heirs of their two bodies, in
this case these Donee^ have a Joynt-Estate during their lives; and if both of
them have issue and dye, both their issue shall hold the Land as Tenants in
Common.

If Lands be given to two men and their Heirs to hold to eac^ a moiety, these
are Tenants in Common.

If a man being seized in certain Lands does enfe off another in the half of it
without limiting of the sam^ half in severalty at the time of the Feoffment
made; that is, do not distinguish that half from the other by particular bounds
and limits; In thi^ case the Feoffer and the Feoffee shall hold their parts of
those Lands in Common.

And as it is amongst Tenants in Difference between Tenants for Life and in
Common.
Common in Lands or Tnements in Fee-Simple or Fee-Tail, in the same nature it
is also between tenants for term of life: as, if there be two Joynt-tenants
seized in Fee, and one of them lets to a man his part for term of his life, and
the other Joynttenant lets to another man his part for term of life; these two
Lessees be tenants in Common for the term of their lives.

Likewise if a man lets Lands unto two persons for the term of their ^ives, and
the one of them grants all ^is Estate of the part belonging unto him unto a
third person; then this third person to whom this grant is made, and the other
Tenant for term of life, be both tenants in Common, during the lives of both
the Lessees.

If there be three Joynt-tenants, and one of them releaseth all his right which
he has in the Land by his Deed to one of his fellows, then he to whom the
release is made, has the third part of the Lands by virtue of that release,
and shall hold that third part with himself and his fellow in Common, and they
two shall hold the other two parts jointly.

Also if a joynt-estate be made unto a man and his wife, and to a third person,
and that third person, releaseth his right which he has in that estate to the
Husband; then the Husband has the third persons moiety, and the wife has
nothing therein at all.

And if such third person relea^ his right in his moiety to the wise not naming
her Husband in the release; then the Wife has the thir^ persons moiety, and
the Husband has nothing at all in it, but only Jure uxoris, in the right of
hi^ Wife: because the release shall wor^ to invest the Estate in the person to
whom the release is made, of all that appertained to him that made such release.

There may be also Tenants in Common (...) in C^mm^nly P^^scription.
by title of Prescription; that is, when two have holden Lands in Common
undivided; the one, one half from his Ancestors; and the other, the other, the
other half from his Ancestors, or from whom the Estate is derived unto them
undivided, time whereof the memory of man has not known the contrary; these
are Tenants in Common, by title of prescription.

Now these Tenants in Common ought in some cases to have for the maintenance of
their possession several Acti^^s; And in some cases they ^^all all join in one
Action: for if their be two Tenants in Common, and they be disseized, they two
cannot bring against the disseizor one Assize in both their names, but they
must have against him two Assizes: for every of them ought to have an Assize of
his half, because the Tenants in Common are seized by several titles.

But amongst Joynt-tenants it is otherwise, for if their be never so many of
them, and they be disseized, they shall have but one Assize in all their names,
because they have all but one joynt-title.

There is likewise a difference in Tenants by diverse Descents.
suing real Actions between Partners that be in diverse descents, and Tenants in
Common. For if a man who is seized in Lands in Fee dies, leaving only two
Daughters his Coheirs, and these two Daughters enter, and have each of them a
Son, and dye without making any partition between them, so that the Lands
descend equally to their two Sons, the one moiety to one of them, and the other
unto the other, and they enter and enjoy the same in Common, and be disseized;
they shall not in this case bring two Assizes, but one Assize in both their
names: for though they came in by diverse discents, yet they be Parceners, and a
writ de Participatione facienda lies between them. Nevertheless, they be not
Parceners by reason of the seizin and possession which they have from their
Mothers, but in respect to their Estate which descended to their Mothers from
their Grandfather.

And so in respect and consideration of their first descent that was to their
Mothers, they have a title in Parcenery which makes them Parceners; and they
be but as one Heir to their common Ancestor their Grandfather, from whom the
Land descended to their Mothers. And therefore before partition made between
them, they should have but one Assize, though they came in by several discents.

And likewise in personal Actions, in Trespass, and such like cases which
concern their Tenements in Common, the Tenants in Common ought to bring such
personal Actions jointly in all their names; as for breaking their Houses,
Closes, or Pastures; wasting, treading down, or otherwise spoiling their Grass;
cutting or felling of their Woods, spoiling their Fruit Trees, fishing in their
Ponds, and such like. In these and all such kind of actions wherein they are
jointly concerned, the Tenants in Common shall have one joint Action, and
recover damages jointly.

Likewise if two Tenants in Common make a Lease of their two Tenements to
another for term of years, reserving unto themselves a certain yearly Rent; if
the Rent be in Arrear, they shall have one Action of Debt for the Rent against
the Lessee in both their names, and not diverse Actions.

If two persons or more, have Tenants in Common by diverse Titles.
Chattels real or personal in Common and by diverse titles, if one of them dye,
the other who Survive, shall not have his part that is dead in those Chattels
by Survivourship, but the Executors of him that dies shall hold and enjoy his
part with them that Survive, as the Testator did or ought to have done in his
lifetime.

If two persons have an estate in common for term of years, and on of them puts
the other out of hi^ possession, and enjoyes all himself then he that is so put
out of possession, may bring his Ejectment against the other for his moiety.

But if two persons be possessed of Chattels personal in Common by diverse
titles, as of an Horse, or an Ox, or a Cow, or the like, and one of them takes
it into his own possession, from the other; now the other has no remedy, but
to take this from him that has done him the injury again, to occupy in Common,
when he has an opportunity; that is, in plain terms, he may come by it as well
as he can.

CHAP. II. Of Leases, Covenants and Conditions, Proviso's and Reservations,
Surrenders and Assignments of Leases.
IN all Leases, as we have said before Leases and Covenants.
in the title of Tenant for term of Years, there must be Lessor and Lessee: He
which demises or lets Land to Farm, is the Lessor; and he who takes the Land;
that is, unto whom it is so let or demised, is called the Lessee; in more
vulgar terms understood by the Country Farmer by the title of Landlord and
Tenant.

According to our general and Firmor or Farmor, who it is.
common acceptance now adays, every Lessee for Life, Years, or at Will, though
it be but of a Cottage, or never so small a Tenement or House, is called a
Firmor or Farmer, and the premises a Firm or Farm; and so we say in the Writ, A
firma sua Ejecit; which may be the reason they are called Farms.

But anciently the chief Message a Parish or Country Town, was (...) led by
way of pre-eminency by t^^ name of a Farm; and unto t^^ Farm belonged great
Demeas^^ of all sorts, as Gardens, Meadow^ Pastures, Rivers, Woods, Moo^
Waters, Marshes, Furzes, Heat^ and also Messuages, Houses Tosts, Mills, and
the like: A^ all these are comprehended under the title of Lands. These
D^measnes were used to be let out to others Demeasnes.
for term of life, years, or (...) will.

These ancient Farms, (or Ferm^ which you will call them; which appellation or
dialect differs according to the Country; In Essex, Norfolk^ and Suffulke, they
call them Ferm^ and Fermors; but the West and be^^ are called Farms and
Farmors) these Farms, I say, attained to this titl^ from the old Saxon word
Fermion^ which signifies to feed, provide or yield Victuals; so that a Farmo^^
The name and nature is now altered.
signifies a Victualler; for anciently the Landlords did not receive money upon
their Leases for their Rent, but Corn and Victuals, being such the Farm yielded
of its growth; till it came by degrees into part ^oney and part Victuals; and
at (...), about the time of King Henry ^^e first, the Rent reserved was ^^rned
into Money, and so has ^^therto continued amongst most ^^en.

Yet amongst some, where the an^^ent Ancient Rents.
Rents or Reservations are not ^^tered, the Rent is in Corn or Vi^tuals to this
day, especially in Col^edg and Church-leases; and doubt^ess many of those
ancient reservati^ns received their utmost period ^n the general dissolution of
the Religious Houses; to the no small detriment of the Industrious Farmer.

All Leases for years reserving Co. 7. par. s. 23.
Rent, must be made of Lands and Tenements, whereunto the Lessor may come to
distreyne; so that a Rent cannot be reserved by a Common person out of any
incorporeal inheritance, as Advousons, Commons, Co. 1. par. Inst. p. 47.
Offices, Tithes, Fairs, Markets, Liberties, Franchizes, and the like: but if a
Lease be made by Deed in writing of one of them, one may have an Action of Debt
by way of (...) tract, but one cannot distreyne: if any Rent be reserved in
such (...) upon a Lease for life, it is utte^ void.

Leases for term of years 23 Lib. Ass. 6.
Chattels; so that if a man have Lease of Lands for five hundr^^ years, it is a
Chattel, and goes to Executor or Administrator, if dispose not otherwise of it
before death.

Every man who is seized of Lan^ in Fee-Simple, may Lease out (...) Lands for
what time or term (...) pleases himself; And so likewi^^ 32 H. 1. C. 28. 13
El. C. 10. 18 El. C 6. 1 Jac. C. 3. Hern. law of Convei. page 662. 67. 68.
might Bishops have done formely, before the Statutes restrain them.

A Tenant in tail being at age may by Deed in writing Lease ou^ such Lands as
have been let to Farm^ twenty years next before the Leas^ made, reserving the
old Rent o^ more, the Words Without Impeachment of Waste must be omitted in it,
and it must commence from the day of the making, or date. And if there be an
old Lease in being, it must be surrendered, expired or ended within one year
after the making the new one, or else it is void. a Lease thus made, binds the
of the Tenant in tail, i^ he dye ^re the term be out but if the (...) in tail
dye without (...) the ^or may avoid the Lea^^ by his (...), and so may ^e in
(...); though he accept the Rent, ^he does not thereby confirm the ^e.

(...) man that is seized in Lands in Simple or Fee-tail, in the right is Wife,
may make a Lease by (...) in writing of his Wifes (...), in the name of himself
and Wife, and she to seal thereunto, (...) the Rent to himself and his (...),
and to the Heirs of his Wife; Lease shall be good against the man and her Heirs
after her (...).

(...), Deans and Chapters (...) the Rules aforesaid, may ^e Leases of such
Estates as they seized of in Fee in Right of Churches: and so may (...),
Provosts, and Fellows of ^edges, and Wardens of (...), if they be not
prohibited by the private Statutes of their Found^tions.

But neither Tenant in tail nor a^ of the Persons before named, can (...) for
any longer term than (...) lives, or one and twenty years; (...) for what term
under they pleas^ But if they do not observe the Rules in their demises, yet
their Le^ses shall be good against them (...) their lives.

If a Lessee for years grant a Ren^ Cook. 8. Jac. 144.
charge, and after surrender, yet (...) the benefit of the Grantee, the (...)
has continuance; although in (...) veritate, it is determined, and (...)
Grantor himself shall not deroga^^ from his own grant, to make it (...) at his
pleasure.

Tenant for years of an Advows^ grants the next Avoidance (...) Donation, if
the same Church shou^^ become void during the term, and^* And afterward
surrenders his ter^ yet if the next Avoidance be wi^^ in the term, the grant is
good, (...) the years cannot determine, but (...) effluxion of time, and the
Law i^plies a limitation, if the Church (...) become void during the term;
(...) expressio eorum quae lacite ni sunt, nihil (...).

A Lessee covenanteth for himself Idem 25 Eliz. Fol. 16.
(...) Executors and Administrators, ^ith the Lessor; That he his Execu^^rs or
Assigns shall build a Brickall upon part of the demised pre^ises, And
afterward the Lessee ^akes an assignment of his Lease to ^. D. for his term;
in this Case (...) Assignee is not bound to build the ^all.

When a Covenant extends to a (...) in being, parcel of the demise, ^hen the
thing to be done by force of (...) Covenant is annexed, and appur^^nant to the
thing demised, And ^^all bind the Assignee, although by ^^press words in the
Covenant he be ^ot bound.

But if the Covenant extends to a (...) which had no being, at the time (...)
the demise made, that cannot be ^nnexed or appurtenant to a thing which had no
being.

If a Lessee Covenant to repair the ^ouses demised to him, during his ^ease,
This is part of the Contract, (...) shall bind the Assignee although (...) the
Covenant, he be not expressly ^ound.

But where the Covenant concer^ a thing not it being, at the time the demise
(...) to be made afre^ this shall bind the Covenantor, (...) Executors and
Administrators, (...) not the Assignee.

If a Lessee Covenant for him (...) his Assigns to build a House upon the Land
of the Lessor, which is (...) parcel of the demise; or to pay (...) collateral
sum of Money to (...) Lessor, or to a Stranger, this shall (...) bind the
Assignee.

If a man demise Lands for year^ with a stock of Cattle or sum of M^ney
rendering Rent, And the Less^ Covenants for him, his Executor^^ Administrators
and Assigns, to d^liver the stock of Cattle, or the (...) of Money at the end
of the ter^ This Covenant shall not charge (...) Assignee.

If an Assignee of a Lessee be ^^^victed he may have a writ of Cov^nant, so
shall a Tenant by Statu^ or by Elegit, or he to whom Lease is sold by virtue of
an Exec^tion.

If a man grant to a Lessee for ter^ of years, that he shall have so ma^^
Estovers as shall serve to repair his ^ouse, or that he shall burn in his ^ouse
or the like, during the term; that is, appurtenant to the Land, and ^^all run
with the same as a thing ap^urtenant, in whose Hands soever (...) same comes.

The Statute extends only to Co^^nants 32 H. 8. C. 24.
which touch the thing de^ised, and not to collateral Cove^ants.

An Assignee of an Assignee, Exe^^tors of an Assignee, Assigns of ^xecutors or
Administrators of every Assignee, may have an Action (...) Covenant, for all
are comprised Cook. lib. 5.
^^thin this word (Assignees) and (...) same Right that was in the Testa^^r or
Intestate, descends to the Ex^^utors or Administrators.

A Lease is made for life, the re^ainder Crompton 49 6
over for life, the remainder (...) in Fee; the first Lessee makes ^aste: And
because he in the Fee (...) no remedy by the Common^^w, and Waste is a wrong
pro^^bited, he shall have releife in Chan^^ry.

A Woman sole, takes considera^^on 4 Eliz.
for making a Lease for one and twenty years, and then Marries; and she and her
Husband made the promised Lease at the one and twent^ years end; The Lessee
surrenders and takes a new Lease for one an^ twenty years more, the Husban^
dies, the Wife oustes the Lessee who sues in Chancery to have the first Lease
continued rest for the first one and twenty years, and could not have remedy,
because the surrender was voluntary, and the Cou^^ gives no relief against a
voluntar^ Act.

A Lease is made of House a^^ Woods, wherein it is Covenanted* That the Lessee
shall have House boot and fireboote; by this it ^^ implied and meant, that he
shall no^ have any of the Woods to use o^ convert to any other purpose; (...)
that the do belonging to the Lessor* And the Lessor shall have help i^
Chancery, leaving to the Less sufficient for House-boote and Fire boot.

If a man demise any Lands or Tenements Lit. Ten. l. 1.
to another by Lease parol the Lessor ought to be seized of the Lands or
Tenements which he so lets at the time of the Lease parol made; or else he
cannot maintain an Action for his Rent; for the Lessee may plead that the
Lessor had nothing in the premises at the time of the Lease made, and then he
is barred of his Action: but if the Lease be made by Deed Indented, then the
Lessee cannot plead this plea thereunto.

If a man lets Land to another by Cook. 1. par. Inst. 55.
Lease, to hold the same at the will of the Lessee; the Law intends it to be at
the will of the Lessor also, and he may put the Lessee out when he pleases;
likewise if it be let at the will of the Lessor, it is intended at the Lessees
will also; for the Lessor cannot force him to stay longer then he pleases.

A Covenant made between Landlord Covenants
and Tenant that the Tenant shall have a new Lease upon the surrender up of his
old Lease; And afterward Noys Maxims, p. 13.
the Lessor makes a Lease by Fine for more years to a third person; in this
case the Lessor has broke his Covenant, although the Lessee did not surrender:
which by the words of the Covenant ought to have (...) Covenants in his Lease,
for such breach the Landlord may bring hi^ Action of Covenant before the en^ of
the term.

A man takes a Lease for years, and Hughs Grand Abridgments. 1. par. P. 492. C.
19.
covenants and grants to and with the Lessor, for him and his Executors to
repair the Houses as often as nee^ requires: and afterward the Less assigns
over his Lease to another and the Assignee suffers the House to decay for want
of repairs; in th^^ case the Lessor may bring an Actio^ of Covenant against the
Assignee, a^though he be not named in the Covenant.

A Landlord lets a Lease, and cov^nants Co. 1. par. Inst. sol 41.
with his Tenant that he sh^^^ have sufficient hedge-boote, to assigned him by
the Landlord or (...) Bailiffe: In this case the Tenant (...) not take
hedg-boote without assignment.

If a man by Indenture take a (...) Perkids Tit. conditions. 738.
of a House that is old, ruinous, wants repairs, and covenants (...) the
Lessor to leave this House at (...) end or expiration of the Lease good repair:
In this case he is (...) to leave this House in good repai^ ^ut if he do not
covenant to do it, he Law then will not oblige him to ^o it.

A man by Indenture takes a Lease Hughs grand Abridg. p. 4^9.
^or years of a Wood, and covenants ^ith the Lessor, to leave his Wood (...) as
good a condition as it was (...) the time of the Lease made; And during the
term the Wood is estroyed, and blown down by vi^lent Winds, and Tempests: in
this ^ase the Landlord can have no Acti^n against the Tenant for the not
^erforming of this Covenant, because it is impossible for him to perform it;
and the Law enforces ^o impossibilities: otherwise it is if ^e take a House,
and that be blown own.

Touching bonds for performance Gold^ borow. p. 16.
^f Covenants, if a man take a Lease or years rendering Rent, and enter ^^to
bond to the Lessor to perform ^ll Covenants and Agreements conained and
comprised in the Lease; (...) he fail in payment of his Rent, the (...) is
forfeited; for the payment ^f Rent is an agreement. Dr. and St. lib. 2. cap. 47.


If a man be bound in a bond, to ^epair the House of the Obligee as often as
need shall require during certain time, and afterward the Houses want
reparations; In the case, although the Obligor do^^ not know that they want
Repar^tions, yet he is bound to take n^tice of it at his peril, for ignorance
will be no excuse in this cas^ because he has bound himself (...) it.

But if the Condition had bee^ that he should repair such Houses, (...) he to
whom he was bound should a^signe, and after he assigns certa^^ Houses to be
repaired, but he (...) is bound has no knowledge of the assignment; this
ignorance shall excuse him in the Law, because he hat^ not bound himself to any
reparatio^ in certain, but to such as the Oblig^^ will assign; and if he
assign non^ the Oblig^r is bound to none; An^ therefore because he that shou^^
make the Assignment is privy to the Deed, he is bound to give notice (...) his
own Assignment; but if the A^sinment had been appointed to have been made to a
stranger, then the Obligor had been bound to have taken notice thereof at his
peril.

If a man makes a Lease for years (...) warranty, yet this is not a war^^nty in
the Law, but a Covenant, be^^use the Lease is but a Chattel; and the Lessee be
ousted, he may bring (...) Action of Covenant against the (...).

If A. be seized of twenty acres of and, and let the same to B. by* (...) for
life or years, and A. re^^rves to himself five shillings Rent* ^^yable at
Christmas, and B. binds ^^mself to A. in a bound of one hun^red pound to pay
the Rent reser^^d upon the Lease justly according (...) the Law, if before any
day of ^^yment A. puts B. out of any part (...) the Land, and he does occupy
the ^^sidue for the whole term, and will (...) pay any Rent, yet the bond is
^ot forfeited; for by putting the te^^nt out of parcel of the Land, the ^hole
Rent is in suspense: but if (...) day of payment be past before (...) Ouster,
then the Tenant must (...) the Rent, or else he forfeits his (...).

But if a stranger who has no ^ight in the Lands do put out the ^essee for
years out of the same Land before any day of payment, and kep^ possession
thereof until the day (...) payment be past; In this case the* Tenant ought to
pay his Rent at the da^ whereon it is appointed to be pai^ or else he forfeits
his bond. If thr^^ Perkins, 828. Copartners.
Copartners be seized of a Manor and one of them without the consen^ of the
other two lets a Lease of the whole Manor in her own name unto I. D. for five
years, paying (...) pound yearly at Christmas unto the Lessor and her Heirs,
and I. D. enters into bond in five pound to (...) the Rent accordingly; and
before any day of payment is come, the other two Copartners who agreed n^^ to
the letting of the Lease, do put the Lessee out of the whole Manner, an^ keep
the possession till a day of payment be come: here the Lessee ough^ to pay a
third part of the Rent reserved to his Lessor, or otherwis^ he forfeits his
bond; because the other two Copartners who ejecte^ him out, have right but in
two part^ of the manor.

A man makes a Lease to thre^ Hughs g^ Abr. 1. par. p. 428.
persons upon this condition, that neither they nor any one of them sha^^
alien, set, or let that Lease to any oer, without license first obtained from
the Landlord. Now if the ^andlord do give license to any one ^f them to let or
aliene, then the ^ther two may alien without li^ense; for the condition being
de^ermined to one, is determined to (...).

In the same nature is a release where many persons commit a tres^ass, if he
against whom the trespass (...) committed do release one of the ^respassers,
that release is as effectual to all the rest, as if they ^ad been particularly
named therein.

If a Landlord do enter for a condition Noys Maxims, page 72.
broken, or the Tenant surrender up his Lease, or his term be expired; yet the
Landlord may have an Action of Debt for the Arrears of Rent if any be.

If a man lets a Lease of Lands upon Dr. and St. lib. 2. C. 35.
a special condition; that is, that the Lessee shall not alien the same to such
a man or such a man; then the condition shall be taken according to the words;
And notwithstanding that condition, they may be aliened to any other, but to
them to whom (...) is expressly prohibited that the Land^ should not be aliened
unto: An^ if the Lands in that case be aliened to one that is not excepted in
the condition, then he may alien the Land to him that is first excepted,
without breaking of the condition: for conditions be taken strickly in the Law,
and without equity.

As, If a Lease be made to (...) upon condition that he shall not (...) or
alien the same to B. if the Tenant alien it to C. and he alien it to B. the
condition is not broken.

If a man be seized of Lands in Fee, Perkins. 7, 10.
and let the same by Indenture of Lease to a stranger paying five pound Rent
per annum, with a condition that if the Lessee will hold over ten years to him
and his Heirs, that them he shall pay twenty pounds per annum, and the
Indenture is executed by Livery and Seizin to the Lessee: In this case the
Lessor shall have an Action of Debt for the Rent Arrear within the ten years;
which proves the freehold and the Fee are not in the Lessee before the ten
years expired: but after the expiration of the ten years, if the Lessee does
continue the possession of the same Land, and does occupy the same by virtue of
the Indenture, then he has Fee, and shall pay the twenty pound as a Rent ^eck.

But if a man seized in Lands does Co. 1. par. Inst. f. 218. b.
^et the same Land by Lease for term of life, yielding to him a Rose for the
first six years; and if he will ^old the Land over the six years, then ^hen to
pay three marks per annmm; Here the freehold is immediately in ^e Lessee.

A man makes a Lease for years, Perkins. 729, 730.
^ith this condition, that if the Lessor ^o aliene the Reversion within the
(...) granted by the Lease, then the ^essee shall have the Fee; and the ^essor
does aliene the Reversion in (...) by fine to a stranger; In this (...) the
Lessee shall not have the Fee, (...) the Freehold and the Fee are ^^wfully in
the Conuzee before the ^^ssee can take it by condition: but the Lessor had
granted the Lands a stranger by Deed only, then the ^^ssee should have had Fee
by the ^^ndition.

If a man have a Lease for years, and Perkins. 833.
demise or grant the same upon condition, and dye; his Executors or
Administrators shall enter for the condition broken; for they are privy in
right, and represent the person of the dead.

If a man make a Lease for years Lit. lib 3. C. 8.
upon a condition that the Rent shall be paid at Christmas, and before that
time come, the Lessor give a general Release to the Lessee of all Actions and
Demands, this Release does not acquit the Lessee of the Rent but the Lessor may
sue for it, because it was neither due, nor to be paid at the time of the
Releas^ made; and it is a thing not merely i^ Action, because it may be grante^
over.

If a Landlord lets a Lease for Dyer f. 67.
years to two Tenants to hold Joyn^ly, with a condition that if the Le^sees dye
before the end of the ter^ the Lease shall be void: Now the Lessees makes
division, and one them aliens his part, and dies; this case the Lessor cannot
enter u^ on the part of him that dyed, b^ the Alienee shall enjoy his half
(...) during the life of the Surviving Lessee.

A Lease made for years upon condition, that if the Lessee demise the premises
or any part thereof, other than for a year, to any person or persons, then the
Lessor and his Heirs to re-enter; the Lessee afterward devises this Lease to
his Son by his Will; this is a breach of the condition.

If a man of his mere motion give Dr. and St. lib. 3. cap. 20. fol. 93.
Lands to H. H. and to his Heirs by indenture, upon condition that he shall
yearly at a certain day pay unto John at Style, out of the same Land, ^ certain
Rent; and if he do not pay ^he Rent, that then it shall be lawful ^o John at
Style to enter; and if the Rent in this case be not paid to John at Style, the
said I. S. may not en^er into the Lands by the Law, though the words of the
Indenture (...) that he shall enter; for there is an ^ncient Maxim in the Law,
that no man shall take advantage in a condition, but he that is party or privy
to the condition: and this man is not ^arty nor privy, and therefore he shall
take no advantage of it.

In many cases the intent of the Dr. and S. 20. C. f. 93.
party is void to all intents, if it be not grounded according to the Law.

As, if a man make a Lease to another for term of life, and after, o^ his mere
motion, he confirms hi^ Estate for term of life to remain after his death to
another and to hi^ Heirs: In this case that remainder is void in Law; for by
the La^ there can no Remainder depen^ upon any Estate, but that the same Estate
begins at the sam^ time that the remainder does: an^ in this case the Estate
began before and the confirmation enlarged n^^ his Estate, nor gave him any new
Estate. But if a Lease be made to man for the term of another man life, and
after the Lessor, only of (...) mere motion, confirms the (...) to the Lessee
for term of his (...) life, the Remainder over in Fe^ this is a good Remainder
over Fee.

No grant can be made, but Dr. and St. lib. 2 C. ^^. p. 94.
him that is party to the Deed, exce^^ it be by way of remainder; A^^ therefore
if a man make a Lease for (...) of life, and afterward the ^^ssor grant to a
stranger that the ^enant for term of life shall have ^e Land to him and Heirs;
that (...) is void, if it be made only (...) his mere motion without recom^^nce.

Likewise if a man make a Lease for Ibid.
(...) of life, and after grant the Re^^rsion to one for term of life, the
^emainder over in Fee, and the Te^^nt Attorneth to him that has the state for
term of life only, intend^^g that he only should have advan^^ge of the grant:
his intent is (...), and both shall take advantage ^^ereof, and the Attornment
shall (...) taken good according to the (...).

If a Tenant for the term of ano^^er Co. ^. par. Inst. fol. 41.
man's life dye living the other (...), he that does first enter upon the state,
after his death, shall be Te^^nt for the other man's life, and shall (...)
liable to the payment of the Rent ^^served.

If a Tenant has a Lease for twenty Perkins. 693.
(...) of Lands and Tenements, and (...) the same Lands for part of his term to
a stranger, reserving (...) himself forty shillings Rent; In the case he may
distreyn for the Rent r^served, or have an Action of De^^ at his pleasure,
because by common Intendment he is to have the sa^^ Land after the years
determined because he has granted but parcel (...) the years, so that the
Remainder r^mains in him.

If Rent be granted to a man, (...) Idem, 108.
may grant it away to another before he be seized thereof.

If a man and his wife be ejected Co. 1. par. Just: fol. 46*
a term in the right of his wise, a^^ the husband bring an Ejectione (...) in
his own name, and do recover, (...) dye; In this case his Executors (...) have
it; and not the wife, because (...) Recovery in his own name did (...) the term
in himself.

If a man be possessed of a term Cook. ibid.
forty years in right of his wife, (...) make a Lease for twenty years
rese^ving Rent, and dye; here the Ex^cutors of the husband shall have (...)
Rent for that term, but the wi^^ shall have the remainder of the ter^ when the
twenty years is out: but he had granted the whole ter^ (...) could have had
nothing. ^ release made to a tenant for term Id. 1. par. Inst. fol. 270.
years before his entry, is void; but release of the Rent before entry, is ^od.

The Tenant may grant away his ^^terest to another before entry; (...) although
the Lessor do dye be^^re entry, yet the Tenant may (...) into the Lands; and if
the Lessee (...) before he enter, his Executors (...) Administrators may enter:
and if Lease be made to two, and one of ^^em dye before entry, the other may
(...) by survivorship; and a Lessor ^^nnot grant away a Reversion by (...) name
of a Reversion, before (...) entry of the Tenant.

If a man grant to a Tenant for Co. 1. par. Inst s 41.
(...), that he shall have so many Esto^^rs as shall serve to repair his house,
(...) that he shall burn within his ^^use, or such like, during the term; ^^is
is appurtenant to the Land, and ^^all run with the same as a thing ap^urtenant,
in whose hands soever the ^^me comes.

If two Tenants in common do Idem, 1. Pa^. Inst. f* 197. ^^
(...) a Rent of ten shillings, this is ^^veral, and they shall be charged with
twenty shillings Rent: but they make a Lease, and reserve t^ shillings rent,
they shall have no (...) but only ten shillings between them

If two Copartners make a (...) reserving Rent, they shall have the Rent in
common, as they have the (...) version: but if afterward they gra^^ the
reversion, excepting the (...) then they shall be Joint tenants (...) the Rent.

If a man Leases lands for years reserving Rent, and a stranger does recover
Dyer 56. and 82.
part of the land, then the (...) shall be apportioned, viz. divided, an^ the
Tenant shall pay having respe^^ to that which is recovered, and (...) that
which still does remain in h^^ hands according to the value, to (...) party
proportionably.

If a man make a Lease excepting Close and Wood, the Law gives hi^ a way to
come to it.

If a Tenant for years do take (...) new Lease for more years, this is (...)
Perkins. 117.
Surrender in Law of the old Lease Watt. and Maidwels case. Hill. 3 Hu^ton. Rep.
104.
Car. R. 1302. B. R.

A Lessee for years cannot surrender Noy^ Max. 74.
before his term begin; neither ^^n he surrender part of his Lease, (...) he
may grant part of it.

^f a Tenant for life or years remove Idem p 72.
(...) goods out of the house and land, (...) reason of the greatness of the
(...), or for any other cause, and the ^^ssor do enter into the House and
(...); this is no surrender of the ^^ssee.

If a Tenant for years assign over (...) term and dye, his Executors shall ^t
be charged for Rent due after his (...).

And if the Executors or Admini^^^ators of a Lessee for years do (...) over
their right in the Lease, (...) lies no Action of Debt against ^^em for Rent
after such an Assign^^nt by them made.

If a Tenant for years assign his Hern. ^ law of Conv. p. 110.
^ase to another, the Landlord may ^arge which of them he will: but if once
accept of the Rent from the signee, knowing of the assignment, (...) cannot
afterward bring an Acti^^ of Debt against the Lessee, for (...) due after the
Assignment.

If a Lessor grant away the rever^n, Popham. 55.
after the Assignment of the ^^see; In this case the Grantee cannot have an
Action of Debt again the Lessee for the Rent, because the^^ is no privity
between them.

If a Lease for years be made^ Perkins. 536.
a man without any consideration the Lessee shall be seized to his (...) use.

If a man make a Lease of (...) Dr. and St. ^. ^C. 24.
to another and to his Heirs for (...) term of twenty years, intending (...) if
the Lessee dye within the (...) that then his Heirs should enjoy (...) Lands
during the Term; In (...) case his intent is void: and if (...) Lessee dye, his
Executors, and (...) his Heirs shall enjoy the term: for the Law of the Land,
all Chattels (...) go to the Executor, and not to (...) Heir.

If a man lets a house with the Hern. L. o^ Conv. p. 104.
purtenances, no Land passes there^^ but if it be with all Lands there^^^^
belonging, here the Lands used (...) the house do pass.

If a man take a Lease of his (...) Terms delcy, Estopple. Co. ^ par. Inst.
sol. 47.
Land by Indenture, he is then (...) concluded to say that the Lessor nothing
in the Land at the time of making of the said Lease; but a the Lease is out,
the Estoppel is re^^^ved.

If two persons be Joynt-tenants of Beverlies case 24. Ca^. Claytons Rep. p.
111.
Lease for years, and one bid the other go out of the house, and he go^th out;
he that goes so out may ^ave an Ejectione firm against the o^^er, as well as
if he had Ejected him (...) by force.

CHAP. III. (...) Payment of Rent, Acceptance, and Extinguishment thereof;
Demands, Entryes, Dates, Continuance, Limitations, and Determinations of Leases.
^T ought to be a principal care of a Tenant, above all things to provide his
Rent at the time of payment, whereby he may avoid ^^ch Slavery and Knavery, of
cruel ^^^ng Landlords.

^f a Tenant be to pay his Rent to Landlord at our Lady Day and ^^chaelmas, or
within fourteen fifteen days after either of the said Feasts; in this case, he
is (...) bound to pay his Rent until the (...) day limited for payment, for
(...) is the legal day of payment, and (...) other before voluntary.

And if there be a clause that if (...) Rent be behind by the space of fift^
days (more or less) after any of (...) said days of payment, then the (...)
to be void; In this case, if the time ^^mitted be fifteen days, then the
^^nant shall have thirty days after (...) of the said Feasts, to save his
Lease: if the clause in the Lease be, that if Rent be behind for the space of
^^^teen days next after either of (...) said Feast days of payment; (...) the
Tenant has but fifteen days (...) allowed him: and so the dive^ is to be
noted in this case in (...) words of a Lease, which with a (...) little and
scarce observable alter^ on makes so much advantage (...) Tenant. Co. 10. lib.
f. 227. (...) par. Institutes, f. 202. Hern. (...) Conv. p. 23.

If a man take a Lease for yea^ Hern. p. 22. 23.
pay his Rent at our Lady Day Michaelmas, or within fifteen (...) after either
of the said Feasts, (...) Landlord dye after either of the (...) Feasts, and
before the fifteen ^^yes be out; the Heir in this case all have the Rent then;
for the (...) day is but voluntary, and the (...) day of payment is at the end
of (...) fifteen days: and if the Tenant (...) that day pay the Rent, such
^^yment is voluntary, and not satis^^ctory; but if payment be in the ^^orning,
and the Landlord dye at (...), it is good to give Seizin: and ^^ough this
payment be volunta^^, yet it is Satisfactory against the ^^eir. Hare and
Savills case. M. Jac in com. B. Brownl. R^p. 2. part. 273.

If a Tenant for years be to pay his No^s Max. p. 80.
(...) at Michaelmas, and to perform (...) Covenants; and if he be bound any
Obligation to pay his Rent ^^ecisely at the day; he must in this (...) seek out
his Landlord to pay (...); but if his Obligation be only perform the Covenants
in the (...), he may then tender his Rent (...) the Land (if no other place be
(...) agreement appointed for the pay^ent thereof) and it is sufficient: for
(...) payment is of the nature of the Rent (...) on a Lease for years, he shall
never (...) void it; for it was but voidable (...), and his acceptance has now
confirmed it.

If a man have Lands in the (...) Acceptance.
of his Wife, and he and his (...) let these Lands for years, reservi^^ a Rent,
and afterward the (...) band dies, and she before any day^^ payment takes
another Husba^^ who accepts the Rent and dies: (...) this acceptance the Lease
is aff^med.

In like manner if a man and (...) Wife let the Lands of his Wife (...) years
rendering Rent, and the Hu^band dies; if the Wife accept (...) Rent, it is a
good Lease. Terms of (...) Law, Acceptance.

But if a Tenant for life Lease lan^ for years and dies, the Lease is voi^ and
the Rent which is reserved upon the Lease is determined. And (...) though he in
remainder do accept (...) Rent, yet his acceptanre will not (...) it good: for
when it is once void (...) death, no acceptance after will (...) it good.

So likewise, if a Tenant in Dow^ lease for years and dye, the Leas^ void, and
acceptance of the Rent by (...) Heir will not make it good (...).

A Lease for years may be confir^^d Noys Max. p. 78.
for a time, or upon condition, or (...) a piece of the land; but if it be a
^ank-Tenement, it shall enure to (...) whole absolutely.

Observe this difference between Lease for life and a Lease for (...): in case
of a Lease for life, ^^ough the conclusion of the condi^^n be, that it shall be
void, yet ac^tance of the Rent due after the (...), does affirm it, and make it
(...) again. Pennants case. 38. Eliz. 3. l.

If a Parson let a Lease for years Cook Inst. f. 300.
^his Glebe-land, if it be con^^ed by Patron and Ordinary, shall bind the
Successor, or else (...).

If a Lease be made to a man for Dr. and. St. 2. l 20. chap. f. 93.
term of another man's life, and ^^rwards the Lessor only of his (...) Motion,
confirms the Land ^^is Lessee for term of his own (...) the Remainder over in
Fee; (...) is a good Remainder in the

If a man let Lands for life o^ Hern. l. Conv. p. 118.
years, reserving Rent, and do ent^^ into any part thereof, and take i^ profit;
the whole Rent is thereb^ extinguished, and shall be suspend during his holding
thereof. Leonar Rep. 110. Goddards case, (...) 34. Eliz. com. Banc. Owens Rep.
(...) 10.

If the Tenant come to the Lar^^lord Co. 1. par. Inst. f. 202.
at any place upon the ground the day of payment, and tender Rent to the
Landlord, it is good nough, and shall save the condition and the Landlord is
bound to ceive it, although it were not at (...) most notorious place, nor last
inst^^^ of the day; for he may tender Rent at any time of the day, althou the
last instant be the legal time payment.

But observe by the way, tha tender of Rent must be of the wh^ Rent, without
deduction of Taxes Assessments, or any other charg^ for stoppage is no payment
in Law. Tr. 23. Car. in B. R. Reg Co. 1. par. Inst. f. 202.
pract. p. 327.

If a man let Land by Lease years to another, reserving the (...) the Land to
be paid at Michael^^s and our Lady Day, or within ^een days after, and for
default of ^^yment to re-enter; In this case it sufficient and lawful for the
Tent to tender his Rent the last day, if the money (...) be told in that time
before it dark; and so it is sufficient for Landlord to demand it the same ^ur.

If a Lease be made with this (...) 1. Par. Inst. p. 211.
, That in case of non-payment, Landlord to re-enter; here if Landlord distreyn,
he may not enter, but he may accept of the ^nt and yet re-enter; but if he do
(...) the next Rent again, then he not re-enter, for that establishes Lease.
Entry into an acre of land, he name of the whole, is a good (...); if the Land
do all lie in one (...).

^n a Lease for years, if the Lessee enant, that if he or his Executors Assigns
do alien, that then the (...) shall re-enter, and afterward makes his Wife
Executrix and (...); and the Widow marries (...), and her second Husband
aliens; In this case the Lessor may re-enter because the second husband is
Assignee in the Law.

If a man make a Lease for term o^ Dr. and St. l. 1. c. 20. f. 35.
years, yielding to him and to h^^ Heirs a certain Rent, upon condition, that
if the Rent be behind an^ unpaid by the space of forty day^^ after any of the
days of payment that then it shall be lawful to the Lessor and his Heirs to
re-enter And after the Rent is behind fort^ days, and is demanded by the
Lessor and is not paid; the Lessor dyet^ and his Heir enters: In this case h^^
entry is lawful; but if the Lessor ha^ dyed after the Feast Day, and before the
fortieth day, so that he had no^ demanded the Rent, and his Hei^ had demanded
the Rent at the fortieth day, and for non-payment he reenters; in this case his
re-entry (...) not lawful.

If a Lease be made to H. for on^ Dyer 254.
and forty years if he live so long, an^ if he dye within the aforesaid ter^
that then the Wife of the aforesai H. shall have it for the residue o^ the said
years; this limitation is voi^ for if H. dye, the term ends, and h^ Wife shall
have nothing in it.

If a man let all his Meadow in D. D^er s. 80.
containing ten Acres; if there be ^wenty Acres of it, all passes in this case.

If a man make a Lease for years 1. part. Inst. s. 48.
, and afterward make a Deed of Feoffment, and delivers Seizin; If the Lessee
be upon part of the premises, and neither know nor assent to it, yet the Livery
is void: for though the Lessor has the Freehold and Inheritance in him, yet
the possession is in the Lessee; and Livery must be given of the possession:
but if the Lessee be absent, and has neither Wife, Children, nor Servants
(though he have Cattle) upon the ground, the Livery shall be good.

If a Lease be made to hold from Da^es.
the day of the making, or from the day of the date, or from the date, the
Lease shall begin the day after it is delivered.

If the Habendum of a Lease Co. 1. par. Inst. ^ 46.
be for a term of one and twenty years, without mentioning when it shall begin;
it shall then begin Cro. 2. par 263, 264.
from the Delivery. So if an Indenture of Lease bear Date upon days
impossible, as Feb. 30. or March 40. There being no such days in one Account,
in this case if the term be limited to begin from the Date, it shall take
effect and beginning from the Delivery, as if there had been no Date at all.

If Lands descend to an Heir, he may Noys Max. p. 67.
make a Lease thereof before his entry into the same. If a man makes a Lease to
day to one for ten years, and to morrow makes another Lease of the same Lands
to another person for twenty years; this second Lease shall be good after the
first is expired, for so many years as (...) therein to come.

If a man make a Lease to another Co. 1. par. Inst. fol: 45.
for one and twenty years, and after another Lease to commence from the end and
expiration of the said term of years, and after the first Lease is surrendered;
In this case the second Lease shall commence presently upon the surrender.

But if it had been made to commence from the end of the said one and twenty
years, there though there had been a surrender, yet it should not have
commenced till the term had been out; so that by this you may observe the Law
puts a distinction between term of years, and time of years.

If a man lets Lands to another to hold till the Lessee has levied twenty
pounds; this is a good Lease, notwithstanding the incertainty.

Bracton says that every Lease must have a certain beginning; and ending; Quia
id certum est, quod certum reddi potest. Yet you see by the case before, this
Rule is contradicted, so that it holds not always, although in the generality
it does.

For if a man make a Lease to another for so many years as I. S. shall name,
although this be uncertain at the beginning; yet when I. S. has named the
years, it is then good for so many years as he names.

So likewise, if A. be seized of Co. 1. par. Inst. fol. 45.
Lands in Fee, and do grant to B. that when he pays him twenty shillings, that
then from that time he shall have and occupy the Land for one and twenty years;
and after B. pays unto A. the twenty shillings; thi^ is a good Lease for one
and twenty years from that time. Co. 6. l. f. 34* 35.

If a Parson make a Lease of his Glebe for so many years as he shall be Parson
there, this is void, because of the uncertainty thereof; for the Parsons time
there terminates with his life, then which nothing is more uncertain.

If a Lease be made for one hundred years, if A. and B. live so long; in this
case if either of them dye, the Lease is ended.

If an Infant who is seized of Lands Co 1. par. Inst. fol. 45.
in Soccage, make a Lease at his age of fifteen years; this is good, and shall
bind him.

If a Tenant in Fee marry a Wise, Co. 1. par Inst. fol. 46.
and make a Lease of his Lands for years and after dye, and the Wife is thereof
endowed, here she shall avoid the Lease, but after her death it shall be in
force again against the Heir.

If a man have a term of years in Co lib. 8. ^ 49.
in the right of his Wife; if she dye, it remains to him; but if she survive
him, it remains to her, and not to his Executors, without he dispose of it in
his lifetime.

If a man license another to enter and occupy his Lands, this is a good Lease
for years in Law. Brownl. 2. part. p. 250.

A Lease for years, although it be never so long, cannot be intayled, because
it is a Chattel, which cannot be turned into an Inheritance. Styles Regist.
pract. p. 197.

If a man seized in Fee-Simple let a Lease to another, to have and to hold the
same Lands for term of life, and do not mention whose life; it shall be taken
for the Lessees life; because the act of every one shall be taken most strongly
against himself.

But if a Tenant in Tail let such a Lease without expressing whose life, it
shall be taken for the life of the Lessor.

If a Joynt-Tenant make a Lease Co. 1. par. Inst. f. 185.
for Years, of his part, though the Lessee never had possession; or though it
be to begin at a Day to come; and the Joynt-Tenant that made it dye before the
day; yet the Survivour shall be bound by the Lease, for the Lessee has a
present Interest,

If two take a Lease for their lives, and make partition, either of them dying,
his part immediately reverts to the Lessor.

If there be two Joynt-Tenants Golds Rep. 187.
for life, and one of them makes a Lease for eighty years, to begin after his
Death, and after dies; This Lease is good against the Survivour.

If a Lease be made to the Husband Dr. and St. lib. 2. c. 33.
and the Wife, yielding a greater Rent then the Land is worth; if the Husband
dye, the Wife after the Husbands death may refuse the Lease, to save her from
the payment of the Rent: but if the Husband over-live the Wife, and then make
his Executors, and dies; if they have Assets; that is, if they have goods
sufficient of their Testator to pay the Rent, they cannot refuse it; but if
they have no goods sufficient of their Testator, to pay the Rent to end of the
term, if they relinquish the occupation, they may by special pleading discharge
themselves of the Rent, and the Lease.

If I let Lands in which are Mines, or Trees, I cannot enter to take the Trees,
or Mines, but am a Trespasser, unless I do reserve such a privilege to my self
when I let the Lands.

But if a Lessor do come upon the grounds Leased, he is no Trespasser, for it
shall be intended, that he came ^o see if Wast were done.

If a Tenant for years, happen by any casualty to loose his Lease, yet he shall
not loose his term in the Lands let by such Lease which is lost, if it can be
proved that there was such a ^erm let to him by Indenture; And that it is not
determined.

CHAP. IV. Of Corn sown, who shall have the Crop of Estovers, and Trees blown
down; of Distresses, What things may be distreyned, and how used; who may take
a Distress, for what cause, when, and where.
IT is a usual saying, and generally received opinion, that he that Sows must
Reap: but as there is no general rule without some exception; so this holds not
always, that he that Sows shall Reap.

But touching the Sowing of Corn; if the Tenant be outed, or his term ends
before it be ripe, who shall have the Corn I have already set down in the first
Chapter, under the Title of Tenant at Will: sor if a Tenant at Will Sow his
Land, and the Landlord put him out before the Corn be ripe, he shall have
liberty to Reap and carry away his Corn, because he knew not when his Landlord
would put him out.

But it is contrary with a Tenant who has a Lease for years: for if his Lease
be out before the Corn be ripe, his Landlord shall have it; because he knew the
end of his Lease: wherefore if he Sowed, it is in his own wrong, unless there
be a Covenant in his Lease between the Lessor and him, that he shall have his
way-going Crop.

But if a Tenant at Will, set Roots, or Sow Hemp or Flax, or any thing that
brings in any yearly profit, if after the planting the Lessor out him, or if
the Lessor dye, yet the Tenant or his Executors shall have the Crop. But it is
otherwise if he plant young Fruit Trees, or other young Trees, as Oaks, Ashes,
or Elmes; or Sow the ground with Acorns; In this case if the Lessor out him, he
shall have none of these, because these yield no yearly profit at present.

If a Tenant for life Sows the ground, and dye before the Crop be ripe, his
Executors shall have it; and so they shall have Grass if it be cut, but if it
be unmown they shall not have it, for that is part of the Inheritance till it
be severed.

Every Tenant that has an Estate uncertain, shall have the corn sown by him;
though he be outed before it be ripe.

If a man be seized in Lan Jure See my Consultam pacis, p. 83.
uxoris, and Sow this Land, and dye before the Corn be ripe; his Executors
shall have the Crop: but if they be Joynt-tenants of Lands, and the Husband
sows the ground and dies, the Wife shall then have the Crop.

But if a Woman who holds Land, Hern. l. of con. p. 239.
Durante viduitate sua, while she continues her Widdow-hood, and Sows the
ground, and marries a Husband before the Corn be ripe; here the Lessor shall
have the Corn, because her Estate ends by her own act.

If a man lets a Lease of his Wifes Noys Max. p. 70.
Land, she not joining with him; this Lease is void after his death: but if the
Lessee have Sown the Land, he shall reap the Crop. Cowel. Inst. p. 142.


A Tenant holds by Lease, and the Land is recovered against the Landlord by a
title Paramount; in this ^ase if the Tenant have Sown the Land, he that has
recovered it shall have the Crop, if it be not reaped before Judgment.

There is three kinds of Estovers in Estovers or Boot.
the Law, which is incident to the estate of every Tenant, whether it be for
life or years.

House-boote, of which is two kinds; the one to repair the Houses, the other to
burn, which is called Fireboote.

Then there is Estovers, called Plough-boote; that is, stuff to mend the
Tenants Ploughs, Carts, Harrows, Wayns, and making Rakes and Forks for getting
in his Hay and Corn.

Thirdly, There is another kind of Estovers, called Hedge-boote; this is Timber
and wood for making Gates, and Styles; and Boughs and Bushes for mending and
repairing Hedges, and Fences.

So there is Estoverium edificandi and ardendi, House-boote.

Estoverium arandis, or Ploughboote.

Estoverium Claudendi, or Hedgeboote.

Estover is a word something harsh in sound, being unusually heard in the Ears
of Tenants; but Boot i^ well known unto them.

The one is Norman, the other Saxon; and both have the same signification, viz.
an allowance, Compensation, or Satisfaction. Any of all these Boots, a Tenant
may take without assignment of the Landlord, unless he be by the Landlord
restreyned by special covenant in his Lease; which is very usual amongst many
Landlords, especially if the Farm be any thing considerable; then they commonly
limit the Tenant how much House-boote, or Plough-boote, or Hedge-boote, he may
take without assignment; and how much by assignment.

If a Tenant for life or years, cut Co. l: 4. 31.
down Trees, or pull down Houses, or suffer them to fall down; the Lessor shall
have the Trees, and Timber, of the said Houses: for the Lessee had them only as
things annexed to the Land; and this severance will not give him a greater
estate in them.

The Landlord shall likewise have Windsals; that is, Timber Trees blown down by
Wind and Tempest, because they are parcel of his Inheritance; so that the
Tenant for life nor years cannot have them, unless it be to build withal where
Houses are in decay. But if they be Pollards without Timber, the Tenant shall
have such when they are blown down.

Distresses is a Law of custom; Distress?
that is, if Rent be in Arrear and un^aid, the Landlord may take a lawful
^istress, and that he shall put in ^ound Overt, there to remain until (...) be
satisfied of what he distreyned (...).

So that if a Landlord distreyn the Dr. and St. l. 1 C. 5. p. 10.
^attel for Rent, and put them in a ^ound Overt, and the Beasts dye ^ere for
lack of meat, it is at the (...) of him that owed the Beasts, and ^ot of him
that distreyned: for in (...) that distreyned there can be as^^gned no desault,
but the default was the other, because the Rent was ^^paid.

Now a distress must be made of (...) a thing wherein some body (...) a certain
and valuable Property; therefore such things as (...) Ferae natura, cannot be
distreyned neither can any one distreyn a Hor^^ if any body be on the back of
him nor any thing which a man holds i^ his hand, or carries about him, a^^
nexed to his body.

And although the Law be, that Landlord may distreyn any thi^^ that he finds
Levant or Couchant u^ on the premises for his Rent behin^ whose Goods or
Chattels soever be, and may detain the same u^ till his Rent be satisfied; yet
the general Rule has some Restrict on and Limitation, for there are sevral
things whereof a Distress cann^^ be taken.

Such things as are for the maintnance What cannot be distreyned for Rent.
and benefit of trades, c^^not be distreyned for Rent; as Horse in a Smith
Shop, nor Horse in an Inn cannot be distreyed Noys Max p. 124.
for the Rent thereof; nor (...) Materials in a Weavers Shop, (...) the making
of Cloth, nor Cloth Terms of the Law, titl. distress.
Garments in a Taylers Shop, (...) sacks of Corn, nor Meal in a Mill the Rent
of the Mill, nor any (...) that the Tenant has distreyned damage feasant, for
that is in the custody of the Law.

Likewise Oxen of the Plough Cook. on Lit. f. 47.
may not be distreyned, nor a Millstone, though it be raised to be picked, so
long as it lies upon the other Stone.

Neither may a Distress be taken of Sheep, if there be a sufficient Distress
^esides.

Neither can a man sever Horses ^oyned together, or to a Cart.

Likewise Victuals, nor Sheafes Cook. ibid.
(...) Shocks of Corn cannot be di^^reyned: But Carts or Wagons ^aded with
Corn may be distrey^ed either for Rent, or damage fea^^nts.

No man's Tools wherewith he Cook ibid.
^orks at his Trade shall be distrey^ed, as the Carpenters Axe, or a ^^collars
Books, etc.

Neither can any thing which is fix^^ to the Freehold be distreyned, as
^^rnaces, Coppers, or Fats fixed for ^^ers or Brewers, (although the ^^nant may
remove them during (...) term) nor the Windows or Doors a House, while they are
upon Hinges. But if they be removed off from the Hinges, they may be distreyned.

The (...) cannot distrey^^^ Tab^^^ (...) the House^ of (...) Tenant, (...)
which cannot be (...) in an Assize; neither can any thing be distreyned of
which the Sheriff cannot mak^ a Replevin, or that cannot be r^stored again in
as good a condition as it was when it was distreyned.

But a man may distreyn the Bea^^ of a stranger (that come by escap^ for Rent,
though they have not be^^ Levant and Couchant upon (...) ground, according to
Cook. 1. par. (...) f. 47.

The Lord of a Leet may sell distress taken for an Amerciam^ in his Leet, as
the King may (...) a distress, because it is the Ki^^ Court.

If a man distreyn Goods or (...), Dr. and St. l 2 C. 27.
he may put them where he weither in a pound Covert, or Ove^ but if they take
any harm, he (...) answer for them.

If they be living Cattle, they ou^ to be put in a common Pound, (...) in some
open place, as in his own ^ard or Close that distreyned them, (...) in some
others by his consent; so ^^at the owner may come lawfully to ^eed them: And
the owner of the Cattle must have notice where they (...), if they be not in a
common ^ound; and then if they dye for (...) of meat, it is the owners fault
(...) as it is said before,) but if they be a Pound covert, or out of the
^ounty, and dye for want of meat, (...) he that distreyned them shall ^ake
satisfaction for them.

Cattle taken damage feasant, may Kitchen. f. 207.
(...) impounded in the same Pound, ^here they are damage feasant; but ^oods or
Cattle taken for other ^^ings may not.

No man ought to drive a distress Co. 1. part. inst. p. 57. Rastal title
distress. 11. Wingar. abr. p. 133.
^ut of the County where it is taken, or out of the hundred, but to a ^ound
Overt within three miles; nei^^er may a distress be impounded several places;
nor above four (...) taken for the Fees of impound^^g one whole distress, on
pain of five ^ound.

If a man distreyn Beasts damage Dr. and St. l. 1. c. 27.
^^asant, and put them in the Pound Overt, within the same County, not above
three miles out of the hundred; and the owner suffers the Beasts to dye for
lack of meat, the loss is his own, and he that distreyned them, may be at
liberty to bring his Action for the trespass if he will; and if it be not a
lawful pound, then it is at the peril of him that distreyned them; and so it is
if he drive them out of the Shire, and they dye there.

If the owner of the Cattle tender Ibid.
amends to him that distreyned, and he refuse it, yet the owner may not take
his Cattle out of the pound; for he may not be his own Judge: and if he do, a
Writ De parco fracto for breaking the pound lies against him; but he must sue
a Replevin to have his Cattle delivered him out of the pound, and afterward
plead his tender of amends, of which the Jury must end the controversy.

If the owner of the Cattle procure Ibid.
a Replevin to deliver them, and he that distreyned them resist it, and will
not deliver them; in this case if they dye after for want of meat, it is at the
peril of him that distreyned, and the owner shall recover damages against him
in an Action upon the Statute for not obeying the Kings Writ.

If a man sends his Servant to take a distress for a Rent or Service, who puts
it in the pound; if the owner of the Beasts or a stranger take them out, I
shall have an Action De parco fracto, for breaking of the pound.

And if one distreyn Cattle, and pound them in another man's Close with his
consent, and the owner of the Cattle come and take them out; in this case he
that made the distress shall have his Action for Poundbreach; and the owner of
the close, an Action of trespass for breaking of his Closs.

There be certain cases where a Co. 1. par. Inst. f. 204, 205.
man may distreyn of common right, and where not of common right: a man may
distreyn for Rent-Service, Homage, Fealty, Escuage, Suit of Court, or for Rent
reserved upon a gift in Tail, Lease for life, years or at Will, though there be
no clause of distress in the Lease; because these distresses are of common
right.

But for Debt, Account, Trespass, Dr. and St. l. 2. C. 9.
or for Reparations or the like, a man cannot distreyn, neither can any
distress be taken for any Services which are not certain, nor can be reduced or
brought into any certainty. And upon an Avowry damages cannot be recovered, for
that which neither has certainty, nor can be reduced to certainty.

Nevertheless (although it be a Paradox) in some cases there may be a certainty
in an incertainty: As for a man to hold of his Lord, to shear all his sheep
depasturing within the Lords Manor; and this is certain enough: although the
Lord has not always a certain number of sheep, but sometimes a greater number,
and sometimes a lesser; yet this incertainty being reduced to the Manner which
is certain, the Lord may distreyn for. And a distress is inseparably incident
to every Service that may be reduced to certainty.

A man may not distreyn for Rent after the Lease is ended, nor out of the
premises, except in some special cases; nor in the night, unless it be damage
feasant.

But the Executors or Administrators of him who had Lands in Fee, or Fee-tail,
or-for life, may either have an Action of Debt against him that should pay it,
or distreyn for it; and so may the Husband after the death of his wife, his
Executors or Administrators, and he which has Rent for another life, for the
Arrearages after his death.

A man puts Cattle into my pasture Noys Max p. 33.
for a week, and afterward I give him notice that I will keep them no longer,
and he will not fetch them away; I may then distreyn them damage feasant.

If a man take Cattle damage feasant, and as he is driving them to Pound, they
run into the Yard or House of the man that owes them, and he refuses to let
them out again; he that distreyned them may have a Writ of Rescous against the
owner of the Beasts for so doing.

If a Landlord come to distreyn for Co. 1. par. Inst. f. 161.
Rent, and see the Cattle, and the Lessee or his Servants drive them out of his
Fee; he cannot have a Writ of Rescous, because the Cattle were not in his
possession: but he may follow after them, and distreyn them in another man's
ground it being for Rent, but not for damage feasant; for they must be taken
damage feasant; that is, doing damages.

If a man distreyn goods, and declare Claytons Rep. p. 64. pl. 111.
not the cause or reason wherefore he does it, if they be put in ^ House, the
owner may break the House, and take them out.

Or if a man distreyn goods without cause, the owner may rescu^ them; but if
they be pounded, b^ cannot break the pound and tak^ them out, because they are
then i^ the custody of the Law.

But if he find the pound-door unlockt, he may take them out.

Although there be a general prohibition in the Laws of England, tha^ it shall
not be lawful for any man to enter upon the Freehold or Possession of another,
without permission and Authority of the owner, or of the Law; yet this is not
without exception.

For if a man drive Beasts along Dr. and St. l. 1. c. 16.
the Highway, and the Beasts run into any Man's Corn or Grass, and he that
drives them goes after them into the Grounds to fetch them out, he may
justify that entry into the Grounds to fetch them out.

If a man make a Feoffment and Dr. and S. l. 2. c. ^.
that in Fee by Indenture, reserving a Rent, he cannot distreyn for that Rent,
unless a distress be expressly reserved; And if the Feoffment be made without an
Indenture reserving Rent, that reservation is void in the Law. And the like Law
is, where a gift in Tail, or a Lease for term of life is made, the remainder
over in Fee reserving a Rent, that reservation is void in the Law.

Also if a man seized of Land for Ibid.
term of life grants away his whole Estate reserving a Rent, that reservation
is void in the Law, without it be by Indenture: and if it be by Indenture, he
shall not distreyn for the Rent, without a clause of distress be reserved.

Also for Amerciaments in a Leet, Ibid.
the Lord may distreyn, although it be in the Highway; but for Amerciaments in
a Court Baron, he cannon distreyn; neither can he distreyn for an Amerciament
in the Leet, in place seized into the Kings hands for the Kings Debt.

Also if a man make a Lease at Michaelmas, Ibid.
for a year, reserving a Re^^ payable at the Feasts of the Annunciation of our
Lady, and St Micha^^ the Archangel; in this case he man distreyn for the Rent
due at our Lady Day, but not for the Rent due a Michaelmas, because the time is
expired.

But if a man make a Lease at the Feast of Christmas, for to endure to the
Feast of Christmas next following, viz. for a year, reserving a Ren^ at the
aforesaid Feasts of our Ladyday and Michaelmas; In this case he shall distreyn
for both the Rents as long as the term continues, that is to say, till the
aforesaid Feast of Christmas.

And if a man have Lands for Dr. and St. ibid.
term of life of J. N. and makes a Lease for terms of years, reserving a Rent,
the Rent is behind, and J. N. dies; there he shall not distreyn, because his
reversion is determined.

And if a Town or Parish be Amerced, and the Neighbors by Assent, Assesse a
certain Sum upon every Inhabitant; And agree, that if it be not paid by such a
day, that certain persons thereunto assigned shall distreyn; in this case the
distress is lawful.

If there be Lord and Tenant, and Ibid.
if the Tenant do hold of the Lord by Fealty and Rent, and the Lord does grant
away the Fealty, and reserve the Rent, and the Tenant Attorneth; In this case
he that was Lord may not distreyn for the Rent, for it is become a Rent-Seck.

But if a man make a Gift in Tail to another, reserving Fealty and certain
Rent, and after that he grants away the Fealty, reserving the Rent and the
Reversion to himself; in this case he shall distreyn for the Rent, for the
grant of the Fealty is void; for the Fealty cannot be severed from the
reversion.

Also for Heriot-service the Lord Dr. and St. ibid. f. 75.
may distreyn, but for Heriot-custome he cannot distreyn, but may Seize.

Also if a Rent be assigned to make a partition or assignment of Dower Egal, he
or she to whom that Rent is assigned may distreyn. And in all these cases
aforesaid, where a man may distreyn, he may not distreyn in the night, but for
damage feasant, that is, where he finds Beasts doing hurt in his ground, he may
distreyn them night or day when he finds them; but for Waste, Reparations,
Accounts, or for Debts upon Contracts, or such like, no man can lawfully
distreyn.

CHAP. V. Of Rescous, in what cases it may be Lawful: of Replevins, how they
are to be sued out; and of Avowries to Declarations upon Replevins.
THe word or term Rescous is Cook 1. par. Inst. 160.
derived from an old Norman verb Rescourrer, which is in the Latin recuperare,
that is, to take from, to get again, or recover; So that Rescue is as much as
to say, to recover or get again what another has taken away.

And in the sense of the Law Rescous is a taking away and setting again at
Liberty goods distreyned, or the body of a Person Arrested and in an Officers
custody by virtue of legal process.

Such kinds of Rescous as appertain unto our present subject are of distresses
taken, in what cases it may be justifiable to Rescue Goods or Cattle
distreyned, and when(...) not.

If a Landlord distreyn when the(...) Co. l. 4. f. 11.
is no Rent due, the Tenant may ma(...) a Rescue, and hinder that distress.

In like manner if a Landlord com(...) 1. Par. inst. f. 160.
to distreyn, and the Tenant tend(...) his Rent unto him, and the Lor(...) will
distreyn notwithstanding; i(...) this case the Tenant may make Rescous.

If Rent be in Arrear, and the Lord Cook ibid Magna Charta. f. 25.
distreyn the Tenants Cattle in the Highway wtthin his Fee; here als^ the
Tenant may Rescue them, for n^ man man distreyn in the Highway but the King
and his Officers by special Authority.

In like manner if a Landlord distreyn Ibid. f. 122.
Averia caracae, goods of the Plough, where there is a sufficient distress to
be taken besides; or if the Lord distreyn any thing Bastal ^it. distress. 10.
that is not distreynable by common Law or Statute: in this case it i^ lawful
for the Tenant to make Rescue.

But if a Lord come to distreyn H^ghs gr^abr. abr. 1. part. p. 117. C 21
Cattle which he sees within his Fee, and the Tenant or any others to prevent
the distress drive the Cattle away out of the Fee; the Lord may follow them
with fresh Suit and distreyn the Cattle, and the Tenant cannot justify a
Rescous of them, because in the judgment of the Law the distress is taken
within his Fee.

But if the Lord be coming to distreyn, Co. 1. par. Inst. fol. 161.
and have not sight of the Cattle within his Fee, though the Tenant drive them
off on purpose, or if the Cattle after the view go out of the Fee of their own
accord, or if the Tenant after the view removes them for any other cause then
to prevent the distress; then if the Lord distreyn them out of his Fee, the
Tenant may justify a Rescue.

If a man come to distreyn Cattle Cook, ibid.
damage feasant, and see the Beasts in his Ground, and the owner of the Cattle
drives them out before the distress taken; the owner of the Ground cannot
follow and take them; for if he do, the owner of the Cattle may Rescue them,
for they must be damage feasant; that is, doing hurt at the time of the
distress taken; and the owner of the ground may bring his action of trespass.

The Lord cannot break open any Cook ibid.
Gate that is locked, nor break open any Enclosure to take a distress; So that
if a Tenant lock up his Gates, and enclose his Ground, so that the Lord cannot
come to distreyn: if the Rent be behind, and the Lord have had actual
possession, this is a disseisin.

For the ^ase and speedy remedy of Replevin.
the Country in case of distresses, where the Cattle be pounded, the Statute
has provided, that every Sheriff, at his first County-day, or within two
months after he first receives his Patent, is to depute and proclaim in his
Shire-Town four Deputies to make Replevins within his County, which must reside
within twelve miles one of another, on pain of five pounds a month for every
month they are wanting.

So that when any man's goods are distreyned or impounded, he may repair to one
of the Sheriffs Deputies for that purpose; and there he may have a Replevin
(upon Plegii de ^etorn. habendum si, etc.) to cause the ^oods distreyned to be
delivered to he owner.

There is likewise a Writ de Relegiari facias at the common Law, ^hereby the
Sheriff is commanded, ^aking pledges of Prosecuting, to re^eliver the goods
distreyned to the ^wner: but since the other is the ^eadier and easier way,
this Writ is ^ut of fashion.

In a Replevin, he whose goods are ^istreyned or impounded becomes ^he
Plantiff, and declares against the ^ther for unjustly taking and de^aining his
Goods or Cattle contra ^vad. and pleg, etc.

If a Landlord distreyn, and carry Rastal* tit. distresses. 7.
the distress to hold, or out of the County, so that the Sheriff upon a
Replevin cannot redeliver the goods, then upon the Sheriffs return of the
Replevin, may have a Writ of Withernam directed to the Sheriff, to take as many
of the Lord Beasts, or as much goods in his keeping, till he have made
deliverance of the first distress; and if the Goods or Cattle be conveyed to a
Fort or Castle, the Sheriff may command the power of the County, and beat down.

If a distress be made in a Franchise or Bailiwick, the Sheriff is t^ direct
his Replevin to the Bail^ thereof to deliver them upon Ple^ges, etc.

The Plantiff in the Replevin oug^^ Property.
to have the property of the goods i^ him at the time of the distress made for
if the defendant claim property the Sheriff cannot Replevie the d^stress, but
the property must be trye^ by Writ.

So that if the defendant claim property Co. 1. par. Inst. f. 145.
in the goods distreyned, the^ must the Plantiff in the Replevi^ have a Writ de
Proprietate probanda, directed to the Sheriff to try the property; and if the
Jury find for the Plantiff, then the Sheriff must make deliverance of the
distress: and if it pass for the defendant, the Sheriff can proceed no further
unless the Plantiff bring Writ of Replegiari facis directed to the Sheriff, and
then though he do return the property, yet it shall proceed to trial in the
Common. Pleas upon the issue of the property.

The defendant in a Replevin; that is, he that made the distress, may if he see
cause bring a Writ of Recordare, and so remove the plant upon the Replevin, out
of Sheriffs County Court into the Common Pleas; and if the Plantiff declare
not, he may have a Retorn. habend. And then if he declare not, a Writ to
enquire of damages.

If a man by his Deed grant a Rent with a clause of distress, and grant further
that he shall keep the goods distreyned against sureties and pledges, till the
Rent be paid, this grant is not good, but the Sheriff may Replevie the goods
distreyned notwithstanding: for if such a distress should be irrepleviable, the
current of Replevins should be stopped, to the great damage of the Subject.

If the Goods or Cattle of several Co. 1. par. Inst. f. 145.
men be destreined, they cannot join in a Replevin, but every man must have a
several Replevin: for in a Replevin it is a good Plea to say, the property is
to the Plantiff and to a stranger; and where there be two Plantiffs, that the
property is to one of them.

If a Lord distreyn his Tena^ wrongfully, although the Cattel^ come back again
to the owner; (...) the Tenant may have a Replevin against the Lord, because he
cann^^ have an action of trespass against hi^.

The Plantiff in a Replevin oug^^ to be careful in giving his instructions for
it, for it must be certain in setting down the number and kinds of the Cattle
which are distreyned, otherwise the Replevin is no^ good.

The Avowant is the defendant in Avowry.
Replevin; that is, he that made the distress; and when he justifies in h^^
Plea for what cause he distreyned that Plea is called his Avowry.

As if a Landlord distreyns for (...) in Arrear, and the Tenant or owner of the
Cattle brings a Replevin, and declares against him for unjustly taking and
detaining his Cattle, and the Defendant justifies he took it in his own right,
and so showing the cause of the taking in his Plea: this is an Avowry.

But if the Defendant took the distress for or in the right of another, then
when he has showed the cause ^n his Plea, he must make Conusance (...)
acknowledgement of the taking ^he distress, as being Bailiff or servant unto
him in whose right he took it. There are four manner of Avowries which a Lord
may make upon a Re^levin.

1. Avowry upon his very Tenant. Co. l. 9. f. 135. 136.


2. Upon his very Tenant by the Manor where the Tenant had but a particular
estate.

3. Upon his Tenant by the Man^or where the Lord had but a particular estate:
and these three are Avowryes at the common Law.

4. The Lord may Avow upon the 21. H. 8. C. 19.
matter in the Land as within his Fee: this is provided by the Statute 21. H.
^. C. 19. and is the safest way for the benefit of the Lords; for by this
Statute, a Lord may Avow the taking a distress, as in Lands holdon of him
within his Fee, without naming of any person in certain; which by the Common
Law they could not do, but were thereby compelled to Avow upon a Person in
certain, which often proved much to their damage and prejudice: for by the
secret Fines, Recoveries, Grants, and Conveyances, which the Tenan^ used
purposely to frame to defra^^ their Lords, they were ignorant upon whom to make
their legal Avowry which inconveniences the forementioned Statute has
prevented.

Now in an Avowry upon this Statute, the Plantiff in the Replevin, (...) he
Tenant for years or otherwise may have every sufficient answer an^ aid, and
every other advantage in the Law to the Avowry: Disclaims only excepted; for
because the Avowry (...) made upon no certain person, he cannot disclaim.

If a Tenant has Rent behind for Co. 1. par. Inst. s 266.
diverse years, and makes a Feoffme^^ in Fee, and the Lord accept the Re^^ or
Service of the Feoffee due in h^^ time, he shall loose the Arrerages (...) his
Rent due in the time of the Feoffor. For after such acceptance, the Lord cannot
Avow upon the Feoffer, nor upon the Feoffee, for the Arrerages due in the time
of the Feoffor; but if the Feoffor dies, although the Lord accept the Rent or
Service by the hands of the Feoffee due in his time, yet he shall not loose the
Arrerages, because he is now by the Law compelled to Avow upon ^^e Feoffee; and
what the Law (...) him to, shall not be prejudicial ^^to him.

If the Plantiff in a Replevin be ^n-suit, or otherwise by Avowry (...) or
overthrown; then the ^efendant or Avowant shall recover (...) and damages
against the Plan^^^f, as the Plantiff should have (...) or had, if he had
revovered the Replevin against the (...).

CHAP. VI. In what cases a Tenant or other shall be said to commit was^ in
Houses, Gardens, Woods Pastures, Orchards, etc. and what Wast shall be
punishable, and what not.
IT concerns every Tenant, (...) what nature soever his Tenur^ be, to be very
careful herein for he may in committing Was^ soon become obnoxious to the Law,
and incur great damage.

I shall therefore by way of caution show you in what cases a Tenan^ may commit
Wast, so as to rende^ himself liable to loss and punishment and then how far a
Tenant may ac^ upon his Tenure, and not commit any punishable Wast.

If a Tenant for life or years, o^ Cook I. pa^. Inst. f. 53.
in Dower, do pull down any of the Houses or Tenements, or suffer them to be
uncovered, to the rooting o^ destroying of the Timber or Material of the House,
this is Waste.

So likewise if Glass-windows be ^roken down or carried away it is Waste,
though the Tenant glazed ^^em himself: for the Glass is ^art of the House. It
is also Waste (...) take away VVainscot, if it be (...) to the Walls or Posts
of the ^ouse.

It is likewise Waste to take away ^oors or Windows, or any thing an^exed or
fixed to the Freehold, although the Tenant fixed them there ^^mself.

If a Tenant build a new House ^here none was before, it is Waste: and ^^ he
suffer it to be wasted, it is a ^ew Waste.

The pulling down of a Stone-Wall, Cook. ibid.
or Mud-Wall of a House is Waste.

If a Tenant of a Park, Warren, ^ove-House, or the like, do not ^ave such
sufficient store as he found ^hen he entered, it is Waste; and so is to suffer a
Park-pale to decay, thereby the Deer are lost or dis^ersed.

If a Tenant suffer the Houses Co. 1. par. Inst. f. 53.
(...) be Wasted, and then Fell Timber to repair them, this is a doub^ Waste.

Waste is properly in Houses, Gardens, and Timber Trees; that is, Oak Ash and
Elm, which are counte^ Timber generally in all places, except in some
Coppy-holds Elm not.

Now these Timber Trees are sai^ to be Wasted either by cutting the^ down,
lopping or topping them, o^ any other ways decaying the Timber.

And in some Countries when Idem.
Timber is scarce, Beech is accounte^ Timber, or other Trees used for building
Houses; and there the cutting of them is Waste.

Or if a Tenant suffer the youn^ Germens of Trees to be destroyed this is
destruction, and punishable i^ Waste.

To cut down any Trees, as Willows, Birch, or the like, which stan^ and grow in
the defense and with in view of the dwelling House, i^ Waste.

It is Waste to cut down Haze^ which grow not under the great Trees, but in a
quarter of the Woo^ by themselves.

If a Tenant grub up or destroy a Co. 1 par. Inst. s, 53.
^uick fence of white-thorn, it is wast.

Burning of a house by negligence (...) mischance is Wast.

Where is a Wood, and nothing ^rowing there but under-wood, ^he Tenant cannot
cut all: but if it (...) a Wood where great trees grow amongst the underwood,
there he may cut all the underwood.

It is Wast to cut apple trees if they bear fruit, though they lie a^ong the
ground.

It is also Wast to cut Damsin^rees or any fruit trees growing in garden or
orchard.

To dig for Gravel, Chalk, Clay, Brick, Earth or Stones, or the like, (...)
Wast; and so it is if a Tenant dig ^or any Mines which were not open ^t the
time of the Lease made.

To suffer a bank or Wall of the ^ea to be in decay, so that by the ^lux and
Reflux of Sea, the Marsh is overflown, so that it becomes unprofitable, is Wast.

But if the Sea break in suddenly ^y a violent tempest, it is no Wast.

It is Wast also if a Tenant suffer the banks of any River or Water to ^ecay,
whereby the ground is surroundded, or becomes unprofitable so it is to suffer
pasture-ground t^ be surrounded so as it becom^ Rushy; or Arable land, so that
becomes tough clay.

It is wast for any Tenant to convert Arable into Wood, or Meado^ into Arable.

The punishment in Wast is trebl^ damages; and forfeiture of the plac^ Wasted.

There is voluntary or actu^ Wast, and permislive Wast.

An action of Wast lies against Tenant by the courtesy, Tenant for life or
years, half a year, or Tenan^ in Dower, by him that has the estate of
Inheritance, in any of al^ these cases before mentioned.

But Wast does not lie against (...) Guardian in Soccage, but an Action of
Account or trespass.

Neither does Wast lie against (...) Tenant by Elegit, Stature-Merchan^ or the
Staple; but an Action of Account after the Debt and damage levied.

Waste does not lie against a Tenant Co. 1 par. Inst. 54.
at will: but if such Tenant voluntarily pull down houses, or cu^ down
Timber Trees or the like; in this case the Lord may have an action of trespass
against him.

But against a Tenant in Mortgage Noy. Max. p. 33.
, either an action of Wast or an account will lie against him, because his
estate, is conditional.

If two or more Joynt-Tenants, or Tenants in common, be in a house, and one
will repair the house, and the other will not; in that case he that will repair
it may have a writ de Reparatione faciend.

If a Landlord covenant to repair the house, and does it not, in this case the
Lessee may cut timber growing upon the ground and repair it, though he be not
compellable thereunto, and shall not be punishable in Wast for so doing.

No man can have an action of Cook. 1. part Inst. p. 53
wast unless he have the immediate estate of inheritance; but sometime another
shall join with him.

As if a Reversion be granted to two, and the Heirs of the one, they two shall
join in an action of wast.

In like manner the Surviving Copartners and the Tenant by the courtesy shall
join in an action of waste.

If a Tenant for years commit Waste and dye, no action of Waste lies against
his Executors or Administrators for waste done before their time.

If there be two Copartners of a ^itchin s. 214.
Reversion, and one of them dye, the Aunt and Niece shall join in an Action of
waste.

If a Tenant for life commit waste, and after surrender his estate, and the
Lessor accepts it; the Lessee is then discharged of the waste.

If a stranger commit Waste upon the lands which one holds for life or years,
the Tenant shall suffer for it, and is left to take his remedy over against he
that did it.

If a Landlord covenant to deliver timber out of the same land to repair the
house let, and will not deliver it, and for defect thereof the Tenant will not
repair it, but suffers the house to fall down; this is waste in the Tenant, and
he is punishable for it.

But if the timber be to be taken out of other lands, and be not delivered,
then the Tenant is excusable if he suffer the house to fall, and no action of
waste lies against him.

If a single woman Rent lands and Idem.
marryes, and her husband commits waste and dies, she shall be punished for
this waste done by her husband.

But if a Lease be made to a man and his wife, and the husband commits waste
and dies; in this case the wife shall not be punished for such waste, unless
she agree to the estate.

If a woman be Tenant for her life Cook. 1. pa^^. I^st. 54.
, and marries, and her husband commit waste, and the wife dies, the man is not
punishable for this waste: but if a woman be possessed of a term of years, and
takes a husband who commits waste, and the wife dies; here the man is liable to
an action of waste for the waste by him committed, because he enjoys the term
of the Lease.

If a man make a Lease for life, or years, and after grants the Reversion, for
years, the Lessor shall have no action of waste during the years; for he
himself has granted away the Reversion, in respect whereof he is to mainteyn
his action.

If an action of waste be brought, and the Term end while it is depending, yet
the writ shall not abate: for although the Plaintiff cannot recover the place
wasted, yet he shall recover the treble damages.

Likewise if one be Tenant for Co. 1. part. Inst. f. 285.
term of another life, and makes waste, and afterward the Cestui que vie
dies, here the Lessor shall recover treble damages, but cannot recover the
place wasted, for that falls to him by the death of the Cestui que vie.

It waste be done in one corner of Cook 1 part. Inst. s 54.
a Wood, that place only which is wasted shall be recovered: but if it be done
here and there about the wood; then the whole wood shall be recovered, or as
much wherein the waste sparsim is done.

And so in Houses, so many Rooms Idem.
shall be recovered wherein there is waste done.

If a man make waste, in cutting Reg^st. pract p. 343.
trees which grow in hedge-rowes, which enclose pastures, nothing shall be
recovered but the place wasted, that is, the circuit of the roots, and not the
whole pasture; but if trees grow scatteringly about the pasture, then the whole
pasture is forseited if they be cut.

It is good plea in bar to a writ of Waste, to say that the house fell by a
sudden tempest, although the Tenant did covenant to repair it; but it is no
plea in an action of covenant.

It is also a good plea in a writ of Waste, to say that the house was Ruinous
at, the time of the Lease making, and the Timber so putrified and Rotten that
it fell.

It also a good plea to say, that the Plaintiff has entered upon the Land,
before which entry no waste was made; or that he Surrendered, and the Plaintiff
did accept; before which time no Waste was made.

If a Tenant does waste, and afterward Cook 1 part. Inst. f. 285.
Surrenders, and the Lessor agrees, yet the Lessor may have an action of waste
and recover treble damages.

If an action of waste be brought by husband and wife in remainder in special
tail, and the wife dies (the suit depending) without issue; in this case the
writ of waste shall abate.

If a Lease be made to hold to one Idem. f. 220.
without any impeachment of waste then the Tenant may cut down trees, and
convert them to his own use: but if the words be to hold without impeachment
for any action of waste^ in this case if the Lessee cut down trees, the Lessor
shall have them.

If a Tenant for life grant a rentcharge, Cook. 1. part Inst. 233. 234.
and after does waste, and the Lessor recover in an action of waste, he shall
hold the land charged during the life of the Tenant for life; but if the rent
were granted after the waste done, the Lessor shall then avoid the grant made
by the Lessee for life.

If a Tenant in Fee release to his Idem f. 345.
Tenant for life all his right, yet he shall have an action of waste.

And if a Tenant in Tail make a Lease for his own life, yet he shall have an
action of waste.

But if there be a Tenant for life, the remainder to another in Tail, and he in
the remainder release to the Tenant for life all his right and State in the
land; he cannot afterward have an action for waste.

If the Grantee of a Reversion bring an action of waste, the Lessee may plead
generally that he has nothing in the reversion.

If a Lessee before his term begin enter into the lands let to him, and do an
act which amounts unto waste, the Lessor shall not have an action or waste
for the same.

None shall have judgment to recover in an action of waste, where the waste
comes but to 12 d. or such a small sum.

If waste be done upon lands let Cook. 2 part Inst. s. 303.
for term of years, or life, by one against whom the Lessee can have no remedy
in Law for committing the same waste, the Less in such case is not punishable
for the same by the Lessor, except there be a special covenant in the Lease,
that he shall not permit nor suffer waste to be done.

If the house be uncovered when the Tenant comes in, it is no waste to the
Tenant if he suffer it to fall down.

The raising of a new frame of a house which was never covered, is no waste. If
a house fall by sudden tempest, or be burnt by lightning, or destroyed by
Enemies, or the like, without any default of the Tenant, or was Ruinous at his
coming in, and fall down; this is no waste.

And the Tenant may build the same again with such materials as remain, and
with other Timber growing upon the ground; but he must not make the house any
larger then it was, for if he do it is waste.

If a Tenant fix a Furnance, and not to the Walls nor Posts of the House, if he
take it away within his term it is no waste.

If a Tenant in Fee fix a Furnace in the middle of the house, the heir shall
have it and not the Executors.

If a house fall by a great wind or tempest, the Lessor shall have the Timber,
for it is no waste, and the Lessee is not bound to build it up again.

CHAP. VII. The Tenants Law, touching Men's Buildings in the City of London, For
prevention 19 Ca^. 2.
of Suits between Landlords, Tenants, and under-Tenants in the City of London,
whose Houses were destroyed by the dismal Fire which happened the 3. Sept. 1666.
For the speedy Rebuilding the City, and preventing differences, It is enacted:
THat the Justices of the A Court of Judicature for Rebuilding the City.
King's Bench and Common Pleas, and Barons of the Exchequer, being of the degree
of the Coise, or any three or more of them, to hear and determine all
differences which may arise between Landlords Proprietors, Tenants, Lessees,
Under-Tenants, or late occupiers of any Houses, Courts, Yards, Grounds, Wharfs,
or of any claiming any Estate, or Title in or to the same their Heirs, etc.

And to defalk apportion or abat^ Rent or Rents, and to limit and prefix or
limit time for Rebuilding and to proceed from time to time and at such place or
places as any three or more of them shall think fit; Sine forma et figura
Judicij, and to enquire by Jurors Verdict, Witnesses upon Oath, Examinations of
parties interessed, or otherwise to hear and determine all differences between
the parties interessed concerning the premises.

That the definitive order of the said Fol. 7. 8. ^
Justices and Barons, or any three of them shall be final, No Writ of Error or
Certiori shall be for reversal or removal of the same.

The said Judges, or any three, or more of them, have power to order the
surrendering, Abridging, Leasing, Determining or Charging of any Estates in the
premises; to add longer time to Leases not exceeding forty years, at such Rent
and Fine, or without, as they shall think fit.

Upon the Petition of any person concerned; The said Judges shall issue our
Notes or Warrants, under the hands of any three of them, to warn the persons
therein named, to appear before them, at such time and place as such Note shall
specify. And upon nonappearance, Oath being made of the service, the said
Justices and Barons, or any three of them, to proceed to definitive Order.

Enacted, That the said Justices Fol. 80.
and Barons or any three of them, shall be a Court of Record, and shall cause
all Judgments and Determinations to be Recorded in a Book of Parchment; and
that every Judgment be Signed by three of the said Justices and Barons, and to
be kept amongst the Records of the City.

The said Justices and Barons are to order a Table of Fees for the Offieers to
be employed in the said Court.

Where any Order is made by a lesser number then seven of the said Justices and
Barons; then any Person grieved by such order, may put in Exceptions in seven
days to the chief Justices and chief Barron, or any two of them, who are to
acquaint the rest therewith, and to hear the Parties, and consider the said
Exceptions: And if seven or more subscribe that they find cause, then any seven
or more of the said Justices and Barrons shall within twenty days after the
Exceptions delivered, review the former order, And to reverse, confirm, enlarge
or diminish the same as they shall think fit.

This Act to continue in force till the last of December, 1668. and no longer.

Enacted, That the Lord Mayor, 19 Car. 2. R. fol. 84. 85.
Aldermen, and Common-Counsel, shall nominate Surveyers or Supervisors to see
the Rules touching the The buildings to be surveyed.
New building of the City observed: If any one build contrary to the Rules
hereafter mentioned, the same to be deemed a Nuisance, and the builder to enter
into Recognizance before the Mayor and Justices, to abate, demolish or amend
the same, according to the Rules and Orders; and if the Offender refuses, he
shall be committed to the common Gaol of the City, without Bail or Mainprize;
there to remain till he shall have abated, demolished, or amended the same; or
else such irregular Buildings may be demolished by order of the Court of
Aldermen.

The Surveyers to take an Oath for Fell. 86.
the impartial execution of their Office.

There shall be only Four sorts of Idem. Buildings and no more.

The least sort in By-Lanes. Four sorts of Buildings.


The second sort in Streets and Lanes of Note.

The third sort of Houses Fronting the principal Streets.

The fourth sort of Houses for Persons of extraordinary quality, not fronting
either of the three former ways; the Roofs of the three first sort of Houses
to be Uniforme.

The Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Idem.
Common-Counsel, shall declare which shall be accounted By-Lanes; which Streets
or Lanes of note; and which High and Principal Streets.

All the Streets and Lanes intended Fell. 87.
to be rebuilt, shall be Marked and Staked out, by order of the Lord Mayor,
Streets and Lanes to be staked out.
Aldermen, and Common Council, that the breadth, length, and extent thereof may
be known and observed.

None shall wilfully pull up, or Penalty for pulling up any Stake or Mark.
remove any Stake or Mark-Stone on pain of ten pounds to the use of the City,
or three Months imprisonment without Bail or Mainprize; or if the Offender be
not able to satisfy such Penalty, then the Justices may by order under his or
their Hands and Seals, cause such Offender to be whipped near the place where
the ofence shall be committed, till his body be bloody: And it shall be lawful
for the said Justice or Justices to reward the Insormer out of the penalty, not
exceeding a third part thereof.

Enacted, That the outsides of all Fol. 88.
Buildings in and about the City, be made of Brick or Stone; or Brick and Stone
together; except Doorcases and Window-frames, the Breast, Summers, and other
parts-of the first Story to the Front between the peers, to be of Oken-timber.
The said Doors, breast, Summers and Window-Frames to be discharged of the
burden of the Fabric by Archwork of Brick or Stone.

Enacted, That the Supervisors Fol. 89. Surveyors to see there be party-Walls.
take care, that there be party-walls, and party-peers, set out equally on each
Builders ground, to be built up by the first Builder, and that there be
touching left in the Front-wall by the first Builder, for the better Joining of
the next House to the same.

That no man be permitted to build on the said party-wall, or on his own
ground, till he has re-imbursed the first Builder the full moiety of the said
party-Wall and Peers, with Interest for the forbearance of the same, after the
rate of six pounds per cent. per annum. to be accounted from the beginning of
the said first building.

If any difference arise concerning the true value of the said charge; the same
to be referred to the Alderman of that Ward, and his Deputy.

And where the said Alderman and his Deputy, or one of them shall be parties,
or cannot compose such difference, The Lord Mayor and Court of Aldermen, to
examine, hear, and determine the same, from whence there shall be no appeal.

The first and least sorts of Houses Fol. 90. The Assize of Buildings*
shall be two Stories high, besides Cellars and Garrets; the Cellars thereof to
be fix Foot and an half high, if Water hinder not.

The first and second Story to be nine Foot high from the Floor to the Cieling:
All Walls in Front, and Rear of the first Story, be of the length of two Bricks
thick; and thence upwards to the Garrets, one Brick and an half; the back part
of the Garret Walls not to be less in thickness, than the length of one Brick.

And that the thickness of the party-Walls between these Houses, be of one
Brick and an half, as high as the Garrets; and the thickness of the Party-Wall
in the Garrets be one Brick in length, and the Timber and Stone to be of the
Assize set down in the Table.

The Houses of the second sort of Assize of the second sort of Building.
building, shall be three Stories high, besides Cellars and Garrets; And the
Cellars to be six Foot and an half high, (if Water hinder not;) The first and
second Stories to be ^en Foot high, from the Floor to the Cieling; the third
nine Foot; (...) Walls of the first Story to be of (...) thickness of two
Bricks length and an half, and upwards to the Gar-^et one Brick and an half;
the thick^ess of the Party-walls to be two Bricks length; the first Story and
hence upwards, one Brick and an ^alf; the Timber and Stone as is pre^cribed in
the Table.

The Houses of the third sort of Third sort of Building.
building to be four Stories high, besides Cellars and Garrets: The first Story
to be ten Foot high; the second ten Foot and an half; the third ^ine Foot; the
fourth eight Foot and ^n half.

All the Walls of the first Story to be the thickness of the length of two
Bricks and an half; and upwards to the Garret Floor one Brick and an half; the
thickness of the Party-Walls two Bricks length as high as the first Story, and
to the Garret Floor one Brick and an half; Timber and Stone as in the Table.

Mansion Houses being the biggest Fourth sort of Houses.
and fourth sort of building, not fronting Streets or Lanes, to keep fol: 39.
the Assize set down in the Table; the Number of Stories and height to be at
the Builders discretion, so it exceed not so^^ Stories.

In all high Streets to be Belconie^ Belconies and Penthouses.
four foot-broad, with rayles and ba^rs of Iron to stand equally in distance
from the ground; and the vacancy of the Front to be supplied with a Penthouse,
of the breadth of the Belcony, to be covered with Lead, Slate, or Tile, and
Ceiled underneath. The water to be conveyed into the Channels by party-Pipes,
and the Pavements under the Belconies and Penthouses to be made of flat Stone.

No first Floor in any high Street Cellar Floores.
be laid above 18 inches above the Street, nor under six.

No Trap-doores, nor open grates to be made into any Cellar, without the
Foundation, but all lights be made upright.

That there be no Bulks, Jetties, Posts, etc. beyond the Ancient Foundation in
any Street or Lane, saving only in the high Streets, the Stallboards when the
Shop windows are open may turn over (...) and no more into the (...).

All persons seized in any ground Limitation for Building:
formerly builded upon, shall build the same in three years; in default
thereof, Proclamation to be made by Act of Common Council upon the ground, and
at the Exchange between twelve and two of the Clock, that the persons
concerned, rebuild within nine months next ensuing; and in refusal or neglect
of rebuilding, the Mayor and Court of Aldermen to issue out Warrants to the
Sheriffs, to Impannel a Jury to inquire of the value of the ground.

After the inquiry and value, the said ground to be sold under the Common Seal
of the City, and the money to be paid into the Chamber of London, and to be
paid out by the Chamberlain to the persons Interest there^n.

The said Sales to be enrolled upon Record in the said City, and shall finally
bar all persons, their Heirs, and Assigns, to claim any Estate out of the
ground so sold, and the Purchasor freed and discharged from all Incombrances
precedent the said sale.

The Justices of the Kings Benc(...) Wages of Workmen and prices of Materials.
or any two or more of them, m(...) call before them Brick-makers, Til(...)
makers, and Lime-burners, th(...) make or burn Brick, Tile, or Lim(...) within
five miles of the Thames, an(...) confer with them if they will be pr^sent, or
in their absence, to Asses(...) reasonable prices upon Bricks, Til(...) and
Lime, to be delivered at th(...) Kilns; and of the Carriage of th(...) same
materials both by Land a(...) Water.

The said Justices of the King Bench, or any two or more of the^ upon the
complaint of the Lord Mayor and Court of Aldermen, man limit and rate the wages
of Brick makers, Tile-makers, Lime-burner^ Carpenters, Brick-layers, Mason^
Plaisterers, Joyners, Plummers, o^ other Artificer workman or L^bourer.

The said Rates and Prices being so Assessed, shall be set down in Table, and
Proclamation there^^ made by the Lord Mayor, which sha^^ bind all persons
concerned.

If any one refuse to sell materia(...) Penalty of Refusal.
at the rate Assessed, or refuse work for the wages Assessed, or leave his work
begun before it be finished, unless it be for non payment of wages; or if any
one shall directly or indirectly Article or agree for greater wages or prices
then shall be Assessed, and be thereof convict by one witness before a Justice,
he shall suffer Imprisonment one month, or pay such Fine as the Justice shall
set upon him, not exceeding ten pounds; out of which Fine the Justice is to
satisfy the party injured, and pay the remainder to the Chamberlain of London,
for the re-edifying the public buildings of the City.

All Carpenters, Brick-layers, Foreigners to work as we^l as Freemen. fol. 49.
Masons, Plaisterers, Joyners, and other Artificers, Workmen and Laborers, who
are not Freemen, shall be set to work as well as Freemen, and enjoy the same
privileges; and after they have wrought seven years in their respective Arts,
they shall have liberty to work as Freemen of the said City, during their lives.

All differences touching Lights, Lights and Watercourse.
Watercourse or Gutters, shall be determined by the Alderman of the Ward, and
his Deputy where the difference is, if they be not parties concerned; but if
they be concerned, or cannot determine the same, the Lord Mayor and Court of
Aldermen, to do it without Apeal.

The numbers and places for all Sewer^ and Pavings.
Common Sewers, Draynes, and Vaults, and the pavings and pitching the Streets
shall be set out by such persons as the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Common
Council shall appoint under their Common Seal* and they or any seven of them
with the Surveyors or one of them, shall order and direct the making, altering,
and cleansing of Vaults, Sinks, and Sewers, and to impose a reasonable Tax upon
all houses within the said City and Liberties toward the same, and to Levy the
same by Distress in case of refusal.

No other Commissioners to intermedle fol. 101.
in the premises in seven years, and so long after, till the said Buildings be
fully finished.

The Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and idem. Noisome T^ades Prohibited.
Common Council, to prohibit such Trades to be used or exercised in the high
Streets, as they shall judge noisome or perilous in respect of Fire.

The Lord Mayor and Court of Aldermen, and Common Council may remove any of the
Conduits out of the High-Streets, and erect them in such other places as they
shall think fit.

The Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Streets to be enla^ged, Fol. 102.
Commons may Enlarge the Streets in such manner as there shall be cause, by the
approbation of his Majesty, and not otherwise; and may enlarge any Passage
which is less than fourteen Foot in breadth. And to make a New Street from
Guild Hall to Cheap Side, of such breadth and widness as they shall judge meet.

The Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Satisfaction for ^^r taken away, Fol. 1^4.
Common Council, to treat with the Owners of such ground as shall be taken
away, or employed as aforesaid; and in case of refusal or other impediment, to
issue out Warrants to the Sheriffs, to return a Jury, to inquire of and assess
Damages and Recompense to the owners of any such Houses or Ground: And such
Verdict and Judgment thereupon, and the payment of the money so awarded to the
owners, or tender, and refusal thereof, shall be binding against the said
parties, their Heirs, Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and others
claiming any title or interest in the said Houses or Ground; And be a full
Authority for the Lord Mayor, etc. to convert the same to the purposes
aforesaid.

In case of refusal or incapacity Improvements, Fol. 106.
of any of the owners, or others interessed in the said Houses, to agree and
compound with the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Commons for the same, A Jury shall
be impanelled, to assess upon the parties interested such sums of money,
considering the improvement of their Houses, as they shall judge fit in
conscience and reason.

All sums of money so raised, to be paid to the City- Chamberlayn, who is
enabled to recover the same by Action at Law, and his Receipt shall be a good
discharge: Which money, shall be employed for satisfaction for such Houses and
Ground as shall be converted into Streets, Markets, Passages, and other
public places; and such satisfaction so given, or tendered, shall divest the
propriety of the owners of such ground, and the same shall be hereby invested
in the Lord Mayor, Commonalty and Citizens of London, and their Successors.

Wheresoever all persons claim several Several Claims determinable by the
Judges, etc.
interests in any Ground to be sold by the Lord Mayor, and Aldermen by virtue
of this Act; if any difference arise between the said persons so interessed,
the Justices of the Kings Bench, and Common Pleas, and Barons of the Coif, of
the Exchequer, or three or more of them, are finally to determine the same,
without formality of Proceedings, and to award such distribution of the money
to the parties interessed, according to their respective Estates or Interests,
as to them shall seem reasonable. According to which order and distribution,
the said purchase-money shall be paid by the Chamberleyn to the said several
persons respectively.

The second day of September (unless An yearly Fast. Fol. 108.
it be Sunday) and if so, the next day following to be for ever observed as a
yearly Fast.

A Column or Pillar of Brass or Stone to be erected on, or as near as
conveniently may, to the place where the Fire began, with an Inscription to be
thereon, in perpetual Remembrance of the said dreadful Visitation.

All tenders of money, or payments Ensurance Office.
which ought to be made in the late Assurance Office, or in the Royal Exchange,
may be made at the Assurance Office in Gresham-Colledge, and be valid to all
intents and purposes. Churches, Fol. 109.


The number of Churches to be rebuilt, shall not exceed 39. which are to be
appointed by the Archbishop of Canterbury, and Bishop of London.

The Scites, and Materials, and Yards of such Churches as shall not be rebuilt,
are vested in the Lord Mayor, and Aldermen; and so much of the Ground as shall
not be laid into the Streets, shall be sold; And the money to be employed
toward the rebuilding of such Churches as are intended to be built.

This Act shall not extend to St. Paul's Church, St. Faiths nor St. Gregory's by
St. Paul's, nor any of the Churchyards thereunto belonging.

Thames Street, and the Ground Thames Street to be raised. fol. 110.
between the said Street and the Thames, shall be raised three foot higher then
now it* is.

No house or other building (except Cranes and Sheds) shall be built within 40
foot of the Thames, from the Tower to the Temple; Nor any house or other
building (Cranes only excepted) shall be built within 70 foot of the middle of
any part of the Common Sewers called Bridewell-Dock, Fleet-Ditch, and
Turnmil-brook, before the 24th. of Ma^ch, 1068.

From the 24th. of June 1667. to to the 24th. of June 1677. All Coals brought
into the River, to be sold by the Chaldron or Tun, shall pay 12 d. every
Chaldren, and for every Tun 12 d. to be paid by the Master or owner of every
Ship or Vessel to the Mayor and Commonalty, etc, or their Deputies or Assigns
before the ship break bulk.

To prevent Fraud; The Coalemeeters shall deliver Certificates to the Officers
or Assigns of the said Mayor and Comonalty, of the quantity of Coals
delivered from on Board any Vessel; if any be Concealed, there shall be paid 5.
^. for every Chaldron or Tun so Concealed, unless the Importer within 24 hours
after Certificate delivered in by the Coale-meeter, give in his Post Entry, and
satisfy the duty for such surplusage.

The money raised upon this Imposition, shall first be disposed to satisfy
such persons, whose Grounds shall be taken for the enlarging of the Streets and
passages within the City; and the Residue shall be employed for the making of
Wharfs and Keys, and building of Prisons within the said City.

All money hereupon to be received, to be entered in a book or books of Vellam
or Parchment, to be kept in the Chamber of London; where also shall be kept
another book or books, wherein shall be entered the Accounts of all payments and
disbursements, expressing the time when the occasion for which, and the name of
the person or persons to whom the same was disbursed.

All persons concerned to have free access to the said Books, when the
Chamberlains Office is open, to view the same without paying any Fee.

The Chamberlain before the end of Michaelmas Term in every year, shall deliver
upon Oath into the Receipt of the Exchequer, a true The Water-house.
Copy of the said books, containing all the Receipts and disbursements of the
preceding year, ending upon the 24th. of June next before; which is to be
received gratis, and kept amongst the Records of the Exchequer, whether any
person concerned may have access to view and peruse the said books without
paying any Fee or Reward.

The Water-house adjoining to London. Bridge may be rebuilt where formerly it
stood.

The Lord Mayor and Aldermen may enlarge the passage called Water-Lane, from
Fleet Street to White-Fryars-Dock by the Thames, and to enlarge a passage to
the said River, from Cheapside through Soper-Lane, to Thames Street, and from
the three Cranes to the Thames; and to enlarge another passage through
Mincing-Lane, by St. Dunstons in the East, to Thames Street, near the
Custom House; and to make the said passages 24 foot in breadth; giving notice
to the Proprietors before the last day of May, 1667. of their resolutions
herein; and to give them satisfaction for their ground, according to the
directions of this Act.

Assize of Timber and Stone for the First sort of Houses.
For the first Floor, Summers under 15. foot, 12. inches, and 8. inches.

Wall-Plates at 7. and 5. inches. Rafters under 15. foot, inches.
at foot 8 at top 5
Single Rafters, 4 and 3 inches.
For the Two other sorts of Houses.
foot, foot, inches, inc. Summers in length, 10 to 15 -- 11-and 8 15 18 13 9 18
21 14 10 21 24 16 12 24 26 17 14

thickness, depth, Joysts which bear 10. foot inches, inches, 3 6 3 7 3 7 3 8 3
8

Principal Rafters from length thickness Foot Foot inches, inches 15 to 18 at
foot 9 7 at top 7 18 21 at foot 10 8 at top 8 21 24 at foot 12 8 at top 9 24 26
at foot 13 9 at top 9

Single Rafters not exceeding fo. inc. inc. in length, 9 5 4 in breadth, 6 4 3
thickness,

Foot, inches, inches, Single quarters in length 8 3 1 Double quarters, 8 4 3

F. I. I. Sawed Joysts in length, 8 6 4 Laths in length 4 1 1 quarter 5 and
half inch.

Assize of Stone.
Inches, First sort of Houses Corner Peers 18. Square Middle Peers 14. and 12.
Double Peers 14. and 18. Door-Jambs 12. and 8.

Fo. Inch. Second and third sort of Houses Corner Peers 2. and 6. Sq. Middle
Peers 18. Square Double Peers 24. and 18 Door-Jambs 14. and 10

No Timber to be laid within twelve Inches of the foreside of the Chimney-Jambs.

No Timber be laid within the Tunnel of any Chimney, upon pain of 10 s. to the
Workman, and 10 s. every week it so continues.

Joysts and Rafters, not to be laid above twelve Inches distant, and no
quarters at above fourteen Inches distant.

No Joysts to bear at longer length than ten Foot; and single Rafters at nine
Foot.

The Roofs, Window-frames, and Cellar-floors to be made of Oak.

Tile-pins to be made of Oak.

Summers and Girders to lie ten Inches into the Wall; and Joysts eight Inches,
and not to be laid over the Head of any Doors or Windows.

FINIS.
Books newly printed: To be sold by W. Jacob and John Amery.
THe Complete Lawyer, by W. Noy, sometime Reader of Lincoln's Inn, Late Atturny
General to King Charles the First, In Octavo, Price ^ s.

The Life and Death of Alexander the Great, King of Macedon, in 10 Books, by
Q^intus Curtius Rufus, (exactly conferd with the Original, and purged from many
gross errors and absurdities) In Octa. Price bound 3 s.

Luis Veneria. Wherein the Names, Nature, Subject, Causes, Signs, and Cure, are
handled: Mistakes in these discovered, rectified; Doubts and Questions
succinctly resolved: By John Wynnell, M. D. In Octa. Price bound 1 s.


