THE COPY OF A LETTER SENT By Mr. D. T. to Mr. John Vicars (Mr. Prynns second)
in Answer to his Letter sent by him to Mr. John Goodwin.
A righteous man hates lying, Prove. 13.5.

Righteousness keeps him that is upright in the way, Prove. 13.6.

Only by pride comes contention, but with the well advised is wisdom, Prove.
13.10.

Therefore thou art inexcusable, O man, whosoever thou art that judge
another, for wherein thou judge another, thou condemnest thy self, for thou
that judge do the same things, Romans 2.1.


Sir,
Whether it was my good or hard hap to meet with your Letter directed and
sent to Mr. John Goodwin, I cannot easily determine: For though all manner of
knowledge, either of persons or things, be in some kind or other beneficial;
it being an undoubted Maxim, that Verum and Bonum convertuntur: yet some
knowledge may be so circumstantiated, that it may prove more burdensome and
offensive to the party knowing, then commodious. I confess from the reading of
your L^nes I have gained thus much, to say I know you: but this gain has
occasioned such a considerable loss i^ ^he things of my joy, that I do even
wish for my former ignorance, and could be well contented, to have met with no
other description of your frame and temper, then what the promise of your
countenance, and the report of your friends have made of you: Indeed it cannot
but deduct somewhat from the comfort of a reasonable man, to see one, whom (one
would think) gray hairs should have taught the language of soberness,
shooting with his tongue at rovers, and speaking sharp and devouring words
against persons and things, which he knows not. Sorry I am, that Mr. Vicars
should break the fair face of his reputation upon this stone, against which
this besotted world is dashing it self in pieces from day to day. I have some
hope that though your zeal to Mr. Prynns glory, did cast you into such an
exstasie of passion, that you scarce knew what you writ; yet by this time you
have pretty well recovered your self again: and lest the sense of your
miscarriage should too much oppress you, I give you to know that you are fallen
into soft and tender hands, and have discovered your nakedness to such only,
who rather pity, then deride it. For my part, I love not to disport my self at
the weakness of any man, or to turn his folly into laughter; for what were
this, but to reflect dishonor upon the same nature, wherein he partakes with
my self. Rather, I could mourn over the vanities of your pen, and weep to see
you so far intoxicated, as to call the most injurious dealing one shall
lightly meet with, by the name of candor and ingenuity. The truth is, you have
so foully berayed your paper with bold and untrue assertions, imputations,
exprobrations, and such like excrements, that I thought even for modesty sake
to have drawn over them the veil of silence, and to have contested with that
spirit that breathes in them no further, then by speaking to it in a secret
wish, the Lord rebuke thee. But I considered with my self, that perhaps you
might communicate in the nature of such persons who (as Solomon says, Prove.
26.5.) are apt (being unanswered) to be wise in their own conceits: and if I
shall hereby demolish or at least weaken this conceit of yours, I presume I
shall do you herein a very charitable and Christian piece of service. Think not
I am become your enemy, because I tell you the truth: you have injured me no
otherwise then by trespassing upon your own credit, and by making thereby a sad
breach in that holy profession, wherein you stand engaged with my self.
Whatever your intentions were, I conceive you have done me no more wrong in
clapping the title of an Independent Proselyte upon my back, then Pilate did to
Christ in affixing this Superscription over his head, This is the King of the
Jews. I think this name to be full as honorable, as that of a poor and
unworthy Presbyterian, wherewith you have pleased to baptize your self: and
conceive that herein only you have followed your own, or rather the Apostles
counsel, in honor to prefer others before your self. But had you been
minded to suppress your name, your very Dialect had been enough to betray you:
Me thinks you write just like such a one as you say you are. Did I not hope
for better things from the hands of more worthy Presbyterians, your unworthy
dealing had set me offten degrees further from your way, then I now stand: But
I will not take the advantage of your, or any man's misdemeanor, though more
gross and absurd then yours, to render Presbytery odious to the world: To
cloth any opinion or practice with the garments of men's personal distempers,
thereby to fall upon them and beat them with the more applause, is a method
which I as much abhor, as the Gentleman you admire, delights in: and if this
property in him were one of those beauty-spots, which ravished you into a
passionate adoration of him, you need not fear, that ever I should become your
corrivall: And yet I love and honor Mr. Pry^^ for what ever you can find
lovely and (...) neath the line of a man, is to make him and my self obnoxious
to the wrath of God, and the scorn of man. I acknowledge that for a time he ran
well, but who hindered him? questionless He who is ever and anon hindering the
Saints in the race of holiness. The Prince of darkness owed him a fall for
his sharp contesting with his prime agents, and now he has paid his debt;
but if Mr. Prynn will be ruled by the advice of his best friends, he may rise
again to his greater glory, and notwithstanding his fall, triumph over the envy
and malice of the devil. Concerning Mr. John Goodwin, (over whom you shake the
rod of your reproof, as if he were one of your Scholars) I could speak as
high and excellent Encomiums, as you have spoken of your precious Gentleman; I
could compare him even with Mr. Prynn himself: but such a comparison as this,
would be to me most odious. I could tell you what he has done, what he
has writ, how deeply he has suffered from unreasonable men; yea, I could
give you such a lively and bright description of him, as would dazell your eyes
to look upon, and make you blush for shame to have grapl'd with such a person
as he is, upon such rude and unmannerly terms as you have done. For you, who
are but a Teacher of boys, so haughtily to correct a great Master in Israel,
is such an absurdity, as cannot but rend a more patient soul then mine, into
disdain and grief. It Is a wonder to me, that, whereas at the beginning of your
Letter, you confess your self to be but a poor and unwrothy Presbyterian,
you should so far forget your self, before you come half way, as to take upon
you, like the Dr. of the Chair; and to censure the best of men and ways with
as much confidence, as if your pen had dropped the Votes of a General Assembly
with its ink. Had a poor and unworthy Independent done the like, you would
have cast his boldness into a Basiliske, and used it to batter down the way of
his profession, and to lay the glory of it even with the ground. But I well
perceive, though you have escaped the snare of gifts and parts (in which you
fear Mr. Goodwin is taken) yet you are fallen into the pit, not of divine, but
natural simplicity; and have verifyed the old Proverb, A rash man's boult is
soon shot. As for that Book of Mr. Goodwins, called Innocence and Truth
triumphing together, though you are pleased to triumph over both, and to cast
it out as an Arch rebel to reason and morallity, yet (I must tell you) it has
found joyful and bountiful entertainment in the judgments of sober and
intelligent men: But certainly, it was the unhappiness of this Treatise to
fall into your hands, when you stood upon the Mount of Mr. Prynns honor, and
when the vision of his transfiguration wrought so strongly in you, that you did
not wot, what you spoke, no, nor what you did neither, for you laid about you
with such regardlesse fury that you broke the head of your friend Priscian, [
The words in the written Copy of your Letter, are these, and thus spelled
qui^n alterum paratus est dicere, ipsum vicio careat oporte, as may appear
from the original in Mr. Goodwins custody. But it seems the Corrector being
the better Grammarian transformed them into good Latin in the Printed Copy.]
of whose safety men of your profession, should bet most tender. I thought to
have argued the case with you, whether your exceptions against this Treatise
and its Author, will hold in the Court of Reason and equity: but perhaps you
are not so well skilled in the rules of this Court; and I am loath to take the
advantage of you. I shall only propound a few Querees, peradventure the
struglings of your thoughts to give them satisfaction, may dissolve the
enchantment that is now upon you. What persons did ever most Learnedly declare
Mr. Goodwin to be justly censured for Socinianisme? When, or in what public
place did they make this Declaration? How call you that Brother of his, who
will justify against him the charge of holding a most damnable opinion about
justifying faith? I suppose you must strain, not so much your memory as your
invention, in shaping your answer: You had done well to remember, that though
Fools (as Solomon speaks) believe every thing; yet wise men will question such
assertions as these: Alas (Sir) the best course you can run to game credit with
the prudent, is to cut your allegations and your proofs, just of one and the
same length: To cloth large and broad sayings with curtaild Arguments,
reflects as much shame upon such sayings, and him that speaks them, as Hanun
did upon the servants of David, in cutting off their Garments to their
buttocks. You cannot but know, how that many grave, sober, godly, and learned
men have fallen into that way you call Independency. Now, your only method, to
have brought over these to your party, and to have filled their mouths with the
cry of a confederacy against this way, had been this; not barely to have
affirmed it to be a novell and disturbant way (as you have done) but to have
poys'd the lightness of your affirmation, with the weight and substance of a
demonstration. I assure you (Sir) (what ever you may think) I approve of this
way no further then I see the footsteps of those sweet sisters, Truth and Peace
Printed in it: I have narrowly viewed it, and I can find no drops of blood, no
strewings of the liberties, estates, names, comforts of the Saints scattered in
it, and yet some Travelers affirm, they have seen such things as these in
that way, which the ignorance of thousands lusts after. But to conclude. I
beseech you (Sir) be more watchful over the extravagancies of your tongue and
pen for the future: since you are (in part) acquainted with their infirmities,
let it be your wisdom to seek their cure. I reverence you for your age, piety,
and some services you have done to the Public; and I should rejoice to see
such an ancient stander in the garden of God ^s you are, carrying your hoary
head with honor to the grave: which that you may do, as I have (you see) in
part endeavored, so I shall further prosecute with my prayers to him, who is
able to keep you to the end: in whom (though I am unknown to you) yet with all
sincerity I profess my self,

February 3. 1644. Sir, (...)

