A Delicate, Dainty, Damnable DIALOGVE, Between the Devil and a Jesuit.

By John Tailor.

depiction of the devil and a Jesuit

LONDON, Printed for I. H. for Thomas Banks. 1642.

A Delicate, Dainty, Damnable Dialogue, between the Devil and the Jesuit.
Devil. MY Dear Adopted Son, since we are met
And in our serious consultation set,
Let us contrive some stratagem most fit.
Our Ancient Greatness, and deep-searching wit,
Lets lay such plots, may make the World admire,
And ad more fuel to our endless fire.

Jesus. An't please your Graceless Majesty to note
That I, with all the Brethren of my Coat,
Have been the truest Servants unto you,
We hold it Just to give the Devil his due,
We have from North to South, from East to West,
Survaid the World, and we have done our best
In every Province, Realm and Monarchy
To Advance and raise the Papal Dignity,
And raising That, we understand right well,
We do enlarge your Ancient Kingdom Hell.

Devil. Though Truth and I did ever disagree,
Yet truth I must say, that the Jesuits be
My dearest Servants, they have ever been
My Actors, and my factors (souls to win)
But now our Cunning is found out, and crossed,
And if we look not to it, all will be lost.

Jesus. Your Hellhood cannot tax us (Mighty Prince)
With sleepy idleness, or negligence:
We have adventured often in dangers deep,
To lull the King of Christendom asleep,
We have made Spain for us, and Italy,
Poland, and the greatest part of Germany,
Hungaria, Russia, France, all Catholics,
(Except a crew of wilful Heretics)
Such as will not by our persuasions come,
And be obedient to the Sea of Rome,
The House of Austria, and great Bavarre,
With Brabant, all our own already are,
But Britain, Sweaden, and the warlike Dane,
We seek their Ruin, and they work our Bane,
There is a Parliament in England now,
That all Romes Rights, and Rites do disallow,
And sure the Scots, with them so fast are Knitt,
That (to the Pope) they never will submit,
We have done all we could, it plain appears
To set them altogether by the ears,
And we have used all means how to prevent
All the proceedings of the Parliament,
We have sowed false distrusts and iealousies,
Mad Tumults, Libells, base reports and Lies;
And over all the Land we caused to flee
Ten thousand Pamphlets (all as true as We.)
And yet we all, as if our wits were Dulled,
Are in our expectations) merely Gulled,
For if we could that Parliament have broken,
We had done something worthy to be spoken.
But they are all (in Unity) so tide,
That all our plots can never them devide,
Which makes us now the outcast scorn of men,
The Common abicts of each Pasquills Pen,
And as our Wisdoms have been highly prized,
We now are greatest Fools, and most despised;
Wherefore (great Monarke of Eternal Night)
Direct and teach us to regaine our Right,
Inspire us with thy Rate Infernal skill,
And we obediently will do thy will.

Dev. I tell the Son, that since the first Creation,
I still have wrought the Churches desolation,
The first man made, I taught to disobey
The firstborn, his just Brother how to slay.
Infernally I Sodom did inspire,
Which drew upon them Heavens consuming fire,
To righteous Lot, I gave incestuous drink,
Noah unseemly in his Tent did wink,
I tempted Corah, madly to Rebel,
And he and his were swallowed quick to Hell,
I had a wedge on Achan to bestow,
A Dallilah, a strong man to overthrow,
In Ahabs Reign, I had Knights of the Post,
When Nabaoths Vineyard, and his life were lost,
The Patriarks, and Prophets, every one,
And my chief Enemy, The Almighties Son
I persecuted to the death, and I
Have been the cause of all the Tyranny
Inflicted on the Apostles, and the Ten
First persecuions on so many men,
With Women, Children, as it plain appears.
In Histories, the first three hundred years,
I in the Marrian Time did Havoc make
In England, Thousands were consumed at stake,
The massacres in France, I formed, and wrought,
And thousand Protestants to death I brought,
Two Henry's, Kings of France, both murdered,
And William, Prince of Aurenge, pistol'd dead,
Duke D'Alva, vexed the Netherlanders too,
And Tiranniz'd as bad as I could do,
The plot of eighty eight I did project,
(A vengeance light on it, thad but bad effect)
And I the Powder Treason first did mint,
Although we had but scurvy fortune in it.
These have I done, and mischiefs millions more,
And yet I have not empted all my store.

Ies. Great Emperor of Darkness, briefly then,
Seek to confound the Scots and English men,
They are our greatest and our hatefull'st foes,
Of all our Enemies, none like to those.
The Hollanders of Amsterdam, or Delfe,
Their faith is much indifferent (like my self)
As for Religion, so it bring in profit,
Let it be what it will, they think not of it:
Geneva is a little paltry Plot,
That has all Romish duty quite forgot;
But Britain is the Magazen of them,
That will tread down the Papal Diadem,
Therefore against them all your forces call,
For if you conquer them, you have won all.

Dev. My pen posts (Libels) my learned Scr. be
I Will set a work, and I will fill with Bribes;
The hands of Justice, Gold shall clear, or bleare
His eyes, and stop her ears, she shall not hear,
Suspicious Ielousies I Will frame, and fling,
Shall breed distaste 'twixt Subjects and the King,
That though they all mean well, I Will make a puther,
They scarcely shall believe, or trust each other:
I in the Church will such division sow,
Which shall go near the Church to overthrow:
I Will scatter strange Hreticall opinions,
In every corner of the Lands Dominions,
That those that see the madness of their Brains,
Shall think the Devil is in them, taking pains,
Like Hidraes heads, I Will make complaints increase
That shall disturb the King and Kingdoms peace;
In every corner, I such strife will scatter,
That it shall seem a Poole of troubled water,
Besides, my Irish Sons (the great O Donnell)
With his stout Kernes, and noble stout Tirconnell:
These with great troops of Rebels, I will rear,
That shall disturb and work much michiefe there.
A Proverb says, He that will England win,
He bold^y first (with Ireland must begin,)
And there already, I have so begun,
That I doubt not our will, will there be done.
Thus (Fencer-like) my aim and stroke is wide,
I strike at England, quite through Irelands side.

Ies. Could you make England like to Germany,
A Field of blood, a Land of misery,
A grizly Golgatha of Dead Men's Bones,
An Empire wasted, full of sighs and groans:
Your plots and ours, there twenty years have lafted,
In half that time all Britain may be wasted;
We (of our holy Order) have instilled
Such counsel into Cesars ears, which filled
His Royal heart with wrath, his mind with error,
All Christendom with horror, grief and terror:
Bavariaes Duke we (as we pleased) did mold,
We drove the Palsgrave from Bohemias Hold,
(For never Prince did our Enchantment hear,
But he was straight ways ours, through love; or fear)
We are their Confessors; we know their mind,
And at our pleasure, can them turn and wind,
They do confess themselves to us, and we
Do know their secrets, and their Master be,
Yet though (like Kings) we rule and Reign,
The King of Britain we shall never gain,
He terms us vassals to the Romish Whore,
And scorns us, as his Father did before.

Dev. Well, since we cannot win him, this we will do,
We Will trouble him, and all his people too,
And we have reason for it, for he of late,
A match with Aurange Son did consumate,
And his fair Daughter, sure that marriage may
Prove cross to our proceedings many a way,
For if Nassaw had not led Belgias powers,
The Butter Boxes, had long since bin ours;
Could thou have crossed that Marriage, thou had done
A work most worthy to be called my son.

Ies. The news of it amongst us was so bad,
At Doway, and at Antwerp all were mad,
But could not hinder't, there is a power supernall,
That countermands our pollices infernal;
And since we cannot win what we intend,
Let us continually our forces bend,
That what we cannot gain with care and toil,
We may disturb, vex, ruinate, and spoil.

Dev. I Will fill the Cinque Ports of the Isle of Man
With malice and with mischief, all I can,
I will men's fancy with such humors fit,
They shall want time to think on grace, or wit,
I Will kill their loves, and for it give them scorns,
That all shall kick the man whom Fortune spurns,
Fantastic toys within their pates shall gingle,
And truth with falsehood they shall brew and mingle,
I Will make the World of such an od condition,
I Will turn it to fool, fe^ther, or Physician,
This can I can do, and take but little pain,
It Is but to do my old work over again,
So farewell Son, let us once again begin
To dee some mischief where we cannot win.

Ies. I have a short complaint few years agon,
A Latin Annagram I looked upon;
Against the Pope most knavishly it is writ,
He read it, and you can interpret it.
Supreamus Pontifex Romanus.
ANNAGRAMMA.
O Non Sum Supra Petram fixus.

Dev. This gives your Holy Father a shrewd knock,
It says he is not fixed on a Rock:
Let him fix where he can, let us make an end,
As long as he will serve me, I am his friend.

FINIS.

