THE ANSWER TO THE RATTLE-HEADS Concerning their fictionate Resolution OF THE
ROUNDHEADS. WHEREIN Is explained every particular therein contained against
them, with many godly counsels to Doctor Little-wit: the Composer of their
former scurrulous and illeterate Pamphlet.

LONDON, Printed for L. H. MDCXLJ.

THE ANSWER TO The Rattle-Heads, Concerning their fictionate Resolution of The
Roundheads.
IF Truth and Peace, Zacharies two Companions, had met in you, as well as us,
this Controversy had never been. The severring of these two, has caused this
ill-composed aspersion upon us, which we could bear and put up, yea bury in
oblivion, but that zeal for the truth of Religion and our own defense, commands
the contrary.

God knows how unwillingly we put our hands to this unkind quarrel. Nothing
so much abates the courage of Christians, as to call their brethren in Christ,
adversaries; yet we must do it as forced, W^ be unto those who have been the
occasion, and by whom this offense comes: Yet by how much the insultation of
a brotherly enemy are intolerable, being not only privately, but in public
print: so much the more cause we see, to answer directly their fictionate
(Resolution concerning us.) And since only for necessary defense and Religious
cause, this task is undertaken, we crave nothing of the Readers but Patience
and Justice; of God, victory to the Truth. As for favor, we wish for none more
then an enemy against himself. And with this confidence, we enter the Lists,
and turn my pen to an Adversary, God knows whether more proud, or weak.

Whereas, you whose self-conceited witty expressions, without all conscience
have branded us with the ignominious title of a seditious and malignant head
(ignorance and obstinancie being your own phrases, and therefore best beseeming
your selves) show but the ardent flames of your cancred spleen toward us,
intending to hang us up on the horns of the Altar of your Superstition, which
you do well in conceiving them to be too weak in bearing so heavy a burden,
or we too wise to be intercepted by them. To exhort and persuade in zealous
manner is to no purpose, you being already by your own confession past
edification, your varieties being Brothels in stead of Broths, and Curses
instead of Custards, these being your luxurious fare, wherein you offend God to
please the Devil, I could leave you in that case, but that my conscience moves
me further.

As for your learning and wits, for which you study long to little purpose, we
affect it not, neither any way disparage: we resolve rather to embrace with
sincerity of affection, what blessings shall be conferred upon us, through
divine inspiration, that we may speak when the spirit moves, you may call us
Roundheads, it is true, I must confess yours are a great deal more in fashion,
being set upon the square block of flat simplicity, as for Prickears, I do not
admire at your expression therein, your fortune being the Jackdawes, who envied
the Peacocks for having such feathers as he wanted, I fear me it is too many of
your cases, by this the Proverb is proved true, one Jack must imitate another.

But dear Brethten, think you it is acceptable to God, to jear us by
Scripture: is it not the Apostles own expression concerning the adding to the
Elect, that their bowels did earn to multiply the true church it is even our
cases, we do the like by their example. I rather resolve out of zeal, to move
you to repentance, then to touch too hard upon this your profaneness. As for
Smell-feasts, I make no question, but you are very well skilled therein, being
better nosed, then any Butchers Dog in the City. As for your habit, it is
correspondent to your person, and conditions, your hat that sits hollow like a
beepot to receive the foggie vapors of bottle Ale and Tobacco, your doublet
with a short waste, shows your thrift, who think (the truth) ^ll waste that is
bestowed upon you: your goodly long breeches so narrow, and strait to your
buttocks, like an Arse-case, may chance to make a pair of sleeves in the
reversion. So that generally wherein we exceed in antiquity you go beyond us
far in simplicity, and for our faith you do well to speak little of that,
having none your self.

And forasmuch as you have composed out of your obstupufied and dulled fancy,
certain tenants, we will likewise prescribe to you the like number, though
differing in the matter, being rather good counsel, instead of your malevolent
and invective aspersions.

I. THat your Scribes or rather Duces omnium malorum, in the next of their
witty endeavors, composed according to Reason, Learning, Divinity, Order,
Discipline, Morality, Piety, and humanity, a penitentiary Petition to God; as
also to acknowledge the wrongs done unto us. II. That hereafter you be not so
forward and ready to judge and pray into, to condemn faults in others, before
the first perusal of your own. III. That whilst you are in this world, you
provide by repentance, fasting, and prayer, to prepare for the world to come,
and the Salvation of your souls. IV. That you keep your selves continent and
chaste from the Cobbler and Feltmakers wives, unless the one make you pay too
dear for selling your bever on your block-head, and the other cause your pride
to have a fall by the loss of a Lunsfords heel. V. That you change your name
of Cavalier by altering your profession of evil into good, unless bravery and
knavery bring on raggerie and beggary. VI. That you fast and pray for your sins
past, giving thanks unto God for moving us to be the Agents to persuade you to
repentance.
YOu come too late Sir
It Is vain to prate Sir,
We Will pull the Miter from the Prelates Crown:
It is no boot Sir,
Though you stand toot Sir,
Hanging's too good for you, for they must down.
Your tricks are found out,
We have the ground out
You cannot cheat the King, if we stand by.
Your Plots discry'd out
And Troasons pride out,
Against the Honor of his Majesty.
Though Roundheads wink at
We Will make you stink at
The hearing of your Bishops second Ditty:
Though now you laugh at,
And in Sack quaffe at
Us, then I fear me ye will all beshit ye.
We shall confound ye,
If we expound ye
Although within the Circuit of a TUB.
We Will cry have at ye,
Though never come at ye,
A word will make such Iades as you to s^rub.
Let chill cold take thy person, Gallows freeze,
Earth take thy body Gug, thy clothes his fees.
FINIS.

