THE HYRELINGS REWARD: OR, A serious Word to considering People.

BEING A RELATION Of some Difference between Mr. WILLIAM JENKYNS, and some
Others.

Occasioned by the Questioning of his Doctrine, and his undertaking to defend
it; Together with his Argument, by which he pretended to do it.

As also His Reasons of deserting his undertaking; With an Answer to his said
Argument and Reasons; Together with some Queries touching the Point in
Question; with the manner of his being publicly opposed, and the Deportment
of himself and his people thereupon: All faithfully laid down by R. T.

Study to show thy self approved, one that need not be ashamed, rightly
deviding the Word of Truth.

2 Timothy 2. 16. But he answered and said, Every plant which my heavenly Father
has not planted, shall be rooted up.

Matt. 15. 13. The Hyreling flees, and cares not for his sheep, because he is
a Hyreling.

Joh. 10. 13. LONDON, Printed by J. C. and T. W. 1652.

To the Christian Reader.
READER,
Possibly thou may have taken up the observation before me, but however it
will not be amiss to remind thee of it, viz. That a person full of prejudicate
thoughts, and prepossest with strong prejudice against either persons, or
things, doctrines or opinions, lies under a very great disadvantage, and stands
upon terms of the greatest improbability that likely can be, to see far, or to
search deep into the mysteries of Truth; yea, the truth is, that one great
reason why men abide so long in the Earth, and do not mount up into the Heavens
themselves; I mean why they converse no more with those great and excel'ent
things which are presented to the view of men in the Gospel of Jesus Christ;
why they solace and delight themselves no more with visions of life and
immortality; but are such strangers unto the glory of spiritual employments; it
is because they are already wedded unto something or other, either in their
judgments (or rather wills) or practices, or both, which to them is as a
beloved Dallilah, which whosoever rises up to oppose, or question (although it
be only to search into the grounds thereof, and so if it be a Truth, to
establish them the more firmly therein; if Error, to show them that it cannot
bless them) shall notwithstanding be the hatred of their souls; they are
already prepossest with hard thoughts against the persons, and prejudice
against such doctrines or opinions, whereof the engagement of the one, and the
tendency of the other shall be to unsettle or take them off the Lees of their
present embraced opinions, although it be to establish them upon that Rock that
is higher then themselves, the clear pathway whereunto as yet they have not
known, or at least have not been so well acquainted with: It is a common
saying, but I judge it has somewhat of weight in it, That Custom. becomes a
second nature; Implying, that whatsoever men shall for a long time have
accustomed themselves unto, whether it be the owning and maintaining of any
doctrine or opinion, or whether it be the practicing of what they so own and
maintain, or whatever else, their long accustomedness thereunto, renders it a
matter very hard and difficult for any man whosoever to remove them off their
standing herein, yea though their feet all this while have been set in slippery
places, and he that desires to remove them, does it only in order to this
great design, viz. That they might now stand in everlasting felicity; yet
nevertheless, the transplantation in this kind becomes (comparatively) as
difficult, and almost as hard as the changing of Nature it self, or the turning
her out of her course; And upon this account, I suppose it is that the Spirit
of God himhimself speaks thus, Can the Blackmoore change his skin, or the
Leopard his spots? What then? Why then indeed may you that are accustomed to do
evil, learn to do well: Implying, that their long accustomedness unto evil,
was that which now had made their Learning to do well, so difficult and hard
unto them.

This supposed, and taken along with us, I conceive thou will not much w^nder
at the manner of the carriage of the business now presented to thy view;
Otherwise indeed it would seem very strange, to see a man who owns himself as
Minister of the Gospel (who of all others ought to apply himself so to the
minds and consciences of men, as (if possible) to convince all gainsayers; but
however to be ready to give to every one that asks him, a reason of that
faith and hope that is in him, to see or hear such a man deliver such things
for and under the name of Truths of God, which notwithstanding he refused to
vindicate and maintain against gainsayers; yea, a reason, or account whereof
he refused to give, though publicly desired; denying also, to answer the
Objections of his gain-sayer; I suppose thou will readily resolve this practice
of his, [Mr. Jenkins] into that principle beforementioned, viz. A
prepossessedness of mind, and prejudicate opinion, either of the person or
doctrine, or both, which now opposed him, being wedded, and deeply baptized
into the Spirit of his own opinion, But (as there is too much cause to suspect)
upon much the same terms, as they that are represented by the stony ground in
our Saviors parable, Matt. 13. 20. is said to have received the Word, viz.
(not having much root in themselves) was therefore unwilling to have his
Doctrine in this kinds too much searched into, or the spirit of it too far
tasted by men, least when the Truth of the Gospel in this respect should be
brought forth into the light, the glory of this his opinion should thereby be
laid in the dust:

My humble request therefore unto thee (Christian Reader) is, That seeing such
a Rock before thee, thou would be very eircumspect and careful, least thou
thy self should run upon it, and be split in pieces by it; Know this, that
Truth is no farther thine, then it is received by thee upon rational grounds;
neither can it do thee any service like it self, till it first enters into thy
soul by the door of thy understanding, and thence passes into thy judgment,
and so proceeds into thy will and affection, and so comes forth into practice
in thy life and conversation; And it is never like thus to enter (at least not
strongly to possess thy judgment and conscience) unless thou shall be willing
to weigh, and pounder, and look round about thee, and consider on what account
thou have or do receive it; Take therefore the Apostles council, Try all
things; sift them to the Bran, search them to the bottom, try them thoroughly,
and then Hold fast that which is good: Thou art never like to Hold fast that
which is good, unless thou shall be willing and industrious to dive into the
depth of the grounds, and reasons of it, and to see the strength that is in it,
That thou may be able thus to do in the Controversy now before thee, shall
be my prayer unto the God of Grace and Love, into whose bosom I now commend
thee.

Farewell.
The Hirelings Reward.
IF it was as a Crown of glory and matter of exceeding joy and peace to the
consciences of the Apostles, in undergoing the malice and rage of the people,
for and in their declaring and making known the counsels of God unto the world,
and that they were accounted worthy to suffer shame and reproach from a
malicious and perverse generation, in the doing of such a pice of service as
this was; and therefore they ceased not, but daily, and in every place
endeavored to finish their course; and their great design in this, was, That
they might manifest the great benefit they had in being one with Christ, that
they also might Acts 5. 40, 41, 42.
have fellowship with him: And so the Apostle Paul became all things to all,
that he might gain some; and thus did he endeavor for the Gospel sake, that
they might be partakers therein with him, that is, that thereby the Gospel
might get ground upon the lives and consciences of men, and be more highly
esteemed by them, and thereby God would be honored, the Apostles satisfied to
see the fruits of their labors, and the world benefited; and doubtless the
hearts of the Apostles were mightily born up in the managing of this great work
by the words of their Lord and Master, that before had told them what they must
expect, if they would undertake that piece of service, how that they should
meet with abundance of persecution and contradiction of sinners, and should be
hated of all men, 1 Cor. 9. 22, 23. (that is of the most part of men) for his
names sake, Joh. 15. 20, 21. but with all comforts them with this
consideration, The servant is not greater then his Master, Job. 30. 16. And if
they have dealt so unworthily with him, they must expect to have a taste of the
same cup, 1 Pet. 1, 2. therefore he is said in his suffering, to leave us that
for an example, and we to follow his steps therein.

I am now to present to thy view, that which is a trouble to my spirit, to
consider that I should be so necessitated by unreasonable men, that upon
Christian-like and honorable terms might have prevented the same, I shall as
briefly as possibly I can give you a narration thereof. 1. I shall give you the
occasion, 2. the matter.

First, the occasion was this; On the fourth day of January Mr. William Jenkins
in his morning Lecture, preaching out of Cant. 1. 3. the words are these,
Because of the savor of thy good Ointment, thy Name is as Ointment powered
forth, therefore do the Virgins love thee: From the words Mr. Jenkins was
pleased to raise these four or five considerations.

First, That Jesus Christ he is a prevailing savor.

Secondly, That he was an attractive and drawing savor.

Thirdly, that he was a defusive and spreading savor.

Fourthly, he was an everlasting and effecting savor, and where the scent of
the savor was received, it could never be lost.

Presently he said, he had been in some places that were as the suburbs of
Hell, where there was cursing, and swearing, and lying, etc. and the reason of
this was, because the savor of Christ was not there. And again, I have been in
other places, as have been as the Suburbs of Heaven, where their good counsel,
and godly sorrow and mourning for sin; and the reason of this was, because the
savor of Christ was there: Now that which was taken notice of from these
expressions, was this, Whereas he was pleased to say, The savor of Christ was
a defusive and spreading savor, spreading it self in every place, and where it
comes, it can never be lost, and yet Mr. Jenkins had been in some places where
the savor was not, which is a mere contradiction; so I with another went to
him to his house, to see how he would reconcile these extremes: And when we
had declared that to him, which we averred to be a contradiction and untruth,
he replied; That he was sure, there were none that used to hear him, but knew
well enough what he meant; but more of this by and by: Mr. Jenkins was then
pleased to say, That he did not say, The savor came in every place: but in
every place that it came, it was received: If one man in a place received it,
it was received in that place; and where it was received, it could never be
left: For, says he, this I am able to prove, if I should undertake, that
Christ was never preached in any place, but there was some one Person or more
received it; But this I must tell Mr. Jenkins, that it would be more easy for
him to eat his words in this thing (as well as in others) than to prove, there
was any one Person in Chorasin, with diverse other Places, which might be
mentioned: where Christ did most of his works, and yet not a word of any one
Convert in them; and therefore he was as much mistaken in this, as in the rest;
But I hope I shall rule my Pen better then Mr. Jenkins and Mr. Vicars, that
were there present, ruled their tongues, I should make the Reader blush to hear
unsavory and hard speeches were received from them, and not only against our
selves, but others also that we thought not of, which only troubled us; but
enough of this; all the water we had could not queuch that flame of wrath and
indignation that brake forth: but we have not so learned Christ to bring
railing for railing; but rather with meekness instruct those that oppose them;
2 Timothy 2. 24, 25. And such as have taken that Office upon them, on whom this
duty is enjoined (but only they have forgotten) and so in stead of instructing
meekly, there is nothing but throwing dirt in men's faces; surely this
persuasion comes not of him that called him. Gal. 5. 8. When Mr. Jenkins did
perceive what contradiction there was in his Positions, he was pleased to say,
This was my sense of it, (though before it was in a mentual reservation) but we
are not in such cases to take men's meanings, but their sayings: then we came to
speak of the permanency, lasting and effectualitie of the Savor of Christ.

But by the way I shall inform thee of one rarity in M. Jenkins, which is
infallibility, indeed it was not only new, but strange to me; The occasion of
this saying in our discourse was, Mr. Vicars with hot indignation rises up
from his seat, and said, Mr. Jenkins you must take that course as formerly
godly Orthodox men did, when they conferred with Laymen, to take their words in
writing, least they should eat them: To which I replied, That if Mr. Vicars
were so well acquainted with Anthors, he must needs be acquainted with this
also, that those he calls Orthodox men, are subject to failings and mistakes as
well as others, else what means, or from whence comes that contrariety of
judgment, contradiction, grudging, and evil surmising, that every day appears
in and amongst them; therefore you may be silent therein: To which Mr. Jenkins
replieth, I am infallable: I pray, said I, demonstrate that: I will, says he,
thus; God cannot lie, in this I am infalible: If this would prove him
infalible, it will prove all men infalible, for what man is there that does
acknowledge a God, but will say that his God is true; but how this will prove
Mr. Jenkin's infallibility is beyond my understanding to conceive: If I say it
is day, because the Sun is in the Horizon, this thing is true, therefore I am
infallible; but if I had said so, Mr. Jenkins would have cried out blasphemy;
but that the speaking of a truth causes him that speaks it to be infalible,
I deny; for example, He that is called the Father of lies said, that Jesus
Christ was the Son of God, Mat. 8. 29. Joh. 8. 44. but this does not prove him
to be infalible, though what he spoke was as true as that spoke was as true as
that spoken by Mr. Jenkins; so that it is evident, that the speaking of a thing
that is true, makes not him that speaks it, infalible: To come to the
Apostles themselves, if any were infalible, they were (mistake me not) I do not
deny, but abundantly acknowledge that they spoke truth as the Spirit gave them
utterance, but that they themselves, their persons, as compound of flesh and
blood were unerring, is that which the Scripture no where to my remembrance
teaches: But on the contrary, Paul himself did those things he allowed not,
Romans 7. 14, 15. And so the Apostle James says, In some things we offend all:
Therefore there is nothing in Mr. Jenkins Argument that does in the least
degree prove his infalibility: If he had said, God cannot lie, therefore he is
infalible, I must have laid my hand upon my mouth and consented to that: But
that God that says he cannot lie, says, All men are liars, Number. 23. 19. Romans
3. 4. Mr. Jenkins is a man, therefore where is Mr. Jenkins infallibility.

And when he had (as he thought) proved his unerring condition, then he laid
down an Argument to prove his Doctrine to be so too (to wit) that those that
have once received the savor of Christ, can never lose it; thus; That Opinion
that contradicts that portion of Scripture which says, He that believes shall
be saved, is an erroneous opinion.

But that Doctrine that teaches; a man may lose the savor of Christ, or fall
from believing, is such a Doctrine: Therefore, this Argument shall after be
considered; when Mr. Jenkins had laid down this Syllogism, he triumphed, as
though he had called Heaven and earth to witness the same, and so departed as
one that is sent of a Message, goes away, who has no answer thereunto, but
takes it in scorn that such young men should attempt such a Royal Fort as he
is, though Mr. Jenkins could say when he had to do with his seniors, that truth
was their senior; so now it might have been said to him (though by infancy)
that truth was his elder: But Mr. Jenkins instead of explaining his terms and
receiving an answer to what he propounded, challenged any of Mr. Goodwins
members, or Mr. Goodwin himself, or all the world, to make his Argument good.
We answered, we doubted not but to bring those that should manage the
Controversy, against you, but withal said, we fear when any shall come to
reason with you, the heat of your passion it is such, that it will not suffer
you to dispute, when followed close, and caused to speak to the question; so we
took our leave of him, and Mr. Bickerstaffe that was then present, coming out
with us, said, You see now he has challenged you, or any of you to dispute the
point; And thereupon we gave notice to some of Mr. Goodwins Congregation, how
they were challenged, and likewise told them the occasion, and some of them
desired me to give Mr. Jenkins notice, that they had accepted of his challenge,
and would desire him, that he would be pleased to appoint a time and place,
that they might attend him, which I did accordingly, and told him that there
would some answer his challenge: Challenge, says he, you lie, I made no
challenge with any, neither will I dispute with any of them: This was his
answer, such a one as I have not found in the mouth of any of the Watchmen of
Israel, unless it was their own to deceive, Mica. 2. 11. Jer. 27. 10, 15. Jer.
28. 15. Ezekiel. 21. 29. But this makes me much admire, that Mr. Jenkins and Mr.
Bickerstaffe should both eat their words; the truth is, what the one says, the
other will not gainsay; So I told Mr. Jenkins, I hoped, notwithstanding he had
so far forgot himself in his indignation and wrath, yet that he would undertake
to prove his Doctrine, or give a reason to the contrary: And he gave three
Reasons, though I give them not to you in order, yet these are they, I will lay
them down, and then leave the impartial Reader to judge whether they will
excuse him.

First, says he, the truth is, I am higher then they, and being a Minister of
the Gospel, ought not to stoop or condescend, or dispute with such men, this is
one of them that will bear him out against his engagement; And this he draws
from his Ministerial Function as an Officer, or else as accomodated with humane
Learning and external parts, both which shall be considered; As for the first:

1. Whether his Ministerial Office does give him this privilege, I am
altogether ignorant thereof; And ignorant shall be still, unless I could be
perswad all he was infallible; for no place of Scripture could he show for it:
If I am not mistaken, 2 Timothy 2. 24, 25. teaches another lesson, the servants
of the Lord must not strive; what then? be gentle, to whom? to all men, as if
he had said, Men are very apt to forget their duty in their Office, especially
those that are great and honorable in the World, and that have great parts; but
to these Mr. Jenkins will be gentle, but as for the other, they are Michanicks;
but how must he behave himself to them? surely, as unto the other, gentle to
all men, I conceive, as well the weak and obstinate, as others, abounding in
meekness toward all: And all the thanks I had for my pains in teaching a man
the right way, it was to be called unmannerly fellow: Surely if Mr. Jenkins
would set the saddle upon the right horse, he should have called the Apostles
unmannerly, for that was his word: But Mr. Jenkins takes it in disdain to be
told his duty from a mean one, though the Message be from the Lord, if the
Person be not exalted; he will have more of it, forgetting that place, 1 Timothy
5. 21. I charge thee before God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, and his elect
Angels, that thou observe these things without preferring one before another,
doing nothing by partiallitie: This Scripture should make Mr. Jenkins tremble
at the reading thereof, or else he thinks it not to be the Word of God, or
that he is so high, it cannot reach him; And that the Injunction of God, prefer
not one before another, and do nothing by partiality, nothing concerns him;
But Mr. Jenkins says, I am above you, I have my fat and my Fleece by such and
such, and by them comes in my gain; therefore I must make a difference, but
says the Apostle, If you do, look to it, for though you may be corrupted with
bribes, yet there are faithful Judges that will not wink at such things, Fitus
1. 9. Holding fast the faithful Word, as he has been taught, to what end, that
he may be able by sound Doctrine both to exhort and to convince gainsayers;
the Apostle does not say, the rich or poor, but all gainsayers, as well of the
Laics, as the Clergy, according to Mr. Jenkins expression; Many Scriptures
might be added; but I think this has sufficiently cleared the point, that it
is the duty of a Minister to give satisfaction to the meanest of his Brethren,
as to those that are the greatest.

Now we shall come to examine the second branch of this Reason, which is, if it
be any thing, it must be his humane Learning, and acquired parts which we shall
now speak to:

If we find it to be any where mentioned as a gift, yet we shall not find it
to be a thing, that thereby they should exalt themselves above their Brethren.
But if Mr. Jenkins says, This is that which puts so great and vast a
difference between him and others; whether herein he pleads not like the Jews,
who said, We have Abraham to our Father, and are you greater then he? so Mr.
Jenkins, he has Humane Learning, and you, says he, are illiterate. But the
Word teaches otherwise. Phil. 2, 3. Let each esteem another above himself.
Joh. 5. 44. the Apostle there says upon the like occasion as this, of Mr.
Jenkins, he that would be greater then his Brethren, Christ says, Let him be
your Minister, and he that will be chief, let him be servant to all: he that
abaseth himself shall be exalted; not the proud man, for the Lord looks upon
the proud afar off; And the Apostle says, I Preach not my self, but Christ
Jesus the Lord, and my self your servant for Jesus sake, 2 Cor. 4, 5. But Mr.
Jenkins has not found this way out, to become a fool that he may be wise; but
rather, his notionall and Human knowledge does puff him up: Let Mr. Jenkins,
and all of his persuasion, consider these places of Scripture; The Apostle
says, Though I speak with the tongues of men, etc. and though eloquent, who
through their high flown strains allure the affections of many toward them;
And though it were possible to speak with the tongue of an Angel, and want
Love, they are but as sounding Brass, or a tinckling Cymbal: yea, though a man
has the gift of Prophecy, and understands all Mysteries and Knowledge, which
is one step higher then Mr. Jenkins has gone, yet this is nothing: Does the
Apostle make nothing of all this? What reason then is there, Mr. Jenkins should
set so high a value, and boast so much of his fragments, which, as he says, he
spent so much time as twenty years ago, he had studied Logic, the same
Apostle answers him again, and says, If any might have confidence the Flesh,
and has any thing to boast of, I more, and reck oneth up his Privileges
(jewels they would have been in Mr. Jenkins eyes:) but what is the conclusion
of all? what things were gain I accounted loss, and dung, that I might win
Christ. So that Mr. Jenkins comes short in this, to make his Argument good,
his strength of parts, and great quallifications should rather be an Argument
or reason for him to maintain what he spoke then, or the contrary: there are
many of those whom he challenged that for natural, and acquired Parts, under
savor come not behind Mr. Jenkins. But by this time, I hope those that have
not sacrifised their understanding upon the Altar of Affection, see clearly the
invaliditie of this Reason.

2. Another Reason why he would not dispute, was; Because he knew not whether
he should convince the gain-sayer.

3. Because Disputes are the occasion of strise: Both which are of so little
weight and concernment, they are hardly worth speaking to, it being but
spending time to no purpose.

First, we never find Christ nor his Apostles deny to maintain their Doctrine
concerning Fundamentals upon Master Jenkins account (who were as wise as he)
which is because they knew not the effect; As for Christ, he preached and
Disputed daily with the Jews, Scribes and Pharisees, Publicans and Sinners,
though he met with great contradiction of sinners: And we find many were
convinced at the Preaching, and by the Disputations of the Apostles; As for
Example Acts. 9. 29. Acts 17. 17. Acts 18. 19. Paul Disputed two years in the
School of one Tir annus; It is not to be thought by any, who have not lost
their Wits, or else mad with their Wits, that all were convinced by Paul.

Secondly, Ministers are commanded to convince gainsayers. Titus 1. 9. I hope
that Mr. Jenkins does not think;

First, That gainsayers are bound to be convinced by his Arguments.

Secondly, That men should imagine that he or any of his coat were unerring,
and could not mistake.

Thirdly, Neither do I think, that though a brother be unsatisfied in what is
held forth as a truth, that it is fitting for him that asserts any thing for
truth, and because another will not consent thereto, to run with open mouth
upon him, and threaten with menaces to take away his life.

Fourthly, That though they act according to the word of truth, 2 Timothy 2. 1, 2.
and do rightly divide the Word of Truth, yet are Ministers to give (or
endeavor to give) satisfaction to gainsayers, and to vindicate the truth: And
so Apollas mightily convinced the Jews, and that publicly; so that it may
clearly appear, That 1. The Apostles did dispute: 2. That this Dispute was
public. 3. That the rule by which they proceeded was the word. 4. And fourthly
you see that their undertaking was not in vain.


And therefore in vain does Mr. Jenkins please himself with this vain and
frivolous excuse. We find it was matter of reproof for Jobs three friends, in
that they suffered him to justify himself, and did not convince him of the
evil thereof, but we find it to be a duty enjoined, and therefore the contrary
a very weak plea for him who is aloft, and so far exceeds others; but precepts
and examples are not sufficient for Mr. Jenkins.

As for his third reason it is included in the second, where there is not
conviction, there will be gainsaying and contradiction. But there are some who
are not of Mr. Ienkins and Mr. Vicars frame and temper of spirit, which are
more noble, like the Bereans, who will search the Scriptures, and see what is
held forth, for truth does agree with the Word of Truth, which is the reason, I
fear, Mr. Ienkins declines an engagement, least thereby he may pull dishonor
on himself, and appear to be (in truth) that which he would not be accounted to
be, which is, an enemy to the Word of truth, but he will sacrifice life, rather
then lose repute in the world; which resolution I esteem not right, but it is
his Diana, his Goddess: And because of janglings; yet he was pleased to say,
the Gospel damned ten times more then it saved; And Mr. Ienkins might as
properly have said, If what he held was truth, that the Gospel therefore ought
not to be Preached: But perhaps Master Jenkins will say, I get my living by
preaching, but I may be a loser by disputing; by preaching comes in my Tithes
and Offerings; But to me it seems but just, that the Hireling should as well
dispute as preach, for by his own argugument, preaching does occasion
stumbling; and indeed, the more for such as he, because they must say what they
please, but give no account thereof, and his counterfeit going for current
Coin, as though seven times purified in the fire, when as if it might be
tried, the fiery trial would consume it, and nothing remain extant but the
shame of such assertions; But the truth is, the generality of people are
willing to take all upon earnest in matters of the greatest moment and
concernment, and to take all upon trust to follow a blind guide, though they
fall into the ditch with him; but there would be no more janglings in disputes
then in preaching, were the spirits of men but moderate, and could they prove
their doctrines by the rule.

But Mr. Ienkins may say, though I have no Scripture, yet I have this for my
argument, that which the Apostle says to Timothy, 2 Timothy 2. 14. That he was
not to strive about words to no purpose: And so in another place, where we are
admonished to shun profane and vain bablings, for they will increase to more
ungodliness, etc. of whom is Hymeneus and Philetus, who concerning the truth
have erred; to this I answer; 1. That janglings and disputings are forbidden,
is not denied. 2. Such disputes as increase ungodliness and subvert the
hearers, that is forbidden, it is not denied. And 3. it is not denied, that
disputes ought to be shuned between profane and wicked persons that deny plain
truths.


But here is nothing spoken but that fundamental and necessary truths to be
satisfied, ought to be disputed of, else it condemns the Apostles own example
and practice, for they did do the same thing, and exorted to the duty, and yet
I presume none will deny but that they did administer jangling; but that all
disputes ought to be shunned, because some ought, which tend to vain jangling,
it seems to be an absurd conclusion. Much more might be said to this purpose,
but I think enough has been said in Answer to Mr. Ienkins three great Reasons,
to take off the edge of them, that they may make no entrance in the minds of
any men, or cause them to think that such a slight account of Mr. Jenkins faith
will give him a full discharge from doing that which is his duty.

Now upon the hearing of these Reasons, I told him, they were too light to bear
this great weight upon; and that it still did appear to be his duty both from
express commands, and example, and if he would not perform it with respect to
his challenge, yet I desired him, that he would do it to discharge his duty,
and to clear the truth, and convince gainsayers: for other wise, men's mouths
might be justly opened against him to say that he had declined to make good
that which he delivered for a truth; but he regarded me not, then I told him,
that if this was his resolution, I must deal plainly with him; if this be all
the satisfaction we should have, he must expect to hear of it in public, or
to meet with public opposition: do what you please, says he; so after a
little while he was to speak in public, and I was there, where he delivered
some impertinencies, and such things as he did formerly gainsay; yea, and at
the same time also, take a taste of one or two of them; first Mr. Jenkins was
speaking of Christ to be the only foundation of our Faith, and that Scriptures
did manifest or show us this foundation, and so in his Bisey Bishop; and yet in
the Blind Guide grants, there was a time when the Scriptures were not a
foundation, nor yet so much as a manifester of the foundation of Faith [ Blind
Guide. p. 46, 17.] but it was manifested by Dreams, Visions and audible
voices, etc. so he would have the Scriptures a foundation of truth, and a
manifester of the foundation also, But I would feign learn of him whether the
thing showing, and the thing showed be all one.

Secondly, Mr. Jenkins speaking further concerning this foundation, the
strength and largeness of it showed that the reason why so few are built upon
it, is not because it is not strong and large enough for them to build upon,
but because men are not willing to build thereon; so the reason according to
Mr. Jenkins Confession, why men build not upon the foundation, is not because
they may not, or cannot, but because they will not, and yet in his Blind Guide,
page 80. he says, God deals with men's wills as he will, and when he will, and
so, like a blind man, strikes at a venture; but we do not much wonder he and
all men of his persuasion are so accustomed to it; but more of this in due time.

After Mr. Jenkin, had done all, I began to speak, and as soon as ever I began
to speak, the Hireling fled, not answering a word, and his sheep, like ravening
Wolves, or Bulls of Basin, compassed me round about, as fierce as Lions, with
high indignation; Some crying, Stone him, others, To Newgate with him; others,
Hang him (before they had judged him) others cried, To the Devil with him, the
Devil pick his beans; if these are not the language of ill tongued men, I know
not where we shall find them: Surely, Mr. Jenkins need not go far to be in the
Suburbs of Hell, for according to his own description of the place, it is his
own Congregation, and he, as a builder in Gods house, has beaten the Air:
surely the stones will be no ornament to it: doubtless Mr. Jenkins and his
Brethren might have saved that labor, as at their own cost, to send out an
Army consisting of Twenty Generals, against a small company of despised poor
Laymen: for Mr. Jenkins has found a new way, seeing the other failed; when
they came to pitch a field, either they we^^ (...) weak, or both, and what they
could not do with the sword of the spirit, they can and will with the arm of
flesh, but indeed they might have saved that labor also, for their chief
General quit his ground immediately, however his soldiers, to show their
valor, after he was fled, would guard the Pulpit, and that they did most
valiantly, ye so gallantly, that I think can hardly be parralell's among
professed Christians in all Ages; (to Mr Fenkins future praise be it:) Well,
the Pulpit being thus stoutly guarded, there was no making the least attempt
thereon, but now being got on the other side the hedge, I may make bold to
speak (what formerly I intended) to the Soldiers and General, which is this; I
had thought Mr. Fenkins had born greater love to God and his Truth, and had
been a greater benefacter to the World, then to preach another Sermon before he
had proved his former to be true, when so deeply questioned and judged to be an
error, this surely would have sorely hurt Mr. Fenkins and his tender lambs to
have heard; all my design, the Lord knows, and my conscience bears me
witness, was, that the truth might appear, and be more inquired into, that men
may not take darkness for a Vision; and seeing they count themselves unworthy
of knowing the mind of God, we shall the better disscharge our duty; but as
for Mr. Jenkins, in as much as he was pleased to lay down an Argument, by which
he would prove his Doctrine, and defend it against all the world; remember
Capernaum (Mr. Jenkins) those things were written for our instruction: alas,
what is it for me to attempt that which the whole world is counted
insufficient, the proud Leviathan, when smitten with a dart, must make to the
sands, and Capernaum must come down again, though Mr. Ienkins in fancy be so
high, yet being he has so soarly stumbled, a weak man may keep him down,
though I confess my self much inferior to many, to undertake such a business,
yet my heart is good, and my Cause better, and therefore I shall leave the
success to him that best knows both; Mr. Ienkins Argument was this; That
Opinion that contradicts that Scripture which says, He that believes shall be
saved. Mark. 16. 16. is an erroneous Opinion.

But that opinion which holds a possibility of losing the Savor of Christ,
or falling from faith contradicts that Scripture, ergo Mr. Jenkins here, by
believing in the major proposition, must mean the first act of faith, and by
faith in the second proposition, or minor, he must mean the same thing, viz.
the first act of faith, or else he says nothing; and if his meaning be so, I
deny his minor.

And say that though it be possible for a man to lose the Savor of Christ, yet
it will not contradict that Scripture; but we shall wave that, and make a
little search into the Text upon which Mr. Jenkins argument is grounded, where
there is a promise, and a threatening, and both seem absolute life upon the
first act of believing, and death unto those to whom it is tendered, and do not
believe: Now if Mr. Jenkins will understand the former part of the vefse, the
promise to be absolute, by the same reason must he understand the latter part,
wherein the threaten is contained to be absolute also; for there is no reason
to be given from the words to the contrary; but if I can first prove, that both
the promise and threatening here, are conditional. 2 That there has been those
that have lost the savor of Christ, then I think this Argument will be laid
in the dust, and discharged from this hard duty it is put upon; As for the
first, there is nothing more evident in the Scripture that I know of, to wit,
that such promises are conditional, and though many of them seem to be
absolute, yet they are not so to be understood, and if this promise in the Text
should be absolute, viz. That men upon the first act of believing should be
unquestionably assured of eternal glory, however they behave themselves
afterward, and that no sin or sins whatsoever should be able to separate God
and them. See how it would present God unlike to himself, viz. after he has
given them such an assurance by promise absolute, to require conditions of
them, and telling of them, that they shall not be saved, unless they hold out
unto the end, Esaias 59. 2. as though God should speak at such a rate, how
inconsistent to an unchangeable God appears to be, viz. To say, You that truly
believe in my Son, and have been once made partakers of my holy Spirit, and are
fully persuaded according to my Will and command given unto you, which you See
Mr. Goodwin's Redem. redeem. p. 318.
have in you from me, which you cannot possibly, no, not by the most horrid
sins, or abominable practices, that you shall, or can commit, fall away either
totally or finally; you know, it is impossible you should die in your sins, you
that know, and are assured, I will lay an irresistible hand of grace on you,
and work perseverance in you, and so you shall be out of the reach of
condemnation; therefore there remains nothing for you, but only giving of
thanks; and do you what you will, in the mean time, you know I will necessitate
you to that also, and yet I earnestly charge, admonish and beseech you, that
you take heed to your selves, that ye continue in the faith, and that there be
not in you at any time an evil heart of unbelief in departing from the living
God, and that ye fall not from your own stedfastness; yea, I declare and
profess unto you, that if you do, my soul shall have no pleasure in you, and if
you deny me, I will deny you; and if you be overcome again of the lusts of
the flesh and the World, being entangled here in your sins, your latter end
shall be worse then your beginning; and if you turn away, all your
righteousness shall not be remembered, but you shall die in your sins, and
suffer the eternal vengeance of hell fire; on the other hand, If you continue
unto the end, my Promise is, you shall be saved; be thou faithful unto death,
and I will give thee a Crown of life; therefore strive to enter in at the
straight gate, labor for the meat that perishes not; watch ye, stand fast in
the faith, quit your selves like men, be strong; ye are made partakers of
Christ if ye hold the beginning of your confidence steadfast unto the end; and
be not slothful, but followers of them, who through faith and patience have
inherited the Promises: Surely, were not Mr. Ienkins mightily prejudiced
against the light of this truth, he cannot thuse but see a great deal of
difference between those exortations, threathings and later promises, and those
declarations, applications and former promises, and cannot choose, if he holds
those former comes from God, the later must be from some body else; or else if
the later come from God, the former from some body else; or if they came all
from God, then those that seem absolute, are yet conditional; or else those
that are conditional, are nothing. Mr. Jenkins would surely be rendered no wise
man, in case he should make his child heir of his estate, and actually invest
him in it, and give him the greatest security as possibly he can for one single
act that has well pleased him, and he so far binds himself to perform it, as
it is now claimed as a proper right, both absolutely and actually, and then Mr.
Jenkins should come to his child, and tell him there is something more to be
done, and he must do it diligently, and continue in doing of it as long as he
lives, or else he shall lose that as he has solemnly and absolutely given him
without condition; would not he render himself rediculus? and yet at such a
rate, would he make God to speak and act; but now as this Scripture seems to be
absolute, so we shall give you a taste of Scriptures that seem to be absolute
(as they are all in God yea and Amen) but to us is the condition in the event,
or thing determined upon such terms, as is suspended upon the condition
included in the detirmination, as for example, it cannot be denied, but God had
determined to destroy Nineveh within Forty days after, warned by Jonahs
preaching unto them, Jonah 3. 10. for surely, if he had not purposed or decreed
it, he would never have sent his Prophet to preach it in his Name; but because
the purpose and determination of God was conditional, it implies only his
purpose of inflicting this punishment determined upon them, in case they had
not humbled themselves in such a time limited, therefore this decree, purpose,
threatening of God, though it seems to be absolute, yet it is not so to be
understood, but conditional; so likewise in the case of Eli, 1 Samuel 2. 30.
Wherefore the Lord of Israel says, I said indeed, that is, I purposed or
determined, that thy house, and the house of thy father should walk before me,
viz. in the dignity and office of the Priesthood for ever; but now the Lord
said, Far be it from me, the reason is, because, Him that honors me, him
will I honor; but they that despise me, shall be lightly esteemed. Here also
is an absolute promise as one would think, when God said, or determined Ely's
house should walk before him for ever; there was no condition expressed, but
included as plainly appears in the event: The time would fail to run over all
the places that lift up their hand to this truth; namely that the promise and
threatening of God; I mean of this nature only, take a taste of them, 2 Cor. 6.
17. etc. Wherefore, says God, come ye out from among them, and touch no
unclean thing, and I will receive you, and be a father unto you, and you shall
be my sons and daughters, says the Lord: And the use the Apostle makes of this
conditional promise, is this, Having these promises, dearly beloved, let us
cleanse our selves from all filthiness of flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness
in the face of God: So likewise Rev. 2. 10. Be thou faithful unto death, and I
will give thee a crown of life, with Romans 11. 22, 23. Matthew. 7. 7. Joh. 16. 21.
Hebr. 4. 1. 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10. Gal. 5. 21. Joh. 15. 7. and 10. Mark. 16. 16. all
which speak aloud, that the promises and threatenings of God, as in the case
before specified, are conditional.

Much more might be said to the clearing of this truth, and making null the
Argument; but in my judgment there has been so much said, that were not men
prejudiced against it with more then ordinary disaffection, they could not
choose but see a truth in it; yet notwithstanding I shall proceed to the second
particular, in order to the clearing of the Question, to wit, to give an
instance or two of persons that have had the savor of Christ, and yet have
lost it: We shall begin with Hymeneus, Philetus and Alexander, where Paul
exhorts Timothy to keep that as others had lost, to wit, faith and a good
conscience, of whom is Hymeneus and Phyletus; and so 2 Timothy 2. 17. and their
words will eat as does a canker, of whom is Hymeneus and Alexander, who have
erred 1 Timothy 1. 19, 20.
from the truth, saying, The resurrection is past already, and overthrow the
faith of some men: From the former of these two, it is evident, that Hymenius
and Alexander had faith, and that saving also, or such a faith as would or did
capasitate them for salvation; the reason is, The Apostle exhorts him to hold
the same, and no other than that which they had put away, and then, if that
they had was not sound, the Apostle exhorts them to hold or keep that which
would stand them in no stead: No, it would then have been such a faith as would
have been a snare unto them.

Secondly, because it was accompanied with a good Conscience, a man can never
be said to have a good Conscience unless he have saving faith, because so long
as he is in a state of unregeneracie and unbelief, his Conscience stands
accusing of him, and so long not good; a good Conscience is more clearly
amplified in the fifth verse of this Chapter, the end of the command is Charity
out of a pure heart, and a good conscience, and faith unfeigned; and he that
has a good Conscience, must needs have a pure heart, they are so linked
together, and all being the end of the Law, that it is impossible to have the
one, and want the other; So the Apostle Peter, [1 Pet. 3. 15, 16.] Sanctify
the Lord in your hearts, and be ready to give an answer to every one that shall
ask, a reason of the hope that is in you, with meekness and fear, having a good
conscience, etc. a little after he sums up the end, or places the sum or
substance of true Christianity in a good conscience, though the other are not
excluded, which shows that for a man to have a good conscience, is to be
eminently in the favor of God, and that a good Conscience proceeds from
unfaigned faith; See 1 Timothy 3. 9. Hebr. 9, 14. and 10. 22. compared to the
former, does clearly evince this to be a truth.

Neither is that much considerable which some would create to excuse themselves
in conceiting the contrary, to wit, That by faith here, is meant the Doctrine
of the Gospel; but whether it be the Doctrine of the Gospel, or the act of
faith, it will amount to one and the same, if a man does receive or hold the
Doctrine of the Gospel with a good conscience, it must be with a pure heart;
and neither of these can be without faith, which is the groundwork of all; so
they that notionize this to relieve them, will take darkness for a vision; but
if it be said, the Apostle could not tell what men were, they knew not the
hearts of men; and so the men that made shipwreck of faith might not have such
a good conscience as is pleaded for; but let those men of this persuasion
consider whether the Apostle spoke these words as a man, or whether it was not
God in the man; if the Apostle had no better insight in the business, we have
little ground to believe, that the holding that he exhorts us to, will do us
any great good, in case we should hold it; and so they would make God speak
like themselves: there is nothing can rationally be concluded by any to refute
this sense contended for, but the consideration of the nature of a good
conscience will repeal it; therefore very evident it is, that those men that
had faith and a good conscience, had the Savor of Christ, and that in an
eminent manner. We shall mention two more instances; we shall briefly run over
them, that is David and his son Solomon; as for David, I think it is no man's
Question, whether he had not the savor of Christ, and was a true and real
Saint before the committing of those two horrid sins of murder and adultery;
for he had this signal testimony, of being a man after Gods own heart, which
was given unto him by God himself, before he had committed those two sins, as
appears, 1 King. 14. 8. with Act. 13. 22. and Psalm. 89. 20. this I think no man
denies; but the Quaere is, whether he remained truly godly under the guilt,
since from the time of his committing of them to the time of his repentance;
they do not stick to affirm it, but I must of necessity deny it, and the reason
is, because he that commits murder and Adultery against the light of
conscience, and with much deliberation, and remains under the guilt of these
sins without repentance, is not a man that is truly godly, or that has the
Savor of Christ in him.

But David is such a one, ergo as for the first Proposition it does not need
much proof; for he that shall act, and without remorse of conscience commit
that as is expressly against the command of God, cannot be a man in the doing of
that in the fear of God, or love of God, because of their want of obeying of
God; but we shall a little illustrate it with a second, thus, he that is truly
godly, and has the Savor of Christ in him, has by the gracious promise of
God a right unto the Kingdom of glory; this I think is not denied by any;
therefore he that commits murder and adultery has no right to the Kingdom of
glory, during his impenitency under the guilt of these sins; ergo, for the
confirmation of this, we shall give an express Text of Scripture, 1 Cor. 6. 9,
10. No whoremongers, and mutherers, nor adulterers, etc. shall enter into the
Kingdom of God; and they that do such things, shall not enter into the Kingdom
of God, Gal. 5. 21. Ephesians. 5. 5, 6. so that David while he remained impenitent,
under the committing of these two abominations, was a subject of death, on whom
the wrath of God should abide for ever; and he was, according to Mr. Jenkins
own confession, in the suburbs of hell; those things that are visibly objected
against, it being the traditions of men only, and the Scriptures so clear
against it, I shall not trouble the Reader with them. Another instance we have
in Solomon also, that he, before his falling in adultery, and other
miscarriages, was a true believer, and one that had the Savor of Christ, is
manifest; and is not, as I know, denied by any; for Nehemiah speaking of
Solomon, says, That among many Nations there was no King like unto him; for he
was beloved of his God, Nohe. 13. 6. but their confession saves a proof of
that; and that he also sinned at an eminent rate, is that also they do not
deny: A Catalogue of his wickedness is reckoned up by God himself in 1 King.
11. 1, 2, 3. his heart was not perfect with the Lord God, as was the heart of
his father David; that he did that which was evil in the sight of the Lord;
that the Lord was angry with him, because his heart was turned from the Lord
God of Israel; and this his father warned him of before his death, 1 Chronicles. 21.
9. therefore evident it is Solomon lost the savor of Christ: Much more migh be
said to this controversy, but seeing Mr. Jenkins lies bound to defend his
Doctrine, I am only to give answer to what is alleged by way of proof,
otherwise much, and that with abundance of light, might be showed to confirm
that Doctrine that pleads against his; and surely if I should deliver any thing
for the mind of God in a publik Congregation, or any where else, if I would not
stand to defend it against gainsayers, when so deeply questioned; I should be
ashamed to appear to speak in the Name of God any more, much more to take
Tithes and offerings, to look after Tyth Mint and Anise, and neglect one great
part of the Ministry, seeing what Mr. Jenkins has yet brought to prove his
Doctrine, is found too scant for that service, but is clearly detected and
discharged from, it lies upon him as he will answer the neglecting of his
making full proof of his Ministry, to show himself one that need not be
ashamed, but rightly dividing the word truth, or in truth.

Therefore let it be seriously minded by all Rational and understanding
Christians;

1. Whether those that profess themselves to be Ministers of the Gospel, and
yet refuse to prove and defend their Doctrine (when questioned) are indeed
Ministers of the Gospel, Considering the Apostle in giving Rules and
Instructions to Titus in and about ordaining of Ministers or Elders, 1 Tet. 9.
prescribe how he should make choice of such quallifed Persons as should be able
and willing both to exhort and convince gainsayers therefore whether those that
do not answer those ends of Ministers, are not pretended Ministers only, or
otherwise very weak and unorthy.

2. Whether those Persons that thus pretend to be Sheepherds of the flock of
Christ, and yet neglect those things that are Essentially necessary to the
keeping the Flock in green Pastures, and also to keep the Wolf from them, are
not such as creep in at a back door, and so appear to be no less then
Hyrelings, taking but little care of the Flock, gaping more after the fleece,
to fether their own nests, then after the sheep, to lead them in fresh
Pastures, more for filthy lucre, then of a ready mind?

3. Whether it be not probable that such Sheepherds, yea, whither it be not
apparent that they do grow so careless of the Flock (that when the Wolf comes,
or when some seeming profit is like to redowne to them in other places) flee
from them; and like bad and covetous servants, that would serve two Masters,
render themselves despisers of God, and his service?

4. Whether when the chief Shepherd shall appear, to call the inferior
shepherds to an Account, it will not go hard with the Hireling, when the
Shepherd will appear that will judge infallibly indeed; then woe to lazy
Lozzells that creep in at the backdoor, when He shall come to Crown faithful
Shepherds with a Crown of glory, the Hyreling's reward will not be according to
this truth, of well done good and faithful servant?

5. Let it also be considered, whether such Shepherds that take no more care
for their flocks, and of making full proof of their faithfulness in the
Ministry, ought to be Countenanced by Authority in their granting of what
maintenance they defire, and that they should take so much care for their body,
that will take no more care (according to their duty and profession) for
precious souls of men?

6. Whether Shepherds are not bound to feed the flock, and also to lead them in
green pastures, and that with much care and faithfulness, though the sheep do
not every year cast their coat, considering the former is enjoined, though the
latter remain unperform'd?

I Had thought here to have ended, having as I humbly conceive, given a full
answer to Mr. Jenkin's Argument, yet being desirous to do some thing which I
conceive may give some light to the Controvercy; I shall humbly Quere.

QUERE I.
WHether the Word of God, which is pretended to hold forth an impossibility of
true Believers declyning to death, does not teach, will all, that it is
possible for such Persons, Viz. Believers, to commit such sins, as against the
committers whereof God pronounces Eternal death, as in Matthew. 21. 43. Mark 10.
15. Romans 14. 17. 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10, 11. Gal. 5. 29. Ephesians. 5. 5. and diverse other
places, it appears, and so it be not rendered inconsistent with it self, by
such an opinion?

QUERE II.
Whether such Persons as fall totally from the grace and love of God, may not
possibly fall finally also, considering that there is no promise from God, that
such Persons shall necessarily and irresistably be brought back again by
repentance?

QUERE III.
Whether that Doctrine that teaches an utter impossibility of the Saints
falling away from the love of God be not a Doctrine that renders God a
respecter of Persons, and a God that favors, loves and delights in such
as are by the Scripture termed children of Belial, and workers of iniquity,
contrary to 2 Samuel 2. 14. 2 Cor. 19. 7. Acts. 10. 34. Job. 37. 24. Ephesians. 6. 4. 1
Pet. 17. Romans 2. 11. Col. 3. 25. with many others?

QUERE. IIII.
Whether Infants, in their state of Infancy (according to the common notion of
Election) are not in a state of grace, and eminently beloved of God? and
whether when they come to Act, they fall not from that state, and become
children of wrath as well as others?

QUERE V.
Whether that Doctrine which teaches an Impossibility of Believers falling
finally out of the love of God, that commit such things (as God pronounces
them unmeet subjects for his Kingdom) does not give God the lie, who says,
They that commit such things shall not inherit the Kingdom of God? 1 Cor. 6. 9.
Joh. 15. 6. 10. 1 Samuel 2. 30. Genesis 4. 7.

QUERE VI.
Whether the said Doctrine does not make useless all those exhortations and
perswas^ons, that God applies himself in unto Believers, to watch and Pray
continually, to stand fast in the faith, to quit themselves like men, to look
to themselves, least they loose the thing they have gained, to be faithful unto
death, and you are made partakers of Christ, if you hold the beginning of your
Confidence or faith steadfast unto the end; and take heed least there be found
in any of you an evil heart of unbelief in departing from the living God, with
a multitude of like nature?

QUERE VII.
Whether the said Doctrine which supposes the said Impossibility, does not
also make void, render useless the Ministry of the Gospel, at least one main
branch thereof, viz. so far as it is furnished by God, and appointed for the
perseverance of the Saints, and confirming them in the faith?

QUERE. VIII.
Whether the said opinion of an absolute impossibility of the Saints falling
away finally, does not represent the best, wisest and boliest of men, and that
when they were most effectually assisted, and infallibly guided by the holy
Ghost, to speak Nonscense, as when the Propbet Ezekiel says, If the righteous
man forsakes his righteousness, he shall die: If we say, it is impossible for
him so to forsake it as to die; and whereas the Apostle Paul says, I beat down
my body, and keep it in subjection, least when I have preached to others, I my
self should become a cast-a-way, or a reprobate; whether I say, to suppose a
Saint cannot become a Reprobate, be not to render the saying weak, and
rediculous, and to make him to speak after this Ayrie light manner, I beat down
my body, and keep it in subjection, least when I have Preached to others, I my
self should become (that which it is impossible ever for me to be) viz. a
east-away or reprobate? Yea,

QUERE IX.
Whether the said opinion opposed, does not make God himself also to speak at
such a rate of weakness and contradictions, in supposing impossibilities, as
has been laid down?

QUERE X.
Whether the said opinion has not a very natural and strong tendency in it to
strengthen the hands of wicked men, to proceed in wicked actions, and to weaken
the resolutions of holy men, fearing the Lord in ways of exactness in walking,
and carefulness in the same, and consequently to make Professors turn head upon
the way of holiness and righteousness, and to give way to all the will of the
old man; therefore let it be considered, whether this be a Doctrine according
to godliness?

Thus I shall conclude, humbly desiring all men that hope to be partakers of
the Saints inheritance, which is undefiled, and whereinto no unclean thing
shall enter; Consider in the fear of the Lord, whether such a Doctrine, as is
here opposed, is like to be from God? and whether there be not great reason to
question the same, and thoroughly to look into it, that so darkness be may
exspell'd, and the light of truth break forth, and be embraced, to the glory of
God, and solvation of all men.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 2. lin. 23. for the read this. p. 3. l. 30. dele but only they. p. 6. l
23. for though I give them not to you in order, read though he gave them not to
me in order.


