NEW PREACHERS, NEW. Green the Feltmaker, Spencer the Horse rubber,
Quartermine the Brewers Clarke, with some few others, that are mighty sticklers
in this new kind of talking Trade, which many ignorant Coxcombes call
Preaching. Whereunto is added the last Tumult in Fleetstreet, raised by the
disorderly preachment, pratings, and prattling of Mr. Barebones the
Leather-seller, and Mr. Green the Feltmaker, on Sunday last the 19. of December.

Green the Feltmaker.

Barebones the Leather seller.



An Epistle written by a private friend to John Green, a Hat-maker.
MAster Green, you would be taken to be a man fearing God, and not only so,
but a teacher in Israel, yea; say more, a teacher of Teachers; for you think
that God has made you wiser then your Teachers, and therefore you take upon
you not only to reprove them for some things that you judge amiss, but also
to instruct them how to preach the word, not the Law nor legal preparation for
the receiving of Christ, that in your opinion is not Gods way. Now truly sir I
think best that you let this question alone, till you (as those tradesmen
which Christ did call) be sent to convert the Infidels; but it is like as you
preach, so you think that all such as meet not in private Conventicles, as you
do, are Infidels, without Christ in the world, and therefore you think it as
great folly for Ministers now to preach legal preparations to these English
pagans, as for the Apostles to have preached it to the Gentile pagans. S^^^r
said, that when he took a text to preach on, that he (...) le^ he should fall
upon somewhat that others had been preaching on, and so printed, fearing if he
should so do, it would scandalize his Ministry. Do not these things come
from proud spirits, that he, and you a Hatmaker, and a Horse-keeper, will ta^^
upon you to be Ambassadors of God, to teach^^ or teachers, and take upon you
to be Ministers of the Gospel in these days of light, in these times, when
(thanks be to God) we may lay, Great are the company of Preachers, yea and
such Preachers that are able out of original tongues to divide the word
aright, who in learning and godliness of lives are not inferior to the
Min^sters of any Churches in Europe, and you will reprove them and ^nstruct
them, and teach them h^^r to teach others.

O Mr. Green for shame blush, I say again blush, and say in these words of
holy Job, Job 40.^, 5. I will lay my hand upon my mouth: Once have I spoken,
but I will not answer ^ee twice. But I will proceed no (...). But put the ^a^e
(...) you are resolved to go on in this way; which indeed I too much fear,
let us reason the matter a little what ground you have for so doing* calling
from man I am sure you have none, for it is not the custom of any well settled
Church in Europe to ordain such as you, I mean Hatmakers, Cobblers, Tailors,
Horsekeepers, upon one and the same day to be plancke and the Pulpit, in the
forenoone making a hat, or rubbing a horse, in the afternoon preaching a
Sermon. But you will say, though you have not a calling from man, yet from God
you have an inward calling. Who shall be judge of that Mr. Green? your self?
Think of what the Apostle says, 2 Cor. ^0.12. Such as measure themselves by
themselves, are not wi^^. But consider I pray you that our Lord would not have
had the Ass, Matthew. 21.3. if he had not stood in need of him. Now the truth
is, our Church has no need of such as you, unlearned, a selfe-conceited
hatmaker; Spencer, a wavering minded fellow, a stable unstable companion in all
his wai^^, having been a Serving man, a Porter, a Groom to a Stable, a
Chandler, a Weaver, yea more, of as many trades almost as religions: but the
Church has need of him, so he says. But I say it is a proud speech. It is
true, that in the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's reign, the Popish Priests and
Friars being dism^ssed, there was a scarcity for the present of learned men,
and so some tradesmen were permitted to leave their trades, and betake
themselves to the ministry; but it was necessity that did then constrain so
to do: but thanks be to God we have now go such necessity, and therefore
this practice of you and your comragues casts in ill aspersion upon our good
God, that does furnish our Church plentifully with learned men; and it does
also scandalize our Church, as if we stood in need of such as you to preach the
Gospel. But you will say that our Lord chose tradesmen, fishermen, and others,
and Paul was a Tent maker, etc, the ^ame God that chose them, has called you.
Your wisdom is great, and it is wittily said: but the tree is known by the
fruit, and if you can do the like works as they did, we will believe that
you have the like calling as they had. Can you speak with strange tongues, and
work miracles? When our Lord chose mechanics to be his messengers and
ministers, it was to show his power, that very babes should perfect his praise,
and confound the wisdom of the world, when such mighty works should be
effected by such weak instruments. And indeed it was said by Moses, that God
gave the Law in such wonders, that Moses law might for ever be believed: so of
Christ, that his Gospel might for ever be believed. He chose such as knew
not their letters, ignorant men, Act. 4.13. which made the world to wonder how
they could do such things. God gave testimony both with signs and wonders,
and diverse miracles, and gifts of the Holy Ghost, Heb. 2.4. but we see none of
these things in you master Green; what is that which you can do more then any
b^ffling Sectary? you tell us you have the Spirit, so do they, but show us no
works to evince us, but as common Mountebanks boast it out of themselves, so
do you: and as men learn trades, so you have private meetings, in which you
learn to preach, at which for a time you are only auditors: ye be at first
like birds in the shell: silly discontented zelots: they only are the fish
that bite at the seducers b^it, which being once caught and perve^ted, then is
the shall broke, and the bird crept forth, and the simple one is become a
schismatic; and then at their meetings begin to talk, and sometimes
thinking himself to understand such or such a Scripture, he will then take
upon him to expound Scriptures, the which they call prophesying or preaching;
and thus as one of them told the Lords in the Parliament, that they were all
preachers, for so they practice and exercise themselves as young players do in
private, till they be by their brethren judged fit for the pulpit, and then up
they go, and like Mountebankes play their parts, making some of their old
honest acquaintance believe that all they do is by the Spirits immediate
infusion, and that it is so, they cunningly apply that Scripture of a promise
by Christ, that says, Take no thought what ye shall say, for it shall be
given in the self same hour: so these men will profess that they speak by
the Spirit, and that they pray by the Spirit, for which they will cite 1 Cor.
14.15. where the Apostle speaks of praying with the spirit, and praying with
understanding also: but let them take the latter end of that verse with them,
and let them sing with the Spirit, and sing with understanding also, and let
the cunningest Mountebank of them all play his part, let him sing Psalms ex
tempore by the spirit, and I will say he is a gull indeed that is seduced by
them. But the Apostle there speaks of those divine men that had the Spirit of
prophecy given for the planting of the Church: for the Apostle says, 1 Cor.
14.21* That if an unbeleever come in when they are prophesying, he is
convinced, that the secrets of his heart is manifested, and falling down upon
his face worships God, and says, Of a truth God is in them. So it was with the
woman of Samaria, Ioh. 4.29 when hearing our Lord Christ, she ran and told her
neighbors, saying, Come see a man that told me all things that over I did, is
not this the Christ? These were those that could then pray by the Spirit, sing
by the Spirit, and without studying preach by the Spirit: and now every proud
sect^rie takes upon him to do the like; Green, Spencer, Robinson, yea all
Brownists, Anabaptists, Familists, Arrians; can all pre^ch by the spirit, pray
by the spirit, but they cannot sing by the spirit; then t^me required it, the
work required it; it was the time of which the Prophets foretold, that God
would pour out the Spirit upon all flesh, and their sons and their daughters
should prophecy: and dare our proud sectaries assume unto themselves the like
gifts: there is not in our days that occasion and necessity for men to be so
gifted: have you new Gospels or new doct^ines to publish to the world? I fear
indeed you have many strange whimsies, and though you have not the like gifts
as the Primitive Christians, yet you have many juggling tricks to deceive the
simple; in th^^ you come not much behind the Iesui^s, but like Iannes and
Iambres, ye have cunning sl^^ his to bewitch and deceive the simple. Away with
these tricks, put off your vizards, and turn honest men, follow your trades
painfully pay your debts honestly, releeve the poor charitably, bear burdens
with your neighbors willingly, obey your governors readily, if you would do
thus, we should not have so many sectaries and beggars about the town. I tell
you I am angry with you, my very purse feels it, it is your enticing to
Conventicles and private meetings that makes men and women to neglect their
callings and trades two or three days a week to follow your heels; and
though they do not follow you so o^t, yet they spend away that precious time
that they should work for themselves and families, and be able to releeve the
pop^e, to p^ate of your doctrines, and to set other upon admiring what strange
gifts and abilities you have given of God. If this be not so, how comes it to
pass in such a City as this, near the one half of men that breaks are
biased your wayle and how many pour families in every parish receive alms,
and run in debt, and make no conscience of paying, and yet they must be at
your meetings, like busybodies, spending away their time in chatting one with
another, censuring those of their neighbors that are not as foolish and
factious as themselves. Mr. Green, Mr. Green, leave off these ways, bring
home such as you have caused to stray. It is such as you that vent your venom
against our godly Preachers, and the divine Prayers of our Church, yea, against
all solemn set form of prayers, all is from Antichrist, but that which you
preach is most divine, that comes fresh from the spirit, the other is an old
dead sacrifice composed (I should have said killed) so long time agone, that
now it stinkes. It is so that in the year of the Lord 1549. it was compiled by
Doctor Cranmer, Dr. Goodricke, Dr. Skip, Dr. Thrilby, Dr. Day, Dr. Holbecke,
D^. Ridly, Dr. Cox, D^. Tailor, Dr. Haines, Dr. Redman, Mr. Robinson Archdeane
of L^^ce^^^ but what are all these? they are not to be compared to John Green
a Hatmaker, for he thinks what he blustreth forth upon the sudden is far
better then that which these did maturely and deliberately compose. Now truly I
will say no more of John Green but this, I think he has more fellows about
the town, such as Solomon speaks of, Prou^ 26.^^ wiser ^^ their ^ w^^e
conceits, the^ men that can render E^a^o^: a^ ^e^ the^ (...), truth says,
Prove. 10. and such prating fools shall fall: and as for such as will suffer
themselves to be seduced and led by Green, or such like, I will say to them,
Much good do it them, that have got a proud Vicar o^ fools for their ghostly
father. But some will say, Green is a very honest man and what he does is in
sincerity of heart. I answer, So did the Heretics of old and all sectaries in
our days, in si^c^ritie of heart: judge all but themselves to be out of the
right pathway to heaven; and this is the cunningnesse of the old Serpent, if he
cannot hold men in one sn^re, he will lay another for them, if he cannot keep
John Green a p^tting companion, he will make a schismatic of him, and he shall
nor fear to take the Priesthood and Ministry upon him, and to tell Moses and
Aaron to their faces, That you take too much upon you ye sons of Levi. Are not
all the Lords people holy as well as you? Has not H^tmakers, Horsekeepers,
Cobblers and Weavers as great abilities of the spirit, and as much holiness, as
any Doctor of them all, that is br^d up in learned Tongues and Arts? Thus Satan
transformes himself into an Angel of light, to deceive the simple; for if the
Devil in his instruments should come in his colors, who then could have ^ene
seduced by him; if Green had been a potting in the forenoone, and preaching
in the afternoon, he could hardly have persuaded a man to have given credit
to his doctrine, neither to his words, as to have given in a hat 5. shillings
in 20. more to him then to another. But both he and many of his fraternity
know very well how to get money, can they but turn non-conformists, or deliver
strange doctrines, or become a leader of some sect, then who but them, both for
rich wives, and many customers. Full truly does Jude in his Epistle speak of
such, saving, These filthy dreamers defile the flesh, despise dominion, and
speak evil of dignities. Woe unto them, for they have gone in the way of Cain,
and ran greedily after the error of Balam for reward, and perished in the
gainsaying of Core.

A brief touch, in memory of the fiery zeal of Mr. Barebones a reverend
unlearned Letherseller, who with Mr. Green the Feltmaker, were both taken
preaching or prating in a Conventicle amongst a 100. persons, on Sunday 19. of
December. last, 1641.
AFter my Commendations Mr. Raubones (Barebones, I should have said) in
acknowledgement of your too much troubling your self, and molesting of others:
I have made b^ld to relate briefly your last Sundays afternoones work, lost
in time your meritorious paines-taking should be forgotten, (for the which, you
and your Associate Mr. Green, do well deserve to have your heads in the
custody of young Gregory to make but tones for hempen loopes) you two having
the Spirit so full that you must either vent or burst, did on the Sabbath
aforesaid, at your house near Fetterlane end in Fleetstreet, at the sign of
the Lock and Key, there and then did you and your consort (by turns) unlocks
most delicate strange doctrine, where were about thousands of people, of which
number, the most ignorant appl^ud^d your preaching, and those that understood
any thing derided your iggnorant prating; but after four hours long and
tedious ta^ling, the house where you were was beleagured with multitudes that
thought it fit to rowse you out of your blind devotion; so that your walls
were battered, your windows all in fractions torn into rattling shivers, and
worse the hurly hurly might have been, but that sundry, Constables came, in
with strong guards of men to keep the peace, in which conflict your Sign was
beaten down and unhang'd to make ro^me for the owner to supply the place: all
which shows had never been; had Mr. Green and Mr. Barebones been content
(as they should have done) to have gone to their own Parish Churches. Also the
same day a mad rusticke fellow ((...) Prophet Hunt) did his best to raise the
like strife and trouble (...) Sepulchers Church.

Con^ider and avoid these disorders, good Reader.

FINIS.

