OF Alterations strange, Of various Signs, Here are Composed A few Poetic
Lines:

Here you may find, When You this Book have read,
The Crowne's transformed, Into the Poets Head.
Read well: Be merry and wise. Written by John Tailor.

Printed at London, 1651.

I Often have seen a Saints head for a Sign,
And many a Kings head too, then why not mine?
As every bare untruth is not a Lie,
So Signs are not the things they signify.
All Lies are Lies, but Metaphors and Fictions
Are Morrals, not Truths real contradictions.
Some lies may run out of a Poets Standish,
(By Art or Nature, native, or outlandish)
But if he be a Poet right, his quill
No Blasphemy or Scandal will distill:
Nor can he lie, for with Similitudes,
With fancies and with fictions he alludes,
From things Terrestrial to Celestial things,
From Cottages unto the Thrones of Kings.
True Poesy does not consist in Rhyme,
It scorns to be a slave to times or time:
A Poet right will suffer pinching want,
And to no greatness be a Sycophant.
He Will wear his threadbare Suite as thin as Serge,
And hates to come within the flatterers Verge:
Necessity does quick invention lend him,
And Apetite (his page) does still attend him;
He rather will fare hard, with no soales booted,
Then Write base adulating lines splay-footed;
Such Roguish stuff as wisdom will deride,
Which none will read but wits who are squint-eyed,
Whose Brains are Cork, whose Fancies all are Feather,
Right Shuttlecocks, tossed here, there, hither, thither.
These sons of ignorance which praise advance
The Rhiming Rascal brood of Ignorance.
These are the Patrons of such sorded Wits,
Who vent their pilfred lines by girds and fits,
But as a Fidler's a Musicians Ape,
And on the Art of Music makes a Rape,
So puffy Poetasters do beguile
Admiring Fools, and steal a Poets style:
Such Poets Spunges are, at meals and Feasts,
And there they steal and pocket up stale Jests:
There every flash and excrement of wit
He catches, pickles up, makes use of it.
Old jeers and Bulls, and clenches set him on
Parnassus top, there finds he Hellicon;
There in the Well of Tempe he has lap'd,
And with Enthusiastic Rhaptures Raped,
That straight he is a Poet for these times,
And beyond reason write most grievous Rhimes.
This scraping, thieving Knave can with compleatnes
Flatter, and fawn, and lick the tail of greatness.
Such are the swarms of paper and ink-spillers,
The scorn of Poets, good wits Caterpillars.
To make a Poet does all Art outstrip;
He Is the master piece of Heavenly workmanship,
He is Angellically Intellected
With Rhaptures, and of God and man respected;
Adorned with nature so, that Art is still
His servant, and a Subject to his quill.
Right Poets are Apollo's only Heirs,
And though wealth comes but seldom to their shares,
To each of them contentment is a bliss,
And to them all Their mind a Kingdom is.
They are the Muses Darlings, and their Lays
To immortality can Mortals raise,
Whose sugared Numbers, and Mellifluous Verse
Does season Good Capacities, and pierce
Ingenious noble minds with such a touch,
That good Inventions with' are mended much.
He that does understand a Verse abhors
Such lines as are not curled with Metaphors,
Adorned with flowing Wit, with Sense embellished,
(Which only is to ignorance disrellish'd)
Lousy Hexameters, and limping Rimes,
Are much in use these Loggerheaded times.
The world is Aged, Age is apt to dote,
And boasters of the Spirit which talk by rote,
Their wits are crooked warp't, their wisdom blind,
Their judgments with sur'd ignorance warm lined.
Ballads are precious Poetry with them,
(The Cock respects the Corn, rejects the Jemme)
Their weathercock opinions will prefer
Base scurrill scandalls of each Libeller,
Whilst all the Poets who have ever writ
Such lines as scald the altitude of wit,
Are by such dunghils hated, scorned, dispis'd,
Of no esteem at all or too low prized:
To such I will not write a line of mine,
A Halter fits them better then a line.
Draffe.'s fit for Hogs, there is Rhiming Knaves enough;
Sir-reverence is a Pancake for a Sow.
As Homer for his worth was Greece's Fame,
So for his want he was the Grecians shame;
His lines gave them fames immortallity,
And they let him live poor and beggarly;
No place would own his birth whilst he had life,
But when he died seven Cities were at strife,
And like together by the ears to fall,
T'he honored with his bones and Funeral:
He was the Prince of Poets, and since he
A beggar was, it is no great shame to me:
For I that am so short of him in wit,
To be in wealth before him 'twere unfit.
My spirits Pegassus is Fancy, and
My Muse does Ride, and flee over sea and Land,
From every Coast and Clime, North, South, West, East,
She brings me curious Cates to feed and feast:
Sometimes a Dish of Sonnets sweet she brings;
Sometimes Heroic Acts of famous things:
Iambicks, Saphicks, Odes, and Epigrams,
Tart Satires, Chronograms, and Anagrams,
Epithalamiums, Epicediums, Cantoes,
Harmonious Measures, Canzoes, and Corantoes,
Sad Eligies, and merry Madrigals;
These are right Poets sumptuous Feastivals.
All these and more are my contented cheer
Though Butchers flesh and poultry ware be dear.
These are to me Hen, Capon, Turkey, Quail,
Duck, Hare, Goose, Mallar'd, Woodcock, Snipe, or Rail,
My Pig, and Partridge, Widgeon, P^geon, Pheasant;
With these (Camelion-like) I live most pleasant.
For full paunch'd Gormondizing Gluttony
With Poets hold no correspondency:
The ones delight's a moments lushious taste,
The other feeds on that shall ever last:
One, with a minutes joy his pallat pleases:
The other takes repast that never cease.
The Emperor Maximinus used to eat
At every dinner forty pounds of meat,
With bread, fruit, Wine, which down his throat did go,
He eat no supper sure that dined so.
The Emperor Geta had his Dishes set
After the order of the Alphabet:
The Flesh, fish, foul, whose names with A begun,
First into his Imperial panch must run:
And so to B, C, D, E, F, and G,
H, I, K, L, M, N, with O, and P.
Q, R, S, T, V, W, X, Y, Z. Zed,
Their mighty Majesty's thus daily fed.
Such Monsters as these were Biberius Mero,
And so was Romes great Tyrant, bloody Nero:
Such was Vitellius, Heliogabalus,
Such was the Assyrian Sardanap^^^^s.
Such would Nick Wood of Kent, and Marriot be,
If they had had such wealth and dignity.
But none of these did ever study spend
To be a Poet, or a Poets friend:
If they to Learning any love had bore,
Their teeth had wrought much less, their brains much more.
If ever Poet graced a Kingdoms Throne,
King James was He, the one, and only one.
as a nameles honest Poet wrote of Poetry.
It is not dressed in Rags of lousy Rhimes,
To please such Gulls as understand it not;
It soars a pitch above these Haggard Times,
And slights the censure of each Cockbraind Sot.
King James his Crown was made of Massy gold,
His Crown of Laurel was more excellent:
The one consuming time will waste and mould,
The other everlasting permanent.
Thus when old time has wasted Tomb and Hearse,
True Honor is preserved by lasting Verse.
Time, Tomb, and black oblivion will devour
Their Honors that dares slight a Poets power.
'Twas not Achilles Sword, but Homers Pen
Made Worthy Hector chiefest Man of Men.
Who had e're heard of Alexanders fame,
If Quintus Curtius had not wrote the same?
A Poets love is lovely, but his hate
Can strike great Kings beneath the foot of Fate.
The sword cuts sharp, kills Sires, and spares the sons:
The Pens keen stroke a generation runs.
Two men, named Hypponax and Bibullus,
Poet and Painter, dwelt in Ephesus:
The Poet had the will favouredst face and feature,
That scarce the like had any two-leg'd creature;
And he such sharp satyrick lines could write,
Which would both smart and rankle, where they bite.
The Painter made the Picture of the Poet
So ill shaped, that all men that did but know it,
Did every one poor Hipponax much jeare
With scorns and scoffs, and many a flout and jeare.
The Poet on revenge did meditate,
And (from the Limbeck of's distilling pate)
He ('against the Painter) wrote harsh lines, so furious,
That Buballus did hang himself most curious.
And I do wish, all that are Poet haters
Were as that Painter, or his Imitaters.
So I that am a Poet, old forlorn,
(Loved by the learned, and ignorances scorn)
Worn from my waxing, to the lowest weine,
Though time tread on me, I dare turn again,
As does a worm; but I perceive and see
My Muse and Pen, both curbed and muzled be;
That (over us) there is Lincean watch,
That we (poor sooles) dare neither bite or scratch;
Yet had I all free liberty, I hate
To meddle with Authority or State,
Or write a line that scandal may produce,
Or be the present Governments abuse:
For States are men, no State so perfect is,
But some things (many things) are often amiss.
For it is a maxim, all men have received
To be deceivers, and to be deceived.
I served two Kings full five and forty year,
Am now grown old, bald, with some hoary hair:
Besides, seven times Elizabeth I served
At Sea, and from my Loyalty never swerved:
Now Kingly Government expulsed is,
I must live in obedience under This:
From those two Kings I had such means to live,
And (with those means) a willing mind to give:
But now I am a Taker, and no Giver,
From which poor state good Jesus me deliver:
Ten years are past, since penny pay I had,
For my unlucky fortune is so bad,
That though I was a Yeoman of the Guard,
And that my fellows some poor pay have shared:
Though (as a Waterman) much pay is due,
Yet not one groat will unto me accrue:
Though no man in a poorer state then I,
Aged 72. in extreme poverty;
Since first these woeful cruel wars began,
I never bare arms, I was no martial man:
I never saw slaughtring swords drawn from their sheaths,
Or mangled men destroyed with various deaths.
A pair of Crutches all my weapons were,
Wherewith I crawled in Oxford nigh three year:
For I was lame, and my Imposthum'd leg
My Patent was, with privilege to beg:
Thus Lamenesse was my fault, my grief, my blame,
And this did get me a Malignants name.
Petitions there has been two hundred given,
To show to what extreme want we are driven,
Whereby few of us some relief have got,
But not one cross to my unlucky lot;
Necessity and I both married be,
In love and fellowship we both agree.
She made m'a Merchant (now most Trades do fail)
A Trade in Ale, and sell it by retaile:
My Sign was once the Crown, but now it is
Changed by asudden Metamorphosis,
The Crown was taken down, and in the stead
Is placed John Tailors, or the Poets Head.
Indeed these are the days of Transformation,
In ten years time has fallen some alteration.
For Charing-Crosse, that had stood times and lives,
Is turned to Salt-sellers, and hephts for Knives.
A Tavern where Saint Martins Picture was,
Is turned t'a Goat that never eat hay or grass.
The Salutation, or Annunciation,
Is made two Gallants with sweet salutation;
Signs subject are to mutability,
And seldom are the things they signify.
The Signs of Kings heads are not heads of Kings:
The Signs of Fountains are no watery Springs:
Blew Bores, Black Swans, and Maiden-heads are signs:
Grapes are but Signs, it is pressing makes 'em Wines.
So is a Poet with oppression pressed,
Want squeeseth him, and then he writes best.
The Painter has his fancy, I did see,
And looking on two Loggerheads made three:
And I have seen Saints Heads for Signs hanged up,
And Sir John Oldcastle with a quaffing Cup;
The Signs of many a Kings Head, many a Queen,
Popes, Bishops, Arius, Taurus, I have seen
Their Heads set up for Signs; likewise I have
Seen Goats heads, with their beards like Townsmen Grave,
Rams heads, Boares heads, Bulls heads, all heads that are,
The Painters Art describes them near and far:
The Sun and Moon are Gods signs, but yet they 1. Genesis

Are Tavern Signs, where men waste time away.
I Knew a Time (when times were not so evil)
There was a famous Tavern, called the Devil;
But 'twas a nickname that the house did bear,
For I have found good entertainment there.
In great Apollo (no man seemed to gull us)
My father Ben and I fared like Lucullus: M. Johnson.

Thus Poetry, and painting in commixion
Do correspond in fancy, and in fiction;
Both liked alike, alike disliked both,
As various humors like to like or loath.
Of Poets I have somewhat said before,
And now of Painters I Will say somewhat more.
The Painters cheated, for I am acquainted
With sundry Signs that never yet were painted:
The crooked Billet who e're painted, who
The Gridir'ne Paint? who did the Horse-shooe do?
Or tell me, honest Reader, if you can,
What man's so mad to paint a Drying Pan?
A Painter seldom does paint Whores, for they
Themselves do with a Pox paint every day.
A Painter right is like a Poet true:
Ultra Maria is the chiefest Blew;
They in their Art are downrigh^, just, and plain,
True honesty they have died deep in grain.
A painter did my Picture Gratis make,
And (for a Sign) I hanged it for his sake.
One De la Roche, here many years has bin
Famed for Teeth-drawing out, and setting in:
He dwells close by Fleet Bridge, and there I saw
His Picture hanged, which was a Sign to draw
Such as were grieved with tooth tormenting pain,
He drew, and in their place set new again.
My Picture likewise hangs to draw, but not
Teeth, but Ale, nappy as e're came in Pot:
Now if my Pictures drawing can prevayle,
'Twill draw my friends to me, and I Will draw Ale.
Two strings are beter to a Bow then one,
And Poetry does me small good alone:
So Ale alone yields but small means to me,
Except it have some spice of Poesy.
Take of a spark of wit some pretty Cantle,
And toaste it for your Ale, twill make it mantle.
For Poetry with Ale together Brewed
Does mount men's wits into an ALetitude.
Blind Fortune is to Poetry unkind;
And Poets wast their wits, and win but wind.
A Poet's like a Candle, that burns bright,
And spends himself in giving others light.
But Ale and I together will agree,
I Will make the Barrel light, and Ale lights me.
And (to conclude) a Satyr I Will relate,
To show how Ale will valor Elevate;
How it can make man vapor and extol
Himself, that from his tongue both arines and Arts will troll:
If he be in his Ale, no man comes near him,
Provided you will believe him when you hear him,
His Travels then will mighty volumes fill,
Beyond our famous Sir John Mandevill.
And to his reputation 'twere a blot,
To put him in the rank of Don Quixot.
He past the Zones, Phrygia, and Torrida,
Surveigh'd the South World, called Incognita,
And there he saw Great Gorgons empty, Scull
So big, four Bushels scarce could fill it full.
At Stamboloya (a most stately Port)
Where the Emperor great Robombo keeps his Court:
There in a Shamaranguah (which we call
A Chapel) was a building round and tall,
Where as the huge Gargantuas corpse were laid,
The Tomb is a full Furlongs length it is said;
Built of a Polisht stone like Crimson jet,
(Surpassing far the Tomb of Mahomet)
Enchac'd with precious Stones that dims the sight,
That none can look on it, it does shine so bright.
From thence he past the streights of Magellan,
And feasted was by mighty Pouhatan,
Where amongst a world of dainties to be brief,
A Phoenix stewed in White-broath was the chief.
Tut, it will tire a man to hear him half,
He has seen Miloes Bull, and Walthams Calfe;
The Monmouth Cap of famous Owen Glendor,
And three eye tee of the ancient witch of Endor:
Ischariots Lantern, at Saint Dennisis,
The Ephesian Dian, at the Louvre is:
The Amphitheater that is at Ulismos,
The Pirramids of Egypt, or the Isthmos,
That parts Utopia from fair Thessaly,
Or lofty Atlas that does prop the sky.
If all be true he says, we may him call
The God of Wars Lieutenant General:
No Turk or Tartar, Moor, or Mirmidon,
Such valiant exployts has under-gone:
He learned Wars Horn-book first, and did not stint,
But past his Grammar Rules was perfect in it;
He first began with trayning, Mustring, Drilling,
Before he came to fighting, or to killing:
To March, to put his men in Files, and Ranks,
To order a Batalia, wings, or Flanks,
To lead the Vaunt-guard, or bring up the Rear,
To be here, there, (and almost every where)
To guide and manage men, and make them stoict,
Double your Ranks and Files, faces about:
He served the Turk nine years a Renegado,
Where often times he felt the Bastinado;
And though he wore a Coat of Bare-freezado,
Yet there he learned the Art of a Soldado,
T'affront an Enemy with a Braveado,
To make a Battery, and to use Scalado;
To use Petards, Engines, Wild-sire, Granado,
T'intrap the foe by secret Ambuscado;
To Raise, Mount, Parrapet, or Camisado;
To make a strength more strong with Canvasado;
With his good sword to use the Imbrocado;
The Punto, the Reverso, the Stockado:
And for Land service or the Sea Armado,
He knows a roll of Match from Trinidado.
His Music, Drums, Guns, Cannons, thundering rore,
As if the Welkin were in totters tore;
The Harquebuz and Muskets go pit, pat,
Towers, Castles, Forts, and Citadels laid flat:
Mines, Countermines, Assaults, Repulses, Sallies,
Whilst Horse and men slain strew the Fields and valleys,
Battalia's, Battries, Breaches, Armies, Arms,
Broils, Garboyles, hot Encounters, fierce Alarms:
Fortifications, Camps, Redoubts, and Trenches,
Vamures, and Count^^-mures, Walls, Sconces, Fences;
On-sets and On-slaughts he has been upon,
He blew up Tauris, conquered Babylon:
He stood perdue beneath the frozen Zone,
Turned to a man of Ice, or Crystal Stone.
The same day Mars his Valor did inspire
And thawed him brave, with Sulphur, smoke, and fire.
He in the Battle seemed a man all flame,
In smouldring Powder, he that day o'recame
The Tartar Chrim, and near to Samercand,
He with Mackoughly Shaugh, fought hand to hand.
The Leaguers, and the Sieges he has seen,
The dreadful dangers where he often has been:
He has daunc'd Antiques in a Crimson Flood,
And swom Levoltaes in a sea of blood:
In greatest perrils he would bravely on,
His throat belched fog, and flames like Phlegeton.
Thus Sallamander like, he often has been
In scorching flashes, and three winters in
An Icie coat, like Armor shining bright
He served the Pole, against the Muscovite.
He has lain down to sleep a Man, in show,
And rose a Snow-ball, or a Ball of Snow.
Like the Camelion, (not to food inclined)
He lived by sucking the cold Northern wind:
Famed by the blast of Fame, that swiftly flies,
Compounding and confounding truth and lies.
He has a Blade (if his report be true)
Wherewith he sixteen desperate Corporals slew;
And eight Lieverenants he outright has killed,
Four Valiant Serjants he has slain in Field:
Two Noble Captains and one General,
His fury, force perforce did force to fall.
Blades broke, and battered Hilts, he has had more
Then any Castle can contain the store;
He had a Rapier, sharp, pure Castilliano,
With which he gored and killed a great Umbrano,
For guided with an Arm and courage fierce,
It quite through double Cannon proof will pierce.
He Will Guard himself from any Bullets fall,
His Sword's his Racket, and the shot the Ball,
Which though it swiftly come, he is so quick-ey'd,
That with his Morglay he would turne't aside:
With the same Bilbo, once he madly strikes
And crop'd the tops off, from a Grove of Pikes:
Thus fighting often in Winter, and in Summer,
He had more wounds then holes are in a Scummer.
A thousand blows and bruises, knocks and cuts
He has received; eight times shot through the guts.
He was in Leagure late before Breda,
Associate with the Marquess Spinola:
And being in a Boat upon the Water,
A Musket shot ran through his Piamater,
It pierced his Perricranion, that his brain
Was taken out and washed, put in again.
Yet all these wounds, and all his desperate matches,
He calls them petty hurts, or simple scratches:
He was so mewl'd once at Berghen ap Zone,
Boys called him Raw-head there, and Bloudy-bone.
From thence he took his Journey into Flanders,
And so to England, where he cants and maunders;
Where though he be not now the man he was,
For an old beaten Soldier he may pass.
The fruits of Ale are unto Drunkards such,
To make 'em swear and lie that drink too much:
But my Ale (being drank with mod eration)
Will quench thirst, and make merry Recreation.
My Book and Sign were published for two ends,
TO invite my honest civil, sober Friends:
From such as are not such, I kindly pray,
Till I send for 'em, let 'em keep away
From Phoenix Alley, the Globe Tavern near,
The middle of Long-Aker: I dwell there.
JOHN TAILOR, Poeta Aquatica.

FINIS.

