AQVA-MVSAE: OR, Cacafogo, Cacadaemon, CAPTAIN GEORGE WITHER Wrung in the
Withers.

Being a short lashing Satyr, wherein the Juggling Rebel is
Compendiously-finely Firked and Jerked, for his late railing Pamphlet against
the King and State, called CAMPO-MUSAE.

Deus dabit his quoque Funem. By JOHN TAILOR.

Printed in the fourth Year of the Grand Rebellion.

To the Dishonorable, Disworshipfull, Disloyal, and detestable the Rebels,
of what Nation, Sex, Sect, Degree, Quality, Rank, Age, Function, or Condition
whatsoever.
BRave, Bold, Adventerors, and unmatchable Patrons, It was my chance (long
since) to read a witty Pamphlet, Entitled, Pierce Penniles his Supplication,
It was Dedicated to the Devil, there were in it many Satyricall true Jerks,
Jybes, Jests, and Ieeres, which reflected and trencht much upon the Graund
Signior Sultan Satan's Reputation, which were much distasteful to his Infernal
Hell-hood, with all the rest of his Members of that Lower House. In lmitation
of that Supplication, dedicated to the Devil, I am bold to Dedicate this my
Satyricall Poem to you his dear Adopted Sons (the Rebels) not doubting, but
you will Patronize it, and Reward the Writer, as your Father would have done
Tom Nash, for his Penniles Volumne; I know that you have more Power then your
Sire, and for State Policy, you have so far gone beyond him, that he blushes
for shame, to hear how the World laughes him to scorn, for being out-strip'd
and overreach'd in his own Art, by his own Sons, Scholars, and Servants. He
did once (sawcily and foolishly) offer to give all the Kingdoms of the World,
but you are better Husbands then to give Kingdoms, for you have done your best
and worst to take Kingdoms and Principalities, you have sold Ireland, and the
Lives and Estates of 100000 People there, and with the Moneys which you
received from your Mungrell Merchant Adventurers for Irish Land, you have
bought, or hired, Scottish Rebels on purpose to make an English Invasion. To
effect which most unparalleled designs, your Pulpits, and Pamphlets have been
most diligent and useful Aggravators and Propagators, amongst whom, and of
which unnumber'd Numberless, damnable Number* Captain George Wyther, is not
to be accounted a small Fool; His Campo-Musae, does declare the Gentleman's
Loyalty with his Book, called, Britains Remembrancer, (in the 8th and 9th
Cantoes) do show his Art in Adulation, and whosoever either has read, or will
or can read, understand and consider those his two Books, may palpably perceive
the constancy of this Capricious Carpet Captain, and also discern what Spirit
of Contradiction inspired his Muse. I have briefly Writ this my Satyr as a
gentle Reproof of his Perfidious unmannerly Mutability, wherein you may descry
not only his Rebellious Legerdemaine, but all his Maintainers, Patrons,
Adorers, Admirers, and Rewarders, may see and be sorry for their Errors; He was
a man that I have these 35 years loved and respected, because I thought him
simply honest; But now his concealed Hypocrifie is by himself discovered, I am
bold to take leave of him in these following lines.

AQVA-MVSAE.
An Answer to WITHER his CAMPO-MUSAE.
HA, let me see, is that that Traitorous Thing,
Whose Campo-Musae has Reviled the King:
Sure it is not he; yet like him much he looks
That late composed such sin Confounding Books,
In sharp Ramnusiaes Pisle, his Pen he dipped
And Britains Great Abuses Whipped and Stripped,
And in his Motto did with Braggs declare
That in himself all Virtues perfect were.
Art thou that wonder of the Universe
Whose lines Heaven, Hell, and Through the World did Pierce,
In Sixteen hundred twenty six, that year
Thou Wr^t'st a Book ( Britains Remembrancer)
And in that Book with Boasting Boldness, then
Thou Vaunt'st thy self a Miracle of Men,
For never Hippocrite did show more skill
And Pend so Well, and yet intend so ill.
In thy third Page, thou in that Preface say,
That thou his Majesty's High favor Weighst
And that thou holdst His Grace more dear to thee
And Precious, then thy very soul could be.
Thy fourth Page Says, thy Muse Spewes not Base Rimes
Against Public Persons (but to Lash the Times)
Thou applie'st King David's Nine and Thirtieth Psalm
His Storms of Griefs, his hidden fire, his Calm,
All which Blasphemously thy self Appliest
Unto thy self; And in Applying Lie.
Thy ninth Page says, bad Tongues will set their stings
Unjustly, on the Sacred names of Kings.
Thy tenth Page truly does the Truth Repeat,
That the King sits in God Almighties Seat.
And thus (with Pharisaicall Ostentation)
Thou say Commission, (Calling, Revelation,)
Were given thee from above, Reader, pray Note,
How this Imposture late has turned his Coat;
View but his Campo M^sae, and Conser
The words and Sense, with his Remembrancer,
And wavering Lies and Lines (Black upon White)
Shows railing Hypocrite, Hermophrodite,
Nor Male or Female, neither both or neither
Much more Incongruent then flint and feather.
Is this the Vulgar Vassalls, Valiant George
Whose Whileom Muse did oracles disgorge,
Who was admired of every Man and Woeman
Of all sorts, from the Tinker to the Broomeman,
Sure this cannot be he, And yet it is he,
Then how (the Devil) can he thus changed be,
Can he, that so much honesty professed
(As if all honesty had been in's Breast)
Can he be Metamorphos'd to a Knave,
And write and fight, his Sovereign to out-brave,
Can his Lines Lie (that sweet Peace did desire)
Yet stirs up Wars, to set the Realm on fire,
All this is possible, all this is done,
This is George Wyther, his own Mothers Son.
Now he is great George a Horseback, (mounted high)
Dares to affront, and Rail against Majesty,
This is the George thus alterd, thus all-turd
Whose Satyrs Goose-quill is transformed to asword,
For whose sake, I protest it with my Pen,
I never will trust Wall-eyd Jade again.
Brave George, no George of Cappodocia,
But famous George of Braggodocia,
Ride on fierce George, until thy high desert
By Transmutation, make thy Horse a Cart.
What contraries does thy mad Brains possess
That with a Traitorous War does Peace profess,
That plays at fast, and loose, with handy dandy
Make Subjects against their Sovereign Bullets bandy,
Much mischief in that double mind did lurk,
And Hell it self, set that damned Muse a work.
Was ever such vile fragment Riming Rags
Patched up together with abusive Braggs;
That who so does his Campo-Musae Read,
Will judge the Devil did his Invention Lead;
Like to a Iesuited subtle Fox,
His Honest Writings but a Paradox:
His Verities are false, his Errors true,
Such Riffe Raffe hotch Potch, his sweet Muse does Brew.
How villainy does cunningly deceive,
And good and bad together interweave;
He Prays, Inveighs, Commends, Contemns, Extols,
Approves, Reproves, Loves, Scorns, Obeys, Controls,
Admits, Commits, Omits, Permits, submits,
Remits, and Limmits, as his humor fits,
Tossing his Sovereigns Honor to and fro,
Even as his saucy Idle Brains do Crow,
And with his Rimes does Knaves and Fools inspire
To blow the Bellows of Rebellious fire.
Hell never Spewd worse villains then are those
That weekly (weakly) Rail in Rhyme and Prose,
Amongst which accursed Crew, a part thou Bearst,
And in the Devils great name Rebellion Rearst.
For had not that black Breed of Cerberus,
Scout, Dove, Diurnall, and Britannicus,
Wise Wither, Booker, and the damned swarms
Of Rake-hells, Animated Englands harms,
All our Contentions had been reconciled
Long since, and blessed Peace had gently smiled.
Were not for theirs and thine ill working Brain,
The King had Justly had His own again:
Th'affrighting front of bloody War had not
Disturbed no honest English man or Scot.
Thousands of Souls are from their Bodies parted,
(By Lies and Cursed Libellers perverted)
Which may be feared did to perdition fall
Before their Bodies could have Burial.
You Mungrell Whelps of Hells Infernal Litter,
What is the cause that makes your hate so bitter,
Is it because you think your selves more Righteous,
Or (in the Devils naine) wherefore thus despite ye us?
Is it because the King's a Protestant
That against him you are joined in Covenant?
Is it because he means to be so still
And never means to change, you wish him ill?
Is it because he is Merciful and Just
You those Indignities upon him thrust,
Is it because he never intended wrong
That you do hold his Life and Reign too long?
Are these the Causes wherefore you dislike him
Are these the occasions why your Malice strike him?
Go hang your selves base Villains, he shall Live
And flourish, and his God will Guerdon give
To you with Judas, and Achitophell
Where unrepenting Cursed Rebels dwell.
What Arms into the Field can Traitors bring
But Armed Impiety against the King;
Is not the Person of the King so high
As God Almighties sacred Deputy?
Then what are those blasphemous Rabshakaes
Anathema's, and Maranathama'es?
Psalm. 14. v. 4, 5, 6, 7.
God looks and sees how they do plot and plod
They understand not, nor seek after God,
Abominable out ot'h way they are gone
There Is none does good amongst them, no not one,
Their Throats are open Sepulchers, their Tongues
Have ly'de deceitfully with slandring Wrongs,
And underneath their Lips Aspes poison is,
Their Mouths are full of Cursing bitterness,
Their Feet are very swift men's blood to shed
Haples destruction in the ways they tread,
The way of Peace they have not known, and there
Before their eyes of God there is no fear.
Thus is the foureteenth Psalm in David's style
Applied to such as dare the King Revile.
And what art thou then, but a false pretender
That seeks to Ruinate the Faiths Defender:
To blow Wars Trumpet, without warrant for it,
Is foul Rebellion, all good men abhor it.
And what has Roguish Riming, Tricks and Ieeres
But set us all together by the Ears,
To Murder, Pilfer, Plunder, and oppress,
To make Wives Widows, Children fatherless,
The Father against the Son, Son against the Father,
And Brother against Brother force together,
Whilst Christian Faith, you Hipocrites or'ewhelme.
And Public Faith has Cheated all the Realm.
This (Master George) is your great Trades A great ship that used to go to the
East Indies, called the Trade's Increase.
Enerease
To Write, Rail, and disturb your Countries Peace,
In Rhyme to render our Dread Sovereign odious,
For your great profit has* been much commodious,
Had thou not Writ, and Raild as thou have done
Thou Had been no Captain, Thou Had bin hanged as soon;
The only way to flourish, and go brave,
Is to turn Rebel, Hipocrite and Knave,
If I my self, would but a Villain be
I should be Mounted and preferred like thee.
Yet it is not fear of Heavens Eternal wrath
Or Hells damned Tortures, me restrained has,
But filial fear of God, in me bears sway,
That I in love his Ordinance obey,
And those that do not (I do fear) their fate
Will be the portion of the Reprobate.
But whither Wither, does my fancy slay?
I ought not write in serious phrase to thee,
Thou precious most pernicious Prelate hater
To Durhams Reverend Bishop thou wast Cater,
Or Steward, where to make thy 'Compts seem clear,
Thou mad^'st two Months of July in one year,
And in the total Reckoning it was found
Thou Cheat'st the Bishop of five hundred pound. Dr Howser.

But thou did hold it for no sin at all,
To Rob the Person that is Episcopal.
This is no Crime in thee or thy Compeeres,
Tub-Preaching Tinkers, Pedlars, Pulpitteeres,
Whose best Religion, is most irreligious,
Who think Church Spoylers are not sacrilegious,
Who hold the Clergy as superfluous People,
And make the Chancell baser then the Steeple.
These are as arrant Rogues as ever twangd
And I do wish them in the Bell-ropes hanged.
But leaving unto God, the wronged Clergy
Now, with a fresh Charge, Wither I must charge ye,
And in a true way, I will make Relation,
That thy best Writings are Equivocation.
And that thy mind and Muse, were never friends*
In any goodness, but for private ends.
But leaving that a while, I will discourse
And once i will put the Cart before the Horse;
His Picture graven before some of his Books, the Commendatory Verses to the
Picture, were written by himself.
Thy Picture to thy Books was Printed, put
With curious Workmanship engraved and cut:
And Verses under it, were wisely pend
Which fools supposed were written by some friend,
Which God knows, thou, I, and a Thousand know,
Those lines (thy self praise) from thy self did flow*
Thou dotedst so upon thine own Effigies,
It looked so smugge, Religious, Irreligious,
So Amiable Lovely, Sweet and Fine,
A Phisnomie Poetique and Divine:
'Till (like Narcissus) gazing in that Brook,
Pride drowned thee, in thy self admiring Book.
Yet for your Valor, you deserved much fame
You Conquered Farnham Castle, and did tame
And vanquished all the Cavaliers so Bravely,
(Look in a Glass, and you shall see the Knave Lie)
A Dog, two Cats, and an old Woeman were
Your opposites, when as you entered there,
For which great service, had your Masters might,
And power withal; you had bin dubd a Knight.
But it is no matter, they might do as well,
They may Create you half a Colonel.
In Farnham Castle, thou wast great Commander,
And Thoughtst thy self more great then Alexander,
Yet in thy Carriage, Valor, Fashion, Form,
Thou wast a Strong, Infirm, Stout, Feeble Worm.
For when thy Master Rebels called thee out,
With all thy fellows of that damned Rout,
Thy Cowardice, thou finely did disguise,
Thy sight was dim, the blame was in thine Eyes,
For want of sight, thou durst not see to Fight,
But like a Rebel Devil could see to Write.
It Is well thou wast not Valiant, as thy Pen
Emblazons thee, thou had then bin Man of Men,
Great Agamemnon to thee were a Toy,
And Brave Achilles but a prating Boy.
Ulysses a poor Silly Stoic As^e,
And Hector for a Fool in Arms should pass.
Oh had thou had the profit of thine Eyne,
Thou Had beaten purblind all the Worthies 9.
Thus blind with Ignorance, and Impudence,
And Wall-ey'de in thy seared Conscience,
Thy Goose-quill, has Reviled the King and Law,
When as thy Sword thou never dare to draw,
For which from both sides thou deserve a Fee,
A Triple Twist at the Triangle Tree.
And now I Will leave to fish in troubled Waters,
Let Us talk a little of some other Matters;
It Is known that once within these thirty years,
Thou wast in Jayle for scandalling some Peer^s,
And it is not lawful for a Satyrs Pen,
To wrong the Honors of particular Men,
Which you did, not for any hate you bore
To Vice or Villainy, but that therefore
You would be famous, and to Prizen Committed,
Whereby you seemed most wonderfully Witted.
There, in the Marshalseas, whole flights of Gulls,
Of Schismatiques, of Cuckolds, Knaves and Trulls,
In Droves and Heardes, in Pilgrimage they came*
(As Er'st Fools did to our Lady of Walsingham)
You were their Idol Saint, and at your Shrine
They offered Hecatombes of Coin and Wine,
Sweet meats and Iunkets, (more then you could dream)
Came flowing to you daily like a stream.
Thus to your Mill came tagge, ragge, great and small,
You Ground, and (with the Cogges) took toll of all.
At last to give some Ease unto your, Mill
You were Releast from Priz'n against your will.
Then was your Pockets Treasure full to the top,
Which (by degrees) might t'a Consumption drop,
Then after that (by chance) met you and I
Where we us'de Complementall courtesy,
And talkd of Poetry, and then I said.
You (by the Muses favor) was well paid,
Whilst I (for my part) what soever I writ
Though men approved and applauded it,
Yet fortune unto me, was still unkind
Bounty was fast asleep, or hard to find,
Verbositie and Vapor was my Gains
And Poverty the Portion of my Pains,
Though you found many an Ignorant Mecenas,
Which made you fat, still remained a Lean Ass,
Words like to those, or much to this effect
I spoke, and you this Answer did direct.
John, you must boldly do, as I have don
Against great Persons let your Verses run,
Snarle at the State, and let your Satyre's pen
Write against Government, and Noblemen.
You must run wilfully into offense,
What though they call it saucy Impudence,
And so Commit you for it, as they did me
Then shall you Thrive, and be as you would be;
Your Books would sell, your self get Coin and Fame,
And then (like mine) Renowned shall be your Name.
I do not say our talk was punctual such,
But what we spoke imported full as much.
By which may be perceived thou Wrot'st soodly
Not out of Hatred unto Acts ungodly,
By insinuation to intrude
Into the affections of the Multitude.
Thus from poor witless Lumps of Ignorance.
Thou gatt'st Applause, Coin, Clothes, and Countenance.
As to their Cost, the most of them can prove
Thou Cheat'st 'em of their Money and their love,
And now your Campo-Musae has found Grace
To grace you in a graceless Captains Place.
Now dreadful Wars, and Politic designs
Are the Effects of thy Prophetique Lines:
Arms, mighty Arms, and strange Redoubted deed^
Are the Issues now that from thy Muse proceeds,
Thou Have turned thy Anagrams to Ambuscadoes
Thy Diagrams to terrible Bravadoes,
Thy Chronograms to horrible Stockadoes,
Thy Epigrams to desperate Imbrocadoes,
Thy Disticks to Redoubts and Barricadoes,
Thy Dactills and thy Spondees to Scalladoes,
Thy measured verse to Marches and Soldadoes,
Thy Cantoes, and Acrosticks to Grenades,
Thy Canzoes to Brigades, and Canvasadoes,
Thy Dialogues to Bruising Bastinadoes,
Thy Prologues to most Barbarous Stab-adoes,
Thy Catalogues to Vagrant Renegadoes,
Thy Epilogues to Warlike Pallizadoes,
And Warwick plays th'usurping Adelantade,
For Englands ruin rules the Kings Armado,
But it is my hope your ends will prove Mockad^,
Not worth a ragge of rotten welsh Freezado,
And thou esteemed less then a Lantzprezado.
For if thou durst lay by thy cursed Spleen,
And speak but Loyally of King and Queen,
Cease to belly the Lords, and but deny
Thou never slandred'st them with Papistry;
Cease to Abuse the Bishops, and the Tribe
Of sacred Levi, cease thou cursed Scribe,
T'applaud foul Treason, and approve all those,
That to Gods Church the King, and Peace are foes:
Seek but thy Countries Peace in word and deed,
Thy Masters then will hang thee for thy Meede,
Be but an Honest man two days together,
No more a Captain then, but Poor George Wither.
Should I but answer every Lie and Line,
In that Ba^e Balderdash poor Thing of thine,
I might b'accounted so, so, Thus and Thus,
An Ass impertinent, Voluminus,
A Murderer of Paper, a time Waster,
A Folio Fool, a Zany Poetaster,
Thy Apish Coxcombe (in thy imitation,
Like thee) the Squirt-Rime of our Troubled Nation,
One of the Sages of Old Gothams Clerks
That makes reply to every dog that Barks.
H're I Will so be thy means for Maintenance,
Let thy Applauders dye in Ignorance,
For it is most probable thy jeeres and Lying,
Thou wrot'st in hope of Gain by my Replying.
And if men truly would thy Book examine,
There may they find both Sense and Reasons famine,
All broken Numbers, fractions, faction, fictions,
Mere Mutabilities, self Contradictions,
In Dock, out Nettle, here, there, every where,
And in conclusion, no where, here nor there,
The Phrase where with thy Verse are Beawtifide,
Is only where the King is Vileifide,
And that for which thou most art Gratifide,
Has made a Thousand fools mis-edifide;
With impudence thou art so fortifide,
And with Hypocrisy so Quallifide,
And (to the World) thy self have justifide,
That from the World thou art clean Mortifide,
All which thy Boasting Rimes have certifide,
For under thine own hand it is Testifide,
And by a crew of Rebels Notifide,
(Such as with Ignorance are Stupifide)
That those bad times so foul and Putrifide,
By thy rare Writings are much purifide:
And as we find by war so mundifide,
Unparalleled and unexemplifide,
(Or at the least so neatly rectifide)
That thou deservest to be stellifide,
Or Idolized and almost Deifide,
In the mean time thy fame is Magnifide,
Thy person wondered at, and dignifide,
And (if they could) thou should be satisfide,
(Although themselves were double Damnifide)
Thy Female fair, adorned and turpifide,
Should, for thy services be Ladifide:
All this by Fools and Rebels Ratifide,
Is by all wise men scorned and Nullifide.
Our Miseries thou have not mollifide,
Thou our ealamities have amplifide,
And this my Satyr's Lash has verifide.
This thou may see, and this thou must allow,
I can Rand words, and Rhyme as well as thou:
Speak and write Nonsense, even by thy example,
(Though not like thine Admired abroad so ample)
Like to the inundation of a flame,
Or like a Mad Lord, never out of frame,
Or like the Entrails of a purple Snaile,
Or like the wagging of the Dog-starres Tail,
Or like the Frost and Snow that falls in June,
Or like sweet Music, that was never in Tune:
Or like a Ship that wants sides, Stem and Keele,
Or like the Marrow-bones of Fortunes Wheel,
Even such is Wither, like all these or nothing,
Yet like himself, in every good man's Loathing.
And is not this rare Nonsense, prithee tell,
Much like thy writing, if men mark it well:
For Nonsense is Rebellion, and thy writing,
Is nothing but Rebellious Wars inciting.
Base Scandal, Lies, and Disobedience,
Is most Ridiculous, and poor Nonsense,
There Is nothing is true sense, but what is true,
And Hanging is good sense for such as you.
Apollo made not thee his only Hoire
In Poetry, I gat some part for my share,
And though, with Art thou partly art endo'wd,
Yet God and Nature, me some Guifte allowed:
Which I (as my poor Tallent will extend)
To Vindicate my wronged King I Will spend.
Nor am I bound (what e're thou may suggest)
To think among Englands Poets thou art best,
Thy Verses many ways applauded are
Yet many that Boast less may reach as far.
Does all invention in thy Brain Consist,
Art thou the Bounds, the Limits and the List,
The Longitude of Wit and Honesty,
The Latitude of true Integrity;
Art thou the Hyporbole wonder, whose Rare Parts
Is Non Plus Vltra, of all (...) and Arte^,
Art thou all this, the Devil thou art. Brag on,
My self once gat a Sippe of H^llicon,
Which with Enthusiasmes did infuse
Into my Brains some Rap'ts of every Muse,
And therefore, I am sure, thou have not all,
I have my Portion too (although but small.)
Which i'ft it were less by half, I dare as^ay,
To Cope with thee, in any Loyal way.
But to write Verse, that may Rebellion breed
There in thou art too hard for me indeed.
In the mean space, Thou Pigmey Impe of War,
Rodomontado, Champion for the Par- These words are purposely cloven or split,
for the understanding of the Learned, Illiterate, Grave, Ridiculous Reader.

Lament, we grieve for grieved Englands woe,
Whilst every true Man's driven from his Po-*
Sessions may try those Knaves that look so big;
And then it is ten to one, but Honest Grig-*
Or I, in Lofty Verse thy praise shall Sing,
And Thou high Mounted to thy Merits, Swing.
FINIS.

