A FAITHFUL TESTIMONY For the Lord against this Nation of England's INIQUITY,
and IDOLATRY, and OPPRESSION, Because of which the Land mourns. Being also a
WARNING to all People to consider what they have done, and what they are a
doing.
OH All People of the World, Repent, Repent, and turn to the Lord, lest his
dreadful Judgments fall upon you! All People fear and dread and serve the
Living God: And know, that the Lord God of Heaven and Earth has caused me,
Laurence Tailor of Settle, to go several Times with my Body naked, and my
outward Visage or Beauty marred with Grime or Soot, and Ashes on my Head: I
say, the Lord God of Heaven and Earth has commanded me several Times to go
into several Steeple Houses in that Manner, and through several Towns, which
may stand a Sign and a Witness against this naked and sinful Generation, whose
Worship is not in Spirit and Truth, and Souls not covered with the Spirit of
Truth, which the Woe is unto; For Woe unto them, who cover, but not with the
Covering of my Spirit, says the Lord, Isa. 30. 1: And God will mar their
Beauty, and consume their Glory into Ashes: Therefore, all People turn your
Minds in, to the Light of Christ, and with it you will see how you stand in the
Sight of the Living God; for verily, the Lord is grieved with this Generation,
and his Spirit is burdened with the Iniquity of this People, who profess
Christianity, but are Enemies to the Cross of Christ, and hate the Appearance
of his Truth: Therefore in the Name of the Lord, I warn you, Repent, and turn
to the Lord, lest his Dreadful Judgments fall upon you; and seek the Lord while
he is to be found, lest the Door be shut, and you stand without, having
slighted the Day of your Visitation: So while you have Time, prize it; and seek
the Lord, while you have a Day and a Time, lest the Night come in which no Man
can work. This from a Lover of Peoples Souls.

And upon the 13th of the 12th Month, called February at Night, 1674. I was
moved by the Lord God to shave the Hair of my Head, and burn it; and these
Words arose in my Heart, So shall the Glory of Egypt be consumed into Ashes by
the fiery Jealousy and fierce Indignation of the Wrath of the Lord, etc.

And on the 14th Day of the 12th Month, being first Day of the Week, in
Obedience to the Lord God, I went into the great Steeple-House at Rippon
(called Minster) with my Body naked (and as abovementioned) and further I had
to signify unto the chief Worshippers there, that their Hands are polluted,
their Sacrifices not acceptable with God, their Prayers an Abomination to the
Lord, etc.

And so for going into the Steeple-House at Rippon with my Body naked, and
bearing my Testimony for the Lord, in being a Sign against this naked and
sinful Generation, their false Worship, and false Worshippers, was I hurried to
Prison, and committed Prisoner, as they pretend, for disturbing them; but they
disturbed me, who was in the Lord's Service; and for obeying the Voice of the
Lord God, have they caused my Body to be detained in outward Bonds; but with my
Spirit I can sing Praises to God for his unlimited Goodness, whose Mercy
endures for ever; So says my Soul, Amen.

But Woe, Woe, unto the false Worshippers, who worship not the living God, and
most especially, to the Priests, Teachers, Leaders and Guiders of this foolish
and dark, ignorant and sottish People, who usually assemble at the great
Minster at Rippon; as also to all other People who are in the same Error; the
Lord is against you the false Teachers, who preach for Hire, and divine for
Money, and also against you People who love to have it so; consider your Ways,
you Priests and Teachers, blind Guides, who run, and the Lord never sent you,
therefore ye shall not profit this People at all, as in Jer. 23. 32. And one
builds a Wall, and lo, others daub it with Untempered Mortar, crying, Peace,
Peace, Ezekiel. 13. 10. When the Lord never pronounced it; for there is no Peace
to the Wicked, says my God, Isa. 57. 21. Therefore, thus says the Lord, I am
against you Priests and Teachers of this Nation of England, who cause my People
to err by your Lies, and by your Lightness or Lewdness; for you say, thus says
the Lord, when the Lord never spoak by you; for you say ( Visions and
Revelations are ceased, and you deny the Teaching of the Holy One, and you
teach for Doctrine the Traditions of Men, and you lay wait for Blood, deceiving
the Souls of the simple by your Lies and Deceits; for you call evil good, and
good you call evil; you put Darkness for Light, and Light for Darkness; you
turn the Blind out of the Way, and you Blind Guides lead the Blind, so both
fall into the Ditch and Pit, and into the Snare; and if any one of those whose
Eyes the Lord has opened, bears witness against you, then ye prepare War
against them, or if they put not into your Mouths, Micah 3. 5. Oh! how many of
the Servants of the Lord have you caused to suffer for their Testimonies sake?
some for not paying Tithes, some who have been imprisoned till Death, and many
caused to suffer deeply in their Goods, besides Violence on the Bodies of many
used; and some by hard Usage and Cruelty have suffered Death, and sealed their
Testimony with their Blood, which you are guilty of who continue in the same
Spirit, and follow the same Practices; you are of them who lead Captive silly
Women laden with Sins and diverse Lusts, ever learning, and never able to come
to the true Knowledge of God, 2 Timothy 3. 6, 7. You are of them who are in the
Way of Cain, and run greedily after the Error of Balaam for Reward, and perish
in the gainsaying of Core, Jude 11. But you shall not proceed much further;
for your Folly is manifest to all whose Eyes the Lord has opened, to see your
Nakedness; and your Fig-Leaf-like Profession will not cover you, nor save you
from the Wrath of the Almighty God: Therefore, howl, howl, you false Shepherds;
lament and weep you blind Guides; for the Lord is arisen to render Fury to his
Adversaries, who despise his Way and Truth, and would not have him to reign,
whose Right it is; Glory be to his Name forever, who is God over all.

And so in the Name of the Lord I warn you false Teachers and blind Guides to
cease deceiving the People, lest you be farther guilty of the Blood of Souls.

And also to you the Magistrates and Rulers in this Nation of England, who have
made Laws to take hold of the Innocent, this is the Word of the Lord unto you,
I am against you, (says the Lord) who persecute the Just; therefore take heed
how you hearken to the murdering Spirit of the Priests, who stir up the Powers
of the Earth to defend them, and to persecute the Just and Innocent People of
God. Oh! but consider how it was the chief Priests that stirred up the
Officers, and cried to Pilate to crucify Christ; and the same Spirit is in the
Priests and Teachers of this Nation of England at this Day: and so in the Name
of the Lord, I warn you chief Magistrates and Judges, or any other, take heed
how you make Laws, or inflict them upon the innocent People of God, called
Quakers; for the Lord's Controversy is great with this Nation of England; and
Woe unto them who are found fighting against the Lord in this the Day of his
Power, in which there shall be nothing able to stand before the Lord, which is
not of him; for he is King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, and the Earth is the
Lords and the Fullness thereof, and he gives it to whom he pleases, and he can
pull down whom he pleases, and exalt whom he pleases; therefore let all fear
him who made Heaven and Earth and all that is therein, in whose Hands is the
Breath of the Spirits of all Flesh, Glory and Endless Praises be to his Holy
Name forever and ever, Amen.

From a Servant of the Lord, whose Name in the Flesh is called, Laurence Tailor.
The 19th of the 1st Month, 1675.

