portrait of (?) Christopher Love Mr. Christopher, Love Aetat 35 1652


THE CERTAIN TRAVAILES of an uncertain JOURNEY, Begun on Tuesday the 9. of
August, and ended on Saturday the 3. of September following, 1653.

Wherein the Readers may take notice, that the Authors purpose was to Travel,
and Write this following Relation, for no other intent or purpose, but to
pleasure himself, and to please his Friends in the first place.

By JOHN TAILOR, at the Sign of the Poets Head, in Phoeniz Alley, near the
Globe Tavern, in the middle of Long-Acre, nigh the Covent Garden.

Those twelve following lines I gave to diverse Gentlemen and Friends, before I
went, and as they have kindly subscribed to my Bill, I ^o humbly expect their
courteous acceptance of this Book.

A merry Bill of an uncertain Journey, to be performed by John Tailor, by
Land, with his Aqua Musa.
TO all my Friends, and courteous Gentlemen,
Know, that my journey is, I know not when:
Unto the parts I go, I know not where,
Or of my entertainment far or near;
Thus neither knowing when, or where, or whether,
Begun, or done, or both ends brought together,
When I this unknown Walk have put in print,
Each man to's pocket, put your fingers in it,
And, for my Book then give me what you list,
To which end, to this Bill, take pen in fist,
And write your names and habitations down,
I Will find you when again I come to Town.
The certainty of the uncertain Travels of John Tailor, performed in this
year 1653.
It Is laudable to read well penned Relations
Of foreign Countries, and their situations,
That by the judgment of the eye and brain
Some knowledge to discourse we may attain.
For Histories, and learned Cosmographers,
And diligent acute Geographers;
One has survay'd celestial lofty spears,
How all the Planets run in their carriers:
The stars, the signs, and every influence
In every Heavenly Orbs circumference,
And were it not for high Astronomy
(Whose lofty painful steps have scaled the sky)
For times and seasons we might grope and seek,
Not knowing years, or quarters, month, or week,
Or hours, or minutes, nor the Sabbath day,
Nor when to eat, or sleep, or debts to pay.
Millions of people would this knowledge lack
Except directed from the Almanac.
Thus Art, (with pains and travel of the mind)
Taught mean capacities, these things to find.
He travels far that goes beyond the Moon,
Or thinks this skill may be attained soon.
Their overweening thoughts fly high and quick
But such mad fools are only lunatic.
Geographers have traveled land and seas
Each coast, and opposite Antipodes;
And the description of all lands and parts
Described are, in several Maps and Charts.
The Sun and Moon have seldom showed their faces
On any Empire, Kingdom, place, or places,
Which Travelers have not viewd and survayd,
And by rare Geographique Art displayed.
By either sea or land, by night or day,
Geography has chalked us out the way:
That with Maps, Compass, and indifferent weather
True men or Thieves may travel any whither.
And thus through thick and thin, ways hard or soft,
Thousand and thousand miles I traveled often.
Some men do travel in their contemplations,
In reading Histories and strange Relations:
Some few do travel in the ways Divine,
Some wander wildly with the Muses nine;
For every man would be a Poet gladly,
Although he write and Rhyme but badly madly.
Sometimes the wits and tongues do, most unfit,
Travel, when tongues do run before the wit.
But if they both keep company together,
Delight and profit is in both, or either.
Discretion gravely goes a gentle pace,
When speech, a gallop, runs a heedles race:
Man's earthly portion 's travel, pain, and care,
(Of which I make a shift to get my share.)
Some do disdain, and hold it in high scorn
To know thatcht cottages where they were born
Some cross the sea to see strange lands unknown
And here, like strangers, do not know their own.
Their own, it is fit work for a golden pen
To write the names down of such knowing men:
Should each on know and have his own, 'twere rare
Right owners would be rich, and knaves stark bare.
He Is counted wise, with the Italians,
That knows his own wife from another man's.
But he is more wise that knows himself to be
Frail, mortal, and a map of Misery.
But wisest he, that patient takes his lot,
And use the world as if he used it not.
Some seem to know most, yet know almost nothing,
For man, in knowledge, is a very slow thing.
Nosce teipsum, Know thy self, and then
Each one will know himself the worst of men.
Many of foreign travels boast and vant,
When they, of England, are most ignorant.
But yearly I survey my Country Native,
And, among 6. cases, live upon the Dative.
I travel hard, and for my life's supply,
I every year receive a Subsidy.
(Or else to come more near unto the sense)
It Is fit to call it a Benevolence.
Thus (traveling) a toyling trade I drive,
By reason of mine age, near seventy five:
It is my earthly portion and my lot,
(The Proverb says, Need makes the old wife trot.)
Seven times at sea I served Elizabeth,
And 2. Kings forty five years, until death
Of both my Royal Masters quite bereft me,
That nothing now but age and want is left me.
This makes me travel, and my friends to try,
Else I might (like my fellows) sterve and die.
Had the last State, had consciences so tender
To think on Oxford siedge, with that surrender,
Had they kept Articles and Covenants,
In some sort, then they had releev'd our wants.
But they were in the land of Promise borne,
Performed, and paid us nothing, but their scorn.
Camelion like we had Air, Words, and Wind,
With these three empty dishes often we dined.
And with light Suppers, and such breaking Fast,
With meagre Famine, many breathed their last.
we nere bare arms, but household servants menial
We waited, if 'twere sin, it was but venial.
These thirteen years no wages I could get,
Which makes me thus to try my friends and wit.
Unto the Kings Revenews great Committee
We often Petitiond, and implored their pity;
And first and last, we gave Petitions plenty,
I Am sure, in number, near two hundred twenty.
Two thousand Books and Bills then printed were,
Wherein our woes and wants we did declare:
Lord Fairfax was himself Lord General then,
He pitied us (poor miserable men;)
And he in person, more then one time went
And told our griefs unto the Parliament.
Besides, for us, to them he Letters wrote,
For all which, only, promises we got.
I will not curse those men, but this I say,
If need and want afflict them, I do pray
They may be comforted, and fed, and clad
With promises, as we from them have had.
THE year sixteen hundred fifty, with 3. added,
Old Tib my Mare, and I, a journey gadded:
I London left, the 9. day I remember
Of August, near 3. weeks before September.
In 4. hours riding Post I got to Croydon,
And so has many a man, and many a boy done.
There was the George a horseback day and night,
And there I, from my mares back did alight.
At Water there wine was, but that is a Riddle,
At Croydon, you may know both ends and middle.
To Micham, from my way full 3. miles wide,
A Gentleman, I thank him, was my guide.
Holland my sheets, and Holland was mine Host,
My entertainment good for little cost,
August the tenth, my bonny Beast and I,
From Surrey traveld to South Saxony,
Now called Sussex, where at Bellinshurst
Six days I felt no hunger, cold, or thirst.
There at a sign, and no sign but a Frame,
It Was the Kings arms, but shatering shot and flame
Did beat them down, as useles, of small stead,
For arms are of no use without a Head.
Mine Host was mighty good, and great withal,
And, amongst Hosts, may be a General.
He Is friendly, courteous, although big and burly,
A right good fellow, no way proud or surly.
Six nights at Bellinshurst I freely stayed,
And all the charge of mare and man was paid
By a Gentleman, to name whom I Will refrain,
Whose love, my thankful mind shall still retain.
Thus in one week I rode Post 30. mile,
And neither man or mare tired all that while.
A Reverend Preacher preached on Sunday twice
Directing souls to the Heavenly Paradise.
And if we could but do as he did say,
His Doctrine told us all the ready way.
Thus Billinshurst thy bounty I extol,
Thou feastedst me in body and in soul.
There was rare Music, sweet and gentile Airs,
For undeserved favors, I am theirs.
My love to Mr. Fist, and to mine Host,
But love and thanks T. H. deserves most.
From Billinshurst, August the sixteenth day,
I took my leave, before I took my way.
The way indifferent good, the welk in smiles,
I rode to Petworth, 7. good Sussex miles.
To set forth Petworth, its worth more worth is,
Then I am worth, or worthy; but know this,
Northumberland the Noble, there does dwell,
Whose good housekeeping, few Lords parallel.
There Honorable bounty is expressed,
With daily charity to the poor distressed.
I speak not this for any thing I got
Of that great Lord, I felt or saw him not:
For had I seen him, my belief is such,
I should have felt and found his bounties tutch:
But I, for my part, never was so rude
To flatter, fawn, or basely to intrude,
Yet I declare him liberal, Honorable,
And there I dined well, at his Stewards Table.
Thanks Mr. Williams there, the Cook exact
By his good friendship there, I nothing lackd.
Thanks to my Hostess kind, good Mrs. Martin,
who welcomed me with good whit wine a quart in.
And last of all, but not of all the least,
I was kind Mr. Barnards costly Guest:
To me he showed his bounty from the Mint,
For which I give him here my thanks in Print.
He paid the chinque, and freely gave me drink,
And I return my gratitude with Ink.
August the 18. twelve long miles to Stenning
I rode, and nothing saw there worth the kenning,
But that mine Host there was a joviall Wight,
My Hostess fat and fair; a goodly sight:
The sign the Chequer, eighteen pence to pay;
My Mare eat mortal meat, good Oats and Hay.
Twelve miles from Stenning I jogd on to Jews,
And there I found no Beggars, Scolds, or Shrews;
Jews has no Bailiff, Mayor, or Magistrate,
For every one there lives in quiet state:
They quarrel not for wagging of a straw,
For each man is unto himself a Law;
They need no bridle (like the Horse or Mule)
Where every one himself can wisely rule.
At the terrestrial Star (a glistring Sign)
I lodged, and found good Diet, and good Wine;
Mine Host and Hostess courteous, free, and kind,
And there I sip'd and supped, but seldom dined:
Jews is an ancient Town, as may be seen
In Cambden, page three hundred and thirteen:
Twelve men they choose, the most substantiallest,
Most rich and wise, to govern all the rest;
And out of that discreet and honest dozen,
Two (as it were) high Constables are chosen:
These have no power themselves to hang or draw,
Or on offenders to inflict the Law;
But to a Justice of the Peace, or Coram
They bring the parties, and their cause before am.
From Friday unto Friday I did stay,
But in the mean time I did take my way
Five miles to Torring where my old friend there,
The Parson welcomed me with Country cheer;
His name is John, or honest Master Rice,
Six meals he meated me, and lodgd me thrice.
He Preachd on Sunday, Augusts twenty one,
Two Sermons, tending to salvation:
His Doctrine's good, and he himself does frame
To live in conversation like the same.
I thank him, and his Wife and Family,
For making of so much (too much) of me:
Thus when he could no longer me retain,
With love and thanks, I rode to Jews again.
This Town contains six Churches, and at least
It is a mile in length from West to East:
A strong and spacious Castle there has been,
As by its moldred ruins may be see^e.
Thence 12 miles I was on my female beast born,
T'an unknown feast born, at a Town called East Bourne;
I at an Inn alighted, and found there
Unlooked for welcome, and good Sussex cheer:
Sir Thomas Dike, Sir Thomas Parker, Knights,
With kind Esquires, whose names and Epithites
I mention not, because I know them not;
But to them all my thanks is unforgot,
For undeserved, unlooked for, and unthought,
From the^ my purse and person both were fraught;
This was on Augusts twenty sixth, a Friday,
Near Dog days end, a very fair and dry day.
The next day, and the next I felt the bounty
Of the high Sheriff of Sussex famous County;
He entertained me Saturday and Sunday,
And would have kept me 20 days past Monday.
There was a high and mighty drink called Rug,
Sure since the Reign of great King Gorbodug
Was never such a rare infused confection,
Injection, operation, and ejection,
Are Hogen Mogen Rugs, great influences
To provoke sleep, and stupifie the senses.
No cold can ever pierce his flesh or skin
Of him who is well lined with Rug within:
Rug is a Lord beyond the Rules of Law;
It conquers hunger in the greedy maw:
And (in a word) of all the drinks potable,
Rug is most puisant, potent, notable.
Rug was the Capital Commander there,
And his Lieutenant General was strong Beer.
Wine plenteous both in Bottles and in flaggons.
whose strength would quel S. George and 20 draggo^s
But Asshuerus Laws were there inrol'd,
No man was forced to drink more then he would.
There was good Will, good Wills son, and good William
As free as was the Emperor Maximilian:
Beasts, fowls and fish, from earth, and sea and air
Unto the Table, well Cooked, did repair,
There were rare Birds I never saw before
The like of them, I think to see no more:
They Are called Wheat ears, less then Lark or Sparrow,
Well roasted, in the mouth they taste like marow.
When once it is in the teeth it is involved,
Bones, flesh, and all, is lushiously dissolved.
The name of Wheat ears, on them is ycleap'd,
Because they come when wheat is yearly reaped.
Six weeks, or therabouts, they are caught there,
And are welnigh 11. months, God knows where.
My humble gratitude is here expressed
To Mr. Sheriff, and his beloved best;
His kindness joind with hers, and hers with his,
Does merit my unfaigned thankfulness.
Unto my Cozen Thomas Tailor there
My love remembered, and for my Samphiere
He promised me, I thank't him thrice before,
And when I have it, I will thank him more.
Twelve miles on Augusts 9. and 20. day,
From Bourne to Battle, 4. miles on my way
At Pemsey does a ruined Castle stand,
And there the Norman Conqueror did land.
Since his invading power arived there,
It Is ^ow 500, 60, and 6. year.
Eight miles from thence, the Battle fierce was struck
Where blood of 70000, like a Brook,
Or rather I may say like Sanguin Rivers
Which down hills, it impetuously delivers
Into the Vales: and where that blood was spilt
The Conqueror caused an Abbey to be built
Of stately structure, and what it has been,
By great extended ruins may be seen.
When Norman forces England overcame,
From bloody Battle, Battle had its name.
This Abbey now is kept, by right and due,
By the Honorable Viscount Montague.
That Lord repaired some part magnificent,
And there is good house kept, when he is resident.
That noble Lord is, in account most famous,
Though many miserable Lords do shame us.
At the Empereall crest, or Eagle spread,
My self and mare, were stabled, lodged and fed.
About the reckoning I did not contend,
My friend T. H. paid all, and there is an end.
August the thirtith, I rode on to Hastings,
Where was relief for men of several tastings,
Or sundry pallats, put them altogether,
Or relisht appetites, take all or neither.
At Hastings I staid not, but hastily
I ambled 6. miles unto Winchelsey:
Which has been counted in the days of yore,
(Until the seas contended with the shore)
A famous sea Town, rich in merchandise,
But buried in the Ocean now it lies.
A Castle stands in the sands, enduring flawes,
Gusts, tempests, storms, and times devouring jaws:
In twice twelve hours, it is twice embraced round
In the arms of Neptune, seeming to be drowned:
And when the floods are eb'd into the main,
Three miles in sands it is compast round again.
In Winchelsey that now is I could ken
Nothing worth observation of my pen.
Two miles from thence, upon a hill, stands Rye,
And there I, at the Star, did lodge and lie:
More ods there is 'twixt singing songs and crying
Then was betwixt my lodging, and my lying.
I lodged by night, and I did lie by day,
And as upon a bed I musing lay,
The chamber hanged with painted cloth, I found
My self with sentences beleaguerd round.
There was Philosophy and History,
Poetry Aenigmatick mystery.
I know not what the Town in wealth may be,
But sure, I on that chambers walls did see
More wit then all the town had, and more worth
Then my unlearned Muse can well set forth.
I will not hold my Reader in dilemma,
Thus truly, lying, I transcribed them a.
NO flower so fresh, but frost may it deface,
None fits so fast, but he may lose his place:
It Is Concord keeps a Realm in Stable stay,
But Discord brings all Kingdoms to decay.
No Subject ought (for any kind of Cause)
Resist his Prince, but yield him to the Laws.
Sure God is just, whose stroke, delayed long,
Does light at last, with pain more sharp, and strong
Time never was, nor n'ere I think shall be,
That Truth (unshent) might speak, in all things free.
This is the Sum, the Marrow and the Pith
My lying Chamber was Adorned with:
And it is supposed, those lines written there
Have in that Room bin, more then 40 year.
Now, Reader take this notice more of Rye,
It Is worth Remembering, and I Will tell you why:
If to unloade your Bellies, Nature drive ye,
In all the Town you'se scarcely find a Privy.
For as our Sectaries, in Tubbs preach here,
They make (Sir Reverence) Reverend Iakeses there,
Of Pulpets of Prophanity, and these
When they are full, are empti'd in the Seas.
My fare was good at Rye, my Reckoning small,
I thank my noble friend, that paid for all,
Neete unto Rye, 2 dirty Ferryes be
So Muddy, that they mir'de my Mare and me:
I past them, And on vltima Augusti,
well meated, Mounted, man and beast both lusty;
I crossed over Gulford ferry, and I went
From Rye in Sussex unto Hide in Kent;
Septembers first day, Sol, with golden eye
Gilt Neptune with celestial Alcaymie:
With sovereign splendour, kissing medows green,
And mantled hills tops were coruscant seen.
When Phoebus mounted was in glorious pride,
I mounted too, and rode away from Hide.
Still as I past through sea Towns first and last,
I did enquire how businesses had past.
The people said that Guns did bounce and thump,
Betwixt our English ships, and Dutch Van Trump.
At Rumney, and at Hide, they were in sight,
Folks heard the drums to beat, and saw the fight.
Thus, little was the news from sea or shore,
Our weekly News books will tell 3. times more.
From Hide to Dover, and to Canterbury
Full 25. miles, dirty, wet and weary,
I took my lodging up, and down I lay
Till Friday came, Septembers second day.
Then with the Lamb I arose, and with the Lark
I got to Gravesend when 'twas almost dark;
But I mistake, from sleep I rowz'd my head,
And rose with th'Lark, but went with Lamb to bed.
On the way I was not vexed with Gates or Styles,
But three and thirty dirty Kentish miles,
With washing dashing ways, and rain well sous'd,
It made my Mare and I glad to be housed:
The sign was Welsh his pie-bald english Bull;
I there was welcome empty, welcome full:
But at the high and mighty Gravesend Whale,
I found most potent admirable Ale,
It Is second to no drink, but East-Bourne Rug,
Put it in Pot or Flaggon, Can or Jug;
You Will find it is the grand Ale, and you will grant,
That it is Ale Parramount, Predominant:
'Twas given me by a Friend; but let him end
With hanging, that loves Ale more then his friend
From Gravesend (Satudray Septembers third)
I rode without sputs, as I had been spurred:
I came to London when the Clock struck one;
And so my Journey and my Book is DONE.
Amongst the Muses where the number Nine is,
The learned Poets end their Works with Finis:
But when unlearned I have Volumes penned,
Finis is Latin, English Done's an End.
A POSTSCRIPT, Of some parts of SUSSEX and KENT that I Traveled, which I have
borrowed out of Mr. SPEED.
SUSSEX
THE North part of this Shire confronts upon Surrey, and Kent: the West butteth
upon Hamshire; and all the rest of the County lies stretched along the British
sea. The City of most account within this County is Chichester, a beautiful,
and large Town; yet for the stateliness of buildings Jews does seem to
contend with it, where William de Warron built a strong Castle, whereunto the
Barons, in time of those civil brotles resorted in warlike manner, and fought
a great Battle against their Sovereign and his son, wherein the King, Henry
the third, had his horse slain under him; Richard King of the Romans the Kings
Brother was surprised, and taken in a Windmill; and Prince Edward (who was
after that King Edward the first, or Longshankes) delivered unto them upon
unequal terms of peace.

Places of other note are these. Shore whence King Harold going upon the Sea
for his pleasure in a small boat was driven upon the Coast of Normandy, where,
by Duke William he was surprised, and retained, until he swore to make him
King after Edward the Confessor his death. West-Wittering where Ella the Saxon
Landed when he came to conquer those parts, and gave the name to the Shore
from Cimen his Son. Finally Gromebridge where Charles Duke of Orleance father
to Lewis the twelfth King of France, was long detained, being taken Prisoner
at Agincourt. Yet I have been in the Castle of Starborough where I was showed
the said Dukes Chamber, in Kent or the edge of Surrey.

KENT.
THis is the first Province that appears in the South of this Kingdom, and
is bounded upon the North with the famous River Thamisis: on the East with the
German sea, and Ocean: on the south with Sussex and the narrow seas: and upon
the West with Sussex and Surrey.

The chiefest City within this County is Canterbury which became famous, both
for the conversion of the Saxons by St. Augustine, whereof eight of their Kings
were there interred; as also was Thomas Becket Archbishop of Canterbury.

The invincible Castle of Dover is a place of the greatest strength not only
of this County, but of the whole Kingdom, being the Key of the Realm; and as
John Rosse, and Lidgate affirm, was built by Julius Caesar. The chiefest and
only thing of admiration in this shire is a hole at Mottingame eight yards
about, and a line of fifty sadomes plummed into it, does find no bottom,
where suddenly the ground sunk, and three great Elmes therein growing, were
swallowed up into the earth. This shire claims the preeminence of
Christianity before all places of England: for Lucius the first Christian
British King in this Jland, built a Church within the Castle of Dover.

There is no other memory or token of the great Battle, which was fought at
Ailesford, between Hengist the ambitious Saxon, and Vortimer the valiant
Britain, wherein Horsa, and Catigern, brethren to both Generals were slain,
then a monument of Catigern, which is nothing else but four stones pitched in
the manner of the Stone henge, on Salsbury Plain, and is vulgarly called
Ciscoatehouse which is upon the plain there.

Englands Kings have had two seats in this County, wherein they were went to
make some aboade, in the Summer time: the one for their Court which is
Greenwitch, the other for their pleasure, which is Eltham, very convenient for
pastimes, and game for hunting.

There is also a place in this Shire called Tunbridge whither there is great
concourse of infirms people, who find present remedy for their maladies, by
virtue of some Wells lately found out, which prove very so^eraigne.

To all my Friends that have subscribed their Names and dwellings to my Bill.
ACcording as you pay, or pay me not;
So is my lucky or unlucky Lot:
I have made use of many friends before
Age tells me now I shall do so no more.
Some friends I have, and some small share of wit,
And want has forced me to use them, and it.
I, in my best of wishes will include
Their kindness, and my humble gratitude.
FINIS.

