The Fools of Fate: OR, The unravelling of the PARLIAMENT and ARMY.

Fate (for our crimes) permitted us
To grumble against each thing,
Next for to be tumultuous,
And fight against our King.
He, down to have those bore our ears,
We our Reformers made
To be sole Authors of our fears,
And to make War a Trade.
They fearing we have found their sly
And villainous projction,
Have raised an Army, and will try
To force us yield subjection.
Their Army are the peoples hate,
Both they will now pull down,
And now behold the Fools of Fate
Fall dead by Charles his Crown.
Printed in the Year. 1648.

The Fools of Fate, or the unravelling of the Parliament and Army.
SEnators, Citizens and Soldiers have been ever noted as of different powers,
so of different tempers, each party never imagining a parity for the Senator to
measure out the Laws by the City-yard, the Citizen to pin his faith upon the
Senators sleeve, or the Soldier to fight in a Gown with the City-Charter in
his hand, is as monstrous as the Chaos of Presbytery, or a King on the stool
of repentance.

A sweet Conjunction fure, an Omen good,
When Senate, City, Army join in blood,
While Martin, Warner, Cromwell do commix
To ruin King and Kingdom by their tricks:
While that these sons of mischief, though they hate
Each other, can meet and procreate
New brats of mischief, and their Bastard Heirs
Must be maintained by the Kingdoms fears;
Fidessa and Speranze all the graces
Do with Astrea, fly to heavenly places:
Bellona vile Duessa, hell and night
Do bring their monstrous birth to the worlds light.
Yet how dare thou thou saucy Muse, to question the acts of those mechanic
Princes? Know thou not that Martin may belch in thy face, (the steeme of his
hot breath being of a more suffocating efficacy to men, then the lake Avernus
to birds) and blast thee with Naamans Leprosy? Fear thou not that Warners
Worship, (that excellent City-Patriot, whose innocence is such that he scarce
discernes his right hand from his left, or a Geneva Bible from the Holy Writ)
the true and undoubted Mayor of London, Stilo novo, will not summon thee before
his Nonsenseship, and having expostulated with thee a long time in the
Barbarian tongue, send a Tipstaffe with thee to Tullianum? may not Cromwell (if
his Grace be yet mortal) command his Journevmen at Westminster to call thee
before them, and to pass their doom upon thee, as an opposer of the Saints,
and an abuser of his Nose? Yes, yes, it is worth thy fear, were it not that
thou art now non-resident, sometimes at Westminster to the terror of the
Junto, sometimes at Guild Hall, and then M. Warner starts, as if he saw the
glimps of his Majesty's sword, sometimes at the Court of Guard, before
Colchester, and then Tom halts from before thee, as if the pockey humor in his
toe had forsaken him: the truth is, thou art prying every where, constant no
where, etc.

And it is but requisite when Rebels gape,
When Lewis that fell wolf, Leechman that Ape,
And Hunscot that same Otter hunt about,
And with a full cry trace the royal Rout.
But I stand too long at the gate, now I will enter the enchanted Castle, and
skirmish a while with Devils and Centaurs, i. e. with the Junto and Army; I am
in the round House of Yeas and Noes, even in the House of Commons, it is fit
therefore I prostrate my self on my maribones, and supplicate their high and
mightinesses thus:

All hail most high and mighty Sots,
Who England do divide by lots,
To whom all Rebels ever were,
Were puny rogues, whose wit or fear
Deterred them from your monstrous acts,
And plowing hell with horrid facts.
Inhumane Vipers hatched to be
The Midwives of our misery,
Where is your King? see how a red
Did deep does over their faces spread:
Is there Law, Gospel, is there sense
Amongst Mortals? or has impudence
Surpised the Organs of the mind?
It has, as truth by you we find;
Our eyes of Treason we accuse,
Because they lead us to peruse
Your damned Votes, such Legends are
Not in Baronius Occular:
Shall Charles be mewd up in a cage,
While you enjoy the golden Age?
He sent to the extremest bounds,
Where night Hyperions son confounds,
Sitting the pole so far beneath,
He scarcely hears the winds that breath,
While you (brave Jovialists) command
Like Gods of clay, by Sea and Land,
Resign, resign, ere it be too late,
Proceed not for to tempt your Fate:
Tom cannot save you, he is lame,
Nois gone to Hell, from whence you came:
Let not your lying Prophets be
The oracles of destiny,
In your esteem, till sent by us
Unto profoundest Tartarus.
Lillies a Liar, each man sees
By his own Ephimerides:
And Booker, has mistook the stars,
While he proposd all peace, no wars:
Though you perhaps, like Fools of Fate,
A while yet longer may be great,
Yet know your ruin is decreed
By heaven and men; then look to bleed.
Look for Platoes year, or for Mahomets Elysium say they, as soon as to
behold our downfall; delude your selves with vain hopes to the last minute; it
will be the more ample Justice and complete revenge: in the mean time, 'twere
fit that the people were thoroughly persuaded of your wickedness, and that they
no longer worshipped the God of Heaven and of Eckron at once, nor like Bugesse
the counterfeit Doctor of Paul's, halt between two opinions, one while inveigh
against Sectaries, another advance the gifts of private Saints, and
Button-makers, you have assumed the impudence to name your selves a Parliament;
are you so -- look how Weaver gnasheth his teeth at me, (the Rogue sure has
got an ague in his Jaws) see how Scot bends his rough front (which to me
seems some barren rock inhabited by Serpents, and over grown with withered
moss) sir, all thy invectives against his Majesty will not avail; the King
must live to behold thy pernicious soul dismissed by torture, the time will
come (when thou that have often urged to thy fellow Ravilliacks, that his
Majesty ought to be brought to legal trial for his life, and to be hanged)
shall be hanged up alive in chains and not die till thou beholdst the fowls of
the air to fetch away thy limbs by parcells. Do you stare Devils, do you
stare? I say, you that have the impudence to name your selves a Parliament, and
your Pamphleters roar out the name of Lords and Commons assembled in
Parliament, with such a bellowing noise, that the whole Land echoes again,
while in the mean time, your selves laugh at the fools that divulge, and all
those that are so mad to believe it, your selves well knowing that you are no
more a Parliament, then I am a Roundhead, that Pembroke is knowing or Say
loyal; you well know, that you are but a part of a part, a handful of cunning
Conspirators, a Parliament being an entire Body, consisting of his Majesty, the
Lords spiritual and temporal, to a head, and a Commoner for every particular
Shire, not a parcel of Peers some twelve in number, that show in their Chaires
when their House is fullest, like so many scabbey sheep upon a vast mountain:
you are a mere Conventicle of Regicides, your House, is that Augaean Stable
which must be purged by that Hercules, whose hands are yet tied behind him,
King Charles. I will show you how and in what sense you are a Parliament.

If to be damned, Dissemblers to pretend
To act a good, yet no such thing intend,
If to be sacrilegious Thieves, to swear,
To covenant with hell Sans wit or fear;
For to rebel against your King, to plot
How to draw in the soon deluded Scot
Jointly for to engage, and so to hell
Send two Nations at once; if lies to tell,
And buz into the credulous peoples ears,
So to stir up their stomachs with their fears;
If to clap up your King a prisoner,
And so alive his person to inter;
Or if to use all ways to take his life,
Banish his children and his loyal wife:
If to overthrow and quite root out all Law,
To cherish vice, and virtue overawe:
If to permit all Errors for to swarm
Unto the Kingdoms, most the Churchees harm;
If to pursue and prosecute with spite,
All those who of your evil acts do write;
If to be perjured persons, to contemn,
And trample on the Royal Diadem,
If for to act against all sense and reason,
The deepest mischief, and the highest treason:
If to defraud a Nation of their goods,
And on the ground, like water spill their bloods,
If to be cursed on all the world may make ye
A Parliament, be so; the Devil stake ye.
But I pray tell me, are you resolved now at last to treat with his Majesty?
dare you look him in the face whom you have so horribly abused, and whose
Rovall Righteous soul you have so inhumanely vexed, that had not God, whose
Vicegerent he is (and whom the world may see he respects as the apple of his
eye) preserved him beyond humane expectation, you by this time might have
triumph in his fall, and this poor Nation have been for ever lost by his
death; Alas we all know that this is but your old trick to deceive the People,
you dare as well be tried by the known Laws for all your forepast actions, as
admit of a Personal Treaty with his Majesty; the one brings on the other as sure
as Death; it is good policy I confess now that the vulgar are so mad against
you, and have declared that they will have their King out of prison with
honor, or pull you out of your house with horror, to stop their mouths with
sugar-plums if they will prove of that babelike temper, as to be led by the
nose with such a spinners thread, and fooled so egregiously after all their
bu^tling? You would feign stave off the loyal citizens, with this reed, till
Skippon has listed a sufficient number of horses, that may if need be fall
upon those that lately manifested their desires for a Treaty, or shall dare to
do it hereafter, to the plundering of their lives and persons, or till
Colchester shall be taken in.

But all these cursed devices must not do,
It is decreed, and you will find it true;
That Colchesters brave lads will neyer yield:
That the Scots Army having taken the Field,
Mixed with fierce Langdales force, Tom must withdraw
And post to Lambert for to help the Daw:
Meantime with those in Colchester will side
All those in London, who abhor your pride:
Then down, down, down, down, the hill,
Then you that have loved blood shall quaffe your fill:
And if your Army moulder away in the North as they are like suddenly to do if
they dare to engage, since the Scots and English (...) there now joined
together make up no less then four (...) thousand a ^e men, who have a cause
able to make (...) valiant, and to p^t a spirit into the most pusillanimous
Therfites, that Army who nave all this while backed you in all your ungodly and
wretched designs, will then smart for all their pernicious practices, their
plunders mass^cres and outrages, such as no history can paral^ll, or any old
Romance produce the like, and if the old Saints be once totally suppressed where
will your high and mightiness make up such annother Army of plunderers, your
nurseries will so much respect their own safety, as not to hazard their
persons for a decaying cause, the citizens now have found their error, and
resolve to keep the little money they have left, since the public faith is
like shortly to take its progress with your selves into some foreign
climate, you have a taste of their intentions and resolutions, by their late
petitioning, for a speedy Personal Treaty.

Then when your Rakeshames of the Army faise,
And your sworn enemies each where prevail.
Whenas the Scots and English shall make war
And force their way even to Colchester:
When London, Westminster, shall both unite
Against their Independent foes to fight,
Whenas Prince Charles shall land, King Charles be free,
Then woe unto you for your Treachery.
Thus you Fools of Fate, for all your big hopes built upon such slender
grounds (that no man possessed of sense, but would count himself capable of
Bedlam College, if he credited them) you cannot avoid your dire and most
inevitable Destiny; your stalking Champion Skippon is looked upon by the
citizens even with as gracious an eye as Fairfax was when he brought the
plunderers into Southwark; they will not permit him to list forces.

Then know you cannot escape, as you can hope,
For there stands Derrick, and there lies the rope.
FINIS

