A RECOMMENDATION TO Mercurius Morbicus. TOGETHER WITH A fair Character upon
his worth.

To the Reader.
Unto the arrant'st Knave that lives by bread,
I send this greeting; (you may please to read)
His name is Mordicus (a nonsense Talker)
Which being interpreted, is Harry Walker;
The Old Liar General, and who but he
Walks now in Print, lies by Authority:
For n'other cause, but lest the Rogue should vapor,
I spend upon him thus much ink and paper;
He stinks already both in verse and prose,
And therefore when you name him, stop your nose.
I may to many now seem to deface him,
But when I physic take, O then, I Will grace him.
Printed in the Year 1647.

To Mercurius Morbicus.
BOe to a Goose, Morbicus, Melancholicus is yet alive to give your lies the lie
an Italian mile down your throat. What sirrah, do you think to lie by
Sun-light, and yet pass like an Owl in darkness, not so much as to be seen,
or notice taken of you? had you reduced your snakes unto one meal, or confined
your malice within the rare discoveries of your hebdomedall journey-work, your
weekly impudent Intelligence, it had been taken as an infirmity, a crime more
tolerable; but to spit venom in volume, to belch poisonous aires in continued
gusts, and that under the scrubbed, scabbed name of a gouty-headed Morbicus; so
to bestink the City and Kingdom, that none can think upon you without a vomit;
or name you without a stool or two: I am resolved in the behalf of my Friend
Melancholicus, whom thou have abused, and whose worth thou have violated beyond
the Laws of truth, modesty, or humanity (whose pen is too worthy to pitch upon
such an unciviliz'd subject, an ulcerous. rotten-nam'd Rascal as you are) to
kick you either into more honesty or civility.

And first of all I must tell the world, that this malicious Zoylus, but to
leave his nature and to give him his own self godfathers worshipful firname,
Morbicus, or Knight Hospitaller, in his small-beer jests begins with a
Proclamation (whereof this City-news-Cryers head has been stuffed as full as a
fardle, ever since he was pen-feather'd in the Pillory, and had his fortune
read in his forehead in Cheapside) and wherein he is pleased to give
Melancholicus the title of a phrenzie Priest (that was when the diseased Doctor
Iremonger cast his water last) and that he has a distempered brain, gotten
nonsense by roat, etc. All which is as apparent truth, as that H. Walker is an
honest man. But stay, Morbicus? sirrah, who gave you that Utopian name? I am
sure, neither Calepine, Cooper, Thomas, Rider, nor any of our Anglo-Latines was
ever guilty of any such false coin; but it appears to be your own, the pure
stamp of your own witty Genius, (except you would picked some Mountebanks pocket of
it) and now the Evangelicall Iremonger and illuminated Pillorian, may plead
antiquity with the primitive Fathers; the Albigenses, and Waldenses, were but
younger brethren to him being of Apostolical descent, either from S. Thomas,
or St. Bartholomew, grand Patriarks to the Lazaries of old Troynovant.

Then the Fool comes in with a Character in yellow laced blew coat verse; but
so sweetly composed, as harp and harrow in a Consort: able to make the Reader
be-cack himself in prose. Then he mounts the stage, (enter Jeronimo) and faces
his speech with a bald patch of beastly Greek as false as himself, and none
knows the meaning of (except Morbicus;) and so proceeds into abominable
raptures of knavery, lies, and nonsense, truly I abhor to name 'em, though his
brazen face never blushed to print 'em. And for an Epilogue, he presents you
with a piece of curtailed Intelligence lickt over again, as his fashion is, to
re-publish his well belshing lies with new titles.

In his next, (which is his Go triumph) he fathers strange names upon
Melancholicus, miscalling him in his zealous knavery, by the name of Hacket,
and Hacklet, and then tells him, he is a knave, for having two names; what then
is H. Walker, and Luke Harruney? and yet the Rogue puts them upon him; for
Melancholicus is no kin to 'em I wonder that he put not one of his own borrowed
names upon him, that would have made him a knave indeed: but who can expect
better stuff (be it spoke with reverence to his plush cloak) from such a nasty
compound of incorrupted villainy? who has no less then two and fifty lies in
his last piece, dated Sept. 20. to Sept. 27. as if he would have no body lie
but himself, and had engrosst knavery by Letters Pattents. I had thought to
have cast his water at this time, and given the Reader a perfect Relation of
the constitution of this Hospital of Diseases; and from the effects, (out of
charity) discourse the Cause and Cure of him, but of that another time; In the
mean space I pray peruse his Character.

Mercurius Morbicus his Character: What he was, what he is, and what he shall
be.
He was being thrust forward, by selfe-ends, Envy, and Ostentation, began to
claw the old men by the shoulders, crept into his books, (as fast his customers
crept out of his) and would venture, (being naturally impudent) to show some
tumbling tricks unto the world, to play Presto begone, with the Laws, to juggle
with Religion, which he made a cover-knave for his Ambition, which plumpt him
to that growth, that no place but Moses Chair must serve him to play his feats
in; where the inspired Rabbi began by his invisible revelations, to unmystery
the Scriptures, and according to the illumination, to make Truth falsehood, and
falsehood Truth, until Law and Truth sat Judges upon him, and forced him to
recant his divinity in a pillory; who there improved so much his former
impudence, that ever since he was able to manage his actions with incomparable,
audacity, and outface the world with his forgeries for authentic verities; so
that now

He is Homer in prose, weekly to historize great Britans Iliads: his ambition
being in the Intellective part, he vents all his wit in print, and has emptied
his head, (that Magazine of infernal rogurie, and dissimulation) into the
presses, not only of what he had, but what upon his cracked credit he could
borrow without leave, his estate is too narrow for his mind, and therefore he
has wrought himself room in others affairs, and now struts as stiff as an
Elephant in his new Office; hoping thereby to purge his nonsense, by the
perusing and authorizing others labors; corragious Pens must veil Bonnet to
this Don Quixot; not a Muse must gad abroad except by Petition to this brazen
calfe for liberty; nor a truth peep out with his head, for fear of being
bitten off by this Caniball; whilst the varnisht Logger-head blesses himself
in his politic plot, and Garragantua conquest over the poor pamphlets, walks
like a knave in print, speaks himself by authority, and charms down learning
with blushlesse lies: no News stirring, but what passes by his door; and be it
true or false, good or bad, all is one to him, he puts it off, though at the
second, or third hand, for pure Orthodox; from home he now begins to tell of
foreign discoveries, by the next we expect wonders from Terra incognita in a
nut-shell. In a word he shows well to all, but seldom says well of any, but
himself, and yet himself is still himself, and that is the worst thing that he
has, his works and he comes all out of one shop, begins like a candle with a
blaze, and goes out with a stink, he is any thing of what is naught, nothing of
what he should be, if any thing is good, worse when an Angel, then when a
devil, a right Spanish soldier, or an Italian theater; a bladder filled with
several winds, the best infectious, a fools wonder, and the wise man's fool,
and

Shall be moveat Cornicula risum,
Furtivis nudata coloribus.
And then shall all his cunning tricks result upon his loath some stomach, his
hypocritical delusions buffet him on the cheeks, his unlimited lies fly by
flocks in his face, and all his knavery return into it is first principle,
himself; and every fool will point the finger at him, and say, There goes Id.
Walker the dissembling knave; and when he dies, every witty Pen will rejoice at
the fall of such an Enemy, and ring out his passing knell in scoffing rymes: if
he make (as it is very like) his end at the Gallows, then says one: Here hangs
Walker in a string
That Judas-like did hate his King:
Faithless, fruitless he was ever,
Except in lies, but loyal never.
From hence h'as taken wing to be
Old Belzebubs chief Mercury.


If he dies in his bed, then says another: Walker the Iremonger, a goodly rich
prize,
Death sent to the Devil for telling of lies:
Where now without check, he may let his pen run,
In legends of wonders, and what here was done
In Parliament, Army, and our times here so sad,
I'assure you better Scribe, the Devil nere had.


Then says another: Here lies the Iremonger, who will deny it?
Whose busy brains did make him live unquiet:
It Is but his body rests; his soul not so,
That Is gone to preach unto the Saints below.


FINIS.

