MAD VERSE, SAD VERSE, GLAD VERSE and Bad VERSE.
Cut out, and slenderly sticht together, By JOHN TAILOR. Who bids the Reader
either to like or dislike them, to Commend them, or Come Mend them.
May 10th Oxford 1644
I Weeping sing the maddest mad Rebellion,
That ever Story told, or Tongue can tell ye on:
The Barbarous Wars of the Heathen Goths, and Vandalls,
Did never make their names such Odious Scandalls:
The Turks, the Jews, the Canniballs and Tartars,
Never kept such wicked, Rude, unruly Quarters.
Jerusalems Eleazer, John and Simon,
Did never yield Poet baser stuff to Rhyme on.
Not bloody Sylla, or consuming Marius,
Into so many mischiefs could e're carry us;
The Roman and the Jmperiall Guelphes and Gibellins,
Unto our English Rebels are but Quiblins.
Not Munsters John a Leyd, or Knipperdoling,
Did ever use such Pilling and such Poleing;
Nor was their Cheating or their Hare-braind trouble like
As ours, (raised by the faithless Faith called Public.)
The Royal twain, Lancastrians, and Yorkists,
Were never so mad as those Cornuted Forkists.
The Heard of all the Council (called Common)
Has showed such wisdom, as was seen by no man,
And many of the Rich and Reverend Aldermen,
(Saving their Beards) in wit were never Balder-men.
The Citizens of all Trades, (poor taine Wedgeons)
Were hardly more in number, then Religions,
That one may say of London, what a Town is it,
Is it quite Metamorphos'd, and turned Brownist,
Or shivered into Sects? alas, how apt is it
To be a Familist, or Anabaptist!
And last of all, (and which of all the worst is)
To be Rebellious, which (of all) accursed is
The two pretended Houses at Westminster
Have made a stir, as there has never bin stir
To equal it, and with Religions Mantle
They Rifle England, by patch, piece and Cantle.
The Documents of Burton, Prinne and Bastwick
Inspires the People minds, and Brains fantastic,
Whilst the Committee close, or close Committee
Makes many Thousands sing a doleful Dittie;
Where daily fears are stamped, and new Coynd Iealousies
For King and Kingdoms spoil, both Fire, and Bellows is.
Their Whirlegigges, their Vanes and Haslerigges,
Whose wisdoms are approved, (like Tarletons lygges.)
Mild-may that monster never be received,
That Judas like his Masters trust deceived,
And let that Pie within the Oven be burned,
That against his Maker is a Rebel turned.
Let Say be less esteemed then rotten Buckram
And Holland scorned and stink like lousie Lockram.
May Deering, a rare Gem, a dear Ring be he,
And (Circle) turned, at the Triangle Tree be.
And I may say of thee, O London, London,
What has thy sword and shield, thy Pike and Gun done,
O what has many a Mothers wicked son done
But made their Magazen of mischief London.
Thrice happy had it been for our Tranquillity,
If the Authors of this damned Incivilitie,
Had been a little checked by Gregory Brandon,
With every one a Hempen twisted Band on.
Because I wrote some Pamphlets, that were printed
In hope thereby their madness might be stinted.
For which my kindness they were still ungrateful,
And every day (with troubles) filled my Pate full,
Abusing my sincere and good Intentions
With foul prejudicate and false Inventions.
For since the time that first I understood men
I never writ any thing to anger good men;
But I have lasht at Nose-wise Scripture Picklers,
At Separatists, and lawless Conventicklers,
Who are this Kingdoms wasting Maledictions,
The Kings, the Churches, and the Lands Afflictions.
They said I was a Villain, and most fervent
In Roguery, for I was the Kings sworn Servant:
They did so far detest me, and abhor me
They caused a Messenger to be sent for me,
He used me kindly for which cause here I name
The man (a wonder) and men call him Binehame.
He said mine Enemies were full of malice
(Wider from truth then Dover is from Callice;)
Their foul Complaints (quoth he) are scimble scamble,
Mere Froth and Vapor, yet we two must amble
Before the close Committees great Tribunal,
(Whose Orders have put Order out of Tune all.)
To Merchant-Taylors-Hall, (as I remember)
He brought me, near the ending of November,
The year of sixteen hundred forty and two
Whereas false Accusations I did stand to,
Ethiopian Corbet, Isaac high and mighty
Looked grim, their very countenance would fright ye.
They charged me with such words, that I had spoken,
Which had I spoke, my Neck they would have broken;
That Pym, Kimbolton, Haslerigge, Strode, Hampden
And Hollis (Rebels which the learned Campden,
Nor Stow, Howes, Speed, old Fabian, Cooper, Grafton
In all their Chronicles, they never left one
For Teason, with those six to be compared,
Or dared to do, the like as they have dared.)
They said I said, those six a cursed Crew were,
That they to God, King, Kingdom, never true were,
That they were Rogues, and Thieves, full of oppression,
Rebels, and Traitors, for which foul Transgression
Because they all grew rich by Robbing others,
Made Sirelesse Sons, So as Sirelesse, Sonlesse Mothers,
By Rapine bringing Thousands unto Beggary,
For which they all deserved reward from Gregory.
These dangerous accusations I denied all,
My conscience knew, that they from Truth were wide all,
And that my 'accusers, that sought my disgrace there,
Not one of them did dare to show his face there.
Upon which answer they did straight acquit me,
Yet to the Messenger they did Commit me;
But he spoke for me, I did humbly woo them,
He said (at any time) I should come to them:
The honest Messenger gat me discharged,
And to the Tavern we went both enlarged,
Where I did give him thanks in Sack and Claret,
And for his pains had but a small fee for it.
My Rascal Enemies did daily watch me,
And vowed to do me mischief if they catch me:
To Murder me, they many times waylaid me,
And near the Guild Hall, once had like to have paid me,
For as my self, and two more honest men was,
One Quart at three-tons Tavern, drinking then was,
The cursed Crew, (more then six score to the hundred)
Did swear tha^ Limb from Limb I should be sundred,
My friends and I Amazed, did much admire on,
Wherefore the House so Rudely they Inviron,
But I perceiving it was no time to dally,
Slipped through a smoke shop, in t'a narrow Alley,
And so into a street men call Cat-Eaten,
And by that means, escaped more then being Beaten,
My Wife lay long sick, many troubles pricked me,
Necessity did diverse ways Afflict me.
The King (my Master) justly was offended,
And on his Service my Estate depended,
He, and His Royal Queen, (my gracious Mistress)
Were driven from us, His Servants left in distress;
Where we (poor fellows) were despised and hated,
And to give Money against our Master Rated:
But I, with others, craved to be excused,
Some give, some gave not, flatly I refused,
My King and's Father, gave me cloth and Wa^^^
Which Motive sure His Servants all ingages:
But too too many a Rascal (worse then Judas,)
Have given the Rebels Money like a Lewd Ass.
The generation of abhorred Vipers,
The Coyn-Collectors, most insatiate Gripers,
Swore to return my name, I feared what may come,
And left my wife a dying, and away come.
My wrongs, my griefs, and sickness so had wearied her,
She died, they sold my goods, and fairly buried her.
Th'usurping Jsaack (Major) did hate me deadly,
But yet I got his pass (by mere Chaunce-Medly:)
I took a Boat, and up to Windsor went I,
Whereas of Rebels (of all sorts) were plenty,
Some great Commanders, who were Tradesemen broaken,
Grown rich with Plunder, late, scarce worth a Token;
Some Cobling Preachers, some perfidious Nobles,
(The Church, the King and Kingdoms cursed troubles,)
Besides a crew of base Knaves, Omnium Gatherum,
Shuffle 'em together, and the Devil father 'um;
One of their General Essex Lifeguard was there
Who struck me, as I up the street did pass there,
He called me pretty surnames, Rogue and Traitor,
Malignant, and the Parliaments great hater,
And Spy, and to the Kings use, then that I would
Betray the Town and Castle both, if I could.
That villain had a mighty mind to bast me,
But I, from him did to the Castle have me,
Where Peterboroughs Earl, and the Lord Rochfort,
(Pardon my Rhyme good Reader I must botch for it)
They knew me, and did entertain me friendly
And asked at what place did my journies end lie,
I said to Abingdon, and that to Henly
I would go that night, if I might pass cleanly,
Or safely from my Lord of Essex Catives
Whose carriage showed, they were not Englands Natives.
The Noble Rebels kindly did discard me
And caused some Soldiers through their Guards to guard me,
And so I Windsor left, (what can be more said)
And weary went to Henly, as aforesaid.
But when to Maidenhead I was advanced
Upon three Ragged Rebels there I chanced,
Who all to Henly, company did bear me
And in the midway, (in a wood) did fear me.
For, in the Thicket of tall Oaks and Beeches
Me thought I heard 'em mutter scurvy speeches,
One said, old man, the Coat you now are wearing
Is much too hot, and heavy for your bearing,
The second spide a bag, wherein I carried
Things for my use, (as my occasions varied)
These two demanded, and I durst not grudge it
But strait delivered them my Coat and Budget.
The third man (which did make their number triple)
Offered his service, like a kind disciple,
Quoth he, of that man you to much have shared him,
And of his goods and movables have pared him,
Shall I that of your Company am third man
Have nothing, shall I be a base absurd man.
My friend, quoth I, all is not quite bereft me
My self is yet mine own, my self is left me,
I Am weary, carry me, they have my clothing
And thou shall carry me, that is more then nothing.
With that they laughed outright, I faining smiled
And so the tedious way with talk beguiled.
My leash of Rascals, were mad Blades, (right Bilboes)
True tattered Rogues, in breech, shirts, skirts and elboes,
They sung, and danced the Morris, like maid Marrian
And sweat and stunk, as sweet as sugar Carrion,
I mused, if they were pleased to jeere and fob me,
Or if they meant to jest with me or Rob me:
But they to me proved Rebels, with some reason
They had not learned their Grammar Rules of Treason,
They kindly brought me to a wholesome Alehouse,
Where merrily we drank like four good fellows,
With songs, and tales, and now and then a story
And 'ere we fell a sleep, we sung John Dorrye.
They gave me all, which they from me had got then,
Deceiving me, cause they deceived me not then;
I left both them and Henly, and away I
To Abingdon, by shutting in of day I
Came to the Kings Head, (my own Brothers house,) and
Of welcomes, I had some part of a thousand.
'Twas near the time of Marches Equinoctial,
J had good meat, and such drink as would fox ye all:
There Is many Barrel full, turned Turvey Topsie
And many a But has dropped away the dropsy,
That there is good fare, and entertainment proper
For Love, for Gold, for Silver, and for Copper.
At Abingdon, I staid almost a fortnight,
The days waxed long, (and each day had a short night.)
Much about Easter time, I came to Oxford,
Where are some few knaves, and some Mizers Fox-furd,
In Christ-Church Garden, then a gladsome sight was
My Sover^igne Lord, and many a Peer and Knight was,
The Hopeful Prince, and James Dux Eboracensis
(Whom God defend from Rebels false pretenses)
The Sun of Sacred Majesty did frustrate
My former griefs, and all my joys Illustrate,
His gracious Eye, did see where I did stand strait
He came to me, puts forth his Royal hand strait,
Which on my knees, I humbly kneeld and kissed it,
I rather had left all I had, then mist it.
But now at Oxford, I was safe arrived
How to be well employed my Brains contrived,
My purse was turned a Brownist or a Roundhead,
For all the Crosses in it, were confounded,
To some Employment I my self must settle.
Fire must be had to boil the Pot and Kettle.
Then by the Lords Commissioners, and also
By my good King, (whom all true Subjects call so)
I was commanded with the Water-Baylie
To see the Rivers cleansed, both nights and daily.
Dead Hogs, Dogs, Cats, and well flayd Carryon Horses,
Their noysom Corpse soyld the Waters Courses:
Both swines and Stable dunge, Beasts guts and Garbage,
Street dirt, with Gardners weeds and Rotten Herbage.
And from those Waters filthy putrefaction,
Our meat and drink were made, which bred Jnfection.
My self and partner, with cost pains and travel,
Saw all made clean, from Carryon, Mud, and Gravel:
And now and then was punished a Delinquent,
By which good means away the filth and stink went.
Besides at all commands, we served all warrants,
To take Boats for most necessary errants,
To carry Ammunition, food and fuel,
(The last of which last Winter was a Jewel.)
Poor Soldiers that were Maimed, or sick, or wounded
By the cursed means of some Rebellious Roundhead;
To carry and recarry them our care was,
To get them Boats as cause both here and there was.
Thus have I been imployd, besides my trade is,
To write some Pamphlets, to please Lords and Ladies,
With Gentlemen or others that will read them,
Whose wits (I hope) not over much will heed them:
To all these services I am immediate
Obedient, willing, at occasions ready at.
My Riches is my Lame Leg, let the blame lie
Upon that Leg, because I have writ Lamelye.
FINIS.

