THE GENERAL COMPLAINT of the most oppressed, distressed COMMONS of ENGLAND.
COMPLAINING TO, AND Crying out upon the Tyranny of the perpetual Parliament at
Westminster.
Written by one that loves, serves, and Honors the KING, and also holds the
Dignity of a Parliament, in due honorable Regard and Reverence. JO. TA.
IT is needless to demand, from what Shire, County, City, Corporation, Town,
Borough, Village, Hundred, Hamlet, House, Family, Persons or person this
Complaint comes, for it were a rare search, and would trouble the brains of
all the cunning men, and wisest Mathemagicians, with all the judicial
Astrologers, and Fortune-telling Figure-flingers, to tell us truly where this
complaint is not. It is so universal epidemically general, that whosoever
has not a grievous sense or remorcefull feeling of it, has a soul stupefied,
and a conscience benumbed mortally with a dead Palsy.

We the most miserable amongst men, do make humble suite to you, who (next to
our sins and selves) are the cause and causers of our miseries, you do best
know the nature and condition of our greifes, you had the power, will and skill
to wound us, and you have the art and knowledge to make us whole; you have the
secret virtue which is feigned to have been in Achilles his Lance, to hurt and
cure. We are sure that the King most graciously eased and removed all our
greivances, (or as many as we complaind on) there was not a monopoly, a tax,
toll or tribute left, that was grievous or justly offensive, but they were all
either made void, or mitigated, neither did his Majesty deny you any thing that
you did demand, nor you ever grant him any thing that he requested; and to our
griefs we speak it, it had bin better he had been more sparing of his Royal
grants, except you had more. Loyally and gratefully dealt with him, and
acknowledged them. We need not tell you, that the Protestant Religion is almost
cast out of the Kingdom by you. It is impertinent to give you notice how you
have used the King, so that the meanest of your selves would be loath to be so
dealt withal; How we have been beggard and ruined by you, we know* how you
have enriched your selves by undoing us, you know, and when you will endeavor
to seek peace, and cease those mischiefs which we suffer, God knows.

Self do, self have, is an old English proverb. It is only our own doings
that has undon us, it was our tongues that extold you, it was our voices that
was your advancement, it was our noyses that Elected you to that power, which
you have turned into intolerable Tyranny, it was we that did rend our throats
for a Kimbolton, a Hampden, a Pym, a Martin, a Haslerigge, a Hollis, and a
great many more then a good many. It was we that made you Knights and Burgesses
for the Shires, Counties, Cities, Towns, Buroughs, Corporations; and for us,
it was our follies to do all this for you, for which it is too too manifest
what you have done for us. Thus by our means you were raised, and by our
ruins you are inrich't. The premises considered, we humbly beseech you to
take these few following lines into your serious considerations, and at your
pleasure or leisure, confute them if you can.

It is a maine point of Romish doctrine, that the Pope cannot err in matters
of Faith, (which error of theirs is far from our opinions) but this we are too
sure of, that you have all erred in matters of trust. We the Freeholders and
Commons of England do lamentably know and feell it; folly and foolishness, are
the only opposites to wisdom, and Knowledge has no enemy but Ignorance, this
being confessed, we pray you to remember, that our rash folly elected you to be
the representative body of the Kingdom, which we did acknowledge you to be;
and we most humbly desire you to consider, that we are the body of the Kingdom
represented; now as a thing representative is but a derivative from that which
is the represented, so is your power derived from us, and from us who are but
men full of infirmities and errors; though our voices had power to give you
power, to be a house of Commons in Parliament; yet from those voices and folly
of ours, we had not power to infuse infallible and inerrable wisdom into you.

We (as men) confident of your integrity, did choose you as our Proctors and
Atturnies, the Kings Majesty, with his best Council, and we (the poor
Commons) entrusted you with all we had, but we had no mistrust that you would
deceive us of all we had, we trusted you to maintain our Peace, and not to
imbroile us in an universal endless bloody War. We trusted you with our
Estates, and you have Robbed, Plundered, and undon us; we trusted you with our
freedoms, and you have laden us with slavery and bondage, we trusted you with
our lives, and by you we are slaughtered and murdered every day. We trusted
you not with our souls, and yet you with a new Legerdemain doctrine, a juggling
kind of Preaching, a pestiferous swarm of Preachers, a Mechanic kennell of
illiterate knaves, with the threats and Tyranny that you have used to us, and
the execrable Covenants which you have forced us to take, we might with as much
safety, and less hazard, have trusted our souls with Judas, Julian the
Apostate, or the Devil himself, as with you, or your Doctrines.

Many thousands of Souls, (laden with their sins) are Impenitently parted
from the Bodies of His Majesty's Subjects (by your seducements and
inforcements) and (alas) few of them knew the Cause wherefore they fought, or
wherefore they so cruelly killed one another. You will say, that you fought for
the Protestant Religion, (that is a lie) it is known, that it was never offered
to be taken from you, and that His Majesty will live and dye in it, and the
defense and maintaining of it; do you fight against the King, as fearing He
would take from us our Laws and Liberties, in those points we plainly
perceive, that He never intended any such wickedness? But if He had had any
such unkingly and Tyrannical intention, you have prevented Him, and done it
your selves.

Do you fight against Him, and Murder His loving Subjects, for fear that He
should bring in Forreigne-Nations to destroy us, (which thought never entered
into His Royal Heart) but you have done the same, both against His Majesty and
us, you have at exceeding Rates and prices (with our Moneys) bought Rebellious
Scots, who have sold themselves to you, and to work wickedness, no purpose to
ruin the King, the Kingdom, you and us, and as the Devil could not overthrow
man without the help of the woman, so you could never destroy this Church and
State without your Golden temptation of those accursed hirelings, which if you
were to fell them again, at half a quarter of the price they cost, it must be
at a very dear Market.

It is an old saying, that the King of Spain is a King of Men, because the
Spaniards (as men and Loyal Subjects to him) do honor, obey, and serve him.
That the French King is a King of Asles, because of the insupportable heavy
burdens, Taxes, and slavery which they undergo and tamely bear. But ('it is
said) the King of England is a King of Devils, because of their disobedient
murmurings, and often Rebellion. For the nature of an English man is, not to
know when things are well, which if we would have known, things had not now
been so bad as they are.

Do you fight against the King to remove some Evil Counselors from him? we
know that you have long fidled upon that string, yet you could never name one
of those Counselors, nor relate any particulars against them, that might so
much, as put a scratch, scarre, or spot upon their Integrity, either to His
Majesty or the public good; all that can be said, either against the King,
Queen, Nobility, or any Loyal Royalist, is vented through your learned
Conduite Pipe, Mercurius Britanicus, who (by your especial favor and Command)
Railes and Reviles, Sheetly, weekly, most wickedly weakly, Cum Privilegio.

Thus we perceive, that you pretend to fight for the Protestant Religion, and
all the World may see and say, you have made a delicate dainty Directory, new
Religion of it. And you have fought for the King, (and that is most certain)
you have fought and sought for the King, but it has been to Catch him, and
make him no King. You have fought for our Liberties, and have taken them from
us, you have fought for the Gospel, and have spoiled the Church, you have
fought for our Goods, and ye have em, and you have fought to destroy the
Kingdom, and you have done it. What can you do, or what would you do more?
and still you persist in these impious Courses, and there is no hope of any end
of our sufferings.

The many Gulleries, that you have put upon us, would fill a large Volume, if
they should be written or Printed; and because you shall not think us to be
fencelesse, or such Blockheads as you would make us, you shall know that we
know somewhat. And to lay aside all old Dogge-tricks, how this Rebellion has
been a Brewing more then 60 years, we will let you know, that we know many of
your State sleights and Policies within these three years, etc.

You have extorted great Sums of Money from us, under the pretense of
Relieving of Ireland, and with the same Moneys, you have maintained a bloody
War in England, so that whatsoever was Raked from us, for the preservation of
one Kingdom, you have employed for the destruction of three; for England is
cheated, Ireland, defeated, and Scotland is heated in her own dissentious
flames.

You have pretended Treaties for Peace, when (God knows) Peace was never in
your Thoughts, (as by your impudent Propositions and demands may appear) for
if the Turk had made a Conquest here, he could not have devised, or would not
have enjoined and tied the King, and his true Liege People to harder
Conditions, and then (to salve your Reputations) you have caused your lying
Lecturers, and slanderous Pamphlets to revile the King, and lay all the fault
on him for the breaking off of the Treaties, when as you had Consulted, and
knew before, that your unreasonable demands, neither would or could be granted.

You have abused and mocked God, with false and forged Thankesgivings, for such
Victories as never were, and with your Sophisticated Triumphs of Guns, B^lls,
Bonefires, Ballads, Libells, and other Imposture-like expressions, whereby we
have been seduced and encouraged to give more and more Contributions, and buy
our own utter undoeings, for (like corrupted and covetous Lawyers) you would
not take so much pains, or do us the courtesy to beggar us Gratis, to ruin
us for nothing; And you would not by any entreaty make us miserable at a cheap
rate, or except we gave you our, Moneys, almost to the uttermost farthing.

Many of your Faction (like decoy Ducks) brought in their Plate and Moneys at
the beginning of this Rebellion, in large proportions to the Gull-Hall of
London, whereby thousands of people were gulled, by deed of gift, (or deeds of
shift) and new found Loanes, and Contributions, to maintain your greatness,
and feed your bottomless Avarice, whilst we, and the rest of your new shorn
sheep, had no other assurance, but the Ayery pawn of a Confounding Faith,
called Public; and those cheating Decoyes, who first gave, and lent to draw
poor Fools on, Those Knaves had their Plate and Moneys privately delivered to
them again, whilst ours was accursedly employed against the true Religion, a
just King, and all His Loyal Protestant Subjects.

You have (to make your Victories seem great) caused many of your own Tattard
Ensigns, Cornets, or Colors of Foot and Horse, with many Arms, to be
privately sent out of the City in an Evening at one Port, and brought in at
another Port in the morning in Triumph, making the People believe, that those
Colors and Arms, were taken from the King at such and such a Battle; and
this trick has hooked us into more chargeable and Rebellious Contributions.

You have caused thousand of Arms to be bought and brought from Foreign
Nations, and those Arms, you have proclaimed to be taken at Sea, and that
either the King had bought them to make War against the Parliament, or that
they were sent Him for that purpose, from some Catholic Prince; and this
slight of Hand, has often jugled away our Moneys.

You have many times, made Women believe that their slain Husbands who went
forth with you alive, were alive still, in such or such Garrisons of yours,
when you knew the same men were killed, and left dead in ditches for Crows
meat, but that His Majesty graciously caused the dead to be buried, and the
maimed and wounded, to be relieved and cured.

You have contrived Letters in Private Chambers, and you have subscribed them
from Foreign Kings and States, or from the Queen to the King, or to some
other Persons of Worth and Eminency near His Majesty, which Letters have been
as full of forged dangerous consequences, as your wicked brains could thrust
or foist into them; And by some miraculous way, the said Letters have been
either intercepted on the Land (by some vigilant great Commander of yours) or
they have been said to be taken at Sea by your valiant Admiral; then are those
Letters openly Read, and copied out a thousand ways, Printed ten Thousand
ways, dispersed a Hundred Thousand ways, and believed by Millions of People,
by the prateing of your Preachers and Pamphlets, which tricks have cost us some
Millions of money, with many thousand of our lives.

You have many times taken (or intercepted) Letters which have been sent from
some of His Majesty's Armies, Garrisons, or some other true and Loyal places
or Persons, or from the King or Queen, one to another; and those Letters have
been publicly Read and Printed, but you have new molded them, you have made
your own Constructions and Interpretations on them, and in a word, you have not
only the procreating Art, to beget and engender such news, as you please to
have; but also you are fruitful in conceiving, and producing such Letters as
has or may be most for your advantage; as Lately you have used in His
Majesty's Cabinet, which you took at Naseby, and brake open at Westminster, and
made the Letters therein, to speak what you would have them; But (maugre all
your malice) the said Letters are as so many Crystal Mirrours, wherein His
Kingly care, His Christian Piety, His immovable Constancy, in the service of
God, in the Protestant Religion, in the Peace of His Kingdoms, and in the
welfare of His Subjects, all these His Letters do show (in despite of your
wrested comparisons, and mingle, mangle juggling alterations) His Transcendent
goodness, and most gracious inclination, and Royal Resolution, and withal,
your mischievous intentions are plainly manifested, in that you still persist
in your wicked courses against so gracious a Sovereign. But there are more
judicious, learned, and grave writers then any of us (your oppressed
Complainants) whose Pens have better described your playing fast and loose in
this kind, to whose better Informations we leave you.

We do most heartily wish, that you were all as weary of being Tyrants, as we
are in bearing the insupportable burdens of your Tyranny; we do humbly
beseech you to be pleased to give over beggering and killing of us, we pray you
to suffer us to live and enjoy the Protestant Religion, we desire you to let us
feed and subsist upon that little which you have left us (against your wills;)
and lastly, we entreat you not to enforce us into a desperate Condition, and
make us do we know not what.

His Majesty, as a true Defender of the true Faith, does with Truth defend that
Faith, and He has most graciously often offered you Peace and Truth, both
which you pretend, but you intend neither. Lay down your Arms, that is the
nearest way to a Peace, and leave Lying, and you shall have Truth. If you will
not, we would have you know, that we must take a course, that neither our
Purses or Persons, shall not long maintain you and your Rebellious Garrisons,
(who are no other but dens of Thieves) and as our Tongues did lift you up, and
made you able to abuse the King, the Religion, Church, and Kingdom, so our
Hands must help to pull, or knock you down, to recover part of that of which
you have bereft us, and to keep about us to Relieve us, that little which yet
we have left us.

FINIS.

