A THUNDERCLAP TO Sion-Colledge.

OR, A Catalogicall hint of the Pulpit Inveteracy, and Apostasy, of that
mischievous Assembly, or mystery of Iniquity, at Sion College.

By S. T. A cordial Friend to Truth and Peace, etc.

Hos. 9.8. The Prophets are fools, the spiritual man is mad. Jer. 23.15.
Behold, I will feed the Prophets with wormwood, and make them drink the water
of Gall, for from the Prophets of Jerusalem, is profaneness gone forth into
all the Land. Verse. 26. They are Prophets of the deceit of their own heart.
Romans 3.13. Their throat is an open Sepulcher, with their tongues they have used
deceit: the poison of Aspes is under their lips. LONDON, Printed for G. W. near
the Royall-Exchange. 1648.

A THUNDERCLAP TO SION COLLEGE.
What? is Presbytery become a faction, will nothing satisfy them but a
factious usurpt interest of will and power: Boundlesly, and unsatiably to
tyrannize over the Consciences of conscientious men: will they never leave
bawling, unless all interests bow down, and be made subordinate to their
interest: now we see, and all rational men may see (that are not resolvedly
blind) what kind of Presbytery that is, which has been so vigorously contended
for this many years, viz. merely a domineering Interest over their Brethren,
and to be Lords over Gods heritage: now their undermining subtilty is unmasked,
and that mystery of iniquity is discovered: and Antichrist in the form and
shape of Presbytery must not think to deceive the Nations any more, and
although Antichrist has more beguiling tricks then one: yet that man of sin
must be revealed, whom God will destroy with the spirit of his mouth. 2 These.
2.7.8. he can turn Prelate, and Presbyter, and Royalist; conform to any shape,
and every form wherein he can most cunningly and plausibly deceive the
Nations: But who would have thought that they would have turned absolute
imposters, professed Royalists, and embraced and shook hands with such
horrible and detestable Apostasy: (O base principles) can you at pleasure,
renounce and perfideously desert that ancient just cause wherein you seemed to
engage in, with all the godly party in the Kingdom 7. years agone, and ever
since: can you without difficulty tear, rack, and wrend such public
principles of justice, freedom, and common safety, (and as, if this were not
enough:) But you must most irrationally lay aside and forget all the limits and
bounds of moderation: you must make it your only business (contrary to the
Gospel) both in Presses and Pulpits, inveterately to rail and envy against a
succesfull, faithful Army: merely and alone for proceeding in, and pursuance
of those very principles of justice, freedom, and common safety, in which you
formerly engaged, though now apostatized: though in your letter to the Lord
Genesis and general Council, you with brazen faces profess you adhere to the
ancient just cause, and you are the same men still, and own the same principles
you ever owned, (I wonder you are not ashamed of this dissembling:) give me
leave to make use of your own phrase: (be not you deceived, for God is not
mocked;) and though you turn with the times, and change your principles for the
advantage of the corrupt interests: yet God laughs you to scorn, (look to it,)
God from Heaven will so transact and regulate different mutable things, as that
your inveteracy, and apostasy, shall manifestly appear to all the world:
whereby unvindicable Infamy will unavoydably rest upon you to posterity.

Do but see a little your corrupt partial dealing; you perfideously connive
and wink at that in your selves: which is the alone mark you shoot at in the
Army, and others who are the objects of your inviteracy.

1. You rail against them for usurping that which is not proper to them, and
upon this account, all the Presbyterian Pulpits in the City must ring of them,
as a seditious, factious Generation, and all the week long is little enough to
study and knock your heads together: to bawle and mouth at them, with all the
calumnies that can be invented the next Lords day: But I pray bear with me a
little.

Adhere a little to this assertion: you call them usurpers, but I pray pull the
beam out of your own eye, for it makes you judge partially and blindly: I
think it would not be absurdity, or rudeness, to call you the most ambitious
usurpers in all the world; for suppose them to be usurpers, as you call them;
yet they usurp nothing but what is proper to men (though we deny this to your
face:) But you must usurp and appropriate no less then the alone proper
prerogative of Christ, ( viz.) to be law givers to the Church, and to be Lords
over Gods heritage: as if Christ were not as faithful in all his house as
Moses: Heb. 3.5. But through forgetfulness must leave his institutions, so
lame and imperfect as must needs stand in need of some addition, or detraction
from men: what may demonstrate you to be a faction, and what may illustrate
your unparelleld usurpation, if this may not, nay, if this does not.

2. You say they delight to rule, and will make all things subordinate to them
and their Interest: (surely you do but forget yourselves) you suppose that to
be in them, which is alone in yourselves: you cannot abide to set the saddle
upon the right horse, I must tell you, its a principle which they abhor; but a
principle which you own and contend for, and it has been your pulpit work for
this many years together, to make all persons, and Interests, stoop and couch
to your Interest, and yet you call that preaching of the Gospel, when
presumptuously you preach only in pursuance of your own Interests, and how
long have you desired and waited for that day, and for that power, whereby you
might be whipping men into a subjection and subordination to your corrupt
principles, Directories, and Doctrines; though never so opposite to the tenor
and substance of the word of truth, and to the primitive institutions of
Christ; for the truth of this, let your constant actions witness, and
rational men judge.

3. You go further, and cry out they act confusedly and irregular; but if you
consider this well, you may very well hold your tongues: we need no other
weapons to beat you then your own, is it not your own corrupt method, are you
not always splitting yourselves upon this rock of irregularity and confusion:
will you believe it when you fee it? You call yourselves ministers of Christ,
and of the Gospel: (which I profess, all things considered, is very
questionable.) But if you are so, why do you not preach the Gospel which is
your own proper and alone work, and aquiesse within the compass of your own
sphere and station, and not in the same breath quite exceed your bounds, and
turn Statesmen: Nay, and which is worse, to take the fishwomens trade out of
their hands: (give me leave) are these the qualifications of Ministers of the
new Testament: to envy, rail, and scold, as if you had served 7. years
Apprentiship at Billings-gate; is this to preach the Gospel, to divulge your
own corrupt fancies, and your own humane inventions, and make hodge podge of
the Gospel: you are in your Element, when you are jumbling and confounding
multitudes of distinct things of a retrogade nature into one bundle, and that
Sermon is not accounted a Sermon amongst you: wherein you do not most
inviterately bespatter, and throw dirt in the faces of them that are honester
then yourselves: either you must be bawling against Sectaries, or mouthing at
the Army, or envying against the Parliament in its present form and
constitution, and yet this you do ambitiously and falsely call preaching of the
Gospel: (what blind doings are these:) do not you hereby make the Doctrine of
the Gospel a Doctrine of division, a Doctrine of sedition and faction, a
Doctrine of confusion: and how do you rack and wrest the infallible Scripture
to the confused factious interpretations and expositions, and falsely you can
render political expositions of spiritual Scriptures: if you must needs turn
Statesmen, one would suppose it most proper for you, when you are out of your
Pulpits: and not so irregularly make your Pulpits Chayres of State, and so
confusedly jumble natural, civil, political, military and spiritual things
together: this has been too to much your Antichristian method, and if
impudence did not hinder, you might be ashamed and blush at the thoughts of
such prevaricating: if this be regular, what is irregular, if this be order,
what is confusion, forbear least it prove your confusion.

Another object of your Inveteracy, are a Company of godly Conscientious men,
whom you brand erroneous and Heretics: who do by that which you call Heresy,
in the sincerity and integrity of their hearts, worship the God of their
Fathers, Act. 24.14. But the People are so habituated to your perverse
Doctrines, which you do so frequently sow amongst them; that all is taken for
current error and heresy; and on the contrary, for undoubted infallible truth
that you set your stamp upon, be it never so scandalous and false. But if we
come maturely and rationally, to examine what that is you call Error, and what
that is you call Heresy, and what that is you call Schism. Its all, and
only, such persons, and doctrines, that cross your usurpt factious Interest
of will and power; that refuse subordination to your Government and Scepter;
and from this rotten Principle radically flows, all that inveterate railing,
scandalous abominating, most intolerable backbiting, and mischievous
bespattering of men, whom their Consciences cannot but be (yea and are)
convinced, they are conscientious godly men.

But because they obstruct and stop the current and stream of their premised
factious Interest, merely upon this very account, almost all the Pulpits in
City and Kingdom must ring of them: O they are a seditious people, not worthy
to live; they are the alone troublers of our Israel, and never expect Peace
while these Sectaries have a being amongst us; (and just like the Pharisees) If
we let this man (or these men) alone, all the world will believe on them, Joh.
11.48. And our trade that has formerly bin the best trade in the Kingdom (
viz. Preaching) that is like to be engrossed from us; and consequently, our
honor, and esteem, and eminency in the world, that decreases also; and our
power, and interest, that will be trodden under foot; and therefore our best way
is to do, as the Pope always does; Vote godly men to be devilish, and then
set the dogs on them; and the wild Bears and Tigers of the earth must be
animated and encouraged to tear them in pieces; and if we can get but a
Pattent to Monopolize this trade, and to Monopolize the Gospel into our own
hands, then we shall be well enough; Is not this your method.

For this is that which perplexes these men, to see other men, whom they
ambitiously call Mechanics and Laymen; to sell, or preach the Gopel at an
under rate; because they do not preach for hire, as they do; and preach for
Honor and a reward as they do; this makes them ready to gnaw their tongues
for pain, and yet they think they cannot tumble out their venomes fast enough;
but rail on them, almost till they foame at the mouth; and in the midst of
this, are like a Fish in the water, in their desired element; they are so
united and habituated to this frame and form, of Pulpit cavelling, and Pulpit
inveighing, that I am Confident, were it possible, they could preach whiles
dooms day, they would never forget this perverse trade; and the reason is,
because they have so little reason, that they are enforst to make it up with
passion: but what Gospel is this, to patch up Sermons out of such a detestable
lust, as passion is, and fill the peoples ears with such railing ruffish.

But if you were taught of God, and if you learnt the truth as it is in Jesus,
you would comfortably and freely acquiesce in the declaration of this truth;
for this is the Gospel method, and if you are Ministers thereof, this is your
alone work, ( viz.) to preach the truth: and consequently, error and delusion
will fall to the ground. Never think to scatter and destroy error, by your
irregular and perverse jumbling, and inveighing against it: in so doing what
do you less then delude the people; and like the Priests of old, you cause
the people to err, Micha 3.5. For I hope you are not so ambitious to think
that you are the only infallible Judges of truth: but you may, (you do) err as
well as others; and therefore, whilst you persist in this confusion, you are so
far from convincing men of error, that you confirm them therein. Man is a
rational creature, and error where it is, it lies in the understanding; and
therefore its only reason, concurring with the power of truth, can enlighten
the understanding, and convince the person so erring. Error is no otherwise but
a mistake in the judgment, and the judgment must be satisfied and convinced,
before error can be subdued, this is undeniable; the conscience that will
adhere to what the judgment believes. Must you go whip the conscience, now this
is according to the rule of your invention: Not according to the infallible
rule of Scripture. The Lord make the people of this Kingdom wiser then their
Teachers.

But now a few words touching your Apostasy: Bear with my Pen a little, for
its no absurdity to call it so. You are turned professed Royallists, and you
are interwoven into the Kings principles; insomuch that now the Kings design
is your design, and your Pulpit work is to propagate the Kings Interest,
though retrograde and destructive to the public interest: and you could own
that perfidious treacherous treaty, and adhere to Malignants in their
engagements, and pray devoutly for the restoring the King to his Crown,
Scepter, and Dignity. (What is Presbytery Kingified now:) can you with the face
of reason, or Christianity, attempt or presume to appear for the Kings
interest. But truly, all things considered, we need not wonder at it: for
Ecclesiastical Interest and Monarchical Interest, has been, and must be
jumbled together, as interwoven one in another: Suitable to that Text, Revel.
17.7. The beast must bear the whore. A lively portracture of your Church. Such
is your Interest, that it cannot stand unless upheld by the Kings of the
earth; your Kingdom is of this world; Contrary to the nature of the Kingdom
of Christ; and upon this account, you may well struggle and bussle for
Monarchy; because your Interest depends upon it. But one would think, you
should not be so mad, and so perfidiously irrarionall, as to attempt, own, or
prosecute the destructive propagation of the corrupt Principles and Interest of
this King; so palpably destructive to the Kingdom, and to the whole public
Interest.

I beseech you look back a little, and take a particular survay of the
wonderful transacting of things, in relation to the Kings proceedings: did
ever any Engage, Contrivers, contend for him, and prosper: has God, think
you, (I appeal to your Consciences) fought so wonderfully, so unparalleldly,
so miraculously, against both foraigne, and domestic enemies, and blasted all
Plots, Contrivances, Attempts, and Stratagems, for nothing, I say, is it for
nothing, that God has done all this.

Nay, what has the People of England fought for this many years, if not for a
free, and impartial execution of Justice upon Capital offenders, and
original Authors of all the blood, misery, and ruin of the People of this
Nation: and dare you (I say, dare you) in person press, or Pulpit attempt to
stop the Current of Justice, (I wonder at your Impudence) is not Impartial
Justice, the alone sollid Foundation of all the peace, liberty, and freedom
that can be expected?

Object. But you would have the King exempted because there is no president for
the like Action, (I wonder at your weakness.)

Answ. This is your great Argument that makes a monster through City and
Kingdom. But, If examined, as light as vanity it self; (for mind) if no
President can be produced, or extracted from our Ancestors. Then this
Parliament has made, and may proceed, to make a president for Posterity, upon
such sollid, stable, answerable, justifiable grounds of Reason, Equity,
Justice, and Common safety: that all the world, if they judge impartially,
cannot possibly contradict: now as Presidence are not constant Rules to act by;
so no former president whatsoever can bound or limit the proceedings and
actions of the succeeding Generations: because presidents of necessity, may,
and must differ, according to the mutable different conditions of times. But
the reason of no president is clear, because no King did ever Personally, or
Commissionally, so perfidiously attempt the ruin and desolation of the public
Interest; and therefore no cause of a president of this nature. I hope
gainsayers will be silent in this; for whoever deny it, must exceed the bounds
of Reason, and common sense.

And whereas you falsely affirm and declare in your pernicious letter-to the
Lord Genesis that its an action contrary to the Law of God and man: if you study
and prevaricate while doomes day, you can never prove it: I demand, whether the
Law of God, or Nations: the Law of equity, justice, and safety: do more or
less in reference to dignity, or a title of Honor: exempt a man from
deserving justice, he that sheds man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed.
Genesis 9.6. now this text nor no other text has the least limitation or
restriction to the title King. But if he be a man, interpret as falsely as you
will, or can; he is not exempted, but comes within the compass of justice.

But when every thing desert you, then as your last support, you fly to the
Covenant, and you can pull and wrack that with all the false misconstructions
that can be invented, to patch up all your weakness and inveteracy, and like
your perfideous Scots, your dear Brethren, you can strike through the heart and
bowels of the Covenant, with the Covenant in your mouths.

But if it be demanded, why I direct my speech to Sion College: its because I
conceive that to be the conservatory, or fountain original from whence flows
all that rubbish, trash, and trumpery that is publicly divulged in most
Pulpits throughout the City, in your monthly morning Lectures, and every Lords
day: though I despise not your Lectures, if either intended or acted for good.

Is this the best eggs you can hatch at your daily and weekly meetings at
SionColledge; that as the results of your pernicious Counsels, you must allot
and appoint every one his work: one shall rail against the Army, another
inveigh against the present form and Constitution of the Parliament; another
must pray and preach devoutly for restoring the King; another cry up the
secluded Members. What ruffish is here to stuff Sermons withal? have you
nothing else to do, but to poison, pervert, distract, and disquiet the Spirits
of men, who would otherwise willingly, and freely aquiese, were they not by you
enraged, encouraged, incensed, and animated against the Army and Parliament.

If you were not as blind as Beetles, you may be satisfied; that the Army in
conscience could do no less; unless they were so mad as to stand still and
serve 7. or 8. years labor, travel, and hazard, so perfidiously lost: and
resign up their Liberties and Freedoms (which is the price of their blood)
into the hands of theirs, and the Kingdoms thrice Conquered enemies; Its as
clear as the Sun, that the Parliament was then going about to sell them, with
all the honest party in the Kingdom, into the blood and revenge of an enraged
and tyrannical King; who I am confident, would under some pretense or other,
have cut the throats of all the godly in the Kingdom by thousands; and all the
Liberty, Freedom, Privilege, and public Interest, fought for eight years
together, would have been swallowed up into perjury and professed tyranny; and
all the circumstances, and parts of that treacherous agreement for Peace with
the King, considered; compact, and patcht up together, were destructive to the
public interest; and upon this account, whether the necessity were not
absolute, or else ruin unavoidable: I leave to the judgments of rational,
impartial principled men public. If the Army which you contemn, had not took
more for the care then you, but derogated from their principles, as you have
don, all the godly in the Kingdom might have hanged their harps upon the
Willow trees, and sought a residence in a strange Land (and get you like
ungratfull wretches) now they have done the Kingdom such unparalled service,
you could now cut their throats for their labor.

I wonder, you are not ashamed to bring such an infamy upon your Coat; are you
not in a direct way, to lay a plat-forme for a new Summers bloody ruining War,
do you love to fish in troubled waters, and delight to be kindling the fire of
discention and discord, and perpetual rigid opposition in the Kingdom: (look
to it) these principles are rotten principles; and unless you forbear, they
will make you obnoxious to the just Censures of all men: and if a third war
follow, we must be necessitated to conclude from rational grounds, that you
are the fomenters and abettors thereof; and that it is the consequent of your
inveterate railing, and perverse mouthing against your Brethren, who would
willingly (if possible they can crave so mvch favor at your hands) as
Freeborn Subjects of England, enjoy a peaceable and quiet residence amongst
you. Its well such cursed Cowes as you are, have short horns; otherwise, if
special providence did not interpose, you would tear and rack your discenting
Brethren, as you have torn and rackt your own principles.

But what means your uncessant inveighingand clattering against the Parl. Some
of you call them a broken Parl. others no Parl. and that Apostate Prinne calls
them an unparliamentary Iunto. And the great reason is, because (they say) they
are under a Force, and consequently, no legal Authority (Good lack, what a
base pvinciple and Interest will do.) Its high time that the Clergy should be
made Judges of Parliamentary Authority: have they not voted themselves the
supreme Authority of the Kingdom, and consequently, a free Representative; and
it was your own Argument not long since, that themselves were the competent
sole Judges of their own Authority; and have they not jointly approved of the
reasons of the Genesis Counsel, for secluding, and securing some of their
treacherous Members, for perfidious diserting, and betraying their trust. But
because you cannot have a Negative voice, and because they proceed without, and
against your approbation, advice, and concurrence: therefore you will dispute
the legality of their authority: what perfidious (in and out, fast and loose)
dealing is this?

For notwithstanding, that unparalled cruel violence of the riotous
tumultuous Apprentices, upon the House, in July, 1647. forcibly keeping the
Speaker in his Chair, and putting things to the question themselves, after the
House was desolved, and when after this, the Speaker, with many other faithful
Members of the House were necessitated to fly to the Army: In whose absence
the Royal Party chose a new Speaker, and attempted (might and maine) to leavy
a force against the Army, thereby engageing the Kingdom in blood.
Notwithstanding all this, your resolved blindness could not own it as a force:
but then they were the Parl. of England, and you could freely read, (and
enforce obedience to) their destructive Ordinances for raising of Forces: and
still so long as they have been your Parl. and served your Inrerest, so long,
and no longer have they bin the Parliament of England. You can dance no longer,
then they pipe your Interest.

And you can like Royalists profess and declare in your Pulpits, against the
Legal just proceedings of Parl. (I profess its insufferable) you detest the
thoughts of calling the King to an account, and its unparalled and
destructive for Protestant Kingdoms, to stain themselves with the blood of
their Kings. Nay, which is more then all; Its contrary to the subtle National
Covenant. Mr. Calamie, that old Conformist, will never leave turning and
conforming for the best advantage of his Interest; but must divulge such
nonsensicall doctrines as these, to confound the ears of his Auditory.

But in order, Its destructive and unparalled, to be stained with the blood
of Kings; but mind, its neither the one nor the other for you to be stained
with your own corrupt, factious, usurpt tyrannical Interest: although you
engage the whole Kingdom in war and blood to accomplish it. But what a guilt
and stain it is for a Protestant Kingdom to execute Justice: Is it not a
treacherous and destructive principle, to detest the thoughts of Justice. I wish
you appear not to be (for you give us probable grounds to believe it,) the
chief obstructers of Justice this 7. years together, by your Parliament
whispering and insinuating, having had such an Antichristian influence upon the
House.

But then you fly to the Covenant, to catch some false interpretation, the
better to enforce the Kings interest, and your delight in prevaricating, and
cheating the people: in taxing the Army with your own perjury for all bonds in
the Covenant, (if you are not mad or blind) touching preserving the King, are
only conditional (not absolute:) But you are possitively and absolutely
engaged to bring all Delinquents to condign punishment, and would it not be
partiality and perjury in the highest degree, that that grand Delinquent and
original public Author and Abettor of all our bloodshed, ruin, and misery,
should be exempted, and inferiors only punished, who acted commissionally from
him, and actually for him; I am confident, you may as well remove a Mountain
into the midst of the Sea, as deny it to be justice in the impartiality of it;
and how has God contmually crossed, confounded, battered, and shattered to
pieces all plots, contrivances, and attempts to vindicate the truth of the
premises: not to be treacherized, and creacified into slavery (which you
promoted:) but to produce a free current of impartial Justice. The premises
maturely and solidly considered: your Pulpit barking and mouthing against Parl.
Army, and your Brethren: is nothing but a probable introduction, to a third
bloody War; to the great hazard (or at least much damage) to the public
interest, and as much as possible you over shadow and eclipse those dawnings
and appearings of liberty, freedom, privilege, and solid security to the
public interest, that upon foundations of Justice and righteousness are (we
hope) flowing in as the proper fruits of all so long fightings, waytings, and
expectations.

FINIS.

