A VINDICATION OF THE Orthodoxe Protestant Doctrine Against the INNOVATIONS OF
Dr. DRAYTON and Mr. PARKER, Domestique Chaplain to the Right Honorable the E.
of Pembroke, In the following Positions.

LONDON: Printed for Richard Royston, at the Angel in Ivie-lane. 1657.

To all the Lovers of Gods Truth, Grace and Peace, through Jesus Christ, the
faithful Redeemer of all his Saints.
BELOVED FRIENDS,
THese are the times foretold wherein there shall be a falling away, and
defection from the Faith, as a mere forerunner of the great and terrible Day.

And there are many false Prophets arisen amongst us, whose study and labor is
to deceive poor souls, if it were possible even the very Elect.

Men confident in an arm of flesh, Goliah-like, defying the whole Israel of
God. Some of which number we have to deal with, as may appear in the ensuing
Treatise.

I shall not much regard how I be esteemed of in the world for engaging in the
quarrel. Applause should not swell us, and dispraise should not deject us,
neither greatness affright us.

When the glory of God lies at stake, and his truth opposed, his people must
not stand by with a guilty silence, but are bound by many obligations to defend
the truth, and withstand gainsayers.

For my self, I am neither worthy of note, nor noted the unworthiest, I
confess, amongst the thousands of Levi. But though I be the meanest of Gods
servants, yet my witness is in heaven I have ever desired to do the best
service I could in Gods Church.

And this part I presume to present to those that desire to fear the Lord, not
begging Patronage from Greatness. (For what is good deserves acceptance; and
wherein I err, I desire pardon, not defense.)

The occasion of the publication hereof was a Dispute, or rather Contest lately
betwixt one Dr. Drayton, and one Mr. Parker, domestique Chaplain to the Earl
of Pembroke, at Wilton in the County of Wilts, and my self.

Where in the public Congregation they stood up, endeavoring to beat down
the truth of the following Positions, and to maintain the contrary, as may
appear by the proceedings betwixt the Doctor and my self, which I have placed
at the beginning.

Now although the points in controversy have been so fully and clearly
asserted and vindicated by the Worthies of blessed memory, and by our yet
living Reverend Clergy; That to any, not puffed up with spiritual pride,
admission of addition may seem superfluous and unnecessary.

And notwithstanding although dici non potest quod non dictum est prius; Yet in
regard there are many people that have been much disturbed and dis-setled by
reason of the audaciousnesse and impudence of the opposers of the ensuing
truths, and many of them are not able to buy Volumes:

Neither by reason of the weakness of their capacities can so readily
apprehend the perspicuity and clearness of the truths upon the hearing of
them; nor yet easily distinguish betwixt them and Falsehood, vayled under
Truth's vizard.

I have therefore for their satisfaction and confirmation in the truth,
presented unto the public some few collections; which being seriously weighed
and digested, I doubt not by the blessing of God may enable the meanest (if
willing) to discover truth from falsehood.

That which others have done, we desire to bless God for it. And if that which
I have now done shall be any thing serviceable, it has obtained the end of him
who is not unwilling to spend and to be spent for the Israel of God: that being
the end for which we are what we are.

Your selves are now upon the Stage, be courageous, fight the good sight of
Faith.

And I assure my self and you, that our victory shall be glorious, through
Jesus Christ our Lord, to whom be glory for ever. Amen.

An obedient Son of the Church, John Tendering.

Doctor Drayton's first Letter.
To his honored Friend, Doctor Tendering, These.
Reverend Doctor,
I Have here sent you the two questions to be debated between us in a friendly
way, truly stated as I conceive; whereof if you maintain the first of them
affirmatively, and the second negatively, I have engaged my self to defend the
contrary in both.

That sin must of necessity have a being in the Saints while they live in the
mortal body.

That the righteousness of the law consisting in the love of God above all,
and of our neighbor as of our selves, cannot in this mortal life be fulfilled
in the Saints by the grace of Christ.

If I have not stated them according to your mind, send them as you would have
them stated to

Your loving friend, THO: DRAYTON.

Doctor Tendring's Answer to Doctor Drayton's first Letter.
Reverend Doctor,
I Much marvel that you should so much alter the state of the Questions
propounded to be debated.

As you have laid them down I assure you I understand them not.

The language is too intricate for one that desires to deal plainly, and
only stands up for the defense of Gods truth, according to the grace that is
given.

Though your greater light has discovered it to be the doctrine of hell, as
you have been pleased to call it.

Our doctrines are plain, and we desire in the sincerity of our hearts the
glory of God and the good of souls, without carrying on of any interest that
your doctrine relates to. We are not ignorant from whence it comes, and who
they have been that have endeavored to carry it on in this nation. I shall say
no more but with Gamaliel, si sit a Deo, etc.

But that you shall see our plainness, lest peradventure you did not take a
copy of what you wrote, I have transcribed it word for word.

That which I should affirmatively maintain you say you conceive is this,

That Sin must of necessity have a being in the Saints while they live in the
mortal body.

Doctor, the words were these, to be witnessed by the Auditors; and this God
assisting I will maintain: That Sin will have a being in the best of men, so
long as their souls have a being in these houses of clay.

Then the second which I should negatively maintain, you say you conceive is
this, That the righteousness of the Law consisting in the love of God above
all, and of our Neighbor as of our selves, cannot in this mortal life be
fulfilled in the Saints by the graee of Christ.

Sir, I have a long time since been acquainted with Mults, and Jus, and Saints,
and such like words.

My words were as plain as my meaning, and this God assisting I will stand to
maintain.

Negatively I deny that any man by grace can in this life perform such perfect
obedience to the law of God, as not to offend against the same.

It was your own language, Or to be thereby justified otherwise then in and
through Christ of grace given.

Doctor, many at the meeting will affirm this to be my language. And this I
have taught as the truth of God, and I hope if I shall be thereunto called,
shall be enabled to seal it with my blood.

Doctor, give me leave, as a Brother, though unworthy, to give you this
Christian Animadversion, Call to mind whose doctrine it is which you stand up
for, and who they have been that have still done the same, Pelagius,
Bellarmine, etc. I doubt not of your acquaintance with the many more.

But how clearly this is against the Fathers of our Church, and some of their
own Doctors, I know you cannot be ignorant, as Augustine, Gregory, Lactantius,
Jerome, Bernard, Anselme, and all Modern Divines, except Bellarmines
Fraternity.

I am sorry that Doctor Drayton should be contrary minded: but they and we are
all men.

I shall pray to God to discover our Errors, and that in the end God may have
glory, his Church reap benefit, and Christian brotherly love may be increased
betwixt Doctor Drayton, and his unworthy fellow labourer in the Lords Vineyard,

John Tendering.
30. March, 1657.
Doctor Drayton 's second Letter.
To his honored Friend, Doctor Tendering, These.
Reverend Sir,
I Did not desire to alter the State of the Questions, nor have I either
wittingly or willingly done it.

All errors in doctrine must come from hell and not from heaven. Therefore if I
prove the doctrines erroneous which I reproved, you will I hope no longer
quarrel the expression.

You say your doctrines are plain, and that you desire in the sincerity of
your heart the glory of God and the good of souls, neither of which can consist
with the continuance of sin in our mortal bodies: nor do I carry on any
interest, but what directly tends to the design which you pretend to aim at.

You further say you are not ignorant from whence our doctrines come, but to
that I crave leave to question; for I am sure it came from heaven, if the
Prophets and Apostles had theirs to come from thence. Nor who they are who have
endeavored to carry it on in this nation, who doubtless were the best men
that ever were in this or any other nation, But I will with you take up
Gamaliels counsel and conclusion, si sit a Deo.

Good Sir, forbear the aspersions of the truth, with the obloquies that have
been cast upon any that have held it forth.

For the first Question, I see no difference betwixt your first stating of it
which I sent unto you in your own words and your last. I shall therefore admit
it in these new expressions, That sin will have a being in the best of men so
long as their souls have a being in these houses of Clay.

For the second, I expressed my self again and again in the words which I sent
unto you, as all impartial and understanding Auditors will attest. But I will
take it in your own words so far as they are plain, (viz.) That you deny that
any man by grace can in this life perform such perfect obedience to the Law of
God, as not to offend against the same.

I mentioned nothing concerning the work of Satisfaction, nor shall that come
into dispute, unless by necessary consequence.

I thank you for your good advise, I shall next after Scriptures, avouch no
other Authors but the Fathers of the Church, and perhaps some of our own
Modern Divines of the best note, and concluding with a note of your own prayer,
rest,

March 3. A servant and lover of the truth that is according to godliness, and
your Fellow Servants in Christ, THO: DRAYTON.
I pray you let me hear in a line or two, whether we are now agreed upon the
stating of the questions.



Doctor Tendring's Answer to Doctor Drayton's second Letter.
Reverend Doctor,
As the Questions are now stated, I agree to them, and do hereby join Issue.
I require your Rejoinder, and let it be at your pleasure whether I shall begin
or you. So I rest,

Yours in the Lord, John Tendering.
Send your Answer by this Bearer.



Doctor Drayton's Third Letter.
For his much honored Friend, Doctor Tendering, These.
SIR,
I Am very glad that we are thus far agreed, viz. about the state of the
Questions; I hope we shall go on in the same correspondency, if you please to
begin, because you are perhaps at better leisure, and so will send one or both
of the Questions with your respective Confirmation to Mr. Parker, you shall
soon after God willing receive mine, who in the interim and I hope ad
interitum shall remain

Your loving friend to serve you in the Lord, Tho: Drayton.

The Positions be these.
THat Sin will have a being in the best of men, so long as their Souls have
a being in these houses of clay.

That no man by grace can in this life perform such perfect obedience to the
Law of God, as not to offend against the same, or to be thereby justified
otherwise then in and through Christ of grace given.

NOw to the end that the er suing Discourse may be proper and profitable for
the informing the judgments of the weak, and for the establishing them in the
faith of the truth, which (next to the glory of God, and the advancement of his
truth) is the only thing intended: I shall observe this method. First, I shall
define what Sin in general is. Secondly, what the first sin wa^. Thirdly, the
causes of the first sin. Fourthly, the effects thereof. And lastly, what
Original Sin is. And so I shall proceed to confirmation of the first position.

And first of the first, what Sin in general is.

sin, signifi th properly misdoing, or missing of the mark or way, as in
Judge. 20.6. it is said that the men of Benjamin could sling a stone at an nares
breadth and not sin, that is, not miss. And in Prove. 19.2. it is said, that he
that is hasty with his foot, sins, that is, misseth or swerveth.

In Religion Gods Law is our mark or way, from which when we swerve, we sin,
and therefore Sin is defined to be the transgression of the Law, as in 1 John
3.4. or whatsoever is repugnant to the Law, that is a defect, or inclination,
or action repugnant to the Law of God. Which is the general nature of sin.

Or defect is this general nature, and inclinations or actions, or rather the
matter of sin.

The difference and formal essence of sin is, as I said, a repugnancy with the
Law.

The property which eleaveth fast unto it is the guilt of the creature
offending (that is to say) the binding of the creature to temporal and
eternal punishments, which is done according to the order of Gods Justice.

And hence it is that we commonly say there is a double formality, or twofold
nature of sin.

Repugnancy with the Law, and guilt.

Or that there are two respects, of which the former is a comparison or
dissimilitude with the Law, the other an ordaining to punishment.

In the second place, the fall or first sin of man was the disobedience of our
first Parents Adam and Eve in Paradise, or the eating of the apple and sruit
forbidden, Genesis 2.16, 17.

This Commandment of God, Man through the persuasion of the Devil transgressed,
and hence is our corruption and misery derived.

Thirdly, the first sin of man sprang not from God, but from the instigation of
the Devil, and from the free will of man.

For the Devil provoked Man to fall away from God, and Man yielding to the
enticeing allurements of the Devil freely revolted from God, and wilfully
forsook him.

Fourthly, the effects of man's first sin are, first, guiltiness of death, and
privation of Gods image in our first Parents.

Secondly, original sin in us their posterity, (that is to say) the guilt of
eternal death, and the corruption and averseness of our whole nature from God.

Thirdly, actual sins which are sprung of original, for quod est causa
causae, est causa causati: That which is the cause of the cause, is also the
cause of the effact.

But the first finne in man is the cause of his original, and original^, sin
is the cause of his actual sin.

Fourthly, all the evils of punishment are inflected for sins, Therefore the
first sin of man is the cause of all other his sins and punishments.

Fifthly, original sin is a want of original righteousness which should be
in us, for original righteousness was not only a conformity of our nature
with the law of God, but also it comprehends in it Gods acceptance and
approbation of this righteousness.

Now by the fall of man, instead of conformity, there succeeded in man's nature
deformity and corruption, and guiltiness instead of approbation.

And thus much briefly by way of explication, what sin in general is. The
general nature of sin, the difference or formal essence of sin, and the
property which cleaves fast unto it.

What the first sin was, the causes of it, the effects of it, and what
original sin is.

Come we now to prove the position, That this sin, original sin, will have
a being in the best of men so long as their souls have a being in these houses
of clay.

And thus we prove it.

First, that the spirit by the law intitleth us to Adams sin, as a derivation
from the root to the branches, as poison is carried from the fountain to the
Cisterne, and as the children of traitors have their blood tainted with their
fathers treason, and the children of bondslaves are under their parents
condition, John 3.5, 6. That which is born of the flesh is flesh, etc. Romans
5.12, 16, 17, 18, 19. Wherefore as by one man sin entered into the world, and
death by sin: and so death passed upon all men for that all bad sinned, and
not as by one that sinned, so is the gift: for the judgment was by one to
condemnation, but the free gift is of many offenses unto justification. For if
by one man's offense, death reigned by one; much more they which receive
abundance of grace and of the gift of righteousness shall reign in life by
one, Jesus Christ. Therefore as by the offense of one judgment came upon all
men to condemnation: even so by the righteousness of one the free gift came
upon all men unto justification of life. For as by one man's disobedience many
were made finners: so by the obedience of one, shall many be made righteous, 1
Cor. 15. 37, 48, 49. The first man is of the Earth earthy, etc. By nature we
are the children of wrath, 2 Ephesians. 3.14. Job. 4. Who can bring a clean thing
out of an unclcane, 51 Psalm. 5. In sin was I conceived etc. I called thee a
transgressour from the womb, Isa. 48.8. G. p. 8. 21. The imaginations of a man's
heart are evil from his youth. We were all one in Adam, In uno universi, and
with him says S. Augustine.

In him legally, in regard of the stipulation and covenant between God and him.
We were in him paries in that covenant, had interest in the mercy, and were
liable to the curse which belonged to the breach of the covenant; and in him
naturally, and therefore unavoidably subject to all that bondage and burden
which the humane nature contracted in his fall. And herewith agree most of the
Fathers.

Add we hereunto these two Arguments.

First, every thing which is borne carries with it the nature of that which
bare it, as touching the substance and the accidents proper to the special
kind.

But we are all born of corrupted and guilty parents. We therefore all draw by
nature in our birth their corruption and guilt.

Secondly, by the death of Christ who is the second Adam, we receive a double
grace, justification and regeneration.

Therefore it follows, that out of the first Adam there issued and flowed a
double evil (I mean the guilt and corruption of our nature) otherwise we had
not stood in need of a double grace and remedy.

This then is the first charge of the Spirit upon us, Participation with Adam
in his sin.

Adams person being the fountain of ours, and Adams will the representative of
ours.

Secondly, In this sin there is universal corruption which has in it two
great evils.

First, a general defect of all righteousness and holiness in which we were
at first created.

And Secondly, an inherent deordination, evil disposition, disease, propension
to all mischief, antipathy and aversation from all good, which the Scripture
calls the flesh, The wisdom of the flesh, the body of sin, Earthly members,
the law of the members, the works of the devil, the lusts of the devil, the
hell that sets the whole course of nature on fire, John 3.6. Romans 8.6.7. James
3.15. Ephesians. 4.22. Col. 3.5. Romans 7.23. 1 John 38.

And this is an evil, of the through malignity whereof no man can be more
sensible and distinctly convinced (as in the evidence of that conviction to cry
out against it with such strange and bitter complaint) then Paul himself, Romans
7.24. O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this
death.

Until his understanding was opened to conceive the spiritualnesse,
penetration and compass of that holy law which measures the very bottom of
every action, and condemns as well the originalls as the acts of sin, Luke
24.25. Romans 7.14. Heb. 4.12. Psalm 119.96. Luke 10.27.

But for more clear satisfaction, let us consider the universality of this
sin: First, the universality of times from Adam to Moses even when the law of
Creation was much defaced, and they that sinned did not sin after the
similitude of Adam against the clear Revelation of Gods holy will, for so I
take the meaning of the Apostle in these words, Romans 5.13, 14, 20, 21. For
until the law sin was in the world: but sin is not imputed when there is no
law. Nevertheless death reigned from Adam to Moses, even over them that had
not sinned after the similitude of Adams transgression, who is the figure of
him that was to come, further see 20. and 21.

Until the law sin was in the world, but sin is not imputed where there is no
law, verse 13.

Though the law seemed quite extinct between Adam and Moses by the wicked of
the world, and with it sin, because sin has no strength where there is no law.

Though men had not any such legible characters of Gods will in their nature as
Adam had at first, And therefore did not sin after the similitude of his
prevarication.

Yet even from Adam to Moses did sin reign over all them, even that sin of
Adam, and that lust which that sin contracted.

Secondly, there is universality of men, and in men universality of parts.

All men, and every part of man shut up under the guilt and power of this sin.

And both these the Apostle notes at large, Romans 3.9. and 19.23.

What then are we better then they? no in no wise; for we have before proved,
both Jews and Gentiles, that they are all under sin.

Now we know, that what things soever the law says, it says to them who are
under the law: that every mouth may be stopped, and all the world may become
guilty before God, for all have sinned, and come short of the glory of God,
Romans 11.32. for God has concluded them all in unbelief, that he might have
mercy upon all. So also Gal. 3.21.22. If there had been a law given that could
have given life, verily righteousness should have been by the law, but the
Scripture has concluded all under sin, etc.

This shows the universality of persons in the 3. to the Romans 13.14.15.16.17.
etc.

The Apostle adds, their throat is an open sepulcher, with their tongues they
have used deceit, etc.

And the 6. Genesis 5. and the 8. and the 21. The imaginations of the heart are
evil continually.

These particulars are enough to make up an induction, and to infer an
universality of parts.

That from the understanding, as it were the Crown of the head to the
affections, as it were the sole of the foot, there is nothing but loathsomeness.

A lively description, whereof you may read in the 16. of Ezehiel.

In the understanding there is a sea of ignorance, incapable of good things,
but wise and witty in wickedness.

The conscience full of blind fears and terrors, or else seared and senseless,

The memory slippery to retain good impressions, but of a marble firmness to
hold fast that which is evil.

The will pliable and obsequious to the devil in his hands as wax, but as
stiff and hard as clay in Gods. All our affections are inverted, we love what
we should hate, and hate what we should love; we are bold where we should
fear, and fear where we should be bold; we remember what we should forget,
and forget what we should remember: And so of all the rest etc. Thus the whole
frame of man's heart is evil continually. The rout and rabble of impure and
impious thoughts and desires are not to be expressed.

Thus we see how universal a corruption original sin is. Therefore in
scripture the whole man is called flesh. Now because in carnal works we work
secundum hominem, when we are carnal we walk as men, 1 Cor. 3.3. As our
Savior says of the devil, John 8.44. when he speaks a lie, he speaks de suo,
of his own, that is according to his own nature, So when men walk after the
flesh, they work of their own, they walk according to themselves.

For of our selves we can do nothing, as the Apostle speaks, but only sin, 2
Cor. 3.5. when we do any good it is by the grace of God, 1 Cor. 15.10. But by
the grace of God I am what I am; and his grace which was bestowed upon me was
not in vain; but I labored more abundantly then they all; yer not I, but the
grace of God which was with me.

Secondly, consider the closeness and adherency of this sin, it cleaves as
fast to our nature as blackness to the skin of an Ethiopian, which cannot
possibly be washed off.

And therefore the Apostle calls it an incompossing sin, Heb. 12.1.

A sin that will not easily be cast off, that does easily occupate and p^ss^ss
all our members and faculties.

A men may as easily shake off the skin from his back, or pour out his bowels
out of his body, as rid himself of this evil Inhabitant.

It is an evil that is ever present with us, Romans 7.21. evil is present with
me, see verse 23.

It will be ever present with us to derive a deadness, a damp, a dullness, and
an indisposednesse upon all our services, an iniquity upon our holiest things
which we stand in need of a priest to bear for us, Exodus 28.38.

And herein appears also the contagion of this sin. Such a pestilentiall
humor there is in it, that it does not only cleave inseparably to our nature,
but derives venom upon every action that comes from us.



That unto the best work, that is done by the concurrence and contribution of
our own faculties,

Such a vitiousnesse does adhere, and such stubbornness of ours it
superinduced, as that God may justly charge us for defiling the grace he gave,
and for the evil we mix with them may turn away his eyes from his own gifts
in us.

Thirdly, consider the fruitfulness of this sin, to beget, to conceive, to
bring forth, to multiply, and to consummate actual sins, James 1.13,14,15.
where the Apostle sets forth the birth and progress of actual sin.

Every man, says, he is tempted when he is drawn away and enticed of his own
lusts.

There lust is the father, the Adulterer, and lust when it has conceived
brings forth sin.

There lust is the mother too:

And there is no mention of any seed but the temptation of lust it self. Mark.
The stirrings, the flatteries and dalliances of the sinful heart with it self.

And thus suddenly this sin brings forth like summer-fruit, Esaias. 66.8.

We may see in our children this sin showing it self before they have hair or
teeth.

Vanity, Pride, frowardness, self-love, revenge, and the like.

I have seen, Aug. in confess. l. 1. c. 7.
says Augustins, a sucking Infant that was not able to articulate a word, look
with a countenance even pale for envy upon his fellow suckling that shared with
him in the same mi^k: upon which consideration the holy man breaks forth into
this pious complaint, Vhi Domine, quando Domine?

Domine, Where ever was the place O Lord, when ever was the time O Lord that I
have been an innocent creature?

Fourthly, this sin breaks forth unexpectedly, instance Hazaell, 2 Kings 8.13.
Is thy servant a dog that he should do this great thing etc.

Instance also Peter. Mat. 26.33.35.

Who could have expected or feared Adultery from such a man as David after such
communion with God?

Or impatience from such a man as Jeremy after such Revelation from God?

Or Idolatry from such a man as Solomon after so much wisdom from God?

Or fretfulnesse or frowardness of spirit in such a man as Jonah after such
deliverance from God.

Or fearfulness in such a man as Abraham after so much protection from God?

Or cursing from such a man as Job after so much patience and experience of God?

The Lord grant that in such examples we may learn our selves, and fear our
selves.

The Disciples could say, Master, is it I that shall betray thee?

Peter did not ask Master, is it John, nor John Master, is it Thomas? but every
one said is is I?

As much as if they should have said, I have a deceitful flesh, a revolting
heart in my bosom, such a traitor that it may be as soon I as another man. See
6. to the Gal. and 1. verse. If a man be overtaken in a fault etc.

Considering thy self (that is) do not rejoice against thy brother, nor insult
over him, do not despise him in thy heart, nor exilt thy self, thou art of the
same mould, thou have the same principles with him.

That God which for a season has forsaken him, may forsake thee.

That temptation which has overcome him may happen unto thee.

That enemy which has ^^^^^d him may winnow thee.

And therefore in his fall learn compassion toward him, and jealousy to thy
self.

Restore him and consider thy self.

Strive we what we can our it fi^mities will incomp^ss us, and our corruptions
will be about us so long as we carry flesh about us, as we may see in the
forenamed instances.

What shall I say but briefly, this thorn will still be in out flesh, our
Canaanite in our side, our twins in our womb; our counterlustings and
counterwillings, though we be like unto Christ, per primitias spiritus, by the
first fruits of the spirit.

Yet we are unlike him, per reliquias vetustatis, by the remainders of our
flesh.

Not to sin is here only our law, Mark.
but in heaven it shall be our reward.

All our perfection here is imperfect, sin has its deaths blow given it, but
yet like a fierce and implacable beast it never lets go its hold till the last
breath.

Animamque invulnere ponit, never cease to infest us till it cease to be in
us:

Who can say my heart is clean, I am pure from my sin? Prove. 20 9. which
interrogation is an emphaticall negation. As affirmative questions commonly
categorically turned mean negatively. Cleanse thou me from my secret sins,
says holy David, Psalm. 19.12.

So Paul, 1 Cor. 4.4. Though I know nothing by my self, yet am I not thereby
justified, and the reason is added, he that judges me is the Lord.

Which Saint John further unfolds, 1 John 3.20. God is greater than our hearts,
and knows all things.

Which places although most dangerously perverted by these innovators with whom
we have to deal, do yet in the experience of the holiest men that are or have
been evince this truth,

That the lusts of the flesh will be in us, and work in us so long as we carry
our mortal bodies about us.

Again Secondly, this truth will appear more fully if we consider the
fourfold condition of man's freedom of will according to his fourfold state
and condition.

First, in statu confectionis. In the state of innocence as he was Created. The
will was free to good and evil, or freely to choose good, but so that it had
ability of choosing evil.

So that it might persist in good, God preserving it; and might also fall into
evil, God forsaking it.

The former is proved from the perfection of the image of God in which man was
created, Genesis 1.27.

The latter is too evident by the event of the thing it self, and by the
testimony of Scripture.

Eccles. 7.29. God made man upright, but man found out many inventions. And the
Apostle says, Romans 11 32. God has shut up all men in unbelief, that he might
have mercy upon all. Where the Apostle testifies, that God of special Wisdom
did not confirm the first man against the fall.

Neither did he allot him such a portion of ability, that he might not be
seduced by the devil and moved to sio.

But that he therefore permitted him to be seduced, and fall into sin and
death, That as many as were saved out of the common ruin might be saved by his
mercy alone.

This fall was not praeter voluntatem Domini, That were to make a lame
providence; nec contra, for that were to make a weak omnipotence; but juxta
voluntatem Domini.

As nothing is done without the Everlasting and most good counsel of God, so
neither can this fall be exempted from it; though not as it was a sin to the
ruin of the Creature, but as a way to exercise the Justice and Mercy of the
Creator:

His justice in punishing, and his mercy in saving.

If in the world there had been no misery, there had been no mercy, no need of
Christ.

If no sin, no matter for his justice to show its self.

And yet herein the crime and fault of sin neither can nor ought to be laid on
God, but on man's will only, falling from the rule of his Creator, albeit
notwithstanding he fell from it by the eternal counsel of God.

God and man both willing the same matter, but not after the same manner, or to
the same end.

God neither willing it with man's intent, nor man with Gods intent. Adams
purpose being to be like God, Gods purpose being to manifest his own glory.

It being necessary in respect of Gods decree, but voluntary in respect of
Adams will.

The purpose of the Creator did not take away the Creatures freedom; for sin
being no positive being, has not an efficient cause but a deficient cause,
(that is) the will of the Creature sailing in obedience.

So that notwithstanding, God did hate the sin, and therefore did neither
absolutely will it nor cause it, yet he justly suffered it to be done.

I say justly, for whatsoever God does is good and just, and not disagreeing
from his nature and law, whether the reason thereof be known or unknown unto us.

I say suffered it to be done, for the Creator was not bound unto his Creature
to preserve him in his goodness, neither does the denial of such grace
disagree with the mercy and bounty of God, God having willed this, to be an
occasion of bestowing a greater grace and benefit, as it is apparent in the
fall and the restoring of man again.

For although it be mercy, not to rejoice in the ruin or destruction of the
Creature, yet mercy ought not to fight with justice.

It is most just that more regard should be had of the chief good, which is
God, both by himself and by others, then of all Creatures.

Wherefore very well do agree together in God his mercy and his justice.

His mercy which will not the death of a sinner, and his justice which
suffers mankind to fall, that thereby the goodness and severity of God may
appear.

So that briefly, in statu confectionis Adamus acceperit posse si vellet, he
received a power to be if he would, sed non habuit velle quod posset, but he
had not power given him to will that he might be.

Which first power having willingly cast away, man now can challenge no more
but what God will give, for God owes no Creature any thing.

If he gives it is of his free grace, if he withholds he does no man wrong.

In the second state in man fallen born of corrupt parents and yet not
regenerate.

Although man has lost that first grace of liberty to be if he will, yet the
will does work freely; but it is carried to evil only, and can do nothing else
but sin.

And the reason is, because the privation of the knowledge of God in the
understanding, ensued on the fall, together with the want of inclination in the
heart and will to obedience.

Instead where of blindness and averseness from God succeeded, the which man
cannot shake off unless he be regenerate.

Briefly, it is the fitness and pronenesse in man after his fall being
unregenerate to choose only evil.

Of this blindness and corruption of man's nature after the fall, it is said,
All the thoughts of man are evil, etc. Genesis 6.5. and can the Ethiopian change
his skin? Jer. 13.23. And a corrupt tree cannot bring forth good fruit, Mat.
7.28. and dead in sinnet, by nature the sons of wrath, Ephesians. 2.1.3. and we
are not able of our selves to think any thing as of our selves. 2 Cor. 3.5.

With these testimonies concurreth every man's experience, and the weary
conscience which proclaims that we have no liberty or pronenesse of will to
do that which is good, but too great freedom and readiness to practice evil,
unless we be regenerate, as it is said, Jer. 31.18. Convert thou me, and I
shall be converted, etc.

Wherefore there is no love of God in us by nature, and therefore we have by
nature no readiness to obey God.

From whence it comes to pass, that the enmity between God and man is not in
God, but in man, who will not now rank himself in the room of a subject, and
yield to the Lord the place of a Commander.

There is only now this question between God and man.

Whose will should be done? The Lord craves that man should subject his will to
Gods will.

But man aspires to make his own will the rule of his actions, and in this
miserable state lives every man not renewed by grace, he sets up within himself
a will contrary to Gods most holy will.

And this is the fruit of Adams apostasy; for in his Creation he had a perfect
conformity to the law or will of God, and had power to yield exact obedience to
the same. But now only a readiness to do evil.

But no power of it self to do good.

Thirdly, in the third state. Take a man as he is renewed, we deny against all
our adversaries that our will is a co-worker with grace, by the force of
nature; But we say it works by grace with grace:

We deny that grace does enable the will of it self to do good works if it
please: But we say that grace works in the will to please, and to do such
offices as God requires at our hands.

God does not hang his work upon the suspended If of our will, but he works
in us to will, and causes us to do the things that he commands to do, as
in Ezekiel 36.27. I will put my spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my
Statutes, and ye shall keep my judgments and do them.

We will indeed, says Augustine, but God works in us to will; we work, but
God works in us to work; we walk, but God works in us to walk; we keep his
commandments, but God works in us to keep them, according to that in the
Philippians 2.13. It is God that works in you both to will and to do of his
good pleasure.

So that in this estate the cause for which the will begins to work well is
this.

Because by the singular grace or benefit of the holy Spirit, man's nature is
renewed by the word of God, there is kindled in the mind a new light and
knowledge of God, in the heart new affections, in the will new inclinations
agreeing with the law of God.

And the will effectually moved to do according to these inclinations, and so
it recovereth both that power of willing that which God approves, and the use
of that power; and begins to be conformed and agreeable to God, and to obey
him, Deuteronomy. 30.6.

The Lord thy God will circumcise thy heart, and the heart of thy seed, etc.
and Ezekiel 36.26. a new heart will I give you, etc. and 16. Act^. 14. The Lord
opened the heart of Lydia, and 1 Cor. 3.7. Where the spirit of the Lord is
there is liberty.

And yet notwithstanding we must know, first, in this life, the renewing of our
nature is not perfect, neither as concerning out knowledge of God, neither as
concerning our inclination to obey God.

And therefore in the best of men while they live here, do remain sins both
original and others.

And Secondly, that the regenerate be not always ruled by the holy Spirit, but
are sometimes forsaken of God, God withdrawing himself for a season, either to
try them, that is, to make their weakness without God known to themselves, as
in Peter; or to chastise or humble them: but yet are recalled to Repentance
that they perish not.

Of the first the Aposte testifies, Romans 7.18. I know that in me, that is my
flesh, dwells no good thing: for to will is present with me, but I find no
means so perform that which is good. And in Mark 9.24. Lord I believe, help
my unbelief.

Of the second it is said, Take not thy holy spirit from me: and Esaias 63.17. It
is said. O Lord, why have thou made us to err from thy ways, and hardened our
heart from thy fear? Return for thy servants sake, the Tribes of thine
inheritance. and in the 1 Kings 8.57.

The Lord our God be with us as he was with our fathers, let him not leave us
or forsake us.

And therefore the regenerate in this life does always go either forward or
backward, neither continues in the same state.

Here then are deduced these two conclusions.

First, as man corrupted before he be regenerate cannot begin new obedience
pleasing and acceptable to GOD, so he that is regenerate in this life, although
he begin to obey God (that is) has some inclination and purpose to obey
according to all his commandments, and that unfeigned, though yet weak and
struggling with evil inclinations, affections, and desires; and therefore there
shine in his life and manners a desire of piety toward God and his neighbor,
yet he cannot yield whole and perfect obedience to God, because neither his
knowledge nor love to God is so great and sincere as the law of God requires.

And therefore it is not such righteousness as may stand before God, according
to the Psalm. 143.2, Enter not into judgment with thy servant O Lord, etc.

Secondly, they who are converted can no further retain good inclinations,
thoughts, affections, or purposes to persevere and go forward therein, then as
the holy Spirit works and preserves these in them, for if he guide and rule
them, they judge and do aright, but if he withdraw, they are blind, and
wander, and slip, and fall, yet so as they parish not, if so be they were ever
truly converted, according to these places, 1 Cor. 4.7. What have thou that
thou have not received, etc. 1 Philip. 4. and 2 Philip. 13. and John 15.5. and
1 Cor. 1.8. 1 Cor. 10.13. and 1 Pet. 1.5.

In the fourth estate after glorification, after the end and consummation of
this present life. In this liberty the will shall only be free to choose good and
not to choose evil and this shall be the perfect liberty of our will, by which we
shall not only not sin, but shall abhor nothing more than sin, and also shall
not be able to sin any more.

No place shall be for ignorance or for error, or any doubting of God, or for
the least stubbornness against God.

Because in the mind shall shine perfect knowledge of God and his will.

In the will and heart a most perfect and exceeding inclination to obey God, an
exceeding love of God, a joy and resting in God, and an agreeableness and
conformity with God, so much and in such manner as such Created vessels are
capable of.

And this shall continue for all eternity, they shall be continually ruled by
the holy Ghost in all their actions.

So that it cannot possibly be, that any of their actions there, should once
swerve from righteousness, and therefore it is said, they are as the Angels of
God in heaven, Mat. 22.30.

The liberty of the will shall be truly conformed and perfected to choose only
good, to obey and love God with unexpressible alacrity for ever.

And thus having laid down the fourfold state of man, and the fourfold
liberty of will answerable to his fourfold state, it may serve for one ground
to confirm the point in hand, That sin will have a being in the best of men,
so long as they are here.

Their renewed state upon earth being but begun not perfected, their state
being but a growing in grace, and profitting more and more, and prevailing in
mortifying their corruptions, but not attaining in this mortal life to have
grace consummate, nor corruption abolished, but sin in part remains and will
remain till they lay down the body, and be completely sanctified in the state
of glory.

And for farther confirmation, I shall lay you down the testimony of the
Scripture, the Confession of the Fathers, and some Reasons grounded upon, and
backed with the Word of God.

First, for Scriptures, see Romans 8.1. There is no condemnation, etc. In which
words we may observe, the Apostle does not say, that there is no sin to them
that are in Christ, but he says there is no condemnation to them.

In the foregoing Chapter he had confessed that he did the evil which he
would not do, and that he saw a law in his members rebelling against the law
of his mind.

But now he rejoices in Christ, that sin in him is not able to condemn him.

But here I expect from my friend either Cajetan or Aquinas false exposition,
or that of Mr. Parker, that the Apostle spoke this when he was a Babe in grace.

But I desire withal that they will acquaint us what state it was when the
Apostle acknowledges himself the chief. of finners, 1 Timothy 1.15.

The glorious Gospel was then committed unto him, enabled by Jesus Christ,
counted Faithful, and put into the Ministry, as you may see in the foregoing
verses: And yet then says he notwithstanding all this, This is a true and
faithful saying, JESUS CHRIST came into the World to save sinners Whereof I am
chief, (Mark) the present-tense, not preterperfect-tense, he does not say,
whereof I have been, but whereof I am.

Nay, I pray see the second Epistle, 1. from 6. to the 13. was all this when he
was a babe in grace? I would feign know how long it was between the time of
writing these Epistles to Timothy, and his Epistle to Philemon. 1. for there
verse 9. he was then Paul the aged.

But these Jesuiticall Cavillings and reasonings are too well known. They never
do nor never shall prevail against Gods truth.

Again, in the second verse, for the law of the Spirit of life which is in
Christ Jesus has freed me from the Law of sin and death.

Here we may observe, that the Apostle says not that we are fully freed from
sin in this life, but from the law of sin.

That is, both from the commanding and condemning power of sin.

Sin does not now reigns in our mortal bodies, neither now has it any more
power, to detain us under death.

But as for temptations of sin, Christian experience teaches that there is no
sort of men more troubled with them then they whom God has begun to deliver
from the law of sin.

For Satan being impatient of his loss, seeks daily to recover his former
dominion:

By which it may appear, That,

Our deliverance from sin is but begun now, not perfected.

But we know our God is faithful, by whom we are called, he shall also confirm
us to the end: Phil 1.6. even He who has begun a good work in us.

Blessed be the Lord, where before we were Captives of sin, now the case of the
Battle is altered, and changed:

Sin is become our Captive, through Christ:

It remains in us, not as a Commander, but as a Captive of the Lord Jesus.

The bolts of sin are yet upon our hands and feet, to admonish us of our former
miserable condition.

We draw the chains of our sins after us, which makes us indeed go forward the
more slowly.

But they are not able to detein us in that bondage wherein we lay before.

We are delivered from the law of sin whilst we live; and the nature of death
the wages of sin is so changed, That it is not the death of the man, but the
death of sin, in the man, mors est Sepultura vitiorum, says Ambrose, Death is
the burial of all vices, and, as Chrysostom says, As the Worm which is bred
in tho Tree, does at last consume it.

So death which is brought out by sin, does at last consume and destroy sin: in
the Children of God, sin will remain, though not reign.

Again in the 13. verse, If ye mortify the deeds of the body; whereby the
Apostle shows, That after regeneration by Grace, and before glorification,
Grace is not consummated, nor is corruption wholly abolished.

For although the Apostle affirmed before in the 9. verse, that these godly
Romans were not in the flesh, yet now he exhorts to a further mortification of
the lusts of the flesh, which exhortation were superfluous, if there were no
lusts in them that needed to be mortified.

Where we see clearly that which we also feel in our selves, that so long as We
live in the body, there is ever some remanent life of sin, which we had need to
mortify and put out.

Our life is therefore called a warfare, Bellum est non triumphus, says August.

And in this battle we must fight without intermission, till we have gotten
the victory, for who can say, that he has in such sort cut away his
superfluities, that there remains nothing in him, which has need of reforming.

When they are once quenched they kindle again.

Whatsoever he be, unless he dissemble, he shall always find within himself,
something that has need to be subdued.

Velis, nolis, infra fines tuos habitavit Jebuseus, will thou, nill thou the
Jebusite shall dwell within thy border, subjugari potest, ex termina non
potest, he may be subdued but cannot be rooted out says holy Ambrose, it is
impossble for a man to lead a Christian life, without a continual battle.

Again in the 17. of Jeremy 9. verse, The heart of man is deceitful above all
things, and evil continually, who can know it? which is not only spoken of a
wicked man's heart.

But the deceiptfulnesse is attributed to all men indifferently.

Christ only excepted, in whose mouth, or heart, there was no guile.

By nature all our hearts are alike.

Procreation is an natural act, though propagation be not from the instrument,
but from the author, Adam begat a son in his likeness: men beget children as
they are men, not as they are regenerate and holy men.

Nature with its corruption is derived, but not Grace, for that is
supernatural.

And the change that Grace makes in this life, is not such, but that in some
sort the hearts of the best are deceitful.

Christ indeed gave Nathaniell that praise, that there was no guile in his
heart; and David says the like of every justified man, Psalm. 32.2.

But this is true only of the Spirit of the new or young man, that is created
by God in the regenerate.

And not of that flesh, that old man, that by reason of his age is often too
hard for the young man.

Though the young man increasing daily, at length gets the victory: So that
thus the best expositors read this Text.

The heart of man is deceitful, even the whole heart of the wicked, because it
is wholly flesh.

And part of the heart of the godly, namely the unregenerate and fleshly part:
The heart of the wicked is deceitful, with a full, strong, and reigning
deceitfullnesse.

But the deceitfulness that is in the heart of the godly, is weaker, as being
discerned of them, and stroven against by them.

The heart of the wicked, shows its deceitfulness in the whole course of their
lives.

The godly only in some particular actions; as it is said of David, his heart
was upright in all things, save only in the matter of Vriah: the general
current of his life was far from deceitfulness, though not the particular
action.

Naturally, the heart of the wicked may be upright in some particular actions,
as Abimilech in taking of Sarah, Genesis 20.6. I know says God, thou have done
this in the uprightness of thy heart; yet not in the main of their lives.

For every regenerate man, is partly flesh, and partly spirit, whereupon
arises that war in their hearts; like the struggling of the two children in
Rebeckahs womb; and that continual wrestling between the flesh and the
spirit; so that their sins are but passing away not passed already.

And their newness of life is but renewing, and not wholly renewed, because
they are like the air at the dawning of the day, wherein darkness and light
are mixed together.

And though the regenerate may be like a cup of Wine mingled with water, that
is, not half water and half Wine, but wholly Wine, and wholly water:

Even as a Vessel filled with equal proportion of hot and cold water, is not
half hot and half cold, but wholly luke warm, that is, partly hot and partly
cold in all the parts of it.

For the regenerate man is not half old, and half new, but old throughout, and
new throughout.

That is, partly holy, and partly unholy, in all the parts and powers both of
his body and soul: although the denomination of a regenerate is always given
him in the Scriptures, a part praestantiori, from his better and more noble
part.

And therefore no Saint on earth is void of sin, his heart being deceitful,
as I have showed you by Gods own testimony.

Again, the Lord who made the heart, and searches all hearts, and to whom all
the imaginations of the thoughts before they are, are only known, as in Psalm.
139.2. pronounces us all guilty of sin, Genesis 6.5.

And shall we not give credence to Gods assertion?

Again, Romans 3.3. every man is a liar, and in the 9. and the 19. verrse, the
Apostle testifies that both Jews and Gentiles are all under sin, and according
to the Psalmist, there is none righteous no not one.

And remarkable is that, the 59. Esaias, to this purpose, and in the Revel. 3.20.
and Gal. 2.16. by the deeds of the Law shall no flesh be justified.

And in the 1 Kings 8.46. there is no man that sins not.

Again, for Job 9.2. in the 20. verse of the 8. chap. Bildad applying Gods just
dealings to Job, says, that God will not cast away a perfect man, the which
Job affirms and acknowledges in the 2. of the 9. chap. I know, says he, it
is of a truth, but how should man be just with God: mark in 30. and 31. verse.
If I wash my self with snow water, and make my hands never so clean, yet shall
thou plunge me in the ditch, and my own cloths shall make me to be abhorred.

So Psalm. 130.3. If thou Lord should mark what is amiss, who might stand,
etc and in 143. Psalm. 2. enter not into Judgment with thy Servant, for in thy
sight shall no man living be justified: that is, by his own righteousness
which is but as filthy rags, Esaias 64.6.

No man living, saving He whom God has made to be sin for us, who know no
sin, that we might be made the righteousness of God by him, 2 Cor. 5.21.
Mark, he does not say actively, that we should make or work our own
righteousness, but positively, that we should be made the righteousness of
God, and that not by by our selves, least we should glory in our selves, but by
another, even Jesus Christ the righteous, blessed for evermore.

Again, Job 14.4. who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean? not one: and
in Pro. 20.9. Who can say I have made my heart clean, I am pure from my sin?
Romans 8, 7. Pro. 24.16. Eccles. 9.3.

If my friends could produce but one such man, and prove it, I would yield the
Buckler: No, Caietan one of their own fraternity says, that damnatum est
peccatum, non extinctum, sin is condemned, but not extinguished, for in many
things we offend all, James 3.2.

Again, hereunto besides many, these and many more testimonies of Scripture,
that might be alleged, the suffrages of pure Antiquity in a sweet harmony does
agree.

I will quote some few of the Fathers; it was the prerogative of Christ alone
to know no sin, and to be found solus in hominibus, qualis quaerebatur in
peccoribus, alone such amongst men, as was sought amongst the beasts, an
immaculate Lamb without spot, and all we, like sheep have gone astray, Esaias
53.6. Gal. 3.22. optat. l. 2. Aug. cont. Relag. l. 2. C. 32. so Gregory. l. 3.
in. Reg. 6. says, There is no man which has not in him some corruption, which
he may and should lament.

So Lactantius cont. Gent. l. 6. cap. 13. No man can be without sin, so long
as he is burdened with the garment of the flesh.

So Hierom. cont. Jovin. li. 2. No man is clean from sin though he live but
one day on earth.

So Bernard in Cant. Sermon. 23 non peccare, Dei justitia est, not to sin is
the justice and property of God: but the remission of sins is the justice of
man.

And therefore as the Ivy will not dye until the Oak be hewn down; so our
sin will not dye as long as we live, neither will it ever be abolished until
death ends the conflict betwixt the flesh and the spirit.

Again, Ambrose de poenitent. li. 1. cap 6. It is not says he, the voice of
thy family, I am whole and need not a Physician, but heal me, O Lord, and I
shall be healed.

Also he spoke thus to the Novatian Heretics of his time, and it may fitly be
turned, over to the Jesuits of our time.

Dare thou, O Jesuit, call thy self clean and holy? albeit thou were clean in
regard of thy work, this one word were enough to make thee unclean. With him
agrees Aug. Sermon. 29. de verb. Apost. Sunt quidam inflati viri spiritu
electionis pleni, non magnitudine ingentes, sed superbiae morbo tumentes, ut
audeant dicere invenire homines absque peccato. There are (says he) some that
be like unto Vessels blown up with wind, filled with a haughty spirit, not
sollidly great but swelled with the sickness of pride: Who dare be bold to say
that men are found on earth without sin?

Of such as these (says he) I demand; What say thou then that art just and
holy this Prayer, Forgive us our sins?

Whether is this a Prayer to be said by Chatechists only, or to be said of such
as are believers and converted Christians?

Surely it is the prayer of regenerate men, yea it is the prayer of the Sons of
God; for they call God their Father in heaven.

Where then are your just and holy ones, in whom are no sins?

If the Regenerate and Sons of God have need to crave remission of sins, What
are you who say you have no sin? Liars says the Apostle, 1 John. 1.9.

And our blessed Savior, Luke 10.17. When you have done all, you can yet say,
etc.

But against this they have a silly subterfuge, albeit, say they, we were never
so righteous, yet for humility sake, we should say we are unprofitable.

I answer them as Aug. answered the same objection in his time, Propter
humilitatem ergo mentiris, then, (says he) for humilities sake thou lie: But
it is certain Christ never taught man to lie for humility. This is but one of
their old forged falsehoods.

Again, Bernard in Annunciat. Mariae, who lived in a very corrupt time, yet
retains this truth, Quis meliori Propheta (says he) de quo dixit Deus, inveni
virum secundum cor meum, and tamen ipse necesse habuit dicere Deo. Ne intres in
Judicum cum servo tuo.

Who better than the Prophet David of whom the Lord said, I have found a man
after mine own heart, and yet he had need to say, Enter not into judgment with
thy servant. Bernard, in Cant. Ser. 23. says, It suffices me for all
unrighteousness to have him reconciled unto me, whom I have only offended.

To be without sin is the righteousness of God: Man's righteousness is Gods
indulgence, pardoning his sin. We conclude therefore with him, In sermon.
contr. vitium. ingrat.

Woe to the miserable Generation, to whom their own insufficiency seems
sufficient; for who is it that has so much as aspired to that perfection which
the holy Scripture commands us?

I grant that in some sense godly men are called perfect in holy Scripture, in
the 3 to the Phillip. about the 14. it is written, Let as many as are perfect
be thus minded.

He moves the question, seeing he had said immediately before that he was not
perfect?

How does he now rank himself amongst those that are perfect?

How agrees these two, that he was perfect, and not perfect? Aug. in Ser. 38.
answers he was perfect secundum intentionem, non secundum preventionem, perfect
in regard of his intention and purpose, but not in regard of prevention and
obteining his purpose. And hereunto agrees that of Bernard, in Cant. sermon. 49.
That great chosen Vessel (says he) grants perfection, that is, a going
forward, but denies perfection; for (...) is not only he who has come to the
end, but he also is walking totowards it.

We are so perfect in this life, that we are yet but walking to perfection.

Therefore St. Ambrose in Romans 8.9. Apostolus aliquando quasi perfectis
loquitur, aliquando perfecturis, aliquando laudat, aliquando commonet, The
Apostle speaks unto Christians sometimes as unto men that are perfect, other
times, as unto men who are perfect in that which is required of them; that is,
somesometimes he praises them for the good they have done, and otherwhiles he
admonishes them of the good they have to do.

And as for that place, Luke 1.6. where it is said, that Zacharias and Elizab.
walked in the Commandments of God without blame. The Jesuits of Rhemes wrest
this to confirm their error, this making not for them.

August. has two reasons whereby he proves out of the same Scripture, That
Zachary was not without sin.

First, because he was a Priest, and was bound to offer, as well for his own
sins, as for the sins of the people, Heb. 5.3.

Secondly, in that the Evangelist says, he walked in the commandments of God,
etc.

It is an argument, he had not attained to the mark, for they that are at their
journeys end sit still.

To the which we may add a third, out of that same place the dumbness
inflicted upon him for his misbelieving, evidently proves, that he was not so
perfect as to be without sin.

Besides this, the Apostle constantly distinguishes betwixt peccatum and
crimen, betwixt sin and crime, that is, some grievous offense that gives
slander and is worthy of crimination: We affirm says August. That the life of
holy men may be said to be without crime, but not without sin.

And again he says, Men live well, if they live without crime.

But he who thinks he can live without sin, does not thereby make himself free
of sin; but debars himself of the pardon of his sins.

There is a two fold perfection or righteousness, first, Imputed which is by
way of relation, and does perfectly justify us before God.

Secondly, Infused by way of inhesion, subjectively in us, and this is but
inchoated and imperfect, and therefore cannot justify us in the sight of God.

Or I say with Zanchius, that the perfection within the holy Scriptures, or
writings of the ancient fathers, is ascribed unto the Saints of God; for their
righteousness and good works, is either Extrinsecall or Intrinsecall; First,
the Extrinsecall or adventitious, is that perfection of condonation, when our
imperfection is freely pardoned, for the death and passion of Jesus Christ,
according to that saying of August. All the Commandments of God, are reputed
as done, when that is remitted, which is left undone.

And this righteousness consists rather in the remissions of sins, than in
the perfection of virtue.

Secondly, the Intrinsecall is that perfection of inhesion; and this is said to
be either absolute or comparative.

First, it is said to be absolute when our hearts are sincere and simple, free
from hypocrysie and double dealing with God, so Job was a perfect man, and
David was a man according to Gods own heart.

Because his heart was ever seeking after God, and sincere toward him; though
through his infirmity he sinned against him.

Secondly, Comparative in respect of others; so Noah is said to be perfect,
Genesis 6.9. but observe, it was in generationibus suis, that is, in respect of
all others that lived in those Godless days.

And so St. Paul means, 1 Cor. 2.7. We speak wisdom amongst them that are
perfect, that is, amongst those that have greater measure of knowledge and
understanding than the rest of men have.

And for any other absolute perfection, St. Paul is absolutely against it, when
he professes of himself that he had not attained unto it, as in the place
before quoted, Philip. 3.

And says Bernard, super Cant. Sermon. 50. Who dares arrogate that to himself
which St. Paul denies?

Or I say that the intrinsecall perfection is two fold.

First, of Parts, Secondly of Degrees.

First, the former is when a man has respect, as the Prophet David says, unto
all the commandments of God, and allows not in his heart the breach of any
of them.

Secondly, the latter is, when a man exactly performs all that the Law in its
full rigor requires.

And he that is perfect in the first sense, may fitly be resembled to a weak
and feeble child, that has omnes parts integrales, but not integraliter, all
the integrall and perfect parts of a man, yet not integrally or perfectly.

But he that is perfect in the second sense, is like a strong and full grown
man, that has all his parts in their perfection.

And we confess, that the true servants of God in this life, may have the
perfection of parts.

Because that in some measure, they may love every good, and hate every evil;
though not continually as touching the exactness of performance.

Yet habitually as touching a constant resolution.

But that a man should have the perfection of degrees, we utterly deny because
that he can neither love the good, nor hate the evil as he should do.

And as for those Testimonies of Scripture, that the Jesuits, Bellarm. Becanus,
and others do wrest against us, to prove the perfection of the Saints in this
life: We answer with August.

First, That some of those places are exhortations showing us what we should
do, not proving what we can do; for admonitions do not show ut tantum
praestari possit quantum suadetur, that so much can be performed which is
enjoined, but they show us quousque conari oportet, how earnestly we should
strive to preserve them, though we be not able perfectly to observe them.

Secondly, That many of those places do show us, not what we are now in via,
in the way, but what we shall be hereafter in patria, at the end of our
pilgrimage, when we shall be freed from the imperfection of our flesh, and
clothed with the Garment of perfect righteousness.

Thirdly, That the Scripture in many places terms them perfect and immaculate
which have defiled their Garments, or polluted their Consciences. Mark, not
with no sins, which is impossible, with no gross sins, or damnable
enormities, which, as I said before, is commendable.

When they fashioned not themselves unto the world, nor suffered sin to reign
in their mortal bodies.

Fourthly, The Scripture pronounces men perfect, blameless, and blessed, not
because they have no sins, but because their sins are not imputed unto
them, as Psalm. 32.1.

And therefore though the Saints are called righteous and perfect, not only in
regard of the imputative righteousness and perfection of Christ, but also in
regard of that inherent righteousness, which is wrought in them by the spirit
of Christ.

Yet we must understand in what sense they are thus inherently called righteous.

For we must not think them to be so perfectly righteous, as to be void of sin,
or to be justified in the sight of God.

Because, that together with the sanctification of the Saints, there is still
in them a remainder of original corruption, by the touch and stain whereof
their best works are corrupted and defiled; and therefore we say, that although
the Saints and holy men of God may, and have lived sine scandalo, without
offense, and sine querela, without reproof, or without complaint on man's part,
by the observance of all outward precepts.

Yet it is imposible that the best of them should live and die sine peccato,
without sin 1 John 1.8.10. and that remarkable place in 4. Romans 2. If Abraham
had to glory, it was not before God.

We grant that the Saints of God in this life may be called righteous or
perfect in a four fold respect.

(Grow in grace.)







And thus you see how the Saints and true Servants of God may be called
righteous and perfect: But still we deny that they are therefore without sin,
or that they are thereby justified in the sight of God.

The best perfection of man in this life, is to find and to acknowledge
himself to be imperfect, as August. speaks.

In the next place I shall lay you down some reasons for the confirmation of
this position, That sin will have a being, etc.

And then I shall answer some objections, and their wresting of some Scriptures
for the maintenance of their Error.

And the first reason may be this, because there is not any amongst the Saints
of God mentioned in Scripture, that the spirit of grace has not charged with
some sin; the most perfect in their generations were not without their
failings, and that after their long walking with God; as Noah drunk, Lot
incestuous; Abraham had some diffidence, when he consented to unlawful means,
in going into Hagar, for bringing about Gods purpose; Sarah lied and
distrusted, when she laughed at the promise of a Son: Moses and Aaron were
barred out of Canaan for dishonouring God by diffidence and passion: Hezekiah
lifted up with pride: Job impatient, and humbled for it: David had foul sins,
and secret sins, which he repented for, and prayed against: Jehosaphat and
Asa reproved: Vzziah and Zachariah punished for sin, the one by untimely
death, the other dumb.

And yet these are reported in Scripture to have served God with all their
heart, with a perfect heart, and to have been faithful.

And therefore August. against the Pelagians, bids them examine all the Saints,
and all will confess that whilst they lived here they were not without sin.

And again the perfection we have is such, that we daily need to pray, forgive
us our trespasses.

If any Saint on earth had to glory, it was with men, but not with God; for
says the Apostle in that Rom 4.2. If Abraham were justified by works, he has
whereof to glory, but not before God.

Now, if this were the state of the best men, how may it be expected that it
should be otherwise?

Nehemiah 13.12. who, when he desired that his good service might be remembered
with Gods reward, he also prayed it might be remembered with Gods forgiveness?

So also we read that the high Priests offered for their own sins, and did
typically bear the sins of the holy things, noting that our best works want
Christ's atonement to make them acceptable.

They came not from such a pure principle of grace as do exactly fill the
Soul, but some corruption remaining stayns them with some defects, there being
in the principle of grace some defects, and the works flowing from it, some
imperfection: Because in this life it is not consummate, as I have showed, and
shall further show.

And therefore sin dwells in us, and is not wholly abolished. God reserves the
consummation of grace for the state of glory.

Grace is glory begun, glory is grace consummate: Glory inchoat here, grace
perfected hereafter. The spirits of just men made perfect are in heaven, Heb
12.23.

Faith, Hope, Charity:

For how shall they believe in him whom they do not know?

But the Apostle tells us, That we know but in part, 1 Cor. 13.12. and
therefore we believe but in part: So that our Savior may say of the best of
us, as once to his Disciples, O ye of little faith, Matt. 8.26.

And the best of us may say unto him; with him whose child was possessed, Mark
9.24. Lord I believe; help my unbelief.

Again, Faith is not simply perfect in this life, because that which is perfect
admits no increase nor addition: But there is no man that lives in this
life which can say that he believes so perfectly, as that he has not need
continually to pray, Lord increase our faith:

Therefore there is no man can say his faith is perfect; and yet his faith
shall be perfect hereafter.

For it is absurd to say there is no Faith in heaven, because Faith is tam
apparentium, quam non apparentium, as well of things seen, as of things not
seen, according to our common saying I believe mine own eyes.

Surely we must believe the continuance of that happiness which we have in
heaven, and therefore there is a perfect Faith in heaven, because it is
grounded upon a certain knowledge.





First, Because, as I proved before, We know but in part, and therefore we can
love but in part.

It is a Maxim amongst Divines, that tantum scimus, quantum diligimus,
imperfect knowledge cannot produce perfect charity.

Quod latet ignotum est, ignota nulla cupido, Ovid. Things unknown cannot be
loved, and according to our knowledge and acquaintance with any one, so is our
affection toward that one.

Bernard says We can neither desire what we know not, nor enjoy what we love
not: We love things according as we know them, and therefore seeing in heaven,
we shall know God so perfectly, as such Creatures are capable of knowing him,
many degrees better than we know him now:

We shall in like manner love him far otherwise than we love him now.

Perfect Charity expels fear, 1 John 4.18. but there is no Saint on earth
without fear, therefore no Saint here endued with pefect Charity.

for love is the fulfilling of the Law, in Romans 13.10. And perfect love is the
perfect fulfilling of the Law, and where the Law is fulfilled, there is no sin
committed, because sin is the transgresion of the Law, Gal. 5.14. 1 John 3.4.

But in many things we offend all, James 3.2.

And therefore there is no man endued with perfect Charity.

Greater love can no man have, says our Savior, than to lay down his life for
his friend, and yet this is not perfect; for they may do it out of vainglory,
pride, and ambition, for a vainglorious reputation, as many have done for the
safety of their Commonwealth.

They may do it for many other sinister ends, yet this cannot prove a
perfection of Charity.

There cannot be a greater argument and sign; yet our Savior does not bring
this to prove the perfection of our love.

Which we cannot judge of, because their ends, intentions, and many other
circumstances, which are requisite for the perfection of any thing, are unknown.

But to show the greatness of his love by the surest argument, that he could
make unto them, so far as might be understood by outward apprehension.

And as for the testimony of St. John 15.14. that is, an hypotheticall
proposition that can never prove the perfection of charity, because we are
never able to perform the condition.

For although Bellarm. says, We can keep Gods Word, that is, fulfill his
Commandment; yet he proves it not.

And for to say his Commandments are not grievous, and to say, that we can
keep them, is not the same.

For a thing may be very light, and yet heavier than I can bear; For the
Commandments are just, and holy and good, Romans 7.12. And the yoke of obedience
is easy and light, Mat. 11.30. yet it is more than we can do; and a great
deal heavier than we can bear, Acts 15.14.

And that not in regard of the heaviness of the things required; but in
respect of the weakness of us that should perform them.

It must therefore follow where there is imperfection of Grace; there must
needs be sin, but in this life Grace is not consummate and perfect, Ergo, etc.

Lastly, that which is the privilege of the Saints in Heaven is not to be
attained here on Earth; but to be exactly perfect, to be filled with God, to
have no defect or imperfection remaining, is the privilege of the Saints in
Heaven.

Therefore not the privilege of the Church Militant.

Here we pray, Enter not into Judgment with thy Servants.

O that my ways were so directed that I might learn thy Statutes.

Make me a clean heart, O God.

Here we still find our need of Christ our Mediator, who is our Advocate with
the Father, 1 John 2.1, 2. What need of an Advocate if no sin? When shall he
exercise his Office, if not for us in this life? etc.

Here we have cause to admire Gods Mercy, to bewail our sins, to go
forward, to rise after falls, to be kept by the mighty power of God, 1 Pet. 1.5.

But in Heaven, sin and fear shall be gone, and all tears wiped away from
our Eyes.

I hope what I have written may suffice for satisfaction, to them whose eyes
the God of this World has not blinded, that sin will have a being in the
best of men, so long as our souls have a being in these houses of clay.

As to our adversaries, I shall pray all that are faithful to pray with me for
them, that God would open their eyes that they may see their sin; and then I
doubt not but that they will be ashamed of their Doctrine.

Considering out of what puddles they draw them, either from Pelagius, or
Bellarmine, Bailey, Becanus, the Jesuits, or from the Adamits, who are conceited
that they are renewed to that purity which Adam had before the fall, Daneus on
Aug. de heresibus 6. cap. 31. or else from some of Romes fraternity, that are
now crept in amongst us, who are very well versed in the old trade of Arch
heritiques, falsifying truths to maintain lies.

But I doubt not but God will discover them in due time, and in the intervall
will keep them that are his, from being deluded by them.

What? Men without sin?

It was good hap for the woman that was taken in adultery, John 8. that her
accusers were none such as these Preachers, for if they had been such they
would have obeyed our Savior.

And the woman had not escaped without a volley of stones, about her ears.

And if it be true that they say, that a man may live and not sin; then that
Article is in vain to believe the forgiveness of sin: What need I believe
the forgiveness of sin, if I be without sin?

But to draw toward conclusion of this point; I shall say as the Eunuch
answered Philip, Acts 8.30, 31. When he asked, Understand thou what thou
read? How can I (says he) understand without a guide?

So we may answer the Lord, when he commands us to walk in his ways.

How can we walk in thy ways, O Lord, without a guide?

I shall therefore commend this counsel, to all people that desire to serve
the Lord, and to walk in his ways, as a point of good Religion.

To turn the Lords precepts into prayers, and to say with holy David, Psalm.
43.3. Send out (Lord) thy light and thy truth, and let them lead us into thy
holy Mountain and thy Tabernacle, and as in the 143.10. Let thy good Spirit
lead me into the land of righteousness.

And from blind Jesuiticall Guides, with their false pretended new lights in a
dark Lanthorn, their feigned lies, pretended Revelations, but delusions, Good
Lord deliver us.

Much good may their perfection on earth do them.

The Lord in mercy discover unto me my imperfections more and more, and humble
me in the sense of them so long as I live on earth, that I may always with the
poor Publican say Lord be merciful unto me a sinner: And that with St. Paul I
may still forget what is behind, and still press forwards toward the Mark,
putting forth all the strength that the Lord shall be pleased to lend me, and
improve all opportunities that the Lord affords me to the best advantage, for
the mortifying of sin and sinful corruptions in me, and for the growing in
grace until I attain unto the measure of the stature of the fullness of
Christ, which shall be after grace consummate in heaven hereafter.

And for him that can find perfection here on earth, let him never look for it
in Heaven.

Now in the last place I shall lay you down some of their arguments against
this truth, and some of the Scriptures that they wrest to maintain their error.

First, They deny original sin, and say it is taken away from the Saints of
God on earth; and therefore they cannot derive it to their posterity.

Unto the antecedent we answer, that we must distinguish of sin. There are
three things therein: the Offense, the Obligation, the Pollution.

For the first, Although God hates sin in his dearest Saints, yet this to the
regenerate man is abolished and blotted out by the mercy of Jesus Christ.

Secondly, For the Obligation of the Sinner to punishment, this likewise is
pardoned to such a man through Christ.

But as concerning the pure essence of sin, the pollution thereof, that is, the
vicious inclination or pronenesse which that sin leaves in us, to fall into it
or the like, this remains in them.

Although the power and strength of this be taken away, that it cannot reign in
a regenerate man, yet the life and being of sin is not quite taken away.

And thus we say, God forgiveth all our iniquities, and heals all our
infirmities, Psalm 103.3. quatenus as to the fault, guilt, and strength; yet
this is not done all at once, but gradually, by degrees, he begins this cure
here, and goes on from day to day. But this renewing is not perfected in this
life otherwise then as I have showed you.

Wherefore the godly do derive such a corrupt nature to their posterity as
they themselves have.

But they reply, That which Parents themselves have not, they cannot derive to
their posterity.

But the guilt of original sin is taken away from regenerate Parents;
therefore, at least, the guilt is not derived.

Unto this we answer, we must distinguish of the Major.

The Parents indeed convey not to their posterity that which by nature they
have not.

But they are freed from the guilt of sin, not by nature, but by grace and
benefit of Christ; wherefore Parents derive unto their posterity, not
righteousness which is freely imputed, but unrighteousness, unto which
themselves by nature are subject.

And the cause why they derive their guilt unto them, and not their
righteousness, is this.

Because their posterity is not born of them according to grace but according
to nature; Neither is grace and justification tied to carnal propagation, but
to the most free election of God, as Romans 9. Esau and Jacob.

Again, the death of Infants prove they have sin, because God being most
just, inflicts not this punishment but for sin, stipendium peccati mors.

Death went over all men, for as much as all men have sinned.

Although Infants do neither good nor evil, nor offend not after the
similitude of Adams transgression, yet they have sin in them, for which death
reigns over them.

They want not the faculty of will, though in act they will not sin, yet they
will it by inclination, and corrupt inclinations are sins, Romans 7.7. I had
not known lust to be sin unless the Law had said, thou shall not lust.

And thus says Ireneus and Chrysostom, Adams sin was no personal offense in
uno universi. Adam stood at the root of all mankind.

His sin was his hand writing by which he made all his posterity debtors unto
God even for that sin, though themselves should have sinned no more.

Secondly, They say concupiscence without consenting to it is no sin; and to
maintain this error, they bring Thomas Aquinas, who says, the first motion of
the lust of Adultery is not sin, because it is an imperfect act; but if
consent be given to it, then it is a perfect act, and is sin.

So Coster, in his little Enchiridion, affirms, that concupiscence proceeds
from sin, and tends unto sin, but is not sin; and this he labors to
express by this similitude.

He that hears (says he) another man speaking filthy language and consents
not to it, but rather is angry at it, and reproves it, sins not, but merits
a greater reward; Even so when our concupiscence sends out any sinful motion,
if we consent not we sin not.

And the Fathers of that Council of Trent, which have as many Curses as
Canons, have decreed in this manner.

Concupiscence, which sometimes the Apostle called sin, the holy Synod declares
that the Catholic Church did never understand it to be called sin, as it is
truly and properly sin in the Regenerate;

But because it comes from sin, and inclines to sin.

But for answer, We say that the Apostle, in 7. Romans toward the latter end,
condemns concupiscence for sin, even when consent is not given unto it.

For he protests of himself that he resisted these motions of sin, but was
oftentimes sore against his will captivated by them:

He condemns them as evil, albeit he gave no consent unto them; For the Law
does not only condemn sin in the branch, but also in the root.

There shall not be in thee any evil thought against the Lord thy God.



If the first motion of sin be not an evil in it self, as they say, then it
is not an evil thing to consent unto; For that which is not evil in it self,
by my consenting cannot become evil.

It is not then the consent following that makes the preceding motion to be
evil, but it is the preceding evil motion that makes the subsequent consent
evil.

Now as for Coster his similitude, it makes plainly against himself.

For it is true indeed, that he who hears evil spoken and reproves it, is
worthy of praise.

But it is also true, that he who spoke the evil has sinned; Even so albeit
we do well when we consent not to the motions of concupiscence in us.

Yet concupiscence is not the less to be condemned; because it has sent out
into the ear of our Soul, the voice of a filthy deslre, which is not agreeable
to Gods most holy Law.

And of this Judgment with us, are also the ancient Fathers, Aug. Ser. de
temp. 45. When I lust, says he, albeit I consont not to my lust, yet that is
done in me which I will not, and which also the Law will not: And again, thy
desire should in such sort be unto God, that there should not be in thee at all
so much as concupiscence which has need of resistance; for thou resistest and
by not consenting thou overcomest; but it were better not to have an enemy,
than to overcome him.

With him agrees also Bernard, That kind of sin (says he) which so often
troubles us, I mean Concupiscence and evil desires, may, and should be
repressed by the Grace of God; so that it reigns not in us, and that we give
not our Members weapons of unrighteousness to sin, and that way there is no
damnation to them who are in Christ, yet it is not cast out, but in death.

From all which it is evident, that the motions of Concupiscence are evil and
sinful, even when they are repressed, and no consent given unto them.

The Pelagians denied Concupiscence to be sin, but the Law says the
contrary, Thou shall not covet; and Rous. 7.7. Paul says, I know no sin but
by the Law, etc.

The Pelagians were condemned in many Counsels summoned and gathered together,
for confutation of Pelagius and Celestius their heresies, about the year 420.
and sometime after, as in the Milevitan Council, the fifth Council of
Carthage, and the Council of Palestina in the East.

I shall lay you down one or two of their main Objections.

Natural things are not sin: Concupiscence, which is a propension to those
things which are forbidden by the Law, is a natural thing; therefore it is no
sin.



So then it is natural, not of it self, but by Accident (to wit) in as much as
since the fall, it is born and bred with us.

As it is natural, that is an evil accident, inseparably cleaving to a nature
good in it self.

Secondly, there are several terms in the Syllogism, by reason of the
ambiguitie of the word natural; for in the Major, it signifies a good thing
created of God, in nature (to wit) man's Appetite before the fall, which was not
contrary to the Law and Will of God.

In the Minor, it signifies a thing which we have not by Creation, but which
we have purchased unto us after the fall.

An affection or appetite even in nature now corrupted to desire good things
and eschew hurtful things, is not sin, because it is a thing made of God;
but such is Concupiscence.



Because either they, affect not such objects as they ought, or affect them not
in such sort, and to that end which they ought.

And therefore are all vicious and very sins, Mat. 7.18. An evil tree cannot
bring forth good fruit.

To desire the fruit of a tree was natural, but to desire it contrary to Gods
express commandment, as it was desired of Eve, was a motion in its own kind
and nature corrupt and very sin.

That which is not in our power to cause either to be in us, or not to be in
us, is no sin: Concupiscence is so in us, that it is not in our power to
shake and put off; therefore it is no sin.



But by the Will and Law of God, whatsoever disagreeth here. with is no sin,
whether men have power to avoid it or no.

And God requiring of us impossible things does not injure us, because he
commanded them when they were possible.

Though we have now lost our ability of performing, yet God has not lost his
right of requiring that of us, which he left with us.

Sin makes men obnoxious to the wrath of God, but Concupiscence does not
make the regenerate obnoxious to the wrath of God; for there is no condemnation
to them that are in Christ Jesus; therefore Concupiscence at least in the
regenerate is no sin.



But this comes not thereof, as if Concupiscence were not sin.

For neither do other sins condemn the regenerate, not because they are no
sins, but because they are remitted by Christ.

In Baptism original sin is taken away; therefore Concupiscence is not sin
in those that are baptized.



But corruption and inclination to sin remains in them that are baptized.

And this is it that the Schoolmen say, the formal of sin is taken away, and
the material remains.

But they say, where the formal is taken away, there also the thing it self is
taken away, because the form of every thing is the cause of the being of it.

But in Baptism the formal of origall sin is taken away; therefore original
sin in it self is taken away in Baptism.



The formal of sin is taken away not simply, but as touching the guilt of it.

For there is double formal of sin.

First, a repugnancy with the Law, and an inclination to sin.

Secondly, the guilt which is the ordaining of it to punishment, the guilt is
taken away but the inclination abides, Romans 7.23. I see another Law in my
members rebelling against the Law of my mind, etc.

And this you see that although original Concupiscence is not a free and
voluntary transgression of Gods Law, and so not sin as actual sins be, but
an inbred perversity of nature that opposes the Law of God, and makes us apt
to transgress the same, it being like a fiery furnace, so hot though it yield
no flames, yet it is ever ready to burn every combustible substance that lights
upon it.

Yet it is most apparent that it is a sin, and that prohibited in the tenth
Commandment.

This I hope may suffice in answer to these objections, which have been so
fully confuted in former ages, that were not these men past all shame, they
would never go about to revive such Heresies, that we had hoped had long since
been buried amongst us.

But so long as there is a Devil in Hell, and a Pope at Rome, we must never
expect to be free from such disturbers of our peace.

Come we now to the Scriptures which they allege, and wrest to maintain their
errors, and against the truth of our position; that sin will have a being in
the best of men, so long as their Souls have a being in these houses of clay.

The first Scripture that we may take notice that they cite, may be that in the
Romans 6.6. we that are baptized into Christ are baptized into his death, That
the whole body of sin might be destroyed.

From whence they conclude, That the corruption of old Adam is quite abolished,
and that they are perfectly quitted from sin, and perfectly renewed by Grace:
Unto this I answer, as in part before, that the guilt of sin, which the Schools
term the form of sin, this is taken away in baptism.

Secondly, the corruption of sin, which they call the matter of sin, and this
is likewise to be considered two ways.

First, in respect of the dominion of sin, and thus the matter of sin is taken
away from the elect, because sin in them is not like a Prince that rules over
them, but like a Slave that rebelleth against them.

Secondly, in respect of the being of sin, and thus the matter of sin is
not taken away from Gods Saints, because St. Paul says, The flesh lusts
against the spirit, Gal. 5.17. and as he says of himself, Romans 7.23.

And therefore seeing the Apostle says not, let not sin be in your mortal
bodies, but let not sin reign. If no sin did remain there were no danger of
reigning: And as Aug. has well observed, it is apparent that sin and
concupiscence is taken away in Baptism, Non ut non sit, sed ut ne obsit, not
as touching the being of it, that we should be without sin; but as touching the
rule of sin, that it should not hurt us, nor hinder us to attain unto
everlasting happiness.

And so Anselme says in Romans 6.6. That the body of sin is destroyed.

Not that our inbred corruption should on the sudden be consumed in our flesh
that lives, but that it may not be imputed to him that is dead, though it was
in him while he lived.

Because sin is destroyed not from having a being in us while we are alive, but
that we should not be compelled to serve it in our life, and that it should not
deprive us of eternal life.

Romans Romans 6.2. cap. 7.4. 1 John 3.
6.2. We are dead to sin, dead to the Law, free from sin; And they that are
born of God, that is, regenerated and sanctified, do not sin; And that our old
man, that is, all the corruption of Adam, is destroyed and passed away, and all
things are become new, Quia Christianus renevatus est per omnia, because a
regenerate man is renewed in all things throughout, in every part and power
both of body and soul, and therefore the Regenerate are quite free from all
corruption of sin, and endued with all perfection of grace.

those or the like places, to show that sin is quite abolished and grace
perfected in the Saints, no otherwise then I showed unto you before.

Inchoative, non perfective, by way of inchoation, not perfection.

But the spirit of God by these forms or phrases would give us to understand
two special things.

First, To assure us that now sin is like a serpent crushed in the head,
according as God said, Genesis 3.15. That the promised seed should bruise the
Serpents head; and therefore can never recover his former strength, nor any
ways hurt the regenerate man, but only to bruise his heel, that is, by the
wrigling of her tail, to cause some temporary affliction to light upon them.

Secondly, to signify unto us that this should be the main scope of all
Saints, to strive continually to mortify the deeds of the flesh, and to do
their best endeavors to be clean rid of them, and for to perfect holiness in
the fear of God, 2 Cor. 7.1.

And this is plainly intimated unto us in all the exhortations of the
Scriptures, as where we are advised to abstain from filthy lusts, and mortify
the deeds of the flesh, and the like.

For if there were no lusts, no deeds of the flesh in us, to what end are we
bidden to mortify them?

John 3.9. quoted before, He that is born of God sins not, therefore, say
they, the regenerate sin not.

David, Peter, and others.

Secondly, He sins not as he is regenerated, but he sins as long as he
abides in this life, sin not reigning in him, and yet sometimes reigning too,
as he is regenerated but in part, and in part carnal; For regeneration or
renewing us to the Image of God, is not perfected in an instant, but is begun
only in this life, as I have formerly showed you, and in the life to come, is
at length finished; for so does John himself pronounce of himself, and all the
Saints in this life, 1 John. 1. If we say, etc.

And if we acknowledge our sins, he is faithful and just to forigve us our
sins; this therefore is the meaning of St. John, that the regenerate indeed
do sin: but yet not so as that they make much of their sin. Or do so at
any time yield and assent to evil desires, that they cast away all love of
godliness, and repent not.

For always in the regenerate there remains some remnant of a regenerate
nature.

Which causes either a strife against sin, or else true repentance (that is)
it suffers them not to sin to everlasting destruction.

Or thus more briefly, He that is born of God makes not a trade of sinning, he
lives not in his sin, he lies not in his sin, he delights not in his sin,
he sins not with purpose, with pleasure, with malice, with perseverance,
sin reigns not; but as the Apostle says, the evil that I do I would not
do, etc.

His seed remains in him, neither can he sin because he is born of God.



Pet. 1.23. Bring born a new, not of mortal seed, but of immortal, by the
word of God who lives for ever.

If therefore, say they, the seed of Gods word never dies in them that are
born a new, they ever remain regenerate and ever retain Grace, neither ever
fall into sin.



For still there abides in them some beginning or print of true Faith and
conversion, which although when they yield to evil inclinations or desires, it
is so oppressed and darkened that it neither can be known of others, neither
confirm them of the Grace of God, and their own Salvation for the present, yet
it suffers them not wholly to forsake God and the known Truth, and to cast
away their purpose of embracing by Faith, the Merits of the Son of God: So
David prays Psalm. 51.10, 11. Create in me a clean heart, O God, and renew a
right spirit within me, and restore me to the joy of thy Salvation.

He had lost therefore cleanness of Heart, rightness and newness of Spirit, and
the joy of Salvation, which he beggeth of God to be restored unto him, and yet
he did not wholly want them, for otherwise he would not have asked, neither
would he have looked for, from God, this renueing and restoring.



If they had been of us, they would have continued with us, says the Apostle,
1 John 2.19.

A good tree cannot bring forth evil fruit.



But if it be partly good and partly evil, such is the fruit also, whereof we
have sufficient trial and experience in this life.

Ephesians. 5.25, 26, 27. This shows us how Christ in this life by the Word and
Sacrament and the operation of Grace does cleanse us, that in the state of
glory we may be perfectly holy without spot or wrinkle: and that the words are
to be understood of the state of glory I shall prove by these ensuing Reasons.







The Church Triumphant without spot or wrinkle, and not the Church Militant.

Tim. 4.7. Paul had fought a good fight and finished his course, And, say our
adversaries, had he not subdued his body, and brought it into subjection? 1
Cor. 9.27.

I answer first, Paul fought a good fight and finished his course, being now
ready to be offered up, yet not so as to obtein exact perfection of Grace, and
so as to be without all sin inherent, of which he complains, To. 7.

Peter also led whither he would not, when he was to suffer, John 21.18.

Paul kept the Faith, and he who said to him my Grace is sufficient for thee,
my power is made perfect in weakness, enabled him to overcome though he had
corruption remaining, and buffettings of Satan.

Paul by fasting and prayer, kept down his body to bring it into subjection,
that he might not be rejected of God. And this shows his continual warfare
against the flesh; as Aug. says of himself, I have continual war, with
fasting, etc. noting that by fasting prayers, and tears, he fought against
corruption remaining.

Ephesians. 4 from the 10. ver. to the 15. God gave gifts, and teachers from Heaven
to bring us to a stature of perfection in Christ, for the edifying of the body
of Christ, etc.

I answer, We grant that the ministry of the Word is given, not only to convert
men from sin, but after to perfect them in holiness. But yet as the same
Paul speaks, Acts 20.32. which is able to build you up.

This is all to edify and build up the Saints more and more.

Yet though they grow under the Word and Ordinances, they do not attain to
exact and complete perfection; so as in this l^fe to be without sin or to
have Grace consummate, but still grow and edify one another in love.

But the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ, is attained in the
state of Glory, not in Earth; in the state of Grace we are growing, but not
exactly perfected till we are glorified in Heaven.

Here we have perfection of parts, there perfection of degrees.

The last objection which hitherto I have met with, that is necessary to be
answered, is this.

They say, That the Apostle prayed for the perfecting of the Saints, Heb.
13.20. 2 Cor. 13.9. 1 Pet. 5.10. and surely they prayed for things feasible and
attainable: nor can the prayer of Christ for the same be in vain, John 17.25. I
in them and they in me, that they may be made perfect in me.

I answer, the Apostles prayed for the perfecting of the Saints, and so did our
blessed Savior and they obtained what they prayed for (that is to say) to have
them sincere in this life and to have Grace consummate in the state of Glory.

Is sin pardoned and mortified, and yet remains?

I answer, It is so pardoned, as not to be imputed, it is so mortified that the
power and dominion of it is taken away.

Yet it remains to be more and more mortified, and wholly cast out at the death
of the body, the last enemy that shall be subdued is Death, sin shall be cast
out at the death of the Body, and Death shall be destroyed at the general
Resurrection, and so be the last enemy destroyed.

But say they, when must sin be purged out, if not here in this life? Must we
carry the remainder of sin into the Kingdom of Heaven, whereunto no unclean
thing shall enter? Rev. 21.17.

I answer, Men shall not carry the remainder of sin into Gods Kingdom with
them, but they shall lay it down at the death of the Body.

The Theif only converted shall be that day in Paradise: the souls of Saints
departed go home to God, and Grace is consummate into Glory: and as for that
Rev. 21.17. It is confessed by their own fraternity is the state of the Saints,
in Patria not in via.

And thus briefly have I proved unto you, the truth of the point, That sin
will have a being in the best men; so long as their Souls have a being in these
houses of clay, and this I hope may be sufficient to satisfy the people.

If I shall meet with any new argument from my Friend against the truth of the
point, God assisting I shall endeavor to answer them by way of replication for
their full satisfaction: as for the old arguments truly they are so stale, that
they stink before God, and good men ( Romes good Creatures excepted.)

They have been so fully answered and confuted, that were not men past shame,
set on work by Hell, and engaged for wages to Rome, they would forbear thus to
disturb the peace of Gods Church.

But we doubt not but, maugre the malice of Men and Devils, truth shall be
hereby made more manifest, and shall prevail.

And the folly of those that resist the truth shall be made manito all men. The
Lord grant that we may obey the Apostles command, From such to turn away, and
the Lord in mercy strengthen our faith in the belief of that promise, 2 Timothy
3.9. that in Gods good time it shall be performed. The promise is, They shall
proceed no further.

Come we now to the second Position, which is this. I deny that any man by
grace in this life can perform such perfect obedience to the Law of God as not
to offend against the same, or to be thereby justified otherwise than in and
through Christ of grace given.

And this, God assisting, I shall clear as the former, dividing the same into
three branches.


And first, of the first. No man can by grace in this life perform, etc.

For the better understanding the point we must know, that grace is an
equivocall word, and it is taken two ways in Scripture: First, pro gratia
gratis data: For the free gift of God infused into our hearts by the Holy
Ghost.

And secondly, pro gratia gratum faciente, for the free favor of God whereby
he makes us acceptable to himself; and in this sense we say that we are
justified by Gods grace, that is, by the free favor of God, whereby he
imputes not our sin unto us.

But accompteth us as just, by imputing the justice of Christ unto us.

Now according as grace is taken in the first sense, I say that so no man by
grace can perform in this life such perfect obedience to the Law of God, as not
to offend against the same, or to be thereby justified, etc.

God never gave, or ever will give such grace to any to fulfill the
righteousness of the Law in their own persons, and so thereby justified or
found righteous by the same; for it stands not with the glory of Christ that
any such grace should be given from above.

And the reason may be this; If by our infirmities the strength of Christ is
made perfect: It must follow that by our strength the virtue of Christ's Cross
must be abated, 2 Cor. 12.9.

And in 2 Cor. 5.20. the Apostle says, God has made Christ to be sin for us
who knew no sin, that we might be made the righteousness of God; as I said
before, he does not say actively that we should make or work our own
righteousness; but passively, That we should be made, that is ex indebita
misericordia, of Gods free mercy, the righteousness of God, and that, Not by
our selves, lest we should glory in our selves, but by another, Jesus Christ,
blessed for ever more.

And thus the Apostle, 3 Phil. 9. relinquisheth his own righteousness, That he
might be found in Christ, etc.

No man therefore by grace infused by the Holy Ghost can perform such perfect
obedience unto the Law of God in this life, as not to offend against the same,
or to be thereby justified, etc.

I grant that unto the Regenerate, the Law in some sort is possible.



in whom he is alone well pleased, Mat. 3.17.

And his fulfilling the Law is their fulfilling, though not in the same manner,
yet in as good effect as if it had been by themselves done, and that thus.

He for them, they by him; He actually performed, they by imputation; He by
virtue and merit, they by gift and grace.

This is the love of God, that we keep his Commandments, 1 John 5.3. But the
Law is impossible to the Regenerate in respect of God, that is, as touching the
perfect inward and outward obedience of the Law, as Psalm 143.2. Enter not
into judgment with thy Servant, etc.

In many things we offend all, James 3.2.

And who knows the errors of his life, etc. Psalm 19.

Isay 64.6.

We have been as an unclean thing, and all our righteousness is as filthy
rags.

Or thus, the perfect obedience to the Commandments of Gods Law is fulfilled
in us two manner of ways.

First, by application of Christ's righteousness to us; He is our Head, and we
his Members, and are so united with him, that now we are not to be taken as
sundry, but as one body with him.

By virtue of the which Communion it comes to pass, that that which is ours is
his, and that which is his is ours; So that in our Head we have fulfilled the
Law, and satisfied Gods justice for our sins, as I showed you before.



The Lord Jesus at the last day, when the last enemy, which is death, shall be
be subdued, shall bring it in us to perfection.

This is the end which Christ has proposed unto himself, Ephesians. 5.26. and
whereof he cannot be frustrate; as he has begun it so he shall finish it.

He shall conform us to the Law, the righteousness thereof shall be fulfilled
in us.

There shall not be left in our nature so much as a sinful motion or desire,
but he shall at the last present us pure and without blame to his Father. He
shall make us perfectly answerable to that holiness which the Law requires,
and in his own good time shall bring it to pass.

But that the Law is fulfilled in men in this life, is denied by some of their
own fraternity. Sin is condemned, says Cajetan, but not extinguished.

Again, the Apostle affirms possitively, That no man shall be justified by
the works of the Law, as in Gal. 2.16. remarkable, Romans 10.4. Christ is the end
of the Law for righteousness to all that believe: and in 2 Gal. 2. If
righteousness come by the Law, then Christ died in vain.

And in the 3. and the 11.1. it is evident, that no man is justified by the
Law, for the just shall live by faith.

And in the 18. verse, if the Inheritance be of the Law, it is no more of
Promise: But God gave it to Abraham by promise, and it is Faith that answers
the promise, obedience holds no proportion with it.

Again, in Romans 8.3. the Apostle says, For that that was impossible to the
Law, in as much as it was weak because of the flesh, God sending his own son
in the similitude of sinful flesh, and that for sin condemned sin in the flesh.

Where the Apostle, having in the first verse set down a Proposition of
comfort, belonging to them who are in Christ, and confirmed it in the second
verse, he here proceeds to the explication of the confirmation, and does
declare how it is, that Christ has freed us from the Law of sin: And first he
shows us in this place how Christ has freed us from the condemning power of
sin.

Namely, that he, taking upon him our nature, and therewithal the burden of
our sins, has condemned sin in his blessed body, and so disanulled it,
that it has no power to condemn us.

And this benefit he amplifies, showing that by no other means we could obtein
it.

For where without Christ there is but one way for men to come to life, namely,
the observance of the Law,

He lets us see it was impossible for the Law to save us.

And least it should seem that he blamed the Law, he subjoyns, that this
impotencie of the Law proceeds from ourselves;

Because that we, through fleshly corruption that is in us, cannot fulfill that
righteousness which the Law requires.

Now the impotencie of the Law appears in these two things.

under pain of death, which albeit most justly it be required of us,
considering that by Creation we received from God a nature so holy that it was
able to do the Law, yet now by reason of the depravation of our nature, drawn
on by our selves, it is impossible that we can perform it.



That the infinite debt of Transgression which we had contracted, should be
forgiven unto us.

This I say the Law could not do, for the Law commands obedience, but promises
not pardon of disobedience: Yea rather,

It binds the curse of God upon us for it.

And again, We stand in need of a suparnaturall grace, to reform deformed
nature, and this also the Law could not do, it being a doctrine that shows us
the way of life, but does not minister grace unto us to walk therein.

But all these which the Law could not do, Jesus Christ, by whom comes grace
and life, has done unto us.

Therefore there is no life to be found in the observance of the Law.

It being impossible for the Law to give: They therefore that seek life only
in the observance thereof, shall never find it.

Again, the Apostle in another place calls the Law the Ministry of death and
condemnation, and that because it instantly binds men under death, for every
transgression of her Commandments.

So that he that has eyes to see what an universal rebellion of nature there
is in man to Gods holy Law:

Yea what imperfections and discordance with the Law are remanent in them, who
are renewed by grace, may easily espy the blind presumption of those who seek
life in the ministry of death.

Yet so universal is this error that it has overgone the whole posterity of
Adam.

Nature teaching all men, who are not illuminated by Christ, to seek salvation
in their own deeds, that is, to stand to the covenant of works:

But the Supernatural doctrine of the Evangelist teaches us to transcend
nature, to go out of our selves, and to seek salvation in the Lord Jesus.

And so to use the Law, not that we seek life by fulfilling it, which here is
impossible, but as a Schoolmaster to lead us unto Christ, in whom we have
remission of our sin, sanctification of our nature, acceptance of our imperfect
obedience, benefits which the Law could never afford us.

Thus you see it is impossible for us in our own persons to fulfill the Law of
God, no such grace being given from above, as I showed you before, or if we
could; yet it is not possible for the Law to save us, not in respect of any
desert or imperfection in the Law; For the Law is just, good, and holy, Romans
7.12. But in regard of the corruption of our nature, which is not able to yield
such perfect obedience unto the Law as the Law requires.

Nay, I say further, that although the Law be good, yet it is not good to this
end, neither was it ordained of God for this purpose:

For the Law was given to a double end.

First, common to all men, Secondly, proper to two sorts of men. First, to the
Elect and Reprobates. First, in respect of all men the Law was given,

First, to show unto all men what was sin; for by the Law comes the knowledge
of sin, Romans 3. and I had not known that lust had been sin, had not the Law
said thou shall not lust.

Cor. 3. that the Law causes wrath, and is the ministry of condemnation,
because it shows unto us how justly we deserve wrath and condemnation.





And therefore it leaves them without excuse, if they leave the one and commit
the other.



As he that informs us of some dangerous disease, does tacitly advise us to
seek for some expert Physician;

So is the Law said to be our Schoolmaster to teach us by the manifestation of
our sins, to seek unto Christ for our deliverance.

But the Law was never intended to that end, that it should justify us, and of
it self bring us to eternal life.





And therefore it is apparent that by the works of the Law, no flesh living can
be justified.

Esayas tell you how acceptable these works are to God? Esaias 1. and, whether
they be like to justify them before God, or not?

For the Lord complayneth, that he is weary of them, that his Soul hates them,
and bids them to bring no more such sacrifice unto him.



If any works could justify, it must needs be that their works wrought in
them, and through them, by the Spirit of God, should justify them.

And yet we say, that the best works of the best regenerate men, cannot
justify them before God: And thus we prove it.

but in part given unto us, as I showed in the proof of the other position, and
so imperfect Graces: Not that the Spirit of God works imperfectly, but that he
means not here to enrich us with any Grace, while we are conversant with
sinful men in this vale of misery, but only so far forth as he sees fit to
bring us to the Kingdom of perfection, where that which is in part shall be
done away, 1 Cor. 13.10. and therefore our inherent justice being but as our
knowledge in part, and therefore imperfect, it is impossible that it should
perfectly justify us before God.



Yet seeing as fair water is defiled by running through a dirty Channel, so
our best works are tainted, when they pass through us that are so subject to
sin, and so many times polluted with so many iniquities.

It is unpossible we should be justified before him, in whosepresence nothing
in the least manner polluted can stand uncondemned: and therefore as the
Prophet says all our righteousness is as astained clothe, Esaias 64.6.

And as Gregory says, Moral. lib. 21. cap. 15. and lib. 5. cap. 7. All men's
righteousness should be found unrighteousness, if God should strictly Judge
it: And Aug. Woe to the most laudable and best life of man.

If God laying aside his mercy should discuss the same in the strictness of
his Justice; for alas! who knows not, that God is a God of pure eyes, which
found folly in his Angels?

And the best of men whilst he lives on earth is both a Saint and a sinner.

A Saint, by reason of Gods Grace wrought in him.

And a Sinner, by reason of his own natural corruption, which, in some
measure, tainteth every Grace of God.

And therefore not only the worst of men, but also the best of Gods Saints,
that being compared with their fellows, might seem just indeed.

Yet looking to the strictness of Gods justice, they disclaimed all their own
righteousness, and relied wholly upon the righteousness of God: so Job 4.17,
18, 19. and Job 15.14. and 9.2.3. and Psalm. 130. and Psalm. 143.2. and Saint
Paul says, 1 Cor. 4.4. That he knew nothing by himself:

Yet he confesses that thereby he was not justified, because that although he
served God most faithfully in the inner man; yet he saw another Law in his
members, which did always rebel against the Law of his mind, and made him
therefore cry out, O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from this
body of death? Romans 7.

Ezekiel 18. and makes us guilty of all the Law, as the Apostle witnesses
James 2. and that we are so prone to commit sin, and so frail to resist sin,
that in many things we sin all:

And therefore taught to beg every day of God, that he would forgive us our
trespasses. It is impossible that any righteousness of man should justify him
before God.

Paul says plainly, Romans 3.28. We conclude that a man is justified by faith
without the works of the Law: and Gal. 5.3.4. That is, if you seek to be saved
or justified by the works of the Law, then are you bound to fulfill the whole
Law, and so you have no need of Christ. But no man is able to fulfill the whole
Law, therefore it is impossible that you should be justified by the works of
the Law.

And that St. Paul excludes not only ceremonial works, or moral, or any
other ki^de of works before we receive faith, but also all works whatsoever, it
is hereby apparent:

For he writes these things, not to unbelieving Jews, but to the Galatians;
they were believing Christians.

Abel was first accepted, and then his offering: And therefore it is impossble
that any works shall justify us, when we must be justified before we can do
any works that can be accounted good.

But then it may be objected, That it is to no purpose to do good works, if we
can neither be justified by them, nor merit by them.

I answer, That as gold is good, yet not to assuage hunger; for then Mydas had
not died with gold in his mouth.

And as the Sun has diverse admirable effects, yet is not able to make a blind
man see; so then Bartimeus had had no need of our Saviors help, that he might
receive his sight:

So good works have many profitable and available necessary uses, yet not to
justify us before God, nor to merit any thing at the hands of God; For when we
have done all we can, we are unprofitable, etc. Luke 17.10.

That if God gives us Commandments which we could not perform them.

First, It were in vain to exho^t us to obey them, seeing we are unable to
perform them.

Secondly, His promises of happiness for performing them were but mockeries,
as if I should promise a Child a thousand pounds for carrying away a Millstone,
which, I know, he is not able to wagg; such were rather mere mockeries than
true promises.

Thirdly, (...)nishments should he unjust upon the transgressors, because
(...)ommandements are beyond their power of performance:

For Laws must be made according to the power that we have to perform them,

Else may he as well be termed a Tyrant and unjust, that enacteth the Law which
we cannot keep, as he which punishes an Innocent which never offended.

But these cannot stand with the wisdom and justice of God; and therefore it
cannot be that God should give us a Law beyond our ability, or the performance
of obedience.

To this I answer, That the consequence is false; for though God commands us
things that we cannot perform:

Yet these consequences cannot follow, because as August says de lib. arbit.
cap. 16.

God commands us to do those things which he knows we are unable to do,
that we might learn to know what we ought to seek of him; and so likewise for
three special ends.

Adam received strength to fulfill it; and we had had that strength, if Adam
had not lost it.

cannot do it; because man abusing his power and free liberty to do what he
would, did loose himself and his power, that now he must do what he would not.

Because as Adam received that strength both for himself and us; so he lost it
both for himself and us.



We might sue unto the Throne of Grace for mercy, and for the gracious
assistance of his holy Spirit, whereby we may be enabled in some measure to
perform that which he so justy requires.

As August. says, In the Commandment we must know what we ought to have: In
the punishment we must learn, that we our selves are the cause of all our wants.

And in prayer we must understand from wh^^^^ we must supply the defects, that
is, from God.

Or to answer more methodically, I say, That God, being on Mount Sinai to
deliver a Law, not de novo, that was never given before, but such as was
formerly engraven in man's heart, and now defaced and obliterated through sin;

It was not for him to bend the Rule of Righteousness, to the crookedness of
our affections to make it answerable to our abilities:

But rather to set down a straight Rule;

Not in favor of our sinful nature, but to express our whole duty, though it
be impossible for us to perform it, now after we have lost our ability.

For as he that lent thee a thousand pounds, may without injustice demand the
same of thee, when he knows that thou through thy lavishnesse have spent all,
and as a Bankrupt, art not able to pay one penny;

So God, having given us power to obey all his precepts, may at any time most
justly call for the performance of the same, though he knows that we, by our
sins, have made our selves unable so much as to think a good thought, 2 Cor.
3.5.

But our Adversaries have and do further object, That a regenerate man has
sufficientia principia rectae operationis, sufficient causes and means of well
doing; as knowledge to understand what is good, will to desire what is good,
and power to effect what is good, his soul being enlightened, sanctified, and
assisted by Gods Spirit; therefore he may do what is good, and all what God
commands.

I answer, That we grant a regenerate man to be enabled to do good, but how
far enabled?

Surely not perfectly, for our knowledge is but in part, obscured with
ignorance; our will is distempered with many turbulent affections, and our
power hindered to do many good things we would do, by many lustful
temptations.

And therefore these principia operationis being not perfecta principia, our
actions cannot be perfect which proceed from them.

Who can tell, says David, how often he offends? Cleanse thou me from my
secret sins.

You see Gods Saints have secret sins.

I may have many sins, and fail in many things, which no man knows of, nor
my self, but only known to God.

I may sin, and not know mine own sin, yet God sees the same.

We cannot judge men's hearts, for we know not our own; it is Gods preroagative
to search and try the Reins, Jer. 17.9.1 John 3.20.

And it is our duty to pray with Nehemiah 13.12. Accept my obedience, but
pardon mine iniquity.

That chosen vessel was compelled to say this, although he knew nothing by
himself, yet he knew that thereby he could not be justified.

And this I hope may suffice, for the clearing the first Branch of the second
Position, That no man can perform such perfect obedience to the Law of God, as
not to offend against the same; or by his obedience thereunto, be justified
before God.

And for further confirmation of the truth thereof, I dare appeal to any man's
conscience, if he be not too arrogant, how upon the confirmation of Gods strict
Judgment, and his own manifold infirmities, he dares justify himself in any
one act against God?

And I doubt not but the proudest heart would soon tremble, and the boldest
face would blush and be ashamed and afraid to have his best works, even his
prayers scanned according to the strictness of Gods Law, or the rigor of Gods
Justice:

And of the adversaries to this truth, I require this one thing, That they will
either produce a man, and prove it,

That has ever performed in his own person, such perfect obedience to the Law
of God, as not to offend against the same:

Or else let them acknowledge their error with shame, and forbear opposing the
truth and disturbing the peace of Gods Church.

Lest by persisting in their malicious wickedness, their sin become
unpardonable.

I shall pray for them as for my self, that the Lord would be pleased to
convince us of the errors of our ways, humble us in the sense of our sins,
and be merciful to our poor Souls.

Come we now to the second Branch of the second Position, which has in it
these two parts to be considered.

First, That no man can be justified by the works of the Law.

Secondly, That we are only justified by the righteousness of Christ.

And first, of the first. In part I have cleared it before, but for further
confirmation,

The Apostle Paul reasons admirably and plainly in this point, saying, Romans
15.6.

If Salvation be of Grace, it is no more of works; for else were Grace no more
Grace: And if it be of works it is no more of Grace; for else works were no
more works. But Salvation is of Grace; for by Grace ye are saved through
Faith, and that not of your selves: It is the gift of God, not of works, lest
any man should boast, Ephesians. 2.8.

And our Savior tells us plainly, that when we have done our best, We are but
unprofitable Servants; Ergo, Salvations is not of works.

Again Reason it self, drawn from the Scriptures, does sufficiently prove, that
we cannot be justified by our works:

For if any works do justify us, they must be done either before or after
justification. But,



Because evil trees cannot bring forth good fruit, and being not done of
Faith, they must needs be sin; for whatsoever is not done of Faith is sin:
and without Faith it is impossible to please God, Heb. 11.6.

Whereupon Saint Paul says, That all men before they be ingrafted into Christ
by Grace are the Servants of sin, far from righteousness, and bringing
forth nothing, but fruits deserving shame and death, Romans 6.20.



The cause must precede the effect.

And so August. tells us, That good works do not go before him, that is to be
justified, but do follow him that is already justified.

And therefore, as good fruits cannot be the cause of the goodness of the
tree; so good works cannot be the cause of justification.

And that place of the Apostle which I cited before, Romans 3.20. makes it clear,
By the works of the Law, no flesh shall be justified.

For first, in the 9. ver. he tells us, That both Jews and Gentiles are under
sin, because all are transgressors of the Law.

Therefore all the world must be guilty before God, and can no ways be
justified by pretending innocence in keeping the Law.

Secondly, He shows the Reason, why no flesh can be justified by the Law;
because the Law convinces us of sin; for by the Law comes the knowledge of
sin:

But the Law convinces them that are under Grace, and which has the greatest
measure of Grace, to be sinners, Phil. 3.9.

Therefore they that do the works of the Law, by the help of Grace, cannot be
justified by the Law; because the Law shows them likewise to be sinners, as
well, though not as great, as they that endeavor to keep the Law without the
help of Grace:

And therefore the Apostle concludes, That we are all justified by the
righteousness of God, without the Law; as you may see in Romans 3. from 2. ver.
therefore not by any righteousness of the Law, done either by the help of
Grace or without Grace;

For he that obeys the Law, how ever he does it, with the help of Grace or
his own strength, yet he has the same righteousness.

The righteousness of the Law, because the different manner of obteining it
alters not the nature of the thing.

But the Apostle shows a great difference betwixt the righteousness of the
Law and the righteousness of Faith.

For Moses describes the righteousness which is of the Law, That the man
which does these things (however he does them, by his own strength, or some
other help, if he does them) he shall live by them, Romans 10.5. But the
righteousness of Faith speaks on this wise, If thou shall confess with thy
mouth the Lord Jesus, and believe in thine heart that God raised him from the
dead, thou shall be saved, ver. 6.9.

And therefore seeing the Apostle opposes doing of the Law, and believing in
Christ, and not doing the Law by our own strength, and doing the Law by the
help of grace,

It is apparent, That we can never be justified by the works of the Law, by
what means soever we do them, whether by the strength of nature, or by the
help of grace.

But Bellarm. in his first Book, cap. 19. de justific. labors to prove, that
all works of the Law are not excluded from our Justification by three especial
Reasons.



And so to be justified by Faith, were to be justified without Faith.

Romans 3. That neither the Jews by the bare observing of Moses Law, nor the
Gentiles by their moral Works:

And so neither Jews nor Gentiles, before they believed in Jesus Christ, could
be justified by any Works that they could do.

Romans 4.4. shows, That the Works which he excludes from Justification, are
those Works to whom wages are due, by debt, not by grace; and those (says
Bellarmine) are all such Works as are done by our own natural abilities,
without the assistance of any supernatural grace.

But for answer unto all these, I say,



But we deny Faith to justify us, as it is a Work performed in obedience to
this command, but as it is an Instrument embracing the righteousness of Jesus
Christ: It is not the act of beleiving, but the thing holden and possessed by
believing, that is, our righteousness.

Bellarmine is mistaken in the whole scope of the Apostle, and that St. Paul
does not only not give us the least intimation that he means that we are not
justified by any works done by our own natural strength.

But rather shows, that in as much as we are all sinners against the Law;
therefore by our obedience to the Law, howsoever done by grace, or without
grace, no man can be justified in Gods sight.

Romans 4.4. intends no such distinction of Works, as Bellarmine alleges, but
he excludes all Works, as well those that are done by the help of grace, as
that are done without grace, from the Justification of Abraham:

For those Works of Abraham are excluded wherein Abraham might glory before
men; but these are the Works that he did by the help of grace; for otherwise if
he were justified by the Works done without the help of grace, he might as well
glory before God as before men.

But the Apostle tells us, That although by these Works, done by the help of
grace, he might glory before men, yet not before God;

And therefore not justified by these works in the sight of God.

For if we could be justified by any works, howsoever done by grace or not
grace, then the wages (that is eternal life) is not counted of favor, but of
debt: But when we cannot be justified by our works, but by believing in him
that justifies the ungodly that is in Jesus Christ, that we are justified by
his righteousness and saved by his merits; Then Faith, says the Apostle, and
not any kind of Works, is imputed unto us for righteousness, Romans 4.5.

I shall then close this point with these conclusions.





First, Whosoever is a transgressor of the Law, cannot be justified by his
obedience to the Law; For by the Law comes the knowledge of sin, Romans 3.20.

That is, the Law convinces all such to be sinners, and condemns them as
transgressors:

And therefore, they can never be pronounced guiltless by that Law which proves
them guilty.

But every man is a Transgressor of the Law, as the Scripture teaches, Romans
3.9. Gal. 2.1 John 1.8. and 10. and our Consciences testify it to our faces.

Therefore no man can be justified by his own obedience to the Law.



And the Law being broken, there is no way to be justified by the Law, but only
by making a plenary satisfaction for the transgression.

But this no sinners satisfaction can do; because a finite Act can never be of
sufficient value, to satissie the offense that is done against an infinite
goodness:

And likewise, because all that we can do is required of us as our duty to the
Law, and therefore cannot be rendered as a payment for the breach of the Law.

To conclude this branch, We are not under the Law for justification of our
persons, as Adam;

Nor for satisfaction of divine justice, as those that perish; but we are under
it as a document of obedience and a rule of living.

It is now published from Mount Sion as a Law of liberty, and a new Law, not as
a Law of condemnation and bondage.

The obedience thereof is not removed, but the disobedience thereof is both
pardoned and cured.

The observance thereof is necessary as a fruit of faith, not as a condition of
life and righteousness, necessary necessitate Praecepti, as a thing commanded;
the transgression whereof is an incurring of sin; not necessitate Medii, as a
strict undisponsible means of Salvation, the transgression whereof, is a
peremptory obligation to death.

And thus much briefly of the first branch; wherein I have clearly showed unto
you, That no man can be justified by the obedience to the Law, nor the works of
the best Christians cannot justify them.

Come we now to the last Branch, and that is, That we are only justified by the
righteousness of Christ.

We believe and maintain, as the Scripture teaches us, That we are acquitted
and absolved from all our sins, and so justified in the sight of God, by and
for the righteousness of Jesus Christ.

Romans 5.18. As by the offense of one, Judgment came upon all men to
condemnation; so by the righteousness of one, the free gift came upon all men
to justification of life.

And in 2 Cor. 5. last verse. He that knew no sin, God has made him to be sin
for us, that we should be made the righteousness of God by him.

And in Act. 13.39. For all things which ye could not be justified by the Law
of Moses, by him every one that believes is justified.

And 1 Cor. 6.11. Ye are justified, that is, in whole, from the guilt and
punishment due to you for your sins, in the name of the Lord Jesus, that is,
for the merits and righteousness of Jesus Christ.

But some may here object and say, The Righteousness is Christ's, and how can a
man be justified by the justice of another?

I answer, As sin is ours by propagation, so righteousness is ours by
imputatiou: and as Adam derived sin by nature to our condemnation, so Christ
brought life by his obedience to our justification.

So if many be made sinners by the disobedience of one man;

Then how much more shall many be made righteous by the obedience of one man?
especially, seeing the nature of Christ was far more divine, than the nature
of Adam, and thee fore more powerful in ability to work this effect to
justify us, than Adam's was to condemn us? And in 1 John 5.11, 12. That
eternal life which God gives us, that is, that righteousness whereby he
brings us to eternal life, is in his Son.

And this the Apostle does most excellently show unto us, when he says, that
God made Christ to be sin for us, and as in the place before cited, 2 Cor.
5.20.

For as our sins were made the sins of Christ, not by alteration of them
inhesively into his own person, but by assumption of them imputatively to make
satisfaction for them, as fully and as truly as if they had been his own
inherent sins.

Even so the righteousness of Christ is as truly made ours by imputation, as
if we had most perfectly fullfilled the Law, by our own actual operation.

And therefore justification is a gracious and judicial action of God, whereby
he judges the elect, being in themselves liable to the accusation and
condemnation of the Law, to be just and righteous by faith in Jesus Christ,
through the imputation of his Justice, to the praise of his glorious power, and
the eternal salvation of their souls.

Now for the Canses of justification: they are especially, first, Efficient,
secondly, Material, thirdly, Formal fourthly, Final; and each one of these
must be considered two ways: first, Actively, in respect of him that justifies
us; secondly, Passively, in respect of Man that is justified First, The
principal efficient Cause of this our justification actively considered, is
God freely purposing to send his son to be made man, to work righteousness
for men. 1 Pet. 1.10. Gal 4 4. then in the fullness of time sending his son
made of a woman, made under the Law; then revealing his son to us by the
preaching of the Gospel, and persuading us to believe the same; and to lay
hold on the son of God, by the operation of his blessed Spirit, and then
accounting to us the obedience of his son for our righteousness.

To show that he is the beginning, the middle, the end of our justification:
And to prove this, the Lord himself says, Isay 43.25. I, even I, am he that
blotteth out thy transgressions for my own sake, and will not remember thy
sins. And the Apostle plainly says, Romans 8.33. It is God that justifies:
And the very Scribes that rejected Christ most impiously, professed this most
truly, that none can forgive sins but God only: And so Gregory says, It is
meet that he should be the giver of Grace, which was the author of nature:
Gregory in Psalm. poenitent. pithily says, It is his office to absolve the
guilty, by whose justice he is made guilty.

Again, The impulsive Cause, that moved God to do all this for man, we find
to be two fold, first Internal, secondly Eternal.

The first is, The mere Grace and free Mercy of God toward man, and that
because he would be merciful unto man.

Because we can ascribe none other Cause of Gods Will, which is the cause of
all things, but only this, Quia voluit, because it pleased him: And therefore
St. Paul attributes our Redemption to the Riches of h^^ Grace, 1. Ephesians. 6, 7.
Romans 3.24. and so likewise in 3. Tit. 4. he says, that after the kindness and
love of God our Savior toward man appeared, not by works of righteousness
which we have done, but according to his mercy he saved us, by the washing of
Regeneration, and the renewing of the Holy Ghost, which he shed in us
abundantly, through Jesus Christ our Savior: Whereby you see the Apostle
makes the Kindness, and Love, and Mercy of God to be the first efficient
principal Cause or Motive, that moved God to send Christ to be the means to
save us.

And St. Aug. in Psalm 30. Idoe, de not. and great. says, That it is the
ineffable grace of God, that a man, guilty of sin, should be justified from
sin; And especialy, against the Pelagian Heresy, that magnified nature to
vilify, and almost to nullify Grace: He says, That the grace of God, whereby
Infants and men of years are saved, is not procured by deserts, but tendered
freely without merits: And so Anselmus in Romans 12. says, That because all men
are shut up under sin, the Salvation of man comes not in the Merits of men,
but in the Mercy of God.

The second is, Christ, God and Man, which purchased by his Merits, that we
should be justified in the sight of God, because the chastisement of our peace
was laidupon him, that we by his stripes might be healed, Isay 55.5.

Secondly, The material Cause of our justification actively considered, is
Jesus Christ: And the benefits we have by Christ are especially two; First,
Redemption, Secondly, Propitiation.

First, Redemption is a word borrowed from the use of wars, and it signifies
freedom from captivity: And thus Christ is our deliverance.

First, From the wrath of God: Because he is our reconciliation unto God,
through faith in his blood, Romans 3.25.

Secondly, From the Tyranny and Dominion of sin: Because, That obeying from
the heart the form of Doctrine which is delivered us, that is, the Gospel of
Christ, we are made free from sin, and are become the servants of Christ, which
is our Righteousness, Romans 6 18

Thirdly, From the punishment of sin: Because it is against Justice, that the
punishment should be inflicted when the sin is pardoned.

For sin being the cause of punishment, it must needs follow, that sublata
causa, etc. the cause being defaced, the effect must be abolished.

Psalm. 73.13. Chastised every morning.

And therefore how can it be, that albeit he forgiveth the guilt of their
sins, yet, as the Prophet says, Psalm. 99.8. he punishes their inventions.

For as many as I love, I rebuke and chasten, Rev. 3.19. Heb. 12.6. etc.

And that for a double end; First, principally, for our Salvation, that we may
not be condemned with the World, 1 Cor. 11.32.

Secondly, Subordinately, for our Sanctification, That we may be partakers of
his holiness, Heb. 12.10.

Secondly, Propitiation is a reconciling us to God, through the blood of
Christ, and it is the accomplishment of that which was typified by the
Mercy-Seat, Exodus chap. 30.

For first, As God gave his Oracles unto the people out of the Mercy Seat; so
he did reveal his will unto us by Jesus Christ, John 1.17.

Secondly, As God was said to dwell between the Cherubims which covered the
Mercy-Seat; so in Christ the fulness of the Godhead dwells bodily, Coloss.
2.9.

And thirdly, As God was made propitious and favorable to his people, to
assist them, and bless them, by the blood which the High Priest sprinkled
before the Mercy Seat; so is God pacified and reconciled unto us, and procured
to enrich us with spiritual blessings, through the blood of Jesus Christ, Col.
1.18.

Again, The ground of those benefits, or meritorious cause thereof, is the most
perfect and absolute obedience which our Savior Christ performed unto his
Father, for our sakes; and is to be considered, first actively, secondly
passively.

First, the active obedience of Christ is, a most perfect performance of Gods
Law, even to the utmost tittle thereof. Touching which we must consider,

First, That although Christ, as Man, fulfilled the Law for himself, that in
both natures he might be a holy High Priest, to offer Sacrifice unto God;

Yet, as Mediator, as God and Man, he became subject to the Law; and did fully
and perfectly execute the same for us.

For Christ is not only our redemption, by that ransom which he paid for our
sins; but he is also the perfection of the Law unto Salvation, unto every one
that believes.

And there be three things that prove the necessity hereof, to be performed for
us.

First, The Justice of God, that will not justify the wicked, Pro 17 15. Exodus
20.5. but such as are just and righteous, either by a proper, or imputed
rigteousnesse.

Secondly, The Office of a Mediator, that was to undergo for us whatsoever was
required of us to be done.

Thirdly, Our recuperation or recovery of happiness, which could not be
obtained without perfect righteousness; because the death of Christ freeth us
from eternal death, and the obedience of Christ brings us to everlasting life.

And therefore we say, That Christ was born for us, not only auferre peccata, to
take away the sin of the World, by his voluntary suffering the most bitter
death of the Cross;

But afferre Justitia, to bring righteousness to us, by his plenary obedience
to the most holy Law of God.

And therefore those Scriptures that do ascribe our whole Salvation unto the
virtue of Christ's death, are not to be taken exclusively, or denying the active
obedience of Christ to be imputed unto us.

But Synechdochically, for the accomplishment of the whole obedience of Christ
that was to be performed for us: and with this agrees the major and melior part
of all orthodox Divines and most of the Fathers.

Secondly, The passive obedience of Christ, is all the sufferings of Christ
both in life and death for our sins; because the justice of God required,
that we should never be freed from death without a just punishment, laid upon
our selves or upon some other for us.

And therefore the Prophet Isay prophesied. That the Messiah should be broken
for our transgressions, and bruised for our iniquities, Esaias 5.35.

And Daniel says, He should be cut off, but not for himsef, Dan. 9.26.

And St. Peter says, He did bear our sins in his own body on the Cross, 1
Pet. 2.24. and St. John says, Rev. 15. That he washed us from our sins in
his own blood.

And here we must observe, that this obedience of Christ, is of sufficient
merit to satisfy for all sins, by reason of the dignity of the person that
did obey; for the hypostaticall union of the Manhood of Christ with his Godhead
makes the obedience of Christ to be of unvaluable value, Acts 20.28.

Thirdly, The formal cause of our justification, actively considered, is the
free imputation of Christ's actual righteousness, whereby the merits of
Christ's obedience is applied unto all believers, that is, the accompting of us
as just and righteous, for the merrits of that obedience which Christ has
effected for us;

For as we apply unto our selves the righteousness of Christ, and make the
same our own, by Faith and acceptance;

So God himself applies it unto us by imputation, and accepts us for
righteous, for the righteousness of Christ.

And this imputation of righteousness, is a work of Grace, not of nature, a
communicating of another righteousness unto us; and not a conferring of any
real or habitual righteousness upon us.

And this is a sweet exchange, says Justin Martyr in Epist. ad Diogen. That
one should be made sin for many, and the iniquity of many should be covered
with the righteousness of one: and that the justice of one should make many
that are unjust, to be reputed just. To omit what most of the Fathers speaks to
this purpose: I shall only note one of their own, Friar Farrus, Ser. 1. in Dom.
1. Advent. where he says, Christ has made all his partakers of his justice
and merits; that so they might be able to stand in the sight, and to sustain
the judgment of God;

Because, says he, there is no mortal man living; whose righteousness can be
sufficient to attain unto eternal Salvation:

And therefore his righteousness is made ours; not, because it is infused or
translated into us, to abide habitually in us:

But, because it is imputed and reputed unto us; when God does acquit from
sin, and adjudge us just, for the justice of Jesus Christ.

And therefore the force of our justification, is not any habitual sanctity,
subjectively remaining in us;

But the righteousness of Christ, freely imputed unto us; and so though it be
without us, yet it is made ours by right of giving.

The Apostle remarkably in Romans 4.6.7. joyneth both the imputation of
righteousness, and the remission of sins, as the two special means to make
us happy.

Blessed is the man, unto whom God imputes righteousness without works: And
blessed is the man; to whom the Lord will not impute sin.

But this righteousness of Christ imputed unto us, must be considered in a
three fold respect.

First, In respect of the truth of our imputed righteousness: And so we say,
that we are as truly righteous before God, as Christ himself; because we are
righteous with the sime righteousness, as he is righteous.

Secondly, In respect of the quantity: But so we deny that it is in the same
measure in us as it is in him: for in him it is in its fullness and largest
measure; but in us it is only received, so far forth as it serves to
justify any particular Believer.

Thirdly, In respect of the quality: And so we say, That this is not in the
same manner in us, as it is in him: for he is righteous actually, we
imputatively: he subjectively, we relatively in him and unto him.

And so in these two last respects, we cannot be said to be equally righteous
with Christ; though we be righteous with the very righteousness of Christ.

He perfectly righteous, we righteous, by reason of our imputative and
inchoative righteousness. Again, as Christ is called holy, and sin, and is
said to know no sin, and to be made sin:

We must thus understand it, Holy in himself, and sin in us, not by infusion
of our sins into his most sacred person, but by the imputation of our sins,
and the acceptance of the guilt and punishment thereof upon himself;

So likewise we are said to be just and sinful: just in him by the imputation
and application of his justice, and sinful in our selves, by the inbred
corruption of our own flesh.

Lastly, The final cause of our justification actively considered, is the
glory of God, which he acquired unto himself, by that wonderful composition of
his Justice and Mercy toward men: Justice, that he would have his own Son to
dye, to make satisfaction for our sins; rather than our sins should escape
unpunished;

And Mercy, that he would have the righteousness of his Son, to be imputed
unto his Servants; rather than we poor slaves should be destroyed for our
sins.

And thus much briefly of the causes of our justification actively considered,
in respect of God.

Now in the second place, we must consider the causes of our justification
passively, in respect of man.

And first, The efficient cause of our justification passively considered, is
wholly Isntrumental, and it is two fold: First, External, which is the
preaching of the Word and the administration of the Sacraments: These are the
chief outward Instruments, which God uses for the application of Christ's
righteousness for the justification of his Servants; and therefore the Gospel
is called, the word of life, Acts 5.10, 13, 16. And the Ministry of
Reconciliation, 2 Cor. 5.18. And the Sacraments are called, the Seals of the
righteousness of Faith,

And our Savior says of the Preachers of the Gospel, That whose sins they
remit, they are remitted, etc. Mat. 18.18.

Secondly, The Internal Instrument, whereby we apprehend the Grace of
justification is only Faith in Jesus Christ: For Christ is set forth to be our
reconciliation through Faith in his Blood, Romans 3.25. John 1.12. Gal. 3 24.

And therefore, the righteousness of Christ is called, the righteousness of
Faith: and we are said to receive Christ by Faith, and to receive the promise
of the Spirit by Faith.

Es. 45.24, 25. Ezekiel. 20 44. Hab. 2.4. Romans 3.24, 26. Gal. 3.8. Acts 13.39.

And so in many other places the Apostle does inculcat the same truth, as Gal.
4 5, 24. and our Savior says, John 3.14, 15.

That is, be justified and so be saved only by believing in him; as those
Israelites that were bitten by those fiery Serpents, Numb. 21.9. were healed
and so saved alive, only by looking up to the brazen Serpent.

The Fathers also are plain and pregnant herein, Chrysostom. in Romans cap. 3.
idem. Sermon. de fide and luce not.

Says, God has justified us, using thereto no works of ours; but only
requiring faith in Christ.

And without Faith no man obtained life.

But I am able to show, that a faithful man has lived and obtained the
Kingdom of Heaven without works; so the Thief did only believe and was
justified: And Basil. in Sermon. de humilitate says, This is to glory in the
Lord, when a man does not boast of his own righteousness; but does acknowledge
himself destitute of righteousness and justified only by faith of Jesus Christ.

who hear his voice and follow him, etc.

Whom he predestined unto life, and elected to be justified before the
foundation of the World, Romans 8.30. Whom he did predestinate, them also he
justified: And Rodolph in Levit. lib. 17. chap. 2. says, That the blood of the
High Priest was the expiation of the sins of all Believers; and so Christ he
has taken away from the Elect, not only original sin, but also all actual
sins, that is, in respect of the guilt and punishment and dominion of sin,
but not in respect of the corruption and pollution of sin, which still
remains in the best Saints; And has likewise given to them everlasting life,
says Haymo in Romans cap. 5. and to none else does justification appertain; and
the Reasons may be these.

All those that are justified shall be glorified; For whom he justifies, them
he glorifieth, Romans 8.30. but all men shall not be glorified, because the
Kingdom of Heaven shall be given but only unto them for whom it is prepared,
Mat. 20.23.

Secondly, Because Christ is called Jesus, for that he should save his people
from their sins, Mat. 1.21. But though all men are his people jure creationis,
by right of creation, yet all men are not his people jure donationis, given him
to be redeemed; For of them thou gave me, I lost none, John 17.12. And ye
belive not, says Christ, because ye are not of my Sheep, John 10.26. therefore
he shall not justify all men, thereby to save them from their sins.

Thirdly, The formal cause of our Justification, passively considered, is the
particular application of the righteousness of Christ, unto every faithful
soul; where these two things are to be considered; First, That Faith must apply
unto us all the benefits that Christ has effected for us. Secondly, That every
man in particular must apply those things to himself. For the first, This is
one of the manifest differences betwixt the faith of Gods Elect, and the faith
of Devils and wicked men, That the godly do apply all the benefits of Christ
unto themselves, and the other know them, but have not the grace to apply them;
for so says Augustine and Peter Lumbard, lib 3. sent did. 23. That there is a
great difference between him that does believe Christ and him that does believe
in Christ; for the Devils believe Jesus to be Christ, but they believe not in
Christ.

Because it is one thing to believe God, another thing to believe that there is
a God, and another thing to believe in God.

For to believe God, is to believe, that he speaks the truth in Scriptures; and
to believe God, is to believe that God is:

But to believe in God, is to believe with love; and, by loving him, to go
unto him, and to cleave unto him, to be made one with him, to dwell in him, and
he in us; and this is that faith, by which a sinful man is instrumentally
justified and accounted righteous in Gods sight.

For the second, We must understand, that this application of Faith, or of
Christ through Faith, must be particularly applied by every man unto himself,
and that in a most special manner;

Because a general Faith is not the right justifying Faith; For St. Paul
testifies, that Agrippa did believe the Prophets, Acts 26.27.28.

And yet Agrippa confesses that he was no Christian.

And a natural man, by the force of reason, may be induced to acknowledge a
God, and that this God is powerful, just, and true, and therefore to a
general persuasion of the truth of such things as are to be believed.

And yet all this faith is not sufficient to justify us;

Because the true justifying Faith is no natural quality, but a supernatural
gift of God, as the Apostle teaches, Ephesians. 2.8. Phil. 1.29. and therefore the
general faith of the Scriptures is not sufficient to make us Christians; but
as we read, the Saints of God do apply the promises of Salvation unto
themselves, as David says, God is my Rock and my Redeemer; and Job 19.25. I
know that my Redeemer lives; and Mary says My Soul rejoices in God my
Savior, Luke 1.47. and I homas says My Lord and my God. John 21. and Paul,
Galat. 2.20. Christ loved me and gave himself for me: So must every Christian
that looks for salvation apply in particlar the grace and favor of God to
himself; and this faith instrumentally justifies the sinner.

Lastly, The final cause of our Justification, passively considered, is peace
of Conscience in this life, and the atonement of eternal happiness in the
life to come.

The first is attained unto by two especial things:

First, by an assured persuasion, that all our sins are forgiven us; So being
justified by Faith, that is, from all the sins that we have committed, we
have peace toward God through Jesus Christ.

Secondly, by an unwearied study, to strive against the stream of our own
natural corruptions, and to keep a constant course in the ways of godliness:

For Christ gave himself for us, and did bear our sins in his body upon the
tree, that we being dead to sin should live unto righteousness, 1 Pet 2.24.
or as Zanch. says, 1 Luke 74.75. and so St. August. That Christ died for the
wicked, not that they should remain wicked, but that they being justified
through faith, should be converted from their wickedness, and bring forth the
fruits of holiness; Because, as St. August. says, also grace justifies that
we might live justly.

The second end of our Justification is, That the eternal blessedness, which
shall be attained hereafter, when Christ shall say unto all his justified
Saints, Come ye blessed, etc. Matthew 25.34.

And so much for all the Causes of our Justification actively and passively
considered.

And I hope this may suffice for the proof of the truth of this last Branch of
the second Position, That we are only justified by the righteousness of Christ.

I shall end with that of our Savior, John 12.48. The word that I have spoken,
the same shall judge you in the last day.

I pray God to enable us all to hold the unity of the spirit in the bond of
peace, and that we may renounce all those Doctrines that sets up any thing of
man, to the abasing of Christ; And that we may embrace those Doctrines that
abases man and exalts the Lord, according to that of the Psalmist, Not unto us
Lord, not unto us, but unto thy name give glory, etc. Psalm 115 1.

FINIS.

