THE Reconciler OF THE BIBLE: WHEREIN Above Two Thousand seeming Contradictions
throughout the Old and New Testament, are Fully and Plainly Reconciled. Being
necessary for all those that desire to understand the Sacred Scriptures aright
unto SALVATION.

By J. T. Minister of the Gospel.

LONDON, Printed for Simon Miller at the Star in St. Pauls-church-yard, near
the West end, M. DC. LVI.

Imprimatur, Edm. Calamy.

To the Reader.
THE Scripture of the Old and New Testament 2 Timothy 3. 16.
revealed from God by the Prophets and Apostles, since it is the rule of
heavenly doctrine, it ought to be held in high account amongst us. For so many
as walk according Gal. 6. 16.
to this rule, peace be on them and mercy, and upon the Israel of God, etc. But
for as much as the enemies of divine truth are adversaries to those who
continue in the same, it is no wonder that they fear not, both to resist the
spirit by whom it was inspired, and to accuse the work of contrariety and
imperfection. Though the Scripture have no real contrarieties indeed in its
self, (for the Spirit of God, by 2 Pet. 1. 21.
whom those holy men that writ it were led, being not Chrysostom. in Genesis hom. 1.
contrary to himself, did so govern the matter, that it should wholly agree in
all parts) yet some apparent contrarieties there are in it, which cause some
difficulty to the Reader; yet the whole body of the Doctrine is not therefore
to be accused of obscurity, as though the will of God could not thence be
certainly known, concerning things which appertain to Religion. Nothing is
searched out there, which is not to be found easily in some other place, nor is
there any opposition in the Scripture, witness Aug. lib. 5. c. 8. de Genes. I
will never dare to think, says Justin Martyr, in Dial. cum Tryph. Judaeo, nor
speak, that the Scriptures can be adverse to themselves, but if any Scripture
seem to be so, and has a color as though it did contradict some other
Scripture, I will rather confess that I understand not the things there
spoken, being certainly persuaded, that no part of Scripture can be opposite to
any other part thereof, etc. This is that I undertake to prove in this
Reconciliatory Bible, wherein are reconciled above Two Thousand places of the
Sacred Scripture opposite in appearance, in a plain order, by the Canonical
books of the Old and New Testament, (short collections of each Book, and
Chronologicall numbers being set down before them) and the truth of the divine
word is proved to be uniforme, to the honor and love whereof, all that doubt
of the consent of the same, are modestly invited. Some man perhaps will object
that some things are borrowed by me from others; which I deny not; for in
compiling this Synopsis, I thought it more safe and discreet, to follow the
steps of the most approved Interpreters, then without the authority of famous
men, in this most corrupt age, which is full of Error and Heresy, to invert
any thing of my own brain, and to publish it to the world. And I hope that the
Courteous Reader, and the equal censurer, are not ignorant, that in the study
of Divinity, nothing can be said now, that was not said before. And it is most
profitable, that many Books should be Eccl. 110. Aug. tom. 3 de Trin. lib. 1.
c. 3.
made by many men, of the same things, in a diverse style, but not in a
different faith. And he shall find that I have compendiously gathered together
in this Concordance, that which the greater works of learned men contain more
at large; so that here he may, as it were at a single view, comprehend the
matter. Let those famous men have the praise, who have set forth large handfuls
in this harvest. I would not that any one should derogate from their Orthodox
labors, but let them have it rather then my self. Yet I doubt not, but that
he who was, and is effectual in their large and learned Commentaries, will
supply me with his grace, and be present to these gleanings.

If any one condemn my brevity and rudeness of my style, I sought to be brief,
but not obscure; because brevity is profitable, and is accounted most
acceptable always; by this there is nothing lost in the substance. My
religious mind bad me stop this little body with solid meat, not with lofty and
windy words (if there be any thing found in it that is not as it should be, I
crave pardon; what is not spoken religiously enough, let it pass as not
spoken) far be it from me that I should arrogate to my self, as though I had
exactly written without error; for I am not he of whom it may be said, He made
it, in the perfect tense, D. Mart. Luth. in praef.
but I stand in the last rank, who scarce dare say, I would have made it; yet
in great matters it is suffient to be willing. Wherefore I being much
solicited by some like my self, that is of the meaner sort, and by the most
pious desire of my intimate friends, by this little Book of mine, first
intended for private use; I would, nay I am obliged to do them good; but not
them who suppose they better understand these things, For who is sufficient for
these things?

Christian Reader, I do patiently and willingly beg of thee, that according to
thy Piety and Candor, thou would sincerely interpret of this my study and
duty performed, in collecting these Concordances of the Bible, and would
look upon it with the same mind that I writ it, that is, with a single and
good eye. Our Lord Jesus Christ, who of God is made 1 Cor. 1. 30.
unto us wisdom, and righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption, in
whom are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge. Sanctify, reconcile
and enlighten us by his holy Spirit, that being reconciled in him, we may
remain for ever, to the praise of his divine grace, and our own salvation.
Which is the desire and prayer of

Your daily Orator at the Throne of Grace, J. T.

RECONCILIATIONS Of the Places of the OLD TESTAMENT.
THE sacred Scripture of the Old Testament is the Word of God brought down from
heaven, from the beginning of the World unto the coming of the Messiah,
preached by the Prophets almost 4000 years, writin Hebrew, except some few
things in Chalde, (Esdras. 4, 5, 6. Dan. 2, to 8. Ezekiel. 10. 11.) called by the
Jews, Esirmve arba, that is, twenty four, divided by Christ into the books of
Luke 24. 27.
Moses, the Prophets and the Psalms.

The Books of Moses.
THe Pentateuch, that is, the five Books. Also the Ocean of Divinity, the
Hebrews call the 1. Bereschit, that is, in the beginning. 2. Velle Semoth,
These are the names. 3. Vajer, He called. The 4. Vajed daber, And he spoke. 5.
Elle hadebarim, These are the words, both in Greek and Latin, 1. Genesis. 2.
Exodus. 3. Leviticus. 4. (...). Numbers. 5. Deuteronomie.

GENESIS.
THe Generation of the World, is so called, because of the Creation before the
flood, and the restoring of it after the flood, and the administration of it by
the Patriarchs unto the birth of Moses; it contains the history of 2310. years.

The Places that are seemingly contradictory.1. Genesis 1. 22. And on the seventh
day God ended his work. Chap. 2. 4. All things were created in the day that the
Lord God made the heavens and the earth.

Reconciling.God created the world and all things therein contained in six
days, and not in one day altogether. The first place therefore is meant of
certain, natural and artificial days. The latter contains indefinitely the
time of the Psalm. 95. 7. Heb. 3. 13.
creation of things. So this day is put for the time of grace.

2. Genesis 1. 2. And the Spirit of God moved upon the face of the waters. Joh. 7.
39. The Holy Ghost was not yet given.

In the first place, the treaty is concerning the person and existence of the
holy Ghost: in the latter concerning the gifts of the holy Ghost, and the
miraculous pouring forth thereof in the day of Pentecost, after the
resurrection of Christ.

3. Genesis 1. 5. God called the light day, before the Sun was. Ecclus. 43. 2. The
Sun when it appears declares the day.

The light which first made the day, was not an other light from the light of
the Sun, but that light which God had dispersed through the hemisphere, which
he collected afterward into the body of the Sun.

4. Gen 1. 27. and 9. 6. God created man after his own image. Chap. 5. 3. And
Adam begat a son in his own likeness after his image.

The Image of God, after which God created man at the beginning, was depraved
by the fall of Adam, and so he begat such a son as himself, a corrupt sinner,
and blind in spiritual things.

5. Genesis 1. 27. God created man, etc. in the image of God, male and female
created he them. 1 Cor. 11. 7. The man is the image and glory of God, but the
woman is the glory of the man.

The woman was created in the beginning 1 Pet. 3. 6. Genesis 24. 9.
after the image of God so well as the man: Paul considering the distinction of
sex, says, that the man came nearer to the image of God in respect of his
dominion, and the end, because the woman was made out of the man, and for the
man.

6. Genesis 1. 2. and 9. 1. Be fruitful and multiply and replenish the earth.
Luke 23. 29. Blessed are the barren and the wombes that never bare.

Children before and since the fall are a blessing from God absolutely:
Barrenness is commended by Christ not simply, but by reason of a judgment was
to fall upon the Jews, and of that heavy calamity to ensue, wherein the flight
would be easier for one alone then for a mother and her little ones; so, Woe be
to them that are with child, and to them which give Mat. 24. 19.
suck in those days.

7. Genesis 1. 28. Multiply and replenish the earth. 1 Cor. 7. 7. For I would that
all men were even as I my self.

Whether Paul were then a Bachelor or a married man, is uncertain; that he was
married his words imply, where he says, Have not we power to lead about a
Sister, or a woman (a wife) as well as the other Apostles? otherwise he had not
been sure of a wife. If he were a Bachelor, he speaks conditionally, unless
the propagation of mankind and of the Church should be hindered.

8. Genesis 1. 31. And God saw every thing that he had made, and behold it was
very good. Eccles. 1. 2. Vanity of vanities, all is vanity.

All the Creatures are good in respect of the creation, and their nature; but
Ecclesiastes condemns their vain and evil inclination, which is not natural
to them, but came upon them by the fall of man.

9. Genesis 1. 31. All that God made was very good. Romans 8. 20. For the Creature
was made subject to vanity, not willingly, but by reason of him who has
subjected the same in hope.

Before the fall every creature was in a better condition then after the fall;
for contrary to nature, they are become subject to the lust of wicked men, and
so to many afflictions, by reason of him who has subjected the creature, that
is, God, under this hope that it shall be at last delivered from the tyranny of
the wicked.

10. Genesis 1. 31. God saw every thing that he had made, and behold it was very
good. Mal. 1. 3. I hated Esau.

Every creature of God is good, and so is Quaest. ex Epist. ad Romans
Man as he is a creature, but not as a sinner, says August. God therefore
hated Esau for his sin, and set him after his brother Jacob.

11. Genesis 2. 2. God rested from all his works Exodus 20. 11. Deuteronomy. 14.
that he had made. Joh. 5. 17. and 14. 10. My Father works hitherto.

God rested from all the works of creation, and of things that should be in
nature: but not from his works of Providence, care and sustentation, for
without that all would return to Psalm. 104. Act. 17.
nothing and perish.

12. Genesis 2. 15. God put man into the garden of Eden to dress it. Chap. 3. 19.
In the sweat of thy face shall thou eat bread.

If Adam had continued in innocence, labor should have been pleasant unto him:
but because he sinned, therefore must we labor with much sorrow and trouble.

13. Genesis 2. 18. It is not good that the man should be alone. Mat. 19. 10. It
is not good to marry. 1 Cor. 7. To touch a woman.

In the first place God speaks of the good and profit of the whole Species and
the Church, which cannot be propagated by one person alone: In the latter the
Apostle speaks of the personal good, and the more commodious kind of life in
the time of persecution.

14. Genesis 2. 24. Therefore shall a man leave his Father and Mother. Exodus 20.
12. Honor thy Father and thy Mother.

To leave Father and Mother here, is not to deny them the honor, love and
help that is due to them; but to leave the house of his parents, and to live
with his wife, and to set up a new family with her.

15. Genesis 2. 24. A man shall cleave to his wife. Exodus 21. 4. The servant going
forth shall leave his wife to his master, etc.

The general Law pertains to all, that is the first, but the special law was
granted to the Jews for the hardness of their hearts, and so we understand the
latter place.

16. Genesis 2. 24. Mat. 19. 5. And they shall be one flesh. 1 Cor. 6. 16. He that
is joined to a harlot is one body.

Married people are one body really and indeed, by divine institution; but
carnal copulation with a whore without marriage, though it be actually one
body, yet it is impure, because it is not of divine institution.

17. Genesis 3. 6. The woman saw that the tree was good for food. Verse. 7. And the
eyes of them both were opened.

First she saw with the eyes of her body the tree and the fruit that was good
to eat; but at length both their eyes were opened spiritually, when they knew
their sin, and transgression of the law of God.

18. Genesis 3 12. The woman gave to the man, of the tree, and he did eat. 1 Timothy
2. 14. And Adam was not deceived, but the woman.

The woman became for prevarication to the man, for by her he was deceived, and
not by the Serpent as she was. Aug. l. 11. de Genesis ad lit. c. ult.

19. Genesis 3. 16. Thy desire shall be to thy husband, and he shall rule over
thee. 1 Cor. 7. 4. The 1 Cor. 11. 2.
husband has not power over his own body, but the wife.

The woman is under the power of the man in oeconomicall government, whilst she
obeys and is subject as the body is to the head; but in conjugal union, the
man has not power of his own body.

20. Genesis 3. 19 In the sweat of thy face shall thou eat bread. Mat. 6. 11. Give
us this day our daily bread.

In the first place punishment and a laborious Prove. 10. 22.
life is denounced against man, idleness is condemned, and Gods blessing is
promised, because a man is born to labor, as a bird to Deuteronomy. 8. 3. Mat. 4. 4.
flying; nor is it repugnant to honest labor, to desire those things which are
necessary for the sustentation of our life, for it is not labor, but the
blessing of God which makes rich: God can feed us without bread, as he sed
Moses, Elias, Christ; but bread cannot feed us without God.

21. Genesis 3. 19. For dust thou art, and unto dust thou shall return. Ecclus.
10. 12. A man when he dies shall inherit creeping things, beasts and worms
etc.

A man though he be consumed by Serpents, Job.
worms, beasts, toads, yet at last he is brought into the dust of the earth.

22. Genesis 4. 1. Eve bear Gain, and said, I have gotten a man from the Lord. 1 John 3. 12. Not as Psalm. 128.
Cain who was of that wicked one.

Eve in childbearing acknowledged Gods blessing, and by way of thankfulness
she offered the first fruits of her labors to God: John speaks not of the
person of Cain, which was created by God, but of his wickedness that came from
the Devil.

23. Genesis 4. 4. And Abel brought of the firstlings of his flock. Chap. 4. 26.
Seth began to call upon the name of the Lord.

Adam with his sons before Seth, offered sacrifice, and called on the name of
the Lord in his family: but public invocation began in Seth, in whose
posterity the Church remained, the Canaanites being rejected.

24. Genesis 4 7. Unto thee shall be his desire, and thou shall rule over him.
Psalm. 37. 23. Prove. 16. 9. Jer. 10. 23. The way of man is not in himself.

In the first place it is said what a man ought Romans 6. 12.
to do, Let not sin reign in your mortal body. In the latter place it is
declared that a man of himself can do nothing in divine and saving mateers.

25. Genesis 4. 15. Whosoever slays Cain, vengeance shall be taken on him seven
fold. Chap. 9. 6. Whosoever sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed.

God is the wisest and freest lawgiver, therefore he would not have Cain
killed by reason of propagation of mankind: after the flood he gave the law
that the Magistrate should punish a Murderer with death.

26. Genesis 4. 16. And Cain went out from the presence of the Lord. Psalm. 139. 7.
Whither shall I go from thy Spirit, or whither shall I flee from thy presence?

Cain being made a runnagate, left his parents and their habitation, and the
place where they worshipped God. In the Psalm Gods omnipresence is maintained.

27. Genesis 5. 24. And Enoch walked with God, for God took him. Romans 8. 8. They
that are in the flesh cannot please God.

Enoch walking with God, lived according to Gods will; the Apostle by the flesh
here understands men that walk after their carnal lusts.

28. Genesis 5. 24. Enoch was not, for God took him. Heb. 9. 27. It is appointed
for all men once to die.

Enochs translation was a work extraordinary, it was to him in the place of
death, as the 1 Cor. 15. 53. 1 These. 4. 17.
taking away of Elias, and the translation of those who in the last day shall
be saved alive. But the Apostle shows what must ordinarily befall all men;
the consequence is not good from a singular privilege to a general rule.

29. Genesis 6. 3. His days shall be 120 years. Chap. 11. 13. Arphaxad and
others after the flood lived above 400 years.

In the first place, the space of time betwixt manifest impiety and the flood,
and not the age of man is to be understood, as if he had said, unless the
world repent, they shall perish within Aug. l. 13. De civ. dei. 1 Samuel 15. 11.
120 years.

30. Gen 6. 6. It repented the Lord that he had made man. 1 Samuel 15. 29. God is
not a man that he should repent.

Repentance, as it is an argument of man's weakness, so can it not fall upon
God; but the Scripture often speaks of God after the manner of men; and where
it is said that it repented God, there is meant the change of Aug. l. 1. c. 7.
De civ. dei. Psalm. 131.
things, God still remaining unchangeable.

31. Gen 6. 9 Noah was a just man and perfect (2 Pet. 2. 5.) Psalm. 13. 3. There
is none that does good, no not one. Romans 3. 12 Heb. 11.


Noah was just before God by faith, and unblameable in the sight of men, he is
said to be perfect, not as though he were without sin, but in comparison of
others, he had his conversation holy, and without hypocrisy.

32. Genesis 7. 2. Of every clean beast thou shall take. Lev. 11. 1. Moses divided
the clean beasts from the unclean.

The Patriarchs before the flood had a distinction in their sacrifices between
clean and unclean living creatures. By the Mosaicall law, not only for
sacrifices, but for meat the use of the unclean was forbidden.

33. Genesis 7. 6. Noah was 600 years old when the flood of waters was upon the
earth. Chap. 5. 32. Noah when he was 500 years old, made the Arc in 120 years.

The 500 years of Noah were not yet complete when he began to make the arc;
the Scripture uses often times to reckon the times, though the years be not yet
complete, as Exodus 40. 17. Number. 1. 1. Deuteronomy. 1. 4. Ezekiel. 1. 1. and 8. 1. and 20.
1.

34. Genesis 8. 1. God remembered Noah. Esa. 49. 1 John 3. 20.
15 I will not forget thee.

In the fight of God, all things are naked and open, he knows all things,
remembrance and forgetfulness are attributed to him by Anthropopathy, he
remembers when he sends help, and hears our prayers, as Genesis 30. 22. 1 Samuel 15.
19. Psalm. 13. 2. and 42. 10. Also he is said to forget, when he defers to help,
and seems not to hear us.

35. Genesis 8. 13. In the year 601 the first month the first day of the month the
waters were dried up. Chap. 8. 14. And in the second month the 27 day of that
month, was the earth dried.

The diminishing of the waters, and the superficies of the earth yet soft and
plashy is intimated verse. 13. 14. The earth is dried and perfectly solid.

36. Genesis 8. 21. Nor will I any more smite Psalm. 103. 13.
every living creature. Chap. 6. 13. and 7. 21. And all flesh dyed. Chap. 19.
24. Sodom overthrown.

Before the flood God judged the world, and he judged Sodom also as a just
judge and revenger: after the flood he promised he would do so no more, as a
father who takes pity of his children.

37. Genesis 8. 21. I will not again curse the ground for man's sake. Deuteronomy. 28. 16.
Thou shall be cursed in thy house, and cursed shall thou be in the field, etc.

A general malediction does not take away a special malediction; neither did
God oblige himself, that he would not send his special punishments and
calamities on those who refuse to hear his voice.

38. Genesis 8. 22. Seed time and harvest as long as the earth endures. 1 King.
17. 1. Jam. 5. 17. And it reigned not for three years and six months.

Barrenness and dryness was sent from God on the earth in the days of Elias,
by reason of the Idolatry of the Israelites. He took not away seed-time and
harvest in other places. The ordinance of God, though it was not observed in
one place for man's transgression, yet it found place in an other.

39. Genesis 9. 2. And the fear of you, and the dread of you shall be upon every
beast of the earth. Job 39. 9. Will the Unicorn be willing to serve thee? In
the former place the dominion over the creatures is partly restored to man
after the fall; and God has cast a fear on them that they should not dare to
hurt man; but should be afraid of man's countenance. But if the Unicorn or any
beast do violence to man, they do but put him in mind of his fall.

40. Genesis 9. 13. I do set my bow in the clouds, and it shall be for a token of
a Covenant between me and the earth. Revel. 4. 3. And there was a rainbow round
about the throne, in sight like to an emerald.

The first place is concerning the ordinary place of the rainbow; the second,
of the extraordinary rainbow, and the seat of God.

41. Genesis 10. 8. Nimrod began to be mighty in the earth. Verse. 10. And the
beginning of his Kingdom was Babel. Romans 13. 1. Let every soul be subject to
the higher powers.

The tyrannical power of Nimrod was with violence, and violation of government
in families, yet not without Gods ordination; nor does every unlawful
attaining take away the lawful power; from ill beginnings and manners, good
laws and profitable thins proceed also. The beginning of the Kingdom of
Judah, was the wantonness and wickedness of the people. The beginning of the
Kingdom of Israel, the sedition of Jeroboam: yet they were afterward lawful
Kingdoms.

42. Genesis 10. 22. The children of Sem, were Elam, Assure, and Arphaxad. Chap.
11. 10. Sem begat Arphaxad two years after the flood.

In History the order of nature and time are not always observed: therefore
though Elam and Assure are named, Chap. 10. before Arphaxad, yet it follows not
that they were elder then he; and Sem is said to have begotten sons and
daughters after Arphaxad was born, and not before.

43. Genesis 11. 7. Let us go down and there confound their language. 1 King. 8.
27. Jer. 23. 24. Do not I fill the earth?

God is not moved from place to place, because he is all every where, says
Augustine; but L. 16. c. 5. De civ. dei.
he is said to descend when he does any thing for the ordinary and usual
course of nature, and so he shows his presence in respect of us, not that
there is any thing that he does not see and know, or does change his place, but
this is attributed to God after the manner of men, and in respect of our sense,
as Genesis 18. 21. Psalm. 14. 2.

44. Genesis 11. 12. Arphaxad begat Salem. Luke 3. 36. Which was the son of Sala,
which was the son of Cainan, etc.

The name and the generation of Cainan in Beda in Luke 3.
Genesis, and the words of the days, according to the truth of the Hebrews, is
not found; but Arphaxad is said to have begotten Sala, there being none betwixt
him; Luke took this Genealogy from the edition of the 70 Interpreters.

45. Genesis 11. 26. Terah lived 70 years, and begat Abram, Nahor and Haran. Chap.
12. 4. And Abram was 75 years old when he departed out of Haran.

Terah did not beget three sons in the same year, but he began to generate at
70 years old, and he lived in Haran to 205 years old; it may be Abraham was the
younger son, but because he is so commended in the Scriptures, he is set down
first before his brethren, as Jacob, Mat. 1. 3. Judas, 1 Pet. 4. 1.

46. Genesis 12. 5. Abraham took Sara his wife, and Lot his brothers son. Chap.
13. 8. and 14. 14. Abraham said to Lot, we are brethren, etc.

Brothers are called by blood, Genesis 27. 13. of alliance, Chap. 14. 4. of
gentility, Deuteronomy. 15. 3. of affection, 2 Samuel 1. 26. of unity, of confession of
faith, Jer. 31. 34. We are brethren, says Abraham to Lot, persuading him not
to contend with him; but seeing that he is joined with him in the band of
religion and consanguinity, he wishes him to avoid occasion of quarrel, and
not to give scandal to the infidels.

47. Genesis 12. 3. and 18. 18. All the Nations of the earth shall be blessed in
him. Gal. 3. 14. The blessing of Abraham came on the Gentiles through Christ.

This promise was made to the seed and posterity, but not to the person of
Abraham, so the promises made by God to the Fathers, Genesis 22. 18. Heb. 11 8.
are fulfilled in their children, and in individuals.

48. Genesis 12. 18. Abraham told a lie. Psalm. 5. 7. Thou shall destroy all those
that speak leasing.

Seeing that the Devil is the Father of lying, Abraham denying his wife, sinned
against God by distrust, against Sara and Pharaoh by injustice, Mat. 26. Psalm.
32.
for he sought to save his life by wrong means, as Peter did by denying Christ.
God will destroy impenitent liars, but not whose lies and offenses are pardoned
in Christ, and covered; as Abraham's, Isaacks, and Peter's were, who repented.

49. Genesis 12 7. and 13. 15. and 15. 38. This land which thou see will I give
to thee and thy seed, etc. Act. 7. 5. Heb. 11. 9. And he gave him no
inheritance in it, no not so much as to set his foot on.

Prophesies and Promises are given to some and fulfilled to others, nor are
they always fulfilled to those to whom they are given; but in those for whose
cause they were given. So the Land was given to Abraham according to right, but
to his posterity for possession.

50. Genesis 13. 16. I will make thy seed as the dust of the earth. 2 Samuel 24. 9.
And Joab gave up the sum of the number of the people unto the King.

The posterity of Abraham, which were and are before the numbering David made,
cannot be numbered, nor had David the complete number of the people from Joab,
who gave the King a less number of the people then they were.

51. Genesis 15. 6. Abraham believed God, and he counted it unto him for
righteousness. Jam. 2. 21. Abraham was justified by works.

Abraham before God was justified by faith, and was declared to be just; by his
works before men, offering up his son Isaac upon the Altar.

52. Genesis 15. 13. Thy seed shall be a stranger in a Land that is not theirs,
and shall serve them 400 years. Exodus 12. 40. Now the sojourning of the
children of Israel who dwelt in Egypt was 430 years.

In the Scripture the years are not always precisely numbered, the lesser
number is omitted, and here under the greater round number the less is
comprehended.

53. Genesis 15. 15. Thou shall go to thy Fathers in peace. Josh. 24. 2. Terah
and his fathers served Chrysostom. hom. 36. in Genesis
other Gods.

To go to his Fathers, that is, to die, it is an Hebrew phrase. Also by the
name of Fathers here may be understood, Adam, Abel, Noah, etc. to whom he went
by faith.

54. Genesis 16. 9. The Angel of the Lord said unto Hagar, Return to thy
Mistress. Chap. 21. 12. God commands Abraham to send Hagar away.

First Hagar flying of her own accord was commanded to return to her Mistress,
then being thrust out by force, she staid in the desert; Gal. 4. 22. Chap. 31.
the Apostle expounds that figure, and applies it to the old and new Testament.

55. Genesis 17. 12. God appointed circumcision. 1 Cor. 7. 19. Circumcision is
nothing.

Circumcision by divine institution in the old Testament was a sacrament to the
coming of Christ, but in the new Testament it is nothing, nor is profitable to
our salvation; we must therefore distinguish the times of the old and new
Testament.

56. Genesis 18. 25. Thou shall not kill the righteous with the wicked. Ezekiel. 21.
3. I will cut off from thee the righteous and the wicked.

Abraham speaks of eternal destruction and cutting off; God speaks of
corporal and temporal affliction of the righteous with the wicked.

57. Genesis 21. 9. Ismael played with Isaac. Gal. 4. 29. He persecuted Isaac.

Jerome says, that Ismael challenged the primogeniture, insulting over Isaac in
words and deeds, and he calls that the contention of the young ones. It is
certain, if Ismael had not wronged Isaac, he should not have been expelled from
his Fathers house.

58. Genesis 22. 1. God tempted Abraham. Jam. 1. 13. Let no man say, when he is
tempted, I am tempted of God.

The first place is concerning outward temptation, sent from God to prove our
faith, patience and hope, and for our good. The latter is concerning internal
temptations from the flesh Aug. l. 16. c. 32. Deciv. Lei.
and the devil, who do allure us to sin, or concerning temptations for our
hurt. Abraham was tried to sacrifice his son, that so his dutiful obedience
might appear, not to God, but to the ages that should be; for a man's mind
oft-times cannot be known to himself, unless he make trial of his strength,
not by word but by deeds, when he is examined by temptation.

59. Genesis 22. 2. Thou shall offer the son whom thou love for a
burnt-offering. Exodus 20. 13. Deuteronomy. 5. 17. Thou shall not kill.

God gave the Law not to himself but us, this is a command and example which is
singular, of the faith or obedience of Abraham, or of his trial, neither is it
contrary to the precept of the Decalogue, of not killing our neighbor: for the
special dictates and commands of God do not derogate from his general
commands.

60. Genesis 22. 2. God commanded. verse. 12. God forbad to offer up Isaac. Jam. 1.
17. With God there is no variableness.

The decree of God which he will bring to effect is immutable: those decrees
that are not fulfilled, are but conditional; and but for trial; such is this
example of a command given to Abraham, and then revoked.

61. Genesis 22. 18. In thy seed shall all the nations of the earth be blessed.
Ephesians. 3. 5. The mystery of the incarnation of the son of God, was not known to
the sons of men as it is now revealed to his Apostles and Prophets by the
Spirit.

In the former place God promised to Abraham that of his seed should be born
Christ the Savior of the world. In the latter the Apostle speaks by
comparison; for that mystery was not known before the preaching of the Gospel,
for it was revealed to the Fathers in Heb. 1. 1.
many parts and diverse manners, under shadows and figures only; but to us,
after the promises fulfilled in Christ, plainly, clearly, and perspicuously.

62. Genesis 23. 37. Abraham stood up and bowed himself to the people of the land.
Exodus 20. 5. Thou shall not bow down thy self to them, nor serve them. Matthew.
4. 10. Thou shall worship the Lord thy God.

He gave civil adoration to the people, which was an ordinary thing amongst
those of the east, but religious adoration is only due to God, which he will
not have to be given to an other.

63. Genesis 25. 23. The elder shall serve the younger. Chap. 33. 3. Jacob lowed
himself seven times when he came to his brother.

Jacob gave civili honor to his brother Esau, who was in great power and
authority, yet that takes not off from the force of the promise, which was
fulfilled in its time; when David Psalm. 60. 1.
conquered the Idumaeans and made them subject to the Israelites.

64. Genesis 26. 34. Esau married two wives, Judith the daughter of B eri the
Hittite, and Besamath the daughter of Elon the Hittite. Chap. 36. 2. Esau took
his wives of the daughters of Canaan, Adah the daughter of Elon the Hittite,
and Abolibama the daughter of Zibeon the Hivite.

Those wives were two, or each of them had two names for the Hittites were in
the borders of the Hivites.

65. Genesis 27. 23. Jacob deceived his father Isaac. Chap. 30. 41. His Father in
law and his uncle Laban. Mark. 10. 29. Defraud not.

We must live by Gods law and not by examples; 1 Thessalonians. 4. 6.
Jacob did that by inspiration from God, without injuring his Father or his
Uncle. Let us so live in mutual conversation, that we circumvent not our
brother in any thing, because God is the revenger of all these things, for all
deceit is openly condemned in the word of God.

66. Genesis 27. 28. God give thee of the dew of heaven, and of the fatness of
the earth, and plenty of corn and wine. Chap. 42. 2. Jacob for want of
provision sent his sons into Egypt to buy corn.

Deficiency and temporal want does not diminish the divine blessing and force
of the promise. As traveling did not hinder Abraham, so Jacob did not lose the
fruit of his Fathers blessing.

67. Genesis 27. 38. Esan list up his voiee and wept. Esa. 12. 17. Esau found no
place of repentance.

Esaus repentance was not true but hypocritical, for he did not aknowledge his
sin, but was sorry for his loss, and would have killed his brother. Nor could
he by his tears move his Father to repent of the blessing given to Jacob.

68. Genesis 32. 3. and 33. 14. Esau lived before Jacobs return in the Land of
Seir. Chap. 36. 6. Esau took all that he had got in the Land of Canaan, and
went unto Seir from the face of his brother Jacob.

Esau, says August. after that his brother was departed to Mesopotamia, would
not live with his parents, whether by reason of that commotion, that he grieved
that he was deceived of the blessing of his Father, or whether it were by
reason of his wives, which he saw were hateful to his parents, or whatsoever
the cause was; and he began to live in the mountain of Seir, then after that
Jacob was returned, peace being made betwixt them, he went back to his Parents,
and when they both together had buried their Father, he went again to Seir, and
there he propagated the Nation of the Idumaeans.

69. Genesis 32. 30. I have seen God face to face says Jacob. Exodus 33. 20. No
man can see my face and live.

It was the common opinion of the Ancients, that if any man should see the face
of God, he must die the death; so Gideon, Manoah, and the Israelites feared
their lives; but Jacob here, Abraham Chap. 18. Isaiah Chap. 6. Daniel Chap. 7.
by Joh. 1. 18.
their example confute that opinion, for they saw God face to face, that is,
the glory of God was manifest to them; but the essence and nature of Gods face,
no mortal man can see, nor ever did see.

70. Genesis 33. 19. Jacob bought a parcel of a field at the hand of the children
of Hamor Shechems father. Chap. 23. 16. Abraham bought the field with the cave
of Ephron the Hittite.

Abraham bought the possession of the Cave with the ground about it for the
burial of the dead. Jacob bought the greater part of the field to dwell there,
where he pitched his tents. In the cave that Abraham bought was Sarah buried,
Genesis 30. 13. Chap. 48. Josh. 24. 32.
and he himself; also Isaac, and Jacob. But in the field that Jacob bought, and
gave to his son Joseph, were Joseph's bones buried; brought thither out of Egypt.

71. Genesis 33. 19. Jacob bought a parcel of a field where he had spread his
Tents. Chap. 23. 16. Abraham paid the money for the Cave, and the borders round
about. Act. 7. 5. And he gave him no inheritance in it, no not so much as to
set his foot on.

The Patriarchs would not possess themselves of the Land of promise before the
time, whose patrimony was not bought with money, but as we find it Act. 7. God
gave it freely to their posterity.

72. Genesis 42. 15. By the life of Pharaoh. Mat. 34. Swear not at all.

Joseph swears not, but he confirms his Deuteronomy 30. 19. 2 Cor. 1. 23.
words by speaking after the usual manner that the Egyptians did. So Moses
calls the heaven and the earth; and Paul calls God to witness upon his
soul. Christ by the Evangelist forbids all vain and unnecessary oaths, and
forbids perjury.

73. Genesis 46. 4. I will go down with thee into Egypt, and I will also surely
bring thee up again. Chap. 49. 33. Jacob died in Egypt. Genesis 50. 13.


Jacob returned out of Egypt in his posterity, and his body also after his
death was brought into the land of Canaan, and buried there.

74. Genesis 46. 21. The ten sons of Benjamin. Chap. 44. 20. He was a child a
little one.

Jacob gave a wife to his youngest son Benjamin, Dom. Mart. Luth.
that Rachel might have seed by him; and whilst God by a singular blessing gave
him so many sons, by that means he pacified Jacobs sorrow for Joseph.

75. Genesis 46. 34. Every shepherd is an abomination to the Egyptians. Chap. 47.
6. If thou know any men of activity amongst them, then make them rulers over
my cattle.

The Egyptians hated the shepherds of the Hebrews, not for their cattle, but
for their circumcision and religion, because they sacrificed those things which
the Egyptians worshipped for Gods.

76. Genesis 47. 31. And Israel bowed himself upon his beds head. Heb. 11. 21.
Worshipped leaning upon the top of his staff.

Jacob being lifted up at the head of his bed bowed himself upon the top of his
staf, and so worshipping God, left an example of piety behind him to his
children.

77. Genesis 49. 10. The Scepter shall not depart from Judah, not a lawgiver from
between his feet, until Shiloh come. 1 Samuel 10. 1. The Scepter was before
David in the tribe of Benjamin. Luke 2. 1. And when Christ was born, it was
with Augustus Caesar.

The supreme power over the Jews, was in Moses and Joshua their leaders, then
in the Judges unto Saul, under the Kings to the captivity of Babylon, under the
Priests until Herod. Now the accompishment of this Prophefie began not in the
time it was pronounced, but from the time the Kingly Government was confirmed
in the tribe of Judah, and the Princes of that tribe were in the Sanhedrim
until Christ came, it was at last abolished by Herod.

78. Genesis 49. 28. Jacob blessed all his sons with their proper benedictions.
Verse. 7. Jacob cursed Simeon and Levi.

That is, he blessed them all in Christ; but he foreshewed to every one of
them, blessings or cursings, as the Holy Ghost inspired him.

EXODUS.
THis Book has its name from going out, for here is described the going forth
of the Children of Israel out of Egypt: the promulgation of the moral Law, and
the ceremonial, and judicial in the wilderness: the raising of the
Tabernacle, with all things belonging to it. It contains a History of 114
years.

79. Exodus 1. 5. And all the sons that came out of the loins of Jacob were 70
souls. Genesis 46. 26. All the souls which came into Egypt with Jacob were 66.
Act. 7. 14. Joseph called his father Jacob and his kindred 75 souls that went
down into Egypt.

There descended with Jacob into Egypt the souls which came out of his thighs
66. if you add to these Jacob and Joseph and his two sons they make 70.
Stephen adds the four wives of Jacob, and the two sons of Judah which were
dead, excepting Jacob, his whole family make 75 souls in number.

80. Exodus 1. 19. The Midwives lied to Pharaoh, and God blessed them. Chap. 3.
18. and 5. 3. Moses said, We will go three days journey into the wilderness,
and sacrifice unto the Lord our God. Zach. 8. 16. Speak every one truth to his
neighbor.

It is not certain whether the Midwives did 1 Pet. 21.
lie or not; it might be the Hebrew women were delivered before they came at
them: and God blessed the Midwives, not for lying, but because they feared him.
Moses spoke the words of God unto Pharaoh, and God is the God of truth.

81. Exodus 2. 3. Moses was laid by the river in an arc of bulrushes. Heb. 11.
23. Moses parents feared not the Kings commandment.

It is certain that the Hebrew parents feared God more then Pharaoh; nor did
they doubt in exposing of Moses, but that God would deliver him.

82. Exodus 2. 15. Moses feared and fled from the face of Pharaoh. Heb. 11. 27.
He feared not the wrath of the King.

Moses feared for killing the Egyptian, whilst Pharaoh sought to slay him,
therefore he fled into the Land of Madian. But upon his return when God sent
him to Pharaoh, he despised his threatenings, being secure from all danger.

83. Exodus 4. 21. and 7. 3. and 10. 27. and 11. 10. But I will harden Pharaohs
heart. Chap. 8. 15. and 8. 32. Pharaoh hardened his heart, and was hardened, etc.

God hardens permissively not effectively, Ezeck. 18. 23. and 33. 11. Cont.
Faust.
by no antecedent will (for he will not the death of a sinner) but by a
consequent will, when he punishes by just judgment, and uses evil to a good
end. Satan, says Augustine, hardens by persuading, Man by consenting, God by
forsaking.

84. Exodus 4. 24. Moses had his wife with him in his journey. Chap. 8. 5. And
Jethro Moses Father in law came with his wife and his sons unto Moses.

Moses sent his wife Zipporah back to her father, and then afterward received
her with her children brought unto him by his father in law.

85. Exodus 5. 2. Who is the Lord that I should obey his voice, and let Israel
go? I know not the Lord, etc. Romans 1. 21. The Nations knew God and his power,
so that they are inexcusable.

Pharaoh was ignorant who Jehovah the God of Israel was, nor had he a true
knowledge of the true God that he might serve him only.

86. Exodus 7. 20, 21. All the waters in Egypt were turned into blood. Verse. 22.
And the Magicians of Egypt did so with their enchantments; when they came to
the water.

That which the Magicians did with water dug out of the earth, seemed to be
the like, for they are no true miracles of God, which are done by the help of
the Devil.

87. Exodus 9. 16. And in very deed for this cause have I raised thee up, for to
show in thee my power, and that my name may be declared throughout all the
earth. Romans 3. 8. We must not do evil that good may come of it.

The hardening of Pharaoh was a punishment of his former sins, and of his
tyranny showed over the Israelites, and this God directed for a good end, that
in Pharaoh his power, glory and justice might appear.

88. Exodus 9. 29. Moses prayed for Pharaoh that the plagues may cease. 1 John
3. 4. and 5. 16. We must not pray for any that sin unto death.

Moses prayed not for Pharaoh, but for the taking away of the plagues, farther
to declare the power of God; and to overcome the wickedness and obstinacy of
Pharaohs tyrannical heart.

89. Exodus 11. 5. And all the first born in the Land of Egypt shall die. Chap.
12. 30. There was not a house where there was not one dead.

We must understand here not only the firstborn by birth, but such as were so
by authority; for it was so ordered by divine providence, that there was a
first born found in every house.

90. Exodus 12. 36. The Israelires spoiled the Egyptians by borrowing of them.
Psalm. 37. 21. The wicked borrows and pays not again.

The Israelites had Gods special command for it, to spoil the ungrateful
Egyptians whom they had served for many years for no Genesis 15. 14.
wages. God foretold this to Abraham, that his posterity should come out of
slavery with great wealth.

91. Exodus 14. 15. And the Egyptians which you have seen to day, you shall see
them again no more forever, Verse. 30. And Israel saw the Egyptians dead upon
the sea shore.

In the former place he means the Egyptians alive, following the Israelites,
which afterward the Israelites saw choked in the waters, and cast dead upon
the seashoar.

92. Exodus 20. 5. I am the Lord thy God, a jealous God, visiting the iniquities
of the fathers upon the children unto the third and fourth generation. Deuteronomy.
24. 16. Ezekiel. 18. 20. The son shall not bear the Fathers iniquity.

God visits the fathers sins upon the children, if they walk in the way of
their fathers (that is on them that hate him) but it is otherwise if the
children repent. Also God punishes the iniquities of the fathers upon the
children with temporal punishments, not with eternal, unless they follow the
footsteps of their wicked fathers.

93. Exodus 20. 8. Remember thou keep holy the Sabbath day. (Deuteronomy. 5. 12.) Mat.
12. 5. On the Sabbath days the Priests in the Temple profane the Sabbath day
and are blameless.

Legal ceremonies, and their external observations give place to charity and
necessity, moral duties are preferred before ceremonials. God forbad those
works which hinder his worship; but Christ defends his Disciples plucking ears
of corn on the Sabbath day, against the Pharisee by the example of David, and
of the Priests killing sacrifices on the Sabbath day, pulling off their hides
and washing of them.

94. Exodus 20. 12. Honor thy father and mother. Luke 14. 26. If any man come
to me and hate not his father, and mother, and wife, and children, and brethren
and sisters, yea and his own life also, he cannot be may disciple.

Christ forbids not the honor due to parents, Mat. 10. 37
but he says, He that loves them more then me, is not worthy of me: for all
things must be forsaken, and hated too, so far as they hinder our love of God
and Christ, for all things must give place to the love of God; and that takes
not away our duty or due honor to our parents.

95. Exodus 20. 12. Honor thy Father. Matthew. 23. 9. Call no man Father upon the
earth.

Christ forbids not children to honor their 2 King. 2. 1 Chronicles. 4.
parents, or the hearers to honor the Preachers, for Paul calls himself the
father of the Corinthians; but he forbids us to depend on humane authority in
divine matters; but we must depend on one God, and have a filial confidence in
him.

96. Exodus 20. 13. Thou shall not kill. Mat. 5. 21. and 18. 9. If thy eye,
hand, foot offend thee, cut it off, and cast it from thee.

Christ would not that we should dismember our selves, but that we should
mortify the old Adam, and bridle the wicked motions and desires of our minds,
and take heed of them.

97. Exodus 20. 18. The people saw thundrings and the lightnings, and the noise
of the trumpet. Deuteronomy 5. 23 You heard the voice out of the midst of the
darkness.

The frighted people standing a far off, stricken with fear, saw the thunder
joined with lightning, breaking forth of the dark clouds in the promulgation of
the law.

98. Exodus 20. 24. Thou shall make unto me an Altar of earth. Chap. 27. 1. Of
Shittim wood.

The inward part of the Altar was earth, the outside of Shittim wood.

99. Exodus 21. 24. Lev. 24. 40. An eye for an eye, a tooth for a tooth. Mat. 5.
38, 39. If any one strike thee on the right cheek, turn to him the left.

The first place is concerning the public judgment of the Magistrate, and the
judicial law; now because the Pharisees interpreted their law falsely, Christ
confutes them and teaches, that private persons must not resist force with
force, and evil with evil, but overcome evil with good, to part with their
garment and Romans 12. 21.
turn the cheek.

100. Exodus 22. 28. Thou shals not revile the Gods, nor curse the ruler of thy
people. Luke 13. 32. Go and tell that fox. (Christ speaks so of Herod.)

Private persons, of ill will or by contempt must not speak reprochfully of the
Magistrate. Christ was no private person, and by his words detecting the
fox-like craftiness of Herod (who endeavored by his craft to overthrow true
Religion and the Gospel) he shows plainly that he feared him not.

101. Exodus 25. 16. Thou shall put into the Ark the Testimony which I shall give
thee, etc. Heb. 9. 4. In the Arc was the golden pot with Manna, and Aarons rod
that budded, and the tables of the Testament.

In the Ark under the covering were only Exodus 16. 33, 34. Number. 17. 7.
the tables of stone of the Covenant, the pot with Manna, and Aarons rod stood
before the Ark. The Apostle joins them all together, because they were in the
Tabernacle in the sight of God.

102. Exodus 29. 32, 33. Aaron and his sons shall eat the holy bread, but a
stranger shall not eat thereof. 1 Samuel 21. 6. David eat thereof and they that
were with him.

The precept of the holy bread or proposition was ceremonial, and a temporal
pedagogie; the moral prohibition was not so: David therefore is here excused
by a case of necessity.

103. Exodus 30. 6. Thou shall put the Altar before the vail that is by the Ark.
Heb. 9. 3, 4. After the second vail in the Tabernacle was the golden censer.

There was a double vail, one by which the outside of the holy place was
distinguished from the inside; the other by which the holy place was
distinguished from the holiest of all: between those two vails the Altar of
Incense was placed.

104. Exodus 33. 20. No man shall see me and live. 1 Cor. 13. 12. Now we see
through a glass darkly.

The essence of God is invisible and incomprehensible 1 John 3. 2.
to us in this world, but in the next world we shall see God face to face, the
glory of God as he is.

105. Exodus 34. 3. God does not justify the wicked. Romans 4. 5. He justifies
the wicked.

He does not justify the impenitent and such as persevere in wickedness; but
he justifies the penitent, and such as are justified in Christ.

106. Exodus 34. 15. Thou shall make no league with the Canaanites. Genesis 21. 27.
Abraham made a Covenant with Abimelech.

Covenants in spiritual matters, and such as belong to Religion, must not be
made with Heathens and Idolaters: but Abraham made a Covenant with Abimelech in
temporal matters, such as belonged to commerce and the common peace of the
Country.

107. Exodus 34. 16. Thou shall not give thy daughter to his Son. 1 Cor. 7. 12.
If any Brother have an unbelieving wife, and she be pleased to dwell with him,
let him not put her away, etc.

God expressly forbad the Israelites to marry with the Canaanites, lest the
Israelites should be seduced to worship other Gods. The Apostle speaks of a
marriage confirmed already, before the conversion of one party to Christ;
otherwise it is a very unhappy thing to marry those that are of false
religions; Nor must we draw 2 Cor. 6. 14.
in the same yoke with them.

LEVITICUS,
WAS so called from Levi one of the Tribes; It contains the Leviticall
sacrifices, the sanctifying of the Priests and people: the difference of meats,
vows, conversation, and other observations and rites.

108. Lev. 1. 6. The sons of Aaron shall pull off the skin of the burnt
offering, and cut it into pieces. 2 Chronicles. 35. 11. The Levites pulled off their
skins.

It was the office of the Priests to pull off the skins of the burnt-offerings,
but because in the time of Hezekiah and Josias, the celebration of the
Paffeover was solemn, and many millions of sacrifices were offered, therefore
it was extraordinarily granted to the Levites to pull off the skins.

109. Lev. 1. 13. The Priest shall burn all oblations upon the Altar, for a
burnt sacrifice for a sweet savor unto the Lord. Joh. 4. 24. Gad is a spirit
and smells not.

In the former words he speaks comparatively, that as man delights in sweet
odors, so God is delighted in their sacrifices, not by reason of the fat of
bullocks, but for the sacrifice of his only begotten son our Lord Jesus
Christ, in whom he is well pleased.

110. Lev. 2. 1. The oblation of a sacrifice to the Lord must be fine flower,
and he shall power oil upon Mat. 3. 17.
it, and put frankincense thereon. Chap. 5. 11. He shall bring the tenth part
of an ephah of fine flower, he shall put no oil upon it, neither shall he put
any frankincense thereon.

Sacrifices of free will were made with oil and frankincense, but offerings
for sin were made without oil and frankincense.

111. Lev. 2. 11. No meat offering shall be brought unto the Lord made with
leaven. Chap. 23. 17. You shall bring two loaves of two tenth deals, they
shall be of fine flower, baken with leaven, they are the first fruits.

The oblation which was leavened, was eucharisticall, or for a thanksgiving,
but the free will offering was without leaven.

112. Lev. 3. 16. All the fat shall be the Lords by a perpetual statute. Chap.
23. 17. Two loaves of the first fruits of two tenth deals, of fine flower with
leaven.

God separated the fat for himself, not to eat it, but to hinder the people
that they should not eat it, for Idolaters did eat the fat of their sacrifices.

113. Lev. 6. 18. The Leviticall sacrifices should endure for ever. Heb. 10.
14. By one offering Christ perfected for ever them that are sanctified.

The sacrifices of the old law are said to be for ever, by reason of the long
continuance of the Jewish polity, but they are all abolished by one complete
sacrifice of Christ.

114. Lev. 9. 24. Fire went out from before the Lord and consumed the
burnt-offering, etc. Amos 5. 22. Though you offer me burnt-offerings* and gifts
I will not accept them, neither will I regard the peace offerings of your fat
beasts.

Offerings to God from a pious and sincere heart were accepted by him, but the
offerings of Hypocrites proceedings from a corrupt heart were an abomination to
the Lord.

115. Lev. 11. 1. Unclean beasts. Genesis 1. 31. All things that God made were
very good.

Unclean creatures in the old Testament, were so in respect of the Jewish
pedagogie of the ceremonial Law, and not by nature; but because God was
pleased to have it so, whereas by goodness of the creation, all things were
good and clean to those that were clean.

116. Lev. 11. 7. The Jews must eat no swines Tit. 2. 15.
flesh. Mat. 5. 11. The Gadarens of the tribe of Benjamin fed hogs.

Hogs flesh was not eaten by the Jews, but yet they were not forbid to apply
the paunch, the skin, and the fat to other uses.

117. Lev. 13. 46. The Leper and unclean lived alone without the Camp. Mat. 8.
2. In the City a Leper craved of Jesus.

The divine Law was that the Leper set apart should dwell alone, but this leper
comes boldly to Christ not doubting to be free from his leprosy.

118. Lev. 16. 3. The sacrifices were appointed by Gods commandment. Psalm. 40.
7. Sacrifices and burnt-offerings thou would not.

The sacrifices were appointed by God under the old Testament, that they might
shadow forth the sacrifice of Christ, and foreshew his coming; but God would
none of them, as the Jews abused them for ostentation, and placed the worship
of God in the outward ceremony without the internal devotion.

119. Lev. 16. 6. Aaron shall offer his bullock, and make an atonement for
himself. Heb. 10. 4. It is impossible that the blood of Goats should take away
sins.

The legal sacrifices did not expiate sins of themselves, but as they were a
figure of Christ, his own oblation surpasses them all, and is propitiatory
for our sins.

120. Lev. 18. 6. None of you shall approach to any that is near of kin to him.
Verse. 16. Thou shall not uncover the nakedness of thy brothers wife. Deuteronomy. 25.
5. The brother shall take his brothers wife.

The law of the nearness of blood, and not uncovering the brothers nakedness
is perpetual, and must be holily observed by us; but that of raising seed to
the brother was partly ceremonial, figuring the primogeniture of Christ,
partly judicial, lest the inheritance should depart to another family, which
does not oblige us, but is abrogated.

121. Lev. 19. 18. Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self. 1 John 2. 15. If
any man love the world, the love of the Father is not in him.

In the former place he understands the love that is due to our neighbor
according to Law. In the latter, concerning unlawful love of worldly things;
as those that prefer the things of this world, as honors, riches and pleasures
before God himself.

122. Lev. 22. 25. From a strangers hand you shall not offer the bread of your
God. 1 King. 5. 10. Hiram gave to Solomon cedar-trees, and fir-trees.

All strangers were not abominable in the sight of God, but only the enemies
and persecutors of his Church: so Cyrus King of the Persians promoted the
building of the second Temple, and restored to the Jews the golden and silver
vessels.

123. Lev. 24. 19. As he has done, so it shall be done to him. Romans 12. 19.
You shall not revenge your selves.

In the former place private persons are forbidden to avenge themselves, but
the Magistrate is admonished of his office. In the latter, only private
revenge is forbidden.

124. Lev. 27. 30. And all the tithe of the Exodus 22. 29. Deuteronomy. 1. 18.
Land, whether of the seed of the Land, or of the fruit of the tree, is the
Lords. Number. 18. 21. I have given the children of Levi all the tithes in Israel
for an inheritance for the service which they serve me.

The tenths are called Gods, because they were commanded by him for a holy use,
and good of the Church; they were given to the sons of Levi, or to the
Ministers of the Church for their service, for an inheritance to support them,
because they being consecrated to Gods service, had no inheritance amongst
their brethren.

NUMBERS.
THis Book is so called from the numbering of the people of God. Wherein
Mansions and Offices were ordained for all the Tribes; between the mount of
Sinah and the promised land, many transgressions and dangers of the people and
punishments, and benefits of God are numbered. The History contains 28. years.

125. Number. 1. 19. Moses numbered the people in the wilderness of Sinah. 2 Samuel
24. David offended God by numbering the people.

Moses and Aaron did that for good order as God commanded them, but David
sinned out of arrogance by numbering the people without command.

126. Number. 4. 3. The Levites stood from 30. years old to 50. years old to
minister in the Tabernacle of the Covenant. 1 Chronicles. 23. 3, 24. The Levites did
the work of the Ministry for the house of the Lord from 20. years old. Number. 8.
23. from 25. years.

The younger Levites were newly instructed to 20. years; then they were
admitted to the office of doing service at 25. years; from that time a kind of
secondary service was committed to them, till they came to be 30. years old,
from 30. to 50. years they did fully execute the Leviticall office.

127. Number. 7. 89. Moses entered into the Tabernacle of the Covenant. Exodus 40.
35. Moses could not enter into the Tabernacle of the congregation, for a cloud
abode thereon, and the glory of the Lord filled the Tabernacle.

First when the cloud covered the Tabernacle of the testimony, and the glory of
God filled that, Moses could not then enter, but when the cloud was removed,
then he went into it.

128. Number. 8. 7. The Levites shall shave off all the hair of their flesh. Lev.
19. 27. You shall not round the corners of your heads, nor shave your beards.

In the time of the Leviticall pacification they did shave the hair of their
flesh, but otherwise to cut their hair of the heads or Ezekiel. 44. 22.
shave their beards round was forbad them by Moses.

129. Number. 10. 29. Hobab was Moses father in Law. Exodus 2. 18. Raguel. Chap. 3.
1. and 4. 18. and 18. 5. Jethro.

Hobab because he was the son of Raguel, is thought by some to be Moses
kinsman; in the Scripture, oft-times persons have two or three names: so the
father in law of Moses had many names.

130. Number. 12. 8. God spoke with Moses mouth to mouth. Exodus 33. 20. Joh. 1.
18. No man has seen God at any time.

The divine essence is invisible, and dwells in 1 Timothy 6. 16.
an unaccessible light; that Moses in his mortality saw not perfectly: yet we
piously believe that the Son of God taking on him the shape of a man, as he was
afterward to be incarnate, did speak with Moses familiarly.

131. Number. 14. 1. All the people with a loud voice, murmured against Moses.
Verse. 23. They shall not see the Land of promise, except Caleb. Josh. 14. 1.
The children of Israel possessed the land of Canaan; which Eleazar the Priest,
and Joshua the son of Nun, and the heads of the Fathers distributed to them.
Chapter 24. 7. Whose eyes saw what the Lord had done in Egypt.

Eleazar and Caleb and other faithful people came into the Land of promise:
but those 1 Cor. 10. 5.
that murmured were destroyed in the wilderness, for with many of them God was
not well pleased.

132. Number. 15. 38. Speak to the children of Israel that they make themselves
fringes in the borders of their garments. Mat. 23. 5. Christ condemns the
Pharisees for enlarging their phylacteries and their borders.

The abuse of a thing does not take away the use of it. God commanded the
Israelites that so often as they should look upon their garments they should
remember the Commandments of God and do them. But the Pharisees abused this
commandment of God, boasting hypocritically of their long garments and
fringes, as though there had been some holiness in them; therefore their
hypocrisy is deservedly reprehended.

133. Number. 16. 32. The earth opening her mouth devoured them all which belonged
to Corah, with their houses and substance. Deuteronomy. 11. 6. (Psalm. 106. 17.) and
26. 32. When Corah perished all his sons perished not.

The sons of Corah which escaped alive, were in the Tabernacle of the Lord when
the sedition began, because they consented not to the Levites in the sedition
of their Father.

134. Number. 18. 16. The redemption of the firstborn, shall be from a month
old, for five shekels, after the shekell of the Sanctuary. Exodus 22. 30. Thou
shall give me thy firstborn, and with Sheep and Oxen thou shall do the like,
seven days it shall be with the dam, on the eight thou shall give it me.

The first born of Man and of clean beasts were consecrated unto God the eighth
day, but the unclean beasts were redeemed after one month. A woman after she
brought sorch a male child must stay apart six weeks, after a female twelve
weeks, in that time they were purged from their issue of blood.

135. Number. 18. 20. God said unto Aaron, Thou shall have no inheritance in the
Land, neither shall thou have any part amongst the Israelites, I am thy part.
Josh. 21. 41. The 48. Cities of the Levites were within the possessions of the
children of Israel.

The Levites had their habitation and food in those Cities with their families;
which Cities were as Schools, wherein they were instructed rightly in the Law,
and to perform their office in holy things as they should.

136. Number. 20. 11. At the stroke of Moses on the rock of flint, the waters came
out abundantly, and the congregation drank, and their beasts also. Psalm. 18. 1.
1 Cor. 10. 4. They all drank the same spiritual drink, for they drank of
that spiritual Rock, which followed them, and that rock was Christ.

Moses relates historically the water that came out of the flint for the use of
the people and their Cattle. The Apostle speaks after a spiritual manner, and
says that Christ's benefits to us were prefigured thereby.

137. Number. 20. 18, 21. Edom would not suffer the Israelites to pass through
the Land. Deuteronomy. 2. 29. Let me pass through thy Land, as the children of Esau
did unto me.

The children of Esau denied to let the children Jud. 11. 18
of Israel pass through the public way through their Cities and Villages; the
King of Edom suffered them to pass about by his borders, and through by-ways.

138. Number. 20. 28. Eleazar the high Priest was present at his fathers death.
Lev. 21. 11. The high Priest shall not go in to any dead body, nor defile
himself for his Father or his Mother.

Eleazar was not yet the high Priest actually; and this was a singular example.
Augustine; That time that the high Priest did his office of high Priest it was
forbidden him, that he should not come to his Parents being dead.

139. Number. 21. 9. Moses made a Serpent of brass, and put it up for a sign,
and when they that were bitten beheld it, they were healed. Exodus 20. 4. Thou
shall not make unto thee any graven image, or any likeness of any thing in
heaven or earth.

God gave an especial command of setting up the brazen Serpent, like to the
fiery Serpents, whose wounds and bites the Israelites could not endure, that so
looking on this they might be safe; it was a figure of Christ crucified.

140. Number. 22. 12. God said to Balaam, Thou shall not go with them. Verse. 20.
Rise and go with them. Verse. 35. Go with the men.

God would not that Balaam should go to curse the Israelites, at last he
suffered him to go though he were displeased at it; yet on this condition, that
he should speak nothing, then what God commanded him.

141. Number. 23. 10. Balaam prophesied to his own disgrace. 1 Cor. 12. 7. To
every man the manifestation of the Spirit is given to profit withal.

The gift of Prophecy was not hurtful to Balaam, in respect of God that gave
it him, had he used it well; but Baalam abused it. False prophets also speak
truth Joh. 11. 51.
as Caiaphas did, though it be against their will.

142. Number. 25. 3. Israel joined himself to Baal-poor, and God was angry with
Israel. 1 Cor. 10. 8. Neither let us commit fornication as some of them
committed.

Since Idolatry is spiritual fornication, Lyra.
Paul makes mention of it; for the daughters of Moab would not admit the
Israelites before they had eaten things offered to Idols.

143. Number. 25. 9. There died of the plague 24000. 1 Cor. 10. 8. They fell in
one day 23000.

Moses collects the number of those which fell by sword and strangling; but the
Apostle counts only those that fell by the sword.

144. Number. 27. 12. Go up into mount Abarim and see the land. Deuteronomy. 34. 1. Moses
went up to mount Nebo to the top of Pisgah, etc.

Abarim was the mountain, but Nebo and Pisgah were the tops of that mountain,
so they differ but as a part from the whole.

145. Number. 27. 21. The Priest shall ask counsel for him after the judgment
of Vrim. 1 Samuel 30. 8. And Abiathar brought to David the Ephod, and he enquired
at the Lord.

The Ephod was properly belonging to the high Priest, common to all sacrificing
Priests, which David made use of extraordinarily, and was inspired by God with
a prophetical spirit.

146. Number. 31. 18. But all maids that have not known a man, keep alive for your
selves. 1 Samuel 15. 3. Slay both man, woman and infant.

The sin of the Midianites was not so horrible as that of the Amalekites; and
we though we know not the cause of Gods commands, yet must we say, Righteous
art thou O Lord, and just are thy judgments.

147. Number. 32. 16, 17. Reuben and Gad, and the half tribe of Manasse went armed
to battle before the children of Israel. Josh. 22. 8. Divide the spoil of the
enemies with your brethren, that is to those that staid at home.

The strong and fighting men went with the Israelites, but those that were weak
and unfit for war staid at home, who took the charge to look to the Cities and
manuring of the fields.

148. Number. 33. 54. Divide the Land by lot amongst you. Deuteronomy. 18. 12. Lots are
forbidden.

Lots were ordained of God, which are used according to Gods commandment, and
the land of Canaan was divided by the lawful use of them; Matthias was chosen
to be Josh. 14. 2. Act. 1. 26.
an Apostle; so every man must be contented with his own lot, they are
unlawful and prohibited, which are used in sports and plays.

149. Number. 34. 17. Eleazar the Priest and Joshua shall divide the Land unto
you. Luke 12. 13. Christ would not divide the Inheritance.

An office which is Ecclesiastical is distinguished from a secular office; in
the dividing of the land Eleazar the Priest for his authority was joined to
Joshua the Prince, that all things might proceed in right order; and the tribe
of Levi might be well provided for a place to dwell in, from every tribe.

DEUTERONOMIE,
THat is the second Law, Moses repeats here the ceremonial and judicial
Laws, spoken before in Exodus and Leviticus chapter 34. to the end, from verse. 5.
Joshua fulfilled them after the death of Moses.

150. Deuteronomy. 1. 16. Judge righteously. Mat. 7. 1. Judge not at all.

Judgments appointed by God in the Church or Commonwealth are lawful, but
Christ forbides disorderly and rash judgments, that no man should suddenly or
falsely pass sentence on his neighbors words or deeds.

151. Deuteronomy. 2. 5. I will not give you in the land of Esau so much as a foots
breadth. Psalm. 60. 8. Over Edom will I cast out my shoe.

The Israelites going into the Land of 2 Chronicles. 10.
Canaan through the Land of the Edomites, were not to offend them, because the
time to bring them into subjection was not yet full; but they were made
tributaries under David; nor was the land of Idumea given to the Israelites as
the land of Canaan was.

152. Deuteronomy. 2. 19. I will not give to thee of the land of the children of
Ammon. Josh. 13. 24. Moses gave to the tribe of Gad the one half of the land
of Ammon.

The Ammonites held the land which they possessed in the days of Moses; the
other part of the Country formerly possessed by Sihon, was distributed to the
Israelites.

153. Deuteronomy. 4. 10, 11. The Israelites stood before the Lord God in Horeb. Exodus
29. 11. The Table of the Law were given in Mount Sinai.

Mount Horeb, was called otherwise, Mount Sinai; or the top of the pinnacle of
the Mount.

154. Deuteronomy. 6. 3. and 10. 20. Thou shall fear the Lord thy God, and him only
shall thou serve. Col. 3. 23. (Exodus 6. 5.) Servants obey in all things your
Masters according to the flesh, with fear.

God must be feared above all things, and he must be first served; masters
according to the flesh must be obeyed, for his sake and in respect to his
commandment.

155. Deuteronomy. 6. 13. Thou shall swear by the name of the Lord. Mat. 5 34. Swear
not at all.

That oath is lawful, when we give testimony Aug. Epist. 154.
to the truth in the name of God, the Magistrate, and necessity requiring that
of us: such an oath Christ condemns not, but vain and unnecessary oaths, and
such as are made by the creatures: and he says so, not because it is sin to
swear the truth; but perjury is a horrid sin.

156. Deuteronomy. 6. 16. Thou shall not tempt the Lord thy God. Jam. 1. 13. God
cannot be tempted with evil.

Divine temptations are for trial, but men do tempt God when they ask such
things of him that are not according to his will. Exodus 17. 8. Psalm. 9. 2. Mat.
12. 39. Diabolical temptations are to seduce us, he tempts good men to turn
them from what is good, wicked men to keep them still in their wickedness.

157. Deuteronomy. 10. 17. The Lord your God is God of Gods and Lord of Eords. Chap.
32. 39. I am God alone, and there is no God besides me.

Many in the world are worshipped which are false Gods, but there is but one
great and true God in essence, by whom only we can be saved.

158. Deuteronomy. 10. 27. God regards not persons nor takes rewards. Genesis 4. 4. God
had respect to Abel and to his offering.

Oblations and gifts are various, God accepts those things he commands to be
offered to him, for Christ's sake, to whom those that offer must have respect by
faith, as to the only offering, etc.

159. Deuteronomy. 11. 25. No man shall stand against you. Jud. 1. 34. The Amorites
forced the children of Dan into the Mountains.

That promise held only for that time till the Israelites had gotten the Land
of Canaan, and continued in piety and the true fear of God.

160. Deuteronomy. 13. 5. A prophet of false dreams shall be put to death. Tit. 3. 10.
An heretic after the first and second admonition reject.

In the old Testament God commanded to Mat. 13. 30.
kill the false Prophets. In the new, Christ says, Let the tares grow unto the
harvest. The Apostolical rejection of an Heretic, is part of excommunication,
and spiritual death, which hinders not the Magistrate, that he should take
cognizance of Heretics, to punish them.

161. Deuteronomy. 15. 3. Of a forainer thou may expect thy money again. Psalm. 37.
21. 112. 5. Prove. 11. 24.) Luke 6. 35. Lend, looking for nothing again.

A modest demand of a debt may be lawful according to the contracts of buying
and selling; Christ speaks of the poor, and says that we must deal brotherly
with them, that if they have not wherewith to pay, we should forgive them their
debts out of Christian charity.

162. Deuteronomy. 16. 8. Six days. Exodus 13. 6. Seven days shall thou eat leavened
bread.

The seventh day of the feast was no less solemn then the first.

163. Deuteronomy. 17. 17. The King shall not have many wives. 1 King. 11. 3. King
Solomon had 700 Wives, and 300. Concubines.

God forbad that the King should have many wives, lest his heart should forsake
the true God, and run after strange gods, as Solomon's did, loving many strange
women, and fell into so great lust by following them, that forsaking the true
God, he set up many Idols of the Gentiles.

164. Deuteronomy. 17. 17. The King shall not greatly multiply to himself silver and
gold. 1 King. 3. 13. God gave to Solomon riches and honor.

Kings must not for their pride heap up great quantity of silver and gold to
the oppression of their subjects; otherwise they had need of great riches to
preserve their Countries and their Kingly Majesty.

165. Deuteronomy. 18. 10. There shall not be found amongst you an observer of time.
(1 Samuel 28. 7) Lev. 19. 13. Chapter 20. 17.
Romans 14. 6. He that regards a day, regards it to the Lord.

Moses condemns superstitious observation of days, as if one day were more
happy then an other. The Heathens divided days into white and black, fortunate
and unfortunate. The Apostle shows the liberty of Christians against those who
by an opinion of sanctity would have the legal feast days observed.

166. Deuteronomy. 18 11. You shall not consult with Wisards, or seek truth from the
dead. Mat. 17. 3. Moses and Elias spoke with Christ in Mount Tabor.

It is an abomination in the sight of God, and a heathen superstition to
consult with Wisards, etc. The appearing of Moses and Elias was of another way,
and their speaking with Christ, was to confirm the Disciples in the doctrine
delivered by Moses and the Prophets.

167. Deuteronomy. 20 17. Thoushalt destroy with the edge of the sword, the Hittites,
the Amorites, the Canaanites, the Perisites, the Hivites and the Jebusites.
Josh. 9. 15. Joshua made a league with the Hivites, and the Jebusites. Solomon
spared the Amorites, 1 King. 9. 20.

The Gibeonites craftily saved their lives, laying down their high spirits, and
Solomon made the Amorites tributaries, the other enemies of God and his people
who continued stubborn in their wickedness were destroyed.

168. Deuteronomy. 20. 19. When you besiege a City, you shall not destroy the trees. 2
King. 3. 19. You shall fell every good tree.

Those trees that bear fruit the Israelites could feed on, were not to be cut
down in the promised land; but in the Country of the Moabites God would show a
peculiar example of his just anger for their sins.

169. Deuteronomy. 21. 16. The sons of the hated being first born, must be
acknowledged for the first born. Genesis 48. 5. Jacob assigned the right of
primogeniture to Joseph the son of his beloved Rachel, and gave two tribes to
his children.

Jacob lived before the promulgation of the Law; Joseph was his first born of
his beloved Rachel, to whose children he wisely assigned two Tribes, as he made
to Judah born from Leah the primogeniture, and gave him the dominion over his
brethren. Genesis 49. 8.

170. Deuteronomy. 21. 21. If any man beget a stubborn child, he shall bring him to
the Elders of the City, to the gate of judgment, and he shall be stoned with
stones till he die. Prove. 19. 18. Instruct thy son, and despair not of him.

Moses speaks of the incorrigible son; Solomon concerning fatherly correction,
whilst there is hope of the sons amendment, and warns him that he shall not set
his mind to destroy him.

171. Deuteronomy. 23. 2. A bastard shall not enter 2 King. 14. 6. 2 Chronicles. 26. 4.
into the Congregation of the Lord. Ezekiel. 18. 20. The son shall not bear the
iniquity of the father.

God would not suffer bastards to be admitted to public offices for the
disgrace of their births, and the honor of Matrimony, lest the Commonwealth
should grow contemptible by such: but that exclusion is not to be taken for a
punishment but an affliction which God in the next life will reward with more
glory, if they be pious and penitent.

172. Deuteronomy. 23. 6. Thou shall make no peace with the Ammonites and Moabites.
Romans 12. 18. If it be possible, as much as lies in you, live peaceably with
all men.

Those Nations did not only lay snares for the Israelites temporal life, but
also for their eternal life: we, so far as we are able, and where piety is
not endangered, must hold and embrace peace with all men.

173. Deuteronomy. 23. 15. Thou shall not deliver to his master the servant which is
escaped from his master unto thee. Philemon verse. 13. Paul sent Onesimus who
was fled from his Master, to his Master again.

The fugitive servant was not to be sent back to his angry master who was ready
to kill him. There was a difference amongst the servants of the Jews, for he
that was to serve seven years, if he ran away after he had served six years,
he was not to be sent back to his Master, but the Gentiles were bond-servants
all their lives.

174. Deuteronomy. 24. 1 If a man have taken a wife and married hor, and she find no
favor in his eyes, because he has found some uncleanness in her, let him
write her a Bill of divorcement and give it 1 Cor. 7. 15.
in her hand, and send her out of his house. Mat. 5. 32. Chap. 19. 7. Whosoever
shall put away his wife saving for the cause of fornication, causes her to
commit adultery, and whosoever shall marry her that is divorced, commits
adultery.

The law of divorcement of wives was nothing but a concession of Moses for the
hardness of the hearts of the Jews, and the danger of the lives of the women:
Christ abrogated that custom by the divine Law, and a precept from the
beginning, and corrected the false glosses upon the Divine Mal. 2. 6.
Law.

175. Deuteronomy. 24 2. She that was sent away from her husband might marry an other
husband. Romans 7. 3. Whilst her husband lives she shall be called an
adulteress: if she be married to an other man.

Divorce by a bill of divorcement does not dissolve matrimony; therefore they
that are unlawfully parted, must not attempt second marriages, because they
that are once married are made one body.

176. Deuteronomy. 24. 16. The children shall not be Genesis 5. 1. 1 Cor. 15. 35.
put to death for the parents. Romans 5. 12. By one men sin entered into the world.

The innocent children are not punished for the sins of their fathers, but in
Adam we all sinned, and we are daily polluted with many actual transgressions.

177. Deuteronomy. 25. 3. Forty stripes he may have given him, and not exceed. 2 Cor.
11. 24. I received of the Jews five times forty stripes save one.

The Jews to seem more merciful subducted one stripe.

178. Deuteronomy. 25. 4. Thou shall not musle the Ox Jos. Ant. ^^ 4. c. 8.
which treads out the corn. 1 Cor. 9. 9. Does God take care for Oxen?

The former place does not properly appertain to Oxen, but it is a figurative
speech. In the latter the Apostle speaks tropologically of the Ministers of the
Church, as if he would say, if God take care for Oxen, then much more does he
care for men, and the Ministers of his Church.

179. Deuteronomy. 27. 15. Cursed be the man that makes a m^lten Image. Romans 12. 14.
Bless and curse not.

The former place must be understood to proceed from duty and zeal to the glory
of God, not out of desire to revenge. So Moses and Paul did curse. Let us
follow the example 1 Cor. 4. 12.
of Christ, who being reviled, reviled not again, when he suffered he threatened
not, lest he should seem desirous of revenge.

180. Deuteronomy. 30. 11. The commandment which I command thee this day, is not
hidden from thee, neither is it far off. Joh. 5. 39. Search the Scriptures.

Moses understands not only legal precepts, but Evangelicall also, which God
writes in our mouth and our heart: Christ commands us to search the Scriptures
to increase our knowledge by; because we know hereby in part, etc. 1 Cor. 13. 9.

181. Deuteronomy. 30. 15. I have set before you this day, life and good, death and
evil. Joh. 8. 24. Ye shall die in your sins.

Moses foreshewes favor to those that keep the Law, and wrath to the
trangressours: Christ threatens the Jews, the servants of sin, with death
and eternal destruction.

182. Deuteronomy. 30. 19. I have set before you good and evil. Romans 6. 16. Wicked
men are the servants of sin.

In the first place it is spoken of Gods people. In the latter of the wicked,
who are called the servants of sin, that run after it with greediness, it
reigns in them, and their will leans to evil.

183. Deuteronomy. 31. 2. Moses was a 120. years old. Psalm. 90. 10. The days of our
years are 70. or 80.

Moses obtained long life by a singular privilege from God. The term of our
life is 70. or 80. years; or at the most 100. years, as Ecclus. speaks 18. 9.

184. Deuteronomy. 32. 21. I will provoke them by those that are not a people. Romans
10. 19. Mat. 10. 5. Enter not into the way of the Gentiles, rather go to the
lost sheep of Israel.

In the former place is understood the calling of the Gentiles. In the latter a
temporary command of Christ, by which he would that the Gospel should first be
preached to the Jews, and then according to Moses Prophecy to all Nations and
people.

185. Deuteronomy. 32. 39. I am alone, and there is not other God. 2 Cor. 4. 4. The
Devil is called the God of this world.

Jehovah is the true God, the Devil is called the God of this world, because
he inclines the minds of wicked men to mischief, and they obey him rather then
God.

186. Deuteronomy. 32. 35. Revenge is mine, I will repay, says the Lord. Romans 13. 4.
The Magistrate is the revenger of Gods wrath on them that do evil.

That is Gods revenge, which is done by the Magistrate, therefore the Scripture
forbids not public revenge by Gods Ministers the Magistrates, but only
private revenge.

187. Deuteronomy. 34. 10. There arose not a Prophet since in Israel, like to Moses.
Matthew. 11. 11. Amongst them that are born of women there has not risen a
greater then John the Baptist.

In the old Testament Moses was the greatest Prophet, in the new Testament Jobn
Baptist, who pointed out our Savior with his finger.

JOSHUA.
THis Book was written by Joshua the son of Nun, who brought the people of
Israel over Jordan into the Land of Canaan, conquering the Cities and killing
their enemies, and divided the land amongst the tribes of Israel; he lived 18.
years after Moses.

188. Josh. 1. 5. None shall be able to stand against thee all the days of thy
life. Chap. 7. 4. Three thousand men fled before the men of Ai.

The promise was conditional, that if they would be obedient unto God; but
because the Covenant was violated, and the condition not performeds on the
peoples part, therefore the violaters of the divine Covenant were punished.

189. Josh. 1. 11. Prepare your victuals. Exodus 16. 20. Manna remained till the
next day.

Joshua understood not Manna alone, but other provisions, which he would have
them buy of the children of Esau. Deuteronomy. 2. 6.


190. Josh. 1. 11. After three days you shall pass over Jordan. Chap. 3. 4.
That was done many days after.

Joshua speaks according to his humane intention, hoping that the spies would
return to him within three days; but because they were forced to lie hid in
the Mountains until such time as those that sought after them were returned,
therefore that passage of Israel over Jordan was delayed.

191. Josh. 2. 14. The spies promised to Rahab life and safety. Deuteronomy. 20. 13.
Thou shall destroy every Male thereof with the edge of the sword.

The enemies of the true God, and of the people of Israel were to be destroyed.
Rahab with her Father and brothers, was well minded toward the spies, and
joining her self to the people of God, forsook the mad Idolatry of the Heathens.

192. Josh. 4. 5. Take you up every man a stone upon his shoulder according to
the number of the tribes of the children of Israel, that it may be a sign
among you. Exodus 14. 22. Passing through the red sea they did not do so.

At the Commandment of God, in memory of the drying up of the water of Jordan
and their passing over, this was done, that it might be a monument of Gods
benefits: Moses did not the same in his passage over the red sea, because he
had no command of God for it.

193. Josh. 5. 7. Circumcision was intermitted in the wilderness for 40.
years. Genesis 17. 14. The man child, whose flesh of his foreskin is not
circumcised that soul shall be cut off from my people.

Circumcision was intermitted during the time of the exile and peregrination of
the children of Israel, because of their continual journying which did hinder
it, for it did cause great pain and languishing to the body.

194. Josh. 6. 4. On the seventh day the Soldiers and the seven Friests shall
compass the City seven times. Exodus 20. 8. Remember to keep holy the seventh
day. Deuteronomy. 5. 15. Ezekiel. 20. 12.

That was a special and singular law of God. There are many things of this
kind, says Justinus, in the sacred Bible, which God imputes not to men as sin,
because of the necessity that fell out, as Circumcision the eight day. The
seven times compassing about Jericho, the offering of sacrifices on the
Sabbath, etc.

195. Josh. 7. 15. He that shall be taken with the cursed thing shall be burnt
with fire. Verse. 16. Achan with his children was stoned by the Israelites.

The fault of Achans sacrifice and violation of the Majesty of God by him and
his children was mitigated, for he was first stoned, and then burned, he and
all that appertained to him.

196. Josh. 7. 24. For Achans sin were his children killed also. Deuteronomy. 24. 16.
The children shall not die for their fathers. 2 King. 14. 6. Ezekiel. 18. 20.

Achan did not only commit sacrilege, but also high treason, and therefore
both he and his family were to die for it; for if for rebellion against earthly
Majesty committed by parents, the children are justly punished in civil
judicature; much more shall God justly revenge the rebellion of parents upon
the children unto the third and fourth generation, unless their Exodus 20. 5.
children repent for it.

197. Josh. 10. 26. The King of Hebron was hanged. Verse. 37. He was slain with
the sword.

The first King being taken was strangled, the second who succeeded him fell by
the sword.

198. Josh. 11. 19. There was not a City which yielded not it self up to the
children of Israel. Yet in the time of the Judges, and the Kings many Cities
were not in their possession.

Joshua took all the Cities he came at, by force, and those that were to be
taken, and they were to be delivered to Israel for a possession.

199. Josh. 15. 8. Jerusalem was in the tribe of Judah. Chap. 18. 28. Benjamin
is numbered.

In the borders of Judah and Benjamin at first they were two small Cities, at
last they were joined into one and fortified with a wall round about.

200. Josh. 15. 63. The children of Judah could not drive out the Jebusites
unto this day. 2 Samuel 24. 18. The Jebusites were in their own possessions in
the time of David, who bought the threshing floor of Araunah the Jebusite.

Because the Israelites spared the Jebusites, and the Benjamites took them into
their protection, so that the remainders of them were tolerated unto David's
time; that succeeded ill to the people of Israel, who by their society were
Exodus 1. 21.
drawn to Idolatry.

JVDGES.
THis Book is so called from the Judges of the people of the Jews. It contains
the condition of the children of Israel after the death of Joshua, under 16
Judges. The Idolatry of Micha. The wickedness of the Gibeathites. The
slaughter of the Benjamites. It was written by Samuel. It contains the History
of 300. years.

201. Judge. 5. 31. Let all the enemies of the Lord perish. Prove. 25. 21. If thy
enemy hunger, Mat. 5. 44. Luke 6. 35. Romans 12. 20.
feed him with bread, if he thirst, give him water to drink.

We must do good to our enemies, but not to Gods enemies, and for private
injuries we must not curse them; but as they are Gods enemies, of whom there is
no hope of their conversion, out of zeal of a S. Spirit, we may pray also for
their destruction.

202. Judge. 6. 17, 36. Gedeon asks a sign from God. Mat. 12. 39. An evil
generation seek for a sign.

Gedeon was confirmed in his office by a sign given from God, so Moses, and
Joshua. Christ calls the Pharisees an evil generation justly because they out
of curiosity sought for a sign: Let us be content with the word of God.

203. Judge. 6. 21. Gedeon sacrificed on a rock. Lev. 1. 5. The sons of Aaron
shall offer the sacrifices on the Altar.

Gedeon offered the matter of the sacrifice to the Lord, and God himself was
the Priest in burning the offering, nor was there any Leviticall officer
present, and the event teaches us, that what Gedeon did was from divine
instinct.

204. Jugd. 11. 39. Jephtha did according to his vow Verse. 31. Whatsoever
comes forth of the doors of my house to meet me, I will offer up for a
burnt-offering to the Lord. Deuteronomy. 12. 31. The Lord hates all the abominations
that the Gentiles used to their Gods, and those that offered us their sons and
daughters, and burned them in the fire.

Jephtha vowed disjunctively, that whatsoever should first meet him out of his
house should be the Lords, that it should be either sacrificed or deputed for
Gods service; for he knew that all living creatures could not be offered in
sacrifice to the Lord; therefore he consecrated his daughter for the work of
the Sanctuary, Ve. 38. for she being sanctified to God knew no man, and she
bewailed her virginity.

205. Jud. 13. 7. Samson was a Nazarite from his mothers womb unto the day of
his death. Mat. 2. 23. It was fulfilled in Christ, he shall be called a
Nazarite.

The Nazarites in the old Testament were votaries according to Law, Number. 6. who
gave themselves wholly to meditate upon divine matters, and others which were
born so, as Samson here, on whose head never rasor came, nor was his head ever
shorn; others were called so, both ways jointly. Christ was prefigured by
them, who was most free from all uncleanness, commonly called a Nazarite,
because he was brought up in the Town of Nazareth.

206. Judge. 16. 31. Samson killed himself. Exodus 20. 14. Thou shall not kill.

Samson killed not himself with the Philistines by any rashness of his own, but
he did that by the instinct and power of God; and was a figure of Christ's
overthrowing our enemies.

RUTH.
IT is so named from Ruth a woman. Samuel describes in this Book Ruths
dutifulness to her Mother in Law, and the integrity of Boas, who was David's
Grandfather.

207. Ruth 3. 4. Naomi persuades Ruth to lie down at Boas feet. 1 Timothy 2. 9.
Women adorning themselves with modesty and sobriety.

That was indeed a dangerous counsel, nor must it be drawn in for an example;
Naomi was brought on to do that by the Law of raising children to the brother
that was dead. Yet God hindered that no dishonesty happened thereby.

208. Ruth. 4. 13. Boas took Ruth, and she was his wife, and he went in unto
her. Deuteronomy. 7. 3. You shall make no marriages with them.

Moah (who was the son of Lot) of his posterity they were not forbid to marry
wives, but of the Hittites, Gergeshites, Ammorhites, Cananites, Perisites,
Hivites, Jebusites, etc. Ruth followed the true Religion and the Nation of the
Jews, and not the Moabites.

The two Books of SAMVEL. Heb. Schemuel.

IN the first Book is described the life and death of Samuel, with the
Government of Saul. In the second, the translation of the Kingdom to David,
and his administration of it. Samuel writ the first book to the 25. Chapter.
The rest with the second Book were writ by Nathan and Gad both Prophets. In
these two Books is contained the History of 120. years.

209. 1 Samuel 3. 13. Eli knew his sons did wickedly, and he restrained them not.
Chap. 2. 24. He said to his sons, Wherefore do you all these things that I hear
of you from all the people? do not so my sons, it is no good report.

The correction of Eli in reproving his sons was too gentle, nor is it
accounted for a restraint. Chrysostom says, if Eli had been unreproveable in
Mat. hom. 17.
himself in his life, he should more sharply have corrected his sons treading
under foot the Law of God; therefore was he justly punished.

210. 1 Samuel 7. 2. From the day that the Ark of God abode in Kirjath-jearim,
the time was long, for it was twenty years, and all the house of Israel
lamented after the Lord. 1 Chronicles. 13. 6. David in the fifth year brought it
from thence.

The Ark was in Kirjath-jearim unto the days of Saul, who first brought it into
the Army, and then sent it back to its place. David being made King, first
translated it to Obed-edoms house, and after that unto the mountain of Sion.

211. 1 Samuel 9. 16. Thou shall anoint him to be Captain over my people Israel,
for I have looked upon my people, because their cry is come unto me. Hos. 13.
11. I gave thee a King in mine anger, and took him away in my wrath.

God gave a lawful Magistrate of his mercy for the good of the godly, to
defend them against the Philistines, yet because by diffidence of God they
sought for a King after the example of the Nations, as if they could not be
safe without a King, therefore God gave them a King in his anger.

212. 1 Samuel 13. 14. David was a man after Gods own heart. Act. 13. 2 Samuel 11.
4. An adulterer. Verse. 5. A Murderer.

David amended all by repentance, and the heart of God is, that he desires not
the death of a sinner, but rather that he should be converted and live. David
indeed erred in many Just. Mart. quaest. 78.
things, yet was he constant in the Covenant with God.

213. 1 Samuel 15. 24. Saul said to Samuel, I have sinned, now therefore I pray
thee pardon my sin. Isa. 43. 25. I am he, says the Lord, that blot out thy
transgressions for my name sake.

God by his own authority, but men ministerially from God remit sins, and
declare to those that are penitent the pardon of their sins for Christ's sake.

214. 1 Samuel 15. 35. After Agag was slain Samuel saw Saul no more. Chap. 19.
24. Saul prophesied with the rest, before Samuel.

Samuel saw him no more, when he had withdrawn himself from Saul, till he had
joined himself to the company of Prophets: or he never saw him more in his
Kingly ornament, or to converse familiarly with him as before.

215. 1 Samuel 15. 35. It repented the Lord that he had made Saul King. Romans 11.
29. The gifts and graces of God are without repentance.

The Scripture speaking by anthropopathy, after the manner of men, affirms
that God repented, because he knew Saul to be impenitent, and that he should
lose his Kingdom and his life also by the just judgment of God.

216. 1 Samuel 16. 1. Saul was rejected by God that he should no longer reign
over Israel above 10 years. Act. 13. 21. he gave them Saul the son of Cis a
King for 40 years.

Saul after he was anointed reigned 10. years. Paul joined the govenment of
Saul and Samuel together.

217. 1 Samuel 16. 21. David stood before Saul and became his Armor-bearer.
Chap. 17. 55. Saul seeing David go forth against the Philistines he said unto
Abner, Whose son is this young man?

Order is not always observed in History, before the duel with Goliath David
was no approved Soldier, but after that, therefore it is Hysterosis, that is
put before which should follow after.

218. 1 Samuel 21. 1. David came to Nob to Abimelech the Priest. Mark. 2. 26. He
went into the house of God in the days of Abiathar the Priest.

Abimelechs Father was Abiathar, the Son doing the Priests office, was in place
of his Father, who followed David, and was in exile with him.

219. 1 Samuel 21. 13. David changed his behavior before Achis and feigned
himself mad. Eccles. 7. 17. Be not foolish. 1 Pet. 2. 1.

David fearing greatly conterfeited folly, and by that dishonest means secured
himself.

220. 1 Samuel 26. 10. Or his day shall come Job 14. 5.
to die. Eccles. 7. 17. Why will thou die before thy time?

His days are determined, the number of his months are with God, thou have
appointed his bounds which he cannot pass. Ecclesiastes warns us that we
should not by intemperance and wichednesse shorten our own days; for they that
are put to death, by man's reason might live longer.

221. 1 Samuel 28. 14. Samuel appeared to Saul after his death. Revel. 14. 13.
For the dead rest from their labors.

He saw a shadow of Samuel, but not true Samuel, whose soul is in Gods hand,
and his body rests in peace; had it been Samuel indeed, he would not suffer
Saul to worship him, but would have reproved him, for that he had fallen from
God to look after Witches; it was the Devil therefore in Samuels likeness.

222. 2 Samuel 8. 18. The Sons of David were priests (elders.) Lev. 8. Aaron and
his sons were consecrated to be Priests.

Priests that were to officiate in sacred things were chosen only out of the
tribe of Levi, as Aaron and his sons: but in politic matters by priests of
Justice, Presbyters of counsels, are Presidents, Princes, and chief Rulers to
be understood.

223. 2 Samuel 10. 2. David would make a league with Hanun King of the Ammonites.
Deuteronomy. 23. 3. Ammonites and Moabites shall not enter into the congregation of
the Lord.

The Jews might not make a public league with the Ammonites; yet they might
hold private friendship with them, and the Moabites.

224. 2 Samuel 12. 15. David judged a man worthy of death for taking away a
sheep, Exodus 22. 1. If any one steal a sheep, he shall restore four sheep for
it.

David judged the punishment of this theft ought to be increased for the civil
circumstances that went with it, so the Magistrate uses to lay on more
punishment where he finds the offender more bold.

225. 2 Samuel 12. 30. David put the crown of the King of the Ammonites on his
own head. Deuteronomy. 7. 25. Thou shall take nothing to thy self of the prey taken
from the enemies of God.

That law was concerning Idolatrous people that inhabited the Land of promise;
the Ammonites were out of those bounds; therefore David sinned not when he put
the Kings crown on his own head, and divided the spoil to his followers.

226. 2 Samuel 14. 27. Absalon had three sons, and one daughter whose name was
Tamar. Chap. 18. 18. He said, I have no sons to keep my name in remembrance.

The sons of Absalon were dead before their father, and so he was without sons.

227. 2 Samuel 17. 25. The Father of Amasa was Jethra an Israelite. 2 Chronicles. 2.
17. An Ismaelite.

He was an Israelite by birth, by education an Ismaelite, for he lived there a
long time.

228. 2 Samuel 19. 23. The King said to Shimei, Thou shall not die, and he swear
unto him. 1 King. 2. 9. He said to Solomon, Bring down his hoary head to the
grave with blood.

David swore for himself, but not for his successor, Shimei need not fear
whilst David lived; and under Solomon he had been out of danger had he staid at
Jerusalem.

229. 2 Samuel 20. 23. Joab was over the whole Army. Chap. 19. 13. David said to
Amasa, Thou shall be Captain of the host for ever before me in the room of
Joab.

David desired to remove Joab from being Captain because of his cruelty, yet he
did it not, because in great matters he stood in need of him. In the mean time
Joab deceitfully killed Amasa, lest he should be preferred before him; the
punishment for this David deferred, but he did not wholly remit.

230. 2 Samuel 24. 9. Joab gave up the number of the people to the King 800000. 2 Chronicles. 21. 5. He gave David the number of them 1100000.

In the former place only the valiant men are counted; in the latter the
ordinary Soldiers also.

231. 2 Samuel 24. 9. Of the tribe of Judah 500000. 1 Chronicles. 21. 5. They are
numbered 47000.

First the Soldiers are numbered with their Colonels, but next they are
reckoned without their Officers.

232. 2 Samuel 24. 13. Shall seven years of Famine come unto thee. 1 Chronicles. 21.
12. Choose three years Famine.

The Famine of seven years is joined with the three years famine sent for the
cruelty of the house of Saul; after that should follow the other, for the sins
of David.

233. 2 Samuel 24. 14. It is better to fall into the hands of the Lord. Heb. 10.
31. It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God.

It is good to be in the hands of God, when he is pleased with us, because his
mercies are great. It is fearful to fall into the hands of God, when he is
angry, for the wicked cannot stand before him in judgment.

234. 2 Samuel 24. 15. God sent a Pestilence upon Israel from the morning unto
the time appointed. Verse. 13. Shall there be three days Pestilence in thy Land.

The time appointed was from the morning until noon of one day, or of the
continual morning sacrifice, that is, four hours.

235. 2 Samuel 24. 24. David bought of Araunah the floor and the Oxen for 50.
shekels of silver. 1 Chronicles. 21. 25. David gave to Araunah for the threshing
floor, 600. shekels of gold, of just weight.

The floor with all the ground about it was bought for 600. shekels of gold, a
greater price then what was given for the threshing floor, the Oxen and the
wood appointed for the sacrifice.

The two Books of KINGS. Heb. Malachim.

THe first Book contains the History of Solomon. The building of the Temple.
The division of the Kingdom to Judah and Israel. The life of five of the Kings
of Judah, and eight of Israel. Of Elias the Prophet. With the History of 116
years. The second contains the deeds of sixteen Kings of Judah, and twelve of
Israel. Of Elisha; and the destruction of the Kingdom, and carrying the people
of Israel captivo to Assyria. Of the children of Judah to Babylon. With the
History of 345. years. Jeremias writ them both.

236. 1 King. 2. 4. If thy children shall keep my ways and walk in them in
truth, there shall not fail thee a man to sit on the throne of Israel. Genesis 49.
10. The scepter shall not depart from Judah till Shiloh come.

In the former place it is spoken conditionally of the Kingdom of Israel, If
the sons of David should keep the ways of the Lord; but because Solomon
failed, therefore the Kingdom of Israel departed from his son, and in the
seventh generation the Kingdom of Judah was translated upon Nathan, whose
posterity ruled over the Jews until the coming of Christ. In the latter place
any kind of dominion is foretold to remain in Judahs posterity until the
Messiah should come.

237. 1 King. 3. 1. Solomon took Pharaoh his daughter, and brought her into the
City of David. Exodus 34. 15. Enter not into Covenant with the Inhabitants of
that Land, nor marry a wife, etc.

Marriages in a different Religion are dangeros, nor are they pleasing to God
We must not 2 Cor. 6. 14.
draw in the same yoke with Infidels, for there can be no firm charity or
unity where the foundation is neglected, that is, true Godliness. That Queen
forsaking her Religion, and her 1 King. 11. 4.
fathers house, and marrying with Solomon, was a type of the marriage of Christ
and his Church. But because Solomon loved also the women of other Nations, and
his heart was led away by them to follow other gods, he drew the anger of God
upon himself and his posterity, and caused a defection from them.

238. 1 King. 3. 13. I have also given thee riches and honor, thot none of the
Kings shall be like unto thee. Mat. 6. 29. Solomon in all his glory was not
like the Lillies of the field.

Solomon exceeded all the Kings in wisdom, riches and honor; Christ compares
the Lillies with his vestiments in his greatest splendor.

239. 1 King. 6. 2. The house which Solomon built for the Lord, the length
thereof was 60 cubits, the breadth 20. cubits, and the height thereof 30
cubits. 2 Chronicles. 3. 4. it is said to be 120 cubits.

In the first place common cubits, in the latter cubits of the Sanctuary must
be understood, for the sacred cubit did contain two common cubits.

240. 1 King. 7. 15. He made two brazen pillars, of 18 cubits high a piece. 2 Chronicles. 3. 15. He made two pillars of 35 cubits high a piece.

Both the pillars did appear but 35 cubits high, the half of each cubit was hid
in the capital or crowning of the pillar.

241. 1 King. 7. 19. The chapiters were four cubits. 2 King. 25. 17. They were
three cubits.

The crown with the chapter was four cubets: without the crown but three
cubits.

242. 1 King. 7. 26. The sea contained 2000 baths. 2 Chronicles. 4. 5. 3000 baths.

In the former place is expressed the number of baths which ordinarily were put
into the Vessel by the Kings order. In the latter the capacity of the vessel
is set down, unto the brim of it, so it would hold 3000 baths.

243. 1 King. 8. 4. The Priests brought up the Ark of the Lord and the
Tabernacle of the Congregation into the Temple. 2 Chronicles. 1. 13. The Tabernacle
of the Congregation of God was at Gibeon.

The Tabernacle of David was a new one, 2 Samuel 6. 17. 1 Chronicles. 16. 1.
in which was the Arc of the Covenant. The old one made by Moses, was in the
desert, and remained at Gibeon.

244. 1 King. 8. 46. There is no man that sins not. 1 John 3. 9. Every man
that is born of God does not commit sin.

Naturally we are polluted with sin by the frailty of the flesh: they that are
born of God are the sons of God, who being regenerate by the holy Spirit, do
not give way to sin, but carefully resist it, being guided by the holy Ghost.

245. 1 King. 8. 27. The heaven, and the heaven of heavens cannot contain God.
Col. 2. 9. In Christ dwells all fullness of the Godhead bodily.

The divine nature cannot be apprehended by us, the divinity of Christ is
personally united to the flesh and dwells in it as in its proper Temple.

246. 1 King. 9. 23. Princes over Solomon's work 550. 2 Chronicles. 8. 10. All the
Princes over Solomon's work were 250.

In the former place mention is made of all who took charge of the work; in the
latter of those that took charge by course.

247. 1 King. 9. 28. Hiram sent to Solomon 420 talents of gold. 2 Chronicles. 8. 18.
They brought from Ophir 450 talents af gold.

The mariners and Solomon's servants spent 30 talents by the way, and they
brought to Solomon to Jerusalem 420.

248. 1 King. 11. 35. God said to Jerohoam I will give unto thee tentribes.
Verse. 36. To Solomon's son one tribe. Chap. 12. 21. Rehoboam gathered together
all the house of Judah and the tribe of Benjamin.

Rehoboam had but one whole Tribe, and Jeroboam ten tribes, the tribe of
Benjamin was divided between them both. Some others also of other tribes that
were godly men, specially the Priests and Levites came to Jerusalem, and staid
in Judea.

249. 1 King. 12. 24. This thing is from me, 2 Samuel 7. 16. Psalm. 142. 12.
says the Lord, that is, the revolting of the Israelites. 2 Chronicles. 13. 5. The
Lord God gave the Kingdom of David over Israel to him and his sons by a
Covenant of salt.

The promise made to David does not much concern his temporal kingdom, as the
eternal and incorruptible kingdom of Christ; and the promise also was under a
condition, if his children should keep Gods laws, and walk in his ways. 1
King. 2. 4.

250. 1 King. 15. 14. Asa took not away the high places. 2 Chronicles. 14. 5. Also
he took out of all the Cities of Judah the high places and the Images.

Those high places where God was worshipped, Asa took not away; but he
destroyed the Idols of the Gentiles and the Images of the Sun.

251. 1 King. 16. 8. In the 26 year of Asa King of Judah, began Ela the son of
Basa to reign over Israel in Tersa two years. Verse. 10. And Zimri went and
smote Ela in the 27 year of Asah King of Judah.

In the 26 year of Asah King of Judah Ela reigned over Israel; in the 27 year
of Asa, Zimri rebelled against Elah, and killing him took the kingdom from him.

252. 1 King. 17. 4. God commands the Ravens to feed Elias. Lev. 11. 15. Every
kind of Raven was abominable to God.

A Raven indeed is an unclean creature, not by creation, but by divine
ordination, and the forbidding men to eat his flesh; but to touch the Raven
alive, or to eat the meat he brought was not unclean to Elias, nor an
abomination before God.

253. 1 King. 17. 22. Elias raised the son of the Widow of Sarepta. 2 King. 4.
18. Elizaeus raises the Shunamites child. Joh. 5. 28. God quickneth the dead.

God raises the dead by his own power, the Prophets did it not by their own
power, but by power from him, and so confirmed the heavenly doctrine.

254. 1 King. 19. 11. The Lord was not in the wind, or the tempest. Ephesians. 4.
6. God is all in all.

God did not reveal his presence to Elias in Act. 12. 21.
the wind or tempest, though he be otherwise in all his creatures.

255. 1 King. 22. 49. Ahasias the son of Ahab said unto Jehosaphat, Let my
servants go with thy servants in the ships; but Jehosaphat would not. 2 Chronicles.
20. 35. Jehosaphat joined himself with Ahasias King of Israel to make ships to
go to Tarsis.

Jehosaphat first refused the friendship of Ahazias, but at length he granted.

256. 2 King. 1. 10. Elias consumed two fifties with fire. Luke 9. 54. Christ
forbad his disciples to do so.

Elias was the Executor of the wrath of God on the enemies of God. The
Disciples would rashly have done the like; their vocation was not to return
evil for evil, but to overcome evil with good, and to love their enemies.

257. 2 King. 4. 29. Go, and if thou meet any man salute him not. Romans 16. 10.
Salute one the other with an holy kiss; Salute the Churches.

Superstitious salutations must be rejected; profitable and honest salutations,
by which we wish good and profit to our neighbor, must be observed. The
command of Elisha to his servant obliged him that without delay or lingering he
should perform his errand, for what he was commanded was a singular charge.

258. 2 King. 8. 25. Ahasias reigned in the 12 year of Joram the son of Ahab.
Chap. 9. 29. In the 11 year of Joram the son of Ahab, Ahasias reigned over
Judah.

In the end of the eleventh year, and beginning of the twelfth of Joram,
Ahasiah began to reign.

259. 2 King. 8. 26. Ahasias was 22. years old when he began to reign. 2 Chronicles.
22. 2. Ahasias was 42 years old when he began to reign.

Ahasias his age in the former place, and the time of the reign of all the
house of Omri is put in the latter place.

260. 2 King. 9. 26. I have seen the blood of Naboth and the blood of his sons,
says the Lord. 1 King. 21. 14. Then they sent to Jesabel, saying, Naboth is
dead.

Naboth and his sons were killed, lest they should by lawful inheritance
possess the vineyard; what therefore the holy Ghost conceals in one place, he
explains in an other.

261. 2 King. 12. 21. Josachar and Josabad his servants smote Joas, and they
buried him with his Fathers in the City of David. 2 Chronicles. 24. 26. Zabad and
Josabad conspired against him, and killed him in his bed and buried him, but
not in the sepulcher of the Kings.

Josachar otherwise is called Zobad; Joas was unworthy of Kingly burial
because he was perfidious to God, and ungrateful to men.

262. 2 King. 13. 1. In the 23 year of Joas the son of Ahaziah King of Judah
reigned Jehoahaz the son of Jehu over Israel in Samaria 17 years. Verse. 10. In
the 37 year of Joas King of Judah began Jehoash the son of Jehoash to reign
over Israel 16 years in Samaria.

Joachas King of Israel reigned 17 years, to the 30 year of Joas King of Judah,
the son of Joachas Joas was joined with his father in the Government, in the 37
year of Joas King of Judah, and so he reigned two years with his father.

263. 2 King. 15. 30. Hoshea the son of Elah, after the death of Pekah reigned
in the 20 year of Jotham the son of Vzziah King of Judah about 33. Jotham
reigned 16 years.

Hoshea reigned in the 20 year of Jotham, not of his reign, but from the
beginning of his reign, who died in the 16 year, and Ahaz his son succeeded him.

264. 2 King. 16. 2. Ahaz was 20 years old when he began to reign, and he
reigned. 16 years. Chap. 18. 2. Ezechias was 25 years old when he began to
reign; so should he be born in the eleventh year of Ahaz.

Physicians do allow this; others do attribute to Jotham 20 years, and read it
thus, Ahaz was 20 years old when Jotham began to reign.

265. 2 King. 22. 3. In the 18 year of King Josiah, the king sent Shaphan the
son of Azaliah. 2 Chronicles. 38. 8. In the 18 year of his reign he sent Shaphan the
son of Azaliah.

Josias began to reign in the 8 year of his age, and in the 18 year of his
reign he sent Shaphan to Helkiah.

266. 2 King. 23. 30. The people of the land took Jehoahaz the son of Josiah,
and anointed him King in his Fathers stead. Verse. 34. And Pharaoh Necho made
Eliakim the son of Josiah King in the room of his Father. Mat. 1. 11. Josias
begat Jechonias.

Iechonias nephew to Josias, was the son of Ioakim, set by Pharaoh into the
place of Ioacas who was carried into Egypt. Matthew passes by the father of
Ieconias.

267. 2 King. 23. 30. Josias was buried at Jerusalem before the Babylonish
captivity. Mat. 1. 11. Josias begat Ieconias and his brethren in the captivity
of Babylon.

Josias in his posterity begat Iechonias and his brothers kindred who lived
when that miserable carrying captive into Babylon began.

268. 2 King. 25. 29. Iechonias or Ioachin died in Babylon. Mat. 1. 12. After
the transmigration unto Babylon, Iechonias begat Salathiel.

That was done after the beginning of the captivity, but not after the
confirmation of it, when the time was that Evilmerodach lifted up the head of
Ioachim, in the 37 year of his reign over Babylon, when the time of deliverance
drew on.

The two Books of CHRONICLES.
THey are called Paralipomena, from (...) and (...); that is, from being passed
by. Things that are passed by in the Books of the Kings are contained here. In
Hebrew they are named Dibre Hajamin, that is, Words of days, of Chronicall
Annals, because they contain Annals and Histories. The first sets down the
Genealogy of Adam; of the Patriarchs and Tribes of Israel: with the reigns of
Saul and David. The latter has the History of Solomon and of all the Kings of
Judah and Israel, to the Babylonish captivity, and their enlargement by Cyrus:
which is done in the year of the world 3435. They were both written by Esdras.

269. 1 Chronicles. 2. 9. The sons of Ezrom, Ieramuel and Ram. Matthew. 1. 3. Ezrom
begat Aram.

Ram and Aram were but one, in Hebrew Ram, in Syriack Aram, signifies, Noble or
High.

270. 1 Chronicles. 3. 11. Ioram begat Ochozias of whom came Ioas. Matthew. 1. 8.
Ioram begat Ozias.

Ochosias, Joas and Amasias are left out by the Evangelist, because they
reigned not well, and to observe the 14 generations, that is, the 14 persons of
Kings in the genealogy of Christ.

271. 1 Chronicles. 3. 18. The son of Salathiel Pedajah, of Pedajah Zorobabel. Ezd.
3. 2. Mat. 12. 2. Salathiel begat Zorobabel.

Zorobabel was the nephew to Salathiel, which he begat by his son Pedajah.

272. 1 Chronicles. 10. 6. Saul died, and his three sons; and all his house died
together. 2 Samuel 2. 8. Abner made Isbosheth the son of Saul, King over Israel.

Isbosheth after his fathers death, though he had for a time the name of a
King, at last he was miserably slain in his bed, and Mephiboseth was by favor
in the Court of David without any rule; so the family of Saul perished rightly
with him, nor ever could aspire any more to any eminent dignity.

273. 1 Chronicles. 18. 12. Abishai smote Edom in the valley of salt 18000. 2 Samuel
8. 13. It was David. Psalm. 60. 2. That Victory is imputed to Joab.

Abishai with Joab having the Army divided, conquered the enemy, at the first
assault he overcame 6000 of the Edomites; Joab killed 12000 of those that fled
away; but the victory is imputed to David as their King.

274. 2 Chronicles. 2. 14. Hiram was the son of a woman of the daughters of Dan,
whose Father was of Tire. 1 King. 7. 14. He was the son of a widow of the trihe
of Nephtalim.

The Father of Hiram was of the tribe of Nephthalim, who lived many years in
Tyria, and had a wife of the tribe of Dan.

275. 2 Chronicles. 8. 1. Solomon built those Cities which Hiram restored to him. 1
King. 9. 11. Solomon gave to Hiram twenty Cities in the Land of Galilee.

Solomon gave to Hiram those Cities for twenty years; that he might have a
yearly revenue from them, until the charges were paid to him; then Hiram
restored them to Solomon and he built them, and made the children of Israel
dwell in them.

276. 2 Chronicles. 19. 2. Josaphat because he lent help to the wicked, and made
friendship with those that hated God, deserved Gods wrath. Genesis 14. 13. Abraham
and Isaac were in league with heathen Kings and Gentiles.

Leagues in civil affairs are granted, but otherwise there can be no firm
league made with them. So was David at peace with his Neighbors, and Abraham
with the Cananites.

277. 2 Chronicles. 35. 18. There was not the like Passover in Israel from the days
of Samuel the Prophet. 2 King. 23. 22. There was not the like passover from the
days of the Judges which judged Israel, nor all the days of the Kings of
Judah.

Samuel was the last of the Judges; the meanning therefore of the words is
this, there was no passover like that, from the time that Kings began in Israel.

278. 2 Chronicles. 35. 34. Josias was killed in battle, by the City of Megiddo, by
the Archers of the Egyptians. Chap. 34. 38. I will gather thee to thy Fathers,
and thou shall be gathered to thy grave in peace.

Josias his reign, death, and burial were peaceable; though he were wounded in
the war fighting against Pharaoh Necho contrary to Gods word; yet there is no
doubt of his salvation.

EZDRAS two Books.
THey were both written by Ezdras, and contain the return of the Jews from
Babylon to Judea, and the building of the Temple and of the City Jerusalem; the
correction of the people, and restitution of religion. With the History of 200
years.

279. Ezd. 1. 5. There rose up the chief of the Fathers of Judah and Benjamin,
the Priests and the Levites, with all them whose spirit God had raised. 1 Chronicles. 9. 3. The Israelites, the Priests, Levites, the Nethinims, went up to
Jerusalem the children of Judah, Benjamin, Ephraim, and Manasses.

There came to Jerusalem in their return not only the children of Judah, but
of other tribes, and they restored the worship of God amongst themselves, who
were before time transported out of Judea with them into Babylon.

280. 1 Ezd. 2. 5. The sons of Arah returned 775. Neh. 7. 10. They are recorded
652.

First are set down those that gave up their names to return; then those that
came into Judea, the rest remaining in Babylon, or perishing in the journey: so
also is reconciled the unequal number of other families.

281. 1 Ezd. 2 6. The children of Pabath-moab 800, and Joab of the children of
Joshua and Moab 280* 2. Neh. 7. 11. The children of Pahath-moab, of the
children of Joshua and Moab 2818.

There was a less number of some of those families, but at length it grew
greater by the dignity of those that went forth; and greatest of all when
others joined themselves to them that had not set down their nam^s.

282. 1 Ezd. 6. 3. Cyrus the King decreed that the house of God should be built
at Jerusalem, and let them lay the foundations, the height thereof 60 cubits,
and the breadth thereof 60 cubits. 1 King. 6. 2. The house which King Solomon
built for the Lord, the length thereof was 60 cubits, the breadth 20 cubits the
height 30 cubits.

The structure of Solomon's Temple was more 2 Chronicles. 3. 3. Agg. 2. 3. 1 Eld. 3.
12.
beautiful then this, therefore the Elders that saw this wept, because the
beginnings of this did not seem to answer the Majesty of the former Temple.

283. 1 Ezd. 7. 7. And there went up some of the children of Israel, of the
Priests and the Levites unto Jerusalem in the seventh year of Artaxerxes. Chapter
Jer. 25. 12. and 34. 10. 2 Chronicles. 3. 22.
1. 1. In the first year of Cyrus King of Persia the Jews had power given them
to go up to Jerusalem.

After that Cyrus had given license to them to return from Babylon to
Jerusalem, many with Ezdras and Nehemiah returned to Jerusalem under the reign
of Artaxerxes.

284. 2 Ezd. 3. 8. The Jews built the walls of Jerusalem after their return.
Zach. 3. 4. Jerusalem shall be inhabited without walls.

Under the name of Jerusalem, Zacharias prophesies Zach. 2. 5.
of the Church of Christ, and the heavenly Jerusalem, the majesty of it is
larger then can be comprehended in one City, of which God is the wall, a fire
round about, and glory in the midst of her.

285. 2 Ezd. 5. 9. 10. 12. Nehemias reprehends the richer Jews, because they
thought to live by usury. Genesis 47. 23. Joseph bought the land of Egypt, and the
people thereof he made subject to Pharaoh for corn.

The Egyptians were punished by God for their iniquities; the Jews after their
return into their Country were so proved, the richer Jews oppressing their poor
brethren, with biting usury did burden them, which Joseph did not.

286. 2 Ezd. 10. 32. The houses were not builded. Verse. 3. Let not your doors
be open.

Their houses were not fully built, the Cities had gates.

287. 2 Ezd. 8. 18. Ezdras read in the book day by day. 1 Ezd. 3. 4. They kept
also the feast of Tabernacles as it is written.

This was a singular example of piety, for they were not bound to do so by the
Law, yet they came willingly day by day, to hear the book of the Law.

288. 2 Ezd. 10. 32. Also we made ordinances amongst our selves yearly to
charge ourselves with a third part of a shekell for the work of the Lord. Exodus
30. 13. They shall give every one that passes amongst them that be numbered
half a shekell.

Moses once by Gods command laid on them that tribute, and Joas at the renewing
of the Temple ordered that every one should give what he pleased; so Nehemias
ordained the third part of 2 shekell by the year, to restore the Temple, not
from the Law, but from necessity.

289. 2 Ezd. 11. 6. Of the children of Phares that dwelt at Jerusalem were 468.
Benjamin 928. 2 Chronicles. 9. 6. Jehuel 690. Benjamin 956.

First the chief are set down to whom a dwelling fell by lot; then other
voluntary inhabitants, who chose a habitation willingly.

ESTHER.
THe book of Esther is so called from Esther who was Ahasuerus wife; here is
showed how Ahasuerus divorcing Vashti, chose Esther to be Queen. Haman the
enemy of the Jews, and of Mordecai, is hanged. Mordecai is made Provost of the
Kingdom. It contains the History of 20 years. Ezdras was the writer of it, or
else the men of the great Synagogue.

290. Esth. 1. 12. Ahasuerus divorced Vashti because she refused to come at his
commandment. Mat. 19. 9. Whosoever shall put away his wife except for
fornication, and shall marry an other commits adultery.

The pride of Vashti hurt not the King alone, but all the people and Princes of
the Kingdom, by showing a kind of dominion over the King before other women.
Now adays men do not divorce their wives but for the cause of Adultery only,
and they are bound by the Laws of God and man to obey their husbands.

291. Esth. 9. 21. Mordecai sent to the Jews in all the provinces, that the 14
and 15 days of the month Adar, should be held for festivals. Deuteronomy. 4. 2.
Chap. 12. 32. What I command you this day you shall not add to it.

The ordinance of Mordecai was not against the Law, nor was it a feast of Gods
worship, but only commemorative for the divine wonderful deliverance of the
people of the Jews.

JOB.
THis Book is so called from Job, who was also called Jobab King of Edom. Moses
Genesis 36.
is thought to have written that book for an example of patience; there is
contained the affliction of Job, and contention with his friends, and disputing
with them. God ends this controversy at last, and restores Job to his former
posterity. The History appertains to the time of Jacob.

292. Job 1. 1. He lived in the land of Vz, his name was Job; he was a perfect
and an upright man, and one that feared God and eschewed evil. Psalm. 147. 20.
He has not done so with any Nation.

Under the old Testament the public worship of the true God was amongst the
Israelites, whither other Nations were admitted to come, which God called by
diverse ways to come unto him, and he had amongst them some that served him
sincerely, as Jethro Moses father in Law; the Gibeonites, and Job here, so
Rahab and Ruth.

293. Job. 1. 6. Satan came amongst the sons of God. 2 Pet. 2. 4. God spared
not the Angels that sinned, but cast them down to hell and delivered them unto
chains of darkness.

The coming of Satan amongst the sons of God was only as an executioner of the
commands and judgments of God.

294. Job 5. 1. Call if there be any that will answer thee, and to which of the
Saints will thou turn? Isa. 63. 16. Abraham knew us not, Israel was ignorant of
us.

Eliphaz teaches Job that there is no flying to Saints in misery, and that no
man is unjustly punished by God, but there is always a just cause for it:
therefore says he, show any of the Saints who being in such a calamity as thou
art, that was so without a cause, as thou supposest thy self to be.

295. Job 14. 4. Who can bring a clean thing Psalm 51. 7. Romans 7. 20.
out of unclean? Romans 11. 16. For if the first fruits be holy, the lump is also
holy.

All of us by original sin are conceived and born in sin, and sin dwells in us;
yet by Gods grace we are reckoned for holy, which account passes over all
within the Covenant as we are.

296. Job 14. 5. His days are determined, the number of his months are with
thee, thou have appointed his bounds that he cannot pass. Prove. 18. 21. Life
and death are in the power of the tongue.

Death and life of man are in the power of God, who has put bounds to his
days. Life and death is said, after a sort, to be in the power of the tongue,
because a wicked man may by slanders, and detraction, and contention hurt a man
even to death.

297. Job 14. 6, 14. Shall a man if he die live again? 1 Cor. 15. 22. In Christ
shall all be made alive.

Job denies not the resurrection, but he says Dan. 12. 2.
rather that men shall rise, not with bodies subject to death, but such as
shall live for ever, but the wicked to eternal death.

298. Job 19. 25. In the last day I shall rise out of the earth. Verse. 26. And
I shall be clothed again with my skin, and in my flesh shall I see God. 1 Cor.
15. 49. It shall rise a spiritual body.

We shall rise with this nature and body that Mat. 22.
that we now carry about us, and shall enjoy eternal felicity; it is called a
spiritual body by the Apostle, not in respect of the substance, but the
qualities, virtues and proprieties: we shall have no need of meat, drink, or
wedlock, we shall be like the Angels.

299. Job 19. 17. Whom I shall see for my self, and my eyes shall behold and
not another. Rev. 1. 7. Every eye shall see him.

Job speaks confidently that in his flesh he should see God to his salvation,
face to face, as he is, after this ordinary seeing by faith; so 2 Cor. 13. 1 John 3. 2.
shall the godly see God a gracious father, the wicked shall see him as a just
and a revenging judge.

300. Job 31. 30. Neither have I suffered my mouth to sin. 1 John 1. 10. If we
say we have no sin, we make God a liar.

Job was not without sin before God, but his conscience did not accuse him of
manifest sin and wickedness toward men.

301. Job 42. 10. The Lord gave Job twice as much as he had before. Verse. 13.
He had seven sons, and three daughters.

His faith of the resurrection is here commended, because his children were not
doubled, but only were as many as before, says Augustine: Ep. 120. c. 10.
for these did signify that those children which Job had lost should rise
again, and so joined together they are doubled.

The PSALTER, from singing.
HEb. Sepher Tehilin, the Book of Praises. It 2 Samuel 23. 2.
is called the Book of Psalms; the small Bible. The Psalms are in number 150.
The most are David's, who was an excellent Psalmist, and is called the sweet
singer of Israel. All of them were wirtten by the dictate of the holy Ghost.
The most before, and some in the time and after the Babylonish captivity, unto
the times of the Macchabees. Some are Didacticall, some Prophetical, some
Eucharisticall; containing Instructions, Doctrines, Exhortations, Consolations.

302. Psalm. 1. 2. In the law of the Lord is his delight. Romans 6. 14. Ye are not
under the Law.

Godly men have a singular delight in the Law, and in the holy Commandments of
God. Yet they are not under the yoke and curse of the law, which neither we nor
our fathers were able to bear, but by the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, we
hope to be saved as well Act. 15. 10.
as they.

303. Psalm. 1. 5. The ungodly shall not stand in the judgment. 2 Cor. 5. 10.
We shall all appear before the judgment seat of Christ.

The first place is to be understood of temporal judgments, which wicked men
cannot endure; when they are examined according to Gods judgments, because they
are convinced of their sins. The latter speaks of the last judgment, when all
good men shall rise to life eternal, and wicked men to eternal death.

304. Psalm. 2. 9. Thou shall break them with an Iron rod like a potters
vessel. Isa. 42. 3. He shall not break a bruised read.

The Son of God will break the wicked with an iron rod, and the blast of his
mouth, but he receives the weak in faith into favor, and he perfects his
strength in their weakness.

305. Psalm. 2. 10. Serve God in fear. 1 Pet. 2. 18. Servants be subject to your
Masters with all fear, etc.

The fear of God is the beginning of wisdom, and before all it is necessary to
have that; yet we must obey earthly Masters next under God.

306. Psalm. 5. 5. Thou hate all workers of iniquity. Romans 9. 18. Whom he will
he hardneth.

God, since he is just and mighty, will and can punish all iniquity; though he
suffer the deceit and violence of the wicked for a time. Hardening is imputed to
God, not as if he Aug. cont. Faust. Exodus 4. 21. and 7. 3. and 10. 27. and 11.
10.
were the author of it as it is evil, but as it is a punishment, and God uses
evil to good ends, and governs the wicked for good.

307. Psalm. 5. 6. Thou hate all the workers of iniquity. Luke 16. 8. Christ
praised the unjust steward, because he dealt wisely.

God hates all iniquity, and deceitful persons are an abomination unto him.
God praised the unjust Steward not for his wickedness, deceit, or wealth, but
he admired his subtilty and craft: so we use in criminal things to commend the
cunning of men, though we detest their wickedness.

308. Psalm. 7. 8. Judge me O Lord according to my righteousness, and my
innocence. Psalm. 143. 2. Enter not into judgment with thy servant, for in thy
sight shall no man living be justified.

In the first place he speaks of the justice and the judgment of the good cause
of David, which he upheld against the enemies of God, who oppressed him with
their false calumnies and violence, and therefore he appeals to God the judge
of his just cause, that he would defend his innocence. In the latter he speaks
of the justice of man, and so no man is just in the fight of God, if God should
try him according to the rigor of his justice.

309. Psalm. 7. 12. God threatens, and God is angry every day. Ephesians. 4. 31. Let
all bitterness, and wrath, and anger, be taken from you.

Anger is commendable, when we are angry for our sins, and detest evil justly
and as we should; so God is daily angry with us for our sins. But damnable
anger and unlawful is joined with sin of those who for every light offense do
maintain their anger, reckoning more of what is committed against them, then
against God.

310. Psalm. 9. 8. God shall judge the world in righteousness. 1 Cor. 6. 2.
Know ye not that the Saints shall judge the world?

The manner of judging of the world is either by authority, so the whole
Trinity will judge; or of subordinate authority, so Christ as Mediator and man
will judge; or of assertion, so the Apostles will judge the world; or of
approbation, so all the Saints and Angels shall allow of the sentence
pronounced by the supreme judge. Chrysostom, the Saints shall judge the world
by exemplary judgment; because by example of their faith, the infidelity of
the world shall be condemned.

311. Psalm. 14. 1. The fool said in his heart, There is no God. Psalm. 19. 1.
The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament shows his handy work.

Wicked men, if not in words, yet in their deeds and actions they deny God, and
as much as in them is, they wish there were no God, and no hell.

312. Psalm. 18. 42. They cried unto the Lord, and he heard them not. Jer. 29.
12. Ye shall call upon me, and I will hearken unto you.

God does not hear the prayers of hypocrites, but he hears the prayers of
penitents.

313. Psalm. 19. 4. Their line went out into the ends of the earth. Romans 10. 18.
Their sound went out into the whole world.

Paul interprets the Psalm concerning the Doctrine of the Gospel, and says,
that it is the Canon of the holy Ghost, and rule of faith and manners of
Christians, appointed by God, by the sound and voice of the Prophets, of Christ
and his Apostles; in which the will of God is revealed, and therefore it is
called the Canonical Scripture.

314. Psalm. 19. 8. The Statutes of the Lord are right rejoicing the heart. 2
Cor. 3. 7. The law is the ministration of death engraven in stones.

In the Psalm by the Law is understood all the will of God revealed from
above. The Apostle speaks only of the moral law, not as it is in it self, for
so it is the perfect law of righteousness and brings life, but in respect of
us who are transgressors of the Law, and obtain nothing but death by it.

315. Psalm. 19. 11. And in keeping of thy commandments there is great reward.
Luke 17. 10. When you have done all ye were commanded ye shall say, We are
unprofitable servants; we have done nothing but what we are obliged to do.

David commends the Law of God, and that there is great reward in the keeping
of it. In which the goodness of God is commended, who may of right require
obedience from us, yet he freely gives a reward unto us, which he owes not.
Christ shows, that we, and all that we have are due unto God; therefore we
can ask nothing for a reward; and it is presumption to think that we can
deserve any thing at Gods hands.

316. Psalm. 22. 1. My God, my God, wherefore have thou forsaken me. Joh. 14.
10. Chap. 16. 32. I am not alone, for the Father is with me.

In the first place is signified the sense of Gods wrath and the effect thereof
in Christ, who taking upon him our person, is made sin for us; though he
complained that he was forsaken as man, yet he was not forsaken as the Son of
God, nor was the divine nature separated from the hnmane nature, but supported
it. In the latter place, when Christ says, I am not alone, he has respect to
the flight of the Apostles, and fortifyeth himself against it by the presence
of his Father.

317. Psalm. 22. 3. My God, I cried by day and thou heardest not. Joh. 11. 42. I
knew, because thou hear me always.

Christ was not heard in his passion, because he was to die. In the latter
place he speaks of his prayer for believers, he gives thanks to his Father that
he was always heard.

318. Psalm. 24. 1. The earth is the Lords and the fullness thereof. Luke 4. 6.
I will give to thee (says Satan unto Christ) all this power and glory.

Satan being the spirit and father of lying, Joh. 8. 44. Mat. 28. Psalm. 23. 8.
does falsely appropriate to himself the power of the world.

Christ being appointed by his father King of Kings, to whom was given all
power in heaven and earth, he rules in heaven and earth, from sea to sea, from
the rivers unto the ends of the earth.

319. Psalm. 24. 2. The Lord has founded the earth upon the seas. Exodus 20. 4.
The waters are under the earth.

The earth has its stability from the first creation, the foundation thereof
is the power of God, which is the center of the whole, and it does as it were
move upon the waters above and beneath, it has the waters on the sides, so
that the sea is higher then the earth: it is therefore the wonderful work of
God that he preserves mankind from drowning in the midst of the waters.

320. Psalm. 26. 2. Prove me O Lord. 1 Cor. 11. 28. Let a man prove himself.

God because he proves our thoughts, words and deeds; therefore we must prove
our selves that we may make our selves approved to God.

321. Psalm. 32. 3. When I kept silence my bones waxed old. Verse. 3. Through my
roaring all the day long.

Silence respects the suppression of sins; Crying, the complaints and
lamentations for grief of mind.

322. Psalm. 32. 10. Many sorrows shall be to the wicked. 73. 5. The righteous
are punished more then the wicked.

Punishments internal and sempiternall are for the wicked, but external and
temporary are understood by the last place.

323. Psalm. 34. 5. They looked unto him and were lightened. 1 Timothy 6. 16. He
dwells in a light that no man can approach unto.

God is said to dwell in light not properly, but metaphorically; for by this
his glory and manifest presence is understood.

324. Psalm. 34. 10. There is no look to them that fear God. 2 Timothy 3. 12. All
that will live godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer persecution.

The Godly suffer no want in spiritual good, but in corporal and temporal
good; yet their persecutions are good for them, and are rewarded with eternal
life.

325. Psalm. 34. 22. None that trust in the Lord shall be desolate. Romans 3. 23.
All have sinned and come short of the glory of God.

In the first place is understood delinquency to death and eternal
destruction, but they that believe in Christ, their faults shall not be imputed
to them unto death.

326. Psalm. 35. 6. Let their way be made slippery and dark, and let the Angel
of the Lord persecute them. Mat. 5. 44. Love your enemies.

In the first place are meant the incorrigible and obdurate enemies of Christ
and his Gospel. In the latter place, those of whose conversion we have hope.

327. Psalm. 36. 8. Thou shall preserve both man and beast O Lord. 1 Cor. 9. 9.
Does God take care for oxen?

Under the general care of God are comprehended all creatures, but under his
special care, Men, for whose sake God has made the beasts. Ambrose says, God
cares not for beasts for themselves, but for our sake, for which he created all
things, and therefore his principal care is for us.

328. Psalm. 37. 21. The wicked borrowes and pays not again. Luke 6. 35. Lend,
looking for nothing again.

If the Debtor be fallen into extreme want that he cannot pay, we must not kill
him, or forsake him in his utmost necessity.

329. Psalm. 37. 25. I have been young and now am old, yet saw I never the
righteous forsaken, nor his seed begging their bread. Luke 16. 20. Lazarus a
beggar desired to be satisfied with the crumbs which fell from the rich man's
Table.

Beggary is a punishment to the wicked, but to the godly a fatherly punishment;
and it is found in the unlawful begging of Monks, sturdy, obstinate and idle
people which refuse to work; but the lawful begging is for the members of
Christ which are brought to extreme poverty by banishment, war, fire, water,
sickness, etc.

330. Psalm. 40. 7. Sacrifice and offering thou would not. 1 Pet. 2. 5. Ye as
living stones are built up a spiritual house, an holy Priesthood to offer up
spiritual sacrifices unto God by Jesus Christ.

God would none of the sacrifices of the Jews which were offered without faith.
The Apostle speaks of the spiritual sacrifices of Christians, as the oblation
of our body, a contrite heart, giving of thanks, works of Charity, which are
acceptable sacrifices to God.

331. Psalm. 40. 9. Lo, I come, in the volume of the book it is written of me,
that I might do thy will O God. Mat. 26. 39. Father if it be possible let this
cup pass from me; yet not as I will, but as thou will.

Christ that he might fulfill the will of his Father in redeeming mankind
offered himself freely, and though in the act he was sorrowful as men are, and
would, if it had been possible, have escaped death, without the detriment of
man's salvation, yet he submitted himself to his Fathers will.

332. Psalm. 44. 23. Awake, why sleep thou O Lord? rise. 121. 4. The keeper
of Israel sleeps not.

So the godly being grievously afflicted, speak after the manner of men, not as
if God slept, or took no care of them; but they crave of God that he would show
himself by his works of justice and mercy, and would help them.

333. Psalm. 45. 2. Thou art fairer then the children of men. Isa. 53. 2. There
was no comeliness in him, he was despised, and we esteemed him not.

In the first place is spoken of Christ's exaltation, and the glory of his
Kingdom, of which Solomon was a type, not outwardly in the sight of men, but
inwardly and spiritually before God and the faithful people. In the latter of
Christ's humiliation, and as carnal men judge of Christ.

334. Psalm. 49. 8. The Brother shall not redeem his Brother. Heb. 2. 12.
Christ our Brother offered himself for the price of our Redemption.

Because men could not satisfy the divine law, Christ God and Man, our Brother
and our Savior, by his obedience and suffering, fulfilled the whole Law for
us; his satisfaction is our Redemption for our sins, and the sins of 1 John 2.
2. Romans 20.
the whole world, and he is the fulfilling of the Law for righteousness to
every one that believes.

335. Psalm. 59. 11. Slay them not O Lord. Verse. 13. Consume them in thy wrath.

First he prays that the enemies of God may be tolerated a while for example
to others, and led captive in triumph: then when others are taught better by
their example, let them be destroyed. That destruction, if it may not be
understood of their lives, yet it may be of their power, dignities and wealth,
that so being brought down they may not be able to hurt the Church, or oppose
themselves against God.

336. Psalm. 60. 3. O God thou have cast us off. Romans 11. 1. Has God cast off
his people? God forbid.

David speaks of temporal casting off; Paul of eternal.

337. Psalm. 62. 11. God spoke once. Heb. 1. 1. God spoke by diverse manners to
the Fathers and Prophets.

God speaks once, not by number, but by counsel, nor does he deliberate the
second time; but he speaks diverse ways with a voice or without a voice to men
waking or sleeping, by himself, or by his Angels. In the former place, the
certainty; in the latter the manner of divine Revelation is understood.

338. Psalm. 69. 1. Save me O Lord. 1 Pet. 3. 21. Baptism saves us.

God is the principal efficient necessary cause of our safety. Baptism is the
isntrumental cause, and not absolutely necessary; because many are saved
without Baptism, for it is not the want of it, but the contempt of it that
condemns us.

339. Psalm. 69. 23. Let their table be made Mat. 5. 44.
a snare unto them. Romans 12. 14. Bless and curse not.

We may curse the enemies of God out of pious zeal, not out of evil affection.
Christ bids us pray for our enemies rather then curse them.

340. Psalm. 69. 25. Let their habitation be desolate. Act. 1. 20. Peter applies
that to Judas.

That which David speaks in general of the enemies of Christ, that Peter
applies to the Captain of them Judas, his habitation was desolate, and his
place amongst the Apostles, until an other took his Bishopric.

341. Psalm. 74. 12. God is my King of old working salvation in the midst of the
earth. Phil. 2. 12. Work out your salvation with foar and trembling.

God from eternity worked our salvation in respect of his decree, in the midst
of the earth, freeing his Church from the beginning, and defending it; in us he
works it when he draws us to him, and gives us power to will and to do, that
being so justified we may study for holiness, and walk in good works unto the
accomplishment of our salvation.

342. Psalm. 72. 8. He shall reign from sea to sea. Joh. 18. 36. My Kingdom is
not of this world. Verse. 36. It is not from hence.

The first place is concerning the power of Christ's kingdom, he reigns also
powerfully amongst his enemies; the latter is of the kingdom of grace, for
with his grace by faith he blesses godly hearts; therefore he says, My
kingdom is not of this world; yet he denied not, but that it was in this world.

343. Psalm. 79. 4. We are made a reproach to our neighbors, a scorn and
derision to them that are round about us. Mat. 5. 10. Happy are they that are
persecuted for righteousness sake.

Good men are more affected with scorns and reproaches then with blows; for,
says Chrysostom, a blow on the body is divided betwixt the body and the soul,
but a reproach wounds the soul only. Yet the godly must valiantly endure
injuries for the glory of God and safety of their neighbors, but if that
accrue not to Gods glory, and is hurtful, we are to remit it to God by our
just complaint, and prayer for revenge on him that does the injury.

344. Psalm. 79. 6. Pour forth thine anger upon the Nations. 1 Cor. 13. 7. Love
endures all things.

The Psalmist asks this, not out of a vicious affection, and desire of revenge,
but from a just zeal kindled by the holy Ghost, whereby he was inflamed for
Gods glory, against Blasphemers the incurable enemies of God.

345. Psalm. 81. 13. He gave them over to their own hearts lust. Act. 17. 28. In
him we live, and move, and have our being.

The first place speaks of the ill affection proceeding from man's corrupt
nature, the latter of the work of God in men, and the conservation,
sustentation, and government of all his creatures.

346. Psalm. 82. 6. I said, Ye are Gods. Joh. 17. 3. This is life eternal to
know thee the only true God. Jer. 9. 23, 24.

The Magistrates are called gods, not by nature, but from the Majesty
communicated to them, and their judiciary power, that so men may be brought to
obedience by them. God is so by nature, the Magistrate by his office has a
grant of part of divine power, and being Gods Vice gerent he must do all
according to Gods will, and not according to his own will.

347. Psalm. 89. 7. O Lord God, who is like unto thee? 1 John 3. 2. We know that
when he appears, we shall be like him.

The Psalmist speaks of the mighty men of the earth, who living wickedly and
ungodly are not like to God: And John speaks of the faithful, who though they
are here strangers and pilgrims, seeing only in a glass by faith, yet when the
time of perfection shall come, we shall see him face to face as he is, and
reign for ever with him.

348. Psalm. 90. 9. We pass away in thy wrath. Joh. 3. 36. He that believes
not the Son, the wrath of God abides on him.

God is angry for a time, not against the persons of the godly, but against
their sins, and he chastneth them here, not for ever; for their good, and not
for their hurt; but unbelievers shall never see Gods gracious face unto life.

349. Psalm. 92. 16. There is no iniquity in God. Romans 11. 32. God has
concluded all under unbelief, that he might have mercy upon all.

God being free from all iniquity has concluded, that it argues all men to be
guilty of sins, not as the cause thereof, but as a judge: whilst he declares
them guilty for sin, if he would deal according to rigor of divine justice.

350. Psalm. 102. 26, 27. Heaven and earth shall pass away, as a garment shall
they wax old, and as a vesture shall thou change them. 104. 5. The earth
Eccles. 1. 4.
shall not be removed for ever, etc.

The earth shall endure to the time appointed by God; and what is corruptible
of it shall be burnt with fire in the end of the world. For ever, here
signifies not eternity but a long time.

351. Psalm. 103. 10. Dealt not with us after our sins, nor rewarded us after
our iniquities. Deuteronomy. 7. 10. I will repay to them in time.

God rewards believers not according to their iniquity, nor does he deal with
us after our sins; for when we were his enemies, he was reconciled to us by
Christ, and gave us life: but he rewards the unbelievers according their works,
and condemns them by just judgment.

352. Psalm. 104. 5. Thou laidst the foundations of the earth. 2 Pet. 3. 5. The
earth standing out of the waters, and in the waters by the word of God.

The basis of the earth is the power of God that supports all this Universe;
the earth is called the Center of the Universe, and is said to subsist in the
waters and out of the waters, because it is compassed by the waters like an
Island.

353. Psalm. 104. 15. Oil that makes a cheerful countenance. Isa. 3. 18. The
Lord will take away the bravery of their tinckling ornaments, their caules, and
their round tires.

God will not have people to paint their faces, for that is reprehended in
Isaiah; but because God fore-knew by the fall, that most grievous diseases
would afflict us, he gave power of healing to plants, and art to Physicians and
Apothecaries to make oils and unguents Chymically, to cure and refresh men, of
this the Psalmist speaks.

354. Psalm. 105. 37. There was not one feeble person amongst them. Deuteronomy. 25.
18. Amalek slew all that were feeble behind thee.

The Israelites going out of Egypt were sick of no disease, but there were
women with child, and old people, who were weary in the way and sat down to
rest.

355. Psalm. 106. 31. Phinehas slew two of them in their fornication, and that
was counted to him for righteousness. Romans 4. 3. Abraham believed God, and it
was imputed unto him for righteousness.

This just heroical act of Phinehas pleased God. To Abraham believing in
Christ, grace and righteousness is imputed. Therefore to be imputed for
righteousness, signifies diversely, as it is applied to different persons.

356. Psalm. 108. 9. He curses his enemies. Mat. 5. 44. Love your enemies,
bless them that curse you, etc.

Christ in the person of David by a prophetical spirit wishes horrid
punishments to the enemies of God and his Church. In Matthew he exhorts to
sincere and ardent charity to our enemies.

357. Psalm. 110. 3. Thy people shall be willing in the day of thy power. Mat.
11. 12. The kingdom of heaven suffers violence, and the violent take it by
force.

We are willing to do good when the holy Ghost does his work in us, and renews
us. The Evangelist means a spiritual violence of men with a burning zeal
entering into the Kingdom of God, and taking of it as it were by force, obeying
the Gospel, forsaking legal ceremonies, and embracing salvation by Christ.

358. Psalm. 112. 6. The righteous shall not be moved for ever. Prove. 24. 16.
The righteous man shall fall seven times a day. Job. 5. 19. Psalm. 34. 10.

The righteous in Christ founded on him by a true faith shall not be
overthrown, though the World and the Devil rage against him; but if at any
time by infirmity of the flesh he do fall, yet he rises again by Gods grace;
nor does he despair, or cast away his trust in God, but by repentance he
returns into favor with God again.

359. Psalm. 115. 4. The Idols of the heathens are silver and gold. Isa. 41. 45,
46. 1 Cor. 8. 4. An Idol is nothing in the world.

Idols for their matter are things created by God; but an Idol is nothing
privatively, not negatively, because it is not that which it is called, namely,
God; it has nothing of God, it can do neither good nor hurt.

360. Psalm. 216. 11. Every man is a liar. Rev. 14. 5. There was found no guile
in their mouth.

The first place shows what we are by nature of our selves; the latter of
what we are by grace, after we apprehend Christ by faith, and are led by the
Spirit of God, which is the Spirit of truth.

361. Psalm. 119. 13. With my lips have I showed all the judgments of thy
mouth. Romans 11. 33. The judgments of God are unsearchable.

The Psalmist speaks of the judgments of Gods mouth revealed in his word; Paul
of the secret and unscrutable judgments, or the reason why God does this or
that, to make one man rich, an other poor.

362. Psalm. 119. 13. I have hated the wicked. Romans 12. 14. Bless those that
persecute you, and curse them not.

Godly men must not hate men's persons, Mat. 5. 2. Act. 7.
but rather their faults; not those that sin of weakness, but those that sin
of obstinacy; and rather to pray for them, both by the example of Christ and
Stephen, etc. then to curse either.

363. Psalm. 119. 155. Health is far from the ungodly. Mat. 9. 13. I came not to
call the righteous, but sinners to repentance.

The Psalmist speaks of wicked men obstinate and such as are hardened in their
sins, rejecting the grace of God, and Christ the author of salvation; Christ
speaks of penitent sinners, who being convinced with the sense of their own
sins, fly to the mercy of God, and seek health in Gods grace only, through
Jesus Christ.

364. Psalm. 125. 1. They that trust in the Lord shall not be moved. Romans 11.
17. Some of the boughs were broken off for their incredulity.

Christ makes fruitful and barren Vines, the Apostles boughs, by which he
represents the faithful and Infidels; those that were broken off, it was for
their unbelief.

365. Psalm. 128. 1. Blessed are all they who fear the Lord. 1 John 4. 18. There
is no fear in love, for love casts out fear.

Filial fear proceeds from faith, by which we apprehend God as present, all
the faithful have this, and consolation accompanies it. The Apostle speaks of
the servile fear of the Infidels, which proceeds from a sense of the presence
of God as a Judge, and there is no consolation in this, but confusion.

166. Psalm. 132. 13. God has chosen Sion for his habitation, this is my rest
for ever, here will I dwell because I have chosen it. Act. 6. 14. We heard him
say, that Jesus of Nazareth should destroy this place and change the traditions
of Moses.

In the first place is a promise of the conservation of the Temple, and of the
Jewish polity, upon condition of their obedience, if the Jews should do that
which God commanded them, and keep his holy Covenant. In the last, Stephen from
the predictions of Christ and the Prophets concerning the ruin of the City and
Temple at Jerusalem, invites them to repentance.

367. Psalm. 139. 1. O Lord thou have proved me. Gal. 6. 4. Every man shall
prove his own work.

The Psalmist prays that God would prove him, not that he was free from
sin, but he desires by mercy to be cleansed. The Apostle shows what is our
duty, namely to make our works approved to God, which he will prove.

368. Psalm. 136. 1, to 26. The goodness and mercy of the Lord is for ever and
ever. Tit. 3. 4. When the gentleness and love of God our Savior appeared.

The Fathers under the old Covenant did no otherwise taste the goodness of God
then we do by looking unto Christ, to whom God commended his goodness, and him
that he promised to give our Fathers for their salvation, he has given unto us
revealed in the flesh.

369. Psalm. 145. 8. The Lord is gracious and full of compassion. Exodus 33. 19.
I will have mercy on whom I will. Romans 9. 15, 19.

God is gracious and merciful, so that he offers his goodness to wicked men
also, and declares in them the effects of his grace and clemency; he made them,
he gives them temporal goods, he defers his temporal and eternal judgments,
though they are ungrateful to him; but he shows mercy to whom he will, not
looking on our worth, but he saves us freely, without being obliged, he does
all of his own goodness and mercy.

The PROVERBS of Solomon.
WIthout doubt it was taken out of his 3000 Parables, and his most wise
sentences, for the good of the Church, teaching good men patience and wisdom,
and the fruit of it is to be embraced, and sin to be fled from. Relating the
works of the wise and foolish, he commends the manners of an honest woman.

370. Prove. 1. 15. My son walk not with sinners, remove thy foot from their
paths. Luke 15. 1. All the publicans and sinners came unto him to hear him, and
he received them.

Solomon forbids us to run to evil with wicked men, or to allow of their
wickedness. Christ receiving publicans and sinners reproved their faults,
exhorted them to repentance by his great love toward them.

371. Prove. 1. 26. I will mock at your trouble, and laugh when your destruction
comes. Ezekiel. 18. 32. I will not the death of a sinner, for I take no pleasure
in the destruction of a sinner.

God is delighted in his justice, when he punishes those which despise his
grace, and that will not hearken to his fatherly vocation; but of his mercy he
will not the death of sinner, as death is the destruction of Nature. The former
place belongs to Gods consequent will; the latter to his antecedent will; that
is ruled by justice, this by mercy.

372. Prove. 6. 6. Go to the Ant thou sluggard, and consider her ways. Psalm.
55. 22. Cast thy way upon the Lord, and he shall bring it to pass.

Solomon by the example of the Pismire, would bring idle slothful people to
honest labor. The Psalmist warns all to trust in God and his providence; yet
not so that we should omit any thing of our duty, for so God does govern all
things, that he will have us to use lawful means, and effect all our works by
them. So when Christ says, Be not careful for the morrow; he does not forbid
us to Luke 12, 15. Theoph.
work, but to give our selves over to care, and to neglect Gods providence, for
we are commanded to till the ground and to take care to live.

373. Prove. 4. 3. Solomon was the only son of his 1 Chronicles. 3. 5.
Mother. 2 Samuel 11. 27. Bathsheba bare sons to Davaid, Simaa, Sobab, Nathan.

Solomon was so beloved of his Mother for the singular gifts of nature, as
though he had been her only son.

374. Prove. 6. 30. It is no great fault for a man to steal to fill his hungry
soul. Exodus 20. 15. Thou shall not steal.

Solomon compares Theft with Adultery, and he determines that the punishment
and the offense is less in Theft then Adultery.

375. Prove. 6. 31. A Thief if he be found shall restore seven fold, he shall
give all the substance of his house. Exodus 22. 1. If any man steal an ox or a
sheep, or have killed or sold it, he shall restore five oxen for one, and four
sheep for a sheep.

If a man stole money or clothes, he must restore seven fold; for the seventh
number being perfect, he must redeem his life by it: Thefts which could be hid,
were more heavily punished, then such as could not so well be hid, as Cattle.

376. Prove. 8. 23. I Wisdom was created from the beginning. 2 Pet. 1. 19, 21.
Holy men spoke as they were moved by the holy Ghost, in time.

First is meant the essential wisdom of God, that is Christ the Lord; but the
Apostle means wisdom revealed by the Prophets.

377. Prove. 8. 35. He that finds wisdom finds life. Eccl. 2. 16. There
shall be no remembrance more of the wise then of the fool for ever.

In the former place we must understand divine wisdom which confers eternal
life. In the latter, humane wisdom which profits nothing after death.

378. Prove. 15. 27. He that hates gifts shall live. Chap. 17. 8. A gift is as a
precious stone in the eyes of him that has it. Chap. 18. 16. A man's gift
makes room for him, and brings him before great men.

A gift to corrupt covetous Judges is accepted, and causes that he that
corrupts the Judges may attain his end that he desires; for he that bribes
oft-times, obtains what his mind wished for.

379. Prove. 16. 4. God made all things for himself. Verse. 4. The wicked also
for the day of wrath.

Since God has ordained the wicked for the day of wrath, he has ordained him
for his own glory; for when he punishes wicked men with temporal or eternal
punishments, he justifies himself in his own glory. God created wicked men
also, but he created not their wickedness.

380. Prove. 16. 6. By mercy and truth iniquity is purged. Heb. 9. 22. And
without shedding of blood there is no remission.

Mercy and Truth are understood of God 1 John 1. 7.
himself, who is the primary cause of the remission of sins; nor does this
contradict the meritorious effusion of Christ's blood for us, whereby we are
cleansed.

381. Prove. 17. 15. He that justifyeth the wicked, and he that condemns the
just, even they both are abominable to the Lord. Romans 4. 5. God justifies the
ungodly.

He that justifies the wicked against the law of God or man, without
satisfaction made by himself or one for him, is abominable unto God. But God
justifies the wicked, not that is so now, but was so, freely, by faith, for
the merits of Christ and his full satisfaction.

382. Prove. 20. 9. Who can say, I have made my heart clean, I am pure from my
sin? Psalm. 24. 3. He that has pure hands, and a clean heart shall stand in the
holy place.

We are all unclean in the sight of God, and corrupt by nature; yet our hearts
are purified by his grace, through faith in the blood of Christ.

383. Prove. 21. 20. There is desirable treasure in the dwelling of the wise.
Mat. 6. 19. Treasure not up for your selves treasures upon earth.

Pious wisdom in honest gain is not reproved by Christ; but covetousness and
confidence in worldly wealth is forbidden, since we lose thereby the heavenly
treasure.

384. Prove. 22. 28. Remove not the ancient I and-marke which thy Fathers have
set. Ezekiel. 20. 18. Walk not in the statutes of your fathers, neither observe
their judgments.

Solomon speaks of the bounds of Land and Inheritance; Ezekiel concerning the
statutes of their Fathers about the worship of God and the profanation thereof.
Let us not imitate those who oppose themselves against Gods law, but let us
walk in his laws and keep his statutes.

385. Prove. 24. 17. Rejoice not at the fall of thine enemy. Psalm. 137. 8. Happy
shall he be that rewards thee as thou have rewarded us.

The Godly do not rejoice for the destruction of their enemies, and for revenge
of wrongs, but for Gods glory and the edification and good of the Church. So
Moses after the drowning of Pharaoh in the Red sea, by his great zeal for Gods
glory sang a song of praise.

386. Prove. 26. 4. Answer not a fool according to his folly, lest thou be like
him. Verse. 5. Answer a fool according to his folly.

The art of dealing with fools is necessary, that we speak not foolish things
with a fool foolishly; for if a fool, that is, an ungodly person, blinded,
profane, speaks with scorns and evil speeches and derisions, we must not
answer him likewise; but when Gods glory is questioned, if there be danger, we
must reprove his folly and his arrogance, lest he proceed to please himself
and corrupt others.

ECCLESIASTES, Heb. Coheleth.
The Preacher.
SOlomon in this book convinces the vanity of the world, and the foolishness
of men. Shows that there is nothing better then to fear God and to keep his
Commandments. And he maintains that there shall be a future judgment. He wrote
this book after his falling from God in token of true repentance.

387. Eccl. 1. 4. The earth abides for ever. (Isai. 40. 8.) Luke 21. 33. Heaven
and earth shall pass away.

In the opinion of men, the earth abides for Romans 822. 2 Pet. 3.
ever; but in respect of God and the future change and purgation from
corruption and vanity, it shall pass away.

388. Eccl. 1. 9. That which was shall be, and there is no new thing under the
sun. Genesis 1. 1. The world was once created. Heb. 9. 25. Christ once offered
himself.

Ecclesiastes speaks not of all things, none excepted, but of the vanity of
natural and artificial things, which is collected from the natural
corruption and change of things.

389. Eccl. 1. 10. There is no new thing under the sun. Revel. 21. 5. Behold, I
make all things new.

Ecclesiastes purpose is not concerning a creation of new kinds of creatures,
but concerning their change and vicissitude in the world, and concerning the
malice of men and the Devil; that men by the instinct of the Devil, from the
beginning, after man had sinned, being defiled with much wickedness, proceed
to covet after evil; unless God renews their hearts, and they become a new
creature in Christ.

390. Eccl. 2. 2. I said of laughter, It is mad, and of mirth, What does it?
Prove. 17. 22. A merry heart does good like a medicine.

In the first place is meant natural laughter, and rejoicing in prosperity,
and the goods of Nature and Fortune, as the Gentiles do; and this Ecclesiastes
condemns as folly. But in the Proverbs is commended that joy only which
proceeds from the holy Ghost.

391. Eccl. 2. 15. What does it profit me that I labored to attain more
wisdom? Prove. 8. 35. He that finds me finds life.

Politic wisdom is indeed a singular gift of God; but if any man abuses it,
and depends on his wisdom it profits not, but is all vanity. Divine wisdom
which teaches us to wait all events from God, and to pray to him for his
direction in all, confers eternal life.

392. Eccl. 2. 23. The days of man are full of labor and sorrow. Psalm. 128.
2. Of the labor of thy hands thou shall eat, and happy shall thou be.

Ecclesiastes condemns not labor which God has laid on men, for that is good
and necessary, having great promises; but because riches are purchased by much
travel, and no man knows whether he shall be a wise man or a fool that he
must leave them to.

393. Eccl. 3. 19. There is one event to man and beast, as the one dies, so
dies the other. Chap. 17. 7. The spirit of man returns to God that gave it him.

In the former place is showed the opinion of carnal men, concerning man and
beasts, who compares them by the likeness of their deeds and events. In the
latter place is taught what is the excellency of man's soul above the beasts,
and the difference after death. But a natural man cannot perceive these things.

394. Eccl. 4. 1. I saw the oppressions done under the sun, and behold the
tears of such as were oppressed, and they had no comforter. Joh. 14. 26. and
15. 26. I will send unto you the Comforter from the Father, the Spirit of Truth.

Ecclesiastes compares the oppressed with the oppressors, in that which
happens in the world: for oppressors are rich, mighty men, they have their
Abetters and their Clients. The oppressed are alone and defend themselves with
tears. Christ shows how true comfort comes to those that are oppressed,
namely, from the holy Ghost.

395. Eccl. 7. 16. Be not over righteous. Revel. 22. 11. Let him that is just,
be just still.

Ecclesiastes understands a man's judgment of himself, and forbids us, that we
should not have too great opinion of our own righteousness, when it is not so
with us. John speaks of the oath of Justice, and continuing the benefit of
justification.

396. Eccl. 8. 14. There are righteous men to whom evils happen according to
the manner of the wicked. Psalm. 1. 3. He shall be like a tree planted by the
river side. Verse. 4. So shall not the ungodly.

Ecclesiastes sets down the judgment of carnal men concerning the righteous
and the wicked, from their outward condition, and they judge of them both
alike; yet the condition of good and bad men is most different in this life,
and in the end of it. Here the state of the godly is more excellent, and after
this life they shall rejoice for ever. Wicked men are abominable here, and
hereafter they shall be punished eternally.

397. Eccl. 9. 1. No man knows either love or hatred. Romans 8. 35, 38. Who
shall separate us from the love of Christ. 2 Timothy 1. 12.

The first place teaches that it cannot be gathered by outward happiness or
unhappiness who it is that God loves or whom he hates, because these fall
out alike to good and evil, righteous and unrighteous men. Therefore we must
not judge according to outward things and accidents; but according to the
testimony of our faith and the holy Ghost, concerning the love of God, being
certain that no things that befall us for adversity, can seprate us from the
love of God.

398. Eccl. 9. 1. No man knows whether he be worthy of love or hatred. 2 Timothy
4. 8. There is laid up for me a crown of righteousness which the Lord shall
give me.

A man knows not from himself, or his own strength or humane wisdom, whether
he be worthy of love or hatred, because God bestows riches, honor, strength,
etc. without any difference. Ecclesiastes speaks of discerning good men from
bad by natural judgment; the Apostle of the certainty of his salvation.

399. Eccl. 9. 8. Let thy garments be always white. Isai. 2. 8. Luke 16. 19.
Luxury in clothing is disallowed.

Ecclesiastes commends not Luxury, but decent and comely clothing, according
to our quality, which God does not detest, but approves, that being refreshed
in body and mind, we may the better undergo the labors of our vocation.

The SONG of SONGS.
HEb. Sirhastrim, and Kodes Kodassin, that is, the Holy of Holies. Wherein
Solomon under the similitude of a Bridegroom and his Bride, describes Christ
and his Church, the heavenly and spiritual treasure, and the mysteries of
salvation to the godly.

400. Cant. 1. 5. I am black. Verse. 6. Look not upon me, because I am black.
Verse. 8. O thou fairest amongst women. Chap. 4. 1. Behold, thou art fair.

First the Spouse of Christ purges herself amongst her friends, that is, her
members, that they should not be offended at her blackness, that is, with the
scorns and reproaches that her adversaries cast upon her, and so she speaks of
herself as she is in herself. In the latter place, as she pleases the
Bridegroom; in which is considerable, how he purges her by beginnings of
holiness in this life, and will in the next life set her completely holy
before his Father without spot or rinckle.

401. Cant. 5. 1. Eat O friends, drink, yea Ephesians. 5. 14. Luke 21. 34 Amb. l. 1.
c. 5. de Cain and Abel.
drink abundantly beloved. Isai. 5. 11. Woe be to ye that rise early in the
morning to drink strong drink.

Drunkenness with grace, not with wine, which makes us rejoice not stumble,
must be here understood. To be drunk here, is to be filled with the grace of
the holy Ghost, and with spiritual joy concerning the Gospel, which thing
produces healthful and pleasant fruit. Isaiah cries out Woe to drunkards,
filling themselves with wine, and luxuriating in over much drink.

402. Cant. 6. 10. The Church is terrible as an Army with banners. Chap. 7. 6.
How fair, how pleasant art thou O love for delights?

She is terrible to the Devil, the World, to Hell; but most dear and
delightful to her Bridegroom the Lord Jesus Christ.

ISAIAS Prophecy.
IT was written by Isaiah the son of Amos, He prophesied 90 years.
the brother of Amasiah King of Judah, about the year of the World 3190. It
contains legal Prophesies from Chap. 1. to the 40. with the History of
Ezechias. And from Chap. 40. to the end, it contains Evangelicall Prophesies.

403. Isai. 1. 2. I have nourished children, and they have rebelled against me.
Verse. 4. Ephesians. 5. 27. The Church is glorious without spot or wrinckle.

The Church of it self and from it self is full of sins and deformities; but
she is without spot or wrinkle in her Husband and head Christ, who loved her
and gave himself for her, that he might sanctify her, cleansing her with the
laver of water in the word of life. Ephesians. 5. 26.


404. Isai. 7. 14. And they shall call his name Emanuel. Luke 2. 21. His name
was called Jesus.

In the Scriptures sometime the name is given to the person not according to
the word, but the thing signified. Emanuel in effect is the same with Jesus.
Emanuel is, God with us, by this word the Prophet would explain the person, the
office and the benefits of Christ, and the mystery of the personal Union, and
that that Son should be God and Man, and live amongst men in his humane nature
that he should assume, that he might redeem them and save them from their
sins.

405. Isai. 8. 20. To the Law and the Testament. 1 Cor. 2. 2. I determined to
know nothing amongst you, but Jesus Christ and him crucified. Mat. 1. 21.


Since Christ is the end of the law and the Prophets; it is most profitable for
us to believe in him, and to seek comfort in his Cross; for without he had
been crucified, he had not wrought salvation for mankind.

406. Isai. 9. 3. Thou have multiplied the Nation, and have not increased their
joy. Chap. 60. 5. Then thou shall see, and shall flow together, and thine heart
shall fear and be enlarged, because the abundance of the sea shall be converted
unto thee, the forces of the Gentiles shall come unto thee.

The joy of the Nation and the people under the yoke of Rome, though it be not
increased, yet it is enlarged, whilst the Heathen people being called into the
Church, forsaking their heathenish rites, do embrace the Christian Religion.

407. Isai. 9. 6. Unto us a child is borne, unto us a son is given. Luke 2.
After 700. years Christ was born under Augustus Caesar.

It is usual in the Scripture to have the present tence and pretertence, put
for the future tence; and the future tense for the present and preter tence: So
Psalm. 22. 8. All make a mock of me.

408. Isai. 9. 6. His name shall be called the Prince of peace, of his peace
there shall be no end. Matthew. 10. 34. Think not that I came to send peace on
the earth, I came not to send peace, but the sword.

In the former place is understood the true Christian peace of God and Christ,
which we have with God, our Neighbor and our selves. In the latter is meant
worldly peace, that we have with men of this world, which is often bad. Yet
Christ does not of himself bring the sword, but by accident in regard of the
malice of the World and the Devil, who are the authors of contentions.

409. Isai. 9. 6. He shall be called the everlasting Father. 1 Cor. 15. 24. He
shall deliver up the Kingdom to his Father, when he shall have put down all
principality.

Since Eternal and Kingly power belongs unto Christ, it shall never be taken
from him; but the manner of his government shall be changed; for he shall no
longer govern his Church by the Ministry of his Word and Sacraments, but shall
represent it to his heavenly Father freed from all evil. Nor shall there be
any more worldly governments after the blessed resurrection.

410. Isa. 9. 7. Of the increase of his Government, and peace there shall be no
end. Luke 12. 49. I came to send fire into the earth, and what will I, but that
it may be kindled?

It is not meant a fire of discord and malice amongst men, but a fire of pure
doctrine, consuming all filth and temptations betwixt the spirit and the flesh,
the true and false teachers, the godly and the wicked, the Devil and men. For
the Gospel is no cause of troubles, but as lime when it is mixed with water,
grows hot, so the wickedness of men stirred up by Gods Word, rages against
Christ and his Gospel.

411. Isai. 26. 20. The wicked will not behold the Majesty of the Lord. Chap.
40. 5. And the glory of the Lord shall be revealed, and all flesh shall see it
together, for the mouth of the Lord has spoken it.

The Prophet speaks concerning the Kingdom of Christ, and the state thereof;
and and he teaches in the former place that the wicked shall be so blinded,
that they cannot perceive the mighty work of God wherein he has showed his
greatness, his glory, his power and his mercy; which blindness of theirs does
not take away the glory of God and of Christ's Kingdom, which all men may see
in the saving work of man's Redemption.

412. Isai. 28. 16. Behold, I lay in Sion a stone, a sure foundation, says the
Lord. 1 Cor. 3. 10. I have laid the foundation, says Paul.

God laid the foundation of our salvation, in respect of his decree, the
sending of his Son, and the perfection of man's salvation. Paul laid the
foundation in respect of manifestation, and of his office, and of the Christian
Religion at Corinth.

413. Isai. 38. 1. Set thy house in order, for thou shall die and not live.
Verse. 5. I 2 King. 20. 1. 2 Chronicles. 32. 24.
will add unto thy days fifteen years, says the Lord.

Augustine says, that Ezechias was in order to die according to some causes of
future events, In Genesis tit. l. 6. c. 17.
yet God added fifteen years to his life, doing only that which be foreknew he
would do before the beginning of the world. Gods Justice brought the command
for Ezechias death, but his Mercy prolonged his life, and so Ezechias Piety and
Repentance is proved.

414. Isai. 41. 7. Chap. 46. 6. They lavish gold out of the bag, and weigh
silver in the balance, and hire a Goldsmith and he makes it a God. 1 Cor. 8.
4. An Idol is nothing.

Silver and Gold, and such materials as the Idols are made of, were created by
God; but relatively unto God they are said to be nothing, because they have
nothing of God in them; for God will not be worshipped by Idols.

415. Isai. 42. 8. Chap. 48. 11. I will not give my glory to another. Mat. 11.
29. Chap. 28. 19. All power is given to me in heaven and in earth.

God will not give his praise and glory to an Image. Christ to whom all power
and glory is given, is not only man, but the true and eternal God also with
the Father and the holy Ghost, having co-equall glory with them; but by reason
of his office of Mediator, all things are given him of the Father.

416. Isai. 42. 8. I will not give my glory to an other. Romans 8. 14. The glory
of God shall be revealed in us.

The first place is concerning those things wherein God will be glorified by us
in this life, that is, by worship, adoration, invocation. The latter concerning
the participation and place of glory in the life to come, which he will
communicate to us.

417. Isai. 42. 10. Sing unto the Lord a new Song (that is the Gospel.) Genesis
3. 15. It was sung in Paradise concerning the blessed seed of the woman.

That Evangelicall song is called new, not from time, but because it
comprehends new and wonderful things, a new light is kindled by it, it makes a
new Creature, and shows us the new way to heaven.

418. Isai. 45. 6, 7. I am the Lord, and there is none else; I form the light,
and create darkness; I make peace, and create evil; I the Lord do all these
things. Genesis 1. 31. And all that God made was good.

God makes evil, not of sin but of punishment and calamity, by which he justly
afflicts sinners: Also the Prophet here opposes the evil of the misery of war
to the good of peace. Mad men here wrest the name of evil, as though God were
the author of evil, that is, sin; but it may easily appear how absurdly they
do it, abusing the testimony of the Prophet. The Antithesis shows this
sufficiently; the members whereof must be compared, together, for he opposes
peace to evil, that is, to adversity.

419. Isai. 49. 6. I will also give thee for a light to the Gentiles, that thou
may be my salvation unto the ends of the earth. Mat. 10. 5. Christ sent the
twelve, saying unto them, Go not into the way of the Gentiles, but to the lost
sheep of the house of Israel.

The first is concerning the general gracious Ministry of Christ to both
Jews and Gentiles. The latter concerning the especial sending forth of the
Apostles to the Jews alone, to whom the Gospel was first published, until
such time as the partition wall betwixt the Jews and Gentiles was broken Mat.
28. 19 Mark 16. 15 Luke 2.
down; which was done in the resurrection of Christ: Afterward he sent the
Apostles to all Nations, for he was the light of the Gentiles.

420. Isai. 52. 10. The Lord has made have his holy arm in the eyes of all the
Nations. Mat. 15. 24. I am not sent but to the lost sheep of the house of
Israel.

Christ was sent for the salvation and redemption of all Nation. His office of
teaching, and confirming his Doctrine by Miracles Isa. 52. 13. Rev. 19. 10
he discharged only amongst the Israelites, as Minister of the Circumcision.

421. Isai. 52. 13. My servant shall be exalted and extolled, and shall be very
high. Revel. 19. 10. Our fellow servant and brother must not be worshipped.

In the first place Christ God and Man is pointed at. In the latter they are
the words of a created Angel, not admitting of divine worship.

422. Isai. 53. 2. He has no form nor comeliness. Heb. 1. 3. The brightness
of his fathers glory.

The Prophet speaks of the passion of Christ, wherein was scorn and great pain,
otherwise he is the splendour of his Father which he represents in goodness and
majesty, the fairest, the most comely, also in his body white, ruddy, beloved,
chosen before thousands, Cant. 5.

423. Isai. 53. 8. Who shall declare his generation? Mat. 1. 1. The book of the
generation of Jesus Christ.

The first place is of Christ's divinity, whose Heb. 7. 3.
generation no man can declare, as he is described in the figure of
Melchisedech. The latter concerning his humanity, for according to the flesh he
was born of the Virgin Mary, Luke 2.

424. Isai. 56. 7. My house shall be called a house of prayer for all people.
Mat. 6. 6. When thou prayest, go into thy chamber, and shutting the door pray.

The Prophet by the name of the house of God understands not only the Temple
built by Solomon where the Jews yearly came together to worship God, but the
Church of which that Temple was but a figure; wherein amongst all Nations God
is invoked every where. Christ against Hypocrites and boasters, teaches that
it is better to pray in our closet, then hypocritically to pray in public
places; yet he does not by this precept take away public prayers in the
Church, but Joh. 4. 21, 23. Ezekiel. 3. 17. chapter 33. 7.
he will have us depend on God, and the internal testimony of our own
conscience, not on the opinion and applause of men.

425. Isa. 58. 1. Cry aloud, spare not, lift up thy voice like a Trumpet.
Ephesians. 4. 31. Let all bitterness, clamours and indignation be taken from you.

In the first place God commands the Prophet to cry aloud against obstinate
sinners, and this cry proceeds from zeal to the glory of God, of which Paul
speaks, Convince, reprove. In the latter the Apostle forbids crying, which
proceeds from anger, troubles the unity of the spirit, and all carnal,
boasting, earthly, divelish cries, directed for revenge against our Neighbor.

426. Isai. 59. 21. This is my covenant with them, says the Lord, my spirit
that is upon thee, and my words which I have put in thy mouth, shall not depart
out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy seed. Mat. 23. 38. Your house
shall be left unto you desolate.

First God promises that he will defend the Church collected together of Jews
and Gentiles against the gates of hell. In the last Christ threatens ruin to
the ungrateful people of the Jews, and desolation to them that were blinded by
their malice.

427. Isai. 60. 6. The multitude of Camels Psa. 42. 10.
shall cover thee, the Dromedaries of Midian and Ephah, all they from Sheba
shall come, they shall bring gold and incense. Mat. 2. 1. The wisemen came from
the East to Jerusalem, Sheba lay to the South.

First this is a general promise concerning the calling of the Gentiles, that
the greatest company of them should give up their names to Christ. The
Evangelist does historically relate the coming of the wisemen to Christ out of
Persia which in respect of Judea lies to the East.

428. Isai. 60. 11. Thy gates shall be open continually, they shall not be shut
day nor night. Luke 13. 24. Strive to enter in by the straight gate.

The heavenly gate is most large, and it stands open to all believers in Christ
who opened it to them, but that all go not in by that gate, it is through their
own fault. For Christ denies not pardon to such as repent, but such as despise
the treasures of Gods patience, who crying to God seek for salvation and are
grieved, not so much that they have offended God, but because the sea
punishment provided for them, which they cannot avoid, and yet they repent not.

429. Isai. 65. 1. I am found of them that sought me not. 1 Chronicles. 28. 9. If
you seek the Lord, you shall find him; but if you forsake him, he will forsake
you.

The first place is of the calling of the Gentile. In the latter, David exhorts
Solomon to serve God with a perfect heart and a willing mind, and to seek him
by holy prayer; so Christ teaches his disciples, for he moves Mat. 7. 7.
our hearts to seek him, and gives both the will and the deed, says Paul.

430. Isai. 65. 24. And before they call I will answer, and before they speak I
will hear, says the Lord. 2 Cor. 12. 8. Paul asked of God thrice, that the
messenger of Satan might depart from him, and yet was not heard.

God hears the prayers of the godly, though not according to their will, yet
according to their salvation and profit, either giving them what they ask, or
deferring them, that they may ask more earnestly, and be content with his
grace.

431. Isai. 66. 2. But to this man will I look, even him that is poor. (Chap.
57. 15. Chap. 61. 1.) Romans 2. 6. There is no respect of persons with God.

God in the Prophet reproving Hypocrites sacrificing with an opinion of their
desert, presers tht poor in spirit before them, and him that is contrite and of
a sincere heart, professing to do nothing without Gods grace; but God respects
not men's persons, nor is he a respector of them, for in gratuities accepting of
persons can have no place. And he is accepted with God amongst all Nations Act.
10. 34.
who seares God and works righteousness.

The Prophecy of JEREMIAH,
THe son of Hilkias the Priest, who prophesied at Jerusalem, about the year of
the world 3324. unto the captivity of Babylon, which he foretold, and the
desolation of the City and the Temple, and the time of the Jews captivity for
70. years. After the captivity he went into Egypt, and there he showed to
Idolaters the anger of God, and punishments, with the destruction of Babylon by
the Medes and Persians: he prophesied 34 years.

432. Jer. 3. 5. Will be reserve his anger for ever, will he keep it to the
end? Matthew. 25. 46. And those shall go into everlasting destruction.

The Prophet speaks in respect of those that are penitent, with whom God is not
angry Mat. 7.
for ever; he chastneth them indeed with temporal punishments. Christ speaks
of obstinately wicked men, of whom God is the severe judge, and he calls them
the workers of iniquity.

433. Jer. 6. 10. Chap. 9. 26. All the house of Israel are uncircumcised in
heart. Romans 11. 16. If the root be holy, so are the branches.

All] is taken here for the greatest part. The root of the Jews was holy by
reason of the Covenant, because they were born from their Father who was in the
Covenant, and so were they confederate with God, and separated from the prosane
Gentiles.

434. Jer. 10. 23. O Lord, I know that the way of man is not in himself, it is
not in man to direct his steps. Mat. 23. 37. I would have gathered thy children
together, and thou would not.

In spiritual matters that concern his salvation, a man can do nothing that is
good. In politic and civil affairs he can indeed do something, but more
inclining to evil then to good.

435. Jer. 17. 5. Cursed be the man that trusts in man. Romans 10. 11. He that
believes in Christ shall not be confounded. Isai. 28. 16.

The Prophet speaks of bare mortal deceitful man in himself. The Apostle
speaks of man subsisting in the person of the Son of God, in whom the fullness
of the Godhead dwelt bodily.

436. Jer. 15. 1. If Moses and Samuel stood before me, yet my mind could not
be toward this people. Mat. 18. 19. If two of you shall agree on earth, as
touching any thing that they shall ask, it shall be done for them of my Father
which is in heaven.

In the former place the speech is hypotheticall; as if he should say, though
they were amongst the living, and did stand before me, and would turn away my
wrath from this people, yet would I not spare them. Christ in the latter
promises temporal good things, upon condition of repentance.

437. Jer. 17. 10. Chap. 20. 12. I the Lord search the heart, I try the reins.
1 Cor. 2. 11. Who knows what is in man, but the spirit of man which is in him?

God is not excluded from knowing what is in the heart; but Angels and men are,
be they good or bad.

438. Jer. 22. 11. Thus says the Lord touching Sellum the son of Josiah. 2
King. 23. 30. 2 Chronicles. 3. 6. The people of the land took the son of Josia,
Joachaz and anointed him to be King.

Joachaz is called Sellum ironically, because as King Sellum, Israel was led
captive into Egypt, so Joachaz shall not return from the Babylonish captivity.

439. Jer. 22. 30. Thus says the Lord, Write ye this man childlesse, for no
man of his seed shall prosper. 1 Chronicles. 3. 19.
Mat. 1. 12. Salathiel his son.

Jekonias died without children, Salathiel the son of Neri was from Nathan, the
adopted son of Jekonias, and by succession, not his natural son.

440. Jer. 25. 1. The fourth year of Jehojakim the son of Josiah King of Judah,
was the first year of Nabuchadonoztr King of Babylon. Dan. 1. 1. In the third
year of Jehojakim King of Judals came Nabuchodonozor King of Babylon to
Jerusalem.

That is in the end of the third year, and the beginning of the fourth year of
Jehojakims reign.

441. Jer. 25. 11. And this whole land shall be a desolation and an
astonishment, and these Nations shall serve the King of Babylon 70 years. Act.
1. 7. It is not for you to know the times.

God by a Prophetical spirit revealed this to Jeremiah, and so comforted his
people; but we must not curiously search to know the times contrary to Gods
will, that is the moment of the day of Judgment, the destruction of the world,
which the Father has reserved in his own power.

442. Jer. 29. 11. I think toward you thoughts of peace and not of evil. Verse.
17. Thus says the Lord of hosts, I will send upon them the Famine.

God gives peace to penitent sinners; but punishes sinners for their sins.

443. Jer. 31. 15. A voice was heard in Ramah, lamentation and Rachel weeping.
Mat. 2. 16. That was done at length in the killing of the children at Bethlehem.

The Prophets speak often in the present tense, or time past, of things which
are to come, for the certainty of the Prophecy. So here he foreshews the
lamentation of the Mothers for the children thae were slain at Bethlehem by
Herod's command.

444. Jer. 31. 2. The Lord shall create a new thing on the earth. Eccl. 1. 10.
There is no new thing under the sun.

New things are made by creation, so God the Father created all things new, so
we are a new creature in Christ; by sanctification, when we are regenerated by
the holy Ghost; by change, so when Christ shall come all things shall be made
new.

445. Jer. 31. 31. Beheld, the days come, says the Lord, and I will make a new
Covenant with the house of Israel and the house of Judah. Mat. 5. 17. I came
not to destroy the Law.

God promised a new Covenant when Christ should come, yet such a one that
should not differ from the former Covenant in substance, but sanctified by the
Messiah. The Doctrine of the Prophets and the Apostles was not changed by the
coming of Christ, but remains an eternal Law of leading our life; the
ceremonies are abrogated according to their use, but their signification was
more declared by his coming, and illustrated, and the Prophesies had their
complement in him.

446. Jer. 36. 30. Thus says the Lord of Jehojakim King of Judah, he shall
have none to sit upon the throne of David. 2 King. 24. 6. And his son Joakim
reigned in his stead.

Joakim did not sit, that is, he had no fast seat in the Kingdom, for in the
third month of his government, Sedechias was put by force, not by right, into
his place by Nebuchodonozor.

447. Jer. 37. 14. Jeremie said, I fall not away to the Chaldeans. Chap. 21. 9.
He that goes out and falls to the Chaldeans shall live.

Jeremie taken in the gate defends his innocence, that he fell not to the
Caldeans, nor was a betrayer of his Country, but he said, that he would go into
the land of Benjamin.

448. Jer. 52. 31. In the 37 year of the captivity of Jehojakim King of Judah,
in the 12 month, in the 25 day of the month, Evilmerodach lifted up the head of
Jehojakim King of Judah. 2 King. 25. 27. In the 37 year of the captivity of
Jehojakim he he was lifted up in the 12 month, the 27 day.

On the 25 day Evilmerodach took counsel, to deliver Joakim out of prison, on
the 27 day it was concluded and effected, all things being disposed well for
his enlargement.

The THRENES or LAMENTATIONS of Jeremiah.
THe Prophet bewails the destruction of Jerusalem, and the Kingdom of Judah,
and the captivity of the people. He comfort himself and the people in the
promises of God, and commends the cause to God by his prayers.

449. Lam. 3. 37. Who is he that says, and it comes to pass, when the Lord
commands not. Verse. 38. Out of the mouth of the most High proceeds not both
evil and good? Deuteronomy. 32. 4. The works of the Lord are perfect.

The evil of punishment not of sin is meant in the first place, which is not
ill in it self, but in respect of men. For all punishment in respect of God
that inflicts it, has the nature of good.

450. Lam. 5. 7. Our fathers have sinned and are not, and we have born their
iniquities. Ezekiel. 18. 20. The sons shall not bear the Fathers iniquities.

The children succeeding the Parents in their sins, succeed them also in their
punishments. Godly and penitent children shall not bear the iniquities of
their parents for ever, though they be afflicted with temporal punishments.

451. Lamen. 5. 21. Turn thou us unto thee O Lord, and we shall be turned.
Psalm. 119. ult. Hosea 14. 2. Turn O Israel to the Lord thy God.

Conversion and Repentance is the work Act. 11. 8.
of God, he gives it to the Gentiles; and none but those that are enlightened in
their hearts, can truly turn unto God.

EZEKIELS Prophecy.
THe Priest the son of Buzi, who was brought into Babylon under Jekonias, and
confirmed the Prophecy of Jeremiah, and comforted the captives, about the year
3350. by the river Chebar he had the visions from God. He prophesied 20 years.

452. Ezekiel. 8. 12. The Lord sees us not. Heb. 4. 13. All things are naked and
open before the eyes of God.

The Prophet makes mention of what foolish men say; who thought both by their
words and deeds, that God saw them not; whose perverse judgment does not
hinder the truth which maintains that all things, be they never so secret, yea
the thoughts of our hearts are open before God.

453. Ezekiel. 18. 4. The soul that sins, that shall die. Romans 5. 6. Christ died
for us.

The first sentence is legal, and teaches what must be done by the law divine
or humane, legally. The last is Evangelicall, showing that God for Christ's sake
freely gives us his grace and salvation.

454. Ezekiel. 12. 13. I will bring Zedekiah into Babylon, to the land of the
Chaldees, yet shall be not see it though he shall die there. Jer. 34. 3. Thine
eyes shall behold the eyes of the King of Babylon, and he shall speak with thee
mouth to mouth.

Zedekias being taken saw the King of Babylon, afterward they put out his
eyes, that he could not see the Land of the Caldees, nor Babylon in his
captivity.

455. Ezekiel. 18. 19. Walk in my precepts, keep my judgments. 1 Timothy 19 The law
was not made for the righteous, but for the wicked and disobedient.

The Prophet understands the law that teaches and enlightens us. The Apostle,
the law that condemns us; For there is no condemnation Romans 8. 33
to those that are justified in Christ Jesus.

456. Ezekiel. 18. 21. But if the wicked will turn from all his sins that he has
committed, he shall not die. Heb. 6. 4. It is impossible for those that were
once illuminated, if they shall fall away, to renew them again by repentance.

It is hard and impossible in respect of those who bar themselves out from Gods
mercy, and shut their hearts that they may not be enlightened by the Sun of
righteousness, but it is not so in respect of God who would have all men to
repent and be saved; yet he justly punishes with final impenitency all
obstinate and malicious Apostates, and such as sin against the holy Ghost.

457. Ezekiel. 18. 23. 33. 11. God will not the death. He has no pleasure in the
death of the wicked. Romans 9. 18. He has mercy on whom he will, and whom he
will he hardneth.

God will not the death of a sinner by his antecedent will, but by his
consequent will or his justice; because he justly punishes him who rejects the
grace of God offered unto him. He hardens therefore permissively, not
effectively.

458. Ezekiel. 18. 23. I will not the death of him that dies. Chap. 3. 18. Thou
shall die the death.

God as our Father will not by the Gospel, but as he is our judge and
revenger, he will by the law, that a sinner shall die.

459. Ezekiel 18. 23. 32. I have no pleasure in the death of him that dies. 1 John 5. 16. A sin unto death.

God will not the death of him that repents, for his mercy is over all his
works. A sin unto death, is a sin against the holy Ghost, and so it is called,
because it is justly punished with final impenitency.

460. Ezekiel. 18. 26. When a righteous man turns away from his righteousness,
and does iniquity, he shall die in it. Romans 8. 30. Whom he justified them he
glorified.

Righteous in the first place is not truly so but only in opinion, so Christ
came not to call the just; but the Apostle speaks of Mat. 9. 13.
those that are truly just, who are justified in Christ and shall be surely
glorified. Or if the place of the Prophet be to be interpreted of him that is
truly just, it is conditional, and so proves nothing, and the contradiction is
reconciled.

461. Ezekiel. 20. 25. I gave them also Statutes that were not good, and judgments
whereby they should not live. Psalm. 19. 9. The judgments of the Lord are true,
and righteous altogether.

Precepts that are not good are either legal threatenings by which God menaces
curses to the wicked, or false doctrine, when God by his just judgment suffers
those that would not believe the truth, but go forward in iniquity, to believe
lies.

462. Ezekiel. 44. 9. No stranger uncircumcised in heart and flesh shall enter
into my Sanctuary. Gal. 5. 2. If you be circumcised Christ shall profit you
nothing.

The Prophet means spiritual circumcision by faith in Christ; but the Apostle
means nothing but corporal and legal circumcision, which was that the Jews
strove to be justified by. Col. 2. 15.


DANIELS Prophecy.
DAniel was carried young with Joakim to Babylon, there he lived 70 years to
the time of Cyrus, in the year 3370. He interprets Nebuchodonozors dream of the
image; and writes what was done under Nebuchodonozors reign, Balshazars and
Darius. And describes the four Monarchies, and the eternal kingdom of Christ,
he numbered also the weeks of years of the coming of Christ.

463. Dan. 1. 5. The King appointed for Daniel and his fellows a daily
provision, that at the end of three years they might stand before the King.
Chap. 2. 1. In the second year of Nebuchadnezzar, the King dreamed a dream,
wherewith his spirit was troubled. Verse. 16. Daniel went in and desired of the
King that he would give him time.

That was done in the second year after these things were ended which were
appointed for the education of Daniel and his companions under the government
of Nabuchodonozor.

464. Dan. 1. 21. and 6. 28. And Daniel continued unto the first year of King
Cyrus. Chap. 10. 1. In the third year of Cyrus King of Persia a thing was
revealed to Daniel.

In the former place the two following years are not excluded; but it is noted
that God prolonged the life of Daniel, until the time of the return of the
people of the Jews from Babylon. Daniel was in his office at Court to the first
year of Cyrus, then being grown old, he led a quiet private life.

465. Dan. 2. 46. Nebuchadnezzar fell upon his face and worshipped Daniel.
Deuteronomy. 6. 13. 10. 30. Mat. 4. 10. Thou shall worship the Lord 1 Samuel 7. 3.
thy God.

Nebuchadnezzar would have worshipped Daniel after the heathen manner, but
being better instructed by him, he changed his purpose, being admonished by
Daniel to worship and Rev. 19. 10
adore the true God of gods.

466. Dan. 3. 12. Chap. 2. 49. Daniel, Shadrach, Meshach and Abednego despised
the Kings commandment. Romans 13. 1. Let every soul be subject to the higher
powers.

God being the highest power we must Act. 4. 19. c. 5 29.
principally obey him, and above all men, we must obey the Magistrate in things
which are not against Gods word and his true worship.

467. Dan. 4. 27. O King break off thy sins by righteousness, and thine
iniquities by showing mercy to the poor. Isai. 53. 7. The Lord has laid upon
him the iniquity of us all. 1 John 1. 7. The blood of Jesus Christ does cleanse
us.

Our sins before men are redeemed by making satisfaction for injuries, and by
sorrow for them, to this Daniel exhorts Nabuchadnezzar; but before God only the
merits of Christ Jesus can take away sins.

468. Dan. 6. 10. Daniel, his windows being open in his chamber toward
Jerusalem, kneeled upon his knees three times a day and prayed. 2 King. 4. 33.
Elisha shutting his doors prayed. Mat. 6. 6. Christ commands the same.

Daniels work of confession was necessary, lest he should seem to deny God and
his truth, by reason of the wicked command of the King. Christ forbids not
public prayers, but boasting hypocrisy.

469. Dan. 9. 3, to the 20. The prayer of Daniel is contained in many words.
Mat. 6. 7. And when ye pray use not many words. Isai. 23. 3.

Daniels prayer was no vain repetitions, but a testimony of his fervent desire
powered out in prayer from before the most holy God. So was the prayer of Moses,
David, Solomon and our Lord Jesus Christ. But in the latter place Christ
reprehends the foolishness of them who think that by many words repeated they
can persuade God.

470. Dan. 9. 17. Cause thy face to shine upon the Sanctuary for the Lords
sake. Joh. 16. 24. Ye have hitherto asked nothing in my name.

We do ask in the name of Christ with confidence of his merit; that did the
godly under the old Testament comparatively, secretly, implicitly, under a
shadow, and a propitaitory; but under the new Testament, simply, nakedly and
openly, without any shadows or external propitiatory, which Christ has
abolished.

471. Dan. 9. 25. Unto Messiah the Prince shall be seven weeks, and threescore
and two weeks. Act. 2. 7. It is not for you to know the times and seasons.

By divine revelation 70 weeks, that is, 490 years were soreshewed to Daniel,
that within so many years Christ should come, and perform the office of a
Messiah: such a knowing of times is not forbid, but that which is rashly
attempted by us without divine revelation.

TEREASAR, that is, as they are commonly called in Hebrew, The Prophesies of
the twelve minor Prophets, not for their authority, but the quantity of the
book.

HOSEAS Prophecy, the son of Beeri.
HE chides the Jews for their idolatry. He shows their casting off, end the
espousing of the Gentiles to God. He declares salvation to those that should
repent. He Prophesied 50 years, in the time of Osiah, Jotham, Achaz, Ezekias
Kings of Judah, and in the days of Jeroboam son of Joas King of Israel, about
the year 3150.

472. Hos. 1. 2. Go take thee a wife of whoredoms and children of whoredoms.
Lev. 21. 14. A widow, or a divorced woman, or profane, or an harlot, these
shall he not take, but a virgin.

The command of God to the Prophet was not that he should marry a whore, but a
lawful wife, yet with such an infamy as though she were a Harlot and her
children bastards. By this emblem the Israelites are admonished of their
spiritual fornication.

473. Hos. 1. 7. I will not save them by bow, nor by sword, nor by battle.
Romans 13. 4. The Magistrate bears not the sword in vain.

The first place is of the conservation of the Kingdom of Judah against the
Assyrian, not by corporal weapons but by miracles, which takes not away the
lawful power of the Magistrate against the enemies of the Church external or
internal.

474. Hos. 1. 9. Ye are not my people. Verse. 10. Ye are the sons of the living
God.

The Prophet divides the people of Israel into those which are, and those which
shall be. Those which are he divides into righteous and wicked, the righteous
that remain shall be few, but the wicked shall be more; he says, that even the
whole people of Israel should forsake God; yet some few should be saved to the
coming of the Messiah, whilst all Nations both Jews and Gentiles should be
gathered into one people and Jer. 3. 18. Ezekiel. 34. 27.
one sheepfold under one King and one shepherd.

475. Hos. 2. 13. I will visit upon her the days of Baalim, when she burnt
incense to them. 1 King. 18 40. Elias the Prophet killed Baals Prophets at the
brook Cison.

The Baalites were destroyed in the time of Elias and of J^hu; yet their
superstition remained and stuck to the posterity of the people.

476. Hos. 4. 23. Swear not, The Lord lives. Deuteronomy. 6. 13. And thou shall swear
by the name of the Lord.

An oath is part of Gods worship, and therefore the Prophet warns Idolaters
not to abuse it as they did in Bethel, that they might seem to serve God, and
not the Calves.

477. Hos. 8. 4. They have set up Kings, but not by me. Romans 13. 1. There is no
power but of God.

The Prophecy respects the breaking of the 10 Tribes from the house of
Solomon, that was not from God, as the Israelites did it, who would not be
subject to the Judges of Judah, contrary to Gods revealed will; but yet it was
from God, because he would punish the sins of Solomon. So Tyrants are from God
not only as a scourge, but by reason of their power, because the power must be
distinguished from the corruption of the person who uses it, etc.

478. Hos. 11. 1. When Israel was a child, then I loved him, and called my son
out of Egypt. Mat. 2. 15. This Prophecy was fulfilled in Christ being brought
back from Egypt.

These words were spoken of Israel Gods adopted son, and of his only
begotten Son, according to the union of the body with the head, and
comparison of the type with the truth. The deliverance of the children of
Israel out of Egypt was a figure of our Redemption and freedom by Christ.

479. Hos. 13. 14. O death I will be thy plague, O grave I will be thy
destruction. 1 Cor. 15. 55. O death where is thy victory?

The first place may be explained by the latter, for in both is showed that
death has lost its strength, and is swallowed up in victory.

JOELS Prophecy, the son of Pethuel.
HE Prophesied in the year 3239. That the Israelites should be carried captives
into Assyria; he exhorts them to repentance, and promises mercy to them that
are penitent.

480. Joel. 1. 13. Chap. 2. 12. Turn you unto me with fasting, with weeping and
with mourning. Mat. 6. 17. When thou fastest anoint thy head, and wash thy
face, that thou seem not to fast before men.

Christ discommends not private or public fastings, but he taxes the
hypocrisy of the Pharisees in their fasts: for godly people must not sound a
trumpet, but be content to have God the witness of their works.

481. Joel 2. 14. Who knows whether God will return and repent and pardon us
Jam. 1. 6. He that doubts is like a wave of the sea.

Who knoweth] belongs not to remission of sins, but removing of punishment, for
that is to be prayed for upon condition of the will of God and our good.

482. Joel 2. 28. Isai. 44. 3. And it shall come to pass after this that I
will power out my spirit upon all flesh. 2 Samuel 23. 2. 2 Pet. 1. 21. Holy men
of God spoke as they were inspired by the holy Ghost.

Joel speaks of the state of the Church after the coming of Messiah, and of the
comparing of the spiritual gifts of the Jewish and Christian members of the
Church. And he teaches that after the Messiah shall be come, the spiritual
gifts of God shall be greater amongst all men; but not that all under the new
Testament should have the gift of Prophecy. The latter places are of public
and ordinary prophecy.

483. Joel 2. 32. Whosoever calls upon the name of the Lord shall be delivered.
Heb. 6. 4. Chap. 10. 26. They that are once enlightened, if they fall they
cannot be restored.

The first place speaks of the faithful who call on the Lords name in faith.
The latter concerning Apostates that sin against the holy Ghost, who have
neither faith nor true prayer, though they pray with their lips; for they do it
not sincerely, and therefore their prayers are an abomination to God.

484. Joel 3. 20. But Judah shall dwell for ever, and Jerusalem from generation
to generation. Amos 9. 11. The Tabernacle of David is fallen down. Mat. 24. 1.
Act. 15. 16.

The promises of the perpetuity of the Temple and Kingdom of Judah, belong not
to the building and walls of the City, or the civil kingdom, but to the
perpetuity of the Kingdom of Christ and his Church; against which the gates of
hell shall never be able to prevail; and they are conditional upon their
faith, obedience and purity of Divine worship.

AMOS his Prophecy.
WHo was of the common people amongst the heardsmen of Tekoa. He prophesies of
the wrath of God to the Kings and Kingdoms of Judah and Israel; and he
threatens Famine, Sword, Pestilence, devastation and ruin to the neighbors
who were enemies to Gods people. He prophesied in the year 3153 in the days of
Josiah King of Judah.

485. Amos 1. 3. 6. 9. 11. 13. Chap. 2. 1. 4. 6. For three transgressions and
for four I will not spare. And at length he reckons but one.

It is a periphrasis of the seventh number which three and four do make, which
is called a perfect number in the Scriptures, and a certain number is put for
an uncertain; as if he would have said, For many iniquities I will not spare
those Nations.

486. Amos 5. 21. I hate, I despise your feast days. Exodus 20. 8. Remember
thou keep holy the Sabbath day.

God hated the feasts and solemnities of the Israelites, because they were
defiled with humane traditions, and a Pharisaicall opinion of merit. But he
does not despise the Sabbaths appointed by himself, and feasts which are kept
at his command.

487. Amos 5. 18. Woe unto you that desire the day of the Lord, that day of the
Lord is darkness. Mat. 6. 10. Thy Kingdom come. Chap. 24. 30. Let it come
with glory.

The Prophet speaks of the day of Judgment of this world which hypocrites
desire, who look to be justified in their works, and not of the last judgment,
which godly men ought to pray for, and to cry without ceasing, Come Rev. 22.
Lord Jesus.

488. Amos 5. 26. But ye have born the Tabernacle of your Moloch, and the
images of your Idols, the star of your God Rempham, the statutes of your Gods
which you made for your selves. I will cause you to go into captivity beyond
Damascus. Act. 7. 43. You took up the Tabernacle of Moloch and the star of your
God Rempham, figures which you made to worship them, and I will carry you
beyond Babylon.

Stephen cites this Prophecy, though in diverse Romans 16. 19 1 E^d. 8. 17.
words, yet in the same sense; so Christ and his Apostles cite other places of
the old Testament. Moloch and Rempham were the Idols of the Ammonites. The
Israelites of Damascus by Cyromedia were carried further into Persia, and the
Country of the Caspians beyond Babylon.

489. Amos 8. 14. They shall fall and never rise up again. 1 Cor. 11. 22. We
shall all rise.

The first place speaks of a resurrection from sin to grace, or from death to
life, which is denied to impenitent sinners. But the latter speaks of the
general resurrection of our bodies at the last day.

OBADIAHS Prophecy.
HE Prophesies against the Idumeans. He comfort the Jews, and promises
grace and help to the people of God. He prophesied in the year 3337.

490. Obad. v. 15. As thou have done it shall be done unto thee. Revel. 18. 6.
Double unto her double.

In both places is manifested the just revenge of God; he is commanded to mix
double for Babylon, according to her works; thereby to show that the kingdom
of Antichrist shall be most miserably destroyed and trod down.

491. Obad. v. 21. And Saviors shall come upon mount Sion. Mat. 1. 21. Jesus
shall save his people from their sins.

The Prophet means ministerial Saviors, that is, the Apostles and other
Ministers of the Jer. 3. 18. 1 Timothy 4. 16. Jam. 5. 20. Isa. 53. 11. Joh. 1. 29.
Ephesians. 1. 7.
Church, who do serve for the salvation of those that believe in Christ, by the
ministry of the word, and not by the merit of their works; and these turning
sinners from their evil ways, do save their souls from death. Christ Jesus is
the only Savior who takes away the sins of the world, in whom we have
redemption by his blood, and remission of our sins according to the riches of
his grace, nor is there salvation in any other. Act. 4. 12.

JONAS Prophecy.
THe son of Amittai of the tribe of Zebulon. He was sent to Nineve the
Metropolis of Assyria to preach. First when he refused, he was cast into the
sea, swallowed by a fish, and the third day he was cast on the shore; then
being sent again to Nineve, he was angry because God spared them upon their
repentance, therefore he was reprehended by God. He prophesied in the year 3110.

492. Jon. 1. 3. Jonas rose up to flee unto Tharsis from the presence of the
Lord. Verse. 9. I fear the Lord the God of heaven, who has made the sea and the
dry land.

Jonas would not flee from God, so much, as to escape his office by flying.
Verse. 9. In the midst of the tempest he gives the Mariners an account of his
Religion, and of his flight, confessing that for his disobedience that great
tempest was sent.

493. Jon. 1. 10. Jonas flees to Tharsis from the presence of the Lord. Psalm.
139. 7. Whither shall I go from thy spirit, or whither shall I flee from thy
presence?

Jonas was not ignorant that no man could so flee from the face of the Lord,
but he thought that if he forsook the holy land, then all divine apparitions to
him would cease; and that God would then call some other man to the office he
had laid upon him.

494. Jon. 2. 6. The earth with her bars was about me for ever. Verse. 10. The
fish cast Jonas on the dry land.

Jonas thought in the belly of the Whale that he should remain there, but God
brought him forth, and showed thereby that he had power over life and death.

495. Jon. 3. 4. Yet 40. days and Nineveh shall be overthrown. Verse. 10. God
spared them.

The divine commination was conditional, if they repented not; but because
they did embrace the word of God, and detesting their wickedness, they did
turn to the Lord with all their hearts, God spared them. Of such (...). 10. 7,
(...). 10.
God means speaking thus, If I speak against a Kingdom or a Nation, that I will
root it out, and that Nation repents of their evil ways, I will repent that I
thought to do so to them.

496. Jon. 3. 4. Jonas foretold the overthrow of Nineveh, and it was not
performed. Duet. 28. 22. If a Prophet speak in the name of the Lord, and that
thing comes not to pass, the Lord has not spoken it, but the Prophet has
spoken it presumptuously.

That Sermon of Jonas was not so much a prophecy as a commination. Moses
speaks not of comminations and Prophesies which have a condition included, but
of such Prophesies as are absolute, as Samuel foresaid to Saul, that two men
should meet him.

497. Jon. 3. 9. Who knows whether God will return and repent? Mal. 3 6. I the
Lord change not. Number. 23. 19. Jon. 1. 7.

Repentance and passions of men are attributed to God, not properly but
figuratively and by way of comparison, and by Anthropopathy, whilst God shows
himself as a man repenting; otherwise with God there Jam. 1. 17.
is no change.

498. Jon. 4. 11. In Nineveh were more then 120000 persons, which partly by
want of age, and partly by simplicity did not know their right hand from their
left. Genesis 8. 21. The imagination of man's heart is prone to evil from his
youth.

Between the right and the left hand they did not know the difference, who were
yet so young as to be free from actual sins, and others in years that were
simple and sincere.

MICHAS Prophecy.
THe Morasihite against the Kings, the Judges, the Priests and false prophets
in Judah and Israel. He threatens perdition to impenitent sinners, and
promises salvation to the Saints which remained. He prophesied in the year
3197.

499. Mich. 1. 2. And thou Bethlehem Ephrata, though thou be little amongst the
thousands of Judah, out of thee shall he come forth unto me, that is to be
ruler in Israel. Mat. 2. 6. And thou Bethlehem in the land of Judah, art not
the least amongst the Princes of Judah, for out of thee shall come a Governor
that shall rule my people Israel.

The Prophet calls it Bethlehem Ephrata, and Matthew, Bethlehem Judah, for a
difference from an other city so called in the Tribe of Zabulon. It was indeed
a little Town before Christ's coming, before Christ was born, but afterward it
became a most noble City, because the Messiah was born there. Matthew cites the
place of the Prophet faithfully, which the Pharisees had corrupted, and sets
down the words which the Pharisees speak unto Herod.

500. Mich. 5. 2. And thou Bethlehem Ephrata out of thee shall he come forth
unto me that shall be Ruler in Israel. Joh. 7. 27. Whence Christ is, no man
knows.

The Prophet expressly names the place of Christ's nativity; the Jews not
knowing Christ to be the true God, did mingle his temporal generation with his
eternal, contending amongst themselves: Does not the Scripture say, that being
of the seed of David, Christ should come from the City of David?

501. Mich. 7. 5. Trust ye not in a friend. 1 Cor. 13. 7. Charity believes all
things.

The first place is a rule of Prudence needful for Charity. The Prophet bids
us not to suspect ill of all men, but he complains of the corrupt manners of
his times, when men could believe no man; therefore he says we must deal
circumspectly, which is agreeing to Charity, lest we be defrauded by craft or
malice. Christ himself did not trust himself with Joh. 2. 25, 26.
the Jews, because he knew all men, and knew what was in man.

502. Mich. 7. 9. I will bear the indignation of the Lord, because I have
sinned. Verse. 9. He will bring me forth to the light, and I shall behold his
righteousness.

The people of Israel being miserably afflicted, could not boast in the sight
of God of their innocence, therefore they ought patiently to endure Gods
corrections; but before their enemies being innocent, they did rise up by
divine help. The Babylonians were formerly to the Israelites as the Turks and
Tartars are now adays to the Christians, afflicting us without cause, though
in the sight of God we are not without fault.

NAHUMS Prophecy, the Elkoshite.
HE Prophesies against the Assyrians. He denounces destruction to the
Ninivites 100 years after Jonas, he comforts the Jews, preaching unto them the
message of peace.

503. Nah. 1. 2. The Lord avengeth and is furious. Psalm. 103. 8. The Lord is
very pitiful, long suffering and full of mercy.

God is jealous, a severe Judge and revenger, not pardoning the sins and
wickedness of impenitent sinners; but he is most merciful as a tender Father
to the godly, and such as be penitent.

504 Nah. 1. 9. Affliction shall not rise up the second time. Romans 1. 28. The
wicked shall be punished in this world, when they are delivered up to a a
reprobate sense, to do those things which are not convenient, and in the world
to come with eternal destruction.

Justice does not punish twice sufficiently for the same fault; but it is not
disagreeing to justice to inflict diverse degrees of punishments for the same
sault: so temporal punishments to the wicked, are but the beginning of
eternal punishments. But the Prophet teaches here, that God will so deal with
the Assyrians in the Land of Judah, that there shall be no need of a second
judgment.

505. Nah. 1. 15. For the wicked shall no more pass through thee. 2 King. 24.
1. Chap. 25. 1. Nebuchadnezzar invaded the land of Judah and spoiled it.

The Prophet speaks of Senacherib, that he should come no more into the land of
Judah, for he was killed by his own sons. Also the words of the Prophet may be
understood concerning the perfect blessedness of the next world.

HABAKKUKS Prophecy.
HE foretells to the Jews when they sinned their destruction by the Caldeans. He
comforts the faithful with the coming of the Messiah, and the destruction of
the Babylonians. He prays for the ignorant. He prophesied in the year 3290.

506. Heb. 1. 5. Behold you amongst the heathen and regard, for I will work a
work in your days which you will not believe though it be told you. Act. 13.
41. Paul refers these words to the resurrection of Christ.

The Apostle compares the resurrection of Christ with the wonderful
deliverance of the Jews from the bondage of Babylon, which though their
forefathers would not believe, yet they found it to be true; so their posterity
must needs acknowledge that Christ was raised from the dead.

507. Hab. 2. 4. The just shall live by his faith. Mat. 9. 2. Jesus seeing
their faith.

Every one shall live by his own faith to eternal life; but an other man's
faith or prayers may obtain from God for us temporal benefits or deliverance.
In the latter place Christ speaks not only of their faith who brought the man
to him that was sick of the Palsy, but of his faith also.

508. Hab. 2. 4. The just shall live by his faith. Luke 10. 28. Do this and
live.

We live and are justified by faith, not for our faith, but because by faith we
lay hold on Christ. Do this, says Christ, to the Lawyer, that from the Law he
might learn to know his own weakness, and not that by observing the Law he
might deserve life, for by the law, no man is justified in the sight of Romans 3.
9. Gal. 3. 24.
God.

ZEPHANIAHS Prophecy
THe son of Chushi, he prophesies to the unbelieving Jews their destruction by
their neighbor Nations, and to those Nations their extermination by other
Nations; But deliverance to believers. He prophesied about the year 3451.

509. Zeph. 1. 5. He prophesied in the days of Josiah of the evils which
should come upon Judah. 2 King. 23. 3. Josias and all the people made a
covenant with the Lord, that they should walk after God with all their heart.

The Prophecy by a legal commination moved both King and people to manifest
their zeal. But he frighted the wicked Hypocrites, and such as were averse from
God, by threatening them, that so they might forsake their sins.

510. Zeph. 1. 7. The day of the Lord is at hand. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 3. Be not
terrified as though the day of the Lord were at hand.

In the former place by the day of the Lord is understood the neernesse of the
Babylonish captivity. In the latter the coming of the Lord to Judgment, the
time whereof is not for us to know.

511. Zeph. 3. 7. I said surely thou will fear me. Verse. 7. But they corrupted
their own doing.

I said] the Lord uses that word after the manner of men, not as though he had
failed of his hope, for all things are known to him before they be; but as if
he should say, Who would thing you should be so hardened, that my very
threatenings should not move you?

HAGGIES Prophecy.
HE upbraids the Jews for that they did not rebuild the Temple, and exhorts
them to build it, and he describes the magnificence of the second Temple. He
prophesied after the captivity of Babylon under Darius Hystaspes, in the year
3444.

512. Hagg. 1. 8. Bring wood and build the house. Isai. 66. 1. Thus says the
Lord, Heaven is my seat, and the earth is my footstool, what house is that you
will build unto me?

The rebuilding of the Temple was accepted with God, for the holy convocation,
and the worship in it to Gods glory; that was with the Priesthood and
Leviticall rites a type of Christ; unto whose coming only it was to endure.

513. Hagg. 2. 3. You that saw this house in its firstglory, and how do you see
it now? Is it not in comparison of it as nothing? Verse. 9. The glory of this
latter house shall be greater then that of the former house, says the Lord of
hosts.

The structure indeed of this house did not answer the Majesty of the first
house built by Solomon. Yet the spiritual glory of this latter house shall be
greater then the former house, because the Lord himself came into it, and
preached in it, disputed, and wrought great miracles there.

514. Hagg. 2. 4. Do so, for I am with you, says the Lord of hosts. Zach. 1.
12. O Lord of hosts, how long will it be ere thou have pity on Jerusalem?

In the first place the Prophet comforts the people by the hope of promises in
Christ, promising that God would be present there with his people after the
captivity of Babylon. In the latter Christ intercedes for his Church which has
sinned against God, and was punished by a just judgment of God with a
Babylonian captivity for 70. years.

515. Hag. 2. 6. Yet a little while, and I will shake the heaven and the earth,
and the desire of all Nations shall come. This Prophecy was fulfilled after
500 years under Augustus Caesar, Luke 2. 11.

With God 1000 years are but as one day, or one watch in the night.

ZECHARIAS Prophecy.
THe son of Barachiah. He warns the Jews to repent, to build the Temple, he
makes mention of his visions, and explains them by the effusion of the Spirit
of grace and prayers, He prophesied after the return from Babylon, in the year
of the world 3456.

516. Zech. 1. 3. Turn unto me, and I will turn unto you. Joh. 6. 44. No man
comes unto me unless my Father draw him.

The first place is legal, requiring of us what we ought, and not what we can
do. The latter is evangelicall, for no man comes unto God unless God draw him
by his Spirit. Therefore we must pray diligently, Convert me O Lord that I may
be converted, because Jer. 31. 18.
thou O Lord art my God.

517. Zech. 1. 17. Chap. 2. 10. The Lord shall yet comfort Zion, and shall yet
choose Jerusalem. Ephesians. 1. 4. God the Father chose us in Christ before the
foundations of the world.

The election of a certain people to be a visible Church, in the first place is
taken metonymically, for by that deed God shows that he has confirmed the
election of Jerusalem. In the latter God speaks of our election unto eternal
life.

518. Zech. 2. 8. He that touches you touches the apple of mine eye. Isai. 3.
1. Behold the Lord of hosts does take away from Jerusalem the whole stay of
bread.

In the first place is contained the promise of God to the faithful that keep
his Covenant. In the latter is the pronouncing of judgment against the
obstinate Jews. God is said to have kept his people as the apple of his eye so
long Deuteronomy. 32. 10. Psalm. 17. 8.
as they were obedient. But temporal punishments inflicted on the wicked do
not infringe the truth of his promise and of divine performance.

519. Zech. 3. 9. I will remove the iniquity of his land in one day. Revel. 13.
8. Christ is slain from the beginning of the world.

In one day is the performance of Christ's passion, who dying for our sins
restored us unto life. But he was slain from the beginning of the world in Gods
determinations by election, virtue, efficacy, and acceptance, and in respect
of the fruits of it, which redounded to the Church under the old Testament.

520. Zech. 6. 13. He shall sit and rule upon his throne. Isai. 9. 7. He shall
sit upon the throne of Daaid, and upon his Kingdom. Luke 1. 33.

Christ in respect of his divine nature has his throne from everlasting to
everlasting. But in respect of his humanity, being he is born of the seed of
David according to the flesh, the Lord God has given him a throne, that he may
reign over the house of Jacob forever.

521. Zech. 11. 12. They weighed for my price 30 pieces of silver. Mat. 27. 9.
Then was fulfilled what was spoken by Jeremiah the prophet, they took 30 pieces
of silver the price of him that was valued, whom they did value.

Eusebius says, that Jeremiahs name was put De Demonstra^^ l. 10. c. 4.
for Zecharias name, by the error of the Scrivener. Out of Jeremiah some make
the computation, where he makes mention of 17 shekels, which make 30 pieces of
silver, Jer. 32. 9.

522. Zech. 13. 7. Awake O sword against my shepherd, and against the man that
is my fellow, says the Lord of hosts, smite the shepherd, and the sheep shall
be scattered. Joh. 10. 10. No man takes away my life from me.

The Prophet mentions God the Father commanding in the name of the whole
Trinity, whose words outwardly are common to the three Persons, and undivided,
that his shepherd, namely Christ, should be slain, that contradicts not
Christ's words, who willingly laid down his life for us.

523. Zech. 13. 7. The sheep shall be scattered. Joh. 17. 12. Those that thou
gave unto me I have kept them. Chap. 18. 9, 10. I have not lost one.

God the Father speaks of the scattering, Christ of the keeping. That
scattering takes not away Christ's keeping, because none of the Apostles which
his Father gave to him perished but the son of perdition.

MALACHIES Prophecy.
HE complains of the wickedness of the people of the Jews and the Priests. He
comforts the godly. Threatens the wicked. Exhorts all to repentance and faith
in Christ. He was the last that prophesied before Christ's incarnation. In the
year of the world 3513.

524. Mal. 1. 2. Was not Esau Jacobs brother? says the Lord, yet I loved Jacob
and hated Esau. 2 Chronicles. 19. 7. There is no accepting of persons with God.

God is a most free agent, and does all things that he does according to his
own good pleasure, he respects not the external quality of the person, nor his
condition, nation, sex, riches, poverty, hatred, etc. so he loved Jacob,
revealed himself unto him, gave to his posterity the land of Canaan. He
neglected Esau who was Isaacs eldest son, and most beloved of his Father, nor
was he bound by any laws to do otherwise unto him.

525. Mal. 1. 8. If you offer the blind, the lame, the sick for sacrifice, is
it not evil? Psalm. 50. 8. I will not reprove thee for thy burnt sacrifices.

The Prophet speaks of sacrifices, the Psalmist of the sacrificers. Sacrifices
were to be offered unto God without spot or fault, not blind, or lame, but
without scars, scabs or blisters, for Christ of whom they were but types, was
an Lev. 22. 22, 25.
oblation, most pure and absolute and free from all spots, for our sins.

526. Mal. 2. 7. The Priests lips should keep knowledge, and they should seek
the law at his mouth. Mat. 22. 29. You err not knowing the Scriptures of God.

The first place is concerning the office of the Priests, who were bound to
keep knowledge that the people might seek for knowledge at their mouth, and
they were to answer the people Lev. 10. 11
that inquired concerning the law. The latter is concerning the ignorance of
the Priests, who fit upon Moses chair, contrary to Gods commandment and their
own duty, which was the cause that the people together with the Priests and the
Scribes ran to error.

Hitherto we have described the Reconciliations of appearing contrarieties in
the Canon of the old Testament, for the space of 4000 years; from the creation
of the world, from Adam, Noah, Abraham and Solomon, until the time that Christ
came. Now follow those of the new Testament, from Christ's Nativity to the end
of the world.

RECONCILING Of Places of the NEW TESTAMENT.
THe Scripture of the New Testament is the Word of God written, after Christ
was revealed, by the Apostles and Evangelists, in the Greek tongue, some few
things were written in Hebrew, namely St. Matthews Gospel, and the Epistle to
the Hebrews. It is divided Eusebius. l. 3. c. 26. l. 6. c. 11. 19. Jeron. in
Catal. Scriptorum.
into Evangelical and Epistolical books.

Those are the Evangelical books, which contain a part of the glad tidings, or
the holy Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ; with the History from his Nativity to
his Ascension into Heaven, at the thirty fourth year of his age.

The Gospel of St. MATTHEW.
IT contains the Genealogy of Jesus Christ, his birth, education, his
Prophetical Office in Preaching, Miracles; his Priestly Office in the oblation
of himself for our sins; and his Kingly Office in his rising from the dead, and
the government of his Church.

527. Mat. 1. 1. The book of the generation of Jesus Christ. 1 Timothy 1. 4. Tit.
3. 9. Avoid foolish and endless genealogies.

The knowledge of Christ's genealogy is more profitable, that we may know Jesus
to be the true Messiah promised, of the seed of Abraham, and David. Paul
condemns the madness of those who tell men's fortunes by their Nativities, and
such as move unprofitable questions concerning genealogies, which the Jews
addicted themselves much to, neglecting the study of godliness; those he bids
us to avoid as vain, and idle, and Heathenish fancies.

528. Mat. 1. 1. The book of the generation of Jesus Christ, the son of David,
the son of Abraham. Luke 3. 23, 38. Who was the son of Heli, Nagge, Matthat,
etc. of Adam, of God.

Matthew and Luke differ not; Matthew describes the genealogy of Christ by the
line of Solomon to Joseph. Luke by Nathan, another son of David, from Joseph's
Father in law, who was called Eli, to David, and so far as Adam the father of
mankind.

529. Mat. 1. 6. David the King begat Solomon. Luke 3. 31. Who was the son of
Nathan, who was the son of David.

Matthew observes the natural order descending from Fathers to the sons. Luke
ascends from the sons to the Fathers. Matthew by Solomon and his posterity
reckons the forefathers of Christ from David to Salathiel; Luke by Nathan and
his posterity; for Solomon's race being extinct, Christ was born of the
posterity of Nathan according to the flesh.

530. Mat. 1. 12. Jeconias begat Salathiel. Luke 3. 27. Salathiel was the son
of Neri, Melchi, Addi.

Jeconias died without children; Salathiel was the natural son of Neri, born
from David by Nathan; the legal son of Jeconias, because he succeeded him by
right in the Kingdom.

531. Mat. 2. 1. Behold wise men came from the East to Jerusalem. cap. 11. 25.
I confess to thee Lord, because thou have hid these things from the wise, etc.

The Wise men were led to Christ, not by humane but divine wisdom,
acknowledging Col. 2. 3. Romans 1. 25. Mat. 23. 23. Luke 11. 12. 1 Cor. 1. 26.
that in Christ were hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge; Christ
rejects no such wise men, but such as are not wise from Gods Spirit, and yet
think themselves wise, following the wisdom of this world; as the Heathen
Philosophers, and the Pharisees amongst the Jews, and those that are wise now
adays with fleshly wisdom.

532. Mat. 3. 1. John the Baptist preached in the wilderness. Luke 3. 3. He
came into all the Country about Jordan preaching by the Desert.

Matthew means not the inward remote parts separated from the company of men,
but the fore-parts, a Mountainous Country lying about Jordan.

533. Mat. 3. 14. John knew Christ before he baptized him. Joh. 1. 33. I knew
him not, but he that sent me to baptize with water, said unto me, Upon whom
thou shall see the Spirit descending and resting upon him, he it is that
baptizeth with the holy Ghost.

John had a knowledge of Christ before his baptism, by inchoation, but that
knowledge was confirmed and consummate, when in baptism he saw the Heavens
open, and the Spirit of God descending upon him like a Dove, and so by an
outward revelation joined with an inward illumination, he pronounced that Jesus
was the Messiah, and the Lamb of God that takes away the sins of the world.

534. Mat. 3. 16. The Spirit of God descended and came upon Christ. Luke 1. 35.
Christ had the holy Ghost before, Gal. 4. 6.

At the baptism of Christ the holy Ghost came upon him like a Dove, to declare
that Jesus Christ is the Mediator between God and man, according to the
prophecy. The Spirit Isa. 61. 1.
of the Lord was upon me, because he has anointed me, to preach good tidings
to the meek, to proclaim the acceptable year of the Lord: who being to Psalm.
45. 8.
take upon him the Office of Mediator, is anointed with spiritual oil.

535. Mat. 4. 2. And when Jesus had fasted forty days and forty nights, he was
afterward an hungered, and the Tempter came and said unto him. Luke 4. 1. He was
tempted forty days.

The internal temptation lasted forty days, then came the Devil to Christ in
an external and corporal shape, and spoke unto him.

536. Mat. 4. 8. The Devil at the third temptation took him up to a Mountain.
Luke 4. 5. The Devil at the second temptation took him into a high Mountain.

In the holy Scripture (says Augustine) there is no contradiction, where any
thing is related by diverse Authors, and not observed the same way. De Cons.
Ecclesiae. Matthew places the temptations in order. But Luke by Hysterosis
puts the second temptation after the third.

537. Mat. 4. 12. 17. Jesus began to preach from the imprisonment of John the
Baptist. Joh. 1. 2, 3, 4. chap. He preached before John was in prison.

Matthew passes over that which John sets down in his 4 first chapters.

538. Mat. 4. 18. Jesus walking by the Sea of Galilee, saw two brothers, Simon
and Andrew, casting a Net into the Sea, and he said, Follow me. Luke 5. 1. He
stood by the Lake of Gennesareth, v. 3. Ascending into Simons ship, he bade
them put off a little from the land, and he sat and taught the people out of
the ship; as he ended his speech, he said to Simon, Lanch into the deep. v. 10.
Fear not, henceforth thou shall catch men.

Here we have need of a threefold reconciliation; Matthew says that Christ
walking toward Sea, called Peter; Luke in a little ship: But Matthew speaks of
his first call; and Luke of his confirmation in it. 2. Matthew makes no mention
of the Miracle, but what he let pass, Luke describes. 3. Matthew calls it the
Sea of Galilee, Luke the Lake of Genesareth; because the Hebrews call all
waters Seas: Matthew respects the Province, Luke the banks by the next City.

539. Mat. 5. 1. Christ seeing the multitude went up into a Mountain and taught
them. Luke 6. 17. He came down with them and stood in the plain. Verse. 20.
Looking on his Disciples, he said, Blessed, etc.

Here is also a threefold difference; either Matthew says that Christ preached
in the Mountain, Luke in the field: Or Matthew says he preached to the people,
Luke to his Disciples: or Matthew says before; Luke after the healing of the
leper. Whence we conclude, that Christ repeated that Sermon a second time.

540. Mat. 5. 4. Blessed are they that mourn, for they shall be comforted.
Verse. 14. Rejoice, and be glad. Phil. 4. 4. Rejoice in the Lord always.

Christ speaks not of all that mourn, but such as from the heart mourn for
their sins, Joh. 16. ^3. Luke 16. 25. 2 Cor. 1.
and believe in him; whose condition in this life is sorrowful, and they suffer
pressures in the world, their mourning brings joy in this world and the world
to come, and God comforts them in all afflictions; Christ pronounces such
mourners happy.

541. Mat. 5. 5. Blessed are the meek, for they shall possess the earth. Heb.
1^. 13. And they all confessed that they were strangers and pilgrims in the
earth.

Meek are gentle, such as with a quiet mind, enduring injuries, do not resist
evil, but overcome evil with goodness, by the example of Christ; to these is
the possession of the earth Romans 12. 21. Mat. 11. 28. 1 Cor. 3. 22. Psalm. 27.
13, 14. 16.
promised, not simply, but by right of inheritance; for the godly, though they
possess nothing, are said to possess the earth, because they have Christ who
possesses all things; and he is only rich, who has a quiet mind. The earth
here is principally taken, not for the element of earth, but the land of the
living.

542. Mat. 5. 10. Blessed are they that suffer persecution for righteousness
sake. Ver. 12. Because great is their reward in heaven. 1 Pet. 2. 10. c. 4. 14.
Romans 8. 18. The afflictions of this world, are not worthy of the glory
hereafter, which shall be revealed in us.

The reward here has no relation to any merit of ours, but to the free love of
God, who promises for Christ's sake a reward of his grace to them that ask him;
and crowns his gifts in us. Nor do the afflictions and sufferings of this life
merit the free rewards of eternal life.

543. Mat. 5. 12. Great is your reward in heaven. Ephesians. 2. 8. By grace you are
saved through faith, it is the gift of God.

Our salvation properly is not a reward, but Romans 5. 6. c. 3. 28. Phil. 2. 13.
1 Timothy 4. 8.
the gift of God, in respect of acquiring it, and application, conservation and
perfection.

544. Mat. 5. 14. You are the light of the world. Joh. 8. 12. I, says Christ,
am the light of this world.

All Doctors of the Church, and all Christians enlightened by Christ are light,
not of themselves, but from Christ of whom they receive their splendour and
divine light; or Christ is of himself the true original light, who enlightens
every man that comes into the world.

545. Mat. 5. 16. Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your
good works. c. 6. 1. Beware that you give not your alms before men.

All that are enlightened with the light of the Gospel must study to do good
works, Romans 13. 12. That by the works themselves, the faith and godliness in
our hearts, may be known to men. But in the latter place, all works of ambition
and boasting are forbidden by Christ, for hypocrites they do so, desiring to
be praised and seen of men.

546. Mat. 5. 17. I came not to destroy the Law, but to fulfill it. Gal. 3. 13.
Christ came to redeem us from the curse of the law.

There is a difference between the law and the curse of it; as Christ has
fulfilled the law, so must we walk in his commandments, and by applying
Christ's satisfaction to our selves, we are said (spiritually) to fulfill the
law, from the curse and condemnation whereof we are redeemed by Christ.

547. Mat. 5. 22. Whosoever is angry with his brother is in danger of
judgment. Ephesians. 4. 6. Be angry, but sin not.

That anger is unlawful, when any one without just cause is angry, and more
with the person then the faults, for his own cause and not for Gods cause; Thou
shall not kill. It is lawful when for Gods glory we are angry with the sins,
and not with the persons: also the Apostle warn's us to moderate this just
anger, that we offend not by anger against God or our Neighbor.

548. Mat. 5. 22. He that says to his brother Thou fool, shall be in danger of
hell fire. Luke 24. 25. O fools and slow of heart to believe. Gal. 3. 1. O
foolish Galatians, who has bewitched you?

Christ condemns a contumelious despising of our brother, and a reproachful
aspersion of foolishness: but he in his way to Emaus, calls Cleophas and his
fellows, fools, not out of a vicious desire, but for their dullness and folly,
because they believed not the Prophets, nor the Word of God, so the Apostle
called the Galatians foolish.

549. Mat. 5. 25. Agree with thine Adversary. 1 Pet. 5. 9. Whom resist strong
in faith.

The first place is concerning all adversaries in general, with whom we must
agree, according to the rule of charity. The latter is concerning the Devil in
particular, whom we must always resist, being armed with heavenly weapons
against him.

550. Mat. 5. 32. Whosoever puts away his wife, unless it be for fornication,
causes her to commit adultery. 1 Cor. 7. 11. If she depart, let her remain
unmarryed, or be reconciled to her husband.

Fornication or Adultery is the principal cause of divorce betwixt those that
are married; but other causes, as witchcraft, impotency, malicious forsaking,
do not so dissolve the band of Matrimony. The Apostle speaks of desertion, and
in that case reconciliation must be first endeavored, before the party
forsaken, or forsaking should be left out of Matrimony.

551. Mat. 5. 39. Resist not evil, but whosoever shall smite thee on the right
cheek, turn the other to him also. Joh. 18. 23. If I have spoken evil, bear
witness of the evil; if well, why smitest thou me?

The manner of resisting evil, is either of retaliation with injury: and this
Christ forbids, or of just defense, by which, without injury we drive off
injuries by reason or law. So Christ said, Why do thou smite me? Not out of a
mind desirous of revenge, but from a well composed heart, he spoke that; and it
is lawful for godly men to complain to the Judge of injuries done unto them.

552. Mat. 5. 43. Thou shall love thy neighbor, and hate thine enemy. Ver. 43.
Love your enemies, Luke 6. 35. Romans 12. 20.
do good to those that hate you.

The first place was corrupt and came into use from the time of the Maccabees.
The latter was not delivered by Christ as a new law; but the true sense of the
divine law concerning love to our neighbors is explained by him. For God in
the Old Testament expressly commands men to love their enemies, Deuteronomy. 22. 2.

553. Mat. 6. 6. When thou prayest, enter into thy closet, and shutting the
door pray. 1 Timothy 2 8. I will that men pray in every place.

Christ against boasters, teaches us that our duty in prayer is, that we seek
to please God rather then men, because God considers our hearts, men look only
on the outside: and he that is alone prays better with a composed mind, then
he that prays amongst a multitude of People: whether therefore we pray
privately or publicly, let us always pray so as if we were hid in our
closets. The Apostle witnesses that our prayer is accepted with God, be it in
private or public, when God is worshipped in spirit and truth.

554. Mat. 5. 40. If any man will sue thee at the law, and take away thy coat
from thee, let him have thy cloak also. Romans 13. 1. There is no power but of
God.

Christ does here prescribe the law of patience to his followers; that they
should not be troubled for the loss of their goods, but wait on the Lord
quietly, until he take revenge on wicked men; yet he forbids not the lawful
means of recovering goods fraudulently or forcibly taken away, or appeal to the
Magistrate for power, much less does he condemn it.

555 Mat. 6. 7. When you pray, use not vain repetitions. Luke 18. 1. Men ought
to pray always, and not to faint. Col. 4. 2. 1 These. 5. 17.

Christ taxes the vain babbling and foolish Isa. 23. 13.
prating of those who suppose to move God with words often repeated, though
they be cold and distrustful in their prayers. But he forbids not continuance
in prayers, but will have us to pray always, if not in words, yet in desires;
for the prayers of godly men are arrows that are shot into heaven.

556. Mat. 6. 13. Lead us not into temptation. Jam. 1. 13. Let no man say, when
he is tempted, that he is tempted of God.

Temptation is either good, for a good end, as when God proves the faith, hope,
patience, obedience, constancy of his children; or evil, to an evil end, and
we pray in the Lords prayer, that God will not let us be tempted with evil;
nor give us over into the hand of Satan to tempt us.

557. Mat. 6. 13. For thine is the Kingdom, the power and the glory. Luke 11.
4. That conclusion is not found in the Lords Prayer.

One Evangelist omitting what the other has set down, does no ways derogate
from the truth of Gods Word. David used the same 1 Chronicles. 29. 11. 2 Timothy 4. 18.
thanksgiving, Thine is the greatness, and the power, and the glory, and the
Victory, and the Majesty. And Paul uses the same words, And the Lord shall
deliver me from every evil work, to whom be glory for ever. Amen. From whence
is taken that of the Church, Glory be, etc.

558. Mat. 6. 19. Lay not up for your selves treasures upon earth. 1 Timothy 5. 8.
But if any provide not for his own, especially for those of his own house, he
has denied the faith.

Christ forbids no man to possess wealth that comes as a blessing from God;
but to lay up treasures to the wrong of other men, and to put our trust in them
as the Gentiles do: nor Lev. 36. 14. Psalm, 112. 3.
does he condemn the care for a man's own family.

559. Mat. 6. 31. Therefore take no thought, saying, What shall we eat, or what
shall we drink? 1 Timothy 5. 8. If any man provide not for his own, he has denied
the faith.

Christ condemns here carnal care joined with Heathenish distrust: but not a
Christian care to provide for our family, with confidence in God.

560. Mat. 7. 1. Judge not. Joh. 7. 24. Judge righteous judgment.

Christ forbids rash judgment, and defamation; Mat. 18. 15. Jude v. 8,
but not Politic or Ecclesiastical Judicature, appointed by God under the
Old Testament; nor yet domestic: because all men are bound to judge of
doctrine and manners, and to call those to the right way that are wandering from
it.

561. Mat. 7. 8. Whosoever asks receives. Jam. 4. 3. Ye ask and receive not.

He that asks as he ought to do in faith, receives what is convenient for
him: they that ask not as they should, that is, in faith, nor for a good end,
receive not, because they ask amiss.

562. Mat. 7. 12. All things that you would that men should do unto you, do
you even so to them; for this is the law and the Prophets. c. 22. 4. On these
two Commandments, the love of God and our Neighbor hang all the Law and the
Prophets.

The first place excludes not the love of God, for he that loves his neighbor
loves God: the latter comprehends a moral rule of all things which are
contained in the Books of Moses, the Law and the Prophets.

563. Mat. 7. 22. Many will say unto me in that day, Lord, Lord, have we not
prophesied in thy Name, and in thy Name have cast out Devils? Then will I
profess unto you, I never knew you, depart from me. c. 10. 32. Whosoever shall
confess me before men, him will I confess before my Father which is in heaven.

Christ in the former place speaks of hypocrites who prophesied in his Name,
and teaching so, did confess him with their tongue. In the latter place he
speaks of those who profess his Name by faith, openly and sincerely without
hypocrisy, they have both a promise and a large reward.

564. Mat. 8. 4. Tell no man. V. 4. Go thy way, show thy self to the Priest.

Christ forbad the Leper for a time, but not for ever, that he should tell no
man that he was healed, but that first he should make his comparition before
the Priest.

565. Mat. 8. 5. A centurion came to Jesus beseeching him, and saying. Luke 7.
3. The Elders of the Jews were sent unto him, beseeching him to come.

Theophylact reconciles these places thus: first the Centurion sent Messengers
to Christ, then he came himself and met the Lord, and beseeched him with his
own mouth relating the business.

566. Mat. 8. 19. A certain scribe came unto him, and said, Master I will
follow thee whithersoever thou go. And Jesus said unto him, The Foxes have
holes. Joh. 6. 37. Him that comes to me will I in no wise cast out.

That Scribe would follow Christ out of vain boasting, and promised to himself
great wealth, and dignities; Christ did not reject this man, but only
admonished him of the poverty and misery of those that follow him in this life,
which is rewarded with salvation and eternal life.

567. Mat. 8. 26. The Disciples were fearful and of little faith. Jam. 1. 6.
Ask in faith, nothing wavering: for he that wavereth is like a wave of the Sea,
driven with the wind and tossed.

The infirmity of the Disciples is to be distinguished from Heathenish
distrust: they that doubt receive nothing; but believers receive what they ask
in faith.

568. Mat. 8. 28. Jesus came to the other side into the Country of the
Gargasens. Mark. 5. 1. They came over to the other side of the Sea into the
Country of the Gadarenes.

The City Gadara, and Gergaza were neighbor places in the Tribe of Manasses,
having their several circuit, in the borders whereof the possessed met our
Savior.

569. Mat. 8. 28. There met him two possessed with Devils. Mar. 5. 2. There met
him out of the Tombs a man with an unclean spirit.

They were two in number, Mark mentions one, because the other was notably
known. August.

570. Mat. 8. 29. The Devils cried out, saying, What have we to do with thee
Jesus thou Son of God? Joh. 8. 44. The Devil is a liar, and the Father thereof.

The Devils did not that for the glory of God and Christ, but to cause distrust
in men's hearts: for the Devil though he do speak truth, yet he does it not
without fraud and a false end, that he may draw men into error.

571. Mat. 9. 6. The Son of man has power to forgive sins. 23. 34. Father
forgive them, they know not what they do.

The Father gives, the Son has merited, and the holy Ghost confirms salvation
and remission of sins.

572. Mat. 9. 1. Jesus sat at meat in Matthews house. Luke 5. 28. Matthew left
all, rose up, and followed Christ.

Matthew left all things which might hinder him from following Christ, as the
receipt of custom, and his Office of a Publican; but he left not his house,
nor did he wholly cast away his household affairs.

573. Mat. 9. 18. My daughter (says Jairus to Christ) is even now dead. Luke
8. 42. The daughter of Jairus lay a dying being about twelve years old.

She lay a dying when her Father went forth of his house; she was dead before
Christ came to her.

574. Mat. 10. 2. The first Simon Peter, Andrew, James, John. Mar. 3. 17.
Peter, James, John, Andrew. Gal. 2. James, Cephas.

The Apostles were equal in dignity and office, but unequal in order. The
Evangelists in naming the Apostles observed not the order of dignity: he that
Matthew makes the second, Mark places in the fourth place, and Paul puts Peter
after James the son of Alpheus.

575. Mat. 10. 5. Jesus sent the twelve, saying, Go not into the way of the
Gentiles. Mar. 16. 15. Go into all the world, and preach the Gospel to every
creature.

Distinguish the time, says Auguistine, and the De Verb, Domini.
Scriptures will be reconciled. The message of the Apostles to the Jews was
before Christ's passion, the partition wall was not yet broken down between the
Jews and the Gentiles. The general message was to all Nations, after Christ's
resurrection and exaltation, and it contains a plenary promulgation of the
Gospel. So first the family, then strangers were called: So God in these days
calls at certain times whom he pleases.

576. Mat. 10. 5. Go not into the way of the Gentiles. Joh. 4. 10. Christ
preached to the Samaritans

That Interdiction was directed only to the Disciples, Christ of his free grace
dispenses the crumbs where and when he will; there is no law can forbid him.

577. Mat. 10. 8. Freely ye have received, freely give. V. 10. The workman is
worthy of his meat. Gal. 6. 6. Let him that is taught in the Word, minister to
him that teaches in all good things.

The Apostles were sent to cure all manner of sick folk, and Christ foreseeing
the Jews to be greedy of money, bad them give every one for 1 Pet. 5. 2.
his health what he pleased, left they should make a gain of Miracles done in
his Name. That 1 Cor. 9. 4.
command contradicts not the saying of Christ and his Apostles, of public
maintenance due to the Ministers of the Church, which must be paid to them for
their pains in their Ministry; but the gift of Miracles were not to be sold.

578. Mat. 10. 9. Provide neither gold, nor silver, nor brass in your purses.
Joh. 13. 29. Judas had the bag.

The possessing of gold, silver, or brass, is not condemned, but the abuse of
it. Christ in his first temporal mission to the Jews, because they were in a
few days to take a view of all Judea, forbad his Disciples to take money or
bags, that they might perform their embassage with greater expedition; doubting
not that they should want any thing. In the mean while he gives charge to Judas
for a common bag. chap. 12 6.


579. Mat. 10. 10. Not a staff. Mar. 6. 8. Save a staff only.

A staff or wand was twofold in use, either to defend or carry, or to journey
and to support a man; in the former place he speaks of a staff of defense,
which would be burdensome to carry, in the latter place of a staff to support
Genesis 32. 10.
on; which we call a walking staff, which is a help to a man in his journey.
Exodus 4. 7.


580. Mat. 10. 10. Nor shoes. Mar. 6. 9. But be shod with Sandals.

He forbids them to take shoes with them, that is, two pair; as he forbad them
to take two coats: but he lets them be shod with Sandals, which were then in
use.

581. Mat. 10. 16. Behold I send you forth as sheep in the midst of wolves.
Joh. 14. 27. My peace I leave with you, my peace I give unto you.

The godly are in danger in the world, as sheep amongst wolves, but they have
peace in Christ: who said unto them, In me you shall have peace, in be world
you shall have trouble.

582. Mat. 10. 16. Be wise as Serpents. Romans 6. 8. To the carnally minded is
death.

Spiritual and Christian wisdom is commended by Christ to his Disciples, and
it ought to be in all Christians, especially Pastors who are often amongst
Wolves; and are bound to take heed that they be not too slow and fearful in
discharging their office, and fly from Christ, 1 Pet. 4. 7.
for fear of dangers. Carnal and worldly wisdom contrary to the will of God,
is death, of that Paul speaks.

583. Mat. 10. 23. When they persecute you in one City, flee ye to another.
Joh. 10. 11. A good shepherd gives his life for his sheep, 1 Pet. 4. 3.

The flight of Ministers is lawful, when they are conversant with those where
there is no hope of propagating the Gospel, and of winning others: or if the
peace and safety of the Church require that, and it may be done without the
scandal of those that are weak, otherwise it is unlawful. Augustine prescribes
this Ad Honcrantium.
moderating of flight, lest any man rashly forsaking his place, should either
betray his flock, or become an example of idleness: and yet no man must
inconsiderately endanger himself; for if the whole Church hinder, or part is
sought for unto death, he shall preposterously withdraw himself afterward;
whose part it is to lay down his life for every one.

584. Mat. 10. 27. What I tell you in darkness, that speak ye in light. Joh.
18. 20. I speak openly, and in secret have I said nothing.

In the former place Christ opposes his Ministry to the Ministry of the
Apostles, for he taught publicly in the Temple and other places; but because
his doctrine was rejected almost by all, it was hid in corners, which he
foretold should be preached openly by his Apostles. In the latter being asked of
the High Priest concerning his doctrine, he says he spoke nothing in secret,
in respect of the time and the persons, as for the substance of his doctrine,
which was always the same, whether taught publicly or privately by the
Apostles or others.

585. Mat. 10. 34. Think not that I am come to send peace on the earth. Joh.
14. 27. Peace I leave with you, my peace I give unto you. Phil. 4. 7. The peace
of God keep your hearts.

Christ is our peace, and his Gospel is our reconciliation and peace with God.
In the first place he speaks of civil peace, in the latter of Ephesians. 2. 14.
peace of conscience.

586. Mat. 11. 9. Christ speaks of the Baptist, that he was more then a
Prophet. Joh. 1. 21. The Baptist being asked whether he were a Prophet,
answered, no.

Christ said John was more then a Prophet, because the Prophets foretold only
that Christ should come; but John Baptist pointed with his finger at Christ
himself; for he was neither any of the old Prophets, nor that great Prophet.

587. Mat. 11. 13. All the Prophets and the Law prophesied until John. Romans
10. 4. Christ is the end of the Law.

Christ and John were both at one time; John was the conclusion of the old
Covenant, Christ the Author of the new, and the perfection of the law, the
Messiah, to whom the law directed.

588. Mat. 11. 14. And if ye will receive it, this is Elias which was to come.
Joh. 1. 21. They asked him, What then? Art thou Elias? and he said, I am not.

Christ calls John Baptist, Elias metaphorically, because he was like him in
spirit and virtue. The Baptist denies that he is Elias the Thishbite, who lived
in the days of Ahab, for the Jews were of that opinion, as some now adays
look for Enoch and Elias.

589. Mat. 11. 18. John came neither eating nor drinking. cap. 3. 4. His meat
was Locusts and wild Honey.

Christ commends John's austere life, sobriety and temperance in the former
place; because he used not ordinary meat and drink. Yet he did not exceed
Christ in his austere life, For bodily exercise 1 Timothy 4. 8.
profits but little.

590. Mat. 11. 25. O Father, Lord of Heaven and Earth, because thou have hid
these things from the wise and prudent, and have revealed them unto babes. Jam.
3. 13. Who so is a wise man and endued with knowledge amongst you; let him show
out of a good conversation his works with meekness of wisdom.

Christ speaks of the wisdom of this world, and Diabolical wisdom, which is
contrary to divine wisdom; James speaks of both divine and humane wisdom.

591. Mat. 11. 28. Christ says, Come unto me all. 1 Cor. 1. 26. You see your
calling, brethren, how that not many wise men after the flesh, not many noble
are called.

The general vocation extends to all; there is one general call of all men to
the great Supper: and another special call of believers only, who Luke 14.
obey Christ and his Gospel.

592. Mat. 11. 30. My yoke is easy, and my burden is light. Mar. 10. 25. It is
easier for a Camel to go through the eye of a needle, then for a rich man to
enter into the Kingdom of God.

The yoke of Christ is easy, and his burden light to the spirit, not to the
flesh, to those that are mild and humble by Christ's example: or the Gospel yoke
is easy by the holy Ghost, and in comparison of the unsupportable yoke of the
law. It is a hard matter for a rich covetous man to enter into the Kingdom of
God, not for that riches are evil, but because he does wickedly abuse them.

593. Mat. 12. 10. The Pharisees ask Christ if it be lawful to heal on the
Sabbath days? Mar. 3. 4. Christ asks the Pharisees, whether it were lawful to
do good on the Sahbath days?

To the question of the Pharisees Christ answered by inversion; intimating that
God was more pleased to help a miserable man then to Mat. 12 8.
forsake him.

594. Mat. 12. 32. Whosoever speaks a word against the Son of Man, it shall
be forgiven him; but whosoever speaks against the holy Ghost, it shall not be
forgiven him Romans 5. 20. Where sin has abounded, grace does much more abound.

The unpardonable sin against the holy Ghost is not so in it self, that it
cannot be forgiven, but for the malicious obstinacy of those that will not come
to Christ by repentance, and do proudly seduce others.

595. Mat. 12. 49. He stretched forth his hand toward his Disciples, and said,
Behold my Mother and my Brethren, Mat. 1. 10. Luke 2. The Virgin was Christ's
Mother.

Christ denies not his kindred according to the flesh, but prefers spiritual
kindred before them; and that speech depends on his Office, who receives the
faithful into the first degree of honor, as though they were his nearest
kindred.

596. Mat. 13. 12. He that has not. Ver. 12. From him shall be taken away,
even that he has.

He is said not to have, who is more careful to seek after novelties, then to
believe Gods Word, or look after his own salvation; such a one, because he
thinks he has the knowledge of God, and disdains his Word, shall fall away at
last by his boasting, and shall by his own Luke 8. 18. Romans 2. 17. Ap. 3.
destruction understand how miserable, naked and poor he is.

597. Mat. 13. 16. Blessed are your eyes that see. Joh. 20. 29. Blessed are
they that have not seen, and yet believed.

In the first place is understood the temporal blessedness and felicity of
those who conversed with Christ. In the latter the heavenly and eternal
felicity of believers.

598. Mat. 13. 33. The kingdom of heaven is like to leaven. 1 Cor. 5. 7. Purge
out the old leaven.

The doctrine of the Apostles was like to leaven, because of its sudden
piercing into the whole world, as the doctrine of the Pharisees was like to
leaven, which was to be avoided; or all iniquity and filthiness of nature, and
Mat. 16. 22.
carnal desires of wicked men, may be so compared: therefore we may interpret
this either for good or evil; leaven in the first place is taken in a good
sense; in the second, in an evil sense.

599. Mat. 15. 22. A woman of Canaan. Mar. 7. 26. A Greek, a Syrophenissian.

She was of the posterity of the Cananites, by kind a Syrophenissian, in the
borders of Tire and Sydon, she dwelt in the Country of Syria and Phenicia.

600. Mat. 15. 24. I am not sent but to the lost sheep of the house of Israel.
1 Timothy 2. 5. There is one Mediator between God and man, who gave himself a
ransom for all.

In the former place, Christ speaks of his Prophetical Office, that is, of
teaching and working Miracles; In his second, of his Mediatorship, of salvation
and redemption, that belongs and is extended to all believers.

601. Mat. 16. 6. Take heed of the Leaven of the Pharisees, and of the
Sadduces. c. 23. 2, 3. The Scribes and the Pharisees sit in Moses seat, All
therefore whatsoever they bid you, that observe and do.

By the leaven of the Pharisees, is here understood their perverse doctrine,
corrupting the purity of Gods Word, Christ commands them to beware of this, and
their hypocrisy, infecting the sincerity of manners; for like leaven it
penetrates, puffs up, and corrupts; but the eyes of God respect sincerity only:
yet he bids them observe what they taught that sit in Moses Jer. 5. 5.
chair, out of the law of God. For truth whosoever preaches it, must be
received for it self, but we must not depend on their false hypocritical
glosses; for God is worshipped in vain after the commandments of men.

602. Mat. 17. 15. Lord have mercy on my son, for he is lunatic. Mar. 9. 17. I
have brought unto thee my son who has a dumb spirit.

He is lunatic, who upon the wane of the Moon is sick of the
Falling Sickness, or a Vertigo, which happens to many by imperfection of
nature. This man was said to be dumb and deaf, not by nature, but because Satan
possessed his tongue and ears; so that he added more diseases to his natural
Infirmity.

603. Mat. 18 8. If thy hand, or thy foot offend thee, cut it off, and cast it
from thee. Ephesians. 5. 29. No man hates his own flesh.

Christ's speaks figuratively, that we should crucify the old man with his
evil affections, that bear rule in the members of our bodies, that we must
cast away the most dear and profitable things from us, which set our sins on
fire and foster them, and offend us.

604. Mat. 18. 15. If thy brother trespass against thee, go and tell him his
fault between thee and him alone. 1 Timothy 5. 20. Them that sin rebuke before all.

Christ speaks of our private duty toward our brethren, that offend us
without public scandalt, and wills that we shall not be too severe or soft
examiners of our brothers faults. The Apostle speaks of the public office of
the Presbytery against those who persevere in their sins, as Theophylact
expounds it.

605. Mat. 18. 20. Where two or three are gathered together in my Name, there
am I in the midst of them. Joh. 11. 15. I was not there.

Christ in the former place speaks of his personal and gracious presence; in
the latter, of his common natural presence with other men in the earth: for
when he was in another place, he was not truly and locally in Bethany.

606. Mat. 19 17. There is no man good save one, who is God. Luke 6. 45. A good
man out of the good treasure of his heart brings forth that which is good.

God is good of his own infinite perfection, by his Essence, Nature, and
Being, to whom evil is contrary. Men and Angels are called good, not from
themselves, but by communication, by the goodness of God in their creation and
restitution. Christ attributes goodness to God only, that he might draw him
that called him good, to acknowledge his doctrine to be divine.

607. Mat. 19. 27. Behold, we have forsaken all and followed thee, What shall
we have therefore? Luke 17. 10. When you have done all those things that were
commanded you, say, We are unprofitable servants, we have done only that was
our duty to do.

Peter glories in the name of the Apostles, that they had forsaken all for
Christ, though it was not much that they had, so men are wont to reckon largely
of their services toward God. Christ opposes against this ambition, our duty
we owe unto God, all that we can, and all we possess is from God, we are his
servants; and they that serve him not for himself, deserve nothing in the sight
of God, doing our duty, we do not repay the thousandth part of what we owe
unto him.

608. Mat. 20. 16. Many are called and few chosen. Romans 8. 38. Whom he did
predestinate, them he also called, and whom he called, them he also justified.

Vocation is either external by preaching of Gods Word; so God calls all men
indifferently to partake of his grace; or by the internal vocation joined with
the outward, whereby God by his holy Spirit manifests to us our Romans 8.
election, and declares us to be his children.

609. Mat. 20. 20. The Mother of Zebedees children came to him and desired.
Mar. 10. 35. James and John the sons of Zebedee came to him.

The Mother spoken to by her children, asked in their name, for they supposed
they should the more easily obtain it by mediaation of their Mother, because
she was Christ's Cousin.

610. Mat. 20. 23. To sit on my right hand and on my left, is not mine to give.
Rev. 3. 21. To him that overcomes will I grant to sit with me on my Throne.

In the first place Christ maintains, that at his first coming, God the Father
had given him no command to assign to any men any degrees of honor, but that
he should instruct the faithful concerning the Cross; and should promise unto
them eternal life, which is given to them who shall overcome by faith, which is
our victory.

611. Mat. 20. 29. And as they departed from Jericho, behold two blind men
sitting by the way side. Mar. 10. 46. As he went out of Jericho, blind
Bartimeus sat by the high way side.

Matthew was an eye witness that they were two, but Mark mentions the most
noted of them.

612. Mat. 20. 29. As they departed from Jericho, Behold two blind men. Luke
18. 35. As he came nigh to Jericho a certain blind man sat by the way side.

When Christ entered the City, the blind man first cried out, and when he was
not heard for the noise, he sat in the way where Christ went out, and never
left crying till Christ called and healed him. Christ did defer his cure, but
did not wholly refuse it; so he made proof of his faith, and of many others.

613. Mat. 21. 19. The fig tree was forthwith dried. Mar. 11. 20. In the
morning as they passed by, they saw the fig tree dried up from the root.

The fig tree indeed withered forthwith, but on the morning the day following
the witherednesse was made manifest.

614. Mat. 22. 32. God is not the God of the dead, but of the living. Romans 14.
8. Whether we live or dye, we are the Lords.

Christ denies not simply, but comparatively and relatively from the
hypothesis of the Sadduces, that God was the God of the dead, for they supposed
the dead should never rise again; Paul from another hypothesis affirms the
same, which depends on Christ's resurrection, on this wise, God is the God of
the dead, because the dead bodies shall rise again.

615. Mat. 23. 9. Call no man your Father upon the earth. 1 Cor. 4. 15. If you
had ten thousand instructors in Christ, yet have you not many Fathers, for in
Christ Jesus I have begotten you.

Christ will have us place our filial confidence in God only, not in men,
though they love us with fatherly affection, and teach us the true Religion,
and so are called Fathers, not by nature, but by participation, that they are
so. So Paul calls himself the Father of the Corinthians, and of Timothy, by
reason of the Gospel, not primarily, but secondarily, because he was an
Instrument which God used to call and regenerate them by the Gospel; that he
preached to them.

616. Mat. 23. 10. Be not called Masters. 1 Cor. 4. 15. You have many Masters.

Christ is our only spiritual Rabbi, Master and Joh. 1.
Doctor; others that have these titles, are but servants to this great Master,
because they must teach no other but the Doctrine of Christ, For of his
fullness we have all received, he is the way, the truth, and the life, and it
is enough to us that he said it.

617. Mat. 23. 17. Ye Fools and blind. c. 5. 22. Whosoever shall say, Thou
Fool, shall be in danger of hell fire.

Christ by his Office and his charity was angry with the Pharisees, and to make
them repent he called them fools and blind, but he forbids, that out of a
carnal reproachful desire, and greediness of revenge, or pride, or mad anger
any man should detract from his neighbor.

618. Mat. 23. 37. O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that killest the Prophets, and
stonest them. c. 27. Jerusalem is called the holy City.

Jerusalem the City of Martyrs is there called the City of many Saints. It is
called the holy City, for the most holy God by whom it was made choice of; or
for the Messiah who taught them the sanctity of faith and life, and offered
himself for us for a price of redemption; or for the Saints that were in it.

619. Mat. 25. 32. He shall separate the Sheep from the Goats. Joh. 10. 16. And
there shall be one sheepfold.

The first place is concerning the future state of the Church after the day of
Judgment, that shall be otherwise then it is now, for then shall there be a
separation made. Hypocrites now pass for Sheep, then they shall be manifested
to be Goats. The latter place is of the faithful Ephesians. 2. 14. c. 5. 23. 1 Cor.
3. 11.
who shall be gathered into one sheepfold, that is, the Church, both Jews and
Gentiles under one shepherd.

620. Mat. 25. 34. Inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of
the world. Ephesians. 1. 4. He chose us in him before the foundation of the world,
that we should be holy.

Christ by the beginning and foundation of the world, understands eternity; the
Apostle looks to the first Creation; for before the foundation of this world
were laid, God chose us in Christ to salvation.

621. Mat. 25. 34. There is a Kingdom prepared for us, before the foundation
of the world. Joh. 14. 3. I go, says Christ, to prepare a place for you.

There is a place by Gods decree provided for us from eternity, according to
predestination, but not particular designation, which is done after Christ's
ascension; but the Devil, Death and Hell, and Malediction did not suffer us to
come thither, until Christ had destroyed those impediments, and by his death
vanquished the Devil, Death, and Hell, blotted out our sins, and by rising
again had restored life to us, by his Ascension had opened heaven to us, and
going thither before us confirmed it, that we should follow him thither.

622. Mat. 26. 2. Ye know that after two days is the Feast of the Passover. v.
6. Jesus was in Bethany six days before the Passover.

The Evangelist began to speak of what was done two days before the Passover,
but repeating the matter higher, he relates somethings were done in Bethany six
days before the Passover, because the History of Judas the Traitor required
that. Therefore here is an Hysterosis.

623. Mat. 26. 7. A woman poured Ointment on our Saviors head. Joh. 12. 3.
Mary took a pound of Ointment of Spikenard very costly, and anointed the feet
of Jesus.

Some hold that these are different Histories, yet it might be that when a
greater quantity of ointment was poured forth, that his feet were anointed also
at the same time.

624. Mat. 26. 8. The Disciples saw it, and had indignation. Joh. 12. 4. Then
says one of his Disciples Judas Iscariot.

The Evangelists usually ascribe to many the fact of one, it their consent went
along with him. So the murmuring which Judas began, is imputed to the rest who
held their peace.

625. Mat. 26. 11. You have the poor always with you, but me you have not
always. c. 28. 20. And lo I am with you always even unto the end of the
world.

In the first place Christ speaks of his corporal presence and natural
conversation with his Disciples in the state of humiliation, that he should not
be so always with them. In the latter of the assistance by his Person, and his
help that should be effectual in their Apostolical duty, though it be
difficult, yet Christ would be present with them by a singular virtue of his
Spirit, dwelling in them. The accomplishment of this promise was manifest in
the Apostles, and in all the faithful by the operation of the Spirit in us, and
shall be so to the end of the world.

626. Mat. 26. 26. This is my Body. c. 24. 23. If any man shall say unto you,
Lo here is Christ, or there, believe him not.

In the first place Christ asserts his presence in the sacred Supper. In the
latter he foretells that false Prophets should come, and exhorts us that we
should beware of those false Impostors, and should not look for salvation in
places, times, or persons, contrary to Gods Word, but only in Christ Jesus our
Lord.

627. Mat. 26. 26. This is my Body. Joh. 6. 63. The flesh profits nothing.

Christ in the first place understands his body that was given to dye for us.
In the latter, flesh, but not his own in special, but in general, the natural
use of any meat whatsoever. Not as the Capernaites dream, that they should so
eat his flesh, who would eat him with their teeth, but not with their heart.

628. Mat. 26. 29. I will not drink henceforth of this fruit of the Vine: He
puts these words after the Institution. Luke 22. 18. He puts those words before
the Institution.

Christ once delivered the Sacramental cup to C. 3. de conv. Evang.
his Disciples, says Augustine; but Luke has not made his Narration in a
continued History, nor always observed the order of time, so that here is an
Hysterosis again.

629. Mat. 26. 29. I will not drink henceforth of the fruit of the Vine, until
that day when I drink it new with you in my Fathers Kingdom. Act. 10. 41. We
eat and drank with him after he rose from the dead.

Christ said he would not drink with his Apostles in his mortal body; but after
the Resurrection, having put off the infirmity of his body, he after conversed
with his Disciples, and eat and drank with them; he calls it new, because he is
made immortal of mortal, and the Devil and Death being destroyed, he had opened
a spiritual Kingdom.

630. Mat. 26. 34. This night before the Cock crow thou shall deny me thrice.
Mar. 14. 30. Before the Cock crow twice, thou shall deny me thrice.

Matthew briefly and in general without relating the circumstances, but Mark
relates the matter with more and more particular words.

631. Mat. 26. 52. All they that take the sword, shall perish with the sword.
Luke 22. 36. He that has no sword, let him sell his garment and buy one.

A sword is taken properly in the first place, for Christ will not that private
men should use the sword for revenge, and to resist evil, but should overcome
evil with goodness: In the latter place, a sword is taken metaphorically for
the Word of God with which we must fight against Satan and our spiritual
enemies, and Romans 12.
therefore we must be armed with it.

632. Mat. 27. 4. Judas says, I have sinned betraying the innocent blood. Act.
1. 18. Falling headlong, he burst asunder in the midst, and all his bowels
gushed out.

The confession of Judas, and the testimony he gave of Christ's innocence was
not with true repentance; but only sorrow by the sense of his sin, which led
him not to conversion, but to hand himself.

633. Mat. 27. 32. They compelled Simon of Cyrenea to bear his Cross. Joh. 19.
17. Christ bearing his Cross, went forth into a place, called the place of a
skull.

At first going forth Christ himself carried the Cross, and when he was grown
too feeble in body, the soldiers compelled Simon whom they met on the way, to
carry the Cross.

634. Mat. 27 44. The Thieves also who were crucified with him, cast the same
in his teeth. Luke 23. 39. And one of the malefactors which were hanged, rayled
on him.

Matthew ascribes to both that which was proper to one, as the murmuring before
amongst the Apostles; or if both at first did rayl on him, one of them at last
confessed his sin, and acknowledged Jesus to be the Messiah.

635. Mat. 28. 8. The Mary's departed from the Sepulcher with fear and great
joy. Mar. 16. 8. They fled from the Sepulcher, for they trembled and were
amazed.

That fear and amazement was joined with joy, as it falls out in sudden
accidents.

636. Mat. 28. 9. The women came and held him by the feet. Joh. 20. 17. He
says to Mary Magdalen, Touch me not, for I am not yet ascended to my Father.

Christ suffered the women to touch him, to confirm the certainty of his
Resurrection, that they might be more sure witnesses to his Disciples and
others: he forbad Mary Magdalen to touch him, because she rejoiced too much
with carnal affection, and therefore he would have her rather touch him by
faith, that is believe in him, to be the Son of God, the Lord of glory,
salvation, life and death.

637. Mat. 28. 18. All power is given to me both in heaven and in earth. Mar.
13. 32. But of that day knows no man, no not the Son, but the Father only.

All power is given unto Christ the Mediator, because he is made Lord in the
glory of God the Father. In the day of his humiliation he knew not as man the
day of Judgment, or not for himself that he knew not, but for us, says
Augustine, because it behoved not us to know.

638. Mat. 28. 18. All power is given to me in heaven and in earth. Romans 9. 5.
Christ who is over all, God blessed for ever.

Power is given to Christ as man, for nothing can be given to him as God, for
as God he had al things before in his power, but the humanity of Christ has
not that power of it self, but from the Divine Nature with which the humane
nature is personally united.

939. Mat. 28. 19. Teach all Nations. Mar. 16. 15. Preach the Gospel to every
creature. Mat. 7. 6. Psalm. 19. 5. Romans 10. 5.
Give not that which is holy to the Dogs, nor Pearls to Swine.

In the first place, by the Nations, and the Creatures, are understood the Jews
and Gentiles, for the sweet voice of the Gospel was to sound to all through the
whole earth, and the seed of the Word to be sown, that Infidels might be left
unexcuseable. In the latter, holy, and Pearls signify the same; It must not be
given to Dogs and Swine, that is, to persecutors, scoffers, despisers, profane;
For he that reproves a scorner, Prove. 9. 7.
gets himself shame, and he that rebukes a wicked man, gets himself a
blet.

St. MARKS Gospel.
IT contains briefly the sayings and deeds of Christ in Galilee, Judea, and
Jerusalem, which Matthew wrote more at large, some will Nicephor. l. 2. c. 48.
Eus. l. 2. c. 15.
have it dictated and approved by Peter, whose Scholar Mark was. Irenaeus says
it was written after the death of Peter and Paul.

640. Mar. 1. 1. The beginning of the Gospel of Jesus Christ. v. 3. The voice
of one crying in the Wilderness. Mat. 1. 1. Luk 1. 2. In the beginning of the
Gospel of Jesus Christ, his Conception and Nativity are described.

Mark understands the beginning of the Gospel to be the time of the
promulgation. Matthew begins the Evangelical History thirty years before the
Preaching of John Baptist; but Mark begins from his preaching, because the Law
and the Prophets prophesied until John, Matthew. 11. 15.

641. Mar. 1. 2. As it is written in the Prophets. Luke 3. 4. In the Book of
the words of Isaiah the Prophet.

Mark understands Malachi and Isaiah the Prophets, Isa. 40. 3. Mat. 3. 1. Isa.
43 4.
Luke means Isaiah only.

642. Mar. 2. 7. Who can forgive sins, but God only? Joh. 20. 23. Whose sins
you remit, they are remitted unto them.

God above remits sins by his own authority. The Apostles and Pastors of the
Churches only testify in the Name of Christ, that upon condition of faith,
they are remitted. But God speaks to us by his Ministers, that we should be
sure of his grace, and should have the Sacred Function in honor since it is
confirmed in Heaven what the Ministers declare on Earth.

643. Mar. 5. 20. The man that was possessed with the Devil published in
Decapolis, how great things Jesus had done for him. Luke 3. 39. He went through
the City publishing.

He published it first in the City of the Gadarens, and afterward in other
parts of Decapolis.

644. Mar. 5. 30. Virtue went forth of Christ to cure the woman. v. 34. He said
unto her, Daughter, thy faith has made thee whole.

By virtue from Christ was the woman restored to her health, which she applied
to her self by faith, and so her issue of blood staid.

645. Mar. 6. 5. Christ could do no mighty works in his own country. Mat. 28.
18. All power is given to me in heaven and in earth.

Christ was not destitute of virtue, but for their incredulity; for faith is
the hand that receives Christ's benefits, and to those that believe all things
are possible that he could not, is meant here, he would not, for that is Gods
will, to be able, says Tertullian.

646. Mar. 9. 2. After six days Jesus takes with him Peter, James, and John.
Luke 9 28. And it came to pass about eight days.

The first place must be understood exclusively in respect of the day, in which
Christ speaks, and was transformed. The latter includes both those days, and
he numbereth not precisely, but about eight, there were not so many whole days.

647. Mar. 9. 35. And he sat down and called the twelve. Mat. 18. 1. The
Disciples came unto him, saying.

The Disciples on the way disputed who should be the greatest of them, Christ
therefore at home called the twelve, and they being called came unto him.

648. Mar. 10. 19. Christ answers him that asked of him about eternal life,
Thou know the Commandments, Do not commit adultery, do not kill, do not
steal. Romans 3. 20. By the deeds of the Law shall no flesh be justified in the
sight of God, Gal. 2. 16 c. 3. 10.

To him that asked, What shall I do? Christ answering his question, that he
might make him know his weakness, he sends him back to the rule of works, or
the law of God, and so would have him to seek salvation in Christ, and not in
his own works.

649. Mar. 11. 7. They brought the Colt to Jesus. Mat. 21. 7. They brought the
Ass and the Colt.

Matthew is an eye witness, that the Ass and Zach. 9. 9.
the Colt were both brought, according to the prophecy, Fear not O Daughter of
Sion, behold thy King comes sitting upon an Ass and the foal of an Ass. Some
make this an emblem of the Jews and Gentiles, by the Jew to be meant the Ass,
which our Savior rid first on, but because she went untowardly, he left her,
and road on the Foal, which was an emblem of the Gentiles, who received the
Gospel willingly, which the Jews rejected.

650. Mar. 14. 12. And the first day of unleavened bread when they killed the
Passover. Joh. 13. 1. Now before the Feast of the Passover when Jesus knew
that his hour was come.

The Jews began their day from the evening, and they were to celebrate the
Passover on the 14. day of the month Nisan according to the law, as Christ
did. But the Jews referred that solemnity to the Sabbath day, and called it the
Lev. 23.
great day of the Sabbath.

651. Mar. 14. 32. They came to a place which was named Gethsemani. Luke 22.
39. And he went as he was wont to the Mount of Olives.

Gethsemani, that is, the Valley of fatness, it was so called from the
fruitfulness of the place, or otherwise the Garden in which the Mount of
Olives was. Therefore the Evangelists here set the same place by diverse names.

652. Mar. 15. 25. And it was the third hour, and they crucified him. Joh. 19.
14. About the sixth hour Pilate said to the Jews, Behold your King.

In the former place, the hour of the day was reckoned according to the manner
of the Jews, from Sun rising to Sun setting, twelve hours to a day; in the
latter, from midnight after the custom of the Romans: Christ was condemned and
cruificed the third hour after Sunrising; at the sixth hour he was exposed to
scorns, at the ninth hour (after three hours darkness) he was dead; and the
remainder of the day was spent in his burial.

653. Mar. 16. 1. When the Sabbath day was Job. 20. 12. ^
past, the Mary's brought spices. Luke 23. 56. The day of the Passover the
women prepared Spices and Ointments.

On the day of the Passover they bought spices, and began to make Ointments,
on the Sabbath day after Sunset they continued it, and when the Sabbath was
past, they came very early in the morning to Christ's Sepulcher.

654. Mar. 16. 5. In the Sepulcher they saw a young man sitting on the right
side. Luke 24. 4. Behold two men stood by them in shining garments.

Mark makes mention of one Angel, which spoke to the women. Luke speaks of two
that were witnesses of our Saviors Resurrection.

655. Mar. 16. 6. He is risen, he is not here; Behold the place where they laid
him. Joh. 20. 14. Mary turned her self back and saw Jesus standing*

The Angel speaks concerning him dead, such a one as the women sought for,
that they might anoint his body, but Christ witnessed himself that he was
alive, not only by testimony of Angel, but by manifesting himself at the
monument, and speaking unto Mary.

656. Mar. 16. 9. When Jesus was risen early the first day of the week, he
appeared first to Mary Magdalen. Mat. 28 9. Jesus met the women which were Mary
Magdalen, and Ioanna, and Mary the Mother of James, and the rest.

Mary Magdalen is first named, because she in a peculiar manner saw Christ,
then the other women after her saw him in their order.

657. Mar. 16. 15. Preach the Gospel to every creature. Mat. 10. 5. Go not
into the way of the Gentiles.

The first place is concerning the enlarging of Christ's Kingdom amongst all
Nations after Christ's Resurrection. The latter is concerning the first temporal
mission of the Disciples to the Jews only; for the mystery of our Redemption
before Christ's death, was not to be preached to the Gentiles; therefore Christ
was called Romans 15. 8.
the Minister of the Circumcision.

658. Mar. 16. 16. He that believes and is baptized, shall be saved. Romans 10.
10. With the heart man believes unto righteousness, and with the mouth
confession is made unto salvation.

Faith is the means of our salvation; confession is required, not that faith is
unsufficient, but because faith is not in the heart, where confession is not in
the mouth, but where it is in the heart it ingenders all parts of outward
confession.

659. Mar. 16. 16. He that believes not shall be damned. Romans 11. 32. God has
concluded them all in unbelief, that he might have mercy upon all.

Christ speaks of some unbelievers, who were hardened that they should not
believe the Gospel, such shall be damned. So they that are not moved by
promises or threatenings, to believe the Gospel, to them is cursing, judgment
and death. Paul speaks of all them both Jews and Gentiles, and describes their
state before the preaching of the Gospel, for they are all by nature shut up in
unbelief, and those that are believers of the Gospel are freed from this state,
that by the Gospel they may be made partakers of Gods mercy in Christ.

660. Mar. 16. 19. The Lord Jesus after he had spoken unto them was received up
into heaven, and sat at the right hand of God. c. 14. 22. This is my body.

Christ ascending and sitting at the right hand of God, does not take away the
presence of his body in the holy Supper, but confessing it, that he is exalted
above all things into Phil. 2. 9.
glory.

661. Mar. 16. 19. Christ sits at the right hand of God, Ephesians. 1. 20. Col. 3. 1.
Heb. 1. 3. c. 8. 1. 1 Pet. 3. 22. Act. 7. 56. Steven saw Jesus standing at the
right hand of God.

To sit is the part of the Judge, to stand, the part of him that fights and
helps us, says Gregory; Homil. de Ascens. Domini. Steven therefore being at
the conflict with death, saw him standing whom he had for to help him; but
Mark, describes Christ sitting after his Resurrection, for after the glory of
his Ascension, he shall come as Judge in the end of the world.

St. LUKES Gospel.
IT comprehends the Conception of John Baptist, and Jesus Christ, with their
Nativity, Life, Vocation, Sermons in special, the Miracles of Christ, his
Passion, Death, Resurrection, Apparition, and Ascension into Heaven.

662. Luke 1. 13. Zacharias prayer is heard. v. 18. He believed not.

Although he had a conflict through the weakness of his faith, of the special
gift of so wonderful a son, yet he had a general faith concerning a Messiah the
Deliverer of the people from their disgrace, and therefore his doubting did not
exclude his prayers from being heard.

663. Luke 1. 32. The Lord God shall give unto him the Throne of his Father
David. Joh. 18. 36. My Kingdom is not of this world.

To sit in the Throne of David here, is not to govern a temporal Kingdom, as
David did here on earth, but a spiritual, wherein Christ reigns by faith in the
hearts of his followers, and he rules over sin, death, and the Devil.

664. Luke 1. 33. And he shall reign over the House of Jacob for ever. 1 Cor.
15. 24. He shall deliver up the Kingdom to God the Father. v. 28. He shall be
subject unto him.

Christ's Kingdom is eternal and without end, not as David's earthly Kingdom
was for a few days, but it must be continued for ever in the Person of Christ,
and the faithful, after a spiritual manner; he shall deliver the Kingdom to
the Father, not that he shall no longer rule with the Father, but because after
this world is ended, he will fully join us to his Father, and will govern his
Church otherwise then it is now governed.

665. Luke 1. 36. Elizabeth Mary's Cousin. ver. 5. She was of the daughters of
Aaron. Luke 2. 5. Mary was of the Tribe of Judah of the house of David.

In Scripture they are called Cousins, though they are not all of the same
family, so vulgarly Anna is affirmed to be the Mother of Mary, and the sister
of Elizabeth.

666. Luke 1. 44. The babe leaped in my womb for joy, that is, John Baptist in
the womb of his Mother, when Mary came to her. Joh. 1. 31. I knew him not,
says John.

Christ was known to John before by internal and spiritual knowledge, but John
knew him externally and corporally in his baptism.

667. Luke 1. 67. Zacharias prophesied being full of the holy Ghost. Joh. 7.
39. The holy Ghost was not yet, because Christ was not yet glorified*

The first place is meant of the gift and Spirit of Prophecy, the latter place
is concerning the visible and wonderful effusion of gifts of the holy Ghost
upon the Apostles after Christ's glorification.

668. Luke 2. 11. There is born to you a Savior in the City of David, which is
Christ the Lord. 1 Pet. 3. 21. Baptism does save us.

Subalternates do not disagree, Christ makes his people safe from their sins
principally as the efficient meritorious cause, Baptism serves but
instrumentally and not always; for it is not the want of baptism, but the
contempt which condemns us.

669. Luke 2. 33. His Father and Mother marvelled at those things. Mat. 1. 8.
Jesus according to his humanity, no Father. Heb. 7. 3. according to his
Divinity, had no Mother.

The Father of Jesus Christ, Joseph was only so for his care, but not really
and naturally so, for he was appointed by God to be a keeper of the Virgin Mary
espoused to him, and her Son, and Christ being a little child, gave him honor
and reverence due to a Father. The Virgin Mary was his natural Mother according
to the flesh, for he received his humane nature of her substance.

670. Luke 2. 34. Simeon blessed him. Heb. 7. 7. The lesser is blessed of the
better.

Simeon prayed well for Mary, congratulating her concerning her happy and
blessed Offspring, and by a Prophetique Spirit fore-shewing the hard success
she and her Son should have, but he did not prefer himself before them.

671. Luke 3. 7. The Baptist calls the Pharisees a generation of Vipers. Mat. 5.
22. He that says to his brother, Thou Fool, shall be in danger of Hell fire.

John Baptist calls them not so reproachfully out of an ill affection, but from
his Office, because such were full of poison and malice, working the Viperous
works of the Devil the old Serpent. So the Ministers of the Church must
publicly complain of the sins of the people.

672. Luke 5. 10. Fear not, from henceforth thou shall catch men. Joh. 1. 42.
Andrew brought Simon his brother to Christ.

Simon is brought by Andrew to follow Christ, and to profess the Gospel, by a
general call, but Christ calls him by a special call to the Sacred Function,
about the matter of Fishing.

673. Luke 6. 1. And it came to pass on the second Sabbath after the first,
that he went through the Corn fields. Mat. 12. 1. At that time Jesus went on
the Sabbath day through the corn.

The Jews called the eight day of the great solemnity, the second Sabbath after
the first; for some of their Feasts lasted for eight days, and the first day
with the eight day were the most solemn, and the intermediate days, not so much
regarded, moreover they were called Sabbaths.

674. Luke 6. 25. Woe to you that laugh now, for you shall mourn and weep. Joh.
16. 22. Your heart shall rejoice, and your joy no man takes from you.

In the first place the pleasures and delights of the world are understood by
the name of laughter, the end whereof is always sorrow; in the latter place is
meant joy in Christ by the holy Ghost, which is heavenly and eternal.

675. Luke 6. 26. Woe unto you when all men shall speak well of you. Mat. 5.
16. (1 Pet. 2. 12.) Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your
good works and glorify your Father which is in heaven.

Woe be to them, who do only so that they may please the world, and desire the
praise of men, flattering the wicked, and winking at their sins that they may
get favor. But not to them who like a light are an example of good works, and
a godly life to others.

676. Luke 6. 30. Give to every man that asks. Eccles. 12. 4. Give to the
godly, and help not a sinner, hold back thy bread and give it not unto him.

Christ will have that we shall do good to our friends, and to our enemies,
though they be wicked and ungrateful, by the example of our merciful heavenly
Father, and if we give not to the person, yet give to his Nature as he is a
man. A place of Ecclesiasticus may not be opposed to Canonical Scripture, who
will have him that craves an alms to be humble, shutting out the wicked and
obstinate in malice, who abuse the beneficence of good men.

677. Luke 7. 13. Weep not. Eccles. 38. 16. Let tears fall down over the dead.

Christ comforts the widow, who wept for the death of her only son, because
her son should suddenly live again. But Christ disallows not moderate weeping
for the death of our neighbor, only we must not mourn as those that have no
hope.

678. Luke 8. 39. Return to thy house, and show how great things God has done
unto thee. c. 5. 14. He commands the Leper that he should tell no man.

Christ commanded him that was possessed with the Devil, to tell what benefits
God had done for him; because the time, the place and other circumstances
required that; but he sent the leprous party who was cleansed, to the Priest,
that he might approve of the cure.

679. Luke 10. 4. Salute no man by the way. Romans 16. 16. Salute one the other
with an holy kiss, The Churches of Christ salute you. Phil. 4. 22. The Saints.

Christ will have his Disciples diligent in dispatch of their Office, that they
should not hinder the course of their Ministry with long discourses and
salutations, but should fulfill their journey in a short time: such a command
gave Elias to his servant: which denies not our Christian duty and humane good
manners to salute one the other.

680. Luke 10. 18. I beheld Satan as lightning fall from heaven. Joh. 8. 44.
The Devil was a Murderer from the beginning, and the Father of lies.

Satan falls from heaven, when he is cast out of our hearts by sound doctrine,
and loses his light, that is his authority, by the preachiny of Gods Word
here, as it were by a Thunderbolt from heaven, that is, from the Kingdom of
God in the heart of man is he cast down and trod under foot: but he was a
murderer and liar from the beginning that he fell; not from that he was created.

681. Luke 10. 22. No man knows who the Son is but the Father, and who the
Father is, but the Son. Joh. 15. 26. The Spirit of Truth he shall testify of
me.

Christ excludes not the Persons of the Deity, but the creatures and the false
gods, for the Father by the Son from eternity infinitely Joh. 16, 13.
communicating his infinite wisdom, revealed it to the holy Ghost, and
therefore Christ says; the Spirit shall not speak of himself, but whatsoever
he shall hear, that shall he speak.

682. Luke 10. 24. Many Prophets and Kings have desired to see those things
that you see. Joh. 8. 56. Abraham saw my day.

There are different manners of the Visions 1 Cor. 13. 12.
of Christ and of God. We see now in a glass darkly, but then, that is, in the
next life we shall see face to face. Abraham and the faithful in the Old
Testament saw Christ promised that he should come: the Apostles saw him
manifested in the flesh. The Prophets saw him of old in shadows and figures,
the Apostles and the Christians now see him clearly and manifestly.

683. Luke 10. 28. Do this and live. Romans 4. 5. But to him that works not,
but believes, his faith is counted for righteousness.

The parts of Gods Word are the Law and the Gospel; the Law promises life
eternal to them that do it, the Gospel to them that believe. Christ by the
words, Do this, does not show that the Lawyer was able to fulfill the law, but
only admonishes him so, that he might grow sensible of his own weakness.

684. Luke 10. 41. Martha, Martha, Thou art careful and troubled about many
things. 1 Timothy 5. 14. I will that the younger women marry, guide the house.

Christ reprehends not Marthas care of her house, but for presumption and false
opinion, because she preferred the care of her house before the Word of God.

685. Luke 11. 41. Give Alms, and all things are clean unto you. 1 Cor. 13. 3.
If I bestow all my goods to feed the poor, it profits me nothing.

Christ speaks of alms proceeding from faith and charity; the Apostle speaks of
hypocritical alms without Christian Charity.

686. Luke 12. 33. Sell what you have and give alms. 1 Timothy 5. 8. But if any
provide not for his own, especially those of his own household he has denied
the faith.

Christ would not have us forsake our neighbor in his wants and necessities,
but rather (to help him) we should sell our possessions, to declare our
conpassion so far as we are able, without doing injury to our family.

687. Luke 14. 23. Compel them to come in. 1 Pet. 5. 3. Not as being Lords
over Gods heritage.

There is used an internal compulsion spiritually, when men are drawn to the
knowledge of their sins, by the law of God explained to them, and are urged in
their consciences to fly to the mediation of Christ: so from the days of John
the Baptist, until now the Kingdom of heaven suffers violence, and the
violent take Mat. 11. 12.
it by force; an external compulsion is, when men not sufficiently instructed,
and forced by carnal weapons to religion against their conscience, such are
made rather hypocrites then good Christians, therefore the Apostle warns us
well that no man should affect to Lord it over Gods people, that is, the
Church, and to use a tyrannical power over their consciences.

688. Luke 14. 24. None of those men which were bidden shall taste of my Supper.
2 Pet. 3. 9. God is long suffering to usward, not willing that any should
perish.

The Gospel, since it is the power of God to salvation to all that believe,
they that hear it, being invited by God and receive it not, dying in their sins
without repentance, they are the cause of their own ruin, and not God.

689. Luke 14. 26. He that hates not his Father and Mother, and Wife, and
Children, and Brethren, and Sisters, yea and his own life also, he cannot be my
Disciple. Ephesians. 6. 2. Honor thy Father and thy Mother, that it may be well
with thee. c. 5. 25. Husbands love your Wives. 1 John 3. 15. He that hates his
brother is a Murderer.

Christ is to be beloved above all creatures, and rather our Parents, brothers,
and sisters, and our own life should be lost, then we should deny the Gospel.
He that loves his Father or Mother more then me, is not worthy of me, says
Christ; otherwise we must honor our Parents and love our children.

690. Luke 16. 9. Make you friends of the Mammon of unrighteousness. 1 Timothy 4.
4. Every creature of God is good.

Riches are good in themselves, as they are a creature, but because they are
after got unjustly, and many abuse them to injustice, pride, tyranny, luxury,
gluttony, etc. therefore Christ calls them the Mammon of unrighteousness,
thorns; Mat. 13. 7. 1 Timothy 6. 9.
the Apostle calls them the snare of the Devil, and will have us so to dispose
of our wealth, that we may reap fruit of them in another world.

691. Luke 15. 7. The righteous need no repentance. c. 3. 8. Bring forth fruits
worthy of repentance.

Repentance of those that stand, which is spoken of in the first place, must be
distinguished from repentance of those that are fallen, which is meant by the
latter place, and we are admonished to it, and to bring forth the fruits of it.

692. Luke 17. 10. When you have done all those things which you are commanded,
say, We are unprofitable servants, we have done that which was our duty to do.
2 Cor. 11. 12. Paul glories, and reckons up his good works and divine
Revelations.

In the former place Christ says that no man can deserve any thing at the hand
of God; since we are all bound to obey God in all things unto the end, so that
we cannot boast before God. In the latter, Paul mentions his labors, not of
vain glory boasting, but being compelled to it for the defense of his Ministry,
against all back-biters and false Apostles that unjustly reproached him.

693. Luke 18. 29. Verily I say unto you, there is no man that has left house,
or parents, or brethren, or wife, or children, for the Kingdom of Gods sake,
who shall not receive manyfold more. 1 Cor. 7. 10. The wife must not depart
from her husband, and the man must not put away his wife.

For Christ his sake we may leave our Wives and al things, when necessity
constrains us, but we cannot leave our Matrimony: Paul admonishes the wife
that she should not by contumacy forsake her husband, nor the husband to
forsake his wife; but if she depart, let her live unmarryed, or be reconciled
to her husband.

694. Luke 22. 28. Ye are they who have continued with me in my temptations.
Mat. 26. 56. All the Disciples forsook him and fled.

In the former place the Disciples constancy is commended for the time past,
that they forsook not Christ in his temptations, when others were backward. In
the latter is observed their scattering abroad, for that at the time of Christ's
passion their faith was much shaken.

695. Luke 22. 29. I appoint to you a Kingdom, as my Father has appointed me.
Mar. 10. 40. For to sit on my right hand and on my left hand is not mine to
give.

He speaks at first, not of the Kingdom of heaven, whereof he has the sole
government, but of the administration of the Kingdom of Grace, in the
promulgation of the Gospel through all the world; and planting of Churches by
Apostolical Authority, which he going to his Father, left in charge with them,
as he had it committed to him by his Father.

696. Luke 22. 31. Satan desired to have you, that he may sift you as Wheat. 1 John 5. 18. And he that is born of God sins not, and that wicked one, that
is, the Devil, touches him not.

Satan lays snares for godly men always, seeking whom he may devour, that
Christ confirms by example of the Disciples. John teaches that that evil one
shall not hurt us, though he set upon us. For God is faithful, who will not 1
Cor. 10. 13.
suffer you to be tempted above what you are able, but will with the temptation
make a way to escape, that you may be able to bear it.

697. Luke 23. 34. Father forgive them. Joh. 17. 9. I pray not not for the
world.

Christ both by words and his own example taught us to pray for our enemies, he
prayed not for the world, that is, for wicked men hardened in their sins, of
whom there was no hopes of repentance: we must not imitate that, because he
only knew best who they were that were such.

698. Luke 24. 10. Mary Magdalen and Joanna, and Mary the Mother of James,
which told these things unto the Apostles. Mar. 16. 10. Mary Magdalen told them
that had been with him.

Mark excludes not the other women, he names Mary Magdalen, either because she
spoke to the Apostles in the name of all the rest, or else with greater
affection, or because she spoke first.

The Gospel of St. JOHN.
IT contains a relation of Christ's Person both Mat. 10. 7.
according to his divine and humane Nature, also his Office, and pains he
endured unto the death or the Cross, his Resurrection also, and his
appearings. It was written after the other Evangelists against the Heresies of
Ebion and Cerinthus, being as it were a Complement of those things were let
pass by the other Evangelists.

699. Joh. 1. 7. John came for a witness to bear witness of the light. c. 5.
34. I (says Christ) receive not testimony from man.

John testified of Christ that he was the light Act. 1. 8. c. 10. 39.
of the world, not for Christ's cause, but for man's cause that they might
believe in him. For seeing he is the chief good, the testimony of men or Angels
can add nothing unto him.

700. Joh. 1. 8. He that is, (John) was not that light. c. 5. 35. He was a
burning light.

John was not the light of life which enlightens Joh. 8. 12.
every man that comes into the world, but Christ who is the light of the world.
Yet John was a burning light, which not of himself, but before others carried
the Torch-light of the Word, and enlightened many by the Ministry, that so they
might see that true Light and Sun of Righteousness. So Ministers of the Church
and all the godly shine before others in holy doctrine and a pious life.

701. Joh. 1. 14, 18. We behold his glory as of the only begotten of the
Father. Gal. 3. 26. For you are all the children of God by faith, which is in
Christ Jesus.

Christ is the only begotten Son of God, Romans 8. 15. 2 Cor. 1. 22. c. 5. 15.
namely, the natural Son begotten from everlasting, by the communication of the
whole divine Nature from the Father: the faithful are called the sons of God by
Adoption, their faith in Christ, and the holy Ghost, which is called the Spirit
of Adoption, because by his virtue and operation, he adopts us to be the sons
of God.

702. Joh. 1. 27. He it is who came after me. v. 27. For he was before me

Christ was born after John the Baptist, of the Virgin Mary, in the sixth
month according to his humane Nature; but he was before him, as he was God
from everlasting.

703. Joh. 2. 4. Woman what have I to do with thee? Mat. 15. 4. Honor thy
Father and Mother.

The words of Christ were of Information, not of Reprehension. For we must obey
God rather then men. By the word woman, he implies that the Virgin Mary must
not be the object of Invocation, but God only, says Epiphan. Haeres. 79.

704. Joh. 3. 13. No man has ascended up to heaven, but he that came from
heaven, even the Son of Man which is in heaven. c. 17. 24. Father I will that
they also whom thou have given me be with me where I am, that they may behold
my glory.

By ascending and descending here, we must understand the usurpation of
heavenly things, for the natural and carnal man perceives not those things
which are from the Spirit of God. And all those whom the Father gave to Christ,
that is, the faithful, shall be blessed with him for ever both in souls and
bodies, and so the first place is explained by the latter. Christ is Head of
the faithful, and we are his Members; he is in the midst of us, and our
conversation is in heaven. He descended in weakness, that he might raise us to
his glory, for no man can come to the Father but by him.

705. Joh. 3. 17. God sent not his Son into the world. Gal. 4. 4. God sent his
Son.

God sent not his Son to judge the world in his state of humiliation; but he
sent him to redeem those that were under the law: now in his state of
exaltation he does and will judge the world. For all judgment and power is
Joh. 5. 19. Mat. 28.
given to him from the Father both in Heaven and in Earth.

706. Joh. 4. 1. Jesus baptized. v. 2. Jesus himself baptized not, but his
Disciples.

Christ did not outwardly baptize with his own hands, but by his Disciples; yet
it is called Christ's Baptism, because he appointed it, and consecrated it by
his Word, sanctified it by his own Baptism, adorned it, and confirmed it by
annexing a promise to it, and because with the outward Baptism by water, he
joyneth the baptism by fire, that is, he Mat. 3. 11. Luke 3. 17.
inwardly washes our hearts by the baptism of his Spirit and his own blood,
pardoning our sins, and purging our corrupt affections.

707. Joh. 4. 13. Whosoever drinks of the water, that I shall give him, shall
never thirst. Ecclesiasticus 24. 21. They that eat me, shall yet hunger, and
they who drink me, shall thirst yet.

Christ speaks concerning thirst and desire of a thing, which a man that has
it not, wishes for; Ecclesiasticus concerning a thing already acquired; and of
wisdom, whose memory is sweeter then Honey, and the Inheritance thereof,
better then Honey and the Honeys-combe, as Lyra speaks on Ecclesiasticus.

708. Joh. 4. 38. You have entered into others men's labors. 1 Pet. 4. 15. Let
no man be a busie-body in other men's matters.

In the first place Christ speaks of Apostles lawfully called, who under the
New Testament not drawn by curiosity, but being divinely and immediately
called, entered on the labors of the Prophets; in the latter an ill desire is
forbidden.

709. Joh. 3. 5. 19. The Son can do nothing of himself. c. 10. 18. No man
takes away my life from me, but I lay it down of my self.

Christ as man can do nothing of Gods works of himself, but from the Father,
giving all honor and glory to the Father. So the Phil. 4. 13.
Apostle could do all things through Christ: In the latter place he treats of
the divine power, that he had of laying down his life for his sheep, Joh. 10.
15.
and of taking it up again.

710. Joh. 5. 22. The Father judges no man, but has committed all judgment
to the Son. c. 8. 15. I judge no man, says Christ to the Jews.

The Father judges by the Son, and works all things: for works external are
common to the three Persons: Christ judges no man with unrighteous Judgment,
as the Jews did rashly judge of him, according to their carnal affections,
being led with hatred and malice.

711. Joh. 5. 27. The Father has given all power and judgment to the Son. c.
3. 17. God sent not his Son into the world, that he might judge the world, but
that the world should be saved by him.

The first place speaks of the coming of Christ in glory, and of his Majesty;
or of the sending of the Son to Judgment; the latter is concerning Christ's
coming in humility, when he came not to judge the world, but that the world
should be saved by him.

712. Joh. 5. 31. If I bear witness of my self, my witness is not true. c. 8.
14. Though I bear record of my self, yet my record is true.

In the former place Christ speaks after the opinion of the Jews, who would say
to him, thou bear witness of thy self, and no man that bears witness of
himself is worthy to be believed; and he urges them with it, that if he
testified of himself, without the testimony of others, then they should not
believe him, but he had John for a witness. c. 5. v. 33. the Father. verse. 32.
37. his works. verse. 36. the Scripture. verse. 39. By the latter he defends the
authority of his own testimony, because he knew for what he was sent; and to
whom he should return, that is, to the Father, and because he was not alone,
but the Father was with Verse. 16.
him.

713. Joh. 5. 34. I receive not testimony from men. c. 15. 27. And ye also
shall bear witness, because you have been with me.

Christ in respect of himself wants no man's testimony, nor does receive the
testimony of men, or glory from them, chap. 5. 41. as the Jews did, chap. 5.
44. But when Christ chooses witnesses of his Truth amongst men, he does it by
reason of our infirmity, that believing Joh. 20. 32. Act. 10. 43. 1 John 1. 3.
we may have society with him, and it may be for our salvation.

714. Joh. 5. 39. Search the Scriptures. c. 6. 45. They shall be all taught of
God.

Christ speaks first of the manner and outward means, but afterward of the
internal means, for God teaches us by the Scripture, as an ordinary means, for
he will have us to search his will in and out of the Scriptures, because he
teaches us by the Scriptures, as he does bring to pass other things by
ordinary means.

715. Joh. 5. 44. How can you believe, who receive honor one of another, and
seek not the honor that comes from God only? chap. 12. 42. Among the Chief
Rulers also many believed on him, but because of the Pharisees they did not
confess him, left they should be put out of the Synagogue.

The faith of the Rulers, if it had been true and lively in Christ, it would
have showed it self by confession and good works, and would have brought forth
good fruit: it was therefore but an Historical or temporary faith; for they
loved the glory of man, more then the glory of God.

716. Joh. 6. 29. This is the work of God, that you believe. Romans 3. 28. We are
justified by faith without the deeds of the Law.

Faith is called the work of God, because it is the effect and gift of God, and
pleasing unto him. The work of faith, as it is a gift of God infused into us,
and is an inherent quality, so faith in this sense does not absolutely justify
us, but relatively as it apprehends Christ with his benefits, and applies them:
so we are justified by faith alone without works, not for the inexistence,
inherence, dignity, or merit of faith, but for the instrumental efficiency, and
application by it.

717. Joh. 6. 37. And him that comes unto me, I will in no wise cast out. Romans
9. 16. It is not of him that wills, nor that runs, but of God that shows
mercy.

To come to Christ, that is, to believe, is not in our power, but in the will
of God, because it is given from the Father, so that it is not in man's will,
but in Gods mercy that we come to Christ, and believe in him.

718. Joh. 6. 53. Except you eat of the flesh of the Son of Man, and drink his
blood, you have not life in you. Heb. 10. 1. The Fathers under the law had
shadows of future good things.

Christ speaks of the spiritual receiving of his body and blood by faith, as
believers are made partakers of his benefits. In the Old Testament under
figures, in the New Tenament without figures; yet so, that the Fathers and we
eat and drink the same spiritual meat and drink, and we as they receive Christ
by faith.

719. Joh. 6. 54. He that eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, has eternal
life. v. 63. The flesh profits nothing.

In the first place is understood the flesh of Christ which gives life, in the
latter the flesh of men taken in a carnal sense: also the flesh profits
nothing in that manner, as the Capernaites dreamt concerning it.

720. Joh. 6. 54. He that eats my flesh, and drinks my blood has eternal
life. 1 Cor. 11. 28. He that eats and drinks unworthily, eats and
drinks his own damnation.

The flesh of Christ in it self gives life, because it is always so, also in
respect of men, because some are faithful, which it does actually give life to,
others Infidels who are not quickened in Christ; the cause whereof is not from
Christ, but from their own Infidelity and unworthiness, for not discerning the
die and blood of the Lord, they draw on the judgments of God upon themselves.

721. Joh. 7. 5. Neither did his brethren believe in him. chap. 16. 27. Ye have
believed that I came out from God.

The former place must be understood of his brethren and corporal kindred; the
latter of the Apostles and his Disciples, which were not all kindred to Christ
according to the flesh.

722. Joh. 7. 7. The world cannot hate you. chap. 15. 19. Ye are not of the
world, but I have chosen you out of the world, therefore the world hates you.

In the first place Christ speaks to his Brethren and Cousins according to
the flesh that did not believe in him, living carnally, and after the manner of
the world; in the latter place he speaks of the Apostles who believed in him,
and were purged from all dregs of Infidelity, and he assigns the causes
wherefore they and other believers were hated of the world.

723. Joh. 7. 8. I go not not up yet unto this feast. verse. 10. He went up to
the feast.

He went not openly with his friends that he might be seen, but privately; by
this example of his, he has taught us not to venture our selves rashly amongst
our enemies.

724. Joh. 7. 16. My Doctrine is not mine, but my Fathers who sent me. chap.
17. 10. All mine are thine, and thine are mine.

The Doctrine of Christ is said to be his Fathers, and his in different
respects; the Father has it from himself, Christ from his Father; also it is
said to be the Fathers, because he sent his Son, for Christ was sent from the
Father to publish it.

725. Joh. 7. 26. Do the Rulers know indeed that this is the very Christ? 1
Cor. 2. 8. Had they known it, they would not have crucified the Lord of glory.

The knowledge of Christ is either carnal and historical, so the Rulers of the
Jews, and the Devils knew Christ; but this is nothing to salvation, or a
spiritual knowledge by faith, which justifies believers, and which the Jews
that crucified Christ had not. Here the same thing is said in both places, and
what in the first place is explained by an Ironical Interrogation, in it self
negative, that in the latter place is done affirmatively.

726. Joh. 7. 34, 36. Where I am, thither ye cannot come. chap. 17. 24. Father,
I will that they also which thou have given me, be with me where I am.

Christ in the former place speaks to the Pharisees and carnal men, rejecting
his grace, and he says to them, Where I am ye cannot come, that is, into
heaven. In the latter place he speaks of all the faithful which his Father has
given him.

727. Joh. 8. 16. I am not alone, but I and the Father that sent me. chap. 16.
5. Now I go my way to him that sent me.

In the first place Christ speaks of the unity of the Divine Nature, and the
inseparable conjunction of the Person; in the latter concerning his Death and
Ascension into Heaven, to intercede with God the Father for us.

728. Joh. 8. 23. Ye are of this world. chap. 15. 19. Ye are not of this world.

To be of the world is to be in darkness, and to lead a wicked life, not to be
of the world, is to acknowledge Christ, and to live godly. The first place
therefore respects the unbelieving Jews and carnal men, the latter respects all
the faithful, the children of God, and elected to salvation.

729. Joh. 8. 26. I have many things to say, and to judge of you. chap. 3. 18.
He that believes not, is condemned already.

In the first place the present tense is put for Romans 14. 10.
the future, For we must all of us appear before Christ's Tribunal, that every
man may receive the things done in his body, according to that he has done,
whether it be good or bad, 2 Cor. 5. 10.

730. Joh. 8. 28. I do nothing of myself. chapter 10. 18. I have power, etc.

Christ of himself, that is, without the Father, or against his Fathers
authority did nothing.

731. Joh. 8. 33. We be Abraham's seed. v. 44. Ye are of your Father the Devil.

There are sons carnal and sons spiritual; the carnal Jews were the seed of
Abraham, in respect of corporal propagation. Spiritual are such as are guided
by a good or evil spirit, sons by a good Spirit are all the faithful who are
of the seed of Abraham by faith in Christ, who gave to believing Abraham, that
he should be called the Father of believers: Christ says the Jews were from an
evil spirit, who did not the works of Abraham, but of the Devil, in respect of
their malice and imitation; and he that does the works of another may be called
his son.

732. Joh. 8. 35. The servant abides not in the house for ever. 1 These. 4. 17.
We shall ever be with the Lord.

In the first place is spoken of a servant of sin, in the latter of the
faithful; who shall be delivered from all bondage being made free by the Son,
Joh. 8. 36.

733. Joh. 8. 36. Ye shall be free indeed. Romans 7. 23. Paul was a captive
under the law of sin.

The faithful are free from sin, in respect of condemnation, dominion, and
perfect liberty which they shall enjoy in the next life, they are said to be
captive under sin, by reason of inherent sin; which begets ill desires in them
against their wills.

734. Joh. 8. 46. Which of you convinces me of sin. chap. 9. 24. We know that
this man is a sinner.

Christ speaks of firm proof, that no man could convince him of sin. The Jews
for despite and calumny said falsely, that he was a sinner.

735. Joh. 8. 50. I seek not mine own glory. verse. 12. I am the light of the
world.

He means glory acquired from his Father, not affected glory: and he calls
himself, the Light of the world, truly confessing what he is, and not by
hunting after vain glory.

736. Joh. 8. 51. If a man keep my saying, he shall never see death. Heb. 9.
27. It is appointed unto all men once to dye.

Christ speaks of spiritual and eternal death, the Apostle speaks of corporal
and temporal death.

737. Joh. 8. 58. Before Abraham was I am. Heb. 2. 17. He took upon him the
seed of Abraham.

There are three kind of speeches concerning Christ, some things are spoken of
him according to his divine Nature, so he was before Abraham, some things are
spoken according to his humane Nature, when he is called Abraham's seed, or
David's, and some things are spoken of both Natures, that he is the Mediator
between God and Man, 1 Timothy 2. 5.

738. Joh. 9. 3. Neither this Man sinned nor his Parents. Romans 3. 10. There is
none righteous, no not one, none that understands.

The cause of his blindness was no notable and enormous wikednesse of himself
or his parents, though all men be sinners, and for their sins, infirmities and
defects of nature are ohnoxious to temporal and eternal punishments.

739. Joh. 9. 31. God hears not sinners. 1. Joh. 1. 9. If we confess our
sins, God is faithful and just to forgive us, and to cleanse us from all our
sins.

God hears not impenitent sinners, obdurate in their wickedness, but to such
as repent, confess and amend their lives, he pardons their sins.

740. Joh. 9. 39. For Judgment I am come into this world. chap. 3. 17. chap.
12. 40. 47. I came not to judge the world, but to save the world.

In the former place by Judgment is meant a benefit given to men by the coming
of Christ, by which he brought those things to good order that were out of
order; in the latter Christ speaks of his principal end of his coming into the
world.

741. Joh. 9. 41. If you were blind, you should have no sin. Romans 11. 25.
Blindness is happened unto Israel.

In the first place Christ's speak of the Jews, according to the opinion they
had of themselves, for they did not acknowledge any blindness of their minds
or their sins; in the latter, what was the truth of them indeed; blindness
happened to them, not that they should all perish, but that many multitudes of
the Gentiles might be converted and saved so well as the Jews.

742. Joh. 10. 28. My sheep shall never perish, neither shall any man pluck
them out of my hand. chap. 13. 18. Judas was chosen to be of Christ's sheep, and
yet perished.

Election in the first place is meant to eternal life; in the latter to an
Office, Judas was Christ's sheep only by outward vocation and profession.

743. Joh. 10. 29. My Father is greater. ver. 30. I and my Father are one.

Christ is equal to God the Father according to his Divine Nature, less then
the Father according to his humane Nature, and his Office of Mediatorship
between God and Man.

744. Joh. 10. 32. Many good works have I showed you from my Father. chap. 14.
10. The Father that dwells in me, he does the works.

In the former place Christ speaks not exclusively, because the works of the
Trinity outwardly are common to the three Persons: there is no work of the Son
which the Father does not work in him. In the latter he ascribing operation to
the Father, he asserts that it is done by the authority and counsel of his
Father, so speaking of the manner and order of working, he takes not away the
unity of essence, Majesty and power.

745. Joh. 11. 4. Lazarus sickness was not unto death. verse. 14. Lazarus is
dead.

The sickness of Lazarus by reason of the event was not unto death, because
Christ raised him again; and says that his death was but a sleep, for we are
not so early awaked from sleep, as Christ called Lazarus out of his grave, and
he shall raise us all at the last day.

746. Joh. 11. 25. He that believes in me, though he were dead, yet shall he
live. verse. 26. He that believes in me shall never dye.

Death is temporal and eternal, temporal in this world is corporal and
spiritual; Christ speaks of both in the former place; Spiritual death is either
of them, who being dead, have not Christ's quickening Spirit, and of this he
speaks not here; but of them that being quickened by Christ's Spirit are dead to
sin and the flesh; in the latter is meant chiefly eternal death.

747. Joh. 11. 26. Whosoever believes in me shall never dye. Heb. 9. 27. It is
appointed for all men once to dye.

The faithful do not dye a spiritual and eternal death; but natural death is
common to all men.

748. Joh. 11. 34. Where have you laid him? chap. 21. 17. Thou know all
things.

Christ enquired of Lazarus his grave, not as if he were ignorant thereof, but
that he might stir up a desire in his sisters and those that were present to
consider, and to see the Miracle of the Resurrection. So God said to Adam, Genesis
3. 9. Adam where art thou?

749. Joh. 11. 50. Caiphas a wicked man prophesied by the instinct of the
Spirit. Romans 8. 14. As many as are led by the Spirit of God, they are the sons
of God.

The gifts of Gods Spirit are of Sanctification and Salvation, and those are
proper to the elect children of God, or gifts of administration, which are
common to good and bad men; amongst which is the gift of Prophecy.

750. Joh. 12. 27. Father save me from this hour. Phil. 2. 8. He became
obedient unto death.

Christ feeling the sins of the world lying upon him, feared death as he was
man; and desired rather to live then dye, if that might have been granted
without detriment to Gods glory and our salvation; but because it was not
possible that that Cup should pass from him, he submitted himself to his
Fathers will, and said, Therefore came I unto this hour.

751. Joh. 12. 30. Now shall the Prince of this world be cast out. Ephesians. 6.
12. We have yet war with the Prince of this world.

That casting out was out of the hearts of the faithful, whom, though the
Devil do tempt and oppose many ways, yet he cannot vanquish them, but is
cast out: also Christ respects the casting out of the Devil, whilst both Jews
and Gentiles, amongst whom the Devil reigned, were called to the grace of
Christ, by his coming.

752. Joh 13. 27. After the sop Satan entered into him. Verse. 2. And Supper
being ended, the Devil having now put into the heart of Judas Iscariot.

The first place is of total possessing, when after so many admonitions from
Christ, and so many humane favors received, Judas yet continued in his purpose
of betraying Christ, he is delivered to Satan to be ruled, so that he could
think on nothing that was sound and good.

753. Joh. 13. 37. A new Commandment I give unto you, that you love one the
other. Mat. 22. 37. This was the greatest Commandment in the Old Testament to
love God and our Neighbor.

It is called a new Commandment not by reason of the substance, but because
Christ renewed it, and the singular affection of love, which Christ requires in
his followers: as he loved them, and gave himself for them, so he would that
they should love one the other with singular affection.

754. Joh. 14. 4. Whither I go ye know, and the way ye know. verse. 5. We know
not.

They did know inchoatively, and imperfectly, but because they knew not that
they did know, the cause was their rudeness and forgetfulness of Christ's
words.

755. Joh. 14. 8. Show us the Father. verse. 9. He that sees me, sees the
Father.

The Apostles did not perfectly know Christ, therefore he taxes them of
ignorance, for they ought to have seen and known the Father in him.

756. Joh. 14. 12. He that believes on me, the works that I do shall he do
also, and greater. chap. 3. 2. No man can do those Miracles that thou do.

Christ means not works of divine Creation, Redemption or Sanctification, but
of his mission, such Miracles as he wrought in the world, such and greater then
they were wrought by the Apostles, whose shadows cured sick men, as they passed
by after Christ's Ascension, and the wonderful conversion of the Gentiles
followed.

757. Joh. 14. 13. chap. 16. 24. Whatsoever you shall ask the Father in my
Name, that will I do. Ask and you shall receive. Jam. 4. 3. Ye ask and receive
not.

We ought to ask in Christ's Name, in full confidence of his merits, with true
faith, and without doubting, spiritual or corporal blessings, with exception of
Gods will, and our own salvation, in all occasions; and in all our prayers,
they that ask so, receive, and they that receive not, ask amiss.

758. Joh. 14. 23. If any man love me, he will keep my words. verse. 23. The
Word which ye hear is not mine.

The Word that Christ taught was his, but not any invention of his, but his
Fathers Word, which he was sent into the world to preach.

759 Joh. 14. 23. And we will come unto him, and make our abode with him. Romans
7. 20. Sin dwells in me, verse. 14. I am sold under sin.

The first place is concerning the inhabitation of the Sacred Trinity in the
spiritual part of a regenerate man. The latter is of the dwelling of sin in our
carnal members.

760. Joh. 15. 15. I call you not servants, but friends. Mat. 25. 21. Well done
good servant.

The Disciples were Christ's servants by right of creation, redemption and
vocation, friends by right of adoption, communication, and patefaction. Aug.
tr. 55. on John.

761. Joh. 15. 15. All things that I have heard of my Father, I have made known
unto you. chap. 16. 12. I have yet many things to say unto you.

In the Scriptures some things are said to be full, which are to be fulfilled,
in the former place Christ speaks concerning the knowledge of God, and the
perfect worship of Christians in it self; in the latter concerning the
understanding of this Word, which the Disciples by reason of their rudeness
could not bear before they had received the holy Ghost; nor did they understand
it.

762. Joh. 16. 13. The Spirit of Truth shall guide you into all Truth. Gal. 2.
11. Peter erred after he had received the holy Ghost.

The Apostles were led into all truth in parts and degrees of it. After they
had received the holy Ghost they erred not in doctrine, in writing or teaching,
but in life and conversation, such was the error of Peter which was to be
reproved whilst he conversed amongst the Gentiles.

763. Joh. 16. 24. Hitherto have ye asked nothing in my Name. Mat. 6. 9. Luke
11. 2. He had given them the form of Prayer before.

The Disciples did indeed pray before, but not so plainly, with a clear
knowledge of Christ's Office, that their prayers should be heard for the Messiah
that was sent.

764. Joh. 16. 26. I say not unto you that I will pray the Father for you. Romans
8. 26. He makes intercession for us.

Christ alone does not pray for us, but we also must come to the Father, and in
his Name at his command pray in full assurance, which is necessary for our
salvation.

765. Joh. 17. 3. That they may know thee, Father, to be the only true God.
Act. 20. 28. The Son is God. chap. 5. 4. The holy Ghost is God.

Onely] here does not exclude the Persons in the Divine Essence, but creatures
and Idols which are no gods.

766. Joh. 18. 20. I speak openly to the world, and in secret have I said
nothing. Mar. 9. 28. He taught his Disciples privately in the Desert.

In the first place he speaks of his doctrine which he brought from Heaven,
that he might reveal it to all men, and teach it publicly and in the temple,
not in private corners; In the latter place he taught privately, explaining
those things which he had taught publicly.

767. Joh. 19. 9. Jesus answered not Pilate. 1 Timothy 6. 13. Christ Jesus before
Pontius Pilate witnessed a good confession.

To Pilates question first Christ did not answer, because he stood before him
to suffer, and not to plead or excuse; at length he gave testimony to the Truth
in words and deeds, for his passion and death were a sufficient testimony and
sealing of his doctrine.

768. Joh. 20. 1. Christ rose on the first day of the week. Mat. 12. 40. The
Son of M^^ shall be three days and three nights in the heart of the earth
(until the third day.)

This is a Synecdochical computation of time; for the least part of the day of
the preparation, is taken for a whole day, and the beginning of the day after
the Passover, or the Sabbath is taken also for a whole day; Christ was three
days in the grave, but it was incompleatly three days; so also he was two
nights in the grave, the night before being added to them.

769. Joh. 20. 1. Mary Magdalen came early when it was yet dark unto the
Sepulcher. Mar. 16. 2. Very early they came to the Sepulcher at the rising of
the Sun.

When it was yet dark very early in the morning she went out of her house, and
the City, waiting for the rest of the women, with which afterward she came to
the Sepulcher at the Sunrising.

770. Joh. 20. 17. Touch me not. Ver. 26. Reach hither thy finger.

Christ after the Resurrection would not be touched of Mary Magdalen, who only
sought him after a carnal way, and thought of enjoying him no otherwise then
she did formerly by his earthly presence amongst them. But he commanded Thomas
to touch him, that his faith being confirmed, he might be a more certain
witness of Christ's Resurrection.

The ACTS of the APOSTLES.
LVKE the Evangelist describes either in general all the Acts of the Apostles;
or in special, Peter's Preachings, Acts, Visions, Miracles, Imprisonments, the
Conversion of Paul, his Travels, Disputations, Miracles, Bonds, Imprisonments;
and the History of the Primitive Church after Christ's Ascension, from 26 years,
unto the 60 year from Christ's Nativity.

771. Acts 1. 1. Of all things that Jesus began both to do and teach, Luke
wrote. John 21. 25. There are also many other things which Jesus did, the which
if they should be written every one, I suppose that even the world it self
could not contain the books that should be written.

Luke in the first Book wrote of all things necessary for our salvation, though
not of all things; but summarily concerning the conception of Jesus Christ, his
Nativity, Life, Passion, Death, Resurrection and Ascension into heaven, August.
Christ did many things that are In John Tract. 49.
not written, as John the Evangelist witnesses, but those things were chosen
to be written, which might suffice for the salvation of Believers.

772. Acts 1. 9. Whilst the Disciples beheld Christ was taken up, and a cloud
received him. John 3. 13. No man has ascended up into heaven, but he that came
down from heaven.

The body of Christ was taken up visibly on high, where Christ was personally
before, according to his Divine nature.

773. Acts 1. 15. The number of names together, were about an hundred and
twenty. 1 Cor. 15. 6. After that he was seen of above five hundred brethren at
once.

The number of an hundred and twenty must be restrained to the faithful there
at Jerusalem, the rest were out of this gathering in other places. Luke by
calling the brethren that were present, shows that there were no women
present at the Election of Matthias.

774. Acts 1. 18. Judas purchased a field with the reward of iniquity. Matthew.
27. 3. He repented himself and brought again the thirty pieces of silver to the
chief Priests and Elders.

Judas purchased a field, not actually, but by purpose and event; for he hoped
with those silver pieces to buy a field, he acquired the money It is Metonymia
adjuncti.
and the price wherewith the Priests bought the field.

775. Acts 2. 23. Jesus being delivered by the determinate counsel and
foreknowledge of God, by wicked hands you have crucified and slain. John 19.
11. He that delivered me unto thee has the greater sin.

The death of Christ is ascribed to God and men in diverse respects: God
delivered him by his determinate counsel that he might procure life for us:
The Jews out of their diabolical hate, that they might blot out the memory of
him.

776. Acts 2. 33. Christ is exalted by the right hand of God. John 17. 5.
Christ was glorified with the Father before the world was.

The state of Christ's humiliation and exaltation, is in respect of right and
profession; Christ was as Mediator at the right hand of God, also before his
corporal Ascension, but in respect of use after his Ascension.

777. Acts 2. 36. God has made that same Jesus whom you have crucified both
Lord and Christ. Luke 2. 11. He is called Lord at his Nativity by the Angel.

Christ by right of his personal union was made Lord at his Nativity; by
possession and use in his Glorification, declared to be so by his sitting at
the right hand of God, according to the rule, Then a thing is said to be done,
when it is manifested to be done.

778. Acts 2. 38. And be baptized every one of you in the Name of Jesus Christ.
Mat. 28. 19. Baptizing them in the Name of the Father, of the Son, and of the
holy Ghost.

In the first place there is the command and fruit of Baptism, but not the
form: Some by the Name Christ understand the three Persons, the Father
anointing, the Son anointed, and the holy Ghost the unction. Also in the Name
of Christ, is, in the doctrine, faith knowledge and obligation of Christ.

779. Acts 3. 2. And a man lame from his mothers womb they laid daily at the
gate of the Temple to ask alms. chap. 4. 34. neither was there any among them
that lacked.

They that carried the lame man to the Beautiful Gate of the Temple were not
of the number of those who believed in Christ, nor the lame man himself before
he was healed.

780. Acts 4. 31. And when they had prayed, they were all filled with the holy
Ghost. chap. 2. 4. In the Feast of Pentecost the holy Ghost sat upon every one
of them before.

The first place is of the increase of gifts, and their boldness and
confidence to profess the Gospel; that casting away all sorrow they were full
of rejoicing, and preached the Word of God freely against the threatenings and
interdicts of the High priests.

781. Acts 7. 38. Moses received in mount Sinai the lively Oracles. 2 Cor. 3.
7. Paul calls the Law the ministration of death.

The words of the Law were words of life, because the Law has life in it self,
and leads us to Christ; it is not the Ministration of death in it self, but in
respect of men's infirmities, and our corrupt nature.

782. Acts 7. 2. Men, Brethren, and Fathers, hearken. verse. 52. Betrayers and
murderers.

In the former place he does civilly use those compellation to the Jews, in the
later he shows what the truth is; according to the Gospel they were enemies,
but according to Election they are beloved for the Fathers sake. Romans 11. 28.


783. Acts 7. 51. You do always resist the holy Ghost, as your fathers did.
Romans 9. 19. Who has resisted his will?

To resist the holy Ghost, is not to hear him in the Word of God, so the Jews
rejected grace proferred unto them, and despised it revealed in the Word, and
so were the cause of their own damnation. The Apostle speaks of Gods absolute
will, according to that he does all things, to which we must be subject.

784. Acts 7. 59. Lord Jesus receive my spirit. Luke 16. 22. Lazarus was
carried by the Angels into Abraham's bosom.

All the godly and faithful children of Abraham, must commend their spirits
into the hands of the Son of God who enlivens us; there is that bosom, and
the soul of Abraham rests there.

785. Acts 8. 1. And they were all scattered abroad throughout the region of
Judah and Samaria, except the Apostles. Mark 16. 15. Go into all the world and
preach the Gospel.

The beginning of the Apostles preaching was at Jerusalem, where they suffered
persecutions building a Church unto Christ, before they went to other Nations.

786. Acts 9. 6. Go into the City, and there it shall be told thee what thou
must do. Gal. 1. 15. Paul was not called by man, neither from men to be an
Apostle of Jesus Christ.

Saul was taught by Ananias concerning the means of his conversion, but not
concerning the Articles of his faith, Ananias was sent to baptize him, and heal
him, but not to call him to be an Apostle.

787. Acts 9. 7. And the men that journeyed with him stood speechless. chapter 26.
14. and when we were all fallen to the earth, I heard a voice.

The companions of Saul were first cast down, then they stood speechless, nor
could they go forward, until Saul also rose from the earth.

788. Acts 9. 7. They heard a voice but they saw no man. chapter 26. 14. They that
were with me, says Paul, heard not the voice.

Hearing the sound of the voice they understand not the meaning of it; so a
voice coming to Christ from heaven, the company that heard John 12. 29.
it said it thundered.

789. Acts 9. 8. They led Saul into Damascus. Gal. 1. 17. He went into Arabia.

Paul after his conversion was first at Damascus, then he went into Arabia, and
so returned again to Damascus.

790. Acts 9. 15 Paul bare the Name of the Lord before the Gentiles, the Kings,
and the children of Israel. Gal. 1. 16. He was separated to preach to the
Gentiles the Gospel of Christ.

He was the ordinary Apostle to the Gentiles, but extraordinarily he might
teach the Jews 1 Timothy 2. 7
also.

791. Acts 10. 30. Four days after the vision of Cornelius Peter came to
Cesarea. ver. 19. The morrow after, they that were sent from Cornelius came to
Peter.

Cornelius the first day at three of the clock after noon sent his servants to
Peter, the second day they came to Peter, the third day they came with Peter
from Joppa, and lay by the way that night, the fourth day they returned to
Cornelius at Cesarea.

792. Acts 14. 22. We must through many tribulations enter into the kingdom of
God. Heb. 6. 12. (c. 11. 1) The Saints by faith and patience inherit the
promises.

The condition of the faithful is common, through many tribulations to enter
into the Kingdom of heaven, from which some are freed by special privilege,
for faith is the means of acquiring life eternal, but tribulation is the way
thither.

793. Acts 15. 10. The Law is a yoke which neither we nor our fathers were able
to bear. 1 John 5. 3. His Commandments are not grievous.

The Law is a yoke in respect of perfect obedience, for here that is impossible
for us: the Commandments are easy in respect of the imputation of Christ's
righteousness, who fulfilled the Law for us, in whom our sins are forgiven.
Romans 6. 14.


794. Acts 15. 28. It seemed good to the holy Ghost and to us that you abstain
from blood and things strangled. Luke 16. 16. The Law and the Prophets were
until John.

That was a temporal command belonging to the Ceremonial Law, until the weak
in faith who were not fully instructed were better confirmed, least their
conscience should be troubled and offended.

795. Acts 16. 3. Paul circumcised Timothy because of the Jews. Gal. 2. 3.
Titus being a Greek was not compelled to be circumcised.

Circumcision from the time of its institution until Christ's death was
necessary, because of Gods command, for it was a Sacrament, and a part of Gods
worship. After Christ's death the Ceremony and use of it remained for some time,
until the Jews were taught concerning the abrogation of the Law; for it was
needful that the Synagogue should by degrees be buried with honor, as the
Ceremonies were by degrees set up. Paul circumcised Timothy lest he should
offend the weak, but might win them to Christ; he would not circumcise Titus
after the Gospel was planted, lest he should do wrong to Christian liberty.

796. Acts 16. 6. They were forbidden of the holy Ghost to preach the Word in
Asia. Mat. 28. 19. Go and teach all Nations.

The time to preach the Word of God in Asia was not yet come, and Paul and
Silas were then sent to some other place to greater increase of the Gospel; yet
at last the Gospel was plentifully 1 Pet. 1. 21.
preached there also.

797. Acts 16. 18. Paul would not suffer the spirit of divination. Phil. 1. 18.
What then? notwithstanding every way, whither in pretense or in truth, Christ
is preached, and I therein do rejoice and will rejoice.

Paul had great causes to cast out the spirit of divination, because
translating himself into an Angel of light, he would have drawn the
Apostolical doctrine to be suspected, as if they had been both as one, and so
they that believed the Apostles should believe the spirit of Divination, that
he might overthrow the Gospel.

798. Acts 17. 28. In him we live and move and have our being: this sentence is
from Aratus the Heathen, out of Menander. 1 Cor. 15. 33. Evil communications
corrupt good manners. Tit. 1. 12. That the Cretians are liars, evil beasts,
slow bellies, is taken out of Epimerides and Callimachus.

Jerem gives the reason of this thing, that they who were obstinate in their
heathenish malice might be condemned out of their own Writers.

799. Acts 18. 8. Paul baptized Crispus and Gaius, and the house of Stephanus.
1 Cor. 1. 17. Christ sent me not to baptize, but to preach the Gospel.

Christ sent all the Apostles to preach and to baptize; yet because the
ordinary way of preaching was better, more hard and more necessary, therefore
he would have them apply themselves rather to this, leaving baptizing to those
that were inferior to them. Paul denies that he was sent to Baptize, not
simply, but comparatively, so God commanded not sacrificing but obedience,
because he will rather have this then that, Jer. 7. 22.

800. Acts 18. 2, 18. Priscilla and Aquila were with Paul at Corinth. Romans 16.
3. Writing from Corinth he salutes Priscilla and Aquila.

Paul when he was again at Corinth, writing to Rome, salutes amongst others
Priscilla and Aquila, who were then there.

801. Acts 18. 18. Paul shaved his head at Cenchrea, for he had a vow. Gal. 5.
1. Stand fast in the liberty wherewith Christ has made us free, and be not
entangled again with the yoke of bondage.

Some refer that vow and shaving to Aquila, if Paul did that, he did it
therefore that he 1 Cor. 9. Act. 21. 26.
might become all things to all men, that he might win some, that he might
serve the time, and not offend the Jews, but promote the cause of the Gospel.

802. Acts 19. 2. The Disciples said to Paul, we have not heard whether there
be any holy Ghost. v. 4. They were baptized therefore they must know the holy
Ghost.

In the first place he speaks of the extraordinary miraculous gifts of the holy
Ghost, otherwise they were taught concerning the person of the holy Ghost by
John, and they had received his common gifts conferred in Baptism.

803. Acts 19. 3. Into John's, verse. 5. They were baptized in the Name of the
Lord Jesus.

Baptism in the first place is taken for the whole Ministry of John, verse. 5.
there was no reiteration of Baptism; but an approbation of Baptism conferred in
the Name of Jesus by John, which is understood to be done by laying on of hands.

804. Acts 19. 13. Certain of the vagabond Jews, exercists, took upon them to
call on the Name of the Lord Jesus. 1 Cor. 12. 3. No man can say that Jesus is
the Lord, but by the holy Ghost.

The Lord Jesus is so called either by the mouth only, as by the exorcists, or
from the heart by the holy Ghost; there are external gifts of the holy Ghost,
and confession is reckoned amongst the common gifts, so those that were
possessed with the devil could say that Jesus was the Son of God; but the
gifts of regeneration are proper to Believers only.

805. Acts 20. 9. Eutichus fallen asleep fell from the third loft, and was
taken up dead. v. 10. his life is in him.

Paul speaks confidently, whether the soul were in the young man or not; so
Christ said before he raised the maid, she is not dead, but sleeps.

806. Acts 20. 27. I have not shunned to declare unto you all the counsel of
God. Romans 11. 34. 1 Cor. 2. 6. Who has known the mind of the Lord?

The counsel of God is either necessary for our salvation, which was hid
before and now is revealed; or not necessary, secret, ascribing to the revealed
will of God.

807. Acts 20. 35. It is more blessed to give then to receive. Paul faith that
these were the words of the Lord Jesus, which are not found in the Evangelists.

Though the words be not found there in the same letters, yet the sense of them
is found in the words of Christ; lend, looking for nothing again, Give and it
shall be given to you; for all Christ's words and deeds are not set down, but
only those which suffice for true faith and our salvation.

808. Acts 21. 4. The Disciples said to Paul that he should not go up to
Jerusalem. chapter 20. 22. Now behold I go bound in the spirit to Jerusalem. says
Paul.

The Disciples by suggestion of the Spirit warned him of bonds and afflictions,
using also some persuasions of their own, as they were moved with brotherly
affection, being ignorant that it was the will of God that Paul should go up
thither, which he had revealed to him after a singular manner.

809 Acts 21. 9. Philip had four daughters virgins which did prophecy. 1 Cor.
14. 34. Let your women keep silence in the Churches.

The first place is concerning private and extraordinary gifts; the later of
the public Ministry, and that which is ordinary used, from which women are
excluded.

810. Acts 23. 3. Paul reviled Ananias the Highpriest. 1 Cor. 6. 10. Revilers
shall not inherit the Kingdom of God.

Reviling is either lawful, which rises from zeal to Justice, and has the
observation of the Law for its object, that is just and honest; so Peter
reviled Ananias, Simon Magus; Paul, Bar Jesus or Elymas, and God all wicked
men: or unlawful, which proceeds from a wicked Act. 5. c. 8 c. 13. 10.
desire, and mind of revenge that Paul had not.

811. Acts 23. 6. Paul cried out in the conusell. Men and brethren, I am a
Pharisee. 1 Cor. 1. 12. He reproves and condemns denominations from men.

Paul amongst those that disagreed admits the denomination only for distinction
sake, and so thinking with the Pharisees, he distingnisheth himself from the
Sadducees: So the faithful Professors of the Gospel are called Christians, but
when the persons agree in Doctrine, he forbids to prefer one before the other.

812. Acts 25. 10. Paul will be judged at Caesar's Judgment seat. 1 Cor. 6. 1.
Dare any of you go to Law before the unjust?

Civil Judicatures are to be had in honor, the abuse of them is condemned, and
he admonishes Christians that they should avoid contentions before unjust
Judges, lest so contending concerning small matters they should prostitute
their sacred Religion.

813. Acts 28. 28. Be it known therefore unto you, that the salvation of God is
sent unto the Gentiles. Matthew. 15. 24. I am not sent but to the lost sheep of
the house of Israel.

The Gospel ought to be preached by the Apostles first to the Jews, they not
believing it came to the Gentiles: So Christ preached to the Israelites, before
he gave command to his Disciples, Go and teach all Nations, Matthew. 28. 19.

St PAUL'S Epistle to the ROMANS.
IT may be said to be the Method of the holy Scripture, in this are contained
that which convinces all both Jews and Gentiles of their sins; it
demonstrates Justification from sin by the Grace of God, by Redemption of
Jesus Christ, which we apprehend by faith, and testify by good Works as the
fruits of our faith. It was written in the year of Christ 55. and sent from
Corinth.

814. Romans 1. 1. Paul a servant of Jesus Christ. John 15. 15. I will not call
you servants.

There are servants of sin, and servants of Righteousness; Christ speaks of
servants of sin, the Apostle was an Apostle of Righteousness, either in
respect of the common condition that he was freed by Christ from the power of
Satan, or of his Apostolical office being placed in the sacred Ministry by a
singular manner.

815. Romans 1. 2. The Gospel of God, which he had promised before by his
Prophets in the holy Scriptures. chap. 16. 25. The Gospel was kept secret since
the world began, but is now manifested.

The Gospel is taken, either largely, as it signifies the doctrine of Glory
concerning Christ revealed in the Word, or strictly: properly for the Gospel
promised or fulfilled; Metonymically, when the name of the thing is given to
the instrument, or it is taken for the Ministry.

816. Romans 1. 13. I often times purposed to come unto you. v. 13. But was let
hitherto.

Paul purposing to go to Rome did not resist the will of God, nor was it
contrary, but according to his will, not absolutely but conditionally, if God
pleased: the impediments he might have, were, Satan casting many hindrances in
his way, or sickness, the planting of Churches or the like.

817. Romans 1. 18. The wrath of God is revealed from heaven against all
ungodliness. chap. 2. 4. The goodness of God leads thee to repentance.

Justice does not oppose the goodness of God punishing wicked men as they are
wicked, but goodness invites men to repentance, deferring the punishments of
the wicked, not as they are wicked, but as they are Gods creatures, and he
delights not in their destruction.

818. Romans 1. 26. He reckons up heathenish beastliness and Sodomy. Ephesians. 5. 3.
Fornication and all uncleanness and filthiness, let it not be once named
among you.

The Apostle commemorates the dissolute life of the Heathens, to make us avoid
it, not to imitate it; by disgracing it, that so being terrified with that
filthiness, we may escape the anger of God.

819. Romans 2. 1. Inexcusable thou art O man whosoever thou art that judge.
chap. 13. 1. There is no power but of God.

The power of the Office is distinguished from the faults of the Person: though
in the Court of Conscience and before God we are sinners, yet we are not in the
Courts of Civil Justice, and before men.

820. Romans 2. 6. God will render to every man according to his deeds. verse. 16.
God will judge the secrets according to my Gospel.

In the former place is treated of the effect of faith that goes before
retribution, in the later of a necessary instrument. God will condemn the
wicked and Infidels according to the Law, and acquit the believers according to
the Gospel, for he that believes shall be saved; and both ways God will reward
according to our works, as they were done well or ill from faith Mark 16. 16.
or infidelity.

821. Romans 2. 6. He shall render to every man according to his deeds. chapter 3.
28. chapter 8. 3. We conclude that a man is justified by faith without the works of
the Law.

To render is not only meant just retribution, but free gift; Behold I come
quickly and my reward Rev. 22. 12.
is with me, to give to every man according as his work shall be. This doctrine
takes not away justice, but confirms it, because it respects works for a man's
faith, and judges by the works as the effects of men's faith and life, and
condemns bad works for unbelief.

822. Romans 2. 13. The doers of the Law shall be justified. Gal. 2. 16. For by
the works of the Law shall no flesh be justified.

Justification is attributed to the Law and to Works, not simply, but by
supposition, if any man can perfectly fulfill the works of the Law; but no man
can in this weakness perfectly fulfill the Law.

823. Romans 2. 14. The Gentiles which have not the Law, do by nature the things
contained in the Law. chapter 8. 7. The carnal mind is enmity to the Law of God,
for it is not subject to the Law of God.

The natural Law convinces the Gentiles, the written Law the Jews. The
Apostle does not in the former place affirm that all the Gentiles do fulfill
the Law, but indefinitely, the things contained in the Law: for he speaks of
outward works, and civil discipline, which was honest amongst some Gentiles. In
the later, by the name Carnal he understands unregenerate part, and the
corruption of nature.

824. Romans 2. 14. The Gentiles have not the Law. 1 John 3. 4. Sin is the
transgression of the Law.

The Gentiles indeed had not the Law published in writing by Moses: but the
natural Law in the first Creation was printed in every man, which we
transgressed in Adam, and so were made sinners: Adam was, says Ambr. on Luke,
l. 7. and in him we were all; Adam fell, and in him all men fell.

825. Romans 2. 25. Circumcision verily profits if thou keep the Law. Gal. 5.
2. chapter 6. 15. If you be circumcised, Christ shall profit you nothing.

External circumcision in the Old Testament was a Sacrament, upon condition of
the Law fulfilled: Under the New Testament, as other Ceremonies, it is mortal;
in the place of this came Baptism: in former times it did profit the Fathers,
as a seal of the righteousness of faith: after Christ came, and the Gospel was
planted it was taken away, by the full plenty of spiritual Circumcision.

826. Romans 3. 2. The Jews exceed the Gentiles much every way, ver. 9. What
then? are we better then they? no in no wise. chapter 10. 12.

The Apostle speaks in the former place in respect of the Jews excellency from
the Covenant of God, who was pleased to bestow on the Jews the grace of his
Covenant and his Law, before the Gentiles were called: in the later place he
speaks of the Jews themselves who deserved no more favor at Gods hands then
the Gentiles, nor were they better then we, and continuing in their unbelief
they have lost their privileges, they were nothing to be preferred before the
Gentiles, but now we are all one in Christ, and that prerogative is taken away.
Gal. 3. 28.


827. Romans 3. 4. Every man is a liar. chapter 9. 1. I say the truth in Christ I lie
not.

Man as he is man corrupt, is subject to lie, but being regenerated and
enlightened with the holy Ghost, he embraces truth, as is manifest in Paul.

828. Romans 3. 8. We must not do evil that good may come. chapter 9 18. God
bardening the wicked produces that which is good.

In the former place is spoken of evil of sin, in the later of evil of
punishment. It is the singular goodness of God that he so overrules sin, that
it may be converted to good, as we see in Joseph.

829. Romans 3. 12. There is no man that does good no not one. John 13. 10. chap.
15. 3. You are clean through the word which I have spoken.

By nature, by reason of inherent sin, we are all unclean by the grace of God
in Christ we are cleansed, and our hearts are purged.

830. Romans 3. 20. For by the deeds of the Law there shall no flesh be justified
in his sight. chapter 2. 7. To them who continue by patience in welldoing, shall he
render glory and honor and eternal Life.

The first place shuts out all works from man's Justification, not by fault of
the Law, but by accident, that is by the fault of men: In the later the Apostle
urges works as necessary, not by necessity of the cause to justify, but to be
present Rem.
in him that is justified; for works are n^^ cause of reigning, but they are
the way to the Kingdom.

831. Romans 3. 28. Faith is greater then charity. 1 Cor. 13. 8. Charity then
faith.

Faith is greater, as it is the cause of charity, and our victory; by faith
Christ dwells in our hearts, we please God, but charity without Exodus 3. 17.
out faith is sin. Charity is said to be greater then faith or hope, because
it never fails, but shall endure in our future state of perfection, faith and
hope then ceasing as to their actions; but it is not greater in respect of
Justification, because charity does not justify Legally, for in many things we
offend all, and it is not perfect nor Evangelically, because in the Gospel the
act of Justification is ascribed to Faith.

832. Romans 3. 25. God has set forth Jesus Christ to be a propitiation. John
18. 2. Judas delivered him to the Jews.

The Father delivered his Son out of love to us; but Judas delivered Christ out
of covetousness. The Father for us and for our salvation, Judas for thirty
pieces of silver to his own destruction.

833. Romans 3. 28. We conclude that a man is justified by faith without the
deeds of the Law. James 2. 24. You see that by works a man is justified, and
not by faith only.

Paul does not separate, as to existency, Gal. 5. 6.
works from faith which works by love, but the object of Justification before
God. James rejects faith which wants good works, that is a dead faith of the
devil, v. 17, 19. and attributes to works the declaration of Justification, v.
21. yet he confirms a lively faith, v. 22. by the example of Abraham, Augustine
says, that when the Apostle says, a man is justified by faith, he does it not
that works should be despised, because they follow the man justified, they do
not go before Justification.

834. Romans 3. 31. Do we then make void the Law through faith? God forbid, yea
we establish the Law. Heb. 7. 18. There is a disanulling of the Commandment
going before through the weakness thereof.

The first place is of the Moral Law, which faith confirms, because Christ
came to fulfill it, and not to destroy it; and the end of the Law is to bring
us to Christ. The later place is concerning the ceremonial Law, which is
abrogated, because the shadow was to give place to the substance.

835. Rom 4. 7. Blessed are they whose iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins
are covered. Mat. 5. 2. Blessed are the poor in spirit, the clean in heart, the
merciful.

In the first place is spoken of the cause of blessedness, namely remission of
sins, and imputation of righteousness: in the later of virtues which are the
way to blessedness.

836. Romans 4 15. ch 5. 20. Where there is no Law there is no transgression. chapter
2. 12. As many as sin in the Law shall be judged by the Law.

In the former place the Law is taken generally, without which there can be no
transgression; in the later he speaks of the natural Law; for even the Gentiles
shall perish for violating of it.

837. Romans 4. 18. Abraham against hope. ver. 18. Believed in hope.

He believed contrary to humane hope, by his hope in God, having confidence
contrary to the reason of the flesh, the force of nature, for all these would
have weakened hope, would make him doubt and despair also, yet he overcame all
those difficulties by firm hope, he hoped in things desperate, distrusting
himself, but trusting in God.

838. Romans 4. 25. God raised Jesus Christ our Lord from the dead. Joh. 10. 18.
I have power to lay down my life, and I have power to take it up.

The Resurrection is ascribed to God the Father, because the works of the
Trinity, ad extra, are indivisible to the Son, because he has the same power
with the Father, who willingly underwent death, and therefore the Resurrection
is to be ascribed to his free will.

839. Romans 5 2. By faith we stand and rejoice. 1 Cor. 10. 12. Let him that
thinks he stands take heed least he fall.

We stand founded on Gods grace, whilst we are kept by the power of God by
faith unto salvation: by sin we fall, when we think we stand.

840. Romans 5. 4. Patience works experience. James 1. 3. Experience works
patience.

Probation in the first place is taken passively for experience which rejoices
by patience, in the later it is taken actively for trial and the effect of it,
that is tribulation, for affliction tries faith, as fire does gold.

841. Romans 5. 6. 7. Christ died for us. 1 John 3. 16. Because he that is Christ
laid down his life for us, and we ought to lay down our lives for the brethren.

Christ dying for us a sacrifice, and revenger, Col. 1. 24.
paid our ransom for us. John comparing the death of Christ for us, and our
death for the brethren, does it secundum quid, for we die not to redeem our
brethren, but to edify them.

842. Romans 5. 8. God commends his love toward us in that when we were yet
sinners, Christ died for us. Romans 8. 32. The Father spared not his own Son, but
delivered him up for us all.

The Father and the Son did always love us, and have done all things for us;
Christ delivered himself for our sins into the power of the devil; and because
we were not to be redeemed by power but by Righteousness, Christ the righteous
died for us, and so by righteousness he overcame the devil; therefore because
the devil had slain Christ, it was necessary that he should release those that
were captives, and the Aug. de Trin. l. 13. c. 2.
devil by the price paid, was not made rich but ensnared.

843. Rom 5. 10. When we were enemies we were reconciled to God by the death of
his Son. John 15. 13. No man has greater love then this that a man lay down
his life for his friends.

By nature we are Gods enemies, by reason of sin, but by grace we are
reconciled to God by Christ, who died for us, and we are so made the dearest
friends unto God.

844. Romans 5. 12, 18. As by one man sin entered into the world, and death by
sin, so death passed over all men. ver. 19. as by one man's disobedience many
were made sinners, so by one man's obedience many shall be made righteous.

The guilt of Adam is here compared with the grace of Christ, because both have
that descends on their followers. Adam derives his guilt on all men by nature,
Christ derives his righteousness by grace on all that believe on him.

845. Romans 5. 20. The Law entered that sin might abound. chapter 7. 12. The Law is
holy, and the Commandment holy, just and good.

The Law increases sin, not of it self and its own nature, but by accident,
because it discovers sin, and the poison of it, that we may know it; for by
the corruption of nature we are stirred up to strive against the Commandment,
yet the Law remains still in it self just and good.

846. Romans 6. 3. So many of us as were baptized into Jesus Christ, were
baptized into his death. Act. 8. 13. Simen Magus and other hypocrites were
baptized, yet they put not on Christ.

To be baptized into Christ is to put on Christ, the Robes of his
Righteousness and Holiness, which believers who are baptized do. Simon Magus
and hypocrites that are not faithful, Hieror. in Rom 6.
receive not the Spirit but water only in Baptism, for there is a common
Baptism to all that are baptized, but not the virtue of Baptism, that is grace.
Aug. in Psalm. 77.

847. Romans 6. 12. Let not sin reign in your mortal body. ch 3. 12. There is
none that does good no not one.

The first place is to exhort us to mortify sin in us, in the Regenerate
sin reigns not, they are wholly dead to sin in Christ, and partly in
themselves; they that are not Regenerate know indeed what they ought to do, and
know that of themselves they are unable to perform it.

848. Romans 6. 14. Ye are not under the Law but under grace. Gal. 3. 22. The
Scripture has concluded all under sin.

The first place is concerning the Regenerate, who are not under the
malediction, dominion, and rigid exaction of the Law: the later is concerning
all that are subject to sin, for whom the Law is a Schoolmaster to Christ by
the knowledge of our sins.

849. Romans 6. 18. You are become the servants of righteousness. verse. 20. You
were free from righteousness.

In the former place is spoken of those who were converted and freed from the
yoke of sin; in the later of those that are not yet converted, who are free
from righteousness, and are not under the government of righteousness, for
carnal wisdom cannot be subject to the Law of God.

850. Romans 6. 23. The wages of sin is death. Wisdom 2. 24. By the envy of the
devil death entered into the world.

The wages of sin is death, because the Justice of God would have it so, to
punish mankind that was fallen, by death, the Author whereof was not God, but
it came into the world by the envy of the devil.

851. Romans 7. 6. Now we are delivered from the Law. Matthew. 5. 17. I came not to
destroy the Law.

We are delivered from the curse of the Law, the rigor and provocation of it
to sin; also from the Law or death in which we were held; but that takes not
away the right use of the Law in respect of us.

852. Romans 7. 7. I had not known lust, unless the Law had said thou shall not
covet. 1 Timothy 3. 1. If a man desires the office of a Bishop, he desires a
good work.

Concupiscence taken morally, is either absolutely indifferent, as to eat and
drink, or relatively to the Law, and so good or bad, as it is done contrary or
according to the Law, being ordinate or disordinate; the later the Law condemns.

853. Romans 7. 8. Sin in me wrought in me all manner of concupiscence. James
1. 15. When lust has conceived it brings forth sin.

Paul means actual concupiscence of corrupt nature, James original
concupiscence.

854. Romans 7. 9. I was alive without the Law once, says Paul. Phil. 3. 6.
Touching the righteousness which is in the Law blameless.

Before his conversion Paul lived a Pharisee, without any true knowledge of the
divine Law, ascribing to himself external righteousness, which was hypocrisy.

855. Romans 7. 12. The Law is holy, just and good. 2 Cor. 3. 7. It is the
ministration of death.

The Law in it self in respect of the Author, is good, holy and just, because
it declares the good and holy will of God: in respect of us it is called the
ministration of Death, because it reproves sin, and threatens us with death.

856. Romans 7. 14. I am carnal sold under sin chapter 6. 22. We are made free from
the Law of sin wherein we were held.

The Apostle according to the unregenerated part was carnal, that is,
indulgent to his carnal lusts: but being Regenerate he did lament for those
carnal affections, and resisted them.

857. Romans 7. 18. In me dwells no good thing. chapter 8. 9. The Spirit of God
dwells in us.

The first place is of the old man, in me, that is my flesh, and that part
which is not regenerate: the second is concerning man that is regenerate, for
Christ lives in us, the holy Ghost lives in us, and indeed the whole Trinity,
John 14. 23.

858. Romans 7. 18. To will is present with me. Phil. 2. 13. God works in you
to will.

To be willing is that good which is wrought in us by the holy Ghost; but after
the fall of man to be willing and be able to will what is good, was lost in us.

859. Romans 7. 22. I delight in the Law of God after the inward man. ver. 23. I
see another Law in my members, warring against the Law of my mind.

Paul delighted, according to his spirit and inward man, the regenerate part,
in the Law of God, but rebelled against it in his outward man, the flesh, and
the part unregenerate: for the whole man is as it is commonly said, is partly
flesh and partly spirit.

860. Romans 7. 23. I see another Law in my members warring against the Law of my
mind. chapter 8. 2. The Law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus has made me
free from the Law of sin and of death.

The faithful are either captivated by the Law of sin, that they cannot do
that good they would, but what sin will have done that dwells in them; or
they are freed from sin here inchoatively, because it does not condemn them,
nor yet reign in them, but in the next Psalm. 32. 1. Romans 8. 1. chapter 6. 12.
world it shall be accomplished, and they shall be perfectly made free from it.

861. Romans 8. 2. The Law of the spirit of life in Christ Jesus has made me
free from the Law of sin and death. Joh. 5. 28. The hour is coming in the
which all that are in the graves, shall hear his voice and come forth.

Resurrection from death to life is common to the good and bad, but in a diverse
manner, and for a diverse end, the good shall come forth gloriously to life, the
wicked ignominiously unto death.

862. Romans 8. 24. We are saved by hope. Ephesians. 2. 8. By grace are you saved
through faith. Mark 16. 16.

Subalternates disagree not, the grace of God is the efficient cause, faith and
hope the isntrumental causes of our salvation.

863. Romans 8. 30. God, whom he did predestinate, them he also called. Matthew.
20. 16. c. 22. 14. Many are called, but few chosen.

The first place is concerning those who being called are obedient to the holy
Ghost, and make their vocation firm unto the end of their lives: The later is
of those who resist the vocation of God; in respect of the former there are as
many predestined as are called, but of the later more called then are
predestined.

864. Romans 8. 31. If God be for us, who can be against us? 1 Pet. 5. 8. Your
adversary the devil.

When God is for us, though the devil be against us, he prevails not.

865. Romans 8. 38. Nothing, nor creature can separate us from the love of God.
chapter 9. 3. I could wish that my self were accursed from Christ, for my brethren.

The wish of Paul was conditional, if it were lawful and might be done; the
Apostle thereby shows the vehemence of his affection toward his kindred, and
submits himself to the Divine will. Chrysostom on this place says, that Paul
by a premeditated prayer desired to be separated from Christ by a temporal and
eternal abjection for the salvation of his brethren, and so would by his own
destruction redeem them to eternal salvation; neither did he therefore love
his brethren more then Christ, for he did not desire to be separated from the
love of Christ, but from the fruit of his love and friendship; he desires to
perish not as an enemy of Christ, but a preserver of his brethren, as Christ
was made a curse for us, not as Gods enemy, but as our Redeemer.

866. Romans 9. 16. It is not of him that wills nor him that runs, but of
God that shows mercy. Matthew. 19. 17. If thou will enter into life keep the
Commandments.

It is therefore said not to be of him that wills, because salvation is not
given for our merit, but of Gods mercy: but it is also of him that wills, not
because we will, though no man is saved against his will, but of unwilling to
receive Gods call, he is made willing.

867. Romans 9. 18. God has mercy on whom he will have mercy, and whom he will
he hardneth. chapter 11. 32. God has concluded them all in unbelief, that he might
have mercy upon all.

The first place is concerning the most free will and power of God, who may
have mercy on whom he please; his antecedent will reaches to all men, his
consequent will is restrained to the believers and unbeleevers, and so he will
have merey of the faithful, that they may be saved, but he justly punishes
and hardneth the unbeleevers and wicked men who resist his grace freely offered
unto them.

868. Romans 10. 10. With the mouth is made confession unto salvation. 1 Cor. 4.
20. The Kingdom of God is not in word.

In the first place is spoken of confession with faith, in the later of humane
words, which the false teachers used in preaching, wherein the Kingdom of God
consists not, but in the virtue, that is, in a true performance of those things
they profess with their mouths.

869. Romans 11. 7. Israel has not obtained that which he seeks for. Matthew. 7.
7. Seek and you shall find.

In the first place he speaks of works, so they that seek God and
righteousness attain it not, but in the later the promise is made to them that
seek by faith.

870. Romans 11. 11. The fall of the Jews is for the salvation of the Gentiles,
that they may provoke them to emulation. chapter 3. 8. We must not do evil that
good may come of it.

God rejected the Jews by his just judgment, not that were guiltless, but
because they were rebellious and unbeleeving, and so caused God to cast them
off, and to take the Gentiles in their room: the later place is to be
understood of the evil of punishment.

871. Romans 11. 22. The Jews that were cut off shall be engrafted again, and the
Gentiles shall be cut off Chapter 11. 29, 15. The gifts and callings of God are
without repentance.

The unbeleeving Jews are excluded, but they that believe shall be grafted in
again and be saved, therefore here follows no change of the counsel of God.

872. Romans 11. 16. If the first fruits be holy, the lump is also holy, and if
the root be holy, so are the branches. Mat. 12. 39. An evil and adulterous
generation. John 8. 44. The Jews were of their father the devil.

The Jews are called holy by right of the Covenant, because they were separated
from the profane Gentiles, thence it is concluded that all hope of salvation
is not cut off from them; they are called a perverse generation for their
wicked works.

873. Romans 11. 17. The Gentiles were engrafted into the stock of the Jews, or
the Olive tree. Chapter 6. 5. If we be planted into the likeness of his death, we
shall be also into the likeness of his resurrection

Christ is the Vine, the Olive tree, the Figg tree in respect of his efficacy,
which is imputed to the Church by participation; and they that are engrafted
into Christ the Head, are made members of the Church which is his Body.

874. Romans 11. 20. Be not high minded but fear. v. 22. Otherwise thou also
shall be cut off. ver. 29. For the gifts and callings of God are without
repentance.

The first place concerns hypocrites, who profers the Doctrine of the Church;
the faithful who are certain of their salvation by confidence from the heart,
fear with a filial, but not a servile fear, for they are taught by that fear
to be careful that they do not by carnal security cast themselves into Gods
displeasure.

875. Romans 11. 25. Blindness is happened in part unto Israel, until the
fullness of the Gentiles be come in. 1 Thessalonians. 2. 16. The wrath of God is come
upon them to the uttermost.

The wrath of God remains upon the unbeleeving, obstinate, malicious Jews, who
crucified Christ, persecuted the Apostles, and hindered the preaching of the
Gospel to the Gentiles.

876. Romans 11. 26. And all Israel shall be saved. Luke 18. 8. When the son of
man comes, shall he find faith on the earth?

Christ speaks comparatively, extenuating the number of the faithful in the
last times, either in respect of the multitude of the wicked, or seduction of
Antichrist; but Antichrist being discovered and consumed with the blast of Gods
mouth, there will be a great multitude of the faithful, so that all Israel
shall be saved; for as the fullness of the Gentiles is not taken generally for
the conversion of every individual amongst the Gentiles, but for a great part,
so it must be understood of the conversion of the Jews.

877. Romans 11. 32. God has concluded them all in unbelief, that he might have
mercy upon all, Matthew. 7. 14. For straight is the way which leads unto life,
and few there are that find it.

The Apostle understands all, that is Jews and Gentiles, who are not saved by
themselves, but of the mere mercy of God.

878. Romans 11. 34. For who has known the mind of the Lord? 1 Cor. 2. 16. But
we have the mind of Christ.

The first place is concerning the inscrutable secrets of Gods wisdom, which
are not needful for us to know; the later is concerning mysteries that belong
to our salvation, revealed in Gods Word, and such which no man by his natural
reason, were it never so acute, could ever come to know.

879. Romans 12. 20. Thou shall heap coals of fire upon the head of thine enemy.
Matthew. 5. 44. Love your enemies, do good to them that hate you.

The Apostle understands here by coals the spiritual things of conscience, not
natural coals, for benefits done to an enemy are a cautery to his conscience,
which pricks and burns our adversary, does justly convince him, and stirs him
up to peace, concord, amendment of life; let us therefore overcome evil with
good, and so win the victory over our enemies.

880. Romans 13. 1. There is no power but of God. 1 Pet. 2. 13. Be subject to
every Ordinance of man.

The Magistracy is a Divine Institution: It is called the Ordinance of man,
because men undergo it, and it is employed for the government of men, and was
ordained for the good of man: though the Magistrate be ordained of men, yet
that is done by Divine Authority, and subalternates disagree not.

881. Romans 13. 2. Whosoever resists the power, resists the Ordinance of
God. Matthew. 22. 21. Render unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's, and unto
God the things that are Gods.

Preachers have authority to reprove the Magistate Theologically for his
sins, but not politiquely to resist him, when he applies himself to Gods
Commandments. But if he shall degenerate into a Tyrant and Idolater, and
opposing 1 Timothy 5. 20. 2 Timothy 4. 2. Act. 5. 29.
himself to God, shall set up what is contrary to God, then we must obey God
rather then men: For the second Table of the Law must give place to the first
Table.

882. Romans 13. 5. You must needs be subject, not only for wrath, but also for
conscience sake. Gal. 5. 1. Stand fast in the liberty wherewith Christ has
made us free.

The Decrees of the Magistrate, if they agree with Gods Word, and are appointed
for good order, they bind the conscience: so also Ecclesiastical
constitutions, for keeping the moral Laws, are to be piously observed, so
far as they hinder not the use of our Christian Liberty.

883. Romans 13 8. He that loves another, has fulfilled the Law. Matthew. 22. 40.
On these two Commandments, (the love of God and our neighbor) hang all the Law
and the Prophets.

The love of our neighbor proceeding from the love of God, is the fulfilling
of the Law; since we have but the Image of God in our neighbor, therefore God
must be principally beloved.

884. Romans 13. 13. Let us not walk in strife and envying. 1 Cor. 14. 39. Covet
spiritual gifts.

Emulation joined with envy by reason of another profit, is evil, and meant by
the first place; in the later, sincerity of love proceeding from good zeal and
Justicee.

885. Romans 14. 1. Him that is weak in the faith receive, but not to doubtful
disputations. Gal. 2. 11. Paul withstood Peter to the face, saying if thou
being a Jew live after the manner of the Gentiles.

They are weak who know not the true use of indifferent things. Peter being
taught by the heavenly vision, that distinction of meats was taken away,
deserved to be reprehended; because what he learned of God, and taught in the
public counsel, he yet observed not, but was scandalous both to Jews and
Gentiles.

886. Romans 14. 3. Let not him that eats, despise him that eats not. Col. 2.
21. Touch not, taste not, handle not.

In the former place, abstinence, and observation of meats proceeding from
faith without scandal, is left free; for the ceremonial Law ended at Christ's
coming: in the later he reproves the superstition of the Colossians, who being
taught the use of things indifferent, yet brought them in as a part of Gods
worship necessary to salvation.

887. Romans 14. 6. He that regards the day regards it unto the Lord, and he
that regards not the day to the Lord, he does not regard it. Gal. 4. 10. He
reprehends them for observing days and months, and times and years.

The first place leaves it free to the weak, who had tender consciences, either
to observe or not observe the legal festival days, so they did it without
opinion of merit, or necessity, or offending their neighbor: the later
reprehends the Galathians, who with a kind of tie of conscience did observe
the Sabbaths and Festival times of the Jews according to the Law, as if they
had not been set free by Christ.

888. Romans 14. 15. Destroy not him with thy meat for whom Christ died. Joh. 10
28. My sheep shall no man pluck out of my hand.

The Elect may be destroyed by themselves as weak men, and by reason of Satan's
malice, that puts so many offenses in their way, but not in respect of God, for
no man can snatch them finally out of his hands

889. Romans 15. 2. Let every one of us please his neighbor. Gal. 1. 10. Should
I yet please men, I should not be the servant of Christ.

We must please men for their edification both by words and examples, but not
to seek for glory at the mouth of the people, for so the Apostle would not
please men.

890. Romans 15. 14. And I my self also am persuaded of you my brethren, that you
also are full of goodness, filled with all knowledge. Chap. 14. 1. There were
many amongst them weak in faith.

The Apostle before by Synechdoche attributes to the whole Church that which
belongs but to one part, for there were many godly, learned and weak also in
that Church.

891. Romans 15. 20. I would not build on another man's foundation. Joh. 4. 38. I
sent you to reap that whereon you bestowed no labor.

Paul compares his Ministry with the other Apostles, and he denies that he
builded on another man's foundation; or to have preached where other Apostles
had planted a Church, but rather to have taught there where the name of Christ
was not so much as once heard of. The Prophets were the seeds men in Gods
field, the Apostles they reaped the harvest, because they saw the fulfilling of
the Prophesies, and they built on the foundation of the Prophets.

892. Romans 16. 20. The God of peace shall bruise Satan under your feet shortly.
Col. 2. 15. Christ has spoiled principalities and powers.

Christ was already become Conqueror, bruising the head of the infernal
serpent, and he daily conquers Satan in us, and he gives us force to overcome
that wicked spirit by the virtue of the holy Ghost; and so to triumph over him.

Two Epistles of St PAUL to the CORINTHIANS.
THe first is Legal, reprehending them who were obnoxious to so many vices, it
is direct against Sectaries, Incestuous, Whoremongers, Adulterers, Contentious,
despisers of the weak brethren, Proud, Arrogant, Covetous, such as denied the
resurrection, Written from Philippi, in the Year of Christ 55.

The other Evangelicall, to comfort the afflicted, commands them to receive him
that was excommunicated, commends the Ministry of the Gospel; exhorts to give
Alms, and do good works, reproves slanderers, and glories against them in the
Lord. It was written from Philippi in the Year of Christ 55

893. 1 Cor. 1. 7. You come behind in no gift. ver. 11. It has been declared
to me that there are contentions amongst you. chapter 3. 3. chapter 11. 15.

The first place is concerning those that were approved and commended amongst
the Corinthians: the later is concerning those who did contentiously prefer
themselves before other Ministers of the Church.

894. 1 Cor. 1. 7. You come behind in no gift. 1 Cor. 13. 9. We know in part.

In the first place is meant necessary graces to salvation, the abundance
whereof was joined with imperfection of degrees, which shall be fulfilled in
the revelation of Christ.

895. 1 Cor. 1. 17. Christ sent me not to baptize, but to preach the Gospel.
Matthew. 28. 19. Go and teach all Nations, baptizing them.

In the Apostolical Ministration the less principal was to baptize; the
principal was the preaching of the Gospel, and that was ordinary or
extraordinary.

896. 1 Cor. 1. 21. The wisdom of God. ver. 21. It is called the foolishness
of preaching.

The Gospel of it self is the wisdom of God; which in the opinion of carnal
and unbeleeving men, is called by accident foolishness.

897. 1 Cor. 1. 21. It pleased God by the foolishness of preaching to save
them that believe. Matthew. 9. 21. If I may but touch his garment, I shall be
whole.

The first place is of the salvation of the soul, which is done by the Gospel:
the later is of the cure of the body, which is wrought by diverse means,
ordinarily by the Word and Sacraments, extraordinarily by other means.

898. 1 Cor. 2. 6. We speak wisdom amongst them that are perfect. chap. 13. 12.
We know in part.

Perfection in the former place is not meant simply but comparatively; the
Apostle calls them perfect here, not those who wanted no perfection, but such as
are so in respect of novices in the Church. Absolute perfection is proper to
the next life, and of that we know here but in part.

899. 1 Cor. 2. 15. He that is spiritual judges all things, yet he himself is
judged of no man. chapter 4. 4, He that judges me is the Lord. chapter 14. 32. And the
spirits of the Prophets are subject to the Prophets.

In the first place God, Ecclesiastical and Political Judges are not
excluded, being they are ordained by God, but those that are carnal and
sensual, the Prophets are subject to the Prophets in the judgment of faith,
concerning things that are to be believed, for God gives us his holy Spirit by
measure: neither do we all understand all things, but comparing our opinions we
must judge with Learned men.

900. 1 Cor. 3. 1, 3. And I brethren could not speak to you as unto spiritual,
but as unto carnal. ch* 1. 2. Sanctified in Christ Jesus, called to be Saints.
ver. 5. Enriched with all knowledge.

The Corinthians were more or less carnal; who walked according to men,
depending on men's authority, in doctrine given to contentions, and troubling
the Church of God with carnal desires.

901. 1 Cor. 3. 7. Neither he that planteth, nor he that waters is any thing,
but God who gives the increase. ver. 8. He that planteth and he that waters
are one.

Any thing, is not to be taken absolutely, or for being in nature, but
comparatively, and secundum quid, for all our labor without Gods operation
prosits nothing.

902. 1 Cor. 3. 8. He that planteth and he that waters are one. ver. 4. Paul
was not one with the Teachers at Corinth.

One is said to be either in number, degree, vocation, gifts, authority, time,
labor or reward. Preachers are not one all those ways. Paul was not one with
those Teachers who preached up themselves more then Christ.

903. 1 Cor. 3. 10. Paul laid the foundation. Heb. 3. 4. He that built all
things is God.

God is the chief Work-master and builder of all things, and who alone gives
faith to his Church; but to commend the Ministry he gives this honor unto
others, which he says do that, which he himself does: so in the Old Testament
he calls the Prophets, in the New the Apostles the Architects of the Foundation,
other Doctors that build the Walls, others who cover the House, and Paul says
by his Apostolical Office, that he laid the Foundation.

904. 1 Cor. 3. 11. Other foundation can no man lay but that is laid, which is
Christ Jesus. Ephesians. 2. 20. You are built upon the foundation of the Apostles
and Prophets.

Christ is the Foundation of salvation by the eternal Decree, by his sending
and delivering himself to death, or by his being apprehended by faith in the
heart of believers: or of Doctrine, because the fundamental Doctrine necessary
to salvation respects Christ, which Doctrine is contained in the Law and the
Gospel; in the Law, because Christ is the end of the Law, and perfect charity;
this is the principal foundation; the second foundation is ministerial, and
that is of the Prophets and Apostles, because by their Ministry the
fundamental Doctrine is delivered.

905. 1 Cor. 3. 15. Heretics shall be saved by fire. Matthew. 7. 22. They shall
be condemned.

The first place is not concerning obstinate Heretics who overthrow the
foundation, but of such as hold the foundation; they that build upon this
foundation, wood, hay, stubble, that is, they that darken the Gospel of Christ
with improper, obscure, frivolous, foolish expositions, mingling vain
questions, men's inventions, philosophical traditions, such if they renounce
their opinions, and hold the true foundation they may be saved.

906. 1 Cor. 4. 1. Let a man so account of us as of the Ministers of Christ.
John 15. 15. You are my friends.

We are servants in respect of Creation, Redemption, Vocation: friends in
respect of Adoption, and Revelation of things necessary to Aug. in John Tract
salvation.

907. 1 Cor. 4. 3. With me it is a small thing to be judged of you. chapter 14. 32.
The spirits of the Prophets are subject to the Prophets.

Paul despises not the judgment of the Church and godly men, but he denies
that he 2 Cor. 10. 15.
hunts after favor or applause from men, or that he cares for the sinister
judgment of those that contemned him, therefore he appeals to the censure of
the Church.

908. 1 Cor. 4. 3. I judge not my self. ver. 4. For 1 Cor. 10. 15.
I know nothing of my self.

I do not judge my self so as to prefer my self before others, nor do I
commend my self, least I should seem to boast, nor do I dispraise my self,
least I do wrong to my Office, says Chrysostom. The Apostle was so modest, who
when he might have commended himself, in respect of his vocation, doctrine, and
fidelity, least he should seem to be a Judge in his own cause, he leaves the
judgment to God. Lastly, he knew nothing by himself, in respect of his Office
and a good conscience wherein he lived honestly; but he speaks not of his
fore-past life.

909. 1 Cor. 4. 3. I judge not my self. chapter 11. 31. If we would judge our
selves we should not be judged.

In the first place he avoids the judgment of dignity, of preferring himself
before others: in the later he commends the judgment of correction and proving
of our selves, which belongs to all men.

910. 1 Cor. 4. 5. Judge nothing before the time. chapter 10 15. Judge ye.

The Apostle in the former place appeals from the corrupt judgment of the
Corinthians unto Christ the supreme Judge; as if he should say, Do not pass
your censure before you know the matter perfectly, and the parties have been
heard, or before the last judgment day, when God shall judge us all; by which
words he casts a bridle on all perverse censurers, and condemns untimely
judgment before things be certainly known.

911. 1 Cor. 5. 1. It is reported that there is fornication amongst you, and
such as is not amongst the Gentiles. Romans 1. 26. The Gentiles were given up to
all unclean affections.

The Apostle shows that this wickedness was detested by the more honest
heathens, that without detestation it could not be named before chaste ears,
also the offenders themselves did detest that wickedness.

912. 1 Cor. 5. 12. What have I to do to judge them that are without? chapter 6. 2.
Do you not know that the Saints shall judge the world?

The first place is of his Apostolical function, whereby Paul was very
careful of those who were made members of the Church by the word he preached
to them: the later is of the Saints in general, and their judgment of
approbation. The Saints, says Chrysostom. shall judge the world by their
exemplary judgment, because by their example the perfidiousness of the world
shall be condemned.

913. 1 Cor. 6. 1. Dare any of you go to Law before the unjust. Romans 13. 1. Let
every soul be subject to the higher powers.

In the first place the Apostle condemn their desire to contend before an
unbeleeving Judge; yet he does not forbid them to appear before civil
Judicature.

914. 1 Cor. 6. 5. Is there not a wise man among you? chapter 1. 20. There are not
many wise.

In the first place he makes the question, in the next he asserts that there
are not many wise men amongst the Corinthians; but he requires not carnal
wisdom, but Christian wisdom, the beginning whereof is the fear of the Lord.

915. 1 Cor. 6. 13. God shall destroy the belly. Phil. 3. 21. He shall change
our vile body.

The first place is of the abuse of the belly, of the flesh and worldly
pleasures; the belly, being it is a part of man's body, shall not be destroyed,
but glorified with the other members.

916. 1 Cor. 7. 1. It is good for a man not to touch a woman. ver. 2. Let every
man have his own wife.

Good here is not opposed to evil, or to sin, as if it were sin to live in
Wedlock; but it signifies tranquillity of life, especially in time of
persecution: The wife before the fall was given to man by God, as a helper to
his devotion, society, generation, education, economy; and much more after the
fall is she a helper to him in his infirmity, and is the remedy of unlawful
love.

917. 1 Cor. 7. 6. I speak this by permission and not of commandment. ver. 5.
Defraud you not one the other. ver. Let every man have his own wife.

The first place leaves it free to married people Genesis 2. 24. Mat 19. 6.
to live continently if they can, and are willing so to do: In the later
places, the pious custom of married people by the Institution of God and the
approbation of Christ is commended.

918. 1 Cor. 7. 10. I command, yet not I, but Mat. 5. 32. chapter 19. 3.
the Lord. ver. 12. Speak I, not the Lord.

First he says, not I, but the Lord, because it was a Law to forbid
divorcements: afterward, I, says he, not the Lord, because by him without a
commandment of God the holy Ghost did then teach.

919. 1 Cor. 7. 14. Your children are holy. Ephesians. 2. 3. We were the children
of wrath.

The first place shows the honest procreation of Christian children, who
though they are by nature the children of wrath, yet by reason of the Covenant
and faith they are called holy.

920. 1 Cor. 7. 21. Art thou called being a servant? care not for it. ver. 21.
but if thou may be made free use it rather.

The first place is to comfort servants against the troubles of servitude, and
he will not have them for that condition to forsake the faith of Christ
whereunto they were called, and lose their Christian liberty for their
corporal service: So that the instruction added to it makes no disagreement,
because servants ought with a willing mind to embrace lawful freedom,
obtained by reason and a safe conscience.

921. 1 Cor. 7. 23. Be not servants of men. chapter 9. 19. The Apostle makes
himself a servant to all men.

It is indeed a most ignominious slavery and sad service to depend on the
commands of other men, besides the commandments of God, but to be serviceable
for the sacred Ministry is not ignominious but honorable.

922. 1 Cor. 7. 23. Be not servants of men. Ephesians. 6. 5. Servants obey your
Masters.

Service is spiritual or carnal, from that he disswades in the former place,
for we must not Gal. 5. 1. Ephesians. 6. 6.
obey the wicked desires of men, and dishonest commands, but must so serve
them, that we may not offend God or wrong our consciences; this he charge us
to do, which though it may be thought hard, yet whilst we do it in the
sincerity of our hearts, for that God requires it, it will be accepted.

923. 1 Cor. 7. 25. Concerning virgins I have no commandment of the Lord, yet I
give my judgment. Matthew. 19. 12. There are some Eunuchs which have made
themselves Eunuchs for the Kingdom of heavens sake.

There is no command of Virginity in both the Covenants. Christ speaks of the
Essens of the time past; condemning them of rashness, because they sought for
the Kingdom of God in perpetual continency, which is a singular gift of God,
and given to very few. Paul speaks for necessity, setting down what is
expedient for all, by reason of time and place, because it was not safe for
Christians, because of persecutions, to stay always in one place, and because
of the cares which ordinarily follow married people.

624. 1 Cor. 7. 29. Let those that have wives be as though they had none. ver.
3, 4, 5. He approves conjugall custom.

In the first place he forbids not the use of Marriage, but he would not have
the husband too uxorious, and he bids them to use the goods of this world
moderately, least we should be overcome with evils, or suppose the good of this
life to be perpetual: since if we lose not all here by some accidents, yet in
our doubts we must leave them all.

925. 1 Cor. 7. 32. I would have you to be without carfulness. 2 Thessalonians. 3.
10. He that will not labor, let him not eat.

By carfulness here he means not, to call men from their vocations and
household cares, but the inconveniences of Matrimony, whereby we are often
called from the service of God.

926. 1 Corinthians. 8. 1. Knowledge puffs up. 1 Cor. 1. 5. Enriched in Christ
with all knowledge.

The first place condemns vain knowledge adjoined with pride; Knowledge puffs
up, nor of it self, but by accident, smatterers and boasters abusing it,
neglecting what is for their edification: the later praises knowledge joined
with charity, as it was a gift of God in Christ amongst the Corinthians.

927. 1 Cor. 8. 11. Through thy knowledge shall thy weak brother perish for
whom Christ died. John 10. 28. Those that are Christ's sheep shall never perish.

Infirm Christians may perish, by reason of their infirmity, Satan's malice, and
the impudeney of the wicked, who abusing their Christian Liberty, are an
offense to the faithful, they cannot perish in respect of the counsel of God
and the merits of Christ, and the efficacy of his intercession, who by a mighty
hand preserves them to salvation.

928. 1 Cor. 9. 15. It were better for me to dye then that any man should make
my glorying void. chapter 1. 29. That no flesh should glory in his presence.

The first place is of true and honest glory, necessary for a good conscience
that has faithfully discharged it self in its office: the later is concerning
vain, unjust boasting, and unnecessary, which must be avoided.

929. 1 Cor. 9. 20. To the Jews I became as a Jew. Acts 13. 46. We turn to the
Gentiles.

The Apostle would have won both Jews and Gentiles unto Christ; for the Jews
cause he circumcised Timothy, shore his head, paid his vow in the Temple, and
observed other Ceremonies for a time: in the later place he turns to the
Gentiles, from the Jews who were hardened, and thrust away from them the Word
of God.

930. 1 Cor. 9. 22. I am made all things to all men. Gal. 1. 10. If I yet
pleased men, I should not be the servant of Christ.

In the first place as a wise Teacher he accommodates himself to strong and
weak, to edisie them in the Gospel, not as flatterers and hypocrites do.

931. 1 Cor. 9 24. So run that ye may obtain. Romans 9. 16. It is not of him
that wills nor of him that runs, but of God that shows mercy.

The first place is of those that are justified, and heirs of eternal life,
that fight a good fight: the later is concerning the efficient cause of our
salvation, which is the grace and mercy of God.

932. 1 Cor. 10 2. They were all baptized unto Moses. chapter 1. 13. Were you
baptized in the name of Paul?

To be baptized in the name is taken improperly, unto Moses, that is in the
Doctrine and Law delivered by him, or by his Ministry, as Acts 19. into John's
Doctrine; but in the later it is taken properly, so we are baptized in the name
of the Father, Son and holy Ghost, for baptism cannot be performed in the
name of any creature, because to be baptized in the name of any one, that is by
his command and authority to be baptized for his worship, faith and obedience.

933. 1 Cor. 10. 23. No temptation has befallen you, but such as is common to
men. Matthew. 4. 3. The devil is a tempter.

Temptation is the divine probation of our faith and obedience, or a devilish
tempting of us to sin, or when men tempt us to persevere in sin, or when
the weakness of our nature draws us into faults and errors, such were the
temptations of the Saints, and of the Corinthians here.

934. 1 Cor. 10. 15. Judge ye your selves what I say. Joh. 5. 39. Search the
Scriptures.

The Apostle makes all men judges of his cause, if any could not judge it was
not imbecility of the Law, but the deed, because all were bound to know things
that concerned their faith, for by the Word of God we may judge concerning
things that belong to faith, the knowledge whereof is necessary for all men,
and it is acquired by reading, meditation, invocation, and searching the holy
Scriptures.

935. 1 Cor. 10. 15. I speak as to wise men. chapter 3. 1. As to carnal and babes.

The Corinthians were wise in respect of their doctrine, but carnal in their
affections, by reason of their strife and contentions; for the most learned
have their carnal desires, nor were they all wise or carnal, for often what
belongs to some is imputed to all.

936. 1 Cor. 10. 21. Ye cannot drink the cup of the Lord, and the cup of
devils. chapter 11. 29. He that cateth and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks
his own damnation.

The first place is of right, and so they cannot nor must not eat or drink,
though they do eat and drink; the later is understood of the fact whereby they
take it.

937. 1 Cor. 10. 24. Let no man seek his own, but every man another wealth. 1 Timothy 5. 8. But if any man provide not for his own, especially for his own
house, he has denied the faith, and is worse then an Infidel.

The first is to be understood with limitation, that no man out of overmuch
love of himself should do his own occasions boastingly, which is far from
Christian charity, which teaches that a man is not born for himself, but to
serve God, and to do good to his neighbor.

938. 1 Cor. 11. 24. Eat, this is my Body. Romans 6. 9. The Body dies no more.

In the Lords Supper, the Body of Christ is not broken by a natural or carnal
manner; the Body and the Blood, the Bread and the Wine are received
conjunctively in respect of the instrument, but they are received disjunctively
in respect of the manner, for the bread and wine is received after one manner,
the Body and Blood after another manner.

939. 1 Cor. 11. 24. Which is broken for you. Luke 22. 1. Which is given.

The Apostle received from the Lord what he delivered to the Corinthians
concerning the sacred Supper; without doubt in the first institution the Lord
used both the words, and because the Evangelists make mention of the name of
giving, the Apostle adds the other.

940. 1 Cor. 12. 3. No man can say that Jesus is the Lord but by the holy
Ghost. Matthew. 7. 21. Isa. 29 Mat. 7. ^^*
Not every one that says unto me Lord, Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom of
heaven.

In the first place it is not only historically with outward lips to say that
Jesus Christ is the Lord, but with faith to believe that he is the Th^^.
Lord, which hypocrites and devils cannot do, for though with their mouth they
confess him, yet with works they deny him; also no man can say for his own
salvation that Jesus is the Lord, unless he have the holy Ghost.

941. 1 Cor. 12 6. God works all in all. Phil. 2. 12. Work out your salvation.

God as the first cause works all good in all men, we with God work (...) our
salvation subordinately, we are called by God moving and helping us freely, and
by his grace we cooperate.

942. 1 Cor. 13. 2. Though I have all faith, so that I could remove mountains,
I am nothing. Romans 3. 28. We are justified by faith without the works of the
Law.

In the first place, by all faith is meant faith of Mat. 17, 20.
working all manner of miracles, so that it can extend it self so far as to
remove mountains, yet charity may be separated from such a (...), but it can
never be separated from a justifying Joh^ (...)*
faith, to subsist without it.

943. 1 Cor. 13. 9. We know in part. 1 John 2. 20. Ye know all things.

In this life our knowledge is in part and imperfect, but in the next life it
shall be perfected: the later place is concerning necessary things to the
knowledge of Antichrist, that is done by the holy Ghost leading us into all
truth by degrees and parts.

944. 1 Cor. 13. 12. We see now through a glass darkly, but then face to face.
2 Cor. 3. 18. But we all as with open face beholding the glory of the Lord.

The face in Scripture is taken for Gods Essence, Exodus 33. 23. for his
general presence, Deuteronomy. 31. 17. for Gods grace, Numb. 6. 25. for his revenge,
Rev. 6. 16. for knowledge and internal vision, Exodus 33. 11. of this in the
first place: but in the later is meant the sight of God in our Country, that is
in heaven; as it is said through a glass, and in a riddle, in respect of the
Law, for God is seen by us in part, in the Word of God, as he is.

945. 1 Cor. 13. 13. Now abides faith, hope and charity, but the greatest of
these is charity. Gal. 5. 6. Faith works by love.

Charity being the effect of faith is the inferior, for by faith we are
justified and Christ Romans 5. 1.
dwells in us, and we please God, we are the sons of God and obtain eternal
life. Charity is not the greatest virtue, but because it shall remain in the
next life in its operations.

946. 1 Cor. 14. 31. You may all prophecy one by one. Heb. 5. 4. No man takes
this honor to himself, but he that is called of God.

The Apostle understands all that are lawfully Jer. 28. 2. 1 Pet. 4. 11.
called to the Office of Prophesying.

947. 1 Cor. 15. 9 I am the least of the Apostles. ver. 10. I labored more
then they all.

He was the least in order, because he was the last called to be an Apostle;
but he was greater in laboring, because the charge of all the Churches was
committed unto him. In the first Romans 15. 16, 17.
place he speaks lowly of himself, according to Christ's commandment, When you
have done all those things which are commanded you, say, we are unprofitable
servants, we have done that which was our duty to do, Luke 17. 10. In the later
place he speaks of those that strove with him by emulation, to whom he compares
himself, not derogating from others, but he magnifies his Apostleship from his
faith, and fruits of his works.

948. 1 Cor. 15. 27. He has put all things under his feet. ver. 28. The Son
also shall be subject to the Father.

That subjection shall be effected in his members and Church which is his Body;
and by resignation of his Kingdom, that now he administers at present by his
Ministers in the midst of his enemies, but not without battle: also he shall
declare his subjection to the Father, answerable to that nature according to
which all power is given to him in heaven and in earth.

949. 1 Cor. 15. 50. Flesh and blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of God. ver.
53. This corruptible must put on incorruption.

Flesh and blood here signifies the corrupt nature of man in the state of
sin; this, as it is such, cannot inherit the Kingdom of God; but our nature
purged from corruption, shall put on incorruption.

950. 1 Cor. 16. 15. The household of Stephanus addicted themselves to the
ministry of the Saints. Heb. 5. 4. No man takes this honor to himself, but he
that was called of God.

In the first place is meant the ministry of transparting the collections to
the brethren, and they did it by the sending of the Apostles by them in a most
dangerous time.

951. 1 Cor. 16. 22. If any man love not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him he
Anathema. Matthew. 5 44. Love your enemies.

The Apostle does not pronounce this Anathema out of his own private affection,
but being led by the holy Ghost; it is not lawful rashly to use private
imprecations, unless the glory of God require it in an especial manner, and
there be no hope left of their salvation.

952. 2 Cor. 1. 1. Timothy with Paul wrote that Epistle. 1. Tim. 1. 3. He was
left at Ephesus, when Paul went into Macedonia.

Paul sailing from Corinth into Asia, left Timothy at Ephesus together with
Aquila Act. 18. 19.
and Priscilla, but that they were with the Apostle at Corinth at that time,
the Inscription it self testifies.

953. 2 Cor. 1. 8. In Asia we were pressed out of measure, above strength. 1
Cor. 10. 13. God will not suffer you to be tempted above that you are able.

The first place is concerning temptation exceeding bare humane strength, the
second concerning faith and strength given to us by God, which is our victory.

954. 2 Cor. 5. 2. In this we groan earnestly, desiring to be clothed upon with
our house which is from heaven. ver. 4. We groan being burdened, not that we
would be uncloathed.

The first place is concerning the groaning by grace, the second by nature, for
the holy Ghost stirs up a desire of life eternal in the mind of the godly,
and it is natural to fear death, because it destroys nature.

955. 2 Cor. 5. 16. We know no man after the flesh. Romans 1. 3. Christ of the
seed of David according to the flesh. Phil. 2. 8.

To know according to the flesh, is to praise that which corrupt flesh delights
in, and to despise what it despises, so we knew not Christ carnally, but out
of Gods Word we know him to be of the seed of David.

956. 2 Cor. 5. 19. God was in Christ reconciling the world unto himself. ver.
20. We pray you in Christ's stead be ye reconciled to God.

Reconciliation is ascribed to God as the principal cause, to Christ as the
meritorious cause, or to the Ministry of the Word as to the Instrumental cause,
or to our selves apprehending it by faith, and applying it for our salvation.

957. 2 Cor. 8. 20. Avoiding this that no man should blame us in this abundance
which is administered by us. 1 Cor. 4. 3. With me it is a very small thing that
I should be judged of you.

The first place is of just dispraise, wherein our hearts convince us; the
later is concerning the unjust judgments of the world, which proceed from men's
depraved affections.

958. 2 Cor. 11. 4. If he that comes preaches another Jesus whom we have not
preached, or receive another Gospel which ye have not accepted, ye might well
bear with him. Gal. 1. 8. Though we or an Angel from heaven preach any other
Gospel unto you, then that we have preached, let him be accursed.

In the first place is meant by another Christ, and another Gospel, a better
Doctrine then the Apostle taught; but in the later, by another Gospel is meant
false doctrine which overthrows Gods grace and Christ's merits.

959. 2 Cor. 11. 17. That which I speak, I speak it not after the Lord, but
foolishly. 1 Pet. 4. 11. If any man speak, let him speak as the oracles of God.

Paul being forced to it by the calumnies of false Apostles, said somethings
concerning his own labors and dangers, which did not directly appertain to his
Ministry. Peter speaks of those things which directly appertain to the Ministry
of the Word; wherein the rule of our words must be the Oracles of God revealed
in the Scriptures.

St PAUL'S Epistle to the GALATIANS.
HE defends the Justice of faith against false Apostles, that a man is
justified, not by the works of the Law, but by faith in Christ, and exhorts to
good works, that the fruits of faith must be sowed in Christian charity and
liberty: It was written from Rome in the Year of Christ 60.

960. Gal. 1. 1. Paul an Apostle, not of men, neither by man, but by Jesus
Christ. chapter 2. 2. I communicated unto them the Gospel which I preach among the
Gentiles. ver. 6. Who seemed to be somewhat.

Paul came to Peter and the rest of the Apostles, not that he might learn the
Gospel from them, but to have their testimony of his Doctrine, that he preached
nothing to the Gentiles but the Gospel of Jesus Christ.

961. Gal. 1. 17. I went not up to Jerusalem to them which were Apostles before
me, but I went into Arabia. Act. 9. 26. Paul after his return to Damascus, came
to Jerusalem.

Paul after his conversion went into Arabia from Damascus, and coming back
thence to Damascus in the third year, persecution befell him, who being in
hazard of his life, was let down in a basket and escaped; and coming to
Jerusalem, when they were all afraid of him, he was brought to the Apostles by
Barnabas, ver. 27.

962. Gal. 4. 11. I am afraid of you least I have bestowed upon you labor in
vain. 1 Cor. 15. 58. Be ye steadfast, knowing that your labor is not in vain in
the Lord.

In the first place the Apostle feared of the success of his labor by reason
of schism amongst the Galatians, who sought their salvation more from the Law
then from Christ: in Isa. 65. 23
the later he hopes well of the Corinthians, that his labor shall not be lost.

963. Gal. 5. 17. The flesh lusts against the spirit. Ephesians. 6. 12. We wrestle
not against flesh and blood, but against powers.

Flesh is taken in the first place for our corrupt nature; in the later for men
whose nature is frail and weak; nor is our chief conflict with those, but with
spiritual powers, which use many deceits, and make many incursions upon the
faithful.

964. Gal. 5. 24. They that are Christ's have crucified the flesh with the
affections. Ephesians. 5. 29. No man ever yet hated his own flesh.

The first place is not concerning the nature of the flesh, but the desire of
the regenerate man, who cares not for the affections of the flesh, will not
serve his belly, his pleasures, the world or worldly delights; the later is
concerning self-love natural to us all; and the Apostle speaking of the wife,
uses the name of flesh, because they are both made one flesh.

965. Gal. 6. 2. Bear ye one another burdens. ver. 5. Every man shall bear his
own burden.

In the first place is spoken of the faults and infirmities of our brethren
which are indeed a burden to us, yet we must bear them by sympathy; and the
rule of charity will have it so, that all of us help our brethren and tolerate
their infirmities, to lift up such as are down, to hide their faults, so much
as may be and is fitting. Thou have this fault, and not that, another Theoderez.
man has another fault, do thou bear his fault, let him bear thine, and so
fulfill the love of charity; be not curious in other men's faults, for every man
shall give account of his own.

966. Gal. 6. 4. Let every man prove his works. 1 Cor. 3. 13. The fire shall
try every man's work.

In the first place is intimated what is our duty, to make our works approved
to God; in the later place, the fire signifies either the holy Ghost or
afflictions by which we are tried.

The Epistle of St PAUL to the EPHESIANS.
HE commemorates the benefits of God which are part, and recites our Election,
Redemption, Sanctification, Vocation into the Church, Justification by faith,
our future inheritance of eternal life, and our duties; in general, of us
all, in special, of married people, and unmarried, of Parents, of Children, of
Masters and of servants. It was written from Rome in the Year of Christ 59. and
sent by Tychicus.

967. Ephesians. 1. 7. In whom we have redemption. Romans 8. 18. We wait for future
glory, and the redemption of our bodies.

We have redemption in Christ from the guilt of sin by our justification, we
expect a full redemption from inherent sins in our glorification; for Christ
shall transform our mortal bodies, that he may make them like to his glorious
body, that as we are one with him here in soul and body by grace, so we may be
also in glory.

968. Ephesians. 3. 5. The mystery of Christ's incarnation was in other ages unknown
to men. Col. 1. 5. You have heard before in the word of the truth of the Gospel.

It was unknown to the Fathers under the Law, in respect of fullness and
clearness of knowledge, revealed since Christ came, and it was made manifest
to the whole world by the Ministry of the Apostles.

969. Ephesians. 3. 15. All paternity is named from God the Father. Joh. 8. 44. The
devil is the father of lies.

God is the Father of heavenly and earthly paternity, the devil is excluded
from these, for he has no such paternity, but as he is the Author, he is
called the Father of a lie.

970. Ephesians. 4. 19. The Gentiles gave themselves over to lasciviousness to work
all uncleanness. Romans 1. 28. God gave them over to a reprobate mind.

The Gentiles gave themselves over in regard of their sins, God gave them
over in regard of punishment.

971. Ephesians. 5. 25. Husbands love your wives. Luke 14, 26.

Wives are to be beloved as they are wives, but if they hinder us from
following Christ, they are to be hated with such a hatred as proceeds not from
anger, but zeal to Gods glory.

972. Ephesians. 5. 33. Let the wife see that she reverence Deuteronomy. 6. 13.
her husband. Matthew. 10. 28. Rather fear God.

Fear in respect of God must be guided the same way that love must. God must be
beloved above all, not excluding fear which is due to others.

973. Ephesians. 5. 1. Be ye followers of God. 1 Cor. 11. 1. Be ye followers of me.

The Apostle warns the Ephesians to be followers of God, for by that they shall
fructify the more: Ae exhorts the Corinthians to follow him, that as he
followed Christ, so they would learn of him; as if he would have said, If you
cannot follow Christ, yet follow me at least that am his servant.

974 Ephesians 5. 26. Christ has cleansed his Church by the washing of water by the
word. 1 John 1. 7. The blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us from all sins.

Christ purges away our spots with his blood, as with water, by the Word and
Sacraments, as by instruments he communicates to us the power of his death.

975. Ephesians. 6. 12. For we wrestle not against flesh and blood. Gal. 5. 17. The
spirit and the flesh are contrary.

In the former place mention is made of our principal and capital enemy, that
is the devil; in the later of the concupiscence of our corrupt flesh, and the
strife of it against the Spirit.

The Epistle of St PAUL to the PHILIPPIANS.
HE exhorts them to patience, and not to be offended with his chains, but that
they should live patiently in mutual love, and take heed of false Teachers,
and study to lead a life unblameable. Written from Rome by Epaphreditus.

976. Phil. 2. 7. He was made in the likeness of man, and was found in fashion
as a man. 2 Cor. 5. 16. Henceforth know we Christ no more after the flesh.

The first place is concerning Christ's true humanity, who after his humiliation
was exalted of God above all creatures, and made to be Lord in the glory of the
Father.

977. Phil. 2. 9. God has given him a Name which is above every name. Matthew.
1. 21. In his conception. Luke 2. 21. In his Circumcision they called his name
Jesus.

By the Name above all names, is understood Majesty and glory given from God
the Father Mat. 1. 22.
unto Jesus Christ our Lord. In his conception he was called Jesus, because he
shall save his people from their sins.

978. Phil. 2. 12. Work out your own salvation with fear and trembling. 2 Timothy
1. 12. I am certain, because the Lord is able to keep that which I committed
unto him.

The Apostle means fear and trembling, not that which is servile but filial,
which is opposed to presumption and security, least we should grow insolent
upon the confidence of our gifts, but that we should altogether depend on the
mercy and goodness of God.

979. Phil. 3. 12. Not as though I were already perfect. ver. 15. So many as
are already perfect.

Man's perfection is in heaven to which we bend our course, that he means in the
first place, but our perfection on earth must be conformable to Christ our
head, in doing well and suffering: The Philippians are called perfect, not
simply so, but comparatively in respect of those that are weak, who are to be
born withal by those which are strong, in respect of whom also Col. 3. 6. Heb.
5. 13.
they are termed children.

980. Phil. 3. 21. Christ shall change our vile bodies, that they may be
fashioned like to his glorious body. Heb. 1. 4, 5, 13. The Angels shall not be
like him.

Our bodies shall be conformable to Christ's glorious body which he had in his
resurrection; but not by reason of his Majesty and power he has by the
Hypostaticall union.

The Epistle of St PAUL to the COLOSSIANS.
HE exhorts them to embrace the Doctrine of the Gospel, and to fly from the
teaching of false Apostles, and he warns them to live godly, putting off the
old and putting on the new man, that in Oeconomicall Government, the men, old
men and Masters, should observe humanity and equity; women, children and
servants should live in obedience, that all should be watchful in prayer. It
was sent from Rome by Tychicus and Onesimus.

981. Col. 1. 24. I fill up that which is behind of the afflictions of Christ
in my flesh, for his body sake which is the Church. Heb. 10. 14. For by one
offering he has perfected for ever them that are sanctified.

The Passions of Christ, as to merit and satisfaction, are perfect for his
Church; the Apostles Zach. 2. 8. Mat. 25. 2 Timothy 3. 12.
and Martyrs fill up in their flesh what is behind of the afflictions of
Christ, enduring miseries, wherein Christ himself suffers, for they are his
Members, He that touches you, touches the apple of mine eye. What you do to
any of these little ones, you do it unto me; it is added for the Church, not to
redeem the Church, but to edify and strengthen the Church by our example of
constancy and patience.

982. Col. 2. 3. In Christ are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge.
Matthew. 24. 36. But of that day and hour knows no man, no not the Angels in
heaven but the Father only.

Christ in the state of exaltation has a perfect knowledge of all things,
because all power in heaven and earth is given to him, and he sits at the right
hand of God. In the state of humiliation he knew not when the last day should
be, not in respect of himself, says Augustine, but in respect of us.

983. Col. 2. 9. In Christ dwells all the fullness of the Godhead bodily.
Heb. 2. 17. It behoved him to be like unto us in all things, sin excepted.

He is like to us in all things in respect of the essence of humane nature, not
in respect of his subsistence in the person of the Word, and of his
Hypostaticall union, Glory and Majesty.

984. Col. 3. 2. Set your affections on things above, and not on things on the
earth. Romans 11. 33. O the depth of the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge
of God.

To set our affections on things above, is to elevate our minds to heaven,
above all earthly things, unto our Country where we wait for our happiness,
yet so that we be not highminded, and desire to know that which God will not
have us to know: for some things are to be believed, and soberly to be searched
into, but other things which exceed the measure of our faith, must not be
searched unto; he is overwhelmed with Glory, that seeks into Gods Pro. 25. 2.
Majesty.

985. Col. 3. 2. Set not your affections on earthly things. 1 Timothy 5. 8. He
that provideth not for his own household is worse then an Infidel.

The first place forbids us to search after earthly things, neglecting
spiritual and heavenly things, for so far must we take care for earthly
things, as they may serve to Gods glory and our use for our salvation.

The two Epistles of St PAUL to the THESSALONIANS.
IN the first he commends their faith and constancy, and exhorts them to an
honest life, and a serious expectation of Christ's last coming; In the second he
comforts them against persecutions, and foretells the last day, the Kingdom of
Antichrist, defection from the Gospel: He exhorts them to good words and works.
These two Epistles were written from Athens.

986. 1 Thessalonians. 1. 3. Remembering your work of faith and labor. Romans 3. 28. Gal.
3. 10. Faith is opposed to works.

Faith is a work, but not ours, or proceeding Joh. 6. 29.
from our own strength, for then it would not justify us, but it is the work
of God, and a quality in us respecting the merits of Christ, therefore the
Apostle calls not faith it self so much a work, as he does that which proceeds
from faith.

987. 1 Thessalonians. 2. 20. For you are our glory. 1 Cor. 1. 31. He that glories,
let him glory in the Lord.

Our glorying has its foundation in God, in the mean while if any thing be
done amongst the auditory by the work of the Ministry, we must say with the
Apostle, It is not I that labored, but the grace of God which was 1 Cor. 15.
10.
with me.

988. 1 Thessalonians. 4. 17. Then we which are alive and remain, shall be caught up
together with them in the clouds to meet the Lord. 2 Timothy 4. 6. I am now ready
to be offered, and the time of my departure is at hand.

In the first place is spoken of the company of the faithful, by reason of the
most near communion and uniting of the body of Christ: for we are all one
spiritual body, so many as believe in Christ, so that what happens to one
member may seem to happen to all the rest.

989. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 5. Ye are all children of the light, and of the day, not of
the night. Rom 8. 19. For the earnest expectation of the creature waits for
the manifestation of the Sons of God.

We are here with Paul children of light and the day, in grace, not yet in
glory. The Apostle expected not to be made the Son of God, because he was so
already actually, but only to be revealed to be so, for it appears not so yet
what we shall be, for though we be heirs, we do not yet actually possess the
Kingdom; we must therefore distinguish sonnehood acquired here by grace, from
that which shall be in our Country by glory.

990. 2 Thessalonians. 1 5. The persecutions and tribulations which you endure, are a
manifest token of the righteous judgment of God, that ye may be counted worthy
of the Kingdom of God, for which you also suffer. Ephesians. 2. 8. You are saved
through faith, and not of your selves, it is the gift of God.

The faithful are worthy, not by their own worthiness but Christ's; also the
word worthy Col. 1. 13.
is the same here with convenient.

991. 2 Thessalonians. 2* 2. The day of Christ is not at hand. 1 John 2. 18. It is the
last time.

To be at hand, and to draw near do differ, the Apostle denies that the day is
at hand, but he denies not that it draws near, it is called the last time in
respect of former time, and because in the last time the day of judgment
draws nigh: it is called the last hour in respect of God, because our days
compared to eternity, are but one moment, and a thousand years in Gods sight as
yesterday, when it is past, also all things are present with God.

992. 2 Thessalonians. 3. 10. If any would not work neither should he eat. 1 Cor. 9. 6.
Have we not power to forbear working?

In the first place, flesh and idleness are condemned; in the later labor is
commended, which is wrought not with the hand alone, but with the head also;
the Ministers of the Church are not to get their living by the labor of their
hands, being they are not Mechanics: The Apostle had a singular gift from God
to preach extemporary, and yet had he means from the 2 Cor. 1. 11.
Churches.

Two Epistles of St PAUL to TIMOTHY.
THE first is a pattern for Pastors, to show them what they ought to be in
Doctrine and Prayers, and in Life with their families; and lays down the way
how to instruct all men, of what state, age or condition soever. It was written
from Laodicea, in the Year of Christ 52. The second confirms Timothy that he
should not be cast down in his mind by reason of the tempests of persecutions,
and warns him that in preaching the Gospel he should avoid false doctrine, that
he should be diligent and come unto him. It was written from Rome, when he was
in prison, in the year of Christ 70.

993. 1 Timothy 2. 4. God will have all men to be saved (every one.) Acts 13. 48.
And as many as were ordained to eternal life believed.

All that believe in Christ, God does promote them to salvation, and they by
Gods Divine Decree are pre-ordained to eternal life: for Christ is the Savior
of all, especially of those who believe.

994. 1 Timothy 2. 5. There is one Mediator between God and man, the man Christ
Jesus. Romans 8. 26. The spirit makes intercession for us, with groans which
cannot be uttered.

Christ is our only Mediator of Redemption and Intercession; the holy Ghost is
said to pray for us, when he stirs up our hearts to prayer, and causes us
to groan when we call upon God.

995. 1 Timothy 2. 12. But I suffer not a woman to teach. Tit. 2. 3. Let the aged
women be teachers of good things.

Women must not teach publicly in the Church, least they should thereby take
occasion of usurping authority over the men; but let them be in subjection; let
the aged women teach the younger women modesty and prudence at home, for that
they are commanded to do.

996. 1 Timothy 2. 15. Women shall be saved in child bearing. Joh. 3. 16.
Whosoever believes in Christ shall not perish, but shall have everlasting life.

The first place is concerning the state of women, and by, for, and in, are set
down for their consolation, least being married they should fall from the hope
of salvation, but they must continue in faith, love, holiness and sobriety.

997. 1 Timothy 3. 1. If a man desires the office of a Bishop he desires a good
work. 1 Cor. 7. 20. Let every man abide in the same calling wherein he was
called.

To desire a Bishops Office for that end that a man may serve God faithfully,
is not disallowed, if a man have an honest vocation, and continue in it, he
does well.

998. 1 Timothy 3. 15. The Church of the living God is the pillar and ground of
Truth. 1 Cor. 3. 11. Other foundation can no man lay, then that which is laid,
even Christ Jesus.

The pillar and ground he says that the Church is, but not the foundation, it
does not primarily support the spiritual building, but the Church it self is
supported by the foundation.

999. 1 Timothy 4. 16. Thou shall both save thy self and them that hear thee. Luke
2. 11. Christ the Lord is our Savior.

The first place speaks of the instrument of our salvation in the Ministry of
the Word, whereby the faithful attain salvation; the later speaks of the
meritorious cause, and that is Christ.

1000. 1 Timothy 5. 20. Them that sin rebuke before all. Matthew. 18. 15. If thy
brother trespass against thee, tell him his fault between him and thee alone.

In the first place he says what the duty of Pastors is in rebuking sins
which are committed publicly to the common scandal; in the second he speaks
of the sins of private men, committed privately against private persons.

1001. 1 Timothy 6. 10. The love of money is the root of all evil. Eccles. 10. 9.
Pride.

Pride and covetousness are almost always joined together. He is proud who
desires to exceed his condition; he is covetous that would have more then
enough; neither of them can be contented with God himself; these two were in
the sin of the first man the chief ingredients.

1002. 1 Timothy 6. 16. God only has immortality. Matthew. 10. 28. The souls of
men are immortal.

God of himself and in himself is immortal only; but Angels and men by the
grace of God.

1003. 1 Timothy 6. 16. No man has seen God. 1 John 3. 2. We shall see him as he
is.

God being by nature invisible cannot be seen with bodily eyes: The faithful
either see God by faith in this life, or after a special manner; in the life
to come we shall see him as he is, by a more perfect way then we do here, by
the participation of his glory.

1004. 2 Timothy 2. 10. I endure all things for the elect sake, that they may also
obtain salvation. 1 Pet. 3. 18. Christ has once suffered for our sins.

The Apostle sustained all things for the elect sake, not by satisfying for
them, but by his example edifying and confirming them, that they might not
refuse to suffer something: when he says that they obtain salvation by Christ,
he shuts out his own sufferings, that they may not be reckoned for satisfactory.

1005. 2 Timothy 2. 21. If any man purge himself from these he shall be a vessel
unto honor. 1 John 1. 7. The blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us from all our
sins.

Paul means purging from the corruptions of doctrine and manners. ver. 18. John
shows a plenary redemption from our sins by Christ Jesus.

The Epistle of St PAUL to TITUS.
IT is the compendium of Christian Doctrine, informing Teachers, set in the
Ecclesiastical State Political or Oeconomicall, what they ought to do; he
exhorts all and every one to good works, and to fly vain questions and
heresies. It was written from Nicopolis in the Year of Christ 54.

1006. Tit. 1. 9. Able by sound Doctrine to convince gainsayers. chapter 3. 9.
Avoid foolish questions, contentions and strivings about the Law.

In the first place he requires that Teachers by their Office shall rebuke
those that are gainsayers, with all long suffering and sobriety: in the later
that they avoid janglings about words, that is contentious, clamorous,
unprofitable Disputations, and verbal Discourse, which tends not to
edification, either with Heretics or others in the Church, because they
edify none, but rather confirm them in their sins.

1007. Tit. 2. 15. Rebuke with all authority. 1 Timothy 3. 3. A Bishop must be no
striker.

Titus was gentle by nature, therefore he is warned to rebuke with authority.
He inculcates to Timothy modesty and mildness, that when he rebukes he should
not strike, but should rebuke diversely according to the diversity of men's
faults, offices, ages, degrees, otherwise old men, otherwise young men,
otherwise those that sin of malice, otherwise those that sin of infirmity,
otherwise those that were ready to obey, and otherwise those that were
obstinate, as there were in Crete many despisers of the Ministry.

The Epistle of St PAUL to PHILEMON.
HE intercedes for Onesimus, who was run from his Master Philemon, and would
have his Master receive him again.

1008. Philem. v. 5. He had love and faith toward all the Saints. Mark 16. 16.
John 3. 16. Whosoever believes in Christ shall be saved.

Philemon did testify to all men by his works of love toward the Saints, that
he had a lively faith in Christ.

The Epistle to the HEBREWS. is also thought to be St PAUL'S, but his Name was
left out, least the Jews should be deterred from the reading of it.
HE describes the person of Christ according to his Divine and humane Nature:
and he confirms his Offices, Priestly, Kingly and Prophetical, and exhorts the
Jews to faith, constancy, and good works, by the example of the Fathers.

1009. Heb. 1. 3. Christ sat down at the right hand of the Majesty on high.
Acts 7. 55. Steven saw the son of man standing at the right hand.

To sit at the right hand, is to have all Glory, Majesty, Kingdom and Power
both in heaven and in earth: The Lamb standing at Gods right hand, which was
slain for us, and intercedes as a Priest on our behalf, stands as Aaron stood
with his Censer of old, betwixt the living and the dead, to turn away the wrath
of God.

1010. Heb. 2. 3. The Gospel was confirmed unto us by those that heard Christ.
Gal. 1. 12. I neither received it of man, neither was I taught it, but by the
revelation of Jesus Christ.

In the first place it is spoken of the Apostles, who were with the Lord, into
which number Paul was taken after Christ's resurrection; and he was more
confirmed after his admission, communicating with them those things that he had
learned by revelation from Christ.

1011. Heb. 7. 19. The Law made nothing perfect. James 1. 25. The perfect Law
of liberty.

The first place is concerning the Ceremonial Law, which the Jews abused,
separating the Law from Grace and the Spirit of Christ, and opposing the Law to
the Gospel: The later place is concerning the whole Doctrine divinely revealed,
comprehended in Gods Word, which contains not only in writing, Moral Precepts,
but also Promises concerning Christ, of all which Christ is the soul,
recreating our souls by his Spirit, and enlightening our eyes.

1012. Heb. 11. 6. He that comes to God must believe that he is. Romans 2. 6.
God shall render to every man according to his deeds.

We must believe, because faith is the means and the instrument of our
Justification. God shall render to every one according to his works, because
works are the outward testimonial and mark of our Faith and Justification
before God.

1013. Heb. 11. 13. The Patriarchs all died not having received the promises.
ver. 33. Obtained promises. Acts 2. 39. The promise is made unto you.

The promise made to the Fathers was temporal, concerning the possession of
the Land of Canaan, which Abraham, Isaac and Jacob Act. 7. 5.
obtained, not by themselves, but by their successors; but the promise was
spiritual concerning Christ to be sent, and that by faith in Joh. 8. 56.
him they should obtain eternal life; so the Fathers obtained the promises,
because they saw Christ afar off, and rejoiced that Christ should come; they
did not obtain the promises, because he came not in their days, yet they
believed he should come.

1014. Heb. 12. 17. Esau found no place for repentance, though he sought it
carefully with tears. Acts 2. 38. Repent for the remission of your sins.

Repentance, if it be taken passively, is referred to Esau's father, whose
mind could not be changed with his prayers, that so he might revoke the
blessing conferred upon Jacob: but Genesis 27. 33. v. 45.
take it actively, concerning Esau's repentance and that was not serious, but
hypocritical, who intended to kill his brother.

The Canonical Epistle of St JAMES.
HE warns them who boasted of their faith without works, that they should show
their faith by their works in the Divine Law, and flee from sins that are
forbidden, and embrace virtues that are commanded.

1015. James 1. 5. If any man lack wisdom, let him ask it of God. 1 Cor. 3. 18.
If any man amongst you seems to be wise in this world, let him become a fool
that he may be wise.

The first place is concerning spiritual and heavenly wisdom, the Author
whereof is God: the later concerning vain, earthly, worldly wisdom, and
carnal, which is foolishness with God.

1016. James 1. 25. chapter 2. 12. The perfect Law of liberty. Gal. 4. 24. Which
gendreth unto bondage.

In the former place, not only the Moral Joh. 8. 36.
Law, according to which whosoever lives is free, but also the Doctrine of the
Gospel, whence true liberty results, is to be understood: in the later, in
respect of us and by accident, it is called the Law of bondage.

1017. James 2. 24. A man is justified by works, and not by faith only. Romans 3.
28. We conclude that a man is justified by faith, without the deeds of the Law.

The sayings of the Apostles Paul and James Aug quest. 76.
are not repugnant one to the other, the one says that a man is justified by
faith without works, the other says that faith is dead without works; those
works that go before faith are vain, but he speaks of those works that follow
faith. Paul considers a man justified before God, James a man justified before
men. Paul speaks of true internal faith which justifies in the sight of God,
James of the outward profession of faith, historical knowledge and the effects
and testimonies of it.

The two Epistles of the Apostle St PETER.
THe former commemorates Gods benefits, exhorts all men in general to the
duties of piety and honesty, toward God, themselves, and their neighbors; but
in particular, in their Domestical, Politic, and Ecclesiastical condition,
etc. the later warns the faithful, that they proceed in godliness, and fly
from false teachers, deriders, and such as deny the coming of Christ, and the
last Judgment.

1018. 1 Pet, 1. 12. The Angels desire to look into. Matthew. 18. 10. Their
Angols behold the face of my Father.

The first place is concerning the mystery of Redemption, which the Angels
desire to look into, because in that is the height and the depth, and the
length and the breadeth of Gods mercy manifested so far, that the very Angels
cannot comprehend it all.

1019. 1 Pet. 2. 11. I beseech you as strangers and pilgrims. Ephesians. 2. 12, 19.
You are no more strangers and forrainers, but fellow Citizens with the Saints.

The faithful are strangers and (...) in respect of the Kingdom of Glory, but
not of the Kingdom of Grace, which S. Paul speaks of.

1020. 1 Pet. 2. 23. Christ when he was reviled, reviled not again, when he
suffered he threatened not. John 8. 44. He contended with the Jews.

Christ as a Priest in his sufferings threatened not, and being reviled, reviled
not again; but as a Prophet he threatened those that were refractory, with hell
fire.

1021. 1 Pet. 5. 8. The devil as a roaring lion, walks about seeking whom he
may devour. Romans 8. 31. If God be for us, who can be against us?

The devils malice can do nothing against us, when God defends us.

1022. 2 Pet. 1. 19. The sacred Scripture is as a burning lamp in a dark place.
chapter 3. 16. In Paul's Epistles somethings are hard to be understood.

In the Scripture things are handled clearly and not obscurely, though they may
seem obscure to us; yet that obscurity is not in respect of faith, but of
humane reason; whence it is that many ignorant and unlearned people, do
foolishly wrest the Scriptures into a contrary sense.

1023. 2 Pet. 1. 21. Holy men of God spoke as they were moved by the holy
Ghost. Joh. 7. 39. The holy Ghost was not yet given, because that Jesus was not
yet glorified.

The Prophets in the Old Testament had the same holy Ghost which the Apostles
had in the New Testament, but after another manner and degree, the least of the
Apostles after the visible miraculous sending of the holy Ghost in the day of
Pentecost, knew the Prophesies more fully and clearly then the Prophets that
foretold them, because the Apostles had seen the fulfilling of the Prophesies,
and Christ opened their minds, that they might understand the Luke 24. 47.
Scriptures.

Three Epistles of the Apostle St JOHN.
THE first is Catholic, it breaths out the love of God to us in Christ our
Mediator, and our love toward God and our neighbor, commands us to beware of
the world, Antichrist and Idols. The second admonishes the Elect Lady and her
children, that remaining in the doctrine and love of Christ, they take heed of
seducers. The third commends the bounty of Gaius, and commends to him those
that were banished for Christ, rebukes Diotrephes, and gives testimony to
Demetrius.

1024. 1 John 1. 8. If we say we have no sin* we deceive our selves. Ioh. 9.
3. Neither has this man sinned nor his parents.

In the former place sin is taken generally and so we are all sinners; in the
later in special for some grievous sin, which uses to be the cause of some
grievous singular punishment from God.

1025. 1 John 1. 8. If we say we have no sin the truth is not in us. chapter 3.
9. He cannot sin because he is born of God.

To have sin and to commit sin differ; we all have sin, and we are
conceived and born in it; yet the faithful commit no sin, because they will
not suffer sin to reign in them, but the wicked and hypocritical have sins
dwelling in them.

1026. 1 John 2. 2. Christ is the propitiation for our sins, and for the
sins of the whole world. ver. 15. Love not the world. Joh. 17. 9. I pray not
for the world.

The word world is taken variously in the Scripture: in the first place are
meant the men that are in the world, for whose sins Christ is the
propitiation, as for the sufficiency of his merits, the price and virtue, but
not for the efficacy thereof, which is hindered by the infidelity and sins of
the wicked, concerning which the later places must be understood.

1027. 1. John 2. 18. Antichrist shall come, and even now are there many
Antichrists. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 3. Antichrist was not yet revealed.

All those are Antichrists in general, who deny Christ's Divine or humane
Nature, or in his Person or Office, etc. In special, that great Antichrist is
the son of Perdition, who in the time of Paul was not yet revealed, though
the mystery of iniquity began to work.

1028. 2 John v. 10. If there come any unto you and bring not this doctrine,
receive him not into your houses, neither bid him God speed. Mat. 5. 44. Love
your enemies.

The first place forbids not to show our duty of humanity to all men, or to
salute them civilly, but we are admonished not to use too great familiarity
with seducers.

1029. 3 John v. 13. I had many things to write, but I will not with ink and
pen write unto thee. Joh. 20. 31. These things are written that you might have
life through his Name.

In the former place it is not said, as though the Apostle would say something
else, then what is contained in the sacred Scriptures: In the later, he
manifestly confirms that all things are written which appertain and are
necessary to true says in Christ, and to eternal life. So that we have no
need of Traditions by word of mouth.

The Canonical Epistle of St JUDE, the son of Thad^aus.
HE exhorts the faithful to constancy, and threatens the adversaries of Christ
with extreme misery; and warns that the godly hold their faith in God, and
avoid false doctrine.

1030. Jude v. 9. Michael disputed with Satan about the body of Moses. Ver. 14.
the Prophecy of Enoch is mentioned, whereof the Scripture before speaks not at
all.

The striving of the Arch-Angell is not expressly set down in Scripture, yet
there appear some prints of it in the burial of Moses by God, for that the
Israelites knew not the place of his burial; and it is out of question that
the devil would willingly have made that known to the Israelites to set up
Idolatry there, but that he was hindered by Michael. The Prophecy of Enoch if
it were not set forth in writing, yet it went by tradition from hand to hand
unto posterity.

The REVELATION of St JOHN the Apostle, the Divine.
IT is called Apocalypse, that is the Revelation, because it contains the
visions which St John saw in the Isle of Pathmos, about the year of Christ 96.
and the Prophecy concerning the state of the Church Militant on earth, and the
Church Triumphant in heaven.

1031. Rev. 1. 1. The Revelation of Jesus Christ, which God gave unto him. Col.
2. 3. In whom are bid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge.

Christ as he is God is the fountain of all knowledge, born of the substance of
the Father: in respect of order he is said to have received this Revelation
from the Father, because the Father by him does reveal his secrets unto us; as
man by his personal union he has a perfect knowledge of all things
communicated to him.

1032. Rev. 1. 1. The things which must shortly come to pass; they are not yet
fulfilled.

Shortly signifies the certainty of the things foretold; in respect of God,
though not in our opinion, he shuts out long delays; for the whole time of
this prophecy unto the last day is in the sight of God, but as one day or one
Psa. 90. 4. 2 Pet. 3. 8.
hour, which is a comfort to the godly, that they may not despair; and it
exhorts the wicked to repentance, by reason of the sudden destruction shall
fall upon them.

1033. Rev. 1. 13. I saw one like to the Son of man. Matthew. 9. 6. Christ is
the Son of man really.

The first place is an Hebraism, by which is intimated the certainty of Christ's
humanity; also he may be said to be like man, because he appeared in a singular
form.

1034. Rev. 2. 11. He that overcomes shall not be hurt of the second death.
Heb. 9. 27. It is appointed unto men once to die.

The bodily death is one, because the soul is but once separated from the body:
The second death is taken Metaphorically, for the misery and torment of the
soul after the death of the body.

1035. Rev. 3. 7. Christ opens and no man shuts, shuts and no man
opens. ver. 20. If any man hear my voice and open the door, I will come into
him.

The Son of God is he that opens the internal door of the heart, we open
only the external, for no man comes to the Father but by him.

1036. Rev. 3. 10. I will keep thee from the hour of temptation which shall
come upon all the world. ver. 19. As many as I love I rebuke and chasten.

God kept the Angel of Philadelphia from evil temptation, because he was a
pious assertor of the truth; but the Angel of Laodicea who was lukewarm, he
would mend by his reprehension.

1037. Rev. 4. 8. They rest not night nor day. chapter 14, 13. They that dye in the
Lord rest from their labors.

The souls in the beavenly rest of the blessed are not idle, they have their
labors that weary them not, but most sweetly refresh them; in the later place
is understood the end of the troubles of this world.

1038. Rev. 5. 1. I saw a book written. ver. 4. No man was worthy to look
thereon.

John saw the book in a bare Vision; but no man could see the mysteries
contained in it.

1039. Rev. 6. 9. Under the Altar I saw the souls of them that were slain. ver.
11. White robes were given to every one of them.

Souls are invisible spirits, which cannot be seen or clothed; it is therefore
the sight of the mind and not of the body which is here understood, for these
things were seen in the Spirit.

1040. Rev. 6. 10. The souls of those that were slain cry out for revenge
against those that slew them. Matthew. 5. 44. Love your enemies and pray for them.

The cry of the souls proceeds not from a wicked desire of revenge, but an
earnest desire for Gods glory, because they would have no ungodliness or
wickedness remain unpunished, etc. in the day of revenge and judgment; we
suffering here according to Christ's command pray for our enemies.

1041. Rev. 7. 9. I saw a great multitude which no man could number. Luke 12.
32. The flock of Christ is called a little flock.

The Church compared with the numerous multitude of the wicked, is a little
flock; but considered in it self, it comprehends an innumerable multitude of
all Ages, Sexes, Places, Tribes and people.

1042. Rev. 11. 19. The Temple of God was opened in heaven. chapter 21. v. 22. And
I saw no Temple therein.

In the former place the Temple is taken figuratively, this the holy Ghost
intimates, that God is worshipped most holily with Hymns and Psalms; in the
later place, we must not think there shall be any material Temple in the life
to come, as we have here on earth.

1043. Rev. 13. 8. The Lamb slain from the foundation of the world. Gal. 4. 4.
When the fullness of time was come, God sent forth his Son made of a woman.

He was the Lamb slain from the foundation of the world, not properly, but
figuratively, and in Gods Decree, by Types, Predictions, and efficacy, by
acceptance, not by execution.

1044. Rev. 16. 1. Go and pour out the vials of the wrath of God upon the
earth. ver. 4. to the 13. They poured out their vials of wrath upon the sea,
the rivers, the fountains, the sun, the seat of the beast, and Euphrates.

In the first place the earth is taken in a general signification, because the
effects of all the Vials redounds to the earth in a manner, and to earthly men
the followers of Antichrist, for whatsoever the wrath of God was which was cast
on the Seas, Rivers, or the Air, or Sun, was not for themselves, but to
afflict the earth and those that dwell thereon.

1045. Rev. 18. 6. Double unto her double according to her work. Matthew. 7. 2.
And what measure you make shall be measured to you again.

The first place is a special command of God concerning retaliation: In the
later Christ forbids rash judgment concerning others, adding the Law of
retaliation the more to convince the Jews.

1046. Rev. 20. 4. And they lived and reigned with Christ a thousand years. 1 Thessalonians. 4. 17. So shall we always be with the Lord.

In the first place a certain number is put for an uncertain, and he speaks of
the state of the Church, which during the reign of Antichrist seemed to be
dead; but afterward at the preaching of the Gospel, she rose again, which is
the first resurrection.

1047. Rev. 22. 11. He that is unjust, let him be unjust still. Matthew 22. 39.
Thou shall love thy neighbor.

The Moral Law forbids private men to do hurt with an evil affection, but to
hurt another man at Gods command, is not against the Law, because God will have
it so, and he commands us to punish malefactors; good men are proved by
injustice, and so are crowned with Martyrdom by it; in the former place is
spoken of punishment justly inflicted on the wicked, which is not against
charity, since God does most justly make use of all the creatures to punish
ungodly men.

1048. Rev. 22. 11. He that is righteous, let him be righteous still. Romans 5.
1. Being justified by faith, we have peace with God through our Lord Jesus
Christ.

Our righteousness is more and more to be declared and proved before men, and
before God by effects of our faith; for we do not find it perfect in us, but
in part only, as our faith increases by degrees.

1049. Rev. 22. 19. If any man shall take away from the words of the Book of
this Prophecy, God shall take away his part out of the book of life. Mat. 7.
23. False teachers and hypocrites have no part in the Book of life.

They are said to be blotted out of the Book of life, Metaphorically, and not
properly; also negatively, because they were not written in; also positively,
as their heresy is made manifest, that we may collect that they were not
written in the Catalogue of the Elect.

1050. Rev. 22. 20. Even so come quickly: He is not yet come.

The coming of Christ is corporal and spiritual, visible and invisible;
Invisibly he comes always to us, and is present with us by his grace and
power: Visibly he came by his lowly Incarnation to save his people. He will
come quickly, that is, he will be suddenly here in the end of the world, in
glory at the last day, and shall render to every one according to their works.

Jude v. 25. To the only wise God our Savior, be Glory and Majesty, Dominion
and Power; now and for over. Amen. FINIS.
Courteous Reader,
THese Books following are Printed and sold by Simon Miller at the Star in St
Paul's Churchyard, near the West end.

Folio.
The Harmony, Chronicle and Order of the New Testament, with Variety of
Observations upon the chiefest difficulties; With an additionall Discourse of
the Fall of Jerusalem, and the Condition of the Jews in that Land afterward. By
John Lightfoot Dr in Divinity: In fol. The Civil Wars of Spain, in the Reign
of Charles the 5th Emperor of Germany, and King of that Nation: Wherein our
late unhappy differences are paralleled in many particulars: In fol.
Quarto.
Abraham's Faith, or the Good old Religion, Wherein is proved, that The Religion
(that is, the Doctrine and Discipline) of the Church of England, is the only
true Catholic and unchangeable Faith of Gods Elect. By John Nicholis Minister
of the Gospel: In 4o. Mr Robert Bolion's General Directions for a Comfortable
walking with God: In 4o. The Anatomy of Mortality* By George Stroode: In 4o. Mr
Henry Ainsworth on the Canticles: In 4o. Mr Paul Baynes Diocesans Trial: In
4o. The Supreme Power of Christian States, Vindicated from the Insolent
pretenses of Gulielmus Apollonii: By E. Gralle. Several Politic and Military
Observations of the Civil and Military Governments, the Birth, Increase, Decay
of Monarchies, the Carriage of Princes, Magistrates, Commanders and Favorites:
By D. P. Esquire. The Meritorious Price of Christ's Redemption: By W. Pinchin of
New England. 4o. Astrology Theologized: In 4o. Jo. Lilburn's Trial at
Guild Hall.
Octavo.
The Reconciler of the Bible, wherein above two thousand seeming Contradictions
are fully and plainly reconciled, being necessaray for all those that desire to
understand the Sacred Scriptures aright unto salvation. 8o. Mr Ed. Waterhouse
Esquire his Discourse of the Piety and Charity of Elder Churches and Christians:
Together with those their Virtues paralleled by Christians Members of the
Church of England. 8o. An Antidote against Popery, being a full discovery of
the ridiculousnesse of the Mass, and other vain Ceremonies of the Church of
Rome. By Peter du Moulin. 8o. A short View and Defense of the Reformation of
the Church of England by K. Edw. and Queen Elizabeth, wherein her Doctrine,
Discipline and Liturgy are considered, and preferred before all others. A Book
of Schemes or Figures of Heaven, ready set for every 4 minutes of time.
Rudiments of the Hebrew Tongue, necessary for all that desire to understand the
Holy Bible in the Original: By H. Knoales. 8o.
Duodecimo.
Mr Robinsons Essaies: In 12o. The duty of Children to Parents, published upon
occasion of the many sad disasters that have lately befallen disobedient
children: In 12o.

