Theologia Germanica. Or, Mystical DIVINITY: A Little Golden MANUAL briefly
Discovering the mysteries, sublimity, perfection and simplicity of
Christianity, in Belief and Practice.

Written above 250 years since in high Dutch, and for its worth translated into
Latin, and printed at Antwarp, 1558.

Whereto is added Definitions Theological and Philosophical.

Also a Treatise of the Soul, and other Additions not before Printed.

1 Timothy 3.16. And without controversy, great is the Mystery of godliness.

LONDON, Printed for John Sweeting, at the Angel in Popes head Alley. 1648.

To the Reader.
Courteous Reader:
WHosoever thou art that love and rejoycest in the sublimity, and simplicity
of truth; I have here presented thee with a Manual, entitled, The German
Divinity; a Book first written by a certain godly Priest, of the Order of the
Lords of Teutonici, in high Dutch; about two hundred and fifty years since, and
afterward, for the incomparable value thereof it was translated out of the
Dutch into the Latin tongue; by John Theophilus, and printed at Antwerpe 1558;
in which tongue it did lie a long season veiled and obscured, from the eye of
the illiterate and unexpert in the same: until, some years since, through the
desires and industries of some of our own Countrymen, lovers of the Truth, it
was again translated, and made to speak to thee in thine own Dialect and
Language. But the time of its Nativity being under the late, wise, and wary
Hierarchy, who had monopolized and engrossed the discovery of others into
their own hands, keeping the people, wisely, at a distance, and dealing out to
them, what, and so much only, for quantity and quality, as seemed best to their
grave wisdoms and discretions; lest they should grow as wise, if not wiser then
their Teachers; and so the rude vulgar should become as one of us: it walked up
and down this City in Manuscripts at deer rates, from hand to hand, of some
well-willets to truth, in clandestine, and private manner; like Moses in his
Arc, or the little Child fled and hid from Herod: never daring to crowd into
the Press, fearing the ruff usage of those then in authority; whose maxim
it was, That the Priests lips should preserve knowledge, though misunderstood,
or applied at least: forgetting this Priest to be the high Priest Jesus Christ
after the order of Melchisedeck. But now it has obtained such auspicious
favor, as to appear without blush in the most public way; it being ushered
into the world under the safe conduct of an Imprimatur, a worthy work of piety
and charity, the first to the truth it self, that it might not be buried in
silence through unknown tongues, the other to our own Countrymen, that they
might not be buried in ignorance; and that the famous lights or lamps kindled
in other Regions, might not be rendered useless, or unprofitable to the meanest
in literature.

The Author, Translators, and Licencer have done their parts, what remains
now? but thine to be performed, which is, deliberately to read, seriously to
weigh, spiritually to discern, and piously to use and reduce into practice and
life, what thou shall find worthy herein: proving all things, and holding fast
that which is good.

The Translator John Theophilus, in his Preface hereunto affixed, has saved me
the labor of informing thee, touching the Author, Nature, Matter, Method, and
Style thereof, and in the Table annexed, and subjoyned in the end hereof will
direct thee to the several Chapters, and their pages, which their distinct
Contents.

There is nothing left behind for me do, neither to it, or thee; but only to
invite thee to taste and see how sweet, how full of life and marrow this small
Tracta^e is. it is as the extract or quintessence of other more thick and
darkly composed Treatises of Theology; being much in little: thou shall find
some kernels herein with their shell ready broken to thine hand; some Riddles
in their plain sense unridled; some mysteries of Histories revealed: so, that
in many things the Scripture Parables are so explained, that thou shall say,
through the light of the truth herein; now know* we that thou speak plainly
and not in parables; mysteries hidden from former ages, being now in measure
more brought to light. The Authors mind in the Latin dress was elegantly,
significantly and perspicuously expressed; it may be the English style will not
be so taking; yet if matter rather than words, be it thou seek, here thou
have it according to the best sufficiency of the Translatour, as I suppose;
though he be to me altogether unknown.

In fine, it may well be called the German Divinity, the child is like the
Father, it shows it self one of that Imperial Race, which bears the Spread
Eagle for its devise. For as the Eagle in flight is highest, swiftest, in sight
cleerest, in fight strongest; so this Tractate soareth aloft, builds on high,
even above the starry Heavens, bearing her chickins the children of Truth, upon
wing to the face of the Sun, speedeth unto the farthest end of truth, pierces
into the inwards and bowels thereof, and over-powreth the mind with her
verity, chasing away deceitful vanity. Were it is worth but known, there would
neither want hand or heart to give it entertainment: what more shall I say? but
as the Apostle in another case, Use hospitality, for thereby some have
entertained Angels; so use thou hospitality to this German stranger, who knows
but that, although he comes to thee in the evening and twilight of thy
understanding, so that at, and sometime after it is first approach, 't appear to
thee as the Angels did, but mean and in man's garb, yet at the Sunrise before
it depart from thee thou may see the Spirit and Angel of Gods Truth in it:
and if the Father of Lights and Spirits shall lead thee profitably into and
through this, it shall be an engagement to him, to present thee with some other
of the like nature, who is a lover of thee and the truth in the Truth.

Giles Randall.

THE PREFACE OF JOHN THEOPHILUS, Who translated it out of high Dutch into
Latin.
THis little Book has so much delighted me, that I thought fit to translate it
into Latin; the style is short and pithy, which may be compared to a green
grove; although little, yet so planted, that therein is no Tree set only for
pleasure and not for fruit, but is every where full of fruit-bearing stocks:
Even so this little book does not delight the Reader with any eloquence of
phrase, with no painting inticements, or (as it were) flowers of speech; but it
does deliver mere precepts, and those most profitable and behoveful to the
instruction of a Christian: Indeed in regard of the shortness it is somewhat
obscure, and often to be read over, and that with diligence.

Also I add further, that if any man be desirous to read this Book, to the end
only to increase his knowledge, and not to do the things contained therein, he
reads it in vain; for he that intends to become a skilful husbandman, must put
his hand to the plough.

As concerning my translation, understand, that I have neither added nor
detracted any thing from the Author, and I could no more avoid obscurity in
translating a book compiled with much affected brevity, then the Author himself
in writing of it; yet I counsel the Reader that he would often and attentively
read it, which may ^^^ve in stead of a Comment; I have used some words in it,
as these; Egoity, Selfness, Meity, Deified, Disposence, Personal^ity, etc.
necessity compelling me thereunto, because the Author uses that manner of
speech; wherein I ought to be thought no more blameable then Tidley, who
doubted not to be bold in using the words Appiety and Lentallity; A Writer may
make bold (when necessity requires it) to command words, and not to learn them

The Inscription of this Book is, Theologia Germanica, the Author is not named,
only I find it written in a certain little Preface to the Book, that he was one
of those who are called Dun Teutonici, or Dutch Lords, the French call them
Knights of the Rhodes, and that he was a Priest and Governor in the house of
Teutonici, or high Dutch at Frankfort.

The Argument is of the new man, or the new creature, for he shows the manner
how a man may be restored, and return to God, from whence he is fallen by
following his own will; It is necessary that he bewilling to be restored,
because medicines are to be contrary to their diseases, that he be deprived of
his own will and follow the will of God; and no man can serve two masters; but
as a man may very well put out his own eyes, or kill himself, yet cannot
restore himself to sight or life again: even so man is in Adam prone to destroy
himself and all his posterity by following his own will. But neither he, nor
any who is guilty, and overthrown by his sin, can possibly save himself, or
repair the breach: It was necessary again, for the saving of the world, that
one should arise and exist who was holy, harmless and undefiled, separate from
sinners, to deliver others from sin, and teach the way of life, and this was
Jesus Christ the Son of the living God, to whom all power is given both in
heaven and earth, who does not only teach man this way to salvation, but also
gives them power by Faith to walk in it.

I would not hereby have you understand a dead Faith, for that is no more Faith
then a dead man is a man; but a working and living Faith, such a one as Saint
Peter describes, together with the works and effects thereof, saying, Add to
your faith virtue, and to your virtue knowledge, and to your knowledge
temperance, and to temperance patience, and to patience godliness, and to
godliness brotherly kindness, and to brotherly kindness charity. For if these
things remain and abound in you, they will make you that you shall neither be
barren nor unfruitful in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus. But he that lacks
these things is blind, and cannot see afar off, and has forgotten that he was
purged from his old sins: Wherefore the rather, brethren, give all diligence to
make your calling and election sure; for if these things be in you, you shall
never fail. S. Peter speaks of a true and lively faith, which does not only
procure unto a man the forgiveness of his sins by the merit of Christ, but also
effects, that as before be yielded his members as weapons of unrighteousness
unto sin, so hereafter he may give them as instruments of righteousness to do
well. And because S. Peter in this place does describe a certain ladder to
salvation, I purpose to make it plain, whereby we may more evidently perceive
by which steps we may ascend to the top thereof, lest that any man should be
content to stand only upon the first step, and yet think he had attained
tosalvation from which he was distant many degrees. Therefore (according to S.
Peter) faith brings forth virtue, that is, strength and ability to perform
those things which thou beleevest are to be done as so taught from God; As for
example, Christ commands us to love our enemies, and to do good to them which
do evil to us: Now there are some who believe that this cannot be done, again
they hate their enemies and do them all mischief: others believe that it is to
be done by the assistance of God, and therefore do good to their enemies.
Consider all sects and kinds of men, and you shall find, that those, who
believe it is possible to be done, do act the same; and that Christ, who has
given them power to believe, has given them power also to perform his
Commandments; for it is not said in vain; that all things are possible to him
that believes: And this I say generally of all other precepts of Christ, As
thou beleevest (says Christ) so be it to thee: this is generally to be taken,
look how much faith any one has; and so much strength of virtue he has also.
And virtue begeteth knowledge, for true knowledge consists in experience, which
comes to pass when a man is made able to perform something, does certainly know
that that which before he did believe, he did not certainly know might have
been performed: Examples hereof we have in Caleb and Joshua, and the rest of
the Israelites, who did overcome the Canaanites* for then did they certainly
know that those might be overcome, as they had before believed: but the rest of
the Israelites, who did not believe that this could be done, could not do it:
and again, they knew it not: So at this day such as do not believe that such a
the power of Christ as that he is able to beat down the power of the Serpent
under the feet of the faithful, those men are not able to resist sin, therefore
they know not how it may be done, and therefore deny it; but those who believe,
can do it by faith, and know certainly that it may be done, and again affirm it
to be true.

Knowledge brings forth temperance, for a man confirmed with this knowledge,
goes forward to the mark, hoping for the same success in the rest: and
therefore withholds himself from bodily lusts and pleasures which fight
against the soul, lest being hindered by them he be deprived of his Crown of
victory. Now as the Chaldeans did vex and persecute Jerusalem, when it rebelled
against them, having before of its own accord served and obeyed them: In like
manner it falls out in all rebellions of Subjects; for the lusts and
pleasures which before we voluntarily served, when we rebel against them by
temperance, do vex us in renewing their desires, and breed us grief as much as
before they did delight; which that we may bear manfully, we stand in need of
patience: And because we know that this trouble which we must undergo, in
resisting these wicked lusts and affections in bearing of injuries, does far
exceed our strength, let us earnestly call upon God with David, that be would
teach and furnish our hands in the battle, and that he would give us strength
for the victory, which invocation and trust in him is true godliness. Further,
having obtained benefits of God by this devotion, we do love him again for
these benefits, and we desire to give him thanks: for even by nature it is
ordained that thou can not but love him who out of his love has done thee
good; but because we can give him nothing (for he needs not our goods) seeing
all things are his, we turn our love upon them whom he loves and commends
unto us, that is to say, upon godly men, and out of love we do them good. And
because this love, which we bear to God and our brethren, in regard of Gods
benefits bestowed upon us, is imperfect, as being joined with the love of our
selves, that is, of our own profit, it never cease to increase until it
attain to perfection: For we see naturally come to pass in Plants and living
Creatures, and all things, that they never cease growing until they come to
ripe age; so it comes to pass, that we proceed so far as to love God, not
because he is good to us, but because he is good; even as by nature we love
those things which be beautiful for very names sake, though no profit redound
to us: Now the beauty of God is goodness it self, besides which none ought to
be loved, either for reward or fear of punishment: This is it which S. John
calls perfect love; the perfection whereof all the elect of God strive to
attain as the chief end; for there is nothing more perfect, and of more
antiquity, then the love of God, yea God himself is love: Whosoever has
obtained this love, is deprived of all Egoity, (that I may use the words of our
Author) and does love God only as he is good, and all things besides, which God
loves himself; that is, all things which are any where, sin excepted; for there
is nothing which God loves not, except sin.

This little Book propounds to us the love of God, and does teach us the way
to attain the same; Blessed is he who valiantly striveth to obtain this price,
and does constantly run this Race; for if death do meet with him whilst he is
running it, he shall die a Soldier of Christ, and so shall be acknowledged of
him before his Father: Even as in the Law, a maid that was betrothed to a man,
was esteemed and called his wife, although as yet they were not come together,
Deuteronomy. 22.28, 29.

JO. THEOPHILUS.

Theologia Germanica, A Little Golden Book, showing briefly, how to put off the
Old Man, and to put on the New.
Chap. I. What is perfect, and what is imperfect.
SAint Paul says, When that which is perfect is come, then that which is
imperfect and in part shall be abolished: Now observe what it is to be perfect,
and what to be in part; perfect is that thing which in it self, and in that
which it is, comprehends and contains all things; and wanting which, and
without which nothing truly is; and wherein all things have that thing which
they are; for it is the being of all things, and is unchangeable and unmovable
in it self, and yet does change and move all other things.

But that is imperfect and in part, which has its being and existence from
that which is perfect, even as clearness and brightness proceeds from the Sun,
or from the light, and seems to be something which is called this or that,
and is named a creature, and none of these imperfect things is that which is
perfect, neither is that perfect thing any of those which are imperfect; those
things which are imperfect may be comprehended, known and expressed, but that
which is perfect is incomprehensible, unknown and unutterable, of all
creatures, as they are creatures: Therefore that which is perfect is without
name, as being none of those; and a creature, as a creature, cannot know or
comprehend it. Now when that which is perfect is come, that which is imperfect
is contemned. But when does it come? I say it comes when it is so far known,
perceived and tasted in the mind, as possible it can be.

Here arises a question; seeing it is such a thing as cannot be known or
comprehended by any creature, and that the mind is a creature? Then how is it
possible that the mind should know it? I therefore added, (as it is a creature)
as if I should say, so far as it is a creature framed and created, and so far
forth as it can be said of it, I, or my self, this is impossible unto it; for
to the end, that that which is perfect may be known of any creature; it is
necessary, that very thing which is created and made, and may be called I, or
my self, should perish, and be turned to nothing. This is the meaning of S.
Paul, when he says, When that which is perfect is come (that is, is known)
then that which is imperfect (being the substance of all created things) and
whatsoever can be said of them, I, or my self, or mine, all this is to be
wholly contemned and counted for nothing: Truly so long as we esteem of that
which we call I, and so long as we cleave unto it, that which is perfect
remains unknown.

Some man may object; you say there is nothing besides that which is perfect,
or without it, and yet you say that something does flow from it, that then
which flows from it is without it.

I answer, That besides it, or without it nothing truly existeth, because
whatsoever flows from it is not truly it, nor has any being but in that
which is perfect, and is a certain evident brightness or clearness; which
indeed is nothing, nor has any being but in the fire, from whence the
brightness flows, as we see in that Sun and light.

CHAP. II. What is Sin?
TRuth, Faith, and Scripture faith, that Sin is nothing else, but that the
creature does divert it self from the immutable God, and adhereth to a mutable,
that is, does turn it self from that which is perfect, to that which is in part
and imperfect, and especially to it self. -- Now this observe, when the
creature does challenge any good thing to it self, as to be, to live, to know,
briefly, to be able to do any thing that can be termed good, as being in it
self that good thing, or as though that good thing were appertaining unto it,
then it averteth it self. What other thing then did the Devil? Or what was his
aversion and fall? but that he did arrogate this unto himself, that he was
something, and would be something, and that something was his, and in his right
and power; this Arrogance to be I, to my self, to be me, and to be mine, was
his aversion and fall, and this is still in use.

CHAP. III. Adams Sin.
WHat did Adam Also else but the very same? Men are wont to say that Adam
perished, because he did eat an apple; I say, this happened to him by reason of
his Arrogance, for that he assumed to himself to be I, to me, mine, me, etc.
For though he had eaten seven apples, if it had not been in regard of his
Arrogance he had not fallen, but when Arrogance took place he then fell, and so
he should have done, though he had eaten no apples at all: But let us proceed,
I have fallen an hundred times more precipitately then Adam did, and all men
were not able to restore the loss and fall of Adam, how then might my fall be
corrected or restored? surely it must be helped as the fall of Adam was, and by
the same helper, and after the same manner.

How then, and from whom procedes this amendment? neither could man do it
without God, nor was God bound to do it without man: Wherefore God assumed the
nature of man or humanity and became man, and man was made God, and thus was
the amendment made, and so must my fall be corrected: I cannot do it without
God, it is not meet, neither will God do it without me: For that this might be
effected, it was fitting that God in me should also become man, that thus God
should take upon himself whatsoever is in me, as well within me as without me,
as nothing might remain in me contrary to God, or might hinder his work, and
though God should assume all men that are unto himself, and should become man
in them, and they in him should become God, and the same should not be done in
me, my fall should never be recovered, nor yet my sin done away, except the
same were also done in me: neither know I, nor am I able to give my furtherance
toward this amendment and recovery, but only I must suffer and be patient, and
God only the agent and doer; I suffering his work and will, which because I
will not suffer, but will my self be I, and to me, and mine, this hindered God,
that he could not work without disturbance, and so comes it to pass, that my
fall and aversion remains unamended, and all this falls out by reason of my
Arrogance.

CHAP. IV. That all good is only Gods.
GOD says, Isai. 42. Mine honor will I give to none, which is as much as if he
should say, that honor and glory is due to none but God only, 1 Timothy 1.
Therefore if I do arrogate any goodness to my self, as that I am, can do any
thing that I know, that I work, of that any thing is mine, or done of me, or
done to me, arrogating such things to my self, and turning them to my honor and
glory, then I do doubly offend: for first I fall and avert my self as has been
formerly said; next I deprive God of his honor in attributing that to my self
which is proper only to God; for whatsoever ought to be called good, that is
due to none but only to the eternal and true good, which is God. And whosoever
does arrogate that unto himself, does unrighteously, and against God

CHAP. V. Of the putting off the Old Man.
SOme men say, that a man ought to become void of wisdom, will, desire,
knowledge, and all other things, which is not to be understood, that in man
there should be no knowledge, or that God should not be known, loved, willed,
desired, praised, or honored in him, for this were a mighty fault, and man
should become like to a beast: but we must proceed so far, that our knowledge
may be so clear and perfect as to understand that this knowledge belongs
neither unto man nor unto the creature, but unto the eternal Wisdom, about
which is the eternal Word; and thus man and the creature vanishes, and does
not arrogate to its self as its own; and the less knowledge that the creature
does arrogate, it becomes the more perfect: the like we must conceive of will,
love, desire, and all such things, for the less that man does arrogate these to
himself, the nobler, the excellenter, and diviner he becomes; and the more he
does assume these unto himself, so much he is made the more blockish, base and
imperfect. Thus then ought man to become void of al things, that is, not to
arrogate them to himself: When then man in this manner is made void of these,
it comes to pass that this is the most excellent and clearest knowledge that can
be in man, and the excellentest love and desire; the cause whereof is this, All
things being only Gods, it is better and more excellent that they should
appertain to God then to any creature; and the cause why I do challenge any
goodness to my self, is by reason that I suppose that it is mine, or that I am
it: If I knew the truth, I should also know that the thing is not mine, nor
that I am it; it proceeds not from me, etc. and so mine Arrogance would fall to
nothing. It is better that God, or that which is belonging to God, should be
known, loved, prayed and honored as much as may be possible, and that man
should conceive that he does praise or love God, then that God should not be
praised, loved, honored and known; for when opinion and ignorance are turned to
knowledge and understanding of this, then Arrogance vanishes; for a man will
then say on this wise, Wretch and fool that I am, I supposed my self to be that
thing, but now I perceive that it was and is God only.

CHAP. VI. How the life of Man is to be composed.
Boethius says, it is our fault that we do not love that which is best, and
herein he says the truth, for that which is best ought most to be loved, and
in this love no respect is to be had of profit or disprofit, gain or loss,
honor or reproach, praise or dispraise, or any such things, but that which in
very truth is the most excellent and best; the same ought also to be dearest
unto us, and that for no other end, but that it is best and most excellent:
According to it a man might compose his life both externally and internally;
externally, because among those things that are created, one thing is better
then another, as the eternal good does shine more in one then in another, in
which thing therefore that eternal good does most of all shine, is brightest,
works, is known and admired; that among all creatures is most excellent:
also, where it is less apparent, that likewise is the less good. Seeing
therefore that man is conversant with the creatures, does use them, and knows
their difference; he ought to esteem that which is best, to be most dear, and
to cleave unto it, and to unite himself thereto, and especially unto those
things which are attributed unto God as his, and belongs unto him, such as
are his goodness, truth, peace, love and justice; and according unto these the
outward man ought to frame his life, and to despise and fly all things which
are contrary unto them: But if the inward man by a jump, as it were, will step
into that which is perfect, that which is perfect will be found and perceived
to be boundlesly, infinitely and innumerably more excellent and better then
whatsoever is imperfect and in part; also the eternal, more then the
transitory; and the fountain and beginning, more then all things which flow or
can proceed from it: and so that which is imperfect, and in part, shall be
unpleasant and become abolished. This observe to the end, that that which is
excellent and the best, may be also held the dearest; it is requisite that this
be done.

CHAP. VII. Of the two Eyes of Christ.
WE must consider that which is read and said, that the Soul of Christ had two
eyes, the one the right, the other the left: In the beginning when things were
created, the right eye did turn it self into Eternity and Divinity, and there
stood unmovable in perfect contemplation, and use of divine Nature, and divine
perfection, and remained unmoved, free from all falling, labor, motion, grief,
pain, and torment, which happen to the outward man: with his left eye he beheld
things created, and did know the difference, and did understand what was better
and worse, more noble and more base, and in this manner the outward man of
Christ was framed: Thus stood the inward man of Christ, according to the right
eye of his Soul, in the perfect use of the divine nature, in perfect pleasure
and joy; but the outward man, and the left eye of the Soul was with him in pain
and calamity, and perfect labor; and so it came to pass, that that inward or
right eye remained unmoved, not hindered, free from all labor, pain and
torment, which happened to the outward man. It is said, that when Christ was
whipped at the pillar, and did hang on the Cross, according to the outward man,
his soul, or his inward man did stand according to the right eye in perfect use
of the divine nature, and in as high a condition of pleasure and joy as after
he ascended into Heaven, and is now: Also that his outward man, or his soul,
according to the left eye in this work in all things which did belong unto him,
as concerning outward things, was not hindered or damnified by the internal,
neither of them depending on the other.

Now the created soul of man, it has also two eyes, the one in the power of
beholding eternity, the other in looking upon time, and things created, to know
the difference, as before has been said, and to give life to the body: But
these two eyes of the soul of man cannot do their work together; for, that the
soul with the right eye might behold eternity, it is necessary that the left
eye do abate all his works, and so carry it self as if it were dead: Also, that
the left eye might perform all his work, and be employed in outward things, and
is in pain, and things created, it is necessary that the right eye be employed
in contemplation.

CHAP. VIII. Whether in this life eternal life may be tasted.
IT is a question whether the soul, whilst it is in the body, may proceed so
far as to behold eternity, and receive a taste of eternal life and everlasting
happiness. Usually it is denied, and so it is true, if you understand it after
this manner: So long as the soul does behold the body, and those things that
belong to the body, as time, and things which are created, and does conform and
mingle himself with them, this cannot be; for to the end the soul may discern
or behold eternity, it is necessary that it be pure and free from all
resemblances, and from all things created, and especially that it be separated
from it self: And this thing never befell in this life. But S. Dennis thinks it
may be done, as may be gathered out of his words to Timothy, which ar^ these;
To behold Divine secrets, it is necessary that thou abandon thy senses, and
whatsoever can be perceived by the senses, reason also, and the actions of
reason, and whatsoever can be perceived and known by reason, whether it be
created or uncreated, and that thou go and pass out of thy self, and from the
knowledge of all these things which I have mentioned, and so come into that one
unity of him who is above all nature and knowledge: thus far he. Now if this
could not befall man, why does he teach it, or why does he speak to man in this
life? Yea, further know, that a certain Master says upon these words of
Dennis, That it does come to pass, that it does often befall man, that he
verily thinks that he does see and behold it as often as he will; and there
is no such aspect, but that it is more excellent, dearer to God, and more
worthy then whatsoever all things created, as created, can perform.

CHAP. IX. That good, except it be in man, cannot make men happy.
WE must especially observe and know, that no creature, no good; no, not the
good it self, which is God, does make man, or the soul endued with virtue, good
or blessed, so long as it is without the soul; and the same we must think of
sin or malice: and therefore although it be a good thing to enquire and search,
and also to know what good men have done or suffered, how they have lived, and
what God in them, or by them, has done or willed; yet it is a hundred times
better that a man should search and know, what, and of what kind the state of
his own life is, and what God is, and would, and does in him, and in what thing
God is willing or unwilling to use him: Therefore this also is true, which is
said, that it is never so good to go abroad, but it is better to remain at
home: This also is to be known, that eternal happiness is in that only one, and
none other; and that man, or his soul, should either be, or become blessed: It
is necessary that that only thing should be in the soul. Some will ask, what is
that one good? I answer, it is good, or to be made good, and yet it is neither
this nor that good which can be named, known, or showed, but all, and above
all: neither is it needful that it should now again enter into the soul, for it
is already in it, though unknown: When it is said, that it is meet we should
come unto it, and that it should come into the soul, it is as much as if you
should say, we ought to seek it, have the seeking of it, and smell it out: And
because it is but one, unity and simplicity is better then multitude; for
blessedness is not placed in many and multitude, but in one and unity; neither
is it in many things created, or in the work of any created thing (that I may
speak briefly) but blessedness is only placed in God, and his work; wherefore I
ought to have respect to God and his work only, and to relinquish all natural
things with their works, and chiefly my self; yea, further, all works, or
miracles, which either God has done or ever may do, in or by the nature of all
things; yea also, God himself, with all his goodness, as he is without me, and
comes to me, does not make me blessed, but as he is within me, and is known,
loved, felt, and perceived by me.

CHAP. X. Of the desire of those who be illuminated.
NOw it is to be observed, that those that be illuminated with that true light,
do know that whatsoever they themselves can desire or make choice of, or
whatsoever has been desired, chosen, or known at any time of any creature, at
all, (as it is a creature) is nothing, if it be compared to that eternal good:
Again, forsaking all desires and choice, they do commit and refer themselves
and all their actions to the eternal good, then there remains in them a
desire to advance and bring themselves nearer to the eternal good, that is, to
a nearer knowledge and more ardent love, and a more ready submission, and to an
entire subjection and obedience. So that every illuminate man may be able to
say of this manner, I could wish I were the same to the eternal good that a
man's hand is to himself: And such men do always fear that they are not become
sufficiently subject unto it, they do also desire the salvation of all men, and
yet are they free from this desire; neither do they challenge it to themselves,
as understanding sufficiently that this desire belongs not to man, but to the
eternal good; for whatsoever is good, that no man ought to arrogate to himself,
because it belongs to the eternal good: Besides these kind of men live in
freedom, so that without fear, either of punishment, or hell, or hope of
reward, or of the Kingdom of Heaven, they do live in mere subjection and
obedience of the eternal good, and that with a free love: This was perfectly in
Christ, and is in his followers, in some more, in some less.

It is a miserable thing, that whereas the eternal good does furnish and stir
us up to that which is most excellent, we are unwilling to entertain it; for
what is more excellent then true spiritual poverty, and yet when it is set
before us we will none of it? We would be (as I may so speak) over-wily, so
that if we but feel a delicate taste, sweetness and pleasure in our selves, we
think it is well with us, and that we love God; but if this be wanting, we are
in sorrow and do forget God, and think we are undone, which is a great fault
and an ill sign: for a true lover does as much love God, and the eternal good?
in want as in plenty, and alike in bitterness as in pleasure, and so in the
rest. Let every man examine himself in these things.

CHAP. XI. Of Hell, and of the Kingdom of Heaven.
THe Soul of Christ was to descend into Hell before it could ascend into
Heaven, and the same must befall the soul of man. But consider how this must be
done: This then comes to pass when a man knows and beholds himself, and
finds himself so evil, as that he is unworthy of all comfort and good that
might befall him from God or the creature: Further, he thinks nothing else of
himself but that he is perpetually damned and lost, and that to be less then he
is worthy of: Further, he thinks himself worthy of more calamities then can
befall him in this life; and that it is right and just that all things should
fall cross upon him, and bring grief and torment to him, all which is less then
he deserves; yea, he supposes it to be just that he should be damned for
ever, and become the footstool of all the Devils in Hell: all which
notwithstanding is less then he is worthy of. Neither will he, nor can he
conceive any comfort or deliverance either from God or from the creatures, but
is willing to want comfort and deliverance; neither does he way wardly bear
damnation and pain, for that it is equal, just, and not contrary to God, but
agreeing to Gods will; therefore he does love it, and take it in good part, not
bearing unwillingly any thing but his own sin and ungodliness, because that is
unjust and contrary to God: this does grieve and trouble his mind, and this is
called the true penitence for sin; and he that does in this life so come into
Hell, the same man after this life does come into the Kingdom of Heaven, and in
this life does attain such a taste as passes all the joy and pleasure, as
either has or can befall a man in this life from any temporal thing: and as
long as a man is thus in Hell, neither God nor the creature can comfort him,
even as it is written, In Hell there is no redemption; of this thing one said,
I perish, I die, I live without comfort, being damned both within and without;
I desire of none that I may be delivered: Now God has not forsaken man in this
Hell, but takes him to himself; so as man desires nothing but the eternal
good, and understands the eternal good to be above measure good, and this is
his pleasure, peace, joy, rest and satisfaction: and when man does not regard
nor desire any thing but the eternal good, and nothing in or concerning
himself, it comes to pass that the peace, joy, rest, pleasure, and all such
like things as do belong to the eternal good, become man's, and so man is in the
Kingdom of Heaven.

This Hell and this Kingdom of Heaven are two good and safe ways for man in
this life, which whosoever does find out rightly and well, is happy; for this
Hell has an end, but this Kingdom of Heaven does remain for ever. Besides man
must mark that whilst he is in this Hell nothing can comfort him, neither can
he think that ever he shall be delivered or comforted again: When he is in this
Kingdom of Heaven there is nothing can hurt or object him, neither does he
believe that he can be hurt or discomforted, and yet, after this Hell he is
comforted and delivered, and after this Heaven he is troubled and deprived of
comfort: Now this Hell and this heavenly Kingdom does befall man, so as that he
knows not when it comes; neither can a man, by his own means, do or omit any
thing whereby they should either come or depart from him; neither can man give
or take away from himself either of these, or take or lose them; but it comes
to pass here, as it is written, John 3.8. The wind (or spirit) blows where it
lists, and thou hear the sound thereof (that is, when it is present) but
know not whence it comes, nor whither it goes. And when man is in either
of these, he is in good case, and he may be as safe in Hell as in the Kingdom
of Heaven: and so long as a man is in this life, he may often pass out of the
one into the other, yea, within a day and a night, and sometimes oftener, and
that without himself: but when man is in neither of these, he is conversant
with the creature, and wandreth hither and thither, and knows not which way to
turn him; wherefore he ought never to let these two things go out of his mind.

CHAP. XII. Of true Peace.
MAny say that they can have no peace nor rest, but are in continual conflict
with many adversities, calamities, griefs and sorrows: If you will consider the
truth of this matter after this manner, the very Devil might have peace, if all
things were carried after his will and choice: For this cause we must mark and
observe the peace which Christ did leave unto his Disciples at his last
passage, when he says, My peace I give unto you, not such as the world gives
give I unto you, for the world deceives with her gifts. But what peace then is
that whereof Christ speaks? Surely that which is (inward) which does pierce
and break through all calamities, adversities, troubles, miseries and infamies,
and all such like; so as a man in all these should be joyful and patient as
Christ's Disciples were; and not they, but also all the elect friends of God,
and all the true imitators of Christ: Wherefore persuade thy self, if any man
confer his love, diligence and endeavors in and upon these things, he may
sufficiently know the true and eternal peace (which is God) as much as is
possible for a creature.

Thaulerus says, There are some in this life, who over-soon forsake their
imaginations before the truth has freed them from them; and because they do
set themselves at liberty, therefore can they hardly, or not at all, attain to
the truth. The work of God then, and his Commandment moving and admonishing,
ought always to be diligently observed, and not the work, command and
admonition of men. Now we must know that no man can be illuminated except he
first be purged, cleansed and freed: and further, that no man can be united
with God, except he first be illuminated; wherefore there are three ways,
first, purgation; secondly, illumination; and thirdly, union.

CHAP. XIII. Of the fall of Adam, and the amendment by Christ.
WHatsoever dyed and was lost in Adam, the same quickened and revived again in
Christ: Likewise whatsoever did rise and live in Adam, the same perished and
dyed in Christ: But what is that? I say, it is true obedience and disobedience.
And what is true obedience? I say it is this, a man ought so far to consist and
to be absolutely without himself, and what may be termed his own, that is,
without self-will, (and as I may so speak, being I) that he seeks and esteems
himself, and what he is in all matters, no more then if he were not at all; and
that he conceives no better of himself, nor esteems no more of himself, and all
that is his, and all creatures, then if he were not at all. What then is that
thing which is to be esteemed and valued? I answer, it is that only one thing
which is called God, and this is true obedience in verity; and so it falls out
in blessed eternity, that in it nothing is sought, esteemed, of loved, but that
one; not any thing accounted worthy, but the same one: From whence it may be
gathered what disobedience is, (viz.) when a man does attribute any thing to
himself, or supposes that he is something, knows and is able to do
something, and regards himself and his own ends in business, loves himself,
etc.

Man was and is created unto true obedience, Romans 5. and does ow the same unto
God; and as this obedience was lost and perished in Adam, so it revived and
flourished again in Christ: But disobedience arose and lived in Adam, but dyed
in Christ. And surely the humanity of Christ was, and consists so far forth
wholly and entirely without it self and all other things, as no other creature
consisted at anytime in like manner, and was none other thing but a certain
mansion and habitation of God: And whatsoever belonged to God, or appertained
to that humanity, had life, and was a certain habitation of God: of these it
never challenged any thing to it self; nay, it did not challenge the very
Divinity to it self, whereof it was a habitation; nor any of those things which
the Divinity willed, or refused in it; nor any of those things which in the
humanity either befell and were suffered: so as in the humanity there was
neither arrogation, seeking, nor desire, saving only a seeking and desire, how
and after what manner it might satisfy the Divinity, and that very desire the
humanity did not attribute unto it self. Of this knowledge more cannot be spoken
or writ in this place, for it is unspeakable; neither was it ever yet
discovered, nor shall be fully expressed; for it is such a thing as cannot be
spoken or written, but of him who is the self-same thing, and knows it.

CHAP. XIV. What the old and new Man is.
THis is also to be observed: when mention is made of the old and new man, the
matter is thus to be understood; the old man is Adam, disobedience, selfness,
egoity, etc. But the new man is Christ and obedience. When we speak of dying,
perishing, and the like, you must thus understand it: It is necessary that the
old man be brought to naught; and when and where this comes to pass in the
divine light, there the new man is born again: also when it is said, That man
must dye in himself, it is as much as if you should say, it is necessary that
himself, or egoity should dye: S. Paul says, Put off the old man with his
works, and put on the new man, who is made and formed according unto God: He
that lives in selfness, and according to the old man, he is, and is called the
son of Adam, and has power most especially and in very truth to live with him;
and is also the son and brother of the Devil: but he that lives in obedience,
and in the new man, he is the brother of Christ and the Son of God.

Now when the old man dies, and the new man is born, there thence arises a
new birth, of which Christ says, Except ye be born again, ye shall not enter
into the kingdom of God: Saint Paul also says, Even as in Adam all men do dye,
even so in Christ all are revived. As if he should say, Whosoever does follow
Adam in disobedience, they are dead, and shall never live again, but in Christ,
that is, in obedience; the cause is this, as long as man is Adam, or his son,
he is without God: Christ says, He that is not with me, is against me: he
therefore that is against God is dead before God, but he that is with Christ in
obedience, he is, and lives with God: This is also written, sin is this, when
the creature does avert it self from the Creator, and is like unto it, and the
very same. For whosoever is in disobedience is in sin, neither shall sin ever
be corrected or amended, but by turning to obedience; and as long as man lives
in disobedience, sin is never corrected nor amended in him, do what he can,
which is to be known by this, because disobedience is sin it self. But if man
do return to true obedience, all faults are corrected, amended, and pardoned,
but otherwise this cannot come to pass.

A matter worthy to be observed, yea, if the Devil could come to true
obedience, he should become an Angel, and all his sin and wickedness should be
corrected, and amended, and at once forgiven; Also if any Angel could return to
disobedience, he should presently become a Devil, although he should do no
other thing.

If it could come to pass, that any man might wholly and absolutely cast off
himself, so as that he lived without all things in true obedience, as the
humanity of Christ was, then he should be void of himself and one with Christ,
and should be the same by grace which Christ was by nature: But men deny that
this can be done, and therefore say, no man is void of sin; howsoever it be,
this is evident, that the nearer any man approaches to this obedience, so much
the less sin is in him; and the further he is from it, the more sin he has:
Finally, that a man should be good, better, or the best of all; evil, worse, or
the worst of all, condemned, or blessed of God; all consists in this
obedience or disobedience. This also is written, the more selfness and egoity,
the more there is of sin and unrighteousness; and the lesser there is of the
one, the greater want there is of the other: This also is written, the more
that my self does decrease (that is, egoity or selfness) the more does in me
increase the I of God, id est, God himself.

If all men were in true obedience, there would be then no pain nor misery, but
only that which is perceived by the senses, and that should be very easy and
not to be complained of: which may be thus proved, for if that should come to
pass all men would be in concord, neither would one grieve or hurt another,
neither would any man live or do any thing which were contrary to God: whence
therefore could grief and misery come? But now alas, all the World, and men in
the World, are in disobedience; and if any man were wholly and sincerely
obedient, as we believe that Christ was, and as he was indeed (else he could
not have been Christ) all men would be disobedient to this man, and would put
him to all bitterness and miserable sorrow, for all men would be contrary to
him, which we may understand by this; For that man in this obedience should be
one with God, and God himself should be there man himself. Now all disobedience
is contrary to God, and is nothing else; In very deed there is nothing contrary
unto God, neither creature nor work of the creature, nor whatsoever can be
named or thought, there are none of these I say, contrary unto God, or that can
displease him, but only disobedience: But a disobedient man is so displeasant
unto him, and contrary, and God complains so much of him, that when as man
does grieve and has a feeling of those things which be contrary to him, that
God would willingly endure an hundred deaths that he might kill disobedience in
man, and beget there again his own obedience: And although no man be so wholly
and so sincere in this obedience as Christ was, yet it may come to pass, that
some may approach so near unto it as to be made and called, and so to be Divine
and God: And the nearer that man does come unto it, and the more he is made
Divine and God, all disobedience, sin and injustice is the more troublesome to
him, and grieveth him, being hard to be endured. Disobedience and sin is the
same thing, there is no sin but disobedience, and that which proceeds from it.

CHAP. XV. That a man ought to attribute good to God, and evil to himself.
OBserve that which now shall be spoken: there be some men which do suppose and
say, that they are so far mortified, and gone out of themselves, that they may
lead a life void of sorrow, and free from all grievances; even as if all men
were in this obedience, or as if they were no creatures: Also that they may
lead an easy and sweet life whereby to please their minds, and in all things
whatsoever give themselves wholly unto pleasure; but surely it is not so, for,
their estate is no other then before is said: It is true, it would be so, if
all men were endued with obedience, but they are not so; and again, this also
cannot be: But some man will say, surely man ought to be free from all things,
and not to attribute any thing unto himself, which is either bad or good. I
answer, no man ought to attribute any good unto himself, for that is proper
only to God and his goodness; but that man has grace and eternal reward, who
is fitted thereunto, being apt and prepared to be the house and habitation of
the eternal good and Divinity, so as it may exercise in him, without
hinderance, the power, will, and work of it self; but if man will exercise
himself, and attribute none evil unto himself, but decline to the devil and
wickedness, then I say, that blame, and Infamy, and eternal misfortune, and
damnation, is due to such a man, for that he is fitted, and prepared, and
accommodated unto this, that the devil, deceit, lying, and all other
wickedness, might have the full scope, power, work and discourse in him, and
that he might be the house and habitation thereof.

CHAP. XVI. That the Christian life is the best.
WE ought also to observe, believe and know, that no life is so excellent,
good, and so beloved of God, as the life of Christ, which notwithstanding is
the most bitter life to all nature and selfnes; also a dissolute and free life
is most pleasant to nature, and selfness, and egoity: yet it is not the best
and most excellent, but it may be made the best in some men: and although the
life of Christ be most bitter, yet it is the best beloved of all, as from hence
may appear, because that is the knowledge whereby the true and simple good is
discerned, which good is not this or that, but the same whereof Saint Paul
speaks, When that which is perfect and entire is come, then all division and
imperfection shall be abolished: which sentence of his is thus to be taken;
That which is perfect, is superior to all division; and evety thing which is
divided and imperfect, is nothing in comparison of that which is perfect. Thus
also shall all knowledge of that which is divided be abolished: when and where
that which is perfect is known, it is needful also that it be so loved; and
that the other love wherewith a man does love himself and all other things, be
wholly abolished: and this knowledge does also discern what is best and most
excellent in every thing, and loves that in the true good, and for none other
cause but for the true good: and where this knowledge is, there is perceived
that the life of Christ is best and most excellent, and therefore also to be
loved of all, and willingly had and born, not regarding whether it be sweet or
sour, acceptable or troublesome to nature. Besides, it is to be observed, that
in what man this true good is known, there it is necessary that the life of
Christ should be, and remain unto the death of the body; he that thinks
othewise is deceived, and he that speaks otherwise, lies; and in whom the
life of Christ is not, he neither knows the true God, nor Truth it self.

CHAP. XVII. Of the way to Christ.
LEt no man conceive that he can attain to this true light and knowledge, and to
the life of Christ, by many questions, hearing, reading, or studying, or by
excellent hard sciences, and learning, or exquisite natural reason: I will say
further, so long as man retains any thing of any thing, or does hold any
thing in esteem, love, desire, or study it, or keeps it in his hands,
whatsoever that is, whether it be man himself or any thing else, he attaineth
not to this: This Christ affirms, when he says, Matthew 16. If thou will
follow me, forsake thy self and come after me. And he that does not forsake
himself and his own life, and does not leave and lose it, is not worthy of me,
neither can he be my Disciple: The meaning of which words is this, he that does
not forsake and abandon all things, can never know me truly, nor attain to my
life: And say, that this had never bin uttered by the mouth of man, yet truth
speaks by it self, for this is as true as truth it self: But so long as man
does love in part, and a portion only, and especially himself, and does make
account and esteem of it, he is so far blinded, and becomes so blind, as that
he knows not good, but such as is most profitable, commodious and pleasing to
himself, and those things which are his, this I say he chiefly accounts of,
and holds most dear.

CHAP. XVIII. That the life of Christ is envyed of humane wisdom.
ANd because the life of Christ is most bitter to all selfness and egoity,
therefore for the obtaining of the same, it is necessary that all selfness and
natural egoity, perish, die, and be utterly forsaken. Therefore also every man's
nature does abhor this life, supposing it to be evil, unjust, and foolish, and
embracing a life fiting it self and pleasant, and such is his blindness that he
does hold it for the best. You see that there is no life so pleasant and
agreeable to nature, as that which consists of liberty and dissolateness:
Therefore nature cleaves to this, enjoying it as her own flesh, peace and
tranquillity; as also all things which are her own. And this comes to pass
especially in them who are endued with excellent natural reason; for this does
climb so high, and stands so far in her own light, and on her self, as that
she thinks her self to be that eternal and true light, and does challenge to
her self to be the same; and being deceived in her self, deceives others with
her self, who know no better, being thereto also inclined.

CHAP. XIX. The state of a Christian is not to be expresled.
HEre some man will ask in what estate that man is who follows the true light
as much as is possible to him? To whom I will answer, that this can never truly
be said: and why so? because that he who is not the thing, cannot say it;
neither can he that is it, and knows it, speak it: But if any desire to know
it, let him expect, until he be that thing.

Further, I believe that his outward conversation and manners are such that he
is capable of whatsoever is fitting and convenient to be done, and whatsoever
is not meet and convenient to be done: But is there not some lust of man, who
says, so I will, so I command? this he is not capable of; but man persuades
himself that many things are fitting and ought to be done, which
notwithstanding are foul and not meet to be done: If a man's own pride, or
covetousness, or any other vice, or dishonesty, provoke him to do or omit any
thing, he says, that necessity urged him to it, and that it ought to be done:
if the favor or friendship of men, or his own lust, do set him forward to this
or that, or does draw him from it, he says, so it is meet and ought to be, and
all these things are false. But if man had none other (must or ought) but that
which God (our preserver and truth) does draw and turn us to, he should
sometimes have more business and work then now he has.

CHAP. XX. That the World is mad.
IT is said that the Devil and his spirit does sometimes so possess and hold
some man, as that he knows not what he does, leaves undone, being besides
himself, the evil spirit having such command over him, as that in him, with
him, and through him, and from him, he does or omitteth whatsoever he will.
This in some sort is true, that the whole world is possessed with the Devil,
and carried of him, that is, by lies, deceits, and other wickednesses and
vices, which are all diabolical. If therefore any man were in such manner
possessed, and transported by the Spirit of God, as that he knew not what he
did, or did not, or were so out of himself, as that the will and Spirit of God
should moderate his actions, and so govern and move him, as to cause him, with
him, and from him, whatsoever he would and how he would, then this man were one
of those of whom Saint Paul speaks, Romans 8. Whosoever are carried and moved
by the Spirit of God, the same are the sons of God, and not subjects to the
Law: and to whom Christ says, it is not you that speak, but the Spirit of
Christ speaks in you: but I fear that there are a hundred thousand, or
rather, so many as cannot be numbered, who are moved by the Devil; whereas, in
the mean time, not one is moved by the Spirit of God, which comes to pass,
because men have more likeness to the Devil then to God: for egoity and
selfness belong wholly to the Devil.

Now in one or two words, all things may be here expressed, which I have here
rehearsed in so many words, Even thus: Be thou wholly and plainly without thy
self. And yet this matter is more fully and better declared, and showed, and
distinguished in many words.

Now some man will say, I am unprepared for all these things, therefore this
cannot be done in me: and so men do get and find out some excuse: To the which
we may thus answer; That man is not ready and is unprepared, it is certainly
his own fault: For if man would mind and do nothing else, but in all things
attend his preparation, and endeavor that he might be prepared, surely God
would prepare him sufficiently, and would add so much love, diligence and study
to that preparation, as sold be sufficient to pour into him (being now
prepared) all those good things; yet there are certain ways which lead us
hither, according to the common saying; If any man desire to learn any Art
whereof he is ignorant, there are four things required to the learning of it:
The first (which of all other is most necessary) is a great desire, diligence
and endeavor continually that it may be done; if this be absent, the matter
will never be attained. The second is, that you have something, whereby to
learn. The third, that you carefully and diligently observe, attend and
reverence your Master. The fourth, that your self do also enterprise and
exercise that thing. And if any of these be wanting, you shall never be able to
learn or obtain the Art. Even such is the manner of this preparation; and he
that has the first, id est, diligence, and a continual and serious desire to
gain the end, he does seek and find all things which appertain, are necessary
and profitable for him: And he that uses not diligence, and does neither love
nor desire, he on the other side does not seek, and therefore does not find,
and without doubt remains unprepared, nor ever comes to the end.

CHAP. XXI. Of the way unto the life of Christ.
THere are certain ways and preparations prescribed likewise toward this,
which are, that we ought to be Gods patients, and to yield obedience, duty and
subjection unto him, which is true; for if any man could attain unto the end,
which may be had and compassed in this life, he should be truly and perfectly
endued with all these things. But he that ought and will suffer God, must also
suffer all things; that is, God and himself, and the nature of all things, none
excepted: And he that ought and will be obedient, subject, and dutiful unto
God, must express his obedience, duty and subjection only by suffering, and not
by doing: also all things in general are to be endured and suffered of him in
silence, and by perseverance in the inward senses of his mind, and quiet and
still bearing: And in all these things we ought neither to desire help, nor to
make excuse, nor to stander any, nor to act revenge, but in all things say,
with a true, loving, and submissive mercy, Father, forgive them, for they know
not what they do, This truly would prove a good way, and an excellent
preparative toward the farthest end that man can attain unto in this life,
which is the beloved life of Christ: For in the life of Christ the aforenamed
ways exist, and are observed fully and perfectly, even to the end of the bodily
life: wherefore there is none other, either more better or more prepared way
for him that loves the life of Christ, then to live and follow the same, and
to exercise himself in it, so far as he may or can: It is already set down in
part what is hereunto required; and whatsoever is said, either here, or
elsewhere, is all the way, or the means of the way to obtain the right end;
but what the end is, no man can tell. If any man desire to know it, let him go
the right way to it, that is, by this life of Christ.

CHAP. XXII. In what man true Christ is.
YEt are there ways to the life of Christ, as we have already said, when, and
wherein God and man are joined together, so that it may be truly said, and
truth it self may acknowledge it, that the true and perfect God, and true
perfect man are one; and man do so yield and give place unto God, that God
himself there is man, and that God also be there present, and work alone, and
do, and leave undone any thing without any I, to me, mine, and the like; where
these things are, and exist, there is true Christ, and no where else:
Therefore, since that here is true and perfect man, here is also perfect sense
of pleasure and pain love and adversity, and of all things that can be felt or
made trial of either inwardly or outwardly. And because God, there is also man
himself, he can understand and know love, and other things of that kind: and
even as man, who is not God, can feel and know all things which do procure
pleasure and sorrow to man, and especially those things which are contrary to
himself: after the same manner it comes to pass where God and man are all one,
and yet God is man himself; there are all things felt which are contrary to God
and man; and even as man is there brought to nothing, and God is all, so
happens it to him in that thing which is contrary to man, and does grief him,
that is, it is also brought to nothing, and this ought to continue from God as
long as corporal and naturallise does endure, and is. This also is to be
observed, that that one thing where God and man are united together, does
consist without it self, and without all things, and is free from all things,
that is, it is for God, and not for man, or the creatures; for it is the
property of God to consist, and be without this or that, without selfness,
egoity, and the like; but it is the property of the creature to seek and will
(in all things which it does or leaves undone) himself, or those things which
are his own, and this or that, here or there: When therefore the creature or
man does lose or lay off his own selfness or himself, it comes to pass that
God enters into him with his own (that is) with his selfness.

CHAP. XXIII. What it is to be rich in spirit.
THis also is to be considered, after that man has passed over all that way
which leads him to the truth, and has exercised himself therein, and has
suffered so much affliction; and so long, as that now he thinks himself wholly
spent, dead, and gone out of himself, and given over wholly unto God: Then does
the Devil first begin to sow his seed in him, from which feed two fruits arise;
one of which is spiritual riches or spiritual pride; the other is inordinate
false liberty. These are two sisters, who ordinarily and willingly frequent
together: and this happens after this manner. The devil does so puff up man,
as that he does suppose he is come to the highest exaltation, so as now he
stands in no more need of Scripture, or any other thing, and generally that he
is become such a one as wants nothing: hence there arises in him a great
cheerfulnes and peace, whereupon it follows that he speaks after this
manner; go to now, I am above all men, and know and understand more then the
whole world; and therefore it is meet and right that I be the God of all
creatures, and that al creatures, and especially all men should serve me, and
worship me, and be subject to me: this he seeks and desires and willingly
receives from all the creatures, and especially from man, and in his own
conceit he is worthy of all these, and thinks that they are due unto him,
and he does account al men as beasts, and whatsoever is such as that it can
yield unto his body, flesh and nature, delight, pleasure, contentment, and
cheerfulness, he thinks himself worthy of it all, and that he seeks and
receives whenever he can obtain it, and he thinks all too little which he
can obtain, supposing that he is truly worthy of them all; and all men that do
serve him, and are at his command, although they be thieves and robbers, yet he
says, that they are noble and faithful hearts, and faithful and charitable to
the truth, and toward poor men; and he praifeth, seeks and follows them
wheresoever they are. And if any man fail to reverence these proud fellows, to
obey them, and to be subject unto their wills, such a one is not commended of
them, but is contemned, although he were as holy as S. Peter. Therefore when
this spiritual pride does seem to it self to stand in need neither of
Scriptureteaching, nor the like: It comes to pass that it does not scorn
alone, but also deride all Ceremonies, Ordinances, Precepts, Laws, and the very
Sacraments of the holy Church: also all those men who have these orders in use,
and do attribute any thing unto them: hence it is easily perceived that both
these sisters do dwell together. Besides this, rich man in his pride does
sometime imagine that he understands and knows more then all men: whence it
comes to pass, that he is forward to speak, and babble more then all other men,
and would have his sayings and talk only in request, and to be heard, and all
other men's discourses to be held erroneous, or ridiculous and foolish.

CHAP. XXIV. Who be poor in spirit.
BUt where spiritual poverty and true submission is, there the matter is
otherwise: And this arises hence, because that we truly find and know, that
man of himself, and by his own means, is nothing, and can do nothing, neither
is fit for any thing, nor has any thing but vice and wickedness: Hence it
comes, that man does hold himself altogether unworthy of these things which can
befall him from God or from all the creatures, and that in the cause of God,
and all the creatures, he ought both to suffer, and sometimes to do for Gods
sake; so as of himself he has truly right to nothing, but out of the humility
of his mind thus he speaks: It is meet and convenient that God and all the
creatures should be mine enemies, and should censure me, and have right against
me, and I have right to nothing: Hence it is, that this man neither will ask
nor regard any thing of God or the creatures, but only things necessary, and
that very fearfully, and as by free gift, and not of right: neither does he
afford his body or nature any more good or pleasure then necessity requires;
neither does he suffer or permit, that any man should help or serve him, but in
case of necessity, and that is not without fear, because he has no right to
any thing, and seems unto himself unworthy of all things. This man thinks,
that all his words and sayings are nothing else but folly, and therefore he
speaks or talks with no man in way of teaching, except he be thrust on with
divine love, and even then he does it with fear, and that as sparingly as may
be.

It is also discerned and found out in this spiritual poverty and humility,
that all men depend wholly and absolutely on themselves, being prone, and ready
to commit any sin and wickedness; therefore as it is necessary and behoveful,
that there should be Ordinances, Ceremonies, Laws and Precepts, whereby their
blindness may be discovered, and their ungodliness reduced unto order, which if
it were not, men would become worse, and more disordered then dogs, and other
beasts: Besides, many men are drawn and converted to the truth by these
Ceremonies, and Ordinances, which otherwise would not be drawn; and surely few
men attain to the truth, who have not first received Ordinances and Ceremonies,
and exercised themselves in them whilst they knew no other, nor better thing:
Hence it is, that Laws and Ordinances are not despised nor contemned in
humility of spirit, and spiritual poverty, nor men who do use and handle them;
but out of love and mercy such a man does complain and lament the case of other
men with grief on this wise: O God of truth, I pour out my complaint before
thee, and thou thy self bewaylest, that man's blindness, vice and wickedness
does cause that to be needful and necessary to be done, which notwithstanding
in truth need not be, nor ought to be done. And here is a certain desire, that
men who know nothing better, nor any other means to the truth, might know and
understand to what end all Laws and Ordinances are, and were made; and this
poor man in spirit, of whom I speak, does use all these things together with
other men, which know neither better, nor any other things, and is partaker of
these with them; by this means he may keep them from turning themselves unto
evil things, and that, if it be possible, he may bring them nearer.

Again, whatsoever has hitherto been spoken of poverty and humility, that is
truly so, and may be made plain and evident by the life and words of Christ,
who did exercise, and perfectly work every act of the humility, as it is found
in his life, and as he taught by his words, saying, learn of me, because I am
meek and lowly of heart; he did not neglect or despise the old Law and
Discipline, nor the men who were subject to the Law, yet he said, that it was
not sufficient, but that we must go forward, as it is true we ought. S. Paul
also did write, that Christ took upon him the Law, that he might free those
that were under the Law, that is, bring them to nearer and better things;
Christ also said, I came not to be served, but to serve.

Briefly, in all the deeds, words and life of Christ, there is nothing found
but true humility and poverty: And (as I said before) where God is man, and
where Christ is, there it is necessary that this should be: Therefore where
pride of mind, and spiritual riches, and (...) of a light mind is, there
neither is Christ nor his true Imitators: Christ says, My soul is sorrowful,
even to the death, speaking of the death of the body, which came to pass,
because he was born of Mary, until the death of his body, and how this was,
has been showed before: Christ said, Blessed are the poor in spirit, that is,
such as are truly humbled, for theirs is the Kingdom of God: so also says the
truth, (yet it is not written) miserable and cursed are the proud in heart, for
theirs is the Kingdom of the Devil; and these things are thus found to be truly
there where God is man: But where Christ and his true followers are, there it
is necessary, that true, inward, spiritual humility and poverty should be, and
also a dejected and constant mind, which mind it is meet should be full of
close and hidden calamity and grief, even to the death of the body: And this I
do truly avouch, that he that thinks otherwise is deceived, and with himself
deceives others, as has been said; for this cause all nature and selfness
does depart from this kind of life, and does cleave to the false and free life,
as has been said.

Now some Adam or Devil, who desires to excuse and defend himself, would come
upon me, and say thus: You would prove indeed that Christ was without himself,
and many other such like things, yet notwithstanding he speaks often of
himself, and does commend himself for this and that: Unto which I thus answer,
When the truth ought, and is willing to do, or will, there is no other cause of
its will, desire and action, but that the truth might be known and manifested,
and this was in Christ, and hither did all his works and actions tend, and
whatsoever was most profitable and behooful for that, also whatsoever things
were done by him, from those he was free, as likewise from all other things
which were done: You will say therefore there was in Christ some cause, why he
did every thing? Unto which I thus answer, If any man ask the Sun why it
shines, it would answer, it is necessary that I shine, neither can I do
otherwise, for this is proper, and belongs to me, and it is my freedom of
nature to be endued with this property, and to shine; even so it is with God
and Christ, and all things that are divine, and belonging unto God, that they
will do and desire no other thing, nor no other good, or for good, neither can
any other cause be alleged.

CHAP. XXV. How all things are to be left or lost.
AFter these things we must observe, that it is said, yea, Christ himself
says, that all things are to be left and lost, which is not to be understood,
as if men should have nothing, or have to do with nothing; for it is necessary
that man should have and do even something in this life, wherein he may be
employed so long as he lives: But this is thus to be understood. Whatsoever
any man or creature can do, omit, or know, is not that thing wherein unition or
uniting is placed: And what is unition? It is no other thing but that thy self
be plainly, singly, and altogether simple in the truth, together with the
simple and eternal will of God: And also that thou be wholly void of thy own
will, and that the created will flow into the eternal will, and there dissolve
and be turned into nothing, so that the ettrnal will do there only will, do, or
leave undone any thing. And what is there that can help or further man to this
matter? that can neither words, works, nor other Ceremonies do; nor finally any
creature, nor the work, power, knowledge, action, or omission of all the
creatures.

Thus ought all things to be lost and l^ft, which is as much as if you should
say, it is not to be supposed or thought that there is any work, speech,
knowledge or learning, or any other thing created, which can help, profit in
this business, but all these things whatsoever are to be lost and left, and we
must make our progress unto unition. And yet it is necessary that these things
should be, and something there is which is to be done and left undone,
especially a man ought to sleep and wake, and walk, and stand, to speak, and be
silent, and many other things which must needs be, so long as a man lives.

CHAP. XXVI. That the inner man is unmoveably joined with God, the outward man
notwithstanding is moved.
THis also is truly to be observed, that where unition befalls, and is truly
made, there immediately the inner man remains unmovable, and suffers his
outward man to be moved hither and thither in those things, and to those
things, which are convenient and necessary to be, and come to pass: So that the
outward man may say, yea, and say truly, I neither will be, nor will not be,
neither live, nor dye, neither know, nor be ignorant, neither do, nor leave
undone, or whatsoever of this kind, but what is fit and ought to be done, to
that I am obedient, whether it be to suffer or to act any thing: Thus it comes
to pass, that the outward man has no other cause, nor any thing else which he
seeks, but only to satisfy the eternal will: for this we may truly perceive,
that the inward man ought to stand immovable, and the outward man ought and
must move. And although the inner man be some cause of the moving of the
outward man, yet this cause is no other thing but that it is necessary, and
must be done by the decree of the eternal will; and where God himself would be,
or is, there also the same thing is done, as is to be perceived in Christ.
Also, where this is in the divine, and proceeding from the divine light, there
is not spiritual pride, nor foolish liberty, or a mind licentious, but lowly
submission, and a depressed, humbled and sorrowful soul, and all order,
justice, equality, truth, and whatsoever belongs to all virtue: There must
also be peace and contentedness of estate and condition; but if it be
otherwise, it is not right with man, as is well elsewhere said more at large:
And as truly there is nothing which may help or further this unition, so is
there nothing which can hinder or avert it, but only man himself through his
own will.

CHAP. XXVII. That no man in this life can be free from pain.
IT is both said and heard, that man ought and may be without pain or grief in
this life, as Christ was after his Resurrection. This they go about to confirm
out of these words of Christ: I will go before you into Galilee, there you
shall see me; Also where he says, a spirit has neither flesh nor bones, as ye
see me have: which words they would thus expound, As you have seen me, and
followed me, when I was in a mortal body, and in this life, after the same
manner you shall see me, and I will go before you, and you shall follow me in
Galilee; that is, you shall both feel and taste, being painless and immutable,
in what estate you shall live, and remain, before you dye the death of the body
and suffer: And as you see me have flesh and bones, being notwithstanding free
from pains, after the self-same manner shall you be also in your corporality
and your mortal humanity, not harmed by the death of the body: To this manner
of reasoning it is thus answered, Christ did not ordain that man should or
could attain unto this, except he first performed and suffered all these things
which were by Christ performed and suffered; and if Christ attained not to this
before he first endured and suffered the death of the body, and all other
things that belong thereunto, then surely no man can nor ever shall attain to
this so long as he is mortal and subject to pain. For if this thing had been
the best and most excellent thing, or if it could or ought to be, that man in
this life might attain hereunto, then surely it should first have been
performed in Christ, for the life of Christ was and is the best, and most
excellent life; also the best approved and most dear unto God of any that ever
was or shall be: since that this neither ought nor could be done in Christ, it
shall never happen surely to a man in that manner, as to be truly the best and
most excellent: It may be thought and called so, but that is no reason why it
should be so.

CHAP. XXVIII. How we must understand, that to a just man no law is to be given.
IT is also said, that a man can and may transcend all virtue, all Ceremony,
Ordinance, Commandment, Law and Justice, so that he may depose, shake off, and
abolish all these things: here something is true, and something is not true,
which must be thus considered; Christ was above the life of Christ, and above
all Virtue, Ceremony, Ordinance, etc. The Devil also is above all those, but
after a diverse manner; Christ was and is above all these things, if you thus
understand it; all words, deeds, ceremony, actions and omissions of actions,
silence, speech, suffering, and whatsoever happened to Christ, was not
necessary to him, neither did he stand in need of them, neither did they confer
any profit at all upon him; and the same was and is the reason of all virtue,
ordinances, justice, and the like: for whatsoever is, or might be attained unto
by these things, all that is before in Christ, and there in readiness; and if
you thus understand the case, then it is true; in the same sense, that saying
of Saint Paul is true and so to be understood, Those who are endued, carried,
and lead by the Spirit of God, are the sons of God, and not subject to the Law;
the sense of which words is this, they are not to be taught what they should do
or leave undone, seeing the Spirit of God, which is their instructor, will
teach them sufficiently, neither is any thing to be commanded or enjoined them,
as to do good, to shun evil, or the like; for he that teaches them what is
good, or not good, best, or not best; the same, I say, does command and enjoin
them, likewise to retain the best, and quit the contrary, and they obey him
accordingly. Hereupon it is that they need look for no Law, Doctrine, or
precept; for another reason also they need no law, by means whereof to obtain
or get profit to themselves; for whatsoever might be obtained, or gotten by
these things, or by the help of all the creatures, or by speech, words, or
works, either in eternal life, or to eternal life, all that they have obtained
already; If you understand the cause on this manner, it is true, that a man may
become more higher and excellent then all law and virtue, and also then the
works, and knowledge, and strength of all creatures; But if you affirm that
other, which is, that both ought to be done, I mean, that both the life of
Christ, as also all commandments, laws, ordinances, and the like, ought to be
laid aside, and cast off, and to be neglected, contemned and derided, then is
it false, and full of lies.

CHAP. XXIX. Of the true and false Lights, and of perseverance in the life of
Christ.
NOw some will say, If neither Christ, nor any other man, can obtain any thing,
nor reap any profit by the life of Christ, nor by all Ceremonies, and
Ordinances, etc. for whatsoever may be obtained by those things that they have
already, what further cause is there why they should not leave off to do these
things? or why ought they to use these things afterward, or handle or have
them any longer in account?

This is to be observed, that there are two Lights, the one a true, the other a
false light; the true light is the eternal Light, which is God; or else it is a
created Light, which is notwithstanding Divine, and is called Grace, and this
is the true Light: The other is a false Light, which is the Light of Nature, or
natural light: But why the first light should be true, and the other false, it
may be better observed then either written or spoken: Nothing appertains to
God, as to the Divinity; neither will, nor knowledge, nor satisfaction, nor any
thing at all that can be named, spoken, or thought; but to God, as God, it
appertains, that he ^ay himself open, know and love himself, that he manifest
himself to himself in himself; and all this is God; and that he is an offense
and not an action, as being without the creature: And in this opening, and
manifestation, is the distinction of persons. But where God, as God, is man, or
where God lives in some Divine or Deified man, there is something belonging
unto God, which is only appertaining to him, and not to the creatures; and God
is that in himself, without the creature, originally or essentially, not in
form or action: and yet God would have this same to be put in practice; for
therefore it is, that it might be conferred to action, and so exercised: for
what then should it be? should it be idle, what then should it profit? for that
which is of no use is not at all: Now this neither God nor Nature would have;
But if God would have this exercised and brought into action, and that this
cannot be done without the creature, it is then necessary that it be so done:
What then? If it were neither this nor that, nor if it were neither any work
nor action, or the like, what should it be? or what should God himself become
to be? or what should he himself be? Here you must return and abide, lest, by
crawling (as it were) so far, you be brought to that pass at the last, as not
to know which way to turn, or by what means to creep back again.

CHAP. XXX. That God is one and simple good, and only to be loved.
NOw this is to be observed; God, as he is God, is good and goodness it self,
and is neither this good, nor that good; but here something is to be marked,
which is somewhere, either here or there, and that is, not in all ends, nor
above all ends or places. Also that which is sometimes to day, or to morrow, is
not always, nor every time, nor above all times; and that which is something,
either this or that, is not all things, nor above all things. Now understand
this after this manner: If God were any thing, either this, or that, he were
not all things, nor above all things, as he is, and so should not be the true
perfection; wherefore he is God, and yet is not this nor that, which the
creatures, as they aye creatures, are able to know, name, think, or utter;
therefore if God, as he is good, were this good or that good, he should not be
all good, neither should he be the simple and perfect good, which
notwithstanding he is. Now if God be also light and knowledge, it appertains
to light and knowledge, and is proper to it, to be bright and to shine, to
appear and know. And because God is light and knowledge, it is necessary that he
shine, be bright, and endued with knowledge; and all this, to shine and know, is
in God, without the creatures, because he is not here as an action, but an
essence and beginning And that it should be done as an action, by doing, it is
necessary that it should be done in the creatures: And therefore when this
knowledge and light does work in any creature, there it does know and learn what
it self is, and so it is good, and therefore it is not this or that; and
further, it does not know this or that, but it does know and learn to know,
that one, true, simple, perfect good, which is neither this nor that, but is
all good, and above all good.

Now it is here said, that he must learn that only good: but does any man learn
of himself? observe and mark this well, even as God is good, knowledge and
light, so is he also will, love, justice and truth; he is also all virtue, and
yet these are all one essence in God; neither can any of these be brought into
action or exercise without the creature, for in God there is nothing but
essence and beginning, not any action: But when this one (which notwithstanding
is all these) shall gain any creature unto it self, and has power over it, and
does so prepare it and fit it, that it may know in it what belongs to it
self; so far forth (I say) as that one is will and love, and is taught of it
self, as it is light and knowledge, neither wills any thing, but that one
which is it self. And furthermore, here is nothing willed or esteemed, but that
which is good as it is good, and that for no other reason, but because it is
good, and not by reason it is this or that, beloved of this man or that man,
and either pleasant or grievous to this man or that man, sweet or bitter, and
the like; and these things are not regarded nor sought, either for self, or as
it self: also all selfness and egoity, I, and to me, etc. are here left and
fall to the ground; so that it is not said, I love my self, or thee, or the
like; and if love were asked what it loves, it would answer, I love God; and
why? because it is good and for good, therefore it is meet and right that it
should be most esteemed; and if there were any thing better then God, That were
and ought to be loved for God: Therefore God does not love himself, as himself,
but as good; and if God knew any thing better then God, he would love that and
not himself; so far is God from all egoity and selfness; neither has he any
thing to do with it further then is needful, in respect of the persons: and
this both ought to be, and in truth is, in a divine and truly (...) otherwise
that man were neither divine nor deified.

CHAP. XXXI. That a deified man knows nothing but to love.
HEnce it comes, that a deified man is indeed endued with pure and unmingled
love, and is kind and loving to all men, and all things; and therefore it is
necessary that he should love all men, and all things, and that he should wish
well to all men and all things; and that he should savor and do them any good,
without putting any difference: Besides, whatsoever you do to a deified man,
whether it be pleasant, or troublesome, amiable, or grievous, or whatsoever it
is; yea, I will further say, although a man should kill such a one, and he
should so often return to life, he would notwithstanding heartily love that man
who had so often slain him; and although he had done him so many injuries, as
you can devise, yet he would notwithstanding from his heart wish him well,
respect him, and desire all good to befall him, yea and perform all good
offices to him, so as the other were able to accept and admit them. This may be
observed and plainly proved in Christ, who said unto Judas, that betrayed him,
Friend, Wherefore art thou come? As if he should say, Thou hate me, and art
mine enemy; whereas I love thee, and am thy friend; and thou desire, and
wishest, and do what evil to me thou either know or can; whereas I both
desire, and wish, and will well unto thee, and would give, and do unto thee
willingly, all things that be good, if thou were able to take and receive them:
As if God should say out of his humanity, I am the pure and simple good, and
therefore I neither can, will, desire, wish, do, or give any thing but good.
And if I must reward thee for thy wickedness and ungodliness, I must do it with
good, seeing I am nothing else, nor have any thing else. Hence it is that God
in a deified man desires no revenge, nor does will or do any mischief,
wherewith he is or may be affected; this may be seen in Christ, who said,
Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do. This also is proper to
God, that he compels no man to do, or omit any thing, but suffers every
man according to his own mind to do, or leave undone as well good as evil
things. Neither will he resist any man; this we may see in Christ who would not
resist his malefactors And again, when Saint Peter would have made resistance,
he said, Peter put up thy sword into thy scabbard, for it is neither my custom
nor yours, who belong to me, to resist by force, strive, or compel: Neither yet
can a deified man vex or grieve any man, which is thus to be understood; It
never falls into his will, desire, or mind, to do or leave undone anything,
to speak or to be silent, whereby he might breed pain or grief to any man.

CHAP. XXXII. That the will of man is prone to evil, and therefore to be
forsaken.
SOme man will say, If he wills, wishes, and does the best, unto every man,
he ought also to help every man, and cause all things to befall him according
to his hearts desire. For example, so as one might obtain to be made Pope,
another a Bishop, etc. I answer, he that furthereth the will of man, helps
him to the worst things; for the more that man follows his own will, and
increases in the same, so much the further he is from God and the true good.

Now God would willingly help man, and bring him to that which is best, and of
it self the best for man; but that this should come to pass, it is necessary
that all self-will should cease, (as before has been said,) and thus God would
willingly help man; but as long as man does seek that which is best for
himself, he does not seek that which should be best for him, and therefore he
never finds it; for it both is and were best for man, neither to seek nor
embrace himself, nor that which is his, which God both teaches and says. If
then, any man desire to be helped by God, to that which both in it self is
best, and also best for man, let him follow the sayings, Doctrines and
Co^mandments of God, so shall he receive help, and so is he now helped; there
is no other means: Now God teaches, and says, That man ought to forsake
himself, and all that he has, and follow him; for whosoever loves his own
soul, that is, himself, and will be saved and defended; id est, he who has a
care of himself, and his own, in these matters, he shall lose his soul; but he
who regards not his soul, and loses both himself and all things belonging to
him, he shall save his soul, and preserve it to eternal life.

CHAP. XXXIII. Of true humility, and spiritual poverty.
ANd now that which is proper unto God in a deified man, is, a true inward and
sincere humility, and where that is not, there is not a deified man, this
Christ both taught in his Word, and Works, and Life; and hence proceeded this
humility, because such a man perceives by the true light, that which indeed
every thing is, and that to be, to live, to know, to be able, and the like, do
belong only to the true God, and not to the creatures. For a creature, as it is
a creature, is nothing and has nothing of it self; and as soon as it turns
it self aside from the true God, by its own will, works, etc. there is nothing
but unrighteousness found in it; and therefore this also is very truth indeed,
that a creature, as it is a creature of it self, is worthy of nothing, and has
right (...) nothing, neither does any ow it any thing, either God or the
creature; but by right it ought to obey and be subject to God. And this is the
chiefest matter, and especially to be regarded; therefore that which ought and
will be obedient and subject unto God, ought also, and must be subject to all
creatures, and that, as I may briefly speak, not in action, but in sufferings,
or else it is false; and from this last matter, and from this last sentence,
proceeds true humility, which if it were not truly so, and if this true and
Divine Justice were not the best things, Christ would never have either taught
it by his Word, or performed it by his Life. And in this consists true
confession, and is true after this manner, that the creatures ought in regard
of divine grace, and for justice sake, become subject to God, and all
creatures, and nothing ought to be subject or to obey the creature it self;
yea, all the creatures have right and claim against it, and unto it; whereas it
self has right to nothing, or against any thing, and is indebted to all,
nothing being indebted to it, and this by suffering, and sometimes also by
doing: And from hence arises spiritual poverty, of which Christ says, Blessed
are the poor in spirit, for theirs is, the Kingdom of Heaven. All these things
Christ taught in words, and practiced in life.

CHAP. XXXIV. That sin only is contrary to God.
BUT here something is to be observed: It is said that something is, and may be
done against God, and that there is somewhat which does grieve him, and make
him sorrowful: we must know that there is no creature against God, or which can
procure his grief or sorrow, in that it is, or in that it lives, knows, or
can do any things, whatsoever are of this kind, are not contrary to God: That
the Devil or man lives, is, and the like, all this is good, and proceeds from
God, for God is every way all these things, essentially and originally.

God, I say, is the essence of all things which are the life of every thing
that lives, and the wisdom of all that are wise, for all things have their
being, their power, their life, and more truly in God then in themselves,
otherwise God were not all good, and therefore all things are absolutely good.

Now that which is good; is beloved of God, and he will have it; and therefore
it is not contrary to him. What then is grievous and contrary to God? nothing
but sin: and what is sin? no other thing but that the creature wills
otherwise then God wills, yea, contrary to the will of God: Every man may
perceive this in himself, after this manner, he that wills otherwise then I
do, or contrary to that which I do, he is mine enemy; and he that wills the
same that I do, he is my friend, and dear unto me: After the same manner it is
with God; You have here what sin is, and what is contrary to God, and what does
grieve and make him sorrowful; he therefore that wills otherwise then I do,
or contrary to that which I do, whatsoever he does, or leaves undone, whether
he speak or hold his peace, all that is contrary and grievous unto me: and so
in like manner it is with God, he that wills otherwise, or contrary to God,
whatsoever he does, or does not, or whatsoever he takes in hand, is contrary
to God, and is sin; and whatsoever wills otherwise then God, the same is
contrary to the will of God: For Christ says, He that is not with me, is
against me: the meaning whereof is this; he that wills not the same thing,
and is not of the same mind with me, he is of a will contrary to me. By these
things a man may perceive whether he does commit sin or no, and what sin is; by
what means, or after what manner, sin may or ought to be corrected or amended.
And this is that will which is said to be contrary to God, and it is termed
Disobedience, Adam, Egoity, and Selfness, our own will, sin, the old man, to
turn from God, and to separate our selves from him; all these are one and the
same thing.

CHAP. XXXV. That God in himself is impatiable, in man he is patiable.
NOw this is to be observed; That pain, trouble, and displeasure, does not fall
upon God, as he is God; and yet God is troubled for the sin of man. And because
this cannot come to pass in God without the creature, it is necessary that it
be done where God is man, id est, in a deified man. But here sin brings so
great sorrow and grief unto God, that God would willingly be tormented, and
endure corporal death; so as by that means he might but extinguish the sin of
one man: And if it should be demanded whether God had rather live, sin
remaining, or not to destroy sin by his death, he would answer, that he would
rather dye; for the sin of one man is more grievous to God, and troubles him
more then the torment and death of God himself. Then if the sin of one man
grieve him so much, what grief shall we think that he undergoeth through the
sins of men in general? Here we may perceive after what manner man troubles
God by sinning, and where God is man, or in a deified man, there is no
complaint of any thing but of sin, neither does any thing else cause grief; for
whatsoever is, or is done without sin, that God would have, and that should be.
But the complaint of sorrow which is for sin, that is meet and fitting that it
should remain in a deified man until the death of the body, though he should
live to the last day, and for ever. From hence did and does arise the hidden
sorrow of Christ, which no man can either utter or know, but only Christ, and
therefore it is both called, and indeed is a hidden sorrow. And surely this is
a thing proper to God, who will have it so, and delighted therewith in man, and
is certainly appertaining to God, for it does not belong to man, neither is it
in man's power, and where God can attain to this, he holds it most dear and
acceptable to him, but to man it is most bitter and grievous. All things which
are here set down of the propriety of God which he will have in man, in whom
they are erected and exercised, this, I say, the true light teaches, and it
does therefore teach that man (upon whom it is bestowed, and in whom it is
exercised to this end) might no more challenge it as his own, then if himself
were not at all: for by this means at the length it does appear that man is not
able to do this, neither ought it to be attributed to him.

CHAP. XXXVI, That the life of Christ is to be loved for it self, and not for
reward.
THerefore, wheresoever such a kind of deified man should be, or is, there also
may be, and is, the best and excellentest life, and most acceptable unto God of
any that ever was or shall be hereafter: and out of the eternal love, which
loves God, as good, and for good, and does also love that in all things which
is best and most excellent, only for good; this true and worthy life is so much
beloved, that it is never forsaken of that man in whom it is, although he
should live even to the last day; yea, and further, it is unpossible that it
should be forsaken, although that man should dye a thousand deaths, and all
evils should befall him which can befall all creatures, he would, I say, be
more willing to endure all these things then forsake this excellent life,
although he could, in exchange thereof, obtain the life of an Angel: And here
answer is made to the question, Where it is asked, if a man by a Christian life
obtain nothing more, nor can raise any other profit, what need is there then
that he should do any thing?

This life is not followed to this end, that thence profit ought to arise, or
any other thing be gained, but only in the behalf of love, and the excellency
thereof also, because it is dear and acceptable to God: Now if any man will
say, or think, that he has gotten enough of it, or that he may give it over,
this man does neither feel nor know it; for where it is truly found and felt,
it can never be forsaken; but he that has the life of Christ to this end, that
thereby he may attain or deserve something, this man has it as an hireling and
not for love, or rather he has it not at all: He that has it not in love,
has it not; and although he thinks he have it, he is deceived: Christ had this
life, not for reward, but for love; and love makes this life easy, and not
grievous, causing it to pass away cheerfuly, and to be willingly born. But he
that does not keep it for love, but supposes that he has it for reward, to
him it is most grievous, and he desires to be soon rid of it; and this is the
property of every hireling, to desire and wish an end of his labor: whereas a
true lover takes neither pain, time, nor labor, in ill part: for this cause it
is written, To serve God, and to live to him, is easy to him that does it;
this indeed is true, to him that does all things in love; but to him that does
them for reward, it is grievous: the same is to be held of all virtues and good
deeds, and also of integrity, equity, and the like.

CHAP. XXXVII. That God is above all order.
IT is said, and it is true, that God is above all custom, measure, and order,
and gives custom, order, and measure to all things; which must be thus
understood: God is willing to have all these things, but notwithstanding he
cannot have them in himself without the creature; for in God, without the
creature, there is neither order nor confusion, Rite nor Ceremony; for this
cause his will is, that these things should be, and that they may and ought to
be done; for where word, work, or action is, there is necessity that these
should be done, either according to order, custom, measure, or reason, or
without order.

Now order and reason are better and more excellent then these things which are
contrary to them.

But now we must observe, that there are four sorts of men who do hold Order,
Ceremony and Law.

Some do it neither for God, nor for any other cause, but only by compulsion;
and these indeed do it as little as they can, and that which they do is bitter
and grievous to them.

2. Others do it for reward; these are they who know no other thing but the
same, and do, that men may and ought to obtain and deserve the Kingdom of God
and eternal life after this manner, and by no other means; and that he, who
performs the most of these things, is blessed; and he that does omit or
neglect any of them, is damned, and belongs to the Devil: and these men use
great pains and diligence herein, yet it is a bitter thing unto them.

3. The third sort are evil and false spirits, who think and say that they are
perfect, and that they stand in no need of these things, and therefore hold
them in scorn and derision

4. The fourth sort are such who are filled with a true light, and do not these
things for reward, for they desire not to obtain any thing by them, or to
attain any thing by their help: But whatsoever thing they perform, concerning
these, they do it out of love: And these men are not so careful, how many of
these things, or how soon they do these or the like things; but how well, and
that they may be done in peace and measure: And if by chance it happen, that
any of these, or the like, be neglected, they do not therefore fall into
despair, for they know very well, that order and reason are better, and of more
esteem then any thing that is done without reason, therefore they will observe
order, and yet they know that happyness is not placed therein, and therefore
they are not so much troubled as others are, and they are blamed and contemned
of all other Sects: For the hirelings say, these men do altogether neglect
themselves, and sometimes they say, that they are wicked, and the like: others,
who are of a free spirit, say in a scoffing manner, that they behave themselves
foolishly, blockishly, and the like: But they themselves do hold that which is
mean and the best; for one lover of God is better and dearer to God then a
hundred thousand hirelings, and we ought to hold the like opinion of their
works.

This also is to be observed, that the Commandment; Speech, and all the
Doctrine of God do tend to this purpose, that the inward man may be joined to
God, which when it comes to pass, the outward man is so well ordered and
instructed by the inner man, that indeed he stands not in need of any outward
Precept or Doctrine; but the Precepts and Laws of men belong to the outward
man, and are necessary where better things are unknown; for these men are
ignorant, either what to do, or what to leave undone; so as if Discipline be
wanting, men become like to dogs, and other beasts.

CHAP. XXXVIII. The description of false light.
HAving made mention of a false light, something must be spoken thereof, as
what it is, and what properly belongs to it: Know therefore, that whatsoever
is contrary to the true light, is belonging to the false. It is a general
property of the true light not to deceive, nor to will that any should be
deceived, neither to be deceived it self: But the false light does deceive, and
is deceived: for God will deceive no man, neither can he be willing that any
man should be deceived: and so may you judge also of the true light. Now mark
this, the true light is God, and some divine thing: The false light is men, or
some natural thing. Now it is proper to God, not to be this or that, neither to
will, desire, or seek this or that in a deified man, but good as good, and that
for no other thing but for good: the same is to be held of the true light.

Also, it is proper to the creature and nature, to be something, this or that,
and to hold something in estimation, and to desire it, either this or that;
neither does it love that which is merely good, as good, and for good, but for
some other thing, this or that. And even as God, and the true light, is void of
all egoity, selfness, and seeking it self; so the property and nature of the
natural false light, is, to be I, my self, me, etc. so as it seeks it self, and
its own in all things, more then good, as it is good; this is proper to it, and
the nature of every each one.

Now let this be observed, wheresoever this light is, at the first, deceived,
it does not will nor choose any good, as good, and for good, but it wills and
chooses it self, and its own, as the best, which is falsehood, and the first
deceiving. It does also suppose, that it is that which it is not; for it does
suppose it self to be God, being nothing but nature, and supposing it self to
be God, it challenges to it self that which is proper to God, and not that
which belongs to God, as God is man, or as he is some deified man, but it
challenges to it self that which belongs to God, and is proper to him, as he
is God, and without the creature for ever and ever: For (as it is said before)
God is not poor, neither wants he any thing, he is free without business, at
liberty above all things, etc. All which are true, he is also immovable,
neither does he challenge any thing to himself, he is without Religion, and
whatsoever he does, is just: After the same manner, (says the false light)
will I also be, for the liker any one is to God, so much is he also the better,
wherefore it says, I will be like unto God, nay I will be God, and sit near
God, I will, I say, be like unto him, as Lucifer the Devil did.

God is everlastingly without pain, passion and trouble, so that nothing is or
can be done, which is grievous to him, or can procure his pain; but where God
is man, or in any deified man, the matter is far otherwise.

Lastly, Whatsoever can be deceived, is deceived by this false light: And
seeing whatsoever is not God or Divine, may be deceived: and since that this
light is nature it self, it comes to pass that it may be deceived, therefore
it is deceived, and also deceived of it self.

Some will say, how comes it to pass, that whatsoever can be deceived, is
deceived of it self? This does proceed from the great and unmeasurable
craftiness thereof; for it is so subtle, deceitful, and nimble of it self,
that it ascends and climbeth so high, as to suppose it self to be above men,
that neither nature, or any creature, can possibly mount so high; for this
cause it supposes it self to be God; then therefore it does arrogate to it
self all things which belong to God, and especially as God is in eternity, and
not as God is man: For this cause it thinks it self to be above all word,
work, custom, order, and even above the corporal Life of Christ, which he did
lead in his humanity; and therefore it refuses to be touched of any creature,
or the works of the creatures, whether they be good or evil, or whether they be
against God, or otherwise; all these it accounts alike, and will be freed
from them, as if it were the eternal God. But all other things which are
belonging to God, and to no creature, it does arrogate to it self, as if it
were worthy of all things, and as if it were meet and right that all the
creatures should serve and be subject unto it.

Thus it comes to pass, that there remains neither sorrow, passions, nor
troubles for any other thing or cause, but only the feeling of the body and
senses, which must remain until the death of the body, and whatsoever pain can
arise from thence: Yea, it does say and (...) suppose, that man is become
higher then the corporal life of Christ, and that he is and ought to be without
pain and untouched, as Christ was after his Resurrection.

There are many other, and wonderful errors, which do arise and proceed hence.
Seeing then that this false light is nature, it has the same property that
nature has, that is, to admire and seek it self, and its own, in all things;
and that which is the best and fittest, most pleasant and sweet to nature it
self in all things; and because it is deceived, it does think and say, that
whatsoever is the best, sweetest and most fit for it self, that indeed is the
best of all other things, and it does say, that it is the best of all that every
man should seek, do and will that which is best for himself: it knows none
other good but its own, and that which is best for it self, as it supposes:
But if you speak unto it of the true and simple good, which is neither this nor
that, it knows not what it is, but only laugheth it to scorn, which indeed is
fitting to be so; for nature, as it is nature, cannot attain to it: Therefore
seeing this light is mearly nature, it cannot proceed so far.

This false light does also say, that it has surmounted both Religion and
Conscience, and whatsoever it does, is right: In so much that a certain false
libertine spirit did say, standing in this error, that although he had slain
ten thousand men, he would make no more conscience of it then if he had killed
a dog.

Briefly, this false and deceived light does fly all things that are contrary
and grievous to nature, and this is proper unto it, because it is nature: and
being so deceived, as that it supposes it self to be God, it doubted not to
swear, by all the Saints, that it knows the thing which is the best, and has
his existence in it, so that it intenddeth only to extol and seek that which is
the best of all.

Thus it comes to pass, that it never either is amended or taught more then
the Devil himself.

Observe also, that this light does suppose it self to be God, and arrogateth
the same to it self, and herein it is Lucifer, the Devil: and whereas it does
reject the Life of Christ, and many other things belonging to the true good,
and such as were taught and beloved of Christ, it is Antichrist, seeing it does
teach and live against and contrary to Christ: And even as this light is
deceived by its own subtilty, so likewise are all things deceived by it, which
are neither God nor Divine; that is, all men who are not illuminated with the
true light, and the love thereof: for whosoever they are that are illuminated
of the true light they are never deceived; but whosoever has it not, and yet
is so affected, as that he will walk with this false light, and remain in it,
he is deceived: And this comes to pass, because all men that are in the light
(which is not true) are turned into themselves, and do esteem themselves, and
that which is profitable, and fit for them, to be the chiefest good; and if any
man will commend and propound that unto them for the chiefest good, and will
help them to it, and teach them how to obtain it, him they follow and esteem as
their Master.

Now this false light does teach all things belonging thereunto, and therefore
all men follow it, who know not the true light; so it comes to pass, that they
are deceived both together.

It is said of Antichrist, that when he comes, all that have not the Seal of
God shall follow him, those which have it shall not follow him; and that is the
same light: this is true indeed; if any man can attain to that which is best
for himself, viz. that which is best, to God ward, that is excellent; but this
is not done so long as man seeks and loves that which is best for himself;
For to the end he may find and obtain that which is best for himself; it is
necessary that he first lose that whith is best for himself, as has been
already said: But if a man be willing to forsake and lose that which is best
for himself, to the end he may find that which is best for himself, this again
is false; therefore there are but few that can come into this way.

This false light, that a man ought to be void of Religion, and that he is a
fool and a block, who makes any account thereof, and this it would prove from
Christ, who was void of Religion; to the which answer is made, that the Devil
is void also of Religion, yet he is no whit the better for being so.

Understand therefore what Religion is; -- Religion is when it is acknowledged
that man is averse or diverted from God by his own will (which both is truly
named and called sin) and that this was man's fault, and not Gods; for God is
free from all fault of sinning; who is he therefore that knows himself to be
guiltless, except Christ alone (and some few besides.) Know, that whosoever is
void of Religion, is either Christ or the Devil: In a word, wheresoever the
true light is, there is also a true and upright life which is acceptable and
beloved of God: And although it be not the Life of Christ in perfection, yet
notwithstanding it is rectified and framed to the imitation of him, and such a
one loves the Life of Christ, and whatsoever properly belongs to reason,
order, and all virtues: In this life, I say, all selfness, I, mine, etc.
perishes.

Lastly, Nothing is in it admired or sought, but only good for good, and as it
is good. But where the false light is, there is no regard had, either of Christ
or all virtues, but that is sought and beloved, which is fitting and pleasing
to nature: hence proceeds false and inordinate liberties, whereby man
becomes secure and negligent in, and of every thing: For the true light is the
seed of God, and therefore brings forth the fruit of God: The false light is
the seed of the Devil, and where it is sown, there also the fruit of the Devil
and the Devil himself increases: This may be perceived and understood by the
words and arguments formerly set down.

CHAP. XXXIX. Who and what a deified man is.
IT might be demanded who is, or what is a deified, or a divine man? whereunto
I answer; he who is illuminated and enbeamed with divine light, and kindled
with the eternal and divine love, is a divine and a deified man: And of this
light we have made some mention heretofore. But we must know, that light and
knowledge is fit for nothing, nor is nothing without love; which may here be
perceived; that although a man very well know what virtue or vice is, yet
except he love virtue, he becomes not, neither is endued with virtue, but
leaving virtue he follows vice: But if he embrace virtue, then he follows
it; and this love causes himself to become an enemy to vice, and in such
manner, that he cannot only not entertain nor commit sin, but also makes him
to hate it in all men, yea, he does so far love virtue, that he cannot be at
rest, except he does exercise or enjoy it as much as he may, and that for no
other cause, but for that he loves virtue, and virtue it self is a reward to
him, with enjoying of which he rests so well contented, as that he will not
exchange her for any treasure.

This is he who becomes and is a virtuous man, and he that is truly endued
with virtue, would not for the whole world be bereaved of virtue: Nay, he had
rather dye a miserable death.

We may speak the like of Justice; most men know sufficiently what is justice,
yet do they not become just, for they love not justice, and therefore they
exercise vice and injustice, for if they loved justice, they could do nothing
which were unjust, for they would hate and become such enemies to injustice, as
that if they should perceive it in any man, they would willingly suffer and act
great matters, whereby injustice might he rooted out, and man become just, and
had rather dye then do any unjust thing, and all these they would do for no
other cause nor end, but the love of justice, and justice should be their
reward, and sufficiently recompense them. Such a one becomes, and is a just
man, who had rather dye an hundred times then live unjustly.

The like may be said of truth; Although a man know, in many things, what is
true, what is false, and a lie, yet if he love not the truth, he is not a true
man; and if he do love it, then that befalls him which is said of justice.
Isaiah speaks of justice when he says, Woe to them that are of a double
spirit: those are they who outwardly serve God, but inwardly are full of lies,
in whose mouth a lie is found.

Hence we may learn, that knowledge and skill, being void of love, is of no
moment. The like is also understood of the devil, who knows and understands
evil and good, just and unjust, truth and falsehood, etc. But because he loves
not the good, which he knows, he becomes not good, which surely he would, if
he could love the truth, and other good things and virtues, which he knows:
It is true indeed, that love and knowledge ought to be taught, but if love do
not follow knowledge and accompany it, nothing is gained.

And such is the consideration of God, and of his nature, and of those things
that appertain to him, that if any man have great knowledge of God, and of his
nature, and thinks that he knows and understands what God is, except he
be endued with love, he cannot become divine or deified: But if he has true
love, it is certain that such a man does cleave unto God, and forsakes all
such things as are not God, nor appertaining to God, and that he does hate, and
is at enmity with all such things, not enduring them, being grievous to him;
and this love does so join a man to God, that he can never be separated from
him.

CHAP. XL. Whether God may be known, and yet not loved.
HEnce a question arises, because it is said, he that knows God not, and
loves him not, can never be blessed. From this kind of knowledge there arises,
what kind of knowledge that is whereby God may be known, and yet not loved,
seeing it is said elswheres, that where God is known, he there also is loved;
and that he that does know God, does also necessarily love him: how then can
these contrary sayings agree together? unto which I answer, that here again
something is to be observed: We have formerly spoken of two lights, whereof the
one is true, and the other false; after the same manner we must discern that
there is a double love, a true one, and a false one, both which must be taught
and brought unto us by some light or knowledge: Now the true light works true
love, and the false light false love, for that which the false light does
account to be best, the same it does propound and persuade to be loved as the
best, and love does follow and obey what it commands. Now it is formerly
taught, that the false light is natural and nature, so as whatsoever is proper
and belonging to nature, is proper and belonging to it, as I, mine, to me,
this, that, this man's, etc. It is necessary therefore it should be deceived,
and false in it self, for I, or mine, never comes to the true light or knowledge
undeceived, except only one, which is the divine persons. And to the end we may
come to the knowledge of the simple truth, it is necessary that all these
perish. This also is one special property belonging to the natural false light,
that it desires to know all things, if it be possible; and conceives much joy
and pleasure, boasting in its knowledge and learning, desiring always to know
more and more, and yet never rests, or is contented therewithal; and the
more or higher things that it knows, the greater occasion it takes of joy
and boasting; and when it is come to so great height, that it supposes it
self to know all things, and more then all, then is it in the highest pleasure
and triumphing, accounting of that knowledge as the most best and excellent
thing, and therefore it teaches, that knowledge and learning ought to be loved,
as the most best and excellent thing. And thus it comes to pass, that knowledge
and learning is more esteemed of then the thing it self which is known; for the
natural and false light does better love its knowledge and learning ( id est, it
self) then that self-same thing which is known, as if it were possible that the
same natural light could know God, and the simple truth, as it is in God and in
truth; yet notwithstanding it would not depart from its one property, that is,
from it self and its own.

After this manner is knowledge without the love of that which is known, or has
been known; and thus it climbeth and creeps to such an height, that it
supposes it self to know God and the true and simple truth, and so it loves
it self in it self. Surely God is known of nothing but of God; and because this
light supposes that it knows God, it perswads it self also that it is God, and
boasts it self as God, and willing to be esteemed God, thinking it self
worthy of all things, and to have right over all things, and that it has
overcome and conquered all things, etc. Yea, it scorneth Christ himself, and
the life of Christ, and all other things, for it would not be Christ but God
eternal; the reason of this is, because that Christ and his life is contrary
and burthensom to all nature, and therefore nature cannot bear it, but would be
God for ever, and not man, yet would it willingly be Christ, as he is now after
his resurrection, for all this is easy, and pleasant, and comfortable to
nature, therefore nature esteems it best, because it seems best for her self.

Some thing is known, but yet not loved of this false light, and of this false
and deceitful love, but knowledge and learning is more loved then the thing it
self which is known.

There is also knowledge which is called Science, and yet is not Science, and
this is when a man supposes by hearing, reading, and some singular knowledge
and learning, many things are known to him, the which is called Science, and
says, that it knows this or that: And if you ask him whence he knows it,
he will make answer, that he has read it in books, etc. And this is termed
knowledge and science, etc. but it is belief, and not science or knowledge; and
by this science or knowledge many things are understood and known, which are not
loved.

There is also a love which is altogether false; as when any thing is loved for
reward; as when a man loves justice, to the end he might obtain something by
it, etc. Also when any creature loves another for something of his own, or if
the creature do love God for some end; then all these things are false; and
this love is most proper to nature as it is nature; neither can nature, as it
is nature, know or perform any other love then this; for if any one were able
to perceive this, nature, as it is nature, loves nothing but it self; by this
means something is acknowledged to be good and not loved. But the true love is
taught and directed by the true light and knowledge, and the true, eternal and
divine light teaches love to love nothing else but the true, simple and
perfect good, and that for no other cause but for good; not that it desires to
have this, or that, or any thing from it by way of reward, but only for the
love of good, and because it is good, and ought deservedly to be loved. That
which is thus known of the true light, must also necessarily be loved of the
true love: Now the perfect good, which is called good, cannot be known but of
the true light, and therefore must needs be loved when it is known.

CHAP. XLI. Of the true Love of God.
THis also is to be observed; in what man soever the true light, or the true
love is, in him the true and perfect good is known, and love of it self; and
this is done, not that he loves it as himself, or as from himself, but as it
is the true and simple good: and surely that which is perfect, neither can nor
will love any thing, so far forth as it is loved of it, but the only true good;
and because it self is that same thing, it necessarily follows, that it self
should love it self, yet not it self, as it self, nor of it self, as of it
self; but so, and in such manner, as one and the true good does love one true
perfect good, and as the one true and perfect good: And hereupon it is said,
and is true, that God does not love himself, as himself; for if there were any
thing better then God, God would love it, and not himself: For in this true
light, and in this true love, there neither remains I, or mine, or to me, or
thou, or thine, or any such things; but the light knows and understands
that one good, which is all good, and above all good; and all things are truly
good in this one, and without this one there is no good. Therefore here, this,
or that, I or thou, or the like, is not loved, but only that One, which is
neither I, nor thou, this, nor that, and in it every good is loved, as the only
good, as it is said, all in one, as in one, and one in all, as in all; and one
and all good is loved by one in one, or by the love of one, for the love that
is born to one. Here it is necessary that all Egoity, mine, selfness, and the
like, should wholly perish and be forsaken, and this belongs properly to God,
excepting what belongs to the personality.

Whatsoever therefore comes to pass in a man who is truly deified, either by
doing or suffering, the same comes to pass in this light or in this love, and
from the same, and by the same, and again into the same; hence it follows
that man is contented with it, and gives over his desire to know more or less,
or to have, live, dye, or not to be, etc. all these things are effected and are
one and the same; neither is any thing here blamed but only sin; and what sin
is, is formerly said: For it is sin to will otherwise then the simple and
perfect good, or the one and eternal will, and to will any thing without it, or
against it, or otherwise then that only will would; whatsoever proceeds
thence, as to lie, injustice, fraud, and all vices. Finally, whatsoever is, and
is called sin, comes hence, that man wills otherwise then God, the true
good: For if there were no will but this only one, there would be no sin
committed. Therefore we may well say, that all our own will is sin, and that
sin is nothing else but that which proceeds from our will; and this is only
that whereof a true deified man does complain, and indeed he is so far grieved
and moved with, as that, if such a man were to endure a hundred infamous cruel
deaths, he would not so much complain or grieve, as for sin. And this must of
necessity continue so until the death of the body; where such a one is wanting,
here surely is not a divine or deified man. Therefore after that in this light
and in this love all good is loved in one, and as one, and one in all, and in
all things, as one, and as all, it follows necessarily, that whatsoever has
truly a good name, should also be loved, as virtue, order, integrity, justice,
truth, etc. Briefly, whatsoever belongs to God, as the true good, being
proper to it, the same is beloved and commended of it: And whatsoever is
contrary hereunto, or void of this, breeds pain and torment, and is blamed,
as sin: And in what man soever this is beloved, in the true light and true
love, he leads the most excellent, best, and worthiest life of any that ever
was or shall be; and therefore this is to be affected and praised above all
other lives: This was and is in Christ most perfect, otherwise he could not be
Christ, and this love, of which all this excellent life and all good is loved,
causes all, whatsoever is meet, convenient, or ought to be suffered, done, or
come to pass, to be willingly and freely done and suffered, though it be or
might be grievous to nature.

Again, Christ says, My yoke is easy, and my burden light: this is wrought
by that love which loves this excellent life, and it is apparent in the
Apostles and Martyrs, who suffered willingly and patiently whatsoever they were
to suffer: neither did they desire of God that the torment and pain might be
shortened and made easy or less, but only that they might abide firm and
constant. And surely whatsoever is proper to the divine love in a truly deified
man, the same is so simple, right, and plain, that it can never be plainly and
truly expressed and written, neither can it be known, but only where it is: and
where it is not, it cannot be loved, much less known.

Again, natural life, where there is a crafty, nimble and uncertain nature, is
so manifold and intricate, that it always seeks and finds many corners of
falsehoods, deceits, and that only for it self, so as that it cannot be
expressed or written.

Seeing then falsehood is deceived, and every deceit does first deceive it self,
it follows, that the same thing must befall this false light and love; for he
that deceives is false himself, as is elsewhere said; And whatsoever is
proper to the Devil and belongs to him, is likewise in this life and light, and
in the love thereof, in so much that there is no difference between them, and
therefore that false light is the devil, and the devil is the self-same light.
This may hence appear, even as the Devil does suppose himself to be God, and at
least would willingly be accounted God, or esteemed as God, and is in all this
deceived, yea so far deceived that he thinks he is not deceived: so it comes
to pass likewise in the false light. and in the love and life thereof. And as
the Devil would willingly deceive all men, and draw them to him, and to his
properties, making them like to himself, and using many arts and devices to
that end, so the same comes to pass likewise in this light: And as no man can
thrust the devil out of his possession, even so the like befalls here. All
this proceeds hence, that the Devil and Nature both imagine and persuade
themselves that they are not deceived, but rather that they are in very good
estate, which truly is the worst, and most hurtful error that can be. Therefore
the Devil and Nature are one and the same; Overcome Nature, and you overcome
the Devil and vanquish him; and as long as Nature is unconquered, the Devil is
also unconquered; Whether this be referred to a worldly, or spiritual life, yet
all this light remains false and erroneous, being it self deceived, and
deceiving others also, if it can.

By that which is formerly said, it may evidently be understood, and known,
that there is no difference, when and where there is any speech made of Adam,
disobedience, the old man, egoity, every man's own will, lust, appetite, I,
mine, nature, and false light, the devil, and sin; all these are one and the
same thing, all this is against God and without God.

CHAP. XLII. That there is nothing contrary to God, but man's own will.
BUt if now any one ask, whether there be any thing contrary to God and the
true good? I answer, that there is nothing, either contrary to God, nor without
God, but only to will otherwise then the eternal will wills. If thou willest
any thing otherwise then the eternal will wills, that is contrary to the
eternal will. Now the eternal will wills, and requires, that nothing should
be willed or loved, but only the true good; and if any thing be done otherwise,
that is contrary to it. Hence it is, that this saying is true, That he who is
not with God, is against God: but in very deed, nothing is against God, or the
true good; which is thus to be understood, as if God had said, he that wills
of himself without me, or wills not as I do, or wills otherwise then I do,
he wills against me; for my will is, that no man should will otherwise then I
do, or without me; and there ought to be no will without my will: As without me
there is neither essence nor life, neither this nor that, so ought there also
to be no will without me, or without my will: and truly, as all things, which
are, are indeed one and the same in true essence, and every good is one good,
neither can any thing be without that one; so also ought all wills to be one
will in one perfect will, neither ought any will to be without this one; when
therefore it is otherwise, it is just contrary to God and his will, and
therefore sin. You see it has been formerly said, That every will, which is
void of the will of God, that is, every proper will, and whatsoever proceeds
from the self-will, is sin; so long as man seeks his own good, and that which
is best for himself, as his own, to himself, and as of himself, he does never '
find it; for as long as this is done, man seeks not not that which is best for
himself, and therefore is far from finding of it: For so long as man is thus
affected, he seeks himself, and supposes himself to be the best: and because
man is not the best so long as he seeks himself; but in what man soever good is
sought, loved, and respected, as good, and for good, and that none otherwise
but only for the love of good, not as from me, I, mine, to me, or for me, etc.
there it is found, for that it is rightly sought; where it is otherwise, it is
false: And truly, by this means the perfect good is sought, and loved, and
respected, and therefore found. It is a great folly in any man, to think that
he knows or can do any thing of himself, especially when he thinks that he
knows, or can do any good, whereby he might attain or deserve any great
matter at Gods hands; for hereby God is dishonored, if you rightly understand
it. Notwithstanding that true good does favor every simple and foolish man who
knows no better things, and does suffer the best things to befall him as much
as may be; and surely God grants him as much good as he is able to receive:
but, as it is formerly said, he neither finds nor obtains it, so long as he
is so affected; for he must necessarily forsake egoity wholly, otherwise he
shall not find it, nor obtain it.

CHAP. XLIII. That where the life of Christ is, there is Christ.
HE that knows and understands the life of Christ, knows also and
understands Christ: Again, he that knows not the life of Christ, knows
not Christ: He that believes in Christ, believes that his life is most
excellent, and the best life; he that believes not this, neither does he
believe in Christ. Look how much of the life of Christ is in any man, so much
of Christ is in him also; and how little there is of the one, so little there
is of the other. For where the life of Christ is, there is Christ; and where
his life is not, neither is Christ there. Wheresoever therefore the life of
Christ is, or may be, there that might be said to be, which Saint Paul
speaks, I live, yet not I, but Christ that lives in me; and this is the best
and most excellent life: for wheresoever this life is, there God himself is,
and lives, and likewise all good: Can there then be any better life then this?
Observe this well; whenever you hear obedience spoken of, the new man, the
true light, true love, or the life of Christ, all these are one and the same;
and wheresoever one of these is abiding, they are all there likewise; where one
is wanting, none are present, for they are all true, and indeed one thing: But
if there be any such things, by the help whereof you may obtain that this might
grow and live in man, you ought to cleave unto it, and to no other thing; and
whatsoever does hinder it, that you ought to leave and forsake: And if any man
could obtain it in the holy Sacraments, he should obtain Christ truly and well;
and the more that you obtain of this, the more you obtain of Christ truly; and
the less of this, the less also of Christ.

CHAP. XLIV. To be content with God.
IT is said, That he who is contented with God, has sufficient, which is true;
and he which is content with any thing else, which is this, or that, is not
contented with God; but he that is content with God, is content with nothing
else, but only with one, which is neither this, nor that, and yet it is all
things; for God is one, and God is all things, and it is necessary that he
should be all things. Again, whatsoever is, and is not one, that is not God;
and whatsoever is, and is not all, and above all, that is not God; for God is
one, and all, and above all; whosoever therefore is content with God, is
content with one. And he to whom all things are not one, and one all things,
and unto whom something and nothing are not of like value, and are one and the
same, he cannot be contented with God: But in whom this is, in him it is found,
that he is contented, and no where else. The like is also to be here
understood: He that will show and approve himself holy, conformable, and
obedient to God, must necessarily be conformable and obedient only in
suffering, and neither resist, help, nor defend himself: he that does not so
conform himself, and become wholly obedient both to men, and all things, obeying
in one, and as in one, he is not conformable, nor does obey God. This we may
see in Christ: To the end therefore that man may suffer God, and have a will so
to do, it is necessary that he suffer all things in one, as in one; and that he
do not in any sort resist any thing that is contrary to him; This Christ also
performed: And he that resists those things which are cross to him. and
guardeth himself against them, neither will nor can suffer God: This is thus to
be understood; Resistance ought not to be made against any thing, or creature,
by force or war, by will or work; yet it is lawful, without committing sin, to
foresee, avoid, and fly those things which are hurtful to us. Therefore he that
goes about or wills love to God, loves all things, in one, as in one; and
one in all things, as all things in one: Also he that loves any thing, this,
or that, otherwise then in one, and for one, he loves not God, because he
loves something which is not God, and therefore he loves something more then
God: He then that loves any thing more then God, or loves any thing besides
God, loves not God; for God will and ought to be only loved, and nothing ought
truly to be loved but God: And in what man soever the true light and true love
is, there is nothing loved of him saving God, for God is there loved, as God,
and for God, and all that is good, as one, and one, as all, for all things are
truly one, and one is all in God.

CHAP. XLV. Whether sin is to be loved.
HEre arises a question; since that all things are to be loved, whether sin
ought to be loved? I answer, No; for when all is mentioned, that only is to be
understood which is good, and every thing is good in that it is: The Devil is
good in that he is; and in this manner nothing is evil or not good: But it is
sin, to will, desire, or love, otherwise then God does; and to will this, is
not to be, and therefore it is not good. Briefly, there is nothing good, but so
far forth as it is in God; now all things are that which they are, in God, and
that a great deal more then in themselves; therefore all things are good so far
forth as they are: and if there were any thing, whose essence were not in God,
that that thing were not good; but to will, or desire any thing, which is
against God, is not in God; for God cannot desire or will any thing against
God, nor otherwise then God does; therefore it is evil and not good, or rather
it is nothing at all: God also loves works, but not all manner of works: What
work does he love? Surely such as proceed from the teaching and discipline of
the true light, and from true love; whatsoever proceeds from these, and is
done therein, in spirit and truth, the same belongs to God, as is pleasing to
him; but that which proceeds from the false light, and false love, all that
is evil, and especially that which proceeds, comes to pass, is done, or left
undone, or is suffered to be done by or from any otherwil or desire, or any
other love, then from the will, or love of God: All this, I say, is, and comes
to pass, without God, and against God, and is also against the work of God, and
is sin.

CHAP. XLVI. That Faith brings forth Knowledge.
CHrist said, He who does not, or cannot, or will not believe, is lost and
damned; this is true: For what man soever comes into this life, neither has
knowledge, not can attain to it, except he first believe; and he that will needs
know, before he believe, never comes to true knowledge: These things are not to
be understood of the chief points of Christian Faith; for all and every
Christian of the common people does believe them, the wicked as well as the
innocent, the evil as well as the good: These are to be believed, else no man
can come to the knowledge of the other: These things are to be understood of the
occasions belonging to truth, which may both be known and found out; these must
be believed before they be known or found out, else it is impossible to come to
true knowledge: And of this Faith Jesus Christ speaks.

CHAP. XLVII. Of man's own proper will.
IT is said, That in Hell nothing abounds so much as self-will, and this is
true, for there is none other but self-will; and if it were not so, there would
be neither Hell nor Devil. Whereas it is said, That the Devil fell down from
Heaven, and averted himself from God, etc. it it nothing else but that he would
have his own will, and not be of the same will with the eternal will. The like
befell Adam also in Paradise: And where mention is made of self-will, then that
is understood to be it, which wills otherwise then the simple and eternal
will would, or wills. But what is Paradise? It is whatsoever is: for
whatsoever is, is good, and pleasant, and also pleasing to God; and therefore
both is, and is rightly called Paradise. Paradise is also said to be the
threshold or suburbs of the Kingdom of Heaven; so also, whatsoever is, may be
well termed the suburbs of the eternal, or of the eternity; chiefly, that which
may be perceived or known, in this life, from temporary things, in the
creatures, and out of the creatures of God, and eternity For the creatures are
a demonstration and way which leads to God and eternity, therefore they are
called a threshold and suburbs of eternity; and he may well be said to be the
Paradise. In this Paradise all things were granted; which were in it, except
one tree and the fruit thereof; which is thus to be understoud: There is
nothing forbidden of all things which are there, nor contrary to God, saving
one thing, which is our own proper will, or that man should will otherwise then
the eternal will wills. This is to be weighed: God says unto Adam, id est,
to every particular man, whatsoever thou do, or do not, that is lawful, and
not forbidden, so as it be done, not out of thy will, nor according to the
same, but out of mine, and after mine, for whatsoever is done out of thy will,
that is wholly contrary unto the eternal will, not because all works so done are
contrary unto the eternal will, but saving only when they are done with another
will, or otherwise then out of the eternal will.

CHAP. XLVIII. Why God did create man's own will, seeing it is contrary to the
eternal will.
HEre some will ask; seeing that this Tree ( id est, our own proper will) is so
contrary to God, and the eternal will, why did God create and make it, and also
place it in Paradise? Unto which I thus answer; If any man, or creature, desire
to search into, and know the hidden Counsel and Will of God, as longing to
understand why God did any thing, or left it undone, or such like, this man
desires the same that Adam and the Devil did; and whilst this desire lasts,
the matter is never known, neither is this man any other, but such a one as
Adam and the Devil; for this desire seldom proceeds from any other motion then
that thou take pleasure and gloriest therein, which is mere pride. A truly
humbled and illuminated man does not desire of God to have his secrets revealed
to him, as if he should ask, why God did do, or delay to do this or that? etc.
But on the contrary part, desires only that himself might be annihilated in
himself, and that his own will might perish, and the eternal will live and
prevail in him, remained unhindered of any other wills, and that he himself, and
all that is in him, might satisfy the eternal will; yet something else might
be said in answer to this question, after this wise: There is nothing so
excellent and pleasing in all creatures, as knowledge, or reason, and will:
which two are so joined together, that where the one is, there is the other
also; and if these two were not, then would there be no reasonable creature at
all, but only bruit beast, and bruitishness, which would be a great fault:
Neither would God (as it is said formerly said) obtain his own nature, or the
nature of those who are his, by acting, which notnotwithstanding is fit to be
done, and appertains to perfection. Now this knowledge, and created reason,
was given with the will, to the end it might both instruct the will, and it
self, that neither the knowledge nor the will was of it self, and that neither
of them had part of themselves, nor ought to serve themselves, nor their own
will, and that neither of them ought to be profitable to it self, or to the use
of it self, but to be of his of whom they had their Being, and to obey and flow
back again into him, and in themselves, that same is to be turned into nothing
in their own selfness.

CHAP. XLIX. Why God created the will.
HEre again is something especially to be observed concerning the will, the
eternal will, which is in God originally and essentially, without any work or
action, the same will is likewise man, and all other living things, both doing
and willing: for the nature and property of the will is to will; for what other
things should it do? for it should not be at all if it had no action, and this
cannot be effected without living creatures; Therefore it is necessary that
there should be creatures, and God will have such, to the end that this will
might have and do its own work in them, which otherwise is in God without work,
and yet cannot but be: Therefore there is a will in living creatures, which is
called a created will, no less belonging to God, then the eternal will is not
appertaining to the creature: And because God cannot will with action and
motion, without living creatures, therefore he will do it in and with the
living creatures: Wherefore living things ought not to will any thing by this
very will, but God ought and will, by action, will together, with the will
which is in man, and yet is the will of God, which if it were any where, or
that this were in man, absolutely or wholly, then men should will nothing but
only God, and there I say will should not be self-will, neither should that man
will otherwise then God wills, for God should there exercise his will and not
man, and there the will of man should be the same with the eternal will, as
having flowed into the same: And in man there would be and remain love and
sorrow, pleasure and pain, with such like: For where the will does will
willingly, there is love or sorrow: wheresoever those things are put in
execution, which the will wills, there is love; but if other things be done
then the will wills, there is sorrow, and this sorrow is not man's, but Gods;
for whose the will is, his also is the love and sorrow, and this love and
sorrow is not man's but Gods, but the will is not the will of man, but of God;
therefore the love and sorrow is his also; neither is there any thing blamed,
saving that which is contrary to God: neither is there any joy or pleasure
conceived, but what proceeds from God, and from that which is Gods, and
belongs to God. Therefore, as it is with the will, so it is with knowledge,
reason, power, love, and all things which are in man, id est, that they all
belong to God, and not to man: And if it should come to pass, at any time, that
the will were wholly forsaken, then all other things would likewise be
abandoned, and by this means God should obtain all things appertaining unto
him, and will should be no more self-will: Thus did God create will, but not
that it should be our own.

CHAP. L. How the Devil and Adam challenge will to themselves.
NOw comes the Devil and Adam, ( id est, false nature) and challenges unto
himself this will, making it his own, and enjoying it to the use of himself,
and those which are his; and this is the great loss and injury: This, I say, is
that bit wherewith Adam did bite the apple, which is forbidden, and contrary to
God. And as long, and where this self-will is, there never is any true
quietness, which may easily be discerned both in man, and also in the Devil:
Neither is there verily any true happyness there, either in this life or
everlastingly. Where this self-will is, there is a propriety, by which man does
challenge will unto himself, and makes it his own; which if it be not forsaken
in this life, but carried forth of this life, it is to be feared that it can
never be abandoned, neither can that man ever receive true contentment, nor
enjoy peace, rest, or happyness: The which may be seen in the Devil. If
creatures were not endued with reason and will, surely God would remain unknown
and unbelieved, neither praised nor honored, and all living creatures would be
of no aceount, and unfit to serve God; and this answer is made to this
question: If there be any one, who from this long and tedious speech, (which
notwithstanding is short and profitable to Godwards) can and will correct
himself, that will be very acceptable to God. That which is free, is proper to
no man, and he that does appropriate it, does ill. Now, of all freedoms,
nothing is so free as the will, and whosoever makes it his own, and does not
leave it to its own noble liberty, free nobleness and free nature, he does ill;
this does the Devil and Adam, and all their Imitators; but he that does leave
will to its own excellent liberty, does as he ought: This does Christ, and all
that imitate him. He that depriveth will of that his excellent liberty, and
makes it his own, this man's reward is, that he becomes subject to cares,
sorrows, poverties, troubles, unquietness and misfortunes, and that he remain
in them so long as that lasts, both in this life and for ever. But he that
leaves will to its own free nature, he enjoys plenty, peace, quietness,
rest, felicity, both in this life and everlastingly. Wherefore, where, and in
what man will is not appropriated, but remains in its own excellent freedom,
there abides, and is a truly free and absolute man, or creature, of whom
Christ says, Truth shall make you free, and presently after, Whom the Son does
make free, he is free indeed. John 8.

CHAP. LI. That in what man the truth is, in that man free will is.
THis also is diligently to be observed; That in what man soever the truth
uses its free liberty, it has a work proper to it self, which is to will, and
that which it wills, it wills without hinderance, and it wills that which
in every thing is the best and most excellent; and whatsoever is not excellent,
nor good, is contrary unto it, breeds grief and complaint; and the freer the
will is, and at liberty, the more sorrow, pain, and cause of moan is brought
upon it, by wickedness, dishonesty, malice, vice, and whatsoever is or can be
termed sin: This may be discerned in Christ, who was endued with a most free,
absolute, and least-appropriated will, that ever was, or shall be in any man;
yea, the humanity of Christ was a creature, most free, and at greatest liberty
of any man that ever was, and yet it suffered so much cause of complaint,
misery, and pain for sin, (that is, for all things contrary to God) as never
any creature was able to suffer more.

But where man does challenge liberty in such sort to himself, as that he will
endure no cause of complaint, or misery, for sin, and such thing as are
contrary to God, but will neglect and free himself from all care, and would be
in this life in the same condition wherein Christ was after his Resurrection,
etc. There is no true liberty arising from the divine light, but a natural,
unjust, false, erroneous and devilish liberty out of a natural life, and
erroneous light: If there were no selfwill, there would be no propriety at all;
in the Kingdom of Heaven, nothing is proper, and therefore there is full
abundance, true peace, and all happpness; and if any one were there, who would
challenge any propriety to himself, he should necessarily go to Hell, and
become a Devil.

But in Hell every one desires to have his own self-will, and therefore there
is all unhappiness and misery; the like also happens in this life. But if
there were any one in Hell, who could free himself from self-will, and
propriety, he should come from Hell to Heaven.

Now man in this world is placed between Heaven and Hell, and may turn himself
to either of them; for the more propriety he has, the more he is subject to
Hell and unhappiness; and the less will he has, the less hell he has, and the
nearer he is to the king dom of heaven. And if man in this present world could
be utterly void of self-will and propriety, and be free and absolute, by means
of the true and divine light, and should remain truly in that estate, this man
should be sure to inherit the Kingdom of Heaven: He that has, would have, or
desires to have any thing proper to himself becomes proper, and, as it were,
his own slave and bondsman; but he that has nothing, nor will have any thing,
nor desires to have any thing proper to himself, he is free and at liberty,
and none has propriety in him.

CHAP. LII. Of Christ his Cross.
CHrist did teach all these things, which are here written, in his long life,
which was almost three and thirty years and a half; and this he did in few
words, when he said, Follow me. Now, that man may follow him, it is necessary
that he forsake all things: for Christ forsook all things, so far forth as they
never were so left of any other, nor could be: Further, he that would follow
him, must also take up his Cross, which Cross is nothing else but the Life of
Christ; for this Cross is bitter to all nature: Therefore he says, Whosoever
does not forsake all, and take up his Cross, he is not worthy of me, and cannot
be my Disciple, neither does he follow me. But the free, false nature supposes
that it has forsaken all things, yet will not endure the Cross, and says,
that it has endured enough of it, and that now it stands in no need of it,
but therein it is deceived* for if it had once truly tasted the Cross, it could
never forsake it: He that believes in Christ, must believe all things that are
written: Christ says, No man comes to the Father, but by me: Now observe, how
we must come to the Father by Christ; man ought to examine himself, and all
things that are his, both inwardly and outwardly, and so behave and help
himself, so far as he can, that in him there never remain or be inwardly any
evil or desire, love or estimation, thought or pleasure, other then becomes
God, and is lawful, even as if God himself were man himself; but when it is
found that there is any thing which becomes not God, neither is lawful, that
ought to be plucked up by the roots, and resisted as soon and as well as may be:
the like ought also to be done outwardly, in doing or not doing, in speaking or
being silent, waking or sleeping. Lastly, in all Ceremony or matters, which man
uses, either with themselves or with others, or toward himself, or toward
others; in all these let care be had that nothing else happen, nor that man
convert himself to any other thing, or suffer any other thing to abide, or be
in him, either outwardly or inwardly; and that nothing else be done by him, but
that which is worthy of God, and may justly and lawfully be done, even as if
God himself were man himself: In such a man, whatsoever is, or might be, or is,
or may be done inwardly or outwardly, that is or should be Gods: And man is or
must be an Imitator of the Life of Christ, which life we may understand and
publish.

CHAP. LIII. Of the Imitation of Christ.
IF then any man could attain to this life, he should go and come through
Christ to the Father, for therein he should be an Imitator of Christ; and
therefore should come with Christ to the Father, and by Christ, and should be
the true servant of Christ; for he that follows him, (as himself says) He
that will serve me, let him follow me: As if he should say, He that does not
follow me, does not serve me: He, I say, who does thus follow Christ, and serve
him, he enters into the same place where Christ is, id est, to the Father.
This our Lord Christ does affirm, when he says, Father, I will that where I
am, there my servants be also: He that goes this way, enters by the door into
the sheepfold, that is, into eternal life, and the Porter opens the door unto
him; but he that goes, or endeavors another way, or supposes that he can
come to the Father, or eternal happiness, otherwise then by Christ, he is in an
error, for he goes not the right way, neither enters at the door, and
therefore it is not opened unto him, because he is a thief and a robber, as
Christ himself faith: Mark then, whether by inordinate liberty,
contentiousness, negligence, virtue or-vice, order or confusion, etc. as you
may easily perceive; Whether (I say) one may thus enter by a right way, or at a
right door, or not? This negligence was neither in Christ, nor any of his
followers. Christ also says, No man comes to me, except my Father draw him;
which you must thus understand: I understand the Father to be the perfect and
simple good, which is all, and above all, and without which there never was,
nor shall be any good work wrought; and because he is all in all, it is
necessary that he should be alone, and above all things, which a creature, as a
creature, is able to understand or comprehend. For whatsoever a creature can
comprehend or understand, as it is a creature, that is, according to the
condition of his creation, the same is something, either this or that, and
further it is a creature: But if the simple and perfect were something, this or
that, which the creature might comprehend, then that would not be all, nor
alone, neither yet perfect, and in that respect it should not be so much as
named: For we must think that it is none of these things which the creature, by
his own nature, is able to understand, comprehend, or name. When this perfect
and innominable good does flow into a begetting person, in which he may beget
his only begotten Son and himself, it is is named Father.

CHAP. LIVE. How the Father draws to the Son, and the Son reciprocally to the
Father.
COnsider and observe, how the Father draws men to Christ, which is after
this manner; when any thing is made known, and laid open, by this perfect God,
to the soul, or unto man, there is begotten in man, as it were, in one moment,
and one violent rapture, a certain desire of approaching the perfect good, and
joining it self with it: The greater that this desire is, the more things are
revealed unto it, and the more it desires, and is drawn nearer to it. Thus man
is drawn and stirred up to join with the eternal good, and this is the
attraction of the Father; and after man is taught, that is, of the Son which
draws him, viz, that he cannot come to this Communion by any other means then
by the Life of Christ; and thus it comes to pass, that he purchases to himself
the life whereof we have formerly spoken.

Now observe these two sayings, which Christ speaks; the one is this, No man
comes to the Father, but by me, id est, by my life, as has been formerly
said. The other is, No man comes unto me, that is, to be capable of my life,
and to follow me; except he be drawn and taught of my Father, that is, by the
simple and eternal good, of which Saint Paul speaks, When that which is
perfect is come, then that which is in part shall be abolished: The meaning
whereof is this; In what man soever the perfect good is known, found and felt,
so far forth as may be in this life, to that man all things that are created
seem to be nothing, in regard of this perfect good, as indeed they are nothing
at all: For where that which is perfect is not, there is no true good, nor true
being; he therefore that has, knows and loves this perfect good, he has,
knows and loves all things, and all good: What should he then do with more,
or other things? or what should he do with the parts? seeing that all the parts
are joined and included in this perfect good in one essence.

CHAP. LV. How God becomes all things in man.
ALL that is here said belongs to the outward life, and is a certain way and
passage unto the true inward life, and the inward life begins according to
this: When man would taste that which is perfect, as far as may be, all things
which are created, and even man himself is brought to naught in this man's
opinion: But if it be truly understood, that only perfection is all things, and
above all things, then it does necessarily follow hence, that we do acknowledge
every good thing to belong unto this perfect good, and not to any creature, as
to essence, life, knowledge, science, power, etc. then it follows, that man
should arrogate nothing to himself, not life, essence, power, knowledge, doing
or not doing; Finally nothing that can be called good: So man becomes poor,
and is in himself brought to nothing, also, in him, and with him, every thing
that is something, id est, all things created, and then at last existeth the
true and inward life, and further, God himself; so that there is nothing more
there, which is not God, or belonging to God: Neither is there any thing which
does challenge or arrogate any thing to it self; so that it comes to pass that
it is God only who lives, understands, is able, loves, wills, does, or
leaves undone: That is, the eternal and perfect good ought thus to be, and
where it is otherwise, there the matter might be both better and streighter:
For a good work and beginning, if care be had that it be the best, becomes
most acceptable, and let the best be chosen and adhered unto, also let man join
himself to it thing in the creatures? But what is the best thing in the
creatures? Surely where the eternal good, and that which is proper unto it,
does enlighten and work, and where they are most known and loved. And what is
that which belongs to God, and is proper only to him? I say, all that is it,
which may be truly and rightly called and named good, when man in the creatures
adhereth and cleaves so to that which is known to be the best, as that he
remains steadfast, and flies not back; then it comes to pass that he
attaineth to something which is better then it, so far forth, until man
perceive and understand, that that only eternal and perfect good is
unmeasurable, infinite, and to be esteemed above all created goodness.

CHAP. LVI. That God alone is to be loved and honored.
THerefore if that which is best ought most of all to be loved, and if man do
follow it, then the only eternal good ought, without doubt, alone, to be loved
above all things, and man ought to stick thereunto only, and to join himself
unto it, so far as is in his power: And if every good thing ought to be
acknowledged, as received from the eternal only good (as worthily and truly it
ought) then also the beginning, going forward, and conclusion, ought rightly
and truly to be acknowledged and esteemed from it, and the same ought to be
imputed and adjudged to it, so as nothing is left as appertaining to man, or
the creatures; and thus it ought of right to be. And whatsoever is said, or
alleged, as against this, yet this is the way which leads into the true
interior life: But what will at last become of this, or be manifested there,
or what manner of life this is like to prove* no man utters or expresses,
neither was it ever declared, or did any heart either know or conceive truly
the quality of such a life. It is briefly contained in this long written
discourse, by what means it may rightly and truly come to pass that man become
free and void of arrogating any thing to himself, or from willing, wishing,
loving, or affecting any thing, saving God and Divinity, that is the eternal,
perfect, and only good; and if any man arrogate to himself, will, esteem, or
desire any thing, other, or more then the eternal good, it is too much and
vicious. Briefly, if a man can obtain so far forth as to be the same to God
which the hand of man is to man, let him rest therewith contented: And this
ought truly to be done for all breathing creatures, especially those who are
endued with Reason; and chiefly man does truly and deservedly ow this duty to
God: This you may gather out of what has been formerly written. This also is
to be committed to memory, after man has proceeded so far as that he should
verily persuade himself to have attained hereunto, it is time then that he
should have regard, lest the Devil sowing ashes there, he seek and repose his
whole nature, tranquillity, rest, peace and pleasure in it, and so slide into
foolish, and inordinate liberty, and negligence, which truly is wholly repugnant
and remote from the divine life; this befalls that man, who neither has, nor
will enter in at the right gate, nor by the right way, that is, by Christ, as
is aforesaid; but wills, and thinks that he may attain to this perfect
truth, otherwise and by other means; or else conceives that he has attained
so far already, before he come to it in truth, id est, manifest by the witness
of Christ; who says, He that will enter by any other means then by me, he
never enters rightly, nor has attained the chief truth, but is a chief and a
robber, That we may depart from our and being dead to our own wills, live only
to God, and the performance of his will; God grant, through him, who subjected
his will to the will of his heavenly Father; who also lives and reigns with
the Father in the Unity of the Holy Ghost, and the perfect Trinity
everlastingly. Amen.

Certain grave sayings, by which the diligent Scholar of Christ may search
into himself, and know what is to be sought and strived for concerning the true
inward uniting of himself to the one supreme good.
GOd is one, and unity existeth, and flows from him alone, and yet not out of
him, otherwise it should decrease and become less.

Where two are, which ought to be preserved, and agree together, it is possible
that betwixt those discord should arise.

These two cannot disagree, saving only in will, which would be the greatest
cause of all discord in God himself, if two things could be in him.

For there is nothing which may breed disagreement amongst all things, which
may disagree, but dissimilitude of wills.

This one God wills that which is one, and is contrary to all things, which
are two; Therefore whatsoever he himself has created he created upon this one,
otherwise it should have wanted order.

Further, his Creation, or the things created, could have had no constancy, by
reason of his contrary will, even as now it comes to pass, and therefore it
must necessarily have perished.

This Unity could not have been measured, considered, handled or known, but
only of one, and through one, and that sometimes in its contrary.

Contrariety existeth of it self without the fault of the Adversary.

Hence it may easily be discerned, that this one, and this best, was to have
some object, from whence it, as far as might be, should be known.

That Object was and is the essence and being of all living things: Chiefly,
and best, in the reasonable, and by the reasonable creature, which was Adam.

Here the omnipotency, mercy and infinite goodness does show it self, whose
name is

To the increasing of further knowledge, he created every thing free which he
did craate: for whatsoever was, is, and so rem ineth free, could not man
naturally make or create any thing that was proper.

Now also that free thing could not more conveniently work in any thing, or
make it self apparent, then in its own object.

He that concludes and appropriateth any thing that is free, and ought to be
free, does the contrary to him which made and created it free, this is sin.

Sin is plainly to be discerned, if you will thoroughly hate it.

Hatred consists in that which is contrary to it; which is truly named the
seed of God, or the Image of God, and desires liberty without intermission.
This remains, and is, and must necessarily so do, as long as God can be, and
remains in that which it self is, for it proceeds from one, and never
suffers it self to be drawn thence; that it might be both soon, and rightly
made good again, that one, which is perfect, interposeth it self, for the
restoring of all that to the full which was severed from it self.

This could, not be done but in some one thing, which should pretend it self
dis-joyned, yet without all detriment to the unity.

This was meet and convenient, yea, necessary, to the end it might openly
declare it self so far forth as it is one, and that only one, whereby liberty
might return to its own estate, which notwithstanding it had never lost.

Hereupon it is that Jesus of Nazareth taught, exercised and used the most
absolute free will that might be.

This was not his own (as himself witnesses) but belonged only to him, of whom
he had received it, that by him it might be made manifest: Yet could he not be
deprived of it, both in regard of his right, as also of his perfection, which
he was necessarily to have, in regard of the liberty, that he might declare the
same in excellency, as it was meet. The entire and absolute uniting of will was
most perfect in him, which did not arrogate that to himself of which it self
was one, otherwise it had fallen from that one.

Now there remains yet; as has been showed, that free thing which is not to
be forsaken or lost, else it would damnifie the Divinity, from which it is, and
to which is properly belongs, for it would have lost something which would
have gone to nothing, and something would have been, whereupon it might have
followed, that the whole should have perished after the same manner.

That this therefore might be done, it is necessary that it should be made
according to the pattern, and that wholly answerable to the will and pleasure
of one which never disagreed from it self, which pattern must necessarily be
the perfectest, in regard of its office.

This is, and is called to return from all disagreeing into that only one which
we ought to endeavor all our life long: He that is willing, is able, and he
that does not believe it, let him make trial.

This may and ought to be done only by the loss of that which is contrary to
one, otherwise it is impossible; this is obedience in obedience; an entire
yeeling up a certain perfect Sacrifice, which is voluntarily.

To be short, it is Christ, the true Son of God, the first begotten of
brethren; to whom whatsoever the Father can do properly belongs, who is the
true Reconciler, by whom only you may and ought necessarily to come to the only
one, that is, the Father; the which Father has ordained him to this thing.

If any one cannot attain to the understanding of this discourse, he wants
the Testimony of the Spirit, the discipline whereof he excludes and refuses.
If any man understand it, let him judge, for the Spirit of God judges all
things. If any man be deprived hereof, and wants it, it is his own fault,
because he is not careful of his fall that it might be amended, which not
withstanding to be corrected. If any man say, that these things are over sharp,
let him know that the greatest folly of the Holy Ghost (as I may so speak) is
more acute then the greatest wisdom in all the world.

It is no wonder if these things seem sharp to flesh and blood, for they are
Divine, of which the flesh cannot judge, and therefore it esteems them sharp;
even as if an Owl should deny that she could behold the brightness of the day,
because she only uses the hight of the night, the most lightsom part whereof
is darker then the most darksom part of the day.

The Authors Institution contained in three points, wherein we learn how to
forsake our selves, and to put on God by a most perfect way.
THE first is, That every man aspire to attain unto a more excellent degree of
sanctity, and singular embracing of God by love; also, that he love God with
all the powers of his soul, and his neighbor as himself; and that he desire to
feel God truly working in himself in this world: Such a one ought both to
extinguish, and also to have extinguished in him all delights and pleasures,
bred by such mortal creatures as are without God, of what sort soever they are.

The second is, That every one, both in this world, and in the world to come,
desire to attain to the perfect knowledge of truth, and that he prepare and
contain himself inwardly from being delighted in any sort spiritually, with any
thing, which he may challenge, claim or possess as his own, or as proper to
himself.

The third thing is, That after a man is perfectly and wholly, both inwardly
and outwardly, freed from adhering to any thing, and has learned to rely upon
his own nothing, but then instantly he has a ready and free passage to the
pure and simple good, that Almighty and most excellent God. But this
conversation is wrought by a certain essential way or means: For here the
Spirit is turned to God, not in part, but wholly and entirely, whence this is
said, not only to be, but is a true, essential, entire and individed, and
perfect conversion, for it is not withdrawn any whither from it self, and
therefore may be said to be essential, and God himself does ever answer it
essentially.

Perfection in the first, second, third and fourth degree.
HE is truly and properly perfect in the first degree, who turns his whole
mind orderly and discreetly away from all visible and transitory things.

In the second degree, who has obtained a peaceable and quiet conscience.

In the third degree, who takes all things in good part from Gods hand, and
resigneth himself wholly to him.

In the fourth degree, he who forgetting himself, and all creatures, does lose
himself in God.

HE that of virtue makes the truest gain,

Seeks not reward, but labor for his pain.

In war, that I am undertaking
Against my self, my force does spend me:
Since with my self war I am making,
O from my self then God defend me.
The Communication of Doctor Thaulerus with a poor beggar, wherein is
comprehended the example of a perfect man, and how we should resign our selves,
in all things, unto the good pleasure of God.
THere was, on a time, a great Divine, who prayed unto God the space of eight
years, that it might be his good pleasure to direct him to a man that might
instruct and teach him the true way of virtue; And it happened, being in this
desire, that he heard a voice from heaven, which said unto him, Go unto such a
Church Porch, and there thou shall find a man that will instruct thee in the
spiritual life: He walking then toward the said Church, found a poor beggar,
who had his feet filthy and foul, and all naked, whose clothes were not worth a
halfpenny, and he saluted him in this sort: God give you good morrow, my
friend. The poor man answered him; Sir, I do not remember that ever I had an
evil morrow. The Doctor said unto him, God give you a good and happy life:
Wherefore say you that, quoth the Beggar unto him, for I was never unhappy?
Which the Doctor not understanding, said unto him again God bless you, my
friend: I pray you speak a little more clearly, for I know not what you mean.

Then the poor Beggar answered him; Good master Doctor, I shall do it
willingly: You know you bade me good morrow; whereunto I replied, that I had
never any evil morrow: for when I have hunger I praise God: If it freeze, hail,
snow, rain, be it fair or foul, I give praise to God; though I be poor,
miserable, and despised of each one, I give thanks unto God: and therefore I
never had any evil morrow. You did wish unto me also a good and happy life;
whereunto I made you answer, that I was never unfortunate; because I have
learned always to resign my self unto the will of God, being certain that all
his works cannot be but very good; by reason whereof, all that happens unto
me, by his permission, be it prosperity or adversity, sweet or sour, I receive
it as from his own hand, with great joy and comfort, and therefore I was never
unfortunate; for I never desired any thing, but the good pleasure of God: which
the poor man having said; The Doctor answered: But what would you say (my
friend) if God would damn you? If God would damn me (said the poor man) verily
if he would use me so hardly, I have two Arms to embrace him: The one whereof
is a profound humility; by the which I am united unto his holy humanity: The
other is love and charity, which joyneth men unto his Divinity, by which I
would embrace him in such sort, that he should be constrained to descend with
me into Hell: And I had rather, without comparison, be in Hell with God, then
to be without him in Paradise.

The Doctor learned in this Communication, That a true resignation, accompanied
with profound Humility of heart, is the shortest way to attain unto the love of
God. After that, he asked of him again, from whence he came; unto whom he made
answer, that God had sent him. The Doctor enquired yet of him, Where he had
found God? I found him (quoth he) so soon as I had renounced and forsaken all
creatures. And where did thou leave him, replied the Doctor? I left him
(answered the Beggar) with the pure and clean hearts, and amongst men of good
will. But who art thou (my friend) said the Divine unto him? The poor man made
him answer, That he was a King: And he asking him where his Kingdom was, it is
(quoth he) in my soul: For I can so well rule and govern my senses, as well
outward as inward, that all my affections and passions do obey unto REASON:
which Kingdom is without doubt more excellent, then all the Kingdoms of this
world.

Moreover the aforesaid Doctor demanded of him, who it was that had brought him
to so great perfection? It was silence (answered the poor man) and mine high
and lofty meditation, and the union which I had with God; I could take no
repose nor comfort in any creature of the world, by the means whereof I found
out my God, who will comfort me, world without end: Amen.

Laus Deo.

De Anima.
The Soul is 1. absolutely An intellectual substance enlightened by God. A
bodiless form, framing and ruling the body and created of nothing.
2. By relation 1. To the creatures, a similitude of all things, because it
comprehends all things. 2. To God, a form of God, because it is after his
likeness; a breath of life, because it was breathed into us to give us life. 3.
To his end a spirit ordained to felicity.



The Soul was supposed to be of Plato, number moving it self. Aristotle, the
motive and form of the body. Pythagoras, a harmony of elements. Hypocrates, a
subtle spirit. Rabanus, light. Democritus, a Composition of Sunny motes.
Aconomius, a fire. Parmenides, a Compound of fire and earth. Epicurus, a
mixture of air and fire. Gallenus, a Blood. Hermogenes, a water, or humid
vapor.


The Soul has diverse names in respect of his diverse operations.

It is called

Anima, as it quickens the body. Men's, as it understands. Animus, as it
wills. Ratio, as it judges. Spiritus, as it gives breath. Sensus, as it
feels. Memoria, as it remembers. Voluntas, as it consents to the thing
willed.
There is a Soul both

1. Vegitable, which gives growth and being; this soul is in all plants. 2.
Sensible, which gives being and sense; and this with the vegitable also is in
beasts. 3. Reasonable, which gives being, sense, and reason; and this with the
vegitable and sensible is also in man; yet are there not diverse souls in man,
but diverse faculties, and one reasonable Soul.
The Vegitable Soul has power to

1. Beget and make generation for the preservation of the Kind. 2. To nourish
and sustain the Kind produced. 3. To increase and augment the Kind nourished.
The nourishing part of the Vegitable Soul has power

1. Attractive, to draw into it self necessary food. 2. Digestive, to dispose
and concoct that food. 3. Retentive, to hold in the strength of that food. 4.
Expulsive, to send the superfluity of this food into the Draught.
The sensible Soul has power

1. Apprehensive to conceive and comprehend withal, and that either Outwardly,
as the 5. outward Senses; Sight. Hearing. Smelling. Taste. Touch.
2. Inwardly, as the inward Senses; Common sense. Imagination. Estimation.
Fantasy. Memory.

2. Motive to move the 1. Appetite Concupiscible to all desires. Irascible to
all passions, as joy, grief, hope and fear, in this is contained Sensuality.
2. Faculty Natural, which from the liver does stir all the humors of the body
by the vital, which from the heart does move the pulses by the Arteries.
Animal, which from the head does move the members of the body by the nerves and
sinews.


The object of Sight is Color, his organ is the Eye. Hearing is Sound, his
organ is the Ear. Smell is Odor, his organ is the Nose. Taste is Savor, his
organ is the Tongue. Touch is every tangible thing, his organ is the whole body.


The common Sense is the

1. Fountain whence all outward senses flow. 2. End whither all outward senses
are directed. 3. Judge that determines the object of every outward sense, and
it is called the common Sense, because it is the head and guider of all the
outward Senses alike. His place is in the forepart of the brain, whither the
Senses, in their operations, have recourse.
The Imagination

Does preserve those Impressions which the common Sense receives. Does defer
to the estimation those forms reserved: His place is in the fore part of the
brain, whither the the common Sense tends and devolveth his Impressions.
The Estimation

1. Apprehends natural intentions of those Impressions. 2. Determines what
is to be followed and what avoided. His seat is the middle part or Cell of the
brain, whither the Imagination stretches his Impresses.
The Fantasy compares Forms with forms, as black with white. Forms with
Intensions, as the form of a wolf with the flight of a wolf. Intention with
Intention, as the feeding of her own with the rejecting of another. His seat is
betwixt the Memory and the Estimation, because is concerns them both; for it is
enlightened by Estimation and maintained by Memory.


Led by Fantasy, Creatures

Make them caves and nests. Provide them sustenance a far off. Know and
distinguish this to be this. Choose and refuse this and that.
Memory

Does receive the operations of all the Senses from the Common Sense. Does
reserve the things receive, as Imagination does the Intents: His seat is in the
hinder part of the head.
Memory is

Artificial, got by litteral observation and practice. Natural, instilled in
our composition.
The Reasonable Soul has

1. Inbred Powers. 2. Acquired Habits. 3. Inferred Passions.
The inbred powers of the Soul are

1. Understanding Speculative, to contemplate withal. Practick, to exercise;
and this is the Cogitative part of the Soul which apprehends withal.
2. Will Natural, which is directed by instinct. Deliberative, which is guided
by reason; and this is the Motive part of the soul which produces all the
operations both of body and mind.

The Soul Knows the good, by the speculative understanding. Affects the
good, by practick understanding. Discerns good and evil, by Reason. Chooses
the good from evil, by freewill. Consents to chosen good, by rectified will.
Inventeth means to accomplish it by will. Raises it self to virtue by the
motive of the Conscience.


This is the order and degree of Understanding;

1. Sense perceives. 2. Imagination represents. 3. Understanding forms. 4.
Wit devises. 5. Reason judges. 6. Memory preserves. 7. Intelligence
apprehends. 8. Contemplation perfecteth,
The Soul knows things

Present, by Sense. Absent and to come, by Imagination. Absent and past, by
Memory. It self, by reflection upon it self. God, by elevation above it self.
Creatures, by humiliation of it self.
The Soul is immortal,

1. Because it is capable of felicity, which is eternal. 2. Because it is made
after Gods similitude, which is immortal. 3. Because it has no contrariety to
corrupt it.
A Spirit does unite the Soul unto a body, whose

Flesh and bones are made of earth. Humors (to wit) Blood, Phlegm, Choler, and
Melancollick, are made of water. Lights are made of air to cool the heat of the
heart. Heart contains fire to temper the moisture of the brain.
The members of the body are

1. Radical, wherein is the root of life, as in the Liver. Heart. Brain. Tests.
2. Serviceable, to convey the natural, animal and vital spirits, as the
Veins. Nerves. Arteries
3. Official, to perform the offices of the body, as the Eyes. Hands. Feet.

The Soul was united to the body

1. To teach us the union of our Soul and God. 2. To accomplish and perfect the
work of God. For as God made one creature merely spiriritual, as the Angels;
and one merely corporal, as the World; so he has made one both spiritual and
corporal, which is Man.
The acquired habits of the Soul be

1. Virtues. 2. Habitual Customs got by industry and use.
Virtues proceed from grace

1. Incoative, which begets them. 2. Continuing, which maintains them. 3.
Perfecting, which consummates and acts them.
Virtue in respect of the

1. Giver, is the operation of God in man. 2. Subject, is the habitation of a
wellgoverned mind. 3. Working, is a habit bringing us to Mediocrity. 4. End, is
a disposition to the best perfection. 5. Quality, a good faculty whereby we
live well.
All Virtues consist in

1. Understanding hard matters 2. Enduring adverse crosses. 3. Abstaining from
pleasures.
The measure of Virtue is placed in Doing

1. Doing neither above Measure nor under Measure but in Measure.
2. Having neither Excess nor Defect.
3 Bearing Prosperity with hu^blenes Adversity with patience,

The tree of Virtue has his

1. Seed, Fear. 2. Irigation, Grace. 3. Root, Faith. 4. Bud, Devotion. 5.
Growth, Desire. 6. Strength, Charity. 7. Greenness, Hope. 8. Leaf, Heed. 9.
Flourish, Discipline. 10. Fruit, Doctrine. 11. Maturity, Patience.
The condition of Virtue is to

1. Remove tentations, this setles Virtue in the Root. 2. Multiply virtuous
actions, this is the flower of Virtue. 3. Delight in goodness, this the fruit
of Virtue.
There be four mother Virtues

1. Faith to conceive them. 2. Charity to bring them forth. 3. Wisdom to
dispose and order them. 4. Humility to sustain and uphold them.
Men are more inclinable to one virtue then to another

1. Because they have the gift of that special virtue. 2. Because their
complexion inclines to that virtue. 3. Because use exercises them in that
virtue. 4. Because that virtue is not suppressed by his contrary vice.
Virtues are

1. Intellectual, conducing to God 1. Wisdom, which rules our affections and
will. 2. Intelligence, which guides cogitations and understandings. 3.
Knowledge of the Spirit, which governs both the will and understanding.
2. Consuetudinal to converse with men, as 1. Honesty, to order our private
actions. 2. Liberality, to benefit our neighbors.

Consuetudinal virtues are,

1. Moral to inform our manners. 2. Oeconomical to dispose our family. 3.
Political to order Kingdoms and Cities.
Man's life is guided by seven Virtues; By

3 Theological: 1. Faith, whereby we know God as Verity. 2. Hope, whereby we
trust in God as in Eternity. 3. Charity, whereby we love God as the only Bonity.
4 Cardinal: 4. Prudence, which rectifieth Reason. 5. Fortitude, which
tempereth Anger. 6. Temperance, which moderates desire. 7. Justice, which
confirms all our powers.

1. Faith is either

Historical, to believe the histories of Scripture. Miraculous, to believe in
Christ for Miracles. Diabolical, to confess of necessity without Hope.
Justifying, to believe and confess with full Hope.
2. Hope is either for

Pardon Grace. Glory.
3. Charity is refered

Naturally to our self, this is called Love, To our Parents, this is called
Piety. To our Neighbors, this is called Dilection. To our follows, which is
called Friendship, and contains 1. Familiarity. 2. Society. 3. Benevolence. 4.
Benignity.
To our Enemies, which is called Exitation. Love of Innocence.
To God, which is properly called Charity.

4. Prudence

1. Loves all things by the line of Reason. 2. Neither wills nor does any
thing, otherwise then right.
Prudence must be in the

Heart, to guide our thoughts and intents. Mouth, to order our speech. Works,
to grace our actions.
Prudence may be divided into

Intelligence, to understand things present. Prudence, to guess at things to
come. Remembrance, to recall matters past.
5. Temperance

1. Brings the appetite under the Rule of Reason. 2. Never exceeds the Laws
of Moderation.
Temperance may be divided into

1. Continency, which refrain and restrain pleasures. 2. Charity, 3. Clemency,
which appeaseth anger 4. Sobriety, which avoydeth excess in Eating, Drinking.
5. Modesty, which escheweth vain-gloriousness in our words or actions.
6 Fortitude

1. Attempteth dangers discreetly, not rashly. 2. Endures calamity, not weakly
but patiently.
Fortitude may be divided into

1. Magnificence, which devises and atchieveth brave exploits. 2. Confidence,
which is not daunted with appearance of peril. 3. Patience, which willingly
suffers misfortune for virtue or profit. 4. Perseverance, which continues
in doing and suffering valiantly.
7. Justice

1. Gives every one his due. 2. Is not deflected or wrung from Truth, by Love.
Fear. Rancor.

Justice may be divided into

1 Religion, which binds to give due to God. 2. Piety, which tyeth us to give
duty to our parents and kindred. 3. Favor, whereby we return due to our friend.
4. Vindication, whereby we vindicate our selves from injuries. 5. Observance,
whereby we give due to our betters. 6. Verity, whereby we deal uprightly in the
eye of men. 7. Equity, whereby we deal justly in our conscience, if the matter
be not manifest to the world.
Definitions Theological.
ALL Divinity is said to be put into a circle, because one attribute is
affirmed of another, and for God, to have a thing is to be that thing, his
having is his being, his moving is his standing, his running is his resting.

He is the absolute Reason in which all Alterity is Unity, all Diversity,
Identity.

The Invisibility of God is represented by contracted shadows, conceived in the
mind and understanding, and in the things that are; It self being free from all
contraction, as not being subject to quantity nor quality, time nor place, but
is the absolute Form of all forms, the adequate measure of all things, and
superexalted, etc.

He therefore that sees God, sees nothing diverse from himself, because he sees
his own truth, or the truth of himself.

God is seen alike by all that see him.

God is the proper object of the mind.

When man attributeh a face to God, he seeks not for it out of the Latitude of
the Species of man, because his judgment is contracted; ergo, excedes not the
passion of this Contraction, as if a Lion should ascribe him a face, he would
give only a lions face, etc.

All things that see his face are not sufficient to admire it which cannot be
seen until a man enter into a secret and hidden silence, where there is neither
knowledge nor conception of a face; For this Mist, Cloud, Darkness and Ignorance
he enters into when he surmounts all knowledge.

He that sees Gods Face, sees all things openly, and there is nothing hid unto
him; yea, he knows and has all things, because no man sees God but he that
has Him

No man comes to God, because unapproachable.

No man can take God, except he give himself unto him.

How will thou give thy self unto me, unless thou give all things that are.

How will thou give thy self unto me, unless thou give my self unto me; whilst
I rest in this silence of contemplation, and hearken unto the Word of God,
which cease not to speak within me, I shall be freed from the service of sin,
and enjoy God as his own gift and the infinite treasure of all desirable things.

God sees all things, and every particular, together or at once.

God stands still, and is moved together, because neither motion nor rest
without God.

Thou, O God, art wholly present to each thing at once, and yet art thou neither
moved nor restest, because super-exaited and free from all.

God is above all station or motion, in most simple and absolute Infinity.

Gods eternal Word cannot be manifold, nor diverse, nor variable, nor
changeable, because it is simple Eternity; Nothing can there be past or to
come, where to come and past concide with the present.

In God the End concides with the Beginning. Alpha and Omega are the same.

All things are all that they are, because God is.

God is no such thing as can be said, or conceived, but infinitely and
absolutely superexalted above all things.

To understand Infinity is to comprehend that which is incomprehensible.

The understanding knows it self ignorant of God, because it knows he cannot be
known, unless that which is unknowable be known, the invisible be seen, the
inaccessible be approached, etc.

God is an end without an end, because the end of himself; his end is his
essence; ergo, that end, which is the end or bound of itself, is infinite;
ergo, God is the bound without bound, which passes all reason, for it infolds
contradiction, etc.

Contradiction in Infinity, is without contradiction, because Infinity.

In Infinity, is opposition of opposites without opposition.

If there were Infinity and something besides it, it were not Infinity.

Infinity complicates all things, and nothing can be besides it, or diverse
unto it.

Infinity is so all things, that it is none of them all.

Infinity is neither great, nor little, nor any thing that can be named,
neither great nor less, nor equal to any thing.

Neither yet is it equality, as contracted equality is understood, but it is
infinite equality, not capable of more nor less.

Definitions Theological and Philosophical.
GOd is the Father, and the good; In Being all things: For he both will be this
and is it; and yet all this for himself.

But then shall we see the chief good when we have nothing at all to say of it.
[Hermis holy Ser.]

For the knowledge of it is a divine silence, and the Rest of all the Senses;
For neither can he that understands that, understand; nor he that sees that,
see, nor hear any other thing; nor, in sum, move, etc.

For it is possible for the soul to be Deified, while it lodges in the body,
contemplating the beauty of the Good.

God, and the Father, and Good, is neither spoken, nor heard: and Knowledge
differs from Sense.

Knowledge is the gift of God: All knowledge is unbodily using the mind as an
instrument, as the mind uses the body.

That which is good, is immaterial and not passable; as the world is the first
of all passable things, and the second of the things that are, was once made,
is ever in generation, of things that have quantity and quality, ergo, not that
good. The world is a sphere, i. e. a head, above the head nothing material,
beneath the feet nothing intelectual.

All things depend of one beginning, and the beginning depends of that which is
one and alone.

The beginning is moved, and that which is one stands and abides unmoved.

God is above all, and the Beams of God are operations.

If God were apparent, he were not all; for whatsoever is apparent is
generated; but God is always, and makes all other things manifest, and aparent
is nothing but generation.

God which makes all things appear, appears in all and by all, especially in
those things wherein himself lists.

The understanding sees that which is not manifest, it self being not manifest,
yea, it contemplates the Image of God.

The things that are he has made manifest, and the things that are not he has
hid in himself.

This is God that is better then any name, that is secret, that is most
manifest, seen by the mind; that has no body, that has many bodies: rather
there is nothing of any body, which is not he; for he alone is all things.

Which way shall I look when I praise thee, upward downward, outward, inward?
All things are in thee, from thee, thou give all things, have all things, and
there is nothing that thou have not.

Thou art what I am, what I do or say, thou art all things, and there is
nothing that thou art not.

Good is in nothing but in God alone, or rather God himself is that good always.

One is the beginning of all things, for it gives all things.

God wants nothing, that he should desire it, nor can any thing be taken from
him; the loss whereof may grieve him.

Nothing is stronger then he, that he should be opposed by it, nor equal to
him, that he should be in love with it; so that nothing remains in his essence,
but only the good.

The good is only in that which is not generated. God is the fullness of good,
or good the fullness of God. Beauty in God is above comparison; and that good is
inimitable, as God himself.

Every motion is in station, and is moved of station. There is nothing empty;
only that which is not, is empfy and a stranger to existence.

That which is, could not be, if it were not full of existence: that which is
in existence, can never be made empty.

God is nothing that can be named, but the cause of all things.

God is to be worshipped by these two appellations, Good, (for God is good, not
according to honor, but nature,) and Father, because of his making of all
things,

Nothing can be like the unlike, and only One; neither has he given of his
power to any other,

Whatsoever is in the world, is moved either according to augmentation or
diminution.

Generation is not a Creation of life, but a production of things to sense:
Neither is change death, but occultation or hiding of that which was.

God is both act and power, and there is nothing that is not God.

Things that appear not are hard to be believed. Things most apparent, are
evil; but the good is secret, having neither form nor figure; it is like unto
it self, but unlike all other things.

Unity is the original of all things, as being the Root and Beginning.

Nothing is without beginning, but beginning is of nothing but it self, for it
is the beginning of all other things.

Unity therefore, being the beginning, contains every number, it self being
contained of none; it begets every number, it self being begotten of none
other number.

Every thing that is begotten or made, is imperfect, may be divided, increased,
deminished.

To the perfect there happens none of these.

That which is increased is increased by Unity.

Truth is the most perfect virtue, highest, not troubled by matter, not
encompassed by a body; naked, clear, unchangeable, venerable, unalterable, good.

Every thing that is altered, is a lie; for being changed it shows other
appearances.

Man, as man, is not true; for that which is true, has of it self alone it
constitution, remains and abides to it self according as it is.

But Man does not abide of himself, but is turned and changed, age after age,
and Idea after Idea; and this while he is yet in the Tabernacle: and being in
many appearances and changes, is falsehood.

Nothing that remans not in it self is true.

The first Truth, the one and only, not of matter, not in a body, without
color, without figure, immutable, unalterable, and always is.

But Falsehood is corrupted.

Corruption follows every generation that it may again be generated.

THE CONTENTS.
WHat is perfect, and what is imperfect. page 1 What is sin. page 4 The sin of
Adam. page 6 That all good is only God. page 7 Of the putting off the old man.
page 8 How the life of man is to be composed. page 10 Of the two eyes of
Christ. page 11 Whether in this life eternal happiness may be tasted. page 13
Except goodness be in man, it cannot make man happy. page 15 Of the desire of
those who be illuminated. page 17 Of Hell and of the Kingdom of Heaven. page 19
Of true peace and happiness. page 23 Of the fall of Adam, and the amendment
made by Jesus Christ. page 24 What the old and new Man is. page 27 That a man
ought to attribute all good to God, and evil to himself. page 32 That a
Christian life is the best. page 33 Of the way to Christ. page 35 That the life
of Christ is envyed of humane wisdom. page 36 The estate of a Christian is not
to be expressed. page 37 That the world is mad. page 39 Of the way unto the
life of Christ. page 42 In what man true Christ is. page 43 What it is to be
rich in Spirit. page 45 What it is to be poor in Spirit. page 48 That all
things are to be left and lost. page 54 That the inward man is immoveably
joined with God, the outward man notwithstanding is moved. page 55 That no man
in this life can be free from pain. page 57 That to a just man no Law is to be
given. page 59 Of true and false Lights, also of perseverance in the life of
Christ. page 61 That God is one and simple good, and only to be loved. page 63
That a deified man knows nothing but love. page 67 That the will of man is
prone to evil, and therefore to be forsaken. page 69 Of true humility and
spiritual powerty. page 71 That sin only is contrary to God. page 73 That God
in himself is impatiable, in man he is patiable. page 75 That the life of
Christ is to be loved for it self, not for reward. page 77 That God is above
all order. page 79 The description of the false Light. page 83 Who and what a
deified man is. page 92 Whether God may be known and yet no loved. page 95 Of
the true love of God. page 100 That there is nothing contrary to God but man's
own will. page 106 Where the life of Christ is, there is Christ. page 109 To be
content with God. page 111 Whether sin is to be loved. page 113 That Faith
brings forth Knowledge. page 115 Of man's own proper Will. page 116 Why God
created man's own will, seeing it is contrary to the eternal will. page 118 Why
God created the will. page 120 How the Devil and Adam challenge will to
themselves. page 122 That in what man the truth is, in that man free will is
also. page 124 Treating of Christ and his Cross. page 127 Of the Imitation of
Christ. page 129 How the Father draws to the Son, and the Son reciprocally to
the Father. page 131 How God becomes all things in man. page 133 That God
alone is to be loved and honored. page 135 Certain grave sayings, by which the
scholar of Christ may search into himself, and know what is to be sought and
strived for concerning the true inward uniting of himself to the one supreme
good. page 138 How to put on God by a most perfect way. page 144 Perfection in
the first, second, third and fourth degree. page 145 The Communication of Dr
Thaulerus with a Beggar, wherein is contained the example of a perfect man.
page 146 An exact Treatise of the Definitions of the Soul. page 151 Definitions
Theological and Philosophical. page 167

