These Tradesmen are Preachers in and about the City of LONDON. Or A DISCOVERY
OF THE MOST DANGEROUS AND DAMNABLE TENETS THAT HAVE BEEN SPREAD WITHIN THIS FEW
years: By many Erroneous, Heriticall and Mechannick spirits. By which the very
foundation of Christian knowledge and practice is endeavored to be overturned.
a Confectioner a Smith a Sho-maker a Tailor a Sadler a Porter a Box-maker a
Sope-boyler a Glover a Meal-man a Chicken-man a Button-maker



1. THat Christ's righteousness was a beggarly righteousness.

2. That Christ's blood did not purchase Heaven for any man.

3. That Christ shed his blood for Kine and Horses, as well as for men.

4. That the souls of men and devils are mortal, and that none a^e immortal
but God.

5. That we are only to believe the Scriptures, so far as they are agreeable
to sense and reason

6. That the Scriptures are uncertain and unsufficient, and not an infallible
Rule of Faith.

7. That the Scriptures cannot be said to be the Word of God, because there is
no word of God but Christ.

8. That the Scriptures of the old Testament do not bind or concern Christians
under the new.

9. That adultery and drunkenness is no sin.

10. That Prayer in Families is unlawful.

11. A company of Soldiers in derision of Baptism, baptized a horse, having
pist in the Font, sprinkled it on the Horse, and crossed him on the Forehead,
and named him Ball-Esau, because he was hairie.

12. That Christ's sufferings were only for our examples, and not to purchase
Heaven for us.

13. That Believers have nothing to do to take care, or keep from sin.

14. That no man was cast into hell for sin, but only because God would have
it so.

15. That Christ will destroy all Governments, lawful and unlawful.

16. That God was never displeased with men for sin; if he were, there were a
changeableness in God.

17. That the soul of man dies with the body.

18. That the Church of England and Ministry thereof is Antichristian, and of
the Devil.

19. That it is the will of G^d that tolleration of the most P^g^^^^, Jewi^h,
Turki^h, or Antichristian worship be granted to all men in all Nat^ons.

20. That a man may lawfully put away his wife if she be not a meet helper

21. That God is the Author of the sinfulness of his people.

22. That man had life before God breathed it into him.

23. That there is no resurrection of the bodies of men after this life.

24. That if a woman's husband was a sleep or absent, she might lawfully lie
with another man, for sleep was death.

25. That John Baptists, doctrine was a leatherne doctrine.

26. That Adams sin did not deserve hell.

27. That all the children of Adam that die in their infancy shall be saved.

28. That all the heaven there is, is here on earth.

29. That John's Baptism which was of Water, did end at the coming of Christ.

30. That it is unlawful to sing Psalms.

31. That it is blasphemy to say that there is now any office of the ministry.

32 That Universities is of the Devil, and humane learning is of the flesh.

33 That many shall be saved that were not elected.

34 That they are the great Antichrist that deny the general redemption of the
whole Creation.

35 That we have no example in all the Gospel, for Saints to pray with
unbeleevers.

36 A Sectary said, what had any man to do if he worshipped the Sun or moon, no
man had to do with his Conscience.

37 That it is injustice in God to punish the souls of the wicked in Hell,
whiles their bodies are at rest in their graves, since both lived together.

38 That all the Heathen shall be saved, because they are not guilty of
unbeleef.

39 That millions of thousands are damned for a time, and not totally, for not
believing the Covenant of general redemption.

40 That the true faith of beleevi^g the Covenant of general redemption,
though it were but in three persons, is sufficient to save all the rest of the
Creation.

41. That the Doctrine of repentance is a soul depraving doctrine.

42 That there ought to be no Fasting days under the Gospel.

43 That Sanctification is but a Dunghill, and dirty qualification.

44 That there is no Original sin in us.

45 That under the days of the new Testament all days are alike to
Christians, and that the Lords day, or sabbath ought not to be kept.

46 That there is no Church, nor Ordinance nor Ministry in the world.

47 That it is unlawful to teach children to pray.

48 That Infants shall never rise again, because they were not capable of
knowing God, and so not of enjoying God.

49 That there is power in men to resist grace.

Printed and Published according to Order. 1647.


