Terrible and Bloody NEWS FROM SEA: Being A full Relation of the last great
and terrible fight at Sea, between the two Fleets of England and Holland,
commanded by General Blake and Admiral Vantrump; the great loss on both sides
impartially related: With the particulars of a former fight, and a List of the
ships then taken; sent in a letter from Genesis Blake to a personage of Honor.

Likewise, The S^ates of Hollands Letter to the States of Hamburgh, and the
other Cities thereabouts for aid and assistance; and their issuing out Orders
to the East India Company, against the English in the East Indies; the
preparations that are making in Denmark and Sweden, and a a discovery of the
King of Polands Plot, in the late massacre of his army by the Tartars and
Cossacks.

woodcut of two ships facing each other Aug 6.

LONDON: Printed for T. G. 1652.

Terrible and BLOODY NEWS From SEA: Being A full relation of the last great and
bloody fight, between the two Fleets commanded by Genesis Blake and Admiral
Vantrump, July 30.
Endeared Sir,
YOurs of the 28 of July I received; in answer whereto, take this, This day
came news to this place of a very great and hot Sea Fight, the manner was thus
related. On the 30 instant the Dutch (after their long stay about Tinmouth, and
other parts thereabouts) were discovered not very far from certain Islands
called the Fern Islands, they came with their sails filled, Trumpets sounding,
Flaggs on Topmast head, showing forth tokens of great resolution; our Fleet
discovering them, the General called a Council, all unanimously agreed to
fight them without delay, whereupon bearing up toward them, the General
perceived the Dutch Admiral to single out himself from the rest, and scorning
advantage of number, went forth alone to meet him, where valor appeared in its
resplendant brightness, above 40 broad sides being exchanged between them: the
Fleets on both sides coming close together, very desperately engaged each
other, and manifested themselves to be the sons of Mars, sighting with such
resolution, that so terrible a Sea-sight has not been heard of in the
remembrance of any man, the discolored sea showing the effects of their wrath.
The General was exceedingly distressed, every one seeking his ruin above the
rest; but Major Bourn, Capt. Peacock and diverse others of our Fleet, seeing him
in such danger, made up to his relief, and so plied the enemy with great and
small shot, that they were forced to tack about, to resist the fury of those
fresh assailants, during this time the rest of the Fleets were not idle but
fought very resolutely, as if they were resolved not to give over so long as a
ship remained to float upon the Ocean.

The Generals on both sides strove to excel each other, and with their
grapling Irons to board one another, but in vain, the Combatants on neither
side giving way, so that small shot flew about as thick as Hail among them; at
last the death of Vantrump (who was seen to fall on the Deck) so discouraged
them, that dispairing of victory, they endeavored all they could to make away;
but our men determining not to let them so escape, so bestirred themselves,
that they took about 54 of them, and sunk near upon 30, the rest fled toward
the Sound; our fleet are in pursuit of them; our loss is reported to be
considerable, yet not so much (we hope) as is related: it is said the
Resolution (in which was our Admiral) is sunk, with about thirteen or fourteen
more, which loss (though it be great) is far inferior to theirs, the rather
for that our General escaped with most of his Officers, in the boat; no doubt
God has reserved him yet to do great things for the glory of his name, and the
good of this Commonwealth.

From the Sole near Yarmouth, August 4. 1652.
A Letter from Hamburgh, dated August 3 stilo novo, 1652.
SIR,
I Arrived here safely yesterday the second instant, and finding now an
opportunity, I thought good to acquit my self of my promise to you. The Swedes
are making great preparations both by Sea and Land; at the late Randezvous or
mustering, which usually is kept once a year, there were numbered twenty
thousand foot, and six thousand Horse, and the Crown ships are in a very
gallant Equipage. They kept a day of humiliation through the whole Country; but
what their intentions are, is not yet known.

The Danes, their near Neighbors, begin to be jealous, and for that end
provide for their own security as fast as they can, in mending their ships, and
fortifying their places upon their frontiers.

At Stockholm there is expected shortly Don Estivan de Gamara as Ambassador
extraordinary for the King of Spain. Reports are likewise of one coming from
Holland, but it is thought he will not be so welcome as one from England, for
the Hollanders are very jealous of a correspondency between the Parliament of
England, and that Crown.

On the 28 of July there passed through this Town of Hambrough in great haste,
an Express from the States of Holland, with several Letters to this and other
Cities hereabouts. He goes on speedily forward to Denmark and the Sound, to
give notice in all parts, of the War commenced between that State and the
Republic of England and to require their aid.

The news of Poland, which for a long time was full of uncertainties and
contradictions, according to the partial affections or disaffections of the
Relators; begins now to appear a little more clear and certain, and time the
mother of Truth, has discovered since several particulars concerning the state
of Affairs there, and the Author of all their miseries (according to my best
intelligence) is found to be their own King; That he invited the Tartars to
fall upon one part of the Army, which as it seems was guided by the Nobles, and
had refused to comply with his ambitions designs, hoping by the removing of
this obstacle, to master the great ones, and to bring the Nobility to his will:
And as soon as the news of this slaughter was brought, he caused it to be
noised abroad through all parts of the Kingdom, setting forth in such a
nature, as if all were lost and undone, thereby to inveigle and amase the
people, and to bring them to doubt of their own sa^ety, that so they might be
brought to assist him with their lives and Estates, to work out his unlimited
desires, and to entrap his Nobles and Great Ones whom he had invited upon so
sudden an occasion, at the place of Rendezvous, to consult about the present
state and condition of the Affairs of the Kingdom; sending out pitiful
Letters and Declarations to all parts of his Command, as if that all would be
destroyed, ruined, and overrun by the approaching numerous Enemy, if they were
not timely prevented; and that the Muscovite on the one side, and the Turks on
the other side, prepare and hasten to second the Tartars and Cosaggs: and
therefore he entreats their aid and assistance, for the good and delivery of
the Kingdom, both of men and moneys, for which end he offers himself, and is
willing to be made a Sacrifice for them.

But this his Plot being in some measure discovered, is opposed by the greatest
persons in Poland, and it is likely will light very heavy upon his Majesty at
the intended Diet at Warsovia, to which usual place he is forced now to remove
it from the said appointed Rendezvous; It was to begin the 23 of July. What the
Results thereof will be, time will produce.

The Commissioners for the Town of Breme, solicit hard, that they may remain a
free Town of the Empire: But I believe their desires therein will never be
granted. Sir, this is all at present from

Hamburgh, Aug. 3. stin. 1652. Your most assured friend, J: B.

Postscript.
Just now the Post from Amsterdam arrived here, who brings news, That the East
India Company have received Order from the States General, to take all the
English, and do all the harm they can to them in the East Indies, having 160
Commissions for private Men of War.

Letters from General Blakes Fleet, and in particular one from himself to a
personage of Honor, dated July 22. give a full account of those 12 Dutch Men
of War lately taken, which were a guard for the Busses, viz. That the dispute
was hot for 3 hours space, there being but 8 English Frigates that engaged in
that service, in which Captain Brandly received a shot in the right hand, which
is since cut off. We lost some of our Soldiers and Sea men, but no great
number; Many of the Dutch are killed and wounded, nine hundred of the prisoners
then taken are still in the fleet till we can otherwise dispose of them. I
shall give you a List of the ships then taken, viz.

The Paul of Rotterdam, the Admiral, 24 Guns. Water Hound, the Vice Admiral, 24
Guns. Sampson of Anchuisen 28 guns Arms of Holland, 30 Guns. Swan of Amsterdam,
28 Guns. Adam and Eve, 24 Guns. John Baptist, 22 Guns. Land of Promise, 24
Guns. Katherine, 24 Guns. Noah's Ark, 24 Guns. Calver Slittle, 22 Guns. Sampson
of Horn, 24 Guns.
Two of which are since sunk.

Six of these ships are disposed for the service of the Commonwealth of
England: Mr. Thomas Adams, formerly Lieutenant to the Admiral in the
Resolution, is now Captain of the Paul, the best and firmest ship amongst them.

FINIS.

